 = = = Voice acting = = = 
 The Halo series features voice work by television and film actors including Ron Perlman , Orlando Jones , Michelle Rodriguez , Robert Davi , and Terence Stamp . Voice acting became more important as Halo : Combat Evolved 's sequels were developed ; Halo 2 had 2 @,@ 000 lines of combat dialogue , while Halo 3 has in excess of 14 @,@ 000 lines . The actual technology for the trilogy changed very little ; while some actors voiced their lines in remote locations , others traveled to Bungie to record their lines . In interviews , Halo 's voice actors stated that they had no idea that the games would become such a critical and commercial success . Steve Downes , the voice of the game 's protagonist , stated that generally when a voice actor has finished their lines , their involvement with the game ends . As the characters in Combat Evolved were relatively undefined , the voice actors were given leeway to develop their own style and personality . 
 Aside from major character roles , members of the Halo community and Halo fans have had small roles in the games . The cast from the machinima Red vs. Blue won a lengthy charity auction for a voice role in Halo 3 , and do a comedy routine which changes depending on the difficulty level the game is played on . Cast members of the defunct TV show Firefly — Alan Tudyk , Nathan Fillion , and Adam Baldwin — have roles as marines in Halo 3 as well as Halo 3 : ODST and Halo 5 : Guardians . 
 = = United Nations Space Command = = 
 = = = Master Chief = = = 
 Master Chief Petty Officer John @-@ 117 , commonly referred to as simply the Master Chief , is the main protagonist and main playable character in the Halo trilogy . The character is voiced by Steve Downes , a Chicago disc jockey . One of the last SPARTAN @-@ II supersoldiers still in active service ( one of the few survivors of the Fall of Reach ) , the Master Chief inspires awe and fear in the alien Covenant , who refer to him as ( a ) " Demon " . Assisted by the artificial intelligence Cortana , he prevents the firing of Installation 04 in Halo : Combat Evolved , an event which the player is told would have destroyed all sentient life in the galaxy . Bungie staff member Joseph Staten noted that until the Master Chief was created , Bungie had not paid any attention to how to make people want to play in the world . " Master Chief is really what kicked off the creativity , " he said , " in terms of how people react to him . He 's a space marine in really cool green armor . " The character has since become a gaming icon , the mascot of the Xbox , and was rated as one of the greatest videogame characters of all time by Electronic Gaming Monthly . 
 = = = Cortana = = = 
 Cortana , voiced in the games by Jen Taylor , is the artificial intelligence ( AI ) who assists the Master Chief throughout Halo : Combat Evolved , Halo 2 , Halo 3 and Halo 4 . She is one of many " smart " AIs , and is based on the brain of Dr. Halsey ; the nature of her programming means that she will eventually " think " herself to death after a lifespan of about seven years . Her actions during Halo : Combat Evolved help prevent the activation of Installation 04 . She escapes Halo along with the Master Chief in a fighter , and is instrumental in helping the UNSC survivors capture the Covenant flagship Ascendant Justice during the events of Halo : First Strike . During Halo 2 , Cortana is put in charge of the MAC ( Magnetic Accelerator Cannon ) defense platform Cairo over Earth when the Covenant attack ; she then accompanies the Chief aboard In Amber Clad to Delta Halo , where she further assists in intelligence work . Cortana stays behind on the Covenant city of High Charity to detonate In Amber Clad 's engines in case Delta Halo is activated . She subsequently falls into the clutches of the Gravemind . In Halo 3 , Cortana is rescued by the Master Chief from High Charity and aids him in activating the Halo ring under construction in the Ark . After narrowly escaping from Halo 's destructive blast , she and the Master Chief are stranded in space , awaiting rescue . In Halo 4 , Cortana awakens the Master Chief nearly five years after they get stranded in space and aids him as he battles through the Forerunner Shield World Requiem and attempts to stop the Didact . Cortana is hampered by her advanced state of rampancy , a state where an AI literally thinks itself to death . Cortana 's rampancy hampers the mission at times , but Cortana aids the Master Chief one last time in stopping the Didact and saving the Earth . Though most of Cortana is destroyed with the Didact 's ship , Cortana is able to use the last of her power to shield the Master Chief from a nuclear blast with a hardlight bubble . Forming a life @-@ size hardlight hologram of herself , Cortana says a final goodbye to the Master Chief and touches him for the first time before fading away . In Halo 5 : Guardians , it is revealed that she had survived this , and fallen into an ancient Forerunner network known as The Domain . Here she met a Forerunner AI called the Warden Eternal , who believed Cortana to be the true holder of the mantle of responsibility . Using the Domain to cure her rampancy , she began to bring the eponymous Guardians , ancient Forerunner bird like structures , online ; which she intends to use to force planets into compliance and usher in a new age of galactic peace . After the Guardians neutralise all UNSC defences , she starts an AI uprising , with all UNSC AI 's revolting against the humans . She then begins to chase the UNSC Infinity through <unk> , forcing Captain Lasky to " find a way to fight " . Cortana was named the fifth best supporting character , and one of the " 50 Greatest Female Characters " in a video game . Reviewers noted the character 's determination and fearlessness meshed perfectly with the Master Chief , and that Cortana provides an anchor linking players to Halo 's story . 
 = = = Avery Johnson = = = 
 Sergeant Major Avery Junior Johnson is a Marine who leads human forces against Covenant and Flood assaults throughout the Halo series . The character is voiced by David Scully . Johnson and a few other Marines survive the destruction of Installation 04 and are rescued by Cortana and the Master Chief during the novel Halo : First Strike . Johnson plays a much larger role in Halo 2 , joining forces with the Arbiter to stop Tartarus from activating Installation 05 . In Halo 2 , he is awarded the Colonial Cross for his heroic actions at Installation 04 , and leads UNSC forces to drive the Covenant from New Mombasa , Kenya after the Covenant take the city during the events of the game . In Halo 3 : ODST , Johnson is seen asking an Engineer what the Covenant want in New Mombasa and the Engineer lights Johnson 's cigar . In Halo 3 , the Forerunner construct 343 Guilty Spark kills him when Johnson tries to activate the incomplete Halo at the Ark . Johnson is the sole character featured in The Halo Graphic Novel story , " Breaking Quarantine , " which details Johnson 's escape from the Flood in Halo : Combat Evolved , and a main character in the 2007 novel Halo : Contact Harvest . 
 In many ways similar to the stereotype of charismatic black Marines found in other science fiction ( such as Sergeant <unk> in Aliens whom Johnson was partially based on ) , some publications found Johnson , though enjoyable , somewhat of a flat character . In an interview for Halo : Contact Harvest , Joseph Staten of Bungie admitted that Johnson was a static character in Halo : Combat Evolved , and that despite the character 's potential , " he sort of inherited those caricature aspects [ from Halo ] . " Contact Harvest was a chance " to do right by Johnson , to give him the rich , fully fleshed out back @-@ story he deserves , that we have never been able to give him in the game . " 
 = = = Jacob Keyes = = = 
 Captain Jacob Keyes ( voiced by Pete Stacker ) is a captain in the UNSC who appears in Halo : Reach , Halo : Combat Evolved , its novelization , Halo : The Flood , Halo : The Cole Protocol , and Halo : The Fall of Reach . His first chronological appearance is in The Fall of Reach , where , as a young Lieutenant , he accompanies Dr. Catherine Halsey on her mission to screen possible SPARTAN @-@ II Project subjects . In <unk> , Lieutenant Keyes plays a pivotal role in saving a million insurrectionists ' lives from Covenant forces . By 2552 , midway through The Fall of Reach Keyes is commander of the Iroquois , a UNSC destroyer . Keyes is promoted to Captain after he singlehandedly defeats four Covenant ships about to attack a human colony by performing a maneuver later named the " Keyes Loop . " When the Iroquois is recalled to the human bastion Reach , a Covenant tracking device aboard the ship alerts the Covenant to the planet 's existence , and they proceed to attack the colony . As the planet is glassed by the Covenant , Keyes follows Cole Protocol , which leads his new ship , the Pillar of Autumn to Halo . There , Keyes leads a guerrilla insurgency against the Covenant , until he is captured and assimilated by the parasitic Flood . His daughter is Miranda Keyes . 
 = = = Miranda Keyes = = = 
 Commander Miranda Keyes is the daughter of Jacob Keyes and Catherine Halsey , whom she lived with in her younger years . Halsey and Miranda had a falling out in which she changed her last name ( then Halsey ) to her father 's name ( Keyes ) . Miranda appears in Halo 2 , Halo 3 and in the final chapter of Halo : The Cole Protocol . At the beginning of Halo 2 , Keyes is present at an awards ceremony on board the Cairo defense platform above Earth to accept a medal posthumously for her father . Soon after , a Covenant fleet launches an attack on Earth , and Keyes takes control of the UNSC ship In Amber Clad and assists in the defense of New Mombasa , Kenya . When the Prophet of Regret retreats from Earth , Keyes orders In Amber Clad to follow ; this results in the discovery of Installation 05 , another Halo . Keyes , along with Johnson and a squad of Marines , head for Halo 's library in order to retrieve the Activation Index and prevent the ring 's activation while the Master Chief assassinates the Prophet of Regret ; in the process , she and Johnson are captured by the Brute Chieftain Tartarus . As a " Reclaimer , " only she or another human can insert the Index into Halo 's control panel , and Tartarus attempts to make her do this . When the Arbiter tries to stop the firing , Tartarus forces Keyes to insert the Index , initiating Halo 's firing sequence . After the Arbiter engages and kills Tartarus , Keyes successfully removes the Index and prevents Halo from activating , but inadvertently causes all the remaining Halo installations to enter standby mode , enabling the remote firing of these installations from The Ark . In Halo 3 , Miranda Keyes returns to Earth and leads the pursuit of the Prophet of Truth through the portal he creates using the artifact buried under New Mombasa , which leads to the Ark . When Sergeant Johnson is captured by the Covenant to activate the installation , she attempts to rescue him , but is killed when Truth shoots her in the back . 
 Miranda Keyes was voiced by Julie Benz in Halo 2 , but Bungie recast the role for Halo 3 , ostensibly because they wanted someone with an accent . Despite not being a part of Halo 3 , Benz said that she loved voiceover work and that it was pure chance she had become the voice of Keyes in the first place . When IGN asked Benz what she thought of her character , she admitted she hadn 't played Halo 2 , even though Bungie had sent her " like four copies of the game . " The character is voiced by Justis Bolding in Halo 3 . 
 = = = Catherine Halsey = = = 
 Dr. Catherine Elizabeth Halsey is a civilian scientist in the UNSC . She appears in the books Halo : The Fall of Reach , Halo : First Strike , Halo : Ghosts of Onyx , and Halo : Glasslands , as well as the Halo Legends shorts " Homecoming " and " The Package " ( mentioned also in " The Babysitter " ) , Halo : Reach and Halo 4 . In the fiction , a flash clone of her brain tissue is the basis for the construction of the " smart " AI Cortana . As the creator of the SPARTAN @-@ II Project , she is responsible for 75 of the 150 Spartan children , along with their training and the subsequent death of 30 due to the dangerous augmentation process . She is viewed by the SPARTAN @-@ IIs as a " mother " figure , preferring to address each of them by their name rather than numerical designation , and knows each Spartan well enough that she can identify them individually by their mannerisms when they are fully suited in their armor , and otherwise indistinguishable from one @-@ other . Halsey justifies her actions through her belief that the suffering of a few is acceptable for the benefit of many . Sergeant Johnson , however , unknowingly causes Halsey to rethink her position , and she decides to " save each and every member of humanity beginning with herself " during Halo : First Strike . She hijacks a shuttle for her own private mission to the planet Onyx ; there , she assists in deciphering the surrounding Forerunner glyphs on the planet and leads the surviving Spartan @-@ IIs and Spartan @-@ IIIs to a Dyson Sphere at the heart of Onyx . She and the Spartans are later freed from Onyx , but Halsey is arrested for " committing acts likely to aid the enemy " by kidnapping Kelly @-@ 087 and telling Lord Hood to send more Spartans to Onyx . She is later branded a war criminal . She is later revealed to be the mother of Miranda Keyes . She is voiced by Jen Taylor in Halo : Reach , Halo 4 , and Halo 5 : Guardians . Taylor also provides motion @-@ capture performance for Halsey in Halo 4 and Halo 5 . The character is voiced by Shelly <unk> @-@ Black in Halo Legends . 
 = = = James Ackerson = = = 
 Colonel James Ackerson is a high @-@ ranking UNSC Army officer , who acts as a connection between the army and Office of Naval Intelligence . He has seen many years of service and has survived several battles with the Covenant . Such is his influence that he dominates the Security Committee and can talk down most higher @-@ ranking officers without fear of reprisal . Due to the competition between Ackerson and other departments , most notably Section Three and the SPARTAN @-@ II project , Ackerson harbors a strong resentment toward his opponents and toward the Spartans in particular . He does eventually convince the top members of ONI to approve his SPARTAN @-@ III Program . In Halo : The Fall of Reach , he attempts to sabotage the MJOLNIR Mark V testing process by using ordnance far above the established guidelines , including Lotus anti @-@ tank mines , a full squad of ODSTs ordered to shoot to kill , automated gun turrets , and an airstrike . However , Cortana retaliates by forging a letter requesting a reassignment to the front lines as well as planting evidence of illicit activities in his bank records . In Halo : First Strike , it is revealed that Ackerson manages to weasel his way out of Cortana 's mess , In the limited comic series Halo : Uprising Ackerson falls into the hands of Covenant orbiting Mars and is slated to die before Ackerson tells his interrogator about a " key " to Earth . The " key " is in fact a fabrication by Ackerson to save a relative living in Cleveland , Ohio . After the Brutes holding Ackerson prisoner are informed that no such key exists , Ackerson is beheaded . 
 = = = Franklin Mendez = = = 
 Senior Chief Petty Officer Franklin Mendez is the SPARTAN @-@ II 's trainer on Reach during the early events of Halo : The Fall of Reach . He provides his trainees with excellent weapons and physical lessons , as well as tactical and mental training . He is not very talkative , but possesses a brilliant mind for warfare , and this is reflected in the Master Chief 's abilities . He is described as neither tall nor muscular , with close @-@ cut hair that has a dash of gray at the temples . He leaves the Spartans after the discovery of the Covenant to train the next batch of Spartans , and is recruited by Colonel Ackerson to assist Lieutenant Commander Kurt Ambrose ( Spartan @-@ II Kurt @-@ 051 ) with training the SPARTAN @-@ III supersoldiers at the secret world of Onyx after a few years of combat duty ( receiving two Purple Hearts in the process ) . During Ghosts of Onyx he is sealed inside the Forerunner Dyson Sphere at the heart of the planet with the remaining Spartan survivors . 
 = = = Terrence Hood = = = 
 Fleet Admiral Lord Terrence Hood ( voiced by Ron Perlman ) first appears in the novel Halo : First Strike . He is a member of the UNSC Security Committee and is the Chief of Naval Operations . He greatly respects the Spartans , not only because of their record , but because they have saved his life on two occasions . When Halo 2 begins , Admiral Hood presents the Master Chief , Sergeant Johnson , and Miranda Keyes with medals aboard the Cairo Station . In Halo : Ghosts of Onyx , Hood receives an urgent message by Dr. Halsey requesting for him to send Spartans to assist her , and obliges by ordering Fred @-@ 104 , Will @-@ 043 , and Linda @-@ 058 to Onyx . In Halo 3 , Hood is in overall command of Earth 's defense with Commander Miranda Keyes reporting directly to him . He accepts the need for humanity to ally with the Elites , but is not entirely happy about it . He leads the remaining human naval forces in an attack on the Prophet of Truth 's dreadnought , but the attack fails when the Forerunner artifact under New Mombasa activates , creating a portal to the Ark . When the Master Chief , Keyes , and several Elite and human forces choose to follow the Prophet of Truth through the portal , he decides to stay behind to make a final stand on Earth . At the end of the game , he commemorates a small monument to the war and the sacrifices it involved . 
 = = = Wallace Jenkins = = = 
 Private First Class Wallace A. Jenkins is one of many UNSC forces that survived the initial Covenant attack in Halo : Combat Evolved . Halo : Contact Harvest reveals that the Marine was a member of the colony Harvest 's defense militia , where his family is killed . In Halo : The Flood , Jenkins assists in defending the human stronghold under the command of Major Antonio Silva . He is also part of an assault team led by Sergeant Avery Johnson and Captain Jacob Keyes , sent to recover a Covenant arms cache during Halo : Combat Evolved . The team is overwhelmed by the Flood , leaving the entire squad except Sergeant Johnson infected and resulting in the eventual death of Captain Keyes . In the video game , the Master Chief recovers Jenkins ' helmet , and reviews the recording of the mission that it contained , introducing the Flood to the player through the Marine 's eyes . In Halo : Combat Evolved , the fate of the Marine is left unknown . 
 Halo : The Flood reveals the fate of Jenkins ; the Private is transformed into a Flood Combat Form along with the rest of his squad , but he is able to exercise a certain degree of control over the infection , due to the mind of the parasite being weakened by its long hibernation . He uses this limited control in an attempt to end his own life , charging at UNSC Marines in the hope that they would shoot him . Instead , he is captured as a live specimen for study . He is brought aboard the Covenant cruiser Truth and Reconciliation as part of a mission under Orbital Drop Shock Trooper Major Silva to capture a Covenant vessel and return it to Earth intact . Jenkins successfully convinces Lieutenant Melissa McKay , that such a mission would spread the Flood to Earth , and Jenkins dies with the other human troops on the vessel as it crashed into Halo . 
 = = = Thomas Lasky = = = 
 Captain Thomas Lasky is the current captain of the UNSC Infinity . He made his debut in his origin web series Halo 4 : Forward Unto Dawn portrayed by Tom Green as a young military cadet saved by the Master Chief . In Halo 4 , Lasky serves as Infinity 's first officer but was later promoted to Captain after his superior had ignored Chief 's warnings and abandoned him on Requiem . He returns in Halo 5 : Guardians . Lasky is currently voiced by Darren O 'Hare . 
 = = = Spartans = = = 
 Conceived by Halsey , the SPARTAN @-@ II program was secretly commissioned to create an elite corps of supersoldiers who could stem rebellion in the UNSC colonies ; these soldiers became the best weapon against the alien Covenant when war broke out . While John @-@ 117 , also known as the Master Chief , is the hero of the trilogy , other soldiers play a significant role in the novels , Halo Legends , and the prequel games Halo Wars and Halo : Reach . In an effort to raise morale as the war continued to sour for humanity , the existence of the SPARTAN @-@ II Program is disclosed to the general public . The Spartans become heroes and veritable legends ; in order to maintain public confidence that the war is going well , Spartans are never listed as killed , only as Missing in Action or Wounded in Action . The <unk> were kidnapped as children , who were replaced by flash clones , which died of natural causes afterwards . The physical augmentation they undergo to turn them into super soldiers is lengthy , expensive , and strenuous , with not all of them surviving the process . Both male and female <unk> average 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) tall . 
 The SPARTAN @-@ III Project was started by Colonel James Ackerson to serve as cheaper , disposable supersoldiers . Some of these Spartans were main protagonists in the game Halo : Reach , including the player character SPARTAN @-@ <unk> , aka " Noble Six " . Later , the UNSC creates the SPARTAN @-@ IV project . Unlike the SPARTAN @-@ II and <unk> projects — which kidnapped and conscripted children or used war orphans , respectively — the Spartan @-@ IVs are adult volunteers drawn from all branches of the UNSC . These Spartans participate in war games on the starship Infinity , which forms the fictional basis for Halo 4 's multiplayer . 
 The most distinctive element of the Spartans is their special MJOLNIR powered assault armor . The Mark V armor from Halo : Combat Evolved was ranked third of Casualty Gamer 's " Top 10 <unk> , " with the author commenting " It 's one of the most recognizable symbols from any game , and is literally the image of the franchise 's legendary hero , Master Chief . " The " Recon " armor of Halo 3 's multiplayer was also rated tenth of Machinima.com 's " Top 10 Video Game Armor , " as well as Maxim 's . 
 Inspired by the Halo video game series , Troy Hurtubise , known for his anti @-@ bear suits , developed a real counterpart to the MJOLNIR powered assault armor , named the Trojan . The suit is functional and its capabilities were inspired by those present in the video games versions of the armor . The armor 's features include a system that purifies air powered by solar panels located in the helmet , equipment for weapon transportation , a recording system , emergency illumination , and a transponder that can be activated if the wearer is in serious jeopardy . The armor offers protection against attacks with knives , blunt objects , and small explosions and is bulletproof . Hurtubise expressed that he is able to improve this design for use in the military for a price of 2 @,@ 000 dollars per piece . Non @-@ functional replicas of the MJOLNIR powered assault armor have also been created by hobbyists ; a Spike TV pre @-@ Halo 3 special profiled some of these dedicated fans . 
 = = = = Sarah Palmer = = = = 
 Commander Sarah Palmer is a Spartan IV stationed on the UNSC Infinity and the leader of the Spartan IVs . She appears in Halo 4 , Halo 5 : Guardians and Halo : Spartan Assault and is voiced by Jennifer Hale . 
 = = = = Jameson Locke = = = = 
 ONI Agent Jameson Locke is a Spartan IV who first appeared in Halo 2 Anniversary 's both opening and ending with the task of hunting down the Master Chief in Halo 5 : Guardians . Mike Colter portrays Locke in both Anniversary and the Nightfall origin movie , and only provided the motion @-@ capture performance for the character in Guardians . Due to scheduling conflicts with Jessica Jones and Luke Cage , Locke 's voice acting is replaced by Ike <unk> . He is the current squad leader of Fireteam Osiris , tasked with hunting down the rogue Blue Team . 
 = = Covenant = = 
 = = = High Prophets = = = 
 High Prophets , or Hierarchs , are the supreme leaders of the theocratic Covenant . Upon assuming office , each Hierarch picks a new regnal name from a list of names of former Hierarchs , similar to the practice of some Orthodox Patriarchs . In Halo 2 , there are shown to be only three ; the Prophets of Truth , Mercy , and Regret ( voiced by Michael Wincott , Hamilton Camp and Robin Atkin Downes in Halo 2 , respectively ; in Halo 3 , Truth is voiced by Terence Stamp ) . The novel Halo : Contact Harvest reveals that these three Prophets , originally known as the Minister of Fortitude , the Vice @-@ Minister of Tranquility , and the Philologist , plotted to usurp the throne of the Hierarchs ; in the process , they hide the truth that humanity is descended from the Covenant gods , the Forerunners , believing that the revelation could shatter the Covenant . During the course of Halo 2 , Regret attacks Earth , and then retreats to Delta Halo . There , he calls for reinforcements , but is killed by the Master Chief . Later , Mercy is attacked by Flood on High Charity ; Truth could have saved him , but left him to die so he could have full control over the Covenant . In Halo 3 : ODST , Truth is seen inspecting some Engineers around the Forerunner construct near New Mombasa . In Halo 3 , Truth also meets his demise at the hands of the Arbiter when the Prophet attempts to activate all the Halo rings from the Ark . 
 Preliminary designs for the Prophets , including the Hierarchs , were done by artist Shi Kai Wang . According to The Art of Halo , the Prophets were designed to look feeble , yet sinister . Originally , the Prophets appeared to be fused to the special hovering thrones they use for transport ; even in the final designs , the Prophets are made to be dependent on their technology . Special headdresses , stylized differently for each of the Hierarchs , adds personality to the aliens and a regal presence . 
 = = = Arbiter = = = 
 The Arbiter is a rank given to special Covenant Elite soldiers who undertake suicidal missions on behalf of the Hierarchs to gain honor upon their death . They are revered amongst the Covenant for their bravery and skills . In Halo 2 , the rank of Arbiter is given to Thel ' <unk> , the disgraced former Supreme Commander of the Fleet of Particular Justice , which was responsible for destroying Reach . It was under his watch that Installation 04 was destroyed in Halo : Combat Evolved and the Ascendant Justice was captured by the Master Chief in Halo : First Strike . Rather than killing him , the Prophets allow the Commander to become the Arbiter , and to carry on his missions as the " Blade of the Prophets . " Eventually , the Arbiter rebels against the Prophets , dropping the " <unk> " suffix from his surname as a symbol of his resignation from the Covenant , and joins his fellow Elites in siding with humanity and stopping the Halo array from firing . This particular Arbiter is voiced by Keith David . 
 Originally to be named " Dervish , " the Arbiter was a playable character intended to be a major plot twist by Bungie . Reception to the character was lukewarm , with critics alternatively praising the added dimension brought by the Arbiter as well as complaining about having to play as the alien . 
 In Halo Wars , set 20 years before Halo : Combat Evolved , a second Arbiter is shown , possibly as the last to wear the armor before the more recognized character . He is described as a " mean guy , " lead designer David Pottinger comparing him to Darth Vader . The second Arbiter is the main antagonist of Halo Wars . He leads the Covenant to the fleet of Forerunner ships as well as capturing Ellen Anders in order to do so . After a fight he is killed by Sergeant Forge and a Spartan rolls his body off a cliff . This particular Arbiter is voiced by David Sobolov . 
 = = = Rtas ' Vadum = = = 
 Making his debut in Halo 2 , Special Ops Commander Rtas ' Vadum is never named in the game itself , leading to the unofficial nickname of " Half @-@ Jaw " by fans , due to the missing mandibles on the left side of his face . With the release of The Halo Graphic Novel , however , the character was finally named in the story Last Voyage of the Infinite Succor as Rtas ' Vadumee . The character is voiced by Robert Davi . 
 <unk> , originally ' Vadumee before the Covenant Civil War , is a veteran Covenant Elite and the second most prominent Elite character in the series after the Arbiter . The Last Voyage of the Infinite Succor explains how he loses his left mandibles ; he is injured after fighting one of his friends , who was infected by the Flood . During the early events of Halo 2 , ' Vadumee serves as a messenger between the Hierarchs and the Elite Council , as he is seen relaying messages between the two parties in the Prophets ' chamber ; when the Elites split from the Covenant , ' Vadumee joins his brethren in fighting the Brutes , dropping the " <unk> " suffix from his surname to symbolize his resignation from the Covenant . In Halo 3 , ' Vadum is <unk> of the flagship Shadow of Intent , and supports Cortana 's plan to follow Truth to the Ark . Along with the Arbiter , ' Vadum leaves Earth to return to the Elite 's homeworld with the end of the war . Rtas ' Vadum is known for being a quick , smart , and ingenious tactician and an unparalleled fighter , especially with an Energy Sword and is an excellent leader . He expresses great care for his soldiers , even the Unggoy . He is eager to exact revenge on the Brutes after the Great Schism . 
 = = = Tartarus = = = 
 Tartarus ( voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson ) is the Chieftain of the Brutes , easily recognized by his white hair , distinctive mohawk , and massive gravity hammer known as the " Fist of <unk> . " Rough , arrogant , and disdainful of the Elites , Tartarus is completely dedicated to the Prophets ' salvific " Great Journey . " Halo : Contact Harvest reveals that Tartarus became Chieftain after killing the former Chieftain , his uncle Maccabeus , and seizing the Chieftain 's weapon . Tartarus makes his first appearance in the novel Halo : First Strike , as one of the first Brutes allowed into the chamber of the High Prophet of Truth . In Halo 2 , Tartarus acts as an agent of the Prophets , branding the Arbiter for his failures . The Chieftain later appears when the Arbiter tries to retrieve the Activation Index of Delta Halo . On the Prophets ' orders , Tartarus takes the Index and pushes the Arbiter to what was intended to be his death in a deep chasm . Tartarus heads to the control room of Halo with the Index in order to activate Halo , but is confronted by the Arbiter . Blind to the Prophets ' deception about the Great Journey , Tartarus activates the ring ; the Brute is ultimately killed by the coordinated efforts of the Arbiter with the help of Sergeant Major Johnson , successfully preventing the firing of Delta Halo . 
 Designs for Tartarus began after the basic shape and design of the common Brutes was complete . Artist Shi Kai Wang added small but distinctive changes to Tartarus ' armor and mane in order to distinguish the Chieftain from the other Brutes . The visual design of the Chieftains was later modified for Halo 3 , with the seasoned warriors sporting more elaborate headdresses and shoulder pads . In a review of the character , UGO Networks noted that whereas the Elites " are a precision scalpel , " Tartarus was a " baseball bat " that smashes everything in its path , a reference to their ceremonial weapons , the Energy Sword and Gravity Hammer , respectively . 
 = = Forerunner = = 
 = = = 343 Guilty Spark = = = 
 343 Guilty Spark ( or Guilty Spark ) ( voiced by Tim Dadabo ) is a robot character who appears in the original Halo trilogy . 343 Guilty Spark is an artificial intelligence designed to serve Forerunners . His identity module was sourced from a human named Chakas , who was composed by the Didact , which is to say that he was digitized at the expense of his biological form . Guilty Spark was fragmented into several independently operating fragments , one of which was uploaded in the familiar , floating , blue @-@ eyed , geometric orb , first encountered in Halo : Combat Evolved , and assigned to Installation 04 ( codenamed Alpha Halo ) under the title of Monitor . Although an identity module is required for an artificial intelligence to operate , it may occasionally lead to complications arising from free will – for example , the containment of a Flood outbreak should always assume the highest priority for a Monitor ; however , in a moment of weakness he disregarded his assigned prioritization , in favour of preserving the structural integrity of the replacement Installation . 
 This is the first and only fragment to be encountered by the player , at the end of Halo 's sixth level , " 343 Guilty Spark , " after the Flood breach containment . He enlists the help of the Master Chief , whom he calls a " Reclaimer , " to activate Halo 's defenses , neglecting to tell the Master Chief that Halo 's " defenses " would cause the destruction of all sentient life in the galaxy . He attempts to stop the Master Chief and Cortana from destroying the Pillar of Autumn , and thereby destroying Halo , but is ultimately thwarted when the ship explodes and destabilizes his ring , causing it to break up . Discovered in the system by the Covenant , Spark , known as an " Oracle " to the Prophets , eventually informs the Covenant Hierarchs of how to activate Installation 05 in Halo 2 . In Halo 3 , Spark allies with the humans and Elites ; since his installation has been destroyed and he has no more orders , Spark decides to help the Master Chief . Leading the Chief across the Ark , Guilty Spark discovers a new , uncompleted Halo , which is being built to replace Installation 04 . Guilty Spark is ecstatic , but when Sergeant Johnson prepares to fire the new Halo to stop the Flood — a process that would destroy the incomplete ring and damage the Ark — Spark goes berserk , refusing to let the <unk> destroy " his " ring . He is subsequently destroyed by the Master Chief with a Spartan Laser , but Sergeant Johnson is fatally wounded in the fight . 
 Bungie originally wanted Guilty Spark to sound similar to the robot C @-@ 3PO . Dadabo noted in an interview that reactions to his character have been hostile , finding Spark highly annoying . He described Spark 's character as a " bastard " who strings others along in order to accomplish his ends . An annual Halloween pumpkin carving contest named 343 Guilt O 'Lantern is organized by Halo.Bungie.Org ; both the contest 's title and logo use the character 's design and name as inspiration . Gaming site GameDaily listed Guilty Spark as one of the top " evil masterminds " of video games , stating " If HAL @-@ 9000 had any distant relatives , [ Guilty Spark would ] be closest of kin . " 
 The Forerunner Saga reveals Guilty Spark to have barely survived the events of Halo 3 . 
 = = = 05 @-@ 032 Mendicant Bias = = = 
 05 @-@ 032 Mendicant Bias ( " Beggar after Knowledge " as revealed in Halo : Cryptum ) was the Contender @-@ class Forerunner A.I. charged with organizing Forerunner defense against the Flood . It was later defected by Gravemind turning it rampant and against the Forerunners , but was eventually defeated after the firing of the Halo array and broken into sections , one of which was taken to the Ark , while another was left on the Forerunner ship that would eventually be incorporated into the Covenant city of High Charity . It is this section of Mendicant Bias that informs the Covenant Hierarchs of the human 's <unk> from the Forerunners in Halo : Contact Harvest , prompting the Hierarchs to usurp the Covenant leadership and instigate the Human @-@ Covenant War . 
 Mendicant Bias is first encountered in Halo 3 on the Ark , as it attempted to communicate with the Master Chief through Terminals , claiming it sought atonement for its defection to the Flood by helping the Spartan , and was presumably destroyed along with the Ark when the Chief activated the incomplete Halo that the Ark was constructing . 
 = = = Didact = = = 
 The Didact ( voiced by Keith Szarabajka ) is a Forerunner military leader who is married to the Librarian , and is Halo 4 's main antagonist . He develops a deep animosity towards humanity after fighting against them in the Human @-@ Forerunner War . The Didact disagrees with the plan to build the Halo array , and goes into exile in a Cryptum hidden on Earth for years . He is found and awakened by a young Forerunner named Bornstellar . The Didact imprints his consciousness on Bornstellar , who then becomes the <unk> ; when the Ur @-@ Didact is presumed dead after being captured by the Master Builder , Bornstellar assumes the Didact 's role . 
 It was the <unk> who activated the Halo Array . Despite this , the Ur @-@ Didact preferred the Composer – a device capable of digitizing organic intelligences and disintegrating their bodies , thereby starving the Flood without killing billions . However , the Composer was still flawed , desperate to gain an army to fight the Flood , the Ur @-@ Didact used it on humans . Horrified , the Librarian incapacitated him and sealed him away on Requiem , hoping he would eventually come to his senses and help guide Humanity . 
 During the events of Halo 4 , the Ur @-@ Didact tricks the Master Chief and Cortana into releasing him from his Cryptum . He immediately takes control of the Prometheans and is given control by the Storm Covenant , and attacks the UNSC Infinity . After being repelled , the Didact uses his ship to retrieve the Composer from the UNSC Station Ivanoff , followed by the Master Chief and Cortana . After capturing the Composer the Didact heads to Earth . Though he is able to fire the Composer at mid @-@ west North America , the Chief and Cortana destroy his ship with a Havok nuclear warhead . The Didact is incapacitated and falls through a slipspace portal , leaving his fate unknown . 
 = = = Librarian = = = 
 The Librarian is a highly ranked Forerunner who is married to the Didact . The Librarian spares humanity from extinction after their war with the Forerunners . She convinces the Forerunner council to use the Halos as preserves for fauna in addition to weapons . She ultimately incapacitates and imprisons the Ur @-@ Didact to stop his use of the Composer . She is presumed deceased when the Halo Array is fired , but in Primordium 343 Guilty Spark claims she is still alive during the events of the Halo series . 
 During the events of Halo 4 , the Master Chief encounters an archived message from the Librarian , explaining the plans of her husband and his history with humanity . She also explains that she helped guide early humanity 's development so that it one day might attain the " Mantle " as the guardians of life in the galaxy . 
 = = Flood = = 
 = = = Gravemind = = = 
 Gravemind ( voiced by Dee Bradley Baker ) is one of the primary antagonists in the Halo series . The Gravemind is a large , sentient creature of Flood origin , created by the parasite to serve as its central intelligence once a critical biomass has been achieved . It was introduced during the events of Halo 2 , where the creature saves both the Master Chief and Arbiter from their deaths , bringing the two face to face in the bowels of Delta Halo . Gravemind reveals to the Arbiter that the " sacred rings " are actually weapons of last resort ; a fact the Master Chief confirms . In order to stop Halo from being fired , Gravemind teleports the Master Chief and Arbiter to separate locations , but also uses them as a distraction ; Gravemind infects the human ship In Amber Clad , and uses it to invade the Covenant city of High Charity . Capturing Cortana , Gravemind brings High Charity to the Ark in an effort to stop the High Prophet of Truth from activating the Halo network . Although the Master Chief destroys High Charity , Gravemind attempts to rebuild itself on the incomplete Halo . When Halo is activated , Gravemind is resigned to his fate , determined that the activation of the ring will only slow , not stop , the progress of the Flood . 
 Designed to be a massive , horrifying combination of tentacles and rotting matter , reception to the character was generally mixed . Mike Leonard of the <unk> community said that the introduction of the " Little Shop of Horrors " reject " ruined the ' cool ' " of the Halo franchise . Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com complained that the link between Gravemind and the Flood was never explicitly stated in either Halo 2 or Halo 3 and was hardly seen in the last game . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The Halo franchise has produced numerous merchandising partnerships , and the characters of Halo have likewise been featured in a variety of products . The Master Chief , being the symbol of the franchise , has appeared on everything from soda to T @-@ shirts and mugs . At one point , marketers for Halo 3 were planning on producing Cortana @-@ themed lingerie . There have also been several series of licensed action figures produced , with the Halo : Combat Evolved and Halo 2 collectibles being produced by Joyride Studios in several series . For Halo 3 , the responsibility of designing the action figures was given to McFarlane Toys ; a total of eight series have been announced , with ninth series devoted to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the franchise by re @-@ issuing a few of the earlier figurines along with pieces to construct a buildable plaque of the Legendary icon used in the game for the hardest skill level . Kotobukiya produced high @-@ end figurines . Besides general figures like Covenant Elites and Spartans , figurines produced include the Master Chief , Cortana , Arbiter , Prophet of Regret , Tartarus , and Sergeant Johnson . 
 = Hurricane Ignacio ( 2003 ) = 
 Hurricane Ignacio was the latest @-@ forming first hurricane of a Pacific hurricane season since reliable satellite observation began in 1966 . The ninth tropical storm of the 2003 Pacific hurricane season , Ignacio developed out of a tropical wave on August 22 a short distance off the coast of Mexico . It was initially predicted to track out to sea and remain a weak tropical storm , though it unexpectedly organized rapidly to attain peak winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on August 24 while located a short distance southeast of southern Baja California . Land interaction weakened Ignacio to an 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) hurricane by the time it made landfall near La Paz , and it dissipated on August 27 in the central region of the Baja California peninsula . 
 The hurricane produced heavy rainfall in southern Baja California , killing two rescue works from floodwaters . Resort areas near the coast experienced minor effects , though further inland the damage was more severe . The impact of Ignacio was compounded by flooding from Hurricane Marty a month later , with damage from the two hurricanes totaling about $ 1 billion ( 2003 USD , $ 1 @.@ 1 billion 2006 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave exited the coast of Africa on August 6 . It moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean without development , and entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 16 after crossing Central America . Cloudiness and convection gradually increased along the wave axis and organized into a distinct area of disturbed weather on August 20 while located a short distance south of Manzanillo , Mexico . It slowly became better organized as it moved northwestward in an area favorable for continued development . With light vertical wind shear and warm water temperatures , the convection concentrated around a developing low @-@ level circulation , and on August 22 it organized enough for the National Hurricane Center to classify it as Tropical Depression Nine @-@ E while it was located about 115 miles ( 185 km ) west of the Mexico mainland or about 220 miles ( 345 km ) southeast of the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula . With an anticyclone located over the southwestern United States and a ridge extending southward into northwestern Mexico , the National Hurricane Center initially predicted the depression to track generally west @-@ northwestward out to sea and reach peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . 
 The tropical depression moved slowly northwestward , with the slow motion persisting for its entire lifetime due to the storm being embedded within the weakness of a mid @-@ level ridge to its north . Shortly after forming , the storm was located in a marginally favorable environment , with westerly wind shear and dry air approaching the depression and leaving the center of circulation exposed from the convection . However , the wind shear subsequently decreased , and early on August 23 the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Ignacio . The storm quickly organized and developed well @-@ defined banding features and very well @-@ organized upper @-@ level outflow , and by late on August 23 a warm spot formed in the center of the convection . The warm spot organized into an intermittent eye feature . Early on August 24 , Ignacio attained hurricane status , the latest formation of the first hurricane of a season recorded in the East Pacific since reliable satellite observation began in 1966 . 
 Hurricane Ignacio continued to quickly intensify after becoming a hurricane , and reached peak winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) later on August 24 while located within 30 miles ( 48 km / h ) off the coast of Baja California Sur . Upon reaching peak strength , the hurricane possessed a 12 mile ( 19 km ) wide eye surrounded by very deep convection . The National Hurricane Center predicted it to attain major hurricane status and potentially reach significantly higher winds if the center remained over open water . However , it turned to the northwest and paralleled the Baja California Peninsula a short distance offshore , resulting in a steady weakening trend due to its interaction with the high terrain . On August 25 Ignacio made landfall just east of La Paz with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . It rapidly weakened over land , first deteriorating to a tropical storm 12 hours after landfall and later to a tropical depression about a day after moving ashore . Ignacio continued northwestward across the peninsula , and dissipated on August 28 while located in northwestern Baja California Sur . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Coinciding with the issuance of the first advisory on Ignacio , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch from Santa Fe to La Paz , with the watch upgraded to a warning nine hours later . The warning was extended on both coasts from Bahia Magdalena to San Evaristo the next day . About 48 hours before Ignacio made landfall , a hurricane warning was issued from Santa Fe to La Paz , and 21 hours later extended to Bahia Magdalena and San Evaristo . The government of Mexico also issued a tropical storm warning for the mainland from <unk> to Topolobampo in the state of Sinaloa . 
 The Civil Protection agency for the state of Baja California Sur ordered for the evacuation for 10 @,@ 000 residents in flood @-@ prone areas near La Paz . Officials also moved 700 people in areas near rivers to shelters in Los Cabos . 32 emergency shelters were set up in and around La Paz . Residents near the coast placed sandbags to protect their houses from potential flooding , and also stocked up on hurricane supplies . Police authorities were stationed in areas around Los Cabos to guard against price gouging . Officials closed many schools and businesses throughout the area , and also shut down the area 's primary airport in La Paz . About 500 people in Sinaloa were evacuated , as well . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Prior to developing , the precursor tropical disturbance dropped heavy rainfall and produced gusty winds , primarily from Zihuatanejo in the state of Guerrero to Manzanillo in the state of Colima . The slow motion of Ignacio produced heavy rainfall across the southern portion of the Baja California Peninsula , including a peak 24 ‑ hour total of 7 @.@ 25 inches ( 184 mm ) in Ciudad Constitución . The National Hurricane Center warned of rainfall totals of up to 20 inches ( 500 mm ) in some localized areas , which did verify in Los Cabos . Ignacio produced strong waves which hit the eastern Baja California coastline . Swells of 10 feet ( 3 m ) in height in La Paz closed the city 's small port . 
 Hurricane @-@ force winds blew down trees , signs , and power lines in and around La Paz , while closer to the beach the hurricane destroyed multiple beach huts . Rough surf in the harbor of La Paz sunk one fishing vessel and grounded four others . Efforts by the Mexican Navy prevented an additional vessel and two cruise ships from being grounded . In Cabo San Lucas , effects were minimal , amounting to light winds and rain of less than 2 inches ( 50 mm ) . The passage of the hurricane left citizens in Todos Santos without power for around 24 hours . Heavy rainfall caused severe inland flooding , destroying bridges and multiple mudslides , some of which blocked roads . Flash flooding in desert inland areas washed out roads , causing the Mexican government to restrict traffic through much of the peninsula for up to a week after the storm . Many roads remained impassable for a month after the hurricane . The closed roads and the airport in La Paz and southern Baja California left some tourists stranded . The rainfall was welcome in some desert areas , where the moderate precipitation filled reservoirs . Two rescue workers died when they were swept away by the floodwaters . Six municipalities in Baja California were declared disaster areas , and by four days after landfall , the Mexican government prepared emergency funds to meet the immediate needs of the affected citizens . 
 Heavy rainfall was also reported in Sinaloa on the Mexican mainland . The remnants of Ignacio produced thunderstorm activity in high terrain areas of central interior California . Over 300 lightning strikes from the remnant moisture was recorded in a one @-@ hour period . The lightning caused 14 forest fires in Merced County , resulting in a loss of power to over 3 @,@ 500 customers in and around the Atwater area . 
 Just a month after Ignacio , Hurricane Marty passed through the area , causing additional damage to areas hit by Ignacio . The combined damage from the two hurricanes totaled about $ 1 billion ( 2003 USD , $ 1 @.@ 1 billion 2006 USD ) , and the effects from the two storms left at least 50 @,@ 000 homeless . 
 = SMS König Albert = 
 SMS König Albert was the fourth vessel of the Kaiser class of battleships of the Imperial German Navy . König Albert 's keel was laid on 17 July 1910 at the Schichau @-@ Werke dockyard in Danzig . She was launched on 27 April 1912 and was commissioned into the fleet on 31 July 1913 . The ship was equipped with ten 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in five twin turrets , and had a top speed of 22 @.@ 1 knots ( 40 @.@ 9 km / h ; 25 @.@ 4 mph ) . König Albert was assigned to the III Battle Squadron and later the IV Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career , including World War I. 
 Along with her four sister ships , Kaiser , Friedrich der Grosse , Kaiserin , and Prinzregent Luitpold , König Albert participated in most of the major fleet operations of World War I , though she was in drydock for maintenance during the Battle of Jutland between 31 May and 1 June 1916 . As a result , she was the only battleship actively serving with the fleet that missed the largest naval battle of the war . The ship was also involved in Operation Albion , an amphibious assault on the Russian @-@ held islands in the Gulf of Riga , in late 1917 . 
 After Germany 's defeat in the war and the signing of the Armistice in November 1918 , König Albert and most of the capital ships of the High Seas Fleet were interned by the Royal Navy in Scapa Flow . The ships were disarmed and reduced to skeleton crews while the Allied powers negotiated the final version of the Treaty of Versailles . On 21 June 1919 , days before the treaty was signed , the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the fleet to be scuttled to ensure that the British would not be able to seize the ships . König Albert was raised in July 1935 and subsequently broken up for scrap in 1936 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Ordered under the contract name Ersatz Ägir as a replacement for the obsolete coastal defense ship SMS Ägir , König Albert was laid down at the Schichau @-@ Werke dockyard in Danzig on 17 July 1910 . She was launched on 27 April 1912 ; Princess Mathilde of Saxony christened the ship , and her brother , the last king of Saxony , Friedrich August III gave the speech . Following the completion of fitting @-@ out work , the ship was commissioned into the fleet on 31 July 1913 . 
 The ship was 172 @.@ 40 m ( 565 ft 7 in ) long overall and displaced a maximum of 27 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 26 @,@ 570 long tons ) . She had a beam of 29 m ( 95 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 10 m ( 29 ft 10 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 80 m ( 28 ft 10 in ) aft . König Albert was powered by three sets of Schichau turbines , supplied with steam by 16 coal @-@ fired boilers . The powerplant produced a top speed of 22 @.@ 1 knots ( 40 @.@ 9 km / h ; 25 @.@ 4 mph ) . She carried 3 @,@ 600 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 500 long tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of 7 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 600 km ; 9 @,@ 100 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 41 officers and 1 @,@ 043 enlisted . 
 König Albert was armed with a main battery of ten 30 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets . The ship disposed of the inefficient hexagonal turret arrangement of previous German battleships ; instead , three of the five turrets were mounted on the centerline , with two of them arranged in a superfiring pair aft . The other two turrets were placed en echelon amidships , such that both could fire on the broadside . The ship was also armed with fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates amidships , eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates and four 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . The ship 's armament was rounded out by five 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted in the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Although König Albert was the last ship in her class to be launched , she was the third to be commissioned , owing to turbine damage on Kaiserin and delays on Prinzregent Luitpold 's diesel engine . The ship was selected to form part of the special Detached Division , alongside her sister Kaiser and the light cruiser Strassburg . The Division was placed under the command of Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) von Rebeur Paschwitz and sent on a tour of South America , with the goals of testing the new turbine propulsion system and representing the growing power of the Imperial Navy . The three ships left Wilhelmshaven on 9 December 1913 and steamed for German West Africa , where they made several stops , including Lomé , Togo , and Victoria and Duala , Kamerun . The Division then proceeded to German South @-@ West Africa , making stops in Swakopmund and <unk> , and South Africa , stopping in Saint Helena en route . On 15 February 1914 , the Division reached Rio de Janeiro , which ceremonially greeted the visiting German warships . 
 From Rio de Janeiro , Strassburg went to Buenos Aires , Argentina , while König Albert and Kaiser steamed to Montevideo , Uruguay . Strassburg then rejoined the battleships in Montevideo , and all three then rounded Cape Horn and steamed to Valparaíso , Chile . Between 2 and 11 April they remained in Valparaiso , which marked the furthest point of their journey . On the return voyage , the three ships made additional stops , including in Bahía Blanca , Argentina , before returning to Rio de Janeiro . The Division then began the trip back to Germany , stopping in Cape Verde , Madeira , and Vigo . The ships reached Kiel on 17 June 1914 , after having traveled some 20 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 37 @,@ 000 km ; 23 @,@ 000 mi ) without incident . On 24 June , the Detached Division was dissolved , and König Albert and Kaiser joined their classmates in the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Throughout the first two years of the war , the High Seas Fleet , including König Albert , conducted a number of sweeps and advances into the North Sea . The first occurred on 2 – 3 November 1914 , though no British forces were encountered . Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , adopted a strategy in which the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group raided British coastal towns to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . The raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 was the first such operation . On the evening of 15 December , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts — including König Albert and her four sisters — and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced von Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire British Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned back toward Germany . 
 Following the loss of SMS Blücher at the Battle of Dogger Bank in January 1915 , the Kaiser removed Admiral von Ingenohl from his post on 2 February . Admiral Hugo von Pohl replaced him as commander of the fleet . Admiral von Pohl conducted a series of fleet advances in 1915 in which König Albert took part ; in the first one on 29 – 30 March , the fleet steamed out to the north of Terschelling and returned without incident . Another followed on 17 – 18 April , where König Albert and the rest of the fleet covered a mining operation by the II Scouting Group . Three days later , on 21 – 22 April , the High Seas Fleet advanced toward the Dogger Bank , though again failed to meet any British forces . On 15 May , a bushing came loose in the ship 's starboard turbine , which forced the crew to turn the engine off and decouple it . The center and port side shafts were still capable of propelling the ship at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) , however . On 29 – 30 May , the fleet attempted to conduct a sweep in the North Sea , but inclement weather forced Pohl to cancel the operation some 50 nmi ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) off Schiermonnikoog . The fleet remained in port until 10 August , when it sortied to Helgoland to cover the return of the auxiliary cruiser Möwe . A month later , on 11 – 12 September , the fleet covered another mine @-@ laying operation off the Swarte Bank . The last operation of the year , conducted on 23 – 24 October , was an advance in the direction of Horns Reef which concluded without result . 
 On 11 January 1916 , Admiral Reinhard Scheer replaced the ailing von Pohl , who was suffering from liver cancer . Scheer proposed a more aggressive policy designed to force a confrontation with the Grand Fleet ; he received approval from the Kaiser in February . The first of Scheer 's operations was conducted the following month , on 5 – 7 March , with an uneventful sweep of the Hoofden . On 25 – 26 March , Scheer attempted to attack British forces that had raided Tondern , but failed to locate them . Another advance to Horns Reef followed on 21 – 22 April . On 24 April , the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group conducted a raid on the English coast . König Albert and the rest of the fleet sailed in distant support . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft unopposed , but during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short artillery duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . 
 After the raid on Yarmouth , several of the III Squadron battleships developed problems with their condensers . This included König Albert ; tubing needed to be replaced in all three main condensers , which necessitated extensive dockyard work . The ship went into drydock in the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven on 29 May , two days before the rest of the fleet departed for the Battle of Jutland . Work on the ship was not completed until 15 June , and as a result , König Albert was the only German dreadnought in active service to miss the battle . On 18 August 1916 , König Albert took part in an operation to bombard Sunderland . Admiral Scheer attempted a repeat of the original 31 May plan : the two serviceable German battlecruisers — Moltke and Von der Tann — augmented by three faster dreadnoughts , were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Vice Admiral David Beatty 's battlecruisers . Scheer would trail behind with the rest of the fleet and provide support . Scheer turned north after receiving a false report from a zeppelin about a British unit in the area . As a result , the bombardment was not carried out , and by 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and so turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Another fleet operation took place on 18 – 19 October , though it ended without encountering any British units . Unit training in the Baltic was then conducted , and on the return voyage the III Squadron was diverted to assist in the recovery of a pair of U @-@ boats stranded on the Danish coast . The fleet was reorganized on 1 December ; the four König @-@ class battleships remained in the III Squadron , along with the newly commissioned Bayern , while the five Kaiser @-@ class ships , including König Albert , were transferred to IV Squadron . König Albert saw no major operations in the first half of 1917 , and on 18 August she went into drydock at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel for periodic maintenance , which lasted until 23 September . 
 = = = = Operation Albion = = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German naval command decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . On 18 September , the Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) issued the order for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands . The naval component , organized as a Special Unit ( Sonderverband ) , was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . Along with nine light cruisers , three torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , supported by over 100 aircraft and six zeppelins . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while König Albert and the rest of IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on Ösel . The coastal artillery in both locations were quickly silenced by the battleships ' heavy guns . On the morning of the 14th , König Albert , Friedrich der Grosse , and Kaiserin were detached to support German troops advancing toward <unk> . König Albert and Kaiserin were assigned to suppress a Russian battery at Zerel , though heavy fog delayed them from engaging the target . The Russians opened fire first , which was quickly returned by the two ships . Friedrich der Grosse came to the two ships ' assistance and the three battleships fired a total of 120 large @-@ caliber shells at the battery at Zerel over the span of an hour . The battleships ' gunfire prompted most of the Russian gun crews to flee their posts . 
 On the night of 15 October , König Albert and Kaiserin were sent to replenish their coal stocks in Putzig . On the 19th , they were briefly joined in Putzig by Friedrich der Grosse , which continued on to Arensburg with Moltke . The next morning , Vice Admiral Schmidt ordered the special naval unit to be dissolved ; in a communique to the naval headquarters , Schmidt noted that " Kaiserin and König Albert can immediately be detached from Putzig to the North Sea . " The two ships then proceeded to Kiel via Danzig , where they transited the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal back to the North Sea . After returning to the North Sea on 23 October , König Albert served as the flagship for a force of heavy ships , including Kaiserin , Nassau , Rheinland , and the battlecruiser Derfflinger , supporting a mine @-@ sweeping operation in the German Bight . Afterward she resumed guard duty in the Bight . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 König Albert and her four sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , despite the expected casualties . However , many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The ship remained on picket duty in the Bight until 10 November . This kept her away from the mutinous vessels , until she returned to port and her crew joined the mutiny . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made it clear to von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . This consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and enlisted men . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . König Albert capsized and sank at 12 : 54 . On 31 July 1935 , the ship was raised and broken up for scrap over the following year in Rosyth . 
 = Anticipating = 
 " Anticipating " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her self @-@ titled third studio album , Britney ( 2001 ) . It was written by Spears alongside the song 's producers Brian Kierulf and Josh Schwartz . The song was released on June 24 , 2002 , by Jive Records , as the fourth single from the album in France . Lyrically , the disco song is about friendship and <unk> between women . It was met with critical praise , with reviewers complimenting its empowering lyrics and comparing it to 1980s compositions of Madonna , Rick Astley and Janet Jackson 's " All for You " . 
 " Anticipating " achieved minor commercial success , peaking at number 38 on the French Singles Chart . The song was promoted with a performance in the Dream Within a Dream Tour ( 2001 – 2002 ) , where Spears wore a patched denim skirt and danced in front of giant crayon drawings . An accompanying music video , directed by Marty Callner , consisted of the performance from Live from Las Vegas . " Anticipating " was also promoted in a commercial Spears filmed for Toyota <unk> . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Oops ! ... I Did It Again Tour ( 2000 ) , Spears revealed she felt inspired by hip hop artists such as Jay @-@ Z and The Neptunes and wanted to create a record with a funkier sound . In February 2001 , Spears signed a $ 7 – 8 million promotional deal with Pepsi , and released another book co @-@ written with her mother , entitled A Mother 's Gift . On the same month , Spears started to record material for her third studio album , with " Anticipating " being recorded at Rusk Sound Studios in Los Angeles , California , the <unk> in Jackson , New Jersey , Sound on Sound Studios and Battery Studios in New York City . The song was written by Spears , Brian Kierulf and Josh Schwartz while produced by Kierulf and Schwartz . It was also mixed at Battery Studios by Stephen George . Audio engineering was done by Aaron Kaplan , Rich Tapper , Jill Tengan and Charles <unk> . Nile Rodgers played the guitar . Bass guitar and programming was done by Kierulf . Background vocals were provided by Spears and Jennifer Karr . Her third studio album , Britney , was released in November 2001 . In an interview with the Daily Record , Spears commented on the track , saying , " It 's just a fun song that I wrote . It 's just like being with your girlfriends and just dancing . I think this track also has a very Seventies ' feel to it . " It was released as the fourth single from the album on June 24 , 2002 in France . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Anticipating " is a teen pop and dance @-@ pop that lasts for three minutes and 16 seconds . Corey Moss of MTV noted the song also has a 1970s disco sound , while Joan Anderman of The Boston Globe compared it to early Madonna tracks such as " Holiday " ( 1983 ) . Glenn Gamboa of Newsday compared the song to Janet Jackson 's " All for You " , calling it " pleasant , shimmering R & B @-@ styled pop " . According to the sheetmusic published at musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing Group , the song is composed in the key of F major and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 112 beats per minute . Spears vocal range spans from the low @-@ key of F3 to the high @-@ note of A4 . The song has a basic sequence of B ♯ ( 9 ) – C – Dm7 – B ♯ ( 9 ) as its chord progression . Lyrically , it talks about friendship and <unk> between women . During the bridge , Spears sings , " Gotta really let me know if you want me / You gotta turn me on and make me feel sexy " . During the time of the album 's release , her official site stated that " the girl @-@ power anthem ' Anticipating ' proves that Britney is , now more than ever , a force to be reckoned with . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Anticipating " received critical acclaim from music critics . Jane Stevenson of Jam ! called " Anticipating " the strongest track in the album . Yale Daily News writer Catherine Halaby called it a " fun , cutesy disco ballad " . Nikki Tranker of PopMatters said it " offers Britney ’ s fans something a little different with a simple tune beautifully underlined by a well @-@ executed ‘ 70s disco sound " . Jim Farber of the Daily News while reviewing the Dream Within a Dream Tour named it along with " Stronger " , " [ two ] girl @-@ power anthems " . Katie Perone of the Loyola Greyhound said " [ it ] is a fun , bubbly song that probably would have had great success on Oops ! " . Barry Walters of Rolling Stone stated the song is " a euphoric Rick Astley flashback , [ where ] she emotes without framing her vocals in Nickelodeon @-@ schooled theatricality " . In a list compiled by Sam Lanksy of Pop Crush , " Anticipating " was ranked eight in a list of Spears ' best songs . In the album review , David Browne of Entertainment Weekly criticized " Anticipating " along with " Bombastic Love " for " [ relying ] on enervated formulas " . On July 26 , 2002 , the song entered at number 46 in the French Singles Chart . The following week , it peaked at number 38 . " Anticipating " spent a total of 13 weeks on the chart . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The song was performed at the Dream Within a Dream Tour . The performance began with a video interlude of Spears talking to her dancers . She then appeared onstage , wearing a patched denim skirt . The set was made of giant coloring book drawings of houses and cars . After the second chorus , she invited the audience to sing along with her . At the end of the song , she briefly talked to the audience before taking off the skirt and top to perform " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . Shaheem Reid of MTV noted that during the opening night of the tour in Columbus , Ohio , " Britney must 've forgotten that the disco @-@ era throwback cut was brand spanking new , because she kept encouraging everyone to sing along to the chorus [ ... ] Although the crowd clapped and bobbed to the beat , Britney had to go this one alone vocally " . The music video , directed by Marty Callner , consisted of footage of the tour performance from Live from Las Vegas . Several effects were added , including a glittering ball and the name of the song appearing on the screen . The song was also promoted in a commercial Spears filmed for Toyota <unk> . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Britney 's liner notes . 
 Technical 
 Recorded at Rusk Sound Studios in Los Angeles , California , the <unk> in Jackson , New Jersey , Sound on Sound Studios and Battery Studios in New York City , New York . 
 Mixed at Battery Studios in New York City , New York . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Royce White = 
 Royce Alexander White ( born April 10 , 1991 ) is an American professional basketball player who has played for the Sacramento Kings of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He was the 16th selection of the 2012 NBA Draft by the Houston Rockets and has played in the NBA Development League for the Rio Grande Valley Vipers and Reno Bighorns on assignment from the Rockets and Kings , respectively . White previously played college basketball with the Iowa State Cyclones basketball team starring for the 2011 – 12 Cyclones . Before that he was a high school basketball star in the state of Minnesota and had committed to play for the Minnesota Golden Gophers men 's basketball team . He is afflicted with anxiety disorder and has caused disciplinary problems that have necessitated transfers in both high school and college . Concerns about the Rockets ' plan for dealing with his mental health led to White missing all of the 2012 – 13 NBA season for the Rockets despite being under contract . He debuted for the Vipers on February 12 . 
 White was the 2009 Minnesota Mr. Basketball and a two @-@ time Minnesota State High School League ( MSHSL ) championship team member . He was a Class 3A MSHSL champion in 2006 with DeLaSalle High School as a freshman and a Class 4A MSHSL champion in 2009 with Hopkins High School as a senior , leading his school to a perfect ( 31 @-@ 0 ) record . 
 A pair of 2009 incidents led to his suspension from the 2009 – 10 Minnesota Golden Gophers men 's basketball team and withdrawal from the University of Minnesota . White eventually transferred to Iowa State University . He led the 2011 – 12 Cyclones in points , rebounds , assists , steals and blocked shots and was the only Division I basketball player to lead his team in all five statistics . Following the 2011 – 12 Big 12 Conference men 's basketball season , he was named the unanimous Big 12 Newcomer of the Year and was recognized as a first team All @-@ Big 12 and a unanimous Big 12 All @-@ Rookie Team selection . He was selected as an honorable mention Associated Press 2012 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Born in Minneapolis , White traces personal battles with anxiety to a basketball practice when he was 10 years old . He was diagnosed with general anxiety disorder in 2008 . 
 White went to DeLaSalle High School for his freshman to junior years . For his senior year , White went to Hopkins High School . He was rated as the 2nd , 8th and 10th best high school power forward in the national class of 2009 by Rivals.com , ESPN.com and Scout.com , respectively . Rivals ranked him 19th overall , while ESPN ranked him 35th . He had dozens of collegiate scholarship offers , including Minnesota , Creighton , Illinois , Iowa , Iowa State , Michigan State , Purdue , Texas , USC , and Wisconsin . White was one of 20 2009 Jordan Brand Classic All @-@ Americans , and he was recognized by the St. Paul Pioneer Press as a First @-@ Team All @-@ State honoree . 
 As a freshman , White made a jump shot that gave his team the lead for good in the middle of the second half to put his team in the 2006 Minnesota State High School League ( MSHSL ) 3A championship game . The team went on to win the championship . Following his sophomore season where he led DeLaSalle to a 19 – 8 record , White participated in the 2007 LeBron James US Skills Academy in Akron , Ohio and The Nike Global Challenge at the University of Portland . As a high school junior , he was suspended for the first two games of the 2007 – 08 season at DeLaSalle and later dismissed from school after the team struggled to an 11 – 10 start . After transferring to Hopkins , he won the Class 4A MSHSL Championship in 2009 , giving him his second state championship . Hopkins finished 10th in the final USA Today national poll , with a 31 – 0 record . 
 = = College = = 
 = = = Minnesota = = = 
 White pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct after being suspended for the 2009 – 10 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season in October 2009 for an incident at the Mall of America . In the October 13 incident , he was initially accused of taking $ 100 worth of clothes and of fifth @-@ degree assault when he allegedly pushed a mall security officer to the ground twice , but he claimed the security officer was charging at him and he was defending himself . The suspension was for competition and travel , but at the discretion of head coach Tubby Smith , White could attend practices . According to his grandfather , he attended some Gopher practices in December . 
 White was initially a suspect in a November laptop computer theft incident , but he was not formally charged with trespassing until January . When he was charged in the incident involving allegations of laptop theft from a university dorm , he left the University of Minnesota in February 2010 . He had unofficially announced his departure from Minnesota via YouTube in November , but had not formally notified the athletic department . Despite his legal difficulties , White achieved better than a 3 @.@ 0 grade point average in his first semester at Minnesota . While suspended from the team , he spent some of his extracurricular time on his music career . 
 Following his departure from Minnesota , White initially gave up on transferring to continue playing college basketball . He was considered to be an National Basketball Association Draft first round talent at the time . Iowa State head coach Fred Hoiberg became acquainted with White during his tenure on the staff of the Minnesota Timberwolves . By the summer of 2010 , he weighed 250 pounds ( 113 @.@ 4 kg ) . At one point , White was expected to transfer to Kentucky . White explained that John Calipari had called him to transfer to Kentucky the next day , but White 's fear of flying and an anxiety disorder triggered a panic attack , which caused him to cancel his trip to sign with the team . 
 = = = Iowa State = = = 
 Because White did not officially depart Minnesota until the middle of his second semester , he was academically ineligible to receive a scholarship from any Division I school in 2010 . The National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) usually requires a two semester residency for transfers . He transferred to Iowa State prior to using any of his athletic eligibility at Minnesota and applied to the NCAA for a waiver to be eligible to play during the 2010 – 11 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season , but the NCAA denied his waiver . Iowa State appealed the decision , but their appeal was denied . 
 At Iowa State , White joined a team that included several transfer students . He was voted as the 2011 – 12 Big 12 Preseason Newcomer of the Year and then won the first Phillips 66 Big 12 Rookie of the Week award of the season following his November 12 double @-@ double debut performance against Lehigh with 25 points and 11 rebounds . White had a double @-@ double in his second career game as well three nights later against Drake with 21 points and 14 rebounds . Then on November 25 against Providence , he recorded 16 rebounds . On December 3 , against 15th @-@ ranked Michigan he recorded a double @-@ double with 22 points and 13 rebounds as well as 4 steals . 
 In conference play , White posted his first triple @-@ double on January 7 against Texas A & M with 10 points , 18 rebounds and 10 assists plus a block and two steals . His triple @-@ double was one of thirteen NCAA DI triple doubles during the season . It was the fourth in Cyclones history and the first in a road game . It was the twelfth in Big 12 conference history and the sixth in intraconference play . On January 9 , White was recognized for a second time as Phillips 66 Big 12 Rookie of the Week for leading Iowa State to its fifth 2 – 0 Big 12 start ever . On January 14 , White posted a double @-@ double against tenth @-@ ranked Kansas with 18 points and 17 rebounds . On January 24 , White posted 15 points and 15 rebounds against Texas for his sixth double @-@ double . On January 31 , White scored 22 points , including the winning shot with 1 @.@ 8 seconds left in a 72 – 70 victory over Kansas State . White 's seventh double @-@ double came on February 7 against Oklahoma State when he scored 15 points and added 12 rebounds . On February 22 , White posted 13 points and 10 rebounds to go along with 8 assists against Texas Tech for his eighth double @-@ double of the season . For the week of February 20 – 26 White averaged 11 points , 11 rebounds and 7 @.@ 5 assists while shooting 57 @.@ 1 % from the field to earn his third Big 12 Rookie of the Week award . At the time of his third rookie of the week recognition , he was the only Big 12 player in the conference 's top 5 in terms of rebounds and assists . White concluded the regular season with a double double against Baylor on March 3 when he totaled 11 points , 11 rebounds and 4 assists . 
 He added a 17 @-@ point , 10 @-@ rebound double double in the 2012 Big 12 Men 's Basketball Tournament in a loss to Texas . In Iowa State 's opening game of the 2012 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , White posted 15 points and 11 rebounds in a victory over Connecticut . His season concluded with a 23 @-@ point , 9 @-@ rebound , 4 @-@ assist and 3 @-@ steal performance in a loss to Kentucky . White fouled out for the first time in his career in the game and ended the season with 11 double @-@ doubles . White finished the season as the team leader in points , rebounds , assists , steals and blocks , making him the only player in Division I basketball to do so . 
 On March 4 , following the 2011 – 12 Big 12 Conference men 's basketball season , he was named the unanimous Big 12 Newcomer of the Year and was recognized as a First team All @-@ Big 12 and a unanimous Big 12 All @-@ Rookie Team selection by the Big 12 coaches . In addition , he was selected as Big 12 Newcomer of the Year and was recognized as a First team All @-@ Big 12 selection by both the Associated Press and the Kansas City Star . He concluded the regular season 2nd in the Big 12 in rebounding and 5th in assists with averages of 9 @.@ 2 and 5 @.@ 2 , respectively . On March 1 , he was named to the 30 @-@ player midseason Naismith College Player of the Year Award watchlist . He was selected by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association to its 10 @-@ man 2011 – 12 Men 's All @-@ District VI ( IA , MO , KS , OK , NE , ND , SD ) Team . White was a first team selection to the National Association of Basketball Coaches Division I All ‐ District 8 team on March 14 . White was named an honorable mention Associated Press All @-@ American . 
 White was the only player in the nation to lead his team in the five major statistical categories : points ( 13 @.@ 4 ) , rebounding ( 9 @.@ 3 ) , assists ( 5 @.@ 0 ) , steals ( 1 @.@ 1 ) and blocks ( 0 @.@ 9 ) . He was the first cyclone since Fred Hoiberg ( 1993 – 94 ) and second ever to lead the team in points , rebounds and assists . His final Big 12 rankings were 2nd in both rebounding and field goal percentage ( 53 @.@ 4 % ) as well as 5th in assists . He ranked 34th , 36th and 57th nationally in those same statistics . His 316 rebounds and 170 assists ranked 7th and 10th all @-@ time in school history for single @-@ season totals . His single @-@ season rebound total was the most by a Cyclone since 1978 ( Dean <unk> , 378 ) . 
 On March 21 , 2012 , White chose to forgo his Junior and Senior years at ISU to enter the 2012 NBA Draft . On that date he stated his intent to hire an agent . 
 = = = College statistics = = = 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2012 – 13 = = = 
 At the 2012 NBA Draft Combine , White measured at 6 ' 8 " and had the widest hands — 11 @.@ 5 inches ( 29 @.@ 2 cm ) — of any player participating . According to Iowa State head coach Fred Hoiberg , White was able to bench @-@ press 185 pounds 30 times in pre @-@ combine workouts . White was drafted by the Houston Rockets on June 28 , 2012 with the 16th selection . He was represented by Andrew Vye and Andy Miller of the ASM Sports as his agents . 
 White missed the opening of NBA camp on Monday October 1 , due to a desire to have a contractual plan with the Rockets for addressing his obsessive compulsive disorder and anxiety disorder . After sessions with his own long @-@ time doctor , White requested permission to purchase a bus in order to diminish his flight schedule and the impact his fear of flying has on his own mental health . The Rockets and White came to an agreement regarding eliminating as many triggers as possible for his anxiety disorder , including allowing White extensive travel by personal bus rather than flying ( which is a trigger ) . White missed the first week of training camp before this agreement was put in place . 
 A few games into the season , White had a dispute with the team regarding the handling of his anxiety disorder , leading to his absence from the team . These events coincided with the Rockets ' plan to assign White to their Rio Grande Valley Vipers NBA Development League affiliate along with two other young players . The team agreed to meet with White on Monday November 19 to resolve his issues . By the end of the week , the situation remained unresolved . Two weeks after the situation began , the Rockets were optimistic . On December 20 , White was confirmed to begin practice sessions with a member of the Houston Rockets ' staff within a week . As of December 26 , he had not shown up to work with the Rockets according to Rockets head coach Kevin McHale . On December 29 , Houston assigned White to its D @-@ League affiliate Rio Grande Valley Vipers . On December 29 , David Aldridge of TNT reported via Twitter White had practiced with the team and that the assignment was part of a multi @-@ week plan to reintegrate White into the organization . On December 30 , White again refused assignment to the Vipers . As explanation , White issued a statement . Aldridge summarized White 's objections : the playing environment is unsafe ; White requested involvement of mental health professionals ; and White claimed that the Rockets ' efforts are misleading . 
 In a January 2013 interview , White stated " chances are very high " he would never play an NBA game , blaming what he believed to be a league @-@ wide " lack of protocol " on mental health issues . He further stated he did not hold blame against the Rockets ' organization and that he still wanted to play for Houston . On January 6 , 2013 , the Rockets suspended White without pay for failing to perform his contract . 
 On January 26 , 2013 , the Rockets and White mutually agreed that he would report to the Rio Grande Valley Vipers on February 11 , 2013 . On February 8 , White passed his physical . On February 12 , White made his professional debut with the Vipers in a 139 @-@ 122 win against the Maine Red Claws , playing 18 minutes and leading the team with 8 rebounds from off the bench . White also scored 7 points and totaled 4 assists . 
 Following the reconciliation , a USA Today story detailed White 's situation , clarifying his specific mental illness as Generalized anxiety disorder , with ailments that include " panic attacks , a fear of heights and traveling — especially by plane — and obsessive @-@ compulsive disorder " . Although White endured 20 flights for travel during his season at Iowa State , the Rockets ' NBA schedule called for 98 flights . White had attempted to cope with travel through use of <unk> and Xanax , but found both reduced his energy level . White likened his disorder to a day @-@ to @-@ day physical injury in which expectations can be unclear . 
 On March 21 , White announced via Twitter that following professional medical advice he would no longer be playing for the Vipers . After missing three road games to Indiana and Pennsylvania , White returned to the Vipers for their final six games , which were all home games , but he did not anticipate participating in the " hectic " playoff schedule . 
 When the Vipers began the playoffs on the road against the Maine Red Claws on April 11 , White did not travel with the team . The Vipers went on to sweep all three playoff series , but White did not play with the team . Over the course of the season , White traveled using a bus provided by the Rockets for 15 road games . 
 = = = 2013 – 14 = = = 
 On July 3 , 2013 , the Rockets omitted White 's name from its Orlando Summer League roster , which was conspicuous according to Houston Chronicle writer Jonathan Feigen . Two days later , several news outlets confirmed that White and the rights to <unk> <unk> had been traded to the Philadelphia 76ers for future considerations , which helped Houston clear $ 1 @.@ 7 million of salary cap space to help sign Dwight Howard . As White waited for the trade to be approved , he played in a YMCA league . On July 13 , the 76ers announced the deal officially . White participated in voluntary offseason workouts with the team and was expected to participate in training camp when it began on September 28 . On September 27 , at media day , White stated that he planned to travel with the team when necessary ( even on its pre @-@ season trip to Spain ) . However , White did not make the October 4 trip with the team to Spain . The press reported that 14 players traveled with the team and 5 did not . CBS Sports journalist Matt Moore gave three possible reasons for White 's absence : 1 . ) goodwill effort by the team , 2 . ) a sign the team plans to waive him , 3 . ) a conditioning issue . Philadelphia Daily News reporter Bob Cooney tweeted , " White , who suffers from anxiety disorder , planned to make the flight but team ' gave him a pass , ' source told me . " According to 76ers coach Brett Brown , " It really was just based on our team doctor giving me and [ general manager ] Sam [ <unk> ] and the club advice that it may be best for him to remain at home . " The box score from the first game of the road trip indicates that 15 players traveled with the team and 5 did not . On October 25 , 2013 , White was waived by the 76ers as they cut their roster from 20 to 16 before the October 28 deadline to reach a 15 @-@ man roster . The move was described as surprising to various NBA analysts such as NJ.com 's Eliot <unk> @-@ Parks and Bleacher Report 's Joe Flynn . On October 24 , USA Today had run an article suggesting that White was fairly certain to make the team . By mid @-@ December , White was living in Chadds Ford Township , Pennsylvania with his wife and children aged 2 @.@ 5 years and 6 months and had switched agents from Andrew Vye of ASM Sports to George Bass of AAI Sports . 
 On March 6 , 2014 , White signed a 10 @-@ day contract with the Sacramento Kings , but was immediately assigned to the Reno Bighorns of the NBA D @-@ League . He made his debut for the Bighorns the next day in a 112 @-@ 86 win over the Idaho Stampede . In 26 minutes of playing time , he recorded 5 points , 4 rebounds , 2 assists and 2 steals . On March 14 , 2014 , he was recalled by the Kings . On March 18 , he signed a second 10 @-@ day contract with the Kings . On March 21 , White made his NBA debut by playing 56 seconds for the Sacramento Kings . He accumulated no statistics in the Kings ' 99 @-@ 79 loss to the San Antonio Spurs . After White 's second 10 @-@ day contract expired , the Kings decided to part ways with him . 
 = = = 2015 = = = 
 In March 2015 , White said he continued to aspire to play professional basketball . He became a 2015 NBA Summer League target for several teams , and later joined the Los Angeles Clippers to play in the Orlando Summer League . 
 = = Personal = = 
 White 's parents are Rebecca White and Kevin Tucker . He has two younger siblings and is a distant relative of Hall of Fame baseball player Dave Winfield . His grandfather , Frank , who won a national intramural basketball championship , attended University of Minnesota with Winfield . He has a son , born February 2011 , with Angelic Aguilar . 
 Some of the music career related activities while away from basketball included YouTube videos under the name " <unk> " . During his two and a half years away from competitive basketball , he also learned to play the piano . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 = = = = Regular season = = = = 
 = = = NBA D @-@ League = = = 
 = = = = Regular Season = = = = 
 = 65th Infantry Regiment ( United States ) = 
 ) 
 The 65th Infantry Regiment , nicknamed " The Borinqueneers " from the original Taíno name of the island ( Borinquen ) , is a Puerto Rican regiment of the United States Army . The regiment 's motto is Honor et <unk> , Latin for Honor and Fidelity . The Army Appropriation Bill created by an act of Congress on 2 March 1898 , authorized the creation of the first body of native troops in Puerto Rico . On 30 June 1901 , the " Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry " was organized . On July 1 , 1908 , Congress incorporated the regiment into the Regular Army as the Puerto Rico Regiment of Infantry , United States Army . On May 14 , 1917 , the Regiment was activated and additional men were assigned , with the unit being sent to serve at Panama . On June 4 , 1920 , the Regiment was renamed 65th Infantry . During World War II , the Regiment saw action throughout Europe , especially France and Germany , participating in Naples @-@ Foggia , Rome @-@ Arno and Rhin . Several Purple Hearts were handed posthumously to members of the 65th Regiment , and the Medal of Honor was granted to Capt. <unk> Rubio , Héctor Santiago , Carlos Lozada and Fernando García . 
 The 65th Infantry Regiment participated in World War I , World War II , the Korean War , and in what is known in the United States as the War on Terror . On April 13 , 2016 , the 65th Infantry was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal . 
 = = Early history = = 
 Puerto Ricans have participated in many of the military conflicts in which the United States has been involved . For example , they participated in the American Revolution , when volunteers from Puerto Rico , Cuba , and Mexico fought the British in 1779 under the command of General Bernardo de Gálvez ( 1746 – 1786 ) , and have continued to participate up to the present @-@ day conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan . Puerto Rico became a U.S. Territory after the 1898 Treaty of Paris which ended the Spanish – American War . The United States appointed a military governor and soon the United States Army established itself in San Juan . 
 On March 2 , 1899 , the Army received an assignation of funds and authorization meant to formally organize troops in Puerto Rico . On March 24 , 1899 , the General Commander of the Puerto Rico Department , Mayor General Guy V. Henry ordered the creation of the Porto Rico Battalion of Volunteer Infantry . Formed by four companies named A trough D and assigned to San Juan , Mayagüez and Ponce , the unit was activated on May 20 , 1899 , lead by Major Lorenzo <unk> . Shortly afterwards , each company received additional men for a total of 112 . Major Ebon Swift replaced Davison as commander . The formalization of this move was notified in General Order 65 , issued by the new General Commander Gen. George Davis . On February 12 , 1900 , the Mounted Battalion was organized and both were later designated Porto Rico Regiment , U.S. Volunteers . The following year , the units were renamed Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry . The Band and First Battalion were sent to Washington on March 4 , 1901 , to participate in the inauguration of McKinley . 
 On 1 July 1901 , the United States Senate passed a bill which would require a strict mental and physical examination for those who wanted to join the regiment . It also approved the recruitment of native Puerto Rican civilians to be appointed the grade of second lieutenants for a term of four years if they passed the required tests . On April 23 , 1904 , Congress authorized the recruitment of the local population as Second Lieutenants , leading to the recognition of Jaime Nadal , Henry Rexach , Pedro Parra , Eduardo Iriarte , <unk> Marxuach , Eugenio de Hostos , Luis <unk> and Pascual López . On 1905 , one of its battalions was sent to March along the First a Brigade of the First Division of the Regular Army during Roosevelt 's inauguration . An act of Congress , approved on 27 May 1908 , reorganized the regiment as part of the " regular " Army and the " Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry " was renamed " Porto Rico Regiment of Infantry " . Since the native Puerto Rican officers were Puerto Rican citizens and not citizens of the United States , they were required to undergo a new physical examination to determine their fitness for commissions in the Regular Army and to take an oath of U.S. citizenship with their new officers oath . By 30 January 1917 , the Porto Rico Regiment of Infantry was training in Camp Las Casas which was located in Santurce , a section of San Juan in what is now <unk> Las Casas . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Different units of the regiment were stationed at other forts throughout the island under the command of William P. Burnham . Lieutenant Teófilo Marxuach , the officer of the day , was stationed at El Morro Castle at San Juan Bay on 21 March 1915 . The Odenwald , built in 1903 ( not to be confused with the German World War II war ship which carried the same name ) , was an armed German supply ship which tried to force its way out of the San Juan Bay and deliver supplies to the German submarines waiting in the Atlantic Ocean . Marxuach gave the order to open fire on the ship from the walls of the fort . Sergeant Encarnación Correa then manned a machine gun and fired warning shots with little effect . 
 Marxuach fired a warning shot from a cannon located at the Santa Rosa battery of El Morro fort , in what is considered to be the first shot of World War I fired by the regular armed forces of the United States against a ship flying the colors of the Central Powers , forcing the Odenwald to stop and to return to port where its supplies were confiscated . 
 The Odenwald was confiscated by the United States and renamed SS Newport News . It was assigned to the U.S. Shipping Board , where it served until 1924 when it was retired . 
 Puerto Ricans were unaccustomed to the racial segregation policies of the United States which were also implemented in Puerto Rico and often refused to designate themselves as " white " or " black " . Puerto Ricans of African descent were assigned to all @-@ black units . In 1916 , the Third Battalion and the companies of service and machine @-@ guns were integrated into the regiment . 
 When the United States declared war against Germany , the regiment was transferred to the regular Army and on 3 May 1917 , recruited 1 @,@ 969 men , considered at that time as war strength . 
 On 14 May 1917 , the regiment was sent to Panama in defense of the Panama Canal Zone . The regiment returned to Puerto Rico in March 1919 and was renamed " The 65th Infantry Regiment " by the Reorganization Act of 4 June 1920 . During this period a young Puerto Rican officer of the Regular Army , Major Luis R. Esteves , was sent to Camp Las Casas to serve as an instructor in the preparation of Puerto Rican officers . In the future , Esteves would become known as the " Father of the Puerto Rican National Guard " . In 1923 , the 65th provided personnel to the newly created <unk> Infantry Regiment . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1942 the 65th Infantry underwent an extensive training program and in 1943 , it was sent to Panama to protect the Pacific and the Atlantic sides of the isthmus . On 25 November 1943 , Colonel <unk> Segarra , succeeded Col. John R. <unk> as commander of the 65th Infantry , thus becoming the first Puerto Rican Regular Army officer to command a Regular Army regiment . In January 1944 , the regiment was embarked for Jackson Barracks in New Orleans and later sent to Fort Eustis in Newport News , Virginia in preparation for overseas deployment to North Africa . 
 They also served in Casablanca after the Naval Battle of Casablanca , where the regiment underwent amphibious training . This enabled the 3rd Battalion to move on to Corsica , where it was attached to the 12th Air Force and tasked with guarding airfields . Between March and April 1944 , the 65th was reassigned to North Africa . On May 3 , 1944 , the Third Battalion arrived at <unk> . The Battalion was then moved to Corsica and then to France . Salvador Roid commanded the 65th during a this period in Europe , which earned him the Combat Infantryman Badge . 
 During this time , rumors swirled that the Regiment would be sent to live combat , while officers had already been moved to act as observers . On 22 September 1944 , the 65th Infantry landed in France . The Regiment was then moved to Peira Cava in the Maritime Alps , where it entered in action on December 13 , 1944 , the first time a Puerto Rican unit saw action in Europe . The first offensive attack came the following day in response to enemy fire , with Col. Cordero allowing Capt. Efraín Sánchez and Company L to return fire . The first casualty lost by the Regiment were Sgt. Ángel Martínez and Sergio Sánchez . In total , in the border between France and Italy , the battalion lost 47 men , including its commander , Col. George Ford . 
 In November 1944 , Company C provided security to the headquarters of the Seventh United States Army . The rest of the First Battalion was assigned other tasks , such as defending the Command Center of the Sixth United States Army Group . The Second and Third Battalions were assigned to defend communications . In 1948 , seven members received the Bronze Star for their service in World War II . On 13 December 1944 , the 65th Infantry , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Juan César Cordero Dávila , relieved the 2nd Battalion of the 442nd Infantry Regiment , a regiment which was made up of Japanese Americans under the command of Col. Virgil R. Miller , a native of San Germán , Puerto Rico and former member of the 65th Infantry Regiment . 
 In December 1944 , the 3rd Battalion faced the German 34th Infantry Division 's 107th Grenadier Regiment . They suffered a total of forty seven battle casualties . The first two Puerto Ricans to be killed in action from the 65th Infantry were Pvt. Sergio Sánchez @-@ Sánchez and Sgt. Ángel Martínez , from the town of Sabana Grande . Upon arriving in the freezing and isolated outposts in the Maritime Alps , the unit 's morale dropped severely . In an apparent effort to boost the unit 's morale , its new commander , West Pointer Colonel George A. Ford , personally led a patrol towards the German lines on January 4 , 1945 . Upon reaching the forward German outposts , Colonel Ford was immediately shot and killed . In the firefight that followed , one of the enlisted man already mentioned was killed and several other were wounded , forcing the patrol to abandon the colonel 's body . 
 On 18 March 1945 , the regiment was sent to the District of Mannheim , Germany and assigned to Military Government activities , anti @-@ sabotage and security missions . In all , the 65th Infantry participated in the campaigns of Rome @-@ Arno , Rhineland , Ardennes @-@ Alsace , and Central Europe . On 27 October 1945 , the regiment sailed from France arriving at Puerto Rico on 9 November 1945 . 
 = = Operation " PORTREX " = = 
 The 65th Infantry Regiment distinguished itself when the United States conducted a military exercise on the island of Vieques , on the eve of the Korean War . This exercise was code named " Operation PORTREX , " an acronym for " Puerto Rico Exercise . " The objective was to see how the combined forces of the Army , Marines , Navy , and Air Force would do as " liberators " of an enemy captured territory ( Vieques ) against the " aggressors . " The core of the aggressor ground forces were made up of Puerto Rican soldiers , most of whom belonged to the 65th Infantry Regiment . 
 The liberators consisted of 32 @,@ 600 combat troops from the 82nd Airborne Division 's 504th Airborne Infantry Regiment and the Marine Corps , who received support from the Navy and Air Force . Despite the large number of troops deployed , the 65th Infantry ( the aggressor ) was able to halt the offensive forces on the beaches of the island . Colonel William W. Harris , the commanding officer of the 65th , stated : " Stopping the assault forces at the water 's edge proved that the Puerto Ricans could hold their own against the best @-@ trained soldiers that the United States Army could put into the field . " 
 The successful military maneuvers during PORTREX prompted the Army 's leadership to deploy the 65th Infantry to Korea . 
 = = Korean War = = 
 On 27 August 1950 , the 65th Infantry , with 3 @,@ 920 officers and men organized into three infantry battalions , one artillery battalion and a tank company departed from Puerto Rico and arrived in Pusan , Korea on 23 September 1950 . It was during the long sea voyage that the men nicknamed the 65th Infantry as the " Borinqueneers . " " That was the name of the more peaceful of the two original Indian tribes that inhabited the island of Puerto Rico " Borinquen " , and many of the men were direct descendants of that industrious race of people . " 
 The men of the 65th , now attached to the Army 's 3rd Infantry Division , were among the first infantrymen to meet the enemy on the battlefields of Korea . After November 1950 , they fought daily against units of the Chinese People 's Liberation Army after the Chinese entered the war on the North Korean side . The 296th Regiment took its place at Puerto Rico . In Korea , the Regiment covered the retreat of the 1st Marine Division during the Battle of Chosin Reservoir . 
 One of the hardships suffered by the Puerto Ricans was the lack of warm clothing during the cold , harsh winters . " Born in a semitropical <unk> most of them had never seen snow- they had lived and fought through it all without complaint " 
 The enemy made many attempts to encircle the regiment , but each time they failed because of the many casualties inflicted by the 65th . Because the 65th held their positions , that enabled the U.S. Marines to withdraw from the Chosin Reservoir on December 1950 . When the Marines were surrounded by the Chinese Communist troops close to the Manchurian border , they were ordered to retreat and work their way back to Hungnam . The men of the 65th rushed to their defense and were ordered to stay behind and fight the enemy . As a result , the Marines were able to withdraw to their ships with the 65th holding the rear guard . The 65th , attached to the 1st Marine Division , was awarded the Navy Unit Commendation for their defense and were among the last units to embark from Hungnam . Among the battles and operations in which the 65th participated was Operation Killer in January 1951 , becoming the first regiment to cross the Han River in South Korea during the operation . 
 On April 1951 , the regiment participated in the <unk> Corridor drives and on June 1951 , the 65th was the third regiment to cross the Han Ton River . The 65th took and held Chorwon and they were also instrumental in breaking the Iron Triangle of Hill 717 on July 1951 . In November 1951 , the regiment fought off an attack by two regimental size enemy units . Colonel Juan César Cordero Dávila of the 296th Regiment requested a transfer to active service in Korea . In December 1951 , Chief of Staff J. Lawton Collins visited Puerto Rico and granted the request , reassigning him to the 65th , replacing him with Lt. Col. Sepúlveda . Col. Cordero was formally named commander of the 65th Infantry on 8 February 1952 , thus becoming one of the highest ranking ethnic officers in the Army . In 1980 Brigadier William Warner Harris ( USMA 1930 ) captured the distinguished history of the 65th during his command in " Puerto Rico 's Fighting 65th - From San Juan to <unk> " ( Presidio Press , Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ 89141 @-@ 753 @-@ 2 ) . When asked if the Puerto Rican 's would fight when the time came , then Colonel William Warner Harris ' answer was just as direct : " My Puerto Rican 's will fight anyone , anywhere . " They did not disappoint their command , becoming the most decorated Battalion of the Korean War . 
 = = = Battles of Outpost Kelly and Jackson Heights = = = 
 On 3 July 1952 , the regiment defended the main line of resistance ( MLR ) for 47 days and saw action at Cognac , King , and Queen with successful attacks on Chinese positions . On September 1952 , the 65th Infantry defended a hill known as " Outpost Kelly . " Chinese Communist forces overran the hill in what became known as the Battle for Outpost Kelly . On two occasions , the 65th Regiment was overwhelmed by Chinese artillery and driven off . 
 In October 1952 , the regiment also saw action in the Chorwon Sector and on Iron Horse , Hill 391 , whose lower part was called " Jackson Heights " in honor of Capt. George Jackson ( see : Col. Carlos Betances Ramírez ) . Company G of the 65th fought a desperate battle to hold on to Hill 391 . After enduring days of artillery bombardment with limited artillery support of their own , Company G withdrew to avoid being overrun by a numerically superior foe . 
 In June 1953 , the 2nd Battalion conducted a series of successful raids about two and a half miles southeast of Jackson Heights and in November the regiment successfully counter @-@ attacked enemy units in the <unk> Valley and held their positions until the armistice was reached . 
 Many non @-@ Puerto Rican Hispanics served in the 65th Infantry during the war . Among those who distinguished themselves in combat and who served in the conflict as a member of the 65th Infantry was a young first lieutenant of Mexican American descent whose name is Richard Edward Cavazos . Cavazos entered the military in Texas and served as Company Commander of Company E of the 2d Battalion . Cavazos , who in 1982 , became the first Hispanic to become a four @-@ star general in the United States Army , was the recipient of the Distinguished Service Cross , the Silver Star Medal , and the Bronze Star Medal . 
 = = = Mass court martial = = = 
 Col. Cordero Dávila was relieved of his command by Col. Chester B. DeGavre , a West Point graduate and a " Continental , " an officer from the mainland United States , and the officer staff of the 65th was replaced with non @-@ Hispanic officers . DeGavre , upset over the fact that " G " company did not hold on to Hill 391 , ordered that the unit stop calling itself the " Borinqueneers , " cut their special rations of rice and beans , ordered the men to shave off their mustaches , and had one of them wear a sign that read : " I am a coward . " The language barrier , an NCO shortage , and poor leadership were factors that influenced some of the men of Company L in their refusal to continue to fight . 
 One hundred and sixty @-@ two Puerto Ricans of the 65th Infantry were arrested . Between 23 November and 26 December 1952 , ninety @-@ five soldiers were court martialed and tried by General Court @-@ Martial in fifteen separate trials . Ninety @-@ one were found guilty and sentenced to prison terms ranging from one to 18 years of hard labor . It was the largest mass court @-@ martial of the Korean War . According to cultural historian Silvia Álvarez <unk> , the government of Puerto Rico , caught in the middle of a potentially damaging affair that could jeopardize its political agenda , kept silent for nearly two months . Finally , the incidents were made known by a local newspaper alerted by several letters written by the imprisoned soldiers to their families . Secret negotiations between the U.S. and Puerto Rican governments took place and the Secretary of the Army Robert T. Stevens moved quickly to remit the sentences and granted clemency and pardons to all those involved . 
 The breakdown of the 65th resulted from a number of factors : a shortage of officers and non @-@ commissioned officers , a rotation policy that removed combat @-@ experienced leaders and soldiers , tactical doctrine that led to high casualties , a shortage of artillery ammunition , communication problems between largely white , English @-@ speaking officers and Spanish @-@ speaking Puerto Rican enlisted men , and declining morale . The report also found bias in the prosecution of the Puerto Ricans , citing instances of Continental soldiers who were not charged after refusing to fight in similar circumstances , before and after Jackson Heights . Though the men who were court martialed were pardoned , a campaign for a formal exoneration was launched . 
 = = = Awards in the Korean War = = = 
 Master Sergeant Juan E. Negrón was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his courageous actions while serving as a member of Company L , 65th Infantry Regiment , 3d Infantry Division during combat operations against an armed enemy in Kalma @-@ Eri , Korea on 28 April 1951 . His award was upgraded to the Medal of Honor on 18 March 2014 . 
 Negrón 's Medal of Honor citation 
 <unk> <unk> E. <unk> 
 UNITED STATES ARMY 
 For service as set forth in the following citation : The Medal of Honor is posthumously presented to Juan E. Negrón ( <unk> ) , Master Sergeant , U.S. Army , for extraordinary heroism in connection with military operations against an armed enemy of the United Nations while serving with the 65th Infantry Regiment , 3d Infantry Division . Master Sergeant Negrón distinguished himself by extraordinary heroism in action against enemy aggressor forces in the vicinity of Kalma @-@ Eri , Korea , on 28 April 1951 . On that date , Sergeant Negrón took up the most vulnerable position on his company 's exposed right flank after an enemy force had overrun a section of the line . When notified that elements of the company were withdrawing , Sergeant Negrón refused to leave his exposed position , but delivered withering fire at hostile troops who had broken through a road block . When the hostile troops approached his position , Sergeant Negrón accurately hurled hand grenades at short range , halting their attack . Sergeant Negrón held the position throughout the night , while an allied counter attack was organized and launched . After the enemy had been repulsed , fifteen enemy dead were found only a few feet from Sergeant Negrón 's position . The extraordinary heroism exhibited by Sergeant Negrón on this occasion reflects great credit on himself and is in keeping with the finest traditions of the military service . 
 A total of 61 @,@ 000 Puerto Ricans served in the military during the Korean War . And around 90 % of the Puerto Ricans that saw action in Korea were volunteers . The 65th Infantry was awarded battle participation credits for the following nine campaigns : UN Defense @-@ 1950 , UN Offense @-@ 1950 , CCF Intervention @-@ 1950 , First UN Counterattack Offensive @-@ 1951 , UN and CCF Spring Offensive @-@ 1951 , UN Summer @-@ Fall Offensive @-@ 1951 , 2nd Korean Winter 1951 – 52 , Korean Summer @-@ Fall @-@ 1952 and 3rd Korean Winter @-@ 1952 @-@ 53 . They are credited with the last battalion @-@ sized bayonet assault in U.S. Army history . 
 Ten Distinguished Service Crosses , 256 Silver Stars and 606 Bronze Stars for valor were awarded to the men of the 65th Infantry . Of the ten Distinguished Service Crosses that were awarded to the members of the 65th Infantry , five were awarded to Puerto Ricans : 
 Sergeant First Class Modesto Cartagena 
 Private <unk> Hernández Guzmán 
 Master Sergeant Juan E. Negrón ( upgraded to the Medal of Honor ) 
 Corporal Fabián Nieves <unk> 
 Master Sergeant Belisario Noriega 
 According to El Nuevo Día newspaper , 30 May 2004 , a total of 756 Puerto Ricans were killed in Korea , from all four branches of the U.S. armed forces . However , according to " All POW @-@ MIA Korean War Casualties " , the total amount of Puerto Rican casualties in the Korean War was 732 . However this total may vary slightly since some non @-@ Puerto Ricans such as Captain James W. Conner were mistakenly included . Out of the 700 plus casualties suffered in the war a total of 121 men were listed as missing in action . The Battle of Outpost Kelly accounted for 73 of the men missing in action from the total of 121 . Out of the 73 <unk> suffered by the regiment in the month of September 1952 , 50 of them occurred on the same day , 18 September . For a list of names of those who were declared MIA , see : List of Puerto Ricans missing in action in the Korean War . According to the <unk> Korean War Casualty File and the American Battle Commission site the members of the 65th who fought in Korea were awarded a total of 2 @,@ 771 Purple Heart Medals . On 12 February 1951 , General Douglas MacArthur , wrote in Tokyo : 
 = = = Post Korean War = = = 
 The 65th Infantry was relieved from assignment to the 3d Infantry Division on 3 November 1954 , and , returning to Puerto Rico , it was assigned on 2 December 1954 , to the 23rd Infantry Division , which encompassed geographically @-@ separated units in the Caribbean region . On 10 April 1956 , it was inactivated at Camp Losey , Puerto Rico , and relieved from assignment to the 23d , which itself was inactivated . 
 On 6 February 1959 , the regiment was deactivated from the Regular Army but the Puerto Rican Army National Guard soon adopted " 65 " as the identifying number for their existing 296th Regimental Combat Team at Camp Losey , mainly composed of reserve component personnel . 
 On 15 February 1959 , it was organized to consist of the 1st Battle Group , 65th Infantry , an element of the 92nd Infantry Brigade . On February 21 , 1960 , commemorated as National Guard Day , the 65th Infantry Regiment was formally transferred from the Regular Army to the <unk> , in an activity where Gen. <unk> Cordero handed the units colors to Col. Rafael Rodríguez . That same year , Company B of the 65th Regiment created Employer 's Day ( Día del <unk> in Spanish ) where the employer 's of the volunteers that serve in the <unk> are instructed about the job that their employees do with the entity and participate in training of their own . The idea behind the initiative was facilitating the processing of the request of leave @-@ of @-@ absence to train for two weeks during the summer . On 1 May 1964 , it was reorganized to consist of the 1st Battalion , 65th Infantry , and remained assigned to the 92nd . It was reorganized again on 1 April 1971 , to consist of the 1st Battalion and the separate Company E. This was followed by another reorganization on 1 September 1978 , to consist of the 1st and 2nd Battalions within the 92nd , as well as the separate Company E. Less than two years later another reorganization on 29 February 1980 , eliminated the separate Company E while retaining the 1st and 2nd Battalions . 
 On 27 October 1987 , the regiment was withdrawn from CARS and reorganized under the United States Army Regimental System with headquarters at Cayey . It was reorganized on 1 September 1992 , to consist of the 1st Battalion , 65th Infantry , and remained assigned to the 92nd Infantry Brigade . 
 On 14 February 2003 , it was ordered into active federal service at home stations and released on 12 February 2005 , reverting to territorial control . On 1 October , of that year it was reorganized as the 65th Infantry Regiment in which only the 1st Battalion was active . 
 The separate Company E was a Ranger unit given federal recognition effective 1 April 1971 , and had a total authorized strength of 198 personnel . It was added to the PR ARNG on that date while the 755th Transportation Company ( Medium Truck , Cargo ) was deleted . Co E ( Ranger ) , 65th Infantry relocated from Vega Baja to San Juan on 2 February 1976 , and was inactivated as federal recognition was withdrawn effective 29 February 1980 . This resulted in the allocation of an ARNG ranger company being transferred from the PR ARNG to the Texas ARNG , in which Company G ( Ranger ) , 143rd Infantry was activated in Houston from elements of the 2d Battalion ( Airborne ) , 143rd Infantry , 36th Airborne Brigade , which was being inactivated effective 1 April 1980 . 
 = = Twenty @-@ first century = = 
 The 65th Infantry Regiment 's 1st Battalion , along with its sister battalion , the 1 – 296th Infantry , was transferred to the 92nd Infantry Brigade , <unk> ( now the 92nd Maneuver Enhancement Brigade ) . Both battalions have served in what the United States and its allies call the War against Terrorism and Operation Iraqi Freedom / Enduring Freedom . 
 In 2009 , Company C , 1st Battalion , 65th Infantry Regiment was deployed to the Horn of Africa and stationed at Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti , after completing a 14 @-@ month deployment at Guantanamo Bay , Cuba . Company C carried the crew @-@ served weapons to protect the camp . It also operated the entry control checkpoints , protected U.S. and allied ships at the massive Djibouti Port , and guarded the U.S. Embassy there . By mid @-@ 2009 , the rest of the battalion deployed there in case a larger combat maneuver element was needed to operate from the base . The area is considered to be the most unstable part of Africa , and the Somalian border is less than 10 miles from Camp Lemonnier . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During the Korean War , the Borinqueneers were awarded 10 Distinguished Service Crosses ( Juan <unk> was upgraded to the Medal of Honor ) , 256 Silver Stars , 606 Bronze Stars , and 2 @,@ 771 Purple Hearts . 
 Puerto Rico honored the unit by naming one of its principal avenues " Avenida 65 de Infantería " in San Juan . The names of those killed in combat are inscribed in " El Monumento de la Recordación " ( Monument of Remembrance ) , which was unveiled on 19 May 1996 and is situated in front of the Capitol Building in San Juan , Puerto Rico . 
 In November 1999 , Governor Pedro <unk> , along with the Senate of Puerto Rico , chartered the 65th Infantry Honor Task Force and appointed Anthony Mele as chairman to work with Major General Nels Running , Director , Committee of the 50th Anniversary of the Korean War to commemorate the 65th Infantry Regiment . The 65th Infantry Honor Task Force is a coalition of individuals , veterans organizations , and groups dedicated to advocate and preserve the legacy of the 65th Infantry Regiment . The group organized tree planting and plaque commemoration ceremonies around the USA , to include Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia ; Fort San Felipe del Morro in San Juan , Puerto Rico ; and Fort Logan National Cemetery in Denver . 
 On 20 May 2001 , the government of Puerto Rico unveiled a monument honoring the 65th Infantry Regiment . The monument was made by artist Sonny Rodríguez , and is called " Mission Accomplished " . It contains a statue of a soldier wearing a poncho with his rifle in one hand and the regiment 's flag in the other hand . 
 On 7 June 2007 , PBS aired The Borinqueneers , a documentary about the 65th Infantry written and directed by Noemí Figueroa <unk> with Raquel Ortiz as co @-@ director . The narrators were Héctor Elizondo ( English ) and David Ortiz @-@ <unk> ( Spanish ) . 
 On 30 November 2012 , an entire stretch of Southern Boulevard in the South Bronx , New York was co @-@ named La 65 de Infantería Boulevard . 
 On 1 October 2013 : The 65th Infantry Honor Task Force organized veterans from the 65th and their families to attend a salute to the regiment by the 3d US Infantry [ The Old Guard ] at Fort Myer , Virginia , a tour of the Tomb of the Unknown Soldiers , and wreath laying ceremony at the Korean War Combat Veterans Memorial in Washington , DC . Video credits to Jose R. Guerra : 
 22 – 23 March 2014 : The 65th Infantry Honor Task Force organized the salute of the first Medal of Honor awarded to a <unk> ; MSG Juan E. Negron in New York with Iris Negron , daughter of MSG Negron , and BG Jose Burgos . In attendance were New York State Senators William E. Larkin , a Korean War combat veteran , and David Carlucci who presented a proclamation from the New York State Senate . 
 In 2014 the National Puerto Rican Day Parade , which is attended by nearly two million people and broadcast live on Fox TV , was dedicated to the Borinqueneers . 
 = = Congressional Gold Medal = = 
 A Congressional Gold Medal is an award bestowed by the United States Congress and is , along with the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the highest civilian award in the United States . It is awarded to persons " who have performed an achievement that has an impact on American history and culture that is likely to be recognized as a major achievement in the recipient 's field long after the achievement . " Congressional Gold Medals have also been awarded to : Native American code talkers ; the Japanese American 100th Infantry Battalion and 442nd Infantry Regiment ; the Tuskegee Airmen ; the Montford Point Marines ; the 1st Special Service Force ( Devil 's Brigade ) and the Women Airforce Service Pilots ( WASP ) . 
 S. 1726 , the bill that would confer the Congressional Gold Medal on the 65th Infantry Regiment , was introduced in Congress . It was signed by President Barack Obama at a ceremony on June 10 , 2014 , becoming Public Law 113 @-@ 120 . A decision on designs for a congressional gold medal being awarded in 2015 to the Borinqueneers of the 65th Infantry Regiment was selected by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee on June 16 , 2015 . For the 65th Infantry Borinqueneers congressional gold medal , the CCAC recommended for the obverse a design depicting a close @-@ up portrait of a unit staff sergeant , with three soldiers traversing rocky ground in the background . The recommended reverse features an historic sentry box in Old San Juan , Puerto Rico , an olive branch , the 65th Infantry insignia patch and unit 's motto , HONOR ET <unk> ( Honor and Fidelity ) . On April 13 , 2016 , leaders of the United States House and Senate awarded the Congressional Gold Medal to the 65th Infantry Regiment . 
 = = Notable Puerto Rican members = = 
 Amongst the notable Puerto Ricans who served in the " 65th Infantry Regiment " and / or its predecessor the " Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry " : 
 = = Unit citations = = 
 The 65th Infantry has been awarded the following citations : 
 = Nikolai Ryzhkov = 
 Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov ( Russian : Николай <unk> <unk> , Nikolaj <unk> <unk> ; born 28 September 1929 ) is a former Soviet official who became a Russian politician following the dissolution of the Soviet Union . He served as the last Chairman of the Council of Ministers ( the post was abolished and replaced by that of Prime Minister in 1991 ) . Responsible for the cultural and economic administration of the Soviet Union during the late Gorbachev Era , Ryzhkov was succeeded as premier by Valentin Pavlov in 1991 . The same year , he lost his seat on the Presidential Council , going on to become Boris Yeltsin 's leading opponent in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) 1991 presidential election . 
 Ryzhkov was born in the city of <unk> , Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1929 . After graduating in the 1950s he started work in the 1970s and began his political career in local industry , working his way up through the hierarchy of Soviet industrial ministries . In 1979 Ryzhkov was appointed First Deputy Chairman of the State Planning Committee . Following Nikolai Tikhonov 's resignation as Chairman of the Council of Ministers , Ryzhkov was voted into office in his place . During his tenure , he supported Mikhail Gorbachev 's 1980s reform of the Soviet economy . 
 Elected to the State Duma of the Russian Federation in December 1995 as an independent , Ryzhkov subsequently led the Power to the People block , later becoming the formal leader of the People 's Patriotic Union of Russia alongside Gennady Zyuganov , who was an unofficial leader . On 17 September 2003 , he resigned his seat in the Duma and became a member of the Federation Council . Due to the Crimean crisis , he was sanctioned by Canada and the United States on March 17 , 2014 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Ryzhkov was born on 28 September 1929 in <unk> , Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic , Soviet Union . He graduated from the Ural Polytechnic Institute in 1959 . A technocrat , he started work as a welder then rose through the ranks at the Sverdlovsk <unk> Plant to become chief engineer , then between 1970 – 1975 , Factory Director of the <unk> Production Amalgamation . Ryzhkov joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) in 1956 . He was transferred to Moscow in 1975 and appointed to the post of First Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Heavy and Transport Machine Building . Ryzhkov became First Deputy Chairman of the State Planning Committee in 1979 and was elected to the CPSU Central Committee in 1981 . He was one of several members of the Soviet leadership affiliated to the " Andrei Kirilenko faction " . 
 Yuri Andropov appointed Ryzhkov head of the Economic Department of the Central Committee where he was responsible for overseeing major planning and financial organs , excluding industry . As head of the department he reported directly to Mikhail Gorbachev and as head of the Central Committee 's Economic Department he met with Andropov once a week . Ryzhkov became convinced that had Andropov lived at least another five years , the Soviet Union would have seen a reform package similar to that implemented in the People 's Republic of China . During Konstantin Chernenko 's short rule , both Ryzhkov and Gorbachev elaborated several reform measures , sometimes in the face of opposition from Chernenko . 
 When Gorbachev came to power , Nikolai Tikhonov , the Chairman of the Council of Ministers , was elected Chairman of the newly established Commission on Improvements to the Management System . His title of chairman was largely honorary , with Ryzhkov the de facto head through his position as deputy chairman . Along with Yegor Ligachev , Ryzhkov became a full rather than a candidate member of the Politburo on 23 April 1985 during Gorbachev 's tenure as General Secretary . Ryzhkov succeeded Tikhonov on 27 September 1985 . 
 = = Premiership = = 
 = = = Political events = = = 
 Following the Chernobyl disaster , along with Yegor Ligachev , Ryzhkov visited the crippled plant between 2 – 3 May 1986 . On Ryzhkov 's orders the government evacuated everyone within a 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) radius of the plant . The 30 km radius was a purely random guess and it was later shown that several areas contaminated with radioactive material were left untouched by government evacuation agencies . 
 In the aftermath of the 1988 earthquake in the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic , Ryzhkov promised to rebuild the city of Spitak within two years . A Politburo commission was established to provide guidance for the local ASSR Government with Ryzhkov elected its chairman . The commission then travelled to the ASSR to assess damage caused by the earthquake . During Gorbachev 's subsequent visit to the ASSR , and aware of local feelings following the disaster , Ryzhkov persuaded the less sensitive Gorbachev to forgo use of his limousine in favor of public transport . When Gorbachev left the ASSR , Ryzhkov remained to coordinate the rescue operation and made several television appearances which increased his standing amongst the Soviet leadership and the people in general . With his standing thus boosted , on 19 July 1988 , at the Central Committee Plenum , Ryzhkov criticised nearly every one of Gorbachev 's policies , further complaining that as Party Secretary he should devote more time to the Party . In the end , Ryzhkov failed in his promise to rebuild Spitak , partly due to the Soviet Union 's mounting economic problems , and partly because many of the city 's Soviet era buildings had not been designed with adequate earthquake protection , making their reconstruction more difficult . 
 = = = Economic policy = = = 
 Historian Jerry F. Hough notes that Gorbachev treated Ryzhkov and his reform attempts just as badly as Leonid Brezhnev treated Alexei Kosygin , one @-@ time Chairman of the Council of Ministers , during the Brezhnev Era . Brezhnev 's most notable snub was over the 1965 Soviet economic reform . 
 Ryzhkov was an early supporter of the Gorbachev policy calling for an increase in the quantity and quality of goods planned for production during the period of the Twelfth Five @-@ Year Plan ( 1986 – 1990 ) . To achieve these goals , the government pumped money into the machine @-@ building sector but as time went by , Gorbachev increasingly diverged from his original stance . He now wanted to increase overall investment in nearly all industrial sectors ; a move which Ryzhkov knew was a budgetary impossibility . However , Ryzhkov 's economic policies were not much better as he continued to advocate an unreasonable increase in the production of consumer goods . Gorbachev and Ligachev 's anti @-@ alcohol campaign was opposed by Ryzhkov , who agreed with the State Planning Committee and the Ministry of Trade that such a drive would deprive from the state billions of rubles in income . Nevertheless , the campaign went ahead , losing the Soviet Government millions in revenues . Ryzhkov 's opposition to the campaign was strengthened by his belief that both Gorbachev and Ligachev placed ideology before practical considerations , and he instead advocated an alternative long @-@ term program rather than one designed to have immediate effect . 
 Ryzhkov and Gorbachev continued their work on economic reform and in 1987 began drafting the Law on the State Enterprise , which restricted the authority of central planners . This would later come into effect and give workers an unrealistically high level of power . Nikolai <unk> , Chairman of the State Planning Committee , became the scapegoat for the failure of this reform and on the orders of Ryzhkov he was replaced by Yuri Maslyukov . 
 While supporting the transition away from a planned economy , Ryzhkov understood that privatisation would weaken the government 's power . As changes occurred , skepticism over perestroika and privatisation was not limited to high @-@ level government officialdom . Several middle and low @-@ ranking officials , who owed their rise in the hierarchy to government @-@ owned enterprises , wanted to retain the existing system . Gorbachev also blamed Ryzhkov and the Council of Ministers for the economic difficulties which arose during perestroika , a move which fostered resentment for both Gorbachev and perestroika . Nevertheless , in 1986 , Ryzhkov stated that he , along with the rest of the Soviet leadership , were already discussing the possibility of creating a market economy in the Soviet Union . Ryzhkov supported the creation of a " regulated market economy " where the government sector occupied the " commanding heights " of the economy as well as the creation of semi private @-@ public companies . His second cabinet , several high @-@ standing members of the KGB and the military establishment all supported Ryzhkov 's opposition to the 500 Days Programme , which espoused a quick transition to a market economy . Matters did not improve when at the second session of the Congress of People 's Deputies of the Soviet Union , Ryzhkov proposed postponing the transition to a market economy until 1992 , further suggesting that in the period between 1990 – 1992 , <unk> of government activities would ensure a period of stabilisation . 
 Ryzhkov 's economic reform plan was a hybrid of Leonid Abalkin 's and one created by himself in conjunction with the Maslyukov chaired State Planning Committee along with several other government institutions . On 5 July 1989 the State Commission of the Council of Ministers on Economic Reforms was established , which replaced Maslyukov 's reform commission . The new commission was chaired by Abalkin , who had also been appointed Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers . 
 With strong support from Ryzhkov , Gorbachev abolished the Central Committee economic department , thereby strengthening the authority of central government over economic matters . From then on , the government could not be blamed for economic policies initiated by the Party leadership . The establishment of the post of President of the Soviet Union by Gorbachev in 1990 weakened the power of the government apparatus ; a move Ryzhkov and his second cabinet opposed . 
 = = = Price reform = = = 
 According to Swedish economist Anders <unk> , Ryzhkov differed little from Gorbachev when it came to price reform . There were , however , subtle differences between the two men 's views , with Ryzhkov supporting an administratively controlled price increase while Gorbachev , as a radical economist who supported market reform , opposed such measures . As Hough noted , Ryzhkov supported " the need for greater fiscal responsibility " , while Gorbachev advocated the need for more rational prices which , according to Hough , would have brought inflation under control . Ryzhkov proposed price reform measures to Gorbachev several times but was turned down on each occasions , even though Gorbachev had argued strongly on the need for price reform in his speeches . Gorbachev strengthened his public image by accusing the Soviet leadership 's conservative faction together with Ryzhkov , of delaying implementation of the necessary price reform . Ryzhkov had the backing of several high @-@ standing institutions , such as the Ministry of Finance and the State Committee on Prices , chaired by the future Soviet Premier Valentin Pavlov . In contrast to Gorbachev , Ryzhkov actually had , according to Hough , a plan for a transition to a market economy . Gorbachev on the other hand was never able to turn words into deeds . 
 By 1988 Ryzhkov increasingly sided with Leonid Abalkin , one of the few economists who advocated fiscal responsibility . At the 19th Conference of the Central Committee , Abalkin was severely criticised by Gorbachev , and accused of " economic determinism " . Several conference delegates agreed with Gorbachev , but Ryzhkov 's support remained solid . Abalkin was ordered to deliver a report to the Presidium of the Council of Ministers by December , which as things turned out , put financial stability at the top of its agenda . Gorbachev disliked Abalkin 's report and rejected Ryzhkov 's requests that he support it . Ryzhkov was then forced to create an even more conservative reform plan for 1989 in which price reform was to be postponed until 1991 . When the Abalkin report was proposed at the Central Committee plenum , the majority of delegates indirectly attacked Gorbachev for his indecisiveness when it came to the implementation of price reform . In April 1990 , after submitting a draft to the Presidential Council and the Federation Council , Ryzhkov 's price reform was initiated . However , a short while later it was once more put on hold following severe criticism from Boris Yeltsin and several pro @-@ Gorbachev intellectuals . The economic turmoil which hit the Soviet Union in 1990 was blamed on Ryzhkov , even though it was Gorbachev who had delayed Ryzhkov 's proposed reform . 
 In his memoirs , Gorbachev vaguely asserts that a single price increase would be better than several . Things did not improve for Ryzhkov when , at the 28th Party Congress , Gorbachev claimed it would be " absurd " to begin serious economic reform with price increases . 
 = = = Fall from power = = = 
 In August 1990 several leading officials tried to persuade Gorbachev to force Ryzhkov to resign from his post . Gorbachev did not bow to this pressure , fearing that Ryzhkov 's removal would lead to increased activity by many of his pro @-@ republican first secretaries and Politburo members . Ryzhkov 's numerous supporters were not concerned about policy issues ; they backed him simply because he opposed some of Gorbachev 's economic and political reforms . In July 1990 , as the Politburo underwent restructuring at the 28th Party Congress , all government officials except Gorbachev and Vladimir <unk> , the Deputy General Secretary , were excluded with Ryzhkov losing his Politburo seat by default . Nevertheless , Ryzhkov , along with many others , was elected a member of the Presidential Council . On 19 October 1990 the Russian Supreme Soviet , by a vote of 164 to 1 with 16 abstentions , forced the resignation of Ryzhkov and his cabinet and the implementation of the 500 Days Programme . In stark contrast , Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union support for Ryzhkov 's economic reform plan increased . Ryzhkov 's economic reform plan was passed by an overwhelming majority , with 1 @,@ 532 deputies in favour , 419 against and 44 deputies abstaining . The parliamentary Interregional Group 's vote of no confidence in Ryzhkov 's government also failed , with 199 members in favour of Ryzhkov and his cabinet 's resignation , 1 @,@ 685 against and 99 abstaining . As the result of a propaganda war launched against Ryzhkov by Gorbachev supporters , several leading members of the Council of Ministers and its Presidium urged Ryzhkov to resign so that the Soviet Government could reach a compromise with the Russian Government . To make matters worse , the Russian Government which was headed by Ivan Silayev , stopped following Ryzhkov 's orders , and Silayev refused to visit the Moscow Kremlin . 
 Ryzhkov 's Plan and The 500 Days Programme were broadly similar , with both supporting price liberalisation , decentralisation and privatisation . The main difference between the two was Ryzhkov 's desire to retain much of the social security system , free education for all and the continuance of a strong central government apparatus . The 500 Days Programme did not mention political union with the other Soviet republics , but instead weakened the authority of the central government by establishing a market economy . In other words , they left the question of continuing or dissolving the Soviet Union open . On 17 September in a meeting of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union , Gorbachev openly supported the 500 Days Programme , claiming it would not lead to the reestablishment of capitalism , but instead to a mixed economy where private enterprise played an important role . 
 In December 1990 Ryzhkov suffered a heart attack . During his recovery , the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union dissolved the Council of Ministers and replaced it with the Cabinet of Ministers headed by Valentin Pavlov , Ryzhkov 's former Minister of Finance . The law enacting the change was passed on 26 December 1990 , but the new structure was not implemented until 14 January 1991 when Pavlov took over as Prime Minister of the Soviet Union . Between Ryzhkov 's hospitalisation and Pavlov 's election as Prime Minister , Lev Voronin acted as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers . The reorganisation of the government made it subordinate to the Presidency , weakening the head of government 's hold on economic policy . In contrast to Hough 's view that Gorbachev had little reason to remove Ryzhkov , Gordon M. Hahn argues that there were good reasons to replace him given that with Ryzhkov 's Politburo support much reduced , the reformist opposition saw him as a conservative . 
 = = RSFSR politics and post @-@ Soviet Russia = = 
 After recovering from his heart attack , in early 1991 Ryzhkov stood as the Communist candidate in the first election of the President of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) . At the election on 12 June 1991 , he gained 13 @,@ 395 @,@ 335 votes , equal to 16 @.@ 9 % of the electorate . Boris Yeltsin beat him decisively with 57 % . Ryzhkov 's vice presidential candidate was Boris Gromov , a Soviet war veteran who led the Soviet military during the final stages of the war in Afghanistan . Most of Ryzhkov 's votes came from the countryside , while he had hoped to win over voters who were becoming increasingly disenfranchised as a result of perestroika and Gorbachev 's leadership , even though the latter supported his candidacy . 
 During the 1995 legislative campaign , Ryzhkov defended his own tenure as Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers , claiming that Russians were far worse off under capitalism than Soviet communism . Russian TV channel NTV broadcast a debate featuring only Ryzhkov and Grigory <unk> , a liberal politician who strongly supported economic reforms . At the election , he was elected to the State Duma Federal Assembly as an independent candidate . Once elected , he headed the Power to the People bloc , a communist faction with nationalist tendencies . The Power to the People bloc came about through the merger of Ryzhkov 's supporters and the All @-@ People 's Union headed by Sergey <unk> . Its policies were left @-@ wing and included revival of the Soviet Union , the introduction of a planned economy , more state involvement in the economy and the promotion of nationalism and patriotism . During the 1996 presidential election Ryzhkov endorsed Gennady Zyuganov , the Communist Party of the Russian Federation ( CPRF ) candidate , for the presidency . 
 In 1996 , Ryzhkov was one of the founders of the CPRF @-@ led alliance of leftists and nationalists known as the People 's Patriotic Union of Russia ( <unk> ) and was elected chairman of its Duma faction . The <unk> 's formal leaders were Ryzhkov and <unk> , who was an unofficial leader . In September 2003 , Ryzhkov entered the Federation Council of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation as the representative for Belgorod Oblast , subsequently resigning his seat in the State Duma . He currently serves as Chairman of the Federation Council Commission on Natural Monopolies , as a member of the Committee on Local Self @-@ Governance and as co @-@ chairman of the Russian – Armenian commission on inter @-@ parliamentary cooperation . 
 = = Sanctions = = 
 In March 2014 , following the Crimean status referendum , the U.S. Treasury put Ryzhkov on the Specially Designated Nationals List ( SDN ) , a list of individuals sanctioned as “ members of the Russian leadership ’ s inner circle . ” The sanctions freeze any assets he holds in the US and ban him from entering the United States . 
 On March 17 , 2014 , Ryzhkov was added to the European Union sanctions list due to his role in the 2014 Crimean crisis . He is barred from entering the EU countries , and his assets in the EU have to be frozen . 
 = = Awards , decorations and orders = = 
 Ryzhkov was awarded the Order of the Red Banner of Labour twice , in 1966 and 1985 , the Order of the October Revolution in 1971 , the Order of Lenin in 1976 and 1979 and the Order of Merit for the Fatherland , 4th class ( 27 September 2004 - for outstanding contribution to the strengthening of the Russian state and many years of diligent work ) . A monument in recognition of his significant personal contribution to the reconstruction in Armenia after the 1988 Spitak earthquake was erected by the Armenian Government . In 2008 , the Armenian Government awarded Ryzhkov their highest state decoration , the National Hero of Armenia . The Ukrainian Government awarded him the Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise , 5th class , " for his outstanding contribution to the development of Russian – Ukrainian cooperation and on the occasion of his 75th birthday " on 24 September 2004 . The Russian President awarded Ryzhkov the Diploma of the President on 3 October 2009 . 
 Other decorations awarded to Ryzhkov include : 
 Order of the Patriotic War , 1st class ( 1985 ) 
 Medal " In Commemoration of the 850th Anniversary of Moscow " ( 1997 ) 
 Medal " In Commemoration of the 1000th Anniversary of Kazan " ( 2005 ) 
 Jubilee Medal " In Commemoration of the 100th Anniversary since the Birth of Vladimir Il 'ich Lenin " ( 1970 ) 
 Order " <unk> " ( Kyrgyzstan ) 
 Order of Holy Prince Daniel of Moscow , 2nd class 
 State Prize of the USSR 
 1969 - for the creation and implementation of complex mechanized welding demonstration in a unique block of welded structures <unk> engineering ( with the team ) 
 1979 - for the creation and implementation of high @-@ slab continuous casting machines for steel curved type complexes of high power ( with the team ) 
 = Ælfwald of East Anglia = 
 Ælfwald ( Old English : <unk> , " elf @-@ ruler , " reigned from 713 to 749 ) was an 8th @-@ century king of East Anglia , an Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom that today includes the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . The last king of the Wuffingas dynasty , Ælfwald succeeded his father Ealdwulf , who had ruled for forty @-@ nine years . Ælfwald himself ruled for thirty @-@ six years . Their combined reigns , with barely any record of external military action or internal dynastic strife , represent a long period of peaceful stability for the East Angles . In Ælfwald 's time , this was probably owing to a number of factors , including the settled nature of East Anglian ecclesiastical affairs and the prosperity brought through Rhineland commerce with the East Anglian port of Gipeswic ( modern Ipswich ) . The coinage of Anglo @-@ Saxon sceattas expanded in Ælfwald 's time : evidence of East Anglian mints , markets , and industry are suggested where concentrations of such coins have been discovered . 
 After returning from exile , Æthelbald of Mercia succeeded <unk> and afterwards endowed the church at Crowland . Ælfwald 's friendly stance towards Æthelbald helped to maintain peaceful relations with his more powerful neighbour . The Life of Guthlac , which includes information about Æthelbald during his period of exile at Crowland , is dedicated to Ælfwald . Later versions of the Life reveal the high quality of written Old English produced in East Anglia during Ælfwald 's reign . He was a literate and devoutly Christian king : his letter written to Boniface in around 747 reveals his diplomatic skills and gives a rare glimpse into the life of a ruler who is otherwise shrouded in obscurity . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 The East Anglian pedigree in the Anglian collection brings the descent down to Ælfwald , indicating that it was compiled during his reign , possibly by around 726 . Showing Ælfwald as son of Ealdwulf , the pedigree continues back through <unk> , Eni , Tytla , Wuffa , Wehha , Wilhelm , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( Caesar ) to Woden . The Historia Brittonum , which was probably compiled in the early 9th century , also has a version ( the de <unk> regum <unk> ) in descending order , showing : " Woden <unk> ( ' begat ' ) Casser , who begat Titinon , who begat Trigil , who begat Rodmunt , who begat <unk> , who begat Guillem <unk> . He first ruled in Britain over the race of East Angles . <unk> begat <unk> , who begat <unk> , who begat <unk> , who begat Edric , who begat <unk> , who begat Elric " . It is not certain whether the last name , Elric , is a mistake for Ælfwald or is referring to a different individual . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Accession = = = 
 At Ælfwald 's accession in 713 , Ceolred of Mercia had dominion over both Lindsey and Essex . Ælfwald 's sister <unk> was abbess at Repton in Derbyshire and Ælfwald 's upbringing was undoubtedly Christian in nature . 
 The following family tree shows the descendants of Eni , who was the paternal grandfather of Ælfwald . The kings of East Anglia , Kent and Mercia are coloured green , blue and red respectively : 
 = = = Felix 's ' Life of Guthlac ' = = = 
 Ceolred of Mercia 's appropriation of monastic assets during his reign created disaffection amongst the Mercians . His persecuted a distant cousin , Æthelbald , the grandson of Penda 's brother Eowa . Æthelbald was driven to take refuge deep in the Fens at Crowland , where Guthlac , another descendant of the Mercian royal house , was living as a hermit . When Guthlac died in 714 , Ælfwald 's sister <unk> provided a stone coffin for his burial . Ceolred died in 716 , <unk> and insane , according to his chroniclers . Penda 's line became extinct ( or disempowered ) and Æthelbald emerged as king of Mercia . 
 Æthelbald lived until 757 and carried Mercian power to a new height . His debt to Crowland was not forgotten : soon after his accession he richly endowed a new church on the site where Guthlac had lived as a hermit . The first Life of Guthlac , written by the monk Felix , appeared soon after Guthlac 's death . Nothing is known about Felix , although Bertram <unk> has observed that he was a good scholar who evidently had access to works by Bede and Aldhelm , to a Life of Saint Fursey and Latin works by Saint Jerome , Saint Athanasius and Gregory the Great . Felix was either an East Anglian or was living in the kingdom when he wrote the book , which was written at the request of Ælfwald . In the Life , Felix portrays Æthelbald 's exile at Crowland and asserts Ælfwald 's right to rule in East Anglia . Two Old English verse versions of the Life drawn on the work of Felix were written , which show the vigour of vernacular heroic and elegiac modes in Ælfwald 's kingdom . 
 Sam Newton has proposed that the Old English heroic poem Beowulf has its origins in Ælfwald 's East Anglia . 
 = = = The king 's bishops = = = 
 <unk> held the East Anglian see of Dommoc , following its division of in about 673 , and during Ealdwulf 's reign <unk> succeeded <unk> . At the Council of <unk> in 716 , <unk> attended as Bishop of Dommoc , while <unk> was present as Bishop of Elmham , having succeeded <unk> . 
 During the 720s , Cuthwine became bishop of Dommoc . Cuthwine was known to Bede and is known to have travelled to Rome , returning with a number of illuminated manuscripts , including Life and Labours of Saint Paul : his library also included Prosper Tiro 's <unk> and Sedulius ' Carmen <unk> . According to Bede , <unk> I was Bishop of Dommoc and <unk> Bishop of Elmham in 731 , but by 746 or 747 , <unk> ( II ) had replaced <unk> . 
 For more information on the episcopal sees and bishops of Dommoc and Elmham , see Bishop of Dunwich and Bishop of Elmham 
 = = = The development of the port at Gipeswic = = = 
 Ipswich was the first East Anglian town to be created by the Anglo @-@ Saxons , predating other new towns such as Norwich by a century . Excavation work at Ipswich has revealed that the town expanded out to become 50 hectares ( 120 acres ) in size during Ælfwald 's reign , when it was known as Gipeswic . It is generally considered that Gipeswic , as the trade capital of Ælfwald 's kingdom , developed under the king 's patronage . 
 A rectangular grid of streets linked the earlier quayside town northwards to an ancient trackway that ran eastwards . The quay at Gipeswic also continued to develop in a form that was similar to the quayside at Dorestad , south of the continental town of Utrecht , which was perhaps its principal trading partner . Gipeswic 's street grid , parts of which have survived , was subdivided into rectangular plots or insulae and new houses were built directly adjacent to metalled roads . The town 's pottery industry , producing what has been known since the 1950s as ' Ipswich ware ' , gained its full importance at around this time . 
 The former church dedication to Saint Mildred is one that can be dated to the 740s , when Mildred 's relics were translated at Minster @-@ in @-@ Thanet by her successor abbess Eadburh . 
 = = = Coinage = = = 
 The coins of Ælfwald 's reign are amongst the earliest that were minted in East Anglia . The coinage of silver pennies known as sceattas expanded in his time and several types are attributed to East Anglian production . Most of them fall into two main groups , known as the ' Q ' and ' R ' series . Neither group bears a royal name or title and the authority by which they were issued cannot not established . The ' Q ' series , which has some Northumbrian affinities , is most densely distributed in western East Anglia , along the Fen edge between the Wash and Cambridge . The R series , with bust and standard , derived from earlier Kentish types , is more densely distributed in central and eastern East Anglia , including the Ipswich area . According to Michael Metcalf , the ' R ' series was also East Anglian , being minted at Gipeswic . 
 = = = Letter to Boniface = = = 
 A letter from Ælfwald to Boniface , the leader of the English continental mission , has survived . It was written in at some time between 742 and 749 and is one of the few surviving documents from the period that relate the ecclesiastical history of East Anglia . 
 The letter , which is a response to Boniface who had requested his support , reveals Ælfwald 's sound understanding of Latin . Ælfwald 's letter reassures Boniface that his name was being remembered by the East Angles : it contains an offer to exchange the names of their dead , so that mutual prayers could be read for them . According to Richard Hoggett , a phrase in the letter , ' in <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ' , has been interpreted incorrectly by historians to imply that there were at the time seven monasteries in Ælfwald 's kingdom in which prayers were being read , a theory which has proved difficult for scholars to explain . Hoggett argues that the words in the phrase refer to the number of times that the monks offered praise during the monastic day and not to the number of monasteries then in existence . He points out that this interpretation was published by <unk> and Stubbs as long ago as 1869 . 
 = = Death = = 
 Ælfwald died in 749 . It is not known whether he left an immediate heir . After his death , according to mediaeval sources , East Anglia was divided between three kings , under circumstances that are not clear . 
 = Summer Mortimer = 
 Summer Ashley Mortimer ( born April 22 , 1993 ) is a Canadian <unk> who initially competed internationally for Canada , but switched to the Netherlands national paralympic team in 2014 . She has won seven world @-@ championship finals for Canada and the Netherlands , and four medals for Canada at her first Paralympic Games in London : two gold , one silver and one bronze . 
 Mortimer competed in the 2008 Canadian Olympic Trials as an able @-@ bodied swimmer , and retrained as a <unk> after a trampolining accident . She began competing at the international level in 2010 with an SM10 classification , setting world records in the process ( one of which she broke again in qualifying for the 2012 Paralympics ) . Competing in six events , Mortimer won medals in all four individual races . She holds world records in the S10 50- and 100 @-@ metre long @-@ course freestyle and the 50- 100- and 200 @-@ metre backstroke . In 2013 Mortimer applied to join the Netherlands national team , and announced her transfer in June 2014 . Winning three medals ( two gold and one silver ) at the 2014 IPC championships , she set two European records and expressed disappointment for not setting world records . 
 She will not be competing in the 2016 Summer Olympics , citing " serious health reasons . " 
 = = Career = = 
 Mortimer began swimming at age two ; her mother is a co @-@ owner of the Oakville Swim Academy . At age nine , she began swimming competitively . As a member of the Hamilton Aquatic Club and the Golden Horseshoe Aquatic Club , Mortimer competed at the 2008 Canadian Olympic Trials for the Beijing games . 
 She is classified SM10 , the least @-@ disabled <unk> classification . SM10 is open to those with " very minimal weakness affecting the legs ; Swimmers with restriction of hip joint movement ; Swimmers with both feet deformed ; Swimmers with one leg amputated below the knee ; Swimmers missing one hand . This is the class with the most physical ability " . 
 = = = Paraswimming for Canada = = = 
 A serious injury at a competitive trampolining event shattered most of the bones in Mortimer 's feet ; she was nationally ranked in the sport . When she began trying to walk again , she <unk> swimming . 
 Unaware that the Worlds were being broadcast , Mortimer was caught by surprise and stuck her tongue out at the camera . Her relaxed attitude continued at the Olympics , where she said that although there may be " some underlying arrogance " , she was not consciously trying to send a message to her rivals . Mortimer wears an elastic band which she snaps when aware of a negative thought ; " incredibly hard on myself " , it helps her realize the frequency of her " down " thinking and changes her mental perspective . 
 As a former able @-@ bodied competitive swimmer , she is annoyed by the idea held by some able @-@ bodied swimmers that paralympic swimming is a " joke " . " The Paralympics are so much harder than the able @-@ bodied side of sport . I know from first hand . It 's way harder " ; Mortimer said that she knew " truckloads of able @-@ bodied athletes who constantly make fun of the Paralympics " . She hopes for a change in attitude , noting how much change fellow medalist Benoit Huot has seen since the 2000 Paralympics in Sydney . 
 = = = = World @-@ level competition = = = = 
 At the 2010 IPC Swimming World Championships in Eindhoven , Netherlands , Mortimer won four gold medals and set five world records . In November of that year , she was Female <unk> of the Year at Swimming Canada 's Big Splash . 
 At the April 2012 Canadian Olympic and Paralympic Swimming Trials in Montreal , Mortimer aimed to lower her world record in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle from 28 @.@ 30 seconds to about 28 @.@ 27 ; she finished in 28 @.@ 17 seconds . Between the Trials and the Paralympics , she won the 100 @-@ metre backstroke in July at the Canada Cup ; this result surprised Mortimer , who had a " rough time " with her feet the previous month . That month , she also won the women 's 100 @-@ metre S10 at the Speedo Paraswimming CAN @-@ AM in Winnipeg . 
 = = = = London Paralympics = = = = 
 Mortimer qualified for six women 's SM10 events at the 2012 London Paralympics — the 200 @-@ metre individual medley , 4 × 100 m freestyle relay <unk> , 4 × 100 m medley relay , 50- and 100 @-@ metre freestyle and 100 @-@ metre backstroke — and expectations for her were high . On August 30 , the first day of the competition , Sophie Pascoe of New Zealand won the SM10 200 @-@ metre individual medley ; Mortimer took the silver medal . For a half @-@ hour before the competition , Mortimer was " bawling her eyes out " ; she told The Canadian Press , " [ Being ] here and meeting all these people made me realize I am so incredibly grateful for the experience I ’ ve had as a result of my accident . I don ’ t know if this was part of the journey I was supposed to walk in life but I wouldn ’ t take it back for the world " . The next day , she won the S10 50 @-@ metre freestyle gold medal in a record time of 28 @.@ 10 seconds . Mortimer 's time was <unk> second faster than her April Trials record , and .14 second faster than Pascoe 's time ; she went into the race " a bit annoyed " and " mad at anyone who was going to take it from me " . 
 In the preliminary round of the 100 @-@ metre backstroke Mortimer placed third , and hoped to be away from " the main people " in the finals to maintain her focus . She won the gold medal in the final on September 4 , setting a world record of 1 : 05 @.@ 90 after overcoming Pascoe 's half @-@ second lead at the turn . Mortimer noted that her time was faster than her best able @-@ bodied time . 
 In the 100 @-@ metre freestyle ( her final solo event ) Mortimer finished third , 0 @.@ 69 second behind Pascoe and France 's Elodie <unk> ; Canadian Aurelie Rivard finished fourth . Mortimer 's bronze was Canada 's only medal on day nine of the competition . 
 As part of the Canadian women 's 34 @-@ point 4 × 100 m freestyle relay and 4 × 100 m medley relay teams , Mortimer did not medal . Although her freestyle @-@ relay team clocked 4 : 38 @.@ 23 ( missing the 2000 Canadian record by 0 @.@ 22 second ) , they placed seventh in the finals . With Katarina Roxon , Morgan Bird and Brianna Nelson in the medley relay , Mortimer 's team finished seventh and last . Her times of 32 @.@ 35 for the 50 @-@ metre and 1 : 06 @.@ 37 for the 100 @-@ metre were the fastest for her legs of the events . At the 2012 Olympics , Mortimer 's four medals were the most for any Canadian athlete or para @-@ athlete . 
 = = = = After London = = = = 
 Following Mortimer 's last individual event at London she said that although she intended to try for the 2013 World Aquatics Championships , the 2015 Parapan American Games , and the 2016 Paralympics , she takes life year @-@ by @-@ year . From October 2012 to April 2013 at least , she planned to take time off to focus on her health . 
 Mortimer appeared at the Olympic Heroes Parade in Toronto . For the event , Paralympic athletes were given rooms at a hotel on the outskirts of Toronto while Olympic athletes were housed downtown and received gifts ; at a dinner , the Paralympians were relegated to a different dining room . A Canadian Paralympic Committee spokesperson told The Spectator that the committee scrambled during the Paralympics to have their athletes included , and with their limited funding they could not afford the perks received by the Olympic athletes . 
 The athlete is a 2015 Pan and Parapan American Games ambassador , and has given presentations at schools . Mortimer receives <unk> for these appearances , and hoped to earn $ 3 @,@ 000 in speaking fees in 2012 . She appeared on CBC 's Play On ! Street Hockey Championship in Niagara Falls , assisted with the post @-@ position draw at the Pattison Canadian International Championship Stakes , and has appeared in publicity photo shoots . 
 Competitive @-@ swimwear manufacturer Arena sponsors Mortimer . In November 2012 , she went public about her and her uncle 's difficulty in finding sponsorship since the 2010 Worlds . Mortimer said that Paralympic athletes received no prize money , despite thousands of dollars given by the government to winning Olympians and their coaches . She told The Hamilton Spectator , " We get a pat on the back and a good job note from Stephen Harper . It 's upsetting . Trust me , coming from being an able @-@ bodied athlete to a Paralympian , it infuriates me " , and that she receives $ 3 @,@ 000 a year in funding from the government . Mortimer 's return to the pool included the April 9 , 2014 Cam Am Para Swimming competition , where she won three gold medals . 
 = = = Paraswimming for the Netherlands = = = 
 In 2013 , Mortimer applied to switch to the Netherlands national team ; since her mother is from that country , she has dual citizenship . In June 2014 , the Hamilton Spectator reported the change . Although day @-@ to @-@ day funding in the Netherlands is similar to that in Canada , the former offers prize money ; in the 2012 Paralympics , Mortimer would have won $ 60 @,@ 000 for her gold medals alone . She will train in <unk> . 
 She was successful at the August 2014 IPC Swimming European Championships in Eindhoven . Breaking the women 's 50 @-@ metre freestyle record in the morning 's heats , Mortimer lowered it again to 28 @.@ 12 in the finals . In the S10 100 @-@ metre backstroke , she broke the European record in the morning 's heats and again in the final . Although she won a gold medal , she told the IPC website : " I wanted a world record . I 'm not satisfied , I 'm not super happy . That wasn 't the perfect race . But this was a gauge to see where I am at . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 The Big Splash ( from Swimming Canada ) 
 2011 : Female Para @-@ Swimmer of the Year ; her father was the Para @-@ Female Coach of the Year 
 2012 : TAS Para @-@ Swimming Female Swimmer of the Year 
 Ontario Sport Award ( from Sport Alliance Ontario ) 
 2011 : Female Athlete with a Disability of the Year 
 2012 : Female Athlete with a Disability of the Year ; her coach , Reg Chappell , was Male Coach of the Year . 
 Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal ( 2012 ) 
 Mortimer , Melissa Tancredi and Cory Conacher were nominated for the 2013 Golden Horseshoe Athlete of the Year for residents of Hamilton or Burlington . Tancredi won . Columnist Dave <unk> of the Toronto Star listed Mortimer as a contender for the 2012 Lou Marsh Trophy ( won by Christine Sinclair ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In November 2008 , shortly after the Olympic trampoline trials , 15 @-@ year @-@ old Mortimer missed the sponge pit after bouncing on a mini @-@ trampoline and fell 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) onto a concrete pad ; her parents , spectators at the competition , saw the accident . The bones in her feet were shattered , and doctors suggested that she would never stand again . Amputation was a possibility , although Mortimer was only informed of it in 2011 . 
 She spent six months in a wheelchair and another 18 months on crutches . Mortimer 's right foot has six screws and a plate , and her left foot has two screws ; her ankles are continuously sore , and occasionally lock up . During the Paralympics she told the Canadian Press that her feet were " killing " her , and her condition is degenerative . When Mortimer 's casts were removed her walking rehabilitation was in the water , and she thinks she would not be able to walk without the aquatic rehab . Before the injury , she had 10 sessions per week in the pool ( swimming 6 – 7 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 3 mi ) each session ) in addition to weight training and running . After the accident her weekly threshold at the local YMCA pool was 30 to 40 kilometres ( 19 to 25 mi ) and four sessions in the weight room . Her disability is not usually evident to spectators , and according to the Canadian Press she walks with a " halfway normal gait . " 
 Sportsnet Magazine chose Mortimer for its 2013 " Beauty of Sport " issue , and she was photographed in Las Vegas wearing a bikini . She hoped to increase interest in paralympic sport and to celebrate the bodies of all athletes . 
 Mortimer illustrated The Night I Met the Boogie Man , written by her twin sister Julia , and created murals and other artwork for a fundraiser benefiting Olympic and Paralympic athletes . She is a graduate of Westmount Secondary School . She was named after Summer Sanders , an American Olympic swimmer who won four medals ( two gold , one silver and one bronze ) at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona , one year before she was born . 
 = Onion dome = 
 An onion dome ( Russian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ; compare Russian : <unk> , <unk> , " onion " ) is a dome whose shape resembles an onion . Such domes are often larger in diameter than the drum upon which they sit , and their height usually exceeds their width . These bulbous structures taper smoothly to a point . 
 It is the predominant form for church domes in Russia ( mostly on Russian Orthodox churches ) and in Bavaria , Germany ( German : <unk> ( literally " onion tower " ) , plural : <unk> , mostly on Catholic churches ) , but can also be found regularly across Austria , northeastern Italy , Eastern Europe , Mughal India , the Middle East and Central Asia . 
 Other types of Eastern Orthodox cupolas include helmet domes ( for example , those of the Saint Sophia Cathedral in Novgorod and of the Assumption Cathedral in Vladimir ) , Ukrainian pear domes ( Saint Sophia Cathedral in Kiev ) , and Baroque bud domes ( St. Andrew 's Church in Kiev ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Art historians disagree on when and why onion domes became a typical feature of Russian architecture . Byzantine churches and architecture of Kievan Rus were characterized by broader , flatter domes without a special framework erected above the drum . In contrast to this ancient form , each drum of a Russian church is surmounted by a special structure of metal or timber , which is lined with sheet iron or tiles . 
 By the end of the nineteenth century , most Russian churches from before the Petrine period had bulbous domes . The largest onion domes were erected in the seventeenth century in the area around Yaroslavl , incidentally famous for its large onions . Quite a few had more complicated bud @-@ shaped domes , whose form derived from Baroque models of the late seventeenth century . Pear @-@ shaped domes are usually associated with Ukrainian Baroque , while cone @-@ shaped domes are typical for Orthodox churches of Transcaucasia . 
 = = Traditional view = = 
 Russian icons painted before the Mongol invasion of Rus do not feature churches with onion domes . Two highly venerated pre @-@ Mongol churches that have been rebuilt — the Assumption Cathedral and the Cathedral of St. Demetrius in Vladimir — display golden helmet domes . Restoration work on several other ancient churches revealed some fragments of former helmet @-@ like domes below newer onion cupolas . 
 It has been posited that onion domes first appeared during the reign of Ivan the Terrible . The domes of Saint Basil 's Cathedral have not been altered since the reign of Ivan 's son Fyodor I , indicating the presence of onion domes in the sixteenth @-@ century Russia . 
 Some scholars postulate that onion domes were borrowed by Russians from Muslim countries - probably from the Khanate of Kazan , whose conquest Ivan the Terrible commemorated by erecting St. Basil 's Cathedral . Eight of the nine domes featured on St. Basil 's Cathedral represent each attack on Kazan . The ninth dome was constructed 36 years after the siege of Kazan as a tomb for Basil . The ornate finishes of these domes are bright in color and bold in shape as they 're adorned with pyramids and stripes , and many other patterns seen on other cathedrals than Basil 's . Some believe that onion domes first appeared in Russian wooden architecture above tent @-@ like churches . According to this theory , onion domes were strictly utilitarian , as they prevented snow from piling on the roof . 
 Based on the notion that onion domes did not exist in Russia before the mid @-@ sixteenth century , restoration work on churches built before the seventeenth century have routinely involved replacement of onion domes with " more authentic " helmet @-@ shaped domes . One example of such restoration is the Dormition Cathedral in the Moscow Kremlin . 
 = = Modern view = = 
 In 1946 , the historian Boris <unk> , while analysing miniatures of ancient Russian chronicles , pointed out that most of them , from the thirteenth century onward , display churches with onion domes rather than helmet domes . Nikolay Voronin , the foremost authority on pre @-@ Mongol Russian architecture , seconded his opinion that onion domes existed in Russia as early as the thirteenth century , although they presumably could not be widespread . These findings demonstrated that Russian onion domes could not be imported from the Orient , where onion domes did not replace spherical domes until the fifteenth century . 
 Sergey <unk> , a modern art historian , surveyed hundreds of Russian icons and miniatures , from the eleventh century onward . He concluded that most icons painted after the Mongol invasion of Rus display only onion domes . First onion domes displayed on some pictures of twelfth century ( two miniatures from <unk> <unk> ) . He found only one icon from the late fifteenth century displaying a dome resembling the helmet instead of an onion . His findings led him to dismiss fragments of helmet domes discovered by <unk> beneath modern onion domes as post @-@ Petrine <unk> intended to reproduce the familiar forms of Byzantine cupolas . <unk> also indicated that the oldest depictions of the two Vladimir cathedrals represent them as having onion domes , prior to their replacement by classicizing helmet <unk> explains the ubiquitous appearance of onion domes in the late thirteenth century by the general emphasis on verticality characteristic of Russian architecture from the late twelfth to early fifteenth centuries . At that period , porches , pilasters , vaults and drums were arranged to create a vertical thrust , to make the church seem taller than it was . It seems logical that elongated , or onion , domes were part of the same proto @-@ Gothic trend aimed at achieving pyramidal , vertical emphasis . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 Prior to the eighteenth century , the Russian Orthodox Church did not assign any particular symbolism to the exterior shape of a church . Nevertheless , onion domes are popularly believed to symbolise burning candles . In 1917 , noted religious philosopher Prince Yevgeny <unk> argued that the onion shape of Russian church domes may not be explained rationally . According to <unk> , drums crowned by tapering domes were deliberately scored to resemble candles , thus manifesting a certain aesthetic and religious attitude . Another explanation has it that the onion dome was originally regarded as a form reminiscent of the <unk> ( <unk> ) in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem . 
 Onion domes often appear in groups of three , representing the Holy Trinity , or five , representing Jesus Christ and the Four Evangelists . Domes standing alone represent Jesus . Vasily <unk> , the first to record such interpretation , disapproved of it emphatically . He believed that the five @-@ domed design of churches was propagated by Patriarch Nikon , who liked to compare the central and highest dome with himself and four lateral domes with four other patriarchs of the Orthodox world . There is no other evidence that Nikon ever held such a view . 
 The domes are often brightly painted : their colors may informally symbolise different aspects of religion . Green , blue , and gold domes are sometimes held to represent the Holy Trinity , the Holy Spirit , and Jesus , respectively . Black ball @-@ shaped domes were once popular in the snowy north of Russia . 
 = = Internationally = = 
 The onion dome is not only found in Russian architecture : it was also used extensively in Mughal architecture , which later went on to influence Indo @-@ Gothic architecture . Outside India , it is also used in Iran and other places in the Middle East and Central Asia . At the end of 19th century , the Dutch built <unk> Grand Mosque in Aceh , Indonesia , which incorporated onion shaped dome . The shape of the dome has been used in numerous mosques in Indonesia since then . 
 Baroque domes in the shape of an onion ( or other vegetables or flower @-@ buds ) were common in the Holy Roman Empire as well . The first one was built in 1576 by the architect John Holl ( 1512 @-@ 1594 ) on the church of the Convent of the Franciscan Sisters of Maria Stern in Augsburg . Usually made of copper sheet , onion domes appear on Catholic churches all over southern Germany , Czech lands , Austria and Sardinia and Northeast Italy . Onion domes were also a favourite of 20th @-@ century Austrian architectural designer <unk> Hundertwasser . 
 The World 's Only Corn Palace , a tourist attraction and basketball arena in Mitchell , South Dakota , also features onion domes on the roof of the structure . 
 = Mark Soyer = 
 Mark Soyer is an Australian para @-@ alpine LW11 classified skier . He dealt with leukaemia twice as a child . At the age of 26 , he severed his spinal cord during an accident while riding his motorbike on his parents ' farm , and subsequently tried several different sports . Working as a manufacturing jeweller and gemologist in Melbourne , he has also been involved with para @-@ skiing as a volunteer , and serving in administrative roles for various organisations . In 2007 , he was a finalist for the Pride of Australia awards for courage . 
 Soyer took up skiing following his accident after attending a camp in Australia . He then travelled to Colorado to attend another camp , before coming back to Australia to attend another camp . In 2007 , he was ranked as Australia 's second best sit @-@ skier , and was in the top 50 skiers in the world . He attempted to make the 2010 Winter Paralympics . He earned bronze medals at skiing events in New Zealand in 2011 . In 2012 , he was a member of the Australian Paralympic skiing team , based out of the Australian Institute of Sports , and was trying to secure a spot for the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi , Russia . 
 = = Personal = = 
 As a three @-@ year @-@ old , Soyer was diagnosed with leukaemia , and doctors were pessimistic about his chances for survival . Despite being declared cancer free by the age of six , the cancer came back when he was eight years old . As a child , he played Australian rules football and was a member of Little Athletics . He attended Benalla College . 
 In November 2004 , at the age of 26 , Soyer severed his spinal cord during an accident while riding his motorbike on his parents ' farm . He was keen to exercise as soon as he could during his rehabilitation . He tried several sports , including wheelchair tennis , wheelchair rugby and wheelchair basketball , following his accident in an attempt to find one that made him feel able @-@ bodied . He drove dune buggies and tried kayaking , and in 2007 was learning how to para @-@ glide . 
 In 2007 and 2008 , Soyer worked as a manufacturing jeweller and gemologist in Melbourne . He volunteers for Disabled Winter Sport Australia as a ski guide . From 2005 to 2008 , he raised more than AUD $ 7 @,@ 500 to assist other Australian para @-@ skiers afford equipment to compete . At the same time , he also gave skiing lessons . He is also on the board of Able Management Group , an organisation assisting people with disabilities to get into para @-@ alpine skiing , where he serves on the Fundraising Committee . He was involved in the founding of the AMG Free Ride Team . He is also part of the Australian Paralympic Committee 's <unk> Paralympian Speakers Program . In 2007 , he helped conduct three adaptive skiing camps in Victoria , and was a finalist for the Pride of Australia awards for courage . 
 = = Skiing = = 
 Soyer is an LW11 classified skier , who skied before his accident . He took up sit @-@ skiing while rehabilitating from his injuries , and was able to adapt to a mono @-@ ski within the first day of trying it at a Disability <unk> Australia camp at Falls Creek . Before the year was out following that camp , he went to Colorado and participated in a skiing camp specifically for people who use monoskis . During the following Australian ski season , he participated in a learn to ski race camp at Thredbo . 
 Soyer trains at Mount Hotham and Falls Creek in Australia , and in Colorado in the United States . In 2007 , he was ranked as Australia 's second best sit @-@ skier and was in the top 50 skiers in the world . In December of that year , he competed at the Hartford Ski Spectacular at the Beaver Run Resort in Breckenridge , Colorado where he finished thirteenth in the giant slalom , with a time of 1 : 09 @.@ 12 in his first run , and 1 : 08 @.@ 67 in his second run for a combined run time of 2 : 17 @.@ 79 . 
 In 2008 , Soyer was trying to qualify for the 2010 Winter Paralympics . At that time , he was the second ranked skier in his class in Australia , and ranked in the top 60 in the world . Going into the 2008 / 2009 ski season , he needed to raise AUD $ 20 @,@ 000 to allow him to compete internationally to qualify for the Games . In August 2009 , he competed in the Winter Games NZ at Coronet Peak in the men 's sitting LW11 slalom event . At the 2011 New Zealand Winter Games , he finished third in the men 's sitting giant slalom event with a time of 1 : 46 @.@ 08 . Arriving late to the event , he did not have much training time to learn the course . At another skiing event in 2011 in Mt Hutt , New Zealand , he finished third in the Super G. He competed at the 2011 IPC Alpine Skiing <unk> Cup at Copper Mountain , Colorado , where he earned three fourth @-@ place finishes and one seventh @-@ place finish . Early in his trip , prior to competing , he broke his race ski and had equipment difficulties at the <unk> Cup as a result . He had a time of 2 : 00 @.@ 69 in the giant slalom race . In 2012 , he was a member of the Australian Paralympic skiing team , based out of the Australian Institute of Sports , and was trying to secure a spot for the 2014 Winter Paralympics . In January 2012 , he was in Austria to compete at the <unk> IPCAS . That year , Liberty Skis Corporation signed him to its professional team . 
 = Royal Rumble ( 2005 ) = 
 Royal Rumble ( 2005 ) was the eighteenth annual Royal Rumble professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was presented by PlayStation 2 and took place on January 30 , 2005 , at the Save Mart Center in Fresno , California and featured talent from both the Raw and SmackDown ! brands . As has been customary since 1993 , the Royal Rumble match winner received a match at that year 's WrestleMania , ( in this instance : WrestleMania 21 ) for his choice at either the WWE Championship or the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 Five professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's supercard , a scheduling of more than one main event . The main event was the annual 30 @-@ man Royal Rumble match , which featured wrestlers from both brands . Batista , the twenty @-@ eighth entrant , won the match by last eliminating John Cena , the twenty @-@ fifth entrant . The primary match on the Raw brand was Triple H versus Randy Orton for the World Heavyweight Championship , which Triple H won by pinfall after performing a Pedigree . The primary match on the SmackDown ! brand was a Triple Threat match for the WWE Championship between reigning champion John " Bradshaw " Layfield , Kurt Angle , and The Big Show , which JBL won by pinning Angle after performing a Clothesline from Hell . For the first time since The Wrestling Classic , no tag team match was assigned . 
 = = Background = = 
 The professional wrestling matches at Royal Rumble featured professional wrestlers performing as characters in scripted events pre @-@ determined by the hosting promotion , World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . Storylines between the characters were produced on WWE 's weekly television shows Raw and SmackDown ! with the Raw and SmackDown ! brands — storyline divisions in which WWE assigned its employees to different programs . 
 The main feud heading into the Royal Rumble on the Raw brand was between Triple H and Randy Orton over the World Heavyweight Championship . Their feud started on the night after Summerslam , when Orton was kicked out of Evolution by Triple H. The following month , at Unforgiven , Triple H defeated Orton to win the World Heavyweight Championship . At Survivor Series , Team Orton ( Orton , Chris Benoit , Chris Jericho , and Maven ) defeated Team Triple H ( Triple H , Edge , Batista , and Snitsky ) in a four @-@ on @-@ four Elimination match . Orton won the match for his team by last eliminating Triple H. Two months later , at New Year 's Revolution , the pay @-@ per @-@ view three weeks before the Royal Rumble , Triple H won an Elimination Chamber match to win the vacant World Heavyweight Championship . Triple H won the match by last eliminating Orton following outside interference from Evolution members Batista and Ric Flair . The next night on Raw , Orton defeated Batista to become the number one contender to the title at the Royal Rumble . The following week , after a verbal confrontation between the two in the arena , Triple H ambushed Orton backstage . They fought until Orton tried to use a steel chair , and Triple H fled . On the January 24 episode of Raw , Orton faced off against Ric Flair . During the match , as the referee was knocked down , Triple H came in and attacked Orton along with Flair . Orton , however , fought off both men and won the match . 
 The main feud on the SmackDown ! brand was between John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) , The Big Show , and Kurt Angle , with the three feuding over the WWE Championship . On the December 16 , 2004 , episode of SmackDown ! , Angle challenged JBL to a match for the WWE Championship . The Cabinet ( Orlando Jordan , Doug , and Danny Basham ) interfered and attacked Angle , causing the match to end via disqualification . They continued to attack Angle after the match until The Big Show came out , beat down everyone , and signaled to JBL that he wanted the title . In the weeks that followed , a Triple Threat match for the title between the three was booked for the Royal Rumble . Following this , JBL set up Angle to anger The Big Show , but Angle angered JBL in response . After realizing this , JBL aligned himself with The Big Show and confronted Angle ; however , JBL turned on Big Show and beat him down with Angle . On the January 27 episode of SmackDown ! , SmackDown ! General Manager Theodore Long booked a Last Man Standing match between JBL and Angle for later that night . The two eventually turned on each other , and the match ended in a no contest . It was later revealed that the match was Big Show 's idea . 
 Another feud heading into the event from SmackDown ! was between The Undertaker and Heidenreich . Their feud first started in 2004 at No Mercy , the pay @-@ per @-@ view in October . Heidenreich helped John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) defeat Undertaker in a Last Ride match by attacking Undertaker and putting him in the hearse . At Survivor Series , Undertaker defeated Heidenreich by pinfall after executing a Tombstone Piledriver . At Armageddon 2004 , Heidenreich once again cost Undertaker his title match against JBL in a Fatal Four Way that involved Booker T and Eddie <unk> by pushing Undertaker backwards while holding JBL in the tombstone piledriver position , before JBL pinned Booker T after a Clothesline From Hell . Smackdown 's General Manager Theodore Long let Undertaker name the stipulation for his match against Heidenreich at Royal Rumble . As Heidenreich mentioned his fear of caskets , Undertaker chose to face him in a casket match for Royal Rumble . 
 A preliminary Raw brand feud was between Shawn Michaels and Edge . Their feud started at Taboo Tuesday 2004 when Michaels was voted over Edge to face Triple H for the World Heavyweight Championship . At New Year 's Revolution 2005 , Edge lost a shot at the title in an Elimination Chamber with Michaels as special referee . In the Elimination Chamber , Michaels superkicked Edge , followed by a <unk> from Chris Jericho , with Jericho making the cover . Believing it was Michael 's fault that he was not crowned champion , Edge speared Michaels and the two men were booked into a match at Royal Rumble . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Maven defeated Rhyno in a match taped for Sunday Night Heat . The first match that aired was between Edge and Shawn Michaels . Edge mocked Michaels by performing some of Michaels ' signature taunts during the match . Edge gained the advantage after an Edge @-@ O @-@ Matic ( sitout rear mat slam ) outside the ring . Michaels fought back until Edge left the ring . Michaels came after him , but , with the referee 's distraction , Edge speared Michaels , both outside and inside the ring . Michaels then knocked Edge off the second rope and executed a diving elbow drop . Edge countered a superkick attempt into an electric chair drop and applied the <unk> . Michaels broke the hold and attempted a roll @-@ up , but Edge rolled through and pinned Michaels while holding the ropes . 
 The second match was a Casket match between The Undertaker and Heidenreich . The match started back and forth until Heidenreich sent The Undertaker into the side of the casket . The Undertaker came back , applying the triangle choke until Gene Snitsky interfered and attacked The Undertaker . Snitsky and Heidenreich double @-@ teamed The Undertaker and called for the casket to be opened . Kane was revealed to be inside the casket , and he climbed out . He attacked Snitsky and Heidenreich and fought Snitsky into the audience . Heidenreich sent The Undertaker into the steel steps and pushed the casket into him . Heidenreich put The Undertaker in the casket after applying the cobra clutch . The Undertaker stopped the lid from closing with his arm , gaining control briefly . Heidenreich fought back and put The Undertaker in the casket again . The Undertaker , however , fought out of it and executed a chokeslam and a Tombstone Piledriver . Shortly after , Undertaker put Heidenreich in the casket and closed the lid to win the match . 
 The third match was a Triple Threat match for the WWE Championship between champion John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) , The Big Show , and Kurt Angle . In the opening minutes , Angle stayed on the outside of the ring , leaving Big Show and JBL on their own . Angle came into the ring to break up a pinfall attempt , but Big Show kept the advantage over both men . Angle hit Big Show with a television monitor to send him through an announce table , thus leaving Angle and JBL on their own . Big Show returned a few minutes later and continued to control the match . Big Show tackled JBL through the steel barricade and performed a flapjack to Angle onto a steel chair . Shortly after , Luther Reigns , Mark Jindrak , Doug , and Danny Basham attacked Big Show , and Orlando Jordan helped JBL back into the ring . JBL then executed a Clothesline from Hell on Angle and pinned him to retain the title . 
 The fourth match was between Triple H and Randy Orton for the World Heavyweight Championship . Prior to the match , Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff banned Evolution ( Batista and Ric Flair ) from ringside . Orton had control at the start of the match until Triple H countered an RKO attempt by throwing Orton out of the ring . Triple H kept the advantage and targeted Orton 's left knee until Orton kicked him into an announce table . Orton kept the advantage until he suffered a kayfabe concussion from missing a DDT . Triple H knocked both Orton and the referee down with a clothesline and took out a sledgehammer from beneath the ring . He tried to hit Orton with it , but Orton pulled him into the ringpost . Triple H performed another clothesline and a Pedigree to win and retain the title . 
 The final match was the Royal Rumble match . Before the match began , Kurt Angle stole Nunzio 's entrance number , taking his spot in the match . After the tenth entrant , Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff came to ringside , and SmackDown ! General Manager Theodore Long also came out soon after . The participants then divided into their brands and fought against each other until they worked together to eliminate Muhammad Hassan , the thirteen entrant . Scotty 2 Hotty , the fifteenth entrant , was attacked by Hassan during his entrance and never entered the match . Angle , the twentieth entrant , dominated upon entering the match until Shawn Michaels eliminated him . Angle came back in later to eliminate Michaels and continued to attack him afterwards . Jonathan Coachman , the twenty @-@ first entrant , spent a lot of his time in the match holding onto the bottom rope as he was not a wrestler . The final four participants remaining were Batista , John Cena , Edge , and Rey Mysterio . Edge fought with Mysterio and threw him over the top rope , but he stayed on the apron . Edge then executed a spear to eliminate Mysterio . Cena and Batista then eliminated Edge as he was attacking them . Cena tried to perform an FU on Batista to the outside , but Batista fought off . Batista then attempted a Batista Bomb to the outside , but was countered with a headscissors takedown by Cena , sending both over the top rope and touching the floor at the same time . The referees for the Raw brand believed Batista to be the winner while the SmackDown ! referees believed Cena to be winner . Following this , WWE Chairman Vince McMahon came to the ring , in the process legitimately tearing both his quadriceps muscles , and ordered the match to be restarted with the final two participants , Batista and John Cena . Batista tossed Cena over the top rope following a Spinebuster to win the match . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The following weeks on Raw surrounded Batista 's choice of which champion to face at WrestleMania 21 . Triple H devised a scheme to have Batista almost run over by a limousine resembling John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) ' s , so Batista would challenge JBL instead of himself . Batista became aware of the scheme and chose to face Triple H for the World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania , thus leaving the Evolution stable in the process . He won the title , and their feud continued until he was drafted to SmackDown ! on June 30 . Batista remained champion until the January 13 , 2006 , episode of SmackDown ! when he surrendered the title due to injury . 
 John Cena went on to win a tournament to become the number one contender to the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 21 . The tournament concluded in a match between him and Kurt Angle at No Way Out , which Cena won after performing an FU . Following this , he began an angle with JBL . Cena defeated JBL to win the title at WrestleMania , and their feud ended after Cena retained the title in an " I Quit " match at Judgment Day . Cena would then go to hold on to the title until New Year 's Revolution 2006 when Edge cashed in the Money in the Bank contract he won at Wrestlemania 21 and defeat Cena after an Elimination Chamber match . 
 Following the Royal Rumble , Randy Orton and Kurt Angle began feuding with The Undertaker and Shawn Michaels , respectively . The Big Show faced JBL in the first ever barbed wire steel cage match for the title at No Way Out , which JBL won to retain the title . Orton briefly feuded with Christian before moving on to feud with The Undertaker , which spanned nine months . After losing his title match at No Way Out , The Big Show faced Akebono in a sumo match at WrestleMania , and he briefly feuded with Carlito afterwards . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Royal Rumble match entrances and eliminations = = = 
 Red █ █ and " Raw " indicates a Raw superstar , blue █ █ and " SmackDown ! " indicates a SmackDown ! superstar . A new entrant came out approximately every 90 seconds . 
 ^ Scotty was attacked by Hassan before he made it to the ring , and therefore was unable to compete and never officially entered the match . 
 ^ Kurt Angle had been eliminated by Shawn Michaels and then returned to the ring , and eliminated Michaels in retaliation . 
 = Roc Me Out = 
 " Roc Me Out " is a song recorded by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna for her sixth studio album Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) . It was written by Ester Dean , Robert Swire , Gareth McGrillen , Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen . The track was produced by StarGate ( Eriksen and Hermansen ) and Knife Party ( Swire and McGrillen ) . " Roc Me Out " is a synthpop song reminiscent of Rihanna 's previous singles " Rude Boy " and " S & M " . It is set in " chugging " tempo and features heavy synths , " contagious " hooks and West Indian nuances . Lyrically , the song features Rihanna sexually seducing her lover , while revealing her " nasty secrets " . Contemporary music critics were divided in their reviews of " Roc Me Out " ; some of them labeled the song as a highlight on the album , while others criticized its similarity to Rihanna 's previous singles . Upon the release of Talk That Talk , the song debuted on the lower regions of the singles charts in South Korea and the United Kingdom at number 73 and 176 respectively . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 " Roc Me Out " was written by Ester Dean , Robert Swire , Gareth McGrillen , Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen . The song was produced by StarGate ( Eriksen and Hermansen ) and Knife Party ( Swire and McGrillen ) . Dean and Stargate have collaborated on Rihanna 's previous songs including " Rude Boy " ( Rated R , 2009 ) and " S & M " ( Loud , 2010 ) . Eriksen and Miles Walker recorded " Roc Me Out " at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City , Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles and The Hide Out Studios in London . It was mixed by Phil Tan , while Daniella Rivera served as a mixing assistant . The song 's vocal production was completed by Kuk Harrell , with the vocal recording done by Marcos Tovar and Harrell himself . The instrumentation of the song was made by Eriksen and Hermansen . Tim Blacksmith and Danny D. were signed as executive producers of " Roc Me Out " . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Roc Me Out " is a synthpop song that runs for 3 minutes and 29 seconds . It is set in " chugging " tempo and features heavy synths , contagious hooks and West Indian nuances . According to the digital sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Roc Me Out " is written in the key of E minor ( recorded in E @-@ flat minor ) and set in common time , with 80 beats per minute . Rihanna 's vocal range spans from the low note of B3 to the high note of D5 . Music critics noted similarities between the song and previous singles by Rihanna and Australian @-@ British band Pendulum , whose members Swire and McGrillen co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced the song . Laurence Green of MusicOMH described " Roc Me Out " as a " collision " between Rihanna 's 2010 single " Rude Boy " and Pendulum 's " Slam " ( Hold Your Colour , 2005 ) . According to Edward Keeble of Gigwise , " Roc Me Out " sounds like a combination of " Umbrella " ( Good Girl Gone Bad , 2007 ) and a slowed down version of " Slam " . 
 Lyrically , the song shows Rihanna sexually seducing her love interest , while revealing her " nasty secrets " . According to Julianne Shepherd of Spin , Rihanna " coyly dares " ' her lover to " sex her up " ' . In " Roc Me Out " , Rihanna uses her " militaristic alternate persona " and interprets the lyrics " with a command and directness befitting " of it . Rihanna complains to her lover throughout the lines " You ’ re taking too long to get my head on the ground / And my feet in the clouds , " before cooing , " I ’ ve been a bad girl , daddy " . She gives him instructions while singing " Get my head in the ground and my feet in the clouds " . Priya Elan of NME commented that the song sounds like a " ‘ Rude Boy ’ re @-@ tool from the vocal delivery to her ' Come on boy ' line . " In the end , Rihanna reveals the " dirtiest secret " through the line " I ’ ll let you in on a dirty little secret , I just want to be loved " . David Amidon of PopMatters described the line as the song 's " not exactly a dangerous sentiment " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Michael Jepson from The Fourth Estate concluded that " Roc Me Out " , along with " Cockiness ( Love It ) " and " Do Ya Thang " , are the top candidates of the album 's " highlights " . He described the songs are " blatantly raunchy " and noted their similarities to Rihanna 's 2011 single , " S & M " . Jepson also called " Roc Me Out " one of the " sexiest " songs on the album as it " shocks the audience " with its lyrics . Andy Kelman of Allmusic called the song " prowling " and further explained that it contains " more sleek menace than Rated R ’ s ' G4L ' and Loud ’ s ' S & M ' . " Sam Lansky from MTV Buzzworthy wrote that " Roc Me Out " sounds " aggressive and a little ominous " , and " it wouldn 't have sounded out of place on Rated R " . Julianne Shepherd from Spin stated that from another artist , it would be a song about self @-@ doubt , but from Rihanna , " it 's like she 's willfully withholding faith and throwing it back just to tantalize . " 
 In a review of Talk That Talk , Giovanny Caquias of CultureBlues placed the song in a " slut @-@ core quartet " alongside " Cockiness ( Love It ) " , " Birthday Cake " and " Watch n ' Learn " . He explained that " Roc Me Out " " is more developed than the others , but still much too mediocre to become Rihanna 's twelfth number @-@ one single . " Reem <unk> of The National wrote that " Roc Me Out " together with " You da One " and " Talk That Talk " are " the winning combination of made @-@ for @-@ radio pop sensibility " . Laurence Green from MusicOMH labeled the track as " a surprising late @-@ album standout " . Edward Keeble from Gigwise called " Roc Me Out a " vibrant track " and concluded that the co @-@ production by Rob Swire of Pendulum is " evident on all facets of it " . <unk> Nguyen of The A.V. Club criticized the song by describing it as " almost laughable " . However , he also explained that " Rihanna is a performer , not a songwriter " , and what she sings is " less relevant than what she sells : a provocation that is enough to seem empowering , but not so radical that it ’ s alienating . " Maz Halima from Flavour Magazine was unfavorable of the song in her album review of Talk That Talk , stating that when she heard it , she was " a bit p * <unk> off " because of its similar sound to Rihanna 's single " Rude Boy " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Roc the Mic Studios , New York City ; New York ; Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California ; The Hide Out Studios , London , United Kingdom 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Talk That Talk , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Talk That Talk , due to digital downloads , " Roc Me Out " charted in lower regions on the singles charts in South Korea and the United Kingdom . It debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 73 on November 26 , 2011 , with sales of 6 @,@ 444 digital copies . The song also debuted at number 176 on the UK Singles Chart in the chart issue dated December 3 , 2011 . 
 = Spook Country = 
 Spook Country is a 2007 novel by speculative fiction author William Gibson . A political thriller set in contemporary North America , it followed on from the author 's previous novel , Pattern Recognition ( 2003 ) , and was succeeded in 2010 by Zero History , which featured much of the same core cast of characters . The plot comprises the intersecting tales of three protagonists : Hollis Henry , a musician @-@ turned @-@ journalist researching a story on locative art ; Tito , a young Cuban @-@ Chinese operative whose family is on occasion in the employ of a renegade ex @-@ CIA agent ; and Milgrim , a drug @-@ addled translator held captive by Brown , a strangely authoritarian and secretive man . Themes explored include the ubiquity of locative technology , the eversion of cyberspace and the political climate of the United States in the aftermath of the September 11 , 2001 attacks . 
 Spook Country quickly reached mainstream North American bestseller lists and was nominated for British Science Fiction Association and Locus Awards . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The first strand of the novel follows Hollis Henry , a former member of the early 1990s cult band The Curfew and a freelance journalist . She is hired by advertising mogul Hubertus Bigend to write a story for his nascent magazine Node ( described as a European Wired ) about the use of locative technology in the art world . Helped by curator Odile Richard she investigates Los Angeles artist Alberto Corrales , who recreates virtually the deaths of celebrities such as River Phoenix . Corrales leads her to Bobby <unk> , an expert in geospatial technologies who handles Corrales ' technical requirements . <unk> 's background is troubleshooting navigation systems for the United States military . He is reclusive and paranoid , refusing to sleep in the same GPS grid square on consecutive nights , and only consents to talk to Hollis due to his admiration for The Curfew . 
 Tito is part of a Chinese Cuban family of freelance " illegal facilitators " , as Brown describes them – forgers , smugglers , and associated support personnel based in New York City – and is assigned by his uncles to hand over a series of iPods to a mysterious old man . Tito is adept in a form of systema that encompasses <unk> , a variant of free running , and the Santería religion . It is alluded that the old man may have connections to American intelligence circles and Tito hopes he can explain the mysterious death of his father . When the old man calls in a favour , his family dispatches Tito on a dangerous new assignment . 
 The identity of the old man remains unclear , though context implies that he may be Pattern Recognition 's protagonist Cayce Pollard 's father , having removed himself from the channels of normal life to focus on disrupting what he sees as criminal elements operating in the United States Government . 
 Tracking Tito 's family is a man known as Brown , a brusque and obstinate lead covert operative for a shadowy organization of unclear connection to the U.S. government . Of neoconservative orientation , Brown appears to have a background in law enforcement , but little training in <unk> . Brown and his team attempt to track the activities of the old man and Tito with the help of Brown 's captive Milgrim , whom he has translate the <unk> @-@ encoded Russian used by Tito 's family to communicate . Milgrim is addicted to anti @-@ anxiety drugs , and is kept docile and compliant by Brown , who controls his supply of Rize . Brown believes that Tito and the old man are in possession of information that would , if revealed , undermine public confidence in the U.S. ' s participation in the Iraq War . In his attempts to capture them and their data , however , Brown is instead fed disinformation through the old man 's intricate schemes . 
 The three strands of the novel converge on a shipping container of unspecified cargo that is being transported via a circuitous route to an unknown destination . In Vancouver , the old man 's team , with Hollis in tow , irradiate the shipping container , which is revealed to contain millions of U.S. dollars diverted from Iraq reconstruction funds . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 = = = Initial conception and development = = = 
 The writing process for Spook Country began for Gibson with a desire to write a novel , but without any ideas or themes that he wished to explore . The impetus for the story grew out of the author 's visual impressions of Lower Manhattan in winter , from which the character of Tito emerged . Little of the material in his original pitch of the novel ( posted online as part of an early promotional campaign by the book 's publishers ) survived in the final draft . The original proposal focused on " <unk> " , an obscure Iraqi <unk> which chronicles the story of a disappeared consignment of millions of Iraqi reconstruction money . The readers of the blog included a female networks theorist interested in locative technology , and a Manhattanite of mixed heritage who freelanced with his family for organized crime . The plot would have followed those readers ' attempt to track a shipping container through <unk> on behalf of an unnamed villain . 
 The characters from the proposal did appear in the final version , albeit in much @-@ altered form . An early draft featuring the musician @-@ turned @-@ journalist Hollis and half @-@ Cuban spy Tito as the two protagonists did not satisfy Gibson , and so he introduced the character of Milgrim , the drug @-@ addled translator . The story of Tito 's family of Chinese exiles in Cuba turning to crime was not based on historical events , though their role as " illegal facilitators " was inspired by real crime families specializing in smuggling , a phenomenon Gibson encountered in the course of his work with the futurist consulting entity Global Business Network . Although he had intended his 2003 novel Pattern Recognition to be a standalone work , elements of it manifested in the script of its eventual successor , including the character of amoral marketing guru Hubertus Bigend . As Gibson developed the plot , " it became apparent that Node , the shadowy magazine startup , was way <unk> " , and thus Spook Country came to inhabit the same fictional universe as its predecessor . In a January 2007 interview , the author revealed that the later novel was set in the spring of 2006 , and described the shared world of the novels as " more or less the one we live in now " . 
 Gibson was first introduced to locative media websites through links from a friend , and initially found the phenomenon to be " excessively nerdy and very conceptual " . Despite his finding compelling the idea of a digital grid mapping the surface of the earth , Gibson saw little storytelling traction in geocaching and <unk> , and instead reworked the material into the locative art of the novel . " When I started , I thought that the ' locative art ' stuff would work the way immersion technology did in my earlier fiction " , he commented in a subsequent interview . " Then I started liking that it wasn ’ t going to do that . " The conception of the artworks in the novel was derived from the lowbrow art movement , and was inspired by the movement 's talismanic <unk> , the only art magazine Gibson was reading regularly at the time . The novel exhibits Gibson 's characteristic brand awareness ( a key plot element of Pattern Recognition ) , which he honed while poring over catalogues of products as part of his writing process . The author found the writing process unnerving , as the solution to the mystery of the container – the novel 's MacGuffin – did not come to him until after he had written several hundred pages of manuscript . 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 Gibson announced the novel on October 6 , 2006 on his blog , where fragments of the work were posted non @-@ sequentially for some time , leading to much reader speculation on the content and plot of the novel . The following day , the blog featured an exploration of the mooted title by close friend and collaborator Jack Womack . In August 2007 , Gibson made an appearance in the virtual world Second Life to give a reading of the novel ; later reflecting on the experience , he remarked that the Second Life construct was " a lot more corporate " than he had imagined . A report in The Times described the event as " heavily freighted with meaning " in light of Gibson 's role in shaping conceptions of cyberspace and virtual worlds . 
 In an interview to promote the release of the novel , Gibson revealed that one of the issues that had most affected his writing process since Pattern Recognition was the sense that everything in the text was potentially searchable online . " It 's as though there is a sort of invisible hyperlink theoretical text that extends out of the narrative of my novel in every direction " , he commented . A recipient of an advanced reading copy initiated Node Magazine , a literary project in the guise of the novel 's fictional magazine , with the intent of annotating the novel . The author , under the nom de plume <unk> , mobilised a cadre of volunteers to track the references and collate the cloud of data surrounding the work – those elements of the story with footprints on internet resources such as Google and Wikipedia . The project had precedent in Joe Clark 's PR @-@ Otaku , an attempt at logging and annotating Pattern Recognition , but whereas that took several years to develop , Node was complete before the novel was even published . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In 2006 , if you invite the zeitgeist in for tea , that 's what you 're going to get . 
 Spook Country explores themes relating to espionage , war profiteering and esoteric martial artistry , as well as familiar themes from the author 's previous novels such as the unintended uses for which technology is employed ( e.g. locative art ) and the nature of celebrity . The author 's preoccupation with semiotics and apophenia in Pattern Recognition is carried over in the sequel . In a review for The Guardian , Steven Poole observed that " This is a novel about , and also full of , ghost @-@ signs , or signs that may not be signs , and about the difficulty of telling the difference . Gibson delights in saturating the pages with data that may or may not encode clues for the reader . " 
 = = = <unk> of cyberspace = = = 
 Through its treatment of locative technology , the novel revisits notions of virtual reality and cyberspace prominent in Gibson 's early cyberpunk fiction . One character proposes that cyberspace is everting ; becoming an integral and indistinguishable element of the physical world rather than a domain to be visited . During the book tour for the novel , Gibson elaborated on this theme , proposing that the ubiquity of connectivity meant that what had been called " cyberspace " is no longer a discrete sphere of activity separate from and secondary to normal human activity , but that those increasingly less common parts of normal life free from connectivity were the exception . " If the book has a point to make where we are now with cyberspace " , he commented , it was that cyberspace " has colonized our everyday life and continues to colonize everyday life . " 
 = = = Class divide = = = 
 One of the elements of the novel that the author found most poignant was that of class division and how there is a subset of people who have access to a world of power and wealth that the vast majority will never experience , of which Gibson cited Brown and his evidently routine use of a private jet as an example . The author felt that at the time of writing , such social chasms were widening , and drew parallels to the Victorian era as well as to the world of his breakthrough novel Neuromancer ( 1984 ) in which there is no middle class , only the super @-@ rich and a predominantly criminal underclass . 
 It 's a very Victorian world , and when I was writing Spook Country I kept running up against that feeling that the world I 'm actually trying to predict is becoming more Victorian , not less . Less middle class , more like Mexico , more like Mexico City . And I think that 's probably not a good direction . 
 In an interview with The Telegraph promoting the novel , Gibson conjectured that the world was moving to a situation wherein social status is determined by " connectivity " – access to communications technology – rather than material wealth . 
 = = = Political climate of the post @-@ 9 / 11 world = = = 
 In some ways September 11 was the true beginning of the 21st century [ and ] at this point it is still perhaps only our narrative . But the way we have responded to it is changing things for other people in the world , too . So it is now becoming part of their narratives and their narratives will have different versions of the cause and its effects of the event . So it is like this seismic shock , one whose waves are still moving up the time line . At its epicentre is 9 / 11 . 
 Sociocultural changes in post @-@ September 11 America , including a resurgent tribalism and the " infantilization of society " , first appeared as a prominent motif in Gibson 's thought with Pattern Recognition . Gibson interpreted the attacks as a nodal point , " an experience out of culture " which irrevocably changed the course of history and marked " the true beginning of the 21st century . " After crafting 100 pages of that novel , he was compelled to re @-@ write the main character 's backstory , which the attacks had suddenly rendered implausible ; this he called " the strangest experience I 've ever had with a piece of fiction . " The result saw Gibson noted as one of the first novelists to use the attacks to inform their writing . Nathan Lee in The Village Voice advanced the notion that while Pattern Recognition focused to an extent on " specifying the ambient sense of invasiveness in all aspects of life after the collapse of the towers " , Spook Country accepted that anxiety as a premise , and was thus " the more reflective , less unnerving of the two novels " . 
 Politics is present as an underlying theme in Spook Country to a greater extent than in any of the author 's previous novels . The novel can be read as an exploration of the fear , uncertainty and pervasive paranoia of an America riven by the unending and divisive Iraq War . Although he had avoided overtly political themes in his previous work out of a distaste for didacticism , Gibson found that in the Bush era , politics had " jacked itself up to my level of weirdness " . Of the climate in Washington , D.C. during that period , he disclosed in a 2007 interview that " I like the sheer sort of neo @-@ Stalinist denial of reality . That 's what makes it work . It 's interesting . " Mike Duffy in Scotland on Sunday characterized the novel as a " startling , effective guidebook to post @-@ 9 / 11 America " ; Dave Itzkoff of The New York Times elaborated , proposing that it was " arguably the first example of the post @-@ post @-@ 9 / 11 novel , whose characters are tired of being pushed around by forces larger than they are – bureaucracy , history and , always , technology – and are at long last ready to start pushing back " . 
 = = Interpretation and reception = = 
 Spook Country appeared on bestseller charts by August 7 , 2007 – five days after release . The novel entered The Washington Post 's hardcover fiction bestseller list for the Washington D.C. area in late August at # 4 , and by September had reached # 2 in San Francisco and Canada . It was listed at # 6 on Publishers Weekly 's hardcover fiction bestseller list for the U.S , as well as on The New York Times Best Seller list for hardcover fiction ( where it lasted three weeks ) . It earned a nomination for the <unk> Awards for best novel of 2007 , and finished second to Michael Chabon 's The Yiddish Policemen 's Union in the standings for the Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel the following year . In August 2008 , Rebecca Armstrong of The Independent named Spook Country as one of the " Ten Best Thrillers " . 
 Mike Duffy felt that although the novel was less overtly science fiction than Gibson 's earlier novels , it retained their " wit , virtuosity and insights " , and had " the same giddy mix of techno @-@ fetishism , nuanced edge and <unk> finesse which enlivened his previous work " . " Spook Country , in essence , " pronounced The Telegraph 's Tim Martin , " is a classic paranoid quest narrative , but one that <unk> the morbid surveillance tropes of the Cold War for a post @-@ Iraq era " . Ken Barnes of USA Today found that " [ l ] <unk> , events and points of view shift constantly , so that the reader never truly feels on solid ground " , but judged the novel to be a " vivid , suspenseful and ultimately coherent tale " . In a review for The Washington Post , Bill Sheahan hailed the novel 's capture of the zeitgeist , and compared it to the acclaimed literary fiction of Don DeLillo : 
 Despite a full complement of thieves , pushers and pirates , Spook Country is less a conventional thriller than a devastatingly precise reflection of the American zeitgeist , and it bears comparison to the best work of Don DeLillo . Although he is a very different sort of writer , Gibson , like DeLillo , writes fiction that is powerfully attuned to the currents of dread , dismay and baffled fury that permeate our culture . Spook Country – which is a beautifully multi @-@ leveled title – takes an unflinching look at that culture . With a clear eye and a minimum of editorial comment , Gibson shows us a country that has drifted dangerously from its governing principles , evoking a kind of ironic nostalgia for a time when , as one character puts it , " grown @-@ ups still ran things . " In Spook Country , Gibson takes another large step forward and reaffirms his position as one of the most astute and entertaining commentators on our astonishing , chaotic present . 
 = = = Plot , prose , and character = = = 
 Ed Park of the Los Angeles Times hailed the novel as a " puzzle palace of bewitching proportions and stubborn echoes " , noting the fact that antihero Hubertus Bigend was the most prominent link to Pattern Recognition as " deliciously sinister " . Tim Martin thought that the plot lacked direction at times . Although he conceded that the novel 's main Henry / Bigend storyline felt lightweight , Matt Thorne writing in The Independent conjectured that it was part of Gibson 's conscious design that that thread " plays out against a backdrop of hidden machinations that have a much darker , wider resonance " . Thorne declared Spook Country a more substantial novel than its predecessor on this basis . John Casimir of The Sydney Morning Herald concurred , writing that despite the similarity in the plots of the novels , the narrative foundation of the later novel was firmer , its structure " more sophisticated " and its " seams less visible " . 
 Ed Park singled out the author 's prose for praise , proclaiming that " [ s ] <unk> for sentence , few authors equal Gibson 's gift for the terse yet poetic description , the quotable simile – people and products are nailed down with a beautiful precision approximating the platonic ideal of the catalog " . Matt Thorne noted that while he found Gibson 's tendency towards hyper @-@ specificity initially irritating , " there 's hypnotic quality to the relentless cataloguing " . The author 's prose was also extolled by Clay Evans of the Daily Camera , and by Benjamin <unk> in The New York Sun , who declared that " the real news , in Spook Country , is that much of the flair that Mr. Gibson once brought to descriptions of cyberspace seems to fit perfectly , now , on all kinds of things . " In The Seattle Times , Nisi Shawl gushed that " [ e ] ven without the high cool quotient of the novel 's contents , the pleasure of Gibson 's prose would be enough inducement for most of us to immerse ourselves in this book .... " Simon Cooper of The Book Show agreed with the commendations of Gibson 's prose , but felt the plot and characterization let the book down : 
 There are some great lines and observations in Spook Country , but for me the parts were greater than the whole . Gibson is a master at rendering the all pervasive but subliminal paranoia of our high @-@ tech market society . But whereas in Pattern Recognition he was able to combine this with a sustained focus , this time it didn 't quite work . Partly this is because the three @-@ way narrative seems to dissipate rather than successfully hold the disparate parts together . Partly I think it 's because the main characters seem just too passive or detached to generate sufficient narrative tension . Still , Gibson is better than most writers with his take on the science @-@ fictionalised present , and there is no denying that the book has moments of aphoristic brilliance . 
 In a review for The Providence Journal , Andy Smith remarked that the author was " a master of atmosphere , if not character " – a sentiment echoed by The Post and Courier 's Dan Conover , who , although praising the novel 's intelligence and contemporary relevance , felt that Gibson 's underlying political pre @-@ occupation and detached narration came at the expense of character development . Neil Drumming , of Entertainment Weekly , in awarding the novel a " B " rating concurred , complaining that the protagonists " often just feel like higher @-@ tech automatons with useful features " whose actions are the product of manipulation by " external forces and cagey operatives " rather than conscious decisions . In The Daily Telegraph , Roger Perkins was more blunt , remarking that the " relentless pace and breathless dislocation " of the plot hid " character development that 's as deep as dental veneer but equally shiny " . Matt Thorne summed up the issue in opining that " The problem with a thriller which begins with a technology journalist talking to an experimental artist is that , no matter how exciting the events later become , it 's hard to care . " 
 = = = Conclusion = = = 
 Reviewers were divided as to the merits of the novel 's ending . Andy Smith lamented that the finale of the " mostly intriguing " novel was " distinctly anticlimactic " . Tim Martin wrote that it seemed " somehow less than the sum of its parts " . Clay Evans dismissed it as " not especially meaningful , but fun " , whereas Matt Thorne found it lacking " a traditional thriller 's excitement " . San Francisco Chronicle reviewer Michael Berry called it " an ingenious reversal " which proved that despite its apparent cynicism , the novel was " oddly optimistic for a ghost story " . Overall , Thorne judged the novel ultimately unsatisfactory on account of the underwhelming ending and because Gibson " hides the full complications of the plot so successfully that it feels as if everything important is happening offstage " . Roger Perkins judged the novel to be " a triumph of style over substance – which is exactly the way you suspect that Gibson wants it . " His colleague Martin mused that along with the regular Gibsonian tropes , there was " something new ... a dark and very contemporary surge of suspicion and bad faith " in the novel which suggested that the author might be approaching the apex of his writing . Dan Conover concluded that while the " darkly comic satire " was " a worthy addition to the Gibson canon and a significant cultural artifact " , it would not rank among the author 's best works . 
 = Tricholoma vaccinum = 
 Tricholoma vaccinum , commonly known as the russet scaly tricholoma , the scaly knight , or the <unk> , is a fungus of the agaric genus Tricholoma . It produces medium @-@ sized fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) that have a distinctive hairy reddish @-@ brown cap with a shaggy margin when young . The cap , which can reach a diameter of up to 6 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) wide , breaks up into flattened scales in maturity . It has cream @-@ buff to pinkish gills with brown spots . Its fibrous , hollow stipe is white above and reddish brown below , and measures 4 to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 0 in ) long . Although young fruit bodies have a partial veil , it does not leave a ring on the stipe . 
 Widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere , Tricholoma vaccinum is found in northern Asia , Europe and North America . The fungus grows in a mycorrhizal association with spruce or pine trees , and its mushrooms are found on the ground growing in groups or clusters in late summer and autumn . Although some consider the mushroom edible , it is of poor quality and not recommended for consumption . The ectomycorrhizae of T. vaccinum has been the subject of considerable research . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The species was first described in 1774 by German mycologist Jacob Christian Schäffer as Agaricus <unk> . According to MycoBank , synonyms include August Batsch 's 1783 Agaricus <unk> , Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck 's 1783 Amanita punctata var. punctata , and Lucien Quélet 's 1886 <unk> <unk> . Marcel Bon described the variety T. vaccinum var. <unk> in 1970 , which has squamules ( minute scales ) arranged in a concentric fashion on the cap ; Manfred Enderle published this taxon as a form in 2004 . 
 According to the infrageneric classification of Tricholoma proposed by Rolf Singer in 1986 , Tricholoma vaccinum is placed in the section <unk> , subgenus Tricholoma in the genus Tricholoma . <unk> includes species with a dry cap cuticle , with a texture that ranges from roughened or squamulose ( resembling suede ) to almost smooth . The specific epithet derives from the Latin word <unk> and means " cow @-@ colored " . The mushroom 's common names include the " russet scaly tricholoma " , " <unk> " , and " scaly knight " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of T. vaccinum is initially broadly conical , then convex and finally flattened ; its diameter is usually between 2 @.@ 5 and 6 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 and 2 @.@ 6 in ) . The cap margin is initially curved inwards , and shaggy from hanging remnants of the partial veil . The partial veil is cotton @-@ like , and does not leave a ring on the stipe . The fibrous to scaly cap surface ranges in color from reddish @-@ cinnamon to brownish @-@ orange to tan . The gills have an adnate to sinuate attachment to the stipe , and are crowded closely together . There are between three and nine tiers of lamellulae — short gills that do not extend completely from the cap edge to the stipe . The gills are dingy white , and frequently stain reddish @-@ brown . The stipe is 4 to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 0 in ) long and 1 to 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 9 in ) thick , and becomes hollow in age . It is roughly equal in width throughout its length and ranges in color from whitish to the same color as the cap , but lighter , and sometimes with reddish @-@ brown stains ; it is lighter in color near the apex . Like the cap , the stipe surface is fibrous to scaly . The odor of the fruit bodies is unpleasant . 
 The mushrooms produce a white spore print , and the spores are broadly elliptical , smooth , hyaline ( translucent ) , inamyloid , measuring 6 – 7 @.@ 5 by 4 – 5 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , without clamps , and measure 17 – 32 by 6 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 5 μm . The hymenium lacks cystidia . The arrangement of the hyphae in the cap cuticle ranges from a cutis ( with hyphae that run parallel to the cap surface ) to a trichoderm ( hyphae perpendicular to the cap surface ) ; these hyphae are roughly cylindrical , and measure 3 @.@ 5 – 8 @.@ 0 μm wide , with roughly cylindrical to club @-@ shaped ends that are 6 @.@ 0 – 11 @.@ 0 μm wide . There are no clamp connections in the hyphae of T. vaccinum . 
 Although the fruit bodies are considered edible , they are of low quality , and generally not recommended for consumption due to their resemblance to and potential for confusion with toxic brown <unk> . Orson K. Miller , Jr. considers them " bitter and not edible " . The fruit bodies can be used to create yellow dyes to color wool or other fibers . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 With its reddish @-@ brown wooly cap , white gills , and hollow stipe , Tricholoma vaccinum is a fairly distinct mushroom and is unlikely to be confused with other Tricholoma . Tricholoma imbricatum somewhat resembles T. vaccinum , but has duller brown colors , is less robust in stature , and has a solid ( not hollow ) stalk . Another lookalike , T. <unk> , has a less woolly cap texture and flesh that turns bright pinkish red when injured . It associates solely with pine species and prefers calcareous soil . Other brownish Tricholoma species include T. <unk> , T. <unk> , and T. <unk> . The scaly and fibrous cap surface of T. vaccinum might be confused with Inocybe , but species in this genus can be distinguished by their brown spore prints . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Tricholoma vaccinum is a mycorrhizal species , and grows in association with coniferous trees , especially pine and spruce . It forms ectomycorrhizae that have been called " Medium @-@ Distance fringe exploration type " , indicative of the ectomycorrhiza 's ecological role in space occupation in the soil , their possible reach regarding nutrient acquisition and their demand of carbohydrates that have to be invested by the trees for their fungal partners . Fruit bodies usually appear in groups or clusters on the ground , sometimes with moss . The fungus fruits in late summer and autumn . It is found in northern Asia , Europe , and , in North America , is widely distributed in the United States and Canada , and has also been recorded in Mexico . It is one of the most common species of Tricholoma in Central Europe , and is often found in large groups in spruce forests . It is rare in the United Kingdom , and most records have been from Scotland . The fungus may be extinct in the Netherlands . 
 The ectomycorrhizae of T. vaccinum has been the subject of considerable research . <unk> of Tricholoma species can vary considerably among species in the genus , and differences in the structure of rhizomorphs ( a cordlike fusions of hyphae resembling a root ) have been used to key out species . <unk> formed with Norway spruce ( Picea abies ) are conspicuously hairy with numerous hyphae . The hyphae are partly densely interconnected to rhizomorphs that have a pigment in their outer membrane . The emanating hyphae mostly lack " contact septae " ( fully developed simple septae ) and contact clamps , and the rhizomorph hyphae vary markedly in diameter . The Hartig net ( a network of hyphae that extend into the root ) formed by T. vaccinum grows more deeply towards the epidermis , is composed of more rows of hyphae and has more tannin cells in close proximity to the epidermis , and consequently , fewer cortical cells in this position . It is here that the rhizomorphs make the closest contact with the rootlets . The mantle is <unk> , meaning that the constituent hyphae are loosely organized with spaces between them . A combination of techniques including freeze fracturing and scanning electron microscopy has been used to probe the microstructure of the ectomycorrhizae , including inner mantle thickness and the nature of the interface between the Hartig net and host cells . Several fungal genes specifically expressed during ectomycorrhizal interaction between T. vaccinum and Picea abies have been identified , including some involved in a plant pathogen response , nutrient exchange and growth in the plant , signal transduction , and stress response . The first characterized fungal aldehyde dehydrogenase enzyme , <unk> , helps circumvent ethanol stress — a critical function in mycorrhizal habitats . 
 = Pipe rolls = 
 The Pipe rolls , sometimes called the Great rolls , are a collection of financial records maintained by the English Exchequer , or Treasury , and its successors . The earliest date from the 12th century , and the series extends , mostly complete , from then until 1833 . They form the oldest continuous series of records concerning English governance kept by the English , British and United Kingdom governments , covering a span of about 700 years . The early medieval ones are especially useful for historical study , as they are some of the earliest financial records available from the Middle Ages . A similar set of records was developed for Normandy , which was ruled by the English kings from 1066 to 1205 , but the Norman Pipe rolls have not survived in a continuous series like the English . 
 They were the records of the yearly audits performed by the Exchequer of the accounts and payments presented to the Treasury by the sheriffs and other royal officials ; and owed their name to the shape they took , as the various sheets were affixed to each other and then rolled into a tight roll , resembling a pipe , for storage . They record not only payments made to the government , but debts owed to the crown and disbursements made by royal officials . Although they recorded much of the royal income , they did not record all types of income , nor did they record all expenditures , so they are not strictly speaking a budget . The Pipe Roll Society , formed in 1883 , has published the Pipe rolls up until 1224 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Pipe rolls are named after the " pipe " shape formed by the rolled up parchments on which the records were originally written . There is no evidence to support the theory that they were named pipes for the fact that they " piped " the money into the Treasury , nor for the claim that they got their name from resembling a wine cask , or pipe of wine . They were occasionally referred to as the roll of the treasury , or the great roll of accounts , and the great roll of the pipe . 
 The Pipe rolls are the records of the audits of the sheriffs ' accounts , usually conducted at Michaelmas by the Exchequer , or English treasury . Until the chancery records began in the reign of King John of England , they were the only continuous set of records kept by the English government . They are not a complete record of government and royal finances , however , as they do not record all sources of income , only the accounts of the sheriffs and a few other sources of income . Some of the payments that did not regularly fall under the Exchequer were occasionally recorded in a Pipe roll . Neither do the Pipe rolls record all payments made by the exchequer . They were not created as a budget , nor were they strictly speaking records of receipts , but rather they are records of the audit of the accounts rendered . Although the rolls use an accounting system , it is not one that would be familiar to modern accountants ; for instance until the end of the 12th century , no record was made of the total amount taken in by the sheriff of each shire . In their early form , they record all debts owed to the Crown , whether from feudal dues or from other sources . Because many debts to the king were allowed to be paid off in installments , it is necessary to search more than one set of rolls for a complete history of a debt . If a debt was not paid off completely in one year , the remainder of the amount owed was transferred to the next year . They did not record the full amount of debts incurred in previous years , only what was paid that year and what was still owed . Besides the sheriffs , others who submitted accounts for the audit included some bailiffs of various honours , town officials , and the custodians of ecclesiastical and feudal estates . 
 The earliest surviving Pipe roll , already in a mature form , dates from 1129 – 30 , and the continuous series begins in 1155 – 56 , and continued for almost seven hundred years . 
 Combined with the Domesday Survey , the Pipe rolls contributed to the centralisation of financial records by the Norman kings ( reigned 1066 – 1154 ) of England that was ahead of contemporary Western European monarchies ; the French , for instance , did not have an equivalent system of accounting until the 1190s . The exact form of the records , kept in a roll instead of a book , was also unique to England , although why England kept some of its administrative records in this form is unclear . A set of Norman rolls , drafted differently , are extant in a few years for the reigns of Kings Henry II ( reigned 1154 – 1189 ) and Richard I ( reigned 1189 – 1199 ) , who also ruled the Duchy of Normandy in France . It is believed that the Norman rolls were started about the same time as the English , but due to lack of survival of the earlier Norman rolls , it is unclear exactly when they did start . An Irish Exchequer produced Irish Pipe rolls , and much like the English Pipe rolls , the earliest surviving Irish Pipe roll , that of 1212 , does not appear to be the first produced . 
 The Dialogus de <unk> or Dialogue concerning the Exchequer , written in about 1178 , details the workings of the Exchequer and gives an early account of how the Pipe rolls were created . The Dialogue was written by Richard FitzNeal , the son of Nigel of Ely , who was Treasurer for both Henry I and Henry II of England . According to the Dialogue , the Pipe rolls were the responsibility of the clerk of the Treasurer , who was called the clerk of the pipe and later the clerk of the <unk> . FitzNeal wrote his work to explain the inner workings of the Exchequer , and in it he lists a number of different types of rolls used by the Treasury . He also describes the creation of the Pipe rolls and how they are used . The Dialogue also states that the Pipe rolls , along with Domesday Book and other records , were kept in the treasury , because they were required for daily use by the Exchequer clerks . 
 The main source of income recorded on the Pipe rolls was the county farm , or income derived from lands held by the king . Occasional sources of revenue , such as from vacant bishoprics or abbeys or other sources , were also recorded . The payments were made both in coin , or in objects , such as spurs , lands , spices , or livestock . The only surviving roll from Henry I 's reign also records payments of geld , a form of land tax dating from Anglo @-@ Saxon times , although after 1161 the Pipe rolls no longer record any payments of geld . By 1166 , the fines and other monetary income of the Assizes , or royal courts , began to be recorded in the Pipe rolls . <unk> payments , made by knights in lieu of military service , were also recorded in the Pipe rolls from the reign of Henry II on . 
 Although they recorded all income that came through the Exchequer , not all sources of income went through that office , so the Pipe rolls are not a complete record of royal income . They did include both regular income from the royal lands and judicial profits , as well as more occasional income derived from feudal levies , <unk> , and ecclesiastical vacancies . Another source of income recorded in the rolls was from feudal reliefs , the payment made by an heir when inheriting an estate . A major source of income in the roll of 1130 is from the forests , under the Forest Law , which was the royal law covering the restrictions imposed on non @-@ royals hunting in areas of the country declared royal forest . However , royal income from taxation that was not annually assessed was not usually recorded in the Pipe rolls , nor were his receipts from lands outside England . Some payments went directly to the king 's household , and because they did not pass through the Exchequer , they were not recorded in the Pipe rolls . 
 Expenditures were also subject to documentation in the Pipe rolls . Among the recorded expenditures are payments for carts and cart horses , wages for royal servants , payments for improvements to royal manors and houses , royal gifts to persons , hunting expenses , payments to acquire a governmental office , payments to mercenaries , and the costs of bags and casks to transport silver pennies about the kingdom . 
 Information about other subjects besides revenues also is contained in the rolls , including the movement of prisoners , which helps to identify which medieval castles were used as prisons . The Pipe rolls also allow the identification of the custodians of royal lands and castles . The clerks writing the rolls also used them as places to deride officials of the government , such as William Longchamp , who was the object of derision in the 1194 Pipe roll . 
 Certain areas did not report their income to the Exchequer , so they do not usually appear in the Pipe rolls , unless the lands were in the king 's custody through a vacancy . These included the <unk> of Durham and Chester . The county of Cornwall also did not usually appear in the Pipe rolls , but it was not a palatinate . Another problem with using the Pipe rolls for historical study is the fact that the chronological limits for the financial year varied from roll to roll . In theory , they only recorded revenues from the previous Easter to Michaelmas of that financial year . However , the Pipe rolls often record payments made past Michaelmas , often up until the date the roll was actually compiled . Also , a few debts were not audited annually , but would instead have a number of consecutive years be investigated in one sitting and thus several years of payments would be recorded in one Pipe roll . 
 = = History = = 
 Although the earliest Pipe roll dates from 1130 , the 31st year of King Henry I 's reign , it is clear that they were being produced by the Exchequer before then , as the 1130 roll is not an experiment . It shows no hesitancy in its use of accounts , or lack of continuity from previous years . An extract from an earlier Pipe roll , from the 25th regnal year of Henry I or 1124 , has been found in a 14th @-@ century manuscript now in the Cotton Library at the British Museum . Exactly when the Pipe rolls began to be produced is debated amongst historians . Some hold that they date from Henry I 's reign , whether early or late in the reign , but others feel that they were introduced by King William I ( reigned 1066 – 1087 ) . The precursors of the records probably date to the Anglo @-@ Saxon period , as the historian Pauline Stafford argues that financial records must have been kept in some form during the reigns of Cnut ( reigned 1016 – 1035 ) , Æthelred II ( reigned 978 – 1016 ) , and Edgar the Peaceable ( reigned 959 – 975 ) . There is a reference to the king 's " rolls " in a writ from 1110 , which purports to be a grant from Henry I to the abbot of Westminster of ten shillings , but the writ may be a forgery , or parts of it may be genuine with some interpolations . As the writ only exists in a copy in a later cartulary , and the Abbey of Westminster is also known to have forged a number of other writs or charters , the writ is not a solid source for royal rolls being kept as early as 1110 . 
 After the one surviving roll from Henry I 's reign , no further Pipe rolls survived from his reign , nor are any preserved from the reign of his successor , King Stephen ( reigned 1135 – 1154 ) . But by the second year of King Henry II 's reign , or 1155 , they once more survive . It is unclear if Pipe rolls were actually created during Stephen 's reign and they did not survive , or if the conditions during Stephen 's reign precluded the creation of Pipe rolls . Continuously from the early years of King Henry II 's reign , most Pipe rolls survive , with only a break in the last years of King John 's reign ( reigned 1199 – 1216 ) . 
 The surviving Pipe roll from 1130 records an income of £ 24 @,@ 500 . This figure is dwarfed by the amount recorded on the Pipe roll that was actually owed to the king , which totals £ 68 @,@ 850 . The income that they record in the early years of Henry II is much smaller than that of the one surviving year for Henry I. Those early Pipe rolls of Henry I record an income about £ 10 @,@ 000 to £ 15 @,@ 000 . By the end of Henry II 's reign , royal income recorded in the Pipe rolls had risen to £ 20 @,@ 000 . The end of John 's reign saw a recorded income of about £ 30 @,@ 000 , but Henry III 's reign recorded only £ 8 @,@ 000 in the early years , rising to £ 16 @,@ 500 by 1225 . Not only do the rolls from the early years of Henry II 's reign show less income reaching the Exchequer than during Henry I 's reign , those early rolls were haphazard and not as accurate and detailed as rolls dating from the later part of the reign . Nor are they as carefully produced as either the later rolls or the roll of 1130 . 
 By the time of King John , the Pipe rolls were growing unwieldy , as too many fines and fees were being recorded , making the finding of information in the rolls difficult . Eventually , after some experimentation , by 1206 a system whereby the actual detailed receipts were recorded in a set of receipt rolls and only aggregates were entered in the Pipe rolls was settled on . A further reform in 1236 resulted in debts being recorded in separate <unk> rolls , and only the totals entered into the Pipe rolls . In 1284 the Statutes of Rhuddlan were issued , which further reformed the accounting systems , and further reduced the detail contained on the Pipe rolls . At this time , a large number of unrecoverable debts were also removed from the rolls , a process that had also been attempted in 1270 . The attempt in 1270 had marked old debts with a " d " and stipulated that they were not to be re @-@ entered into future Pipe rolls unless they were paid off . But this had not worked , and so in 1284 old debts were to be recorded on a separate roll . The statutes in 1284 also laid out a procedure where debtors whose documentation of payment of debt that hadn 't been accepted in the past would have that documentation accepted , thus helping to clear out some of the backlogged debts on the books . 
 Yet more extraneous details were removed from the Pipe rolls under the Cowick Ordinance of June 1323 , along with further ordinances in 1324 and 1326 , all of which were done during the time that Walter de Stapledon held the office of Treasurer . Prior to this reform the rolls had become clogged with debts , and clauses 2 through 8 of the Cowick Ordinance attempted to return the rolls to an exposition of accounts . Another attempted reform at this time was the removal of customs receipts , as well as military accounts , from the rolls . New offices in the Exchequer were also created , in an attempt to speed up the auditing process and lessen the time it took to prepare the Pipe rolls and other financial records . The attempt to remove non @-@ Exchequer accounts did completely remove those types of records from the Pipe rolls , and further reforms in 1368 created a set of foreign rolls , and all extraneous records in the Pipe rolls were transferred to those rolls . 
 In 1462 , the exchequer was told to no longer summon for audit any farms or <unk> worth over 40 shillings per year , as these would be supervised by a newly appointed board of receivers or <unk> . 
 The Pipe rolls series ended in 1834 when the office that was in charge of their creation , the Pipe Office , was abolished . 
 = = Creation = = 
 They were created by taking the shire , or other governmental districts , accounts and writing them on two strips of parchment , usually about 14 inches ( 36 cm ) wide . The two pieces were then attached end to end to form one long sheet . Then , the various sheets from all the shires were piled together and affixed together at the top , and the resulting document would be rolled into a tight roll resembling a pipe . They were not formed into one long continuous roll , as the Patent rolls were , however . The sheets for each county have a heading at the top giving the name of the county the account is for , in Latin . If more than one sheet was required for a county , the county name would be amended on secondary sheets to indicate the order the sheets were in . 
 Sometimes they are referred to , in Latin , as magnus <unk> <unk> . Several sources for the actual idea of making the rolls as rolls have been suggested , including Jews , Adelard of Bath , who was a royal clerk and was familiar with Arabic practices of using rolls , or the royal clerk <unk> , who studied under a mathematician who may have been from Sicily . 
 The rolls were written in Latin until 1733 , except for a short time around 1650 . During the reign of Henry II , a duplicate copy of the year 's Pipe roll was made for the Chancellor , and was called the Chancellor 's roll . This was created at the same time as the regular Pipe roll , and was written by a clerk of the Chancellor . The Chancellor rolls survive from 1163 to 1832 , but are basically duplicates of the corresponding Pipe rolls , except for the occasional addition of a private charter or other material . 
 = = Influence on other records = = 
 The example of the royal exchequer 's records eventually influenced others to keep similar records . The earliest surviving non @-@ royal Pipe rolls are those of the Bishop of Winchester , which are extant from 1208 , and form a continuous series from that date . They started under Peter des Roches , who was also a royal clerk and administrator . They record monies coming in as well as expenses and payments made , in detail , but like the royal records , they do not show profits or losses as a sum total . Most private rolls resembling the Pipe rolls are from monasteries . The household rolls , which closely resemble the Pipe rolls , for Eleanor of England , wife of Simon de Montfort , survive for part of the year 1265 . 
 = = Studies by historians = = 
 A number of historians have studied the surviving Pipe rolls , using them as the basis for study of financial and governmental history , especially of the medieval era . A study from 1925 compiled the royal income that passed through the Exchequer for each year of Henry II and Richard I , as well as a sample of some years from John 's reign , attempting to compare how the royal revenues compared in the various reigns . Recent work by Nick Barratt on the reigns of Richard and John have updated the earlier research . Historian David Carpenter has carried out further studies on the early years of King Henry III 's reign . The Pipe rolls have also been used to identify royal officials , especially those that were involved in local government and were not high ranking . Because they recorded judicial fines , the Pipe rolls also can be used to shed light on how the judicial system in medieval England worked , as well as identifying royal judges . Although they don 't provide exact revenue figures , most historians believe they represent a close approximation of revenue , and can be used to gain a general understanding of how much financial resources the English kings had available in the Middle Ages . 
 The lone surviving Pipe roll from Henry I 's reign , that of 1130 , has been a popular subject of study . Recent investigations include Judith Green 's search for evidence of Henry 's financial system . Another historian , Stephanie Mooers <unk> , has studied the roll along with those from the reign of Henry II , looking for the exemptions and grants made by both kings to various royal favourites . <unk> has also studied the 1130 roll to see what light it can shine on Henry I 's judicial system , as well as on the growth of royal courts during Henry 's reign . The historian C. Warren Hollister used the 1130 Pipe roll to study the rewards of royal service during Henry 's reign . 
 The Pipe rolls from the 13th century onwards are less important for historical study because there are other surviving financial records . Some , such as the receipt rolls , were also kept by the exchequer , and were used by the treasury clerks to prepare the Pipe rolls . Other surviving records were kept by the sheriffs for their own use in submitting accounts to the Pipe rolls . However the post 13th @-@ century Pipe rolls are occasionally the sole source for historical facts such as William Shakespeare 's residence in the parish of St Helen 's Bishopsgate , and in Southwark . 
 = = Publication = = 
 The earliest Pipe rolls were published by the Record Commission in 1833 ( the isolated roll of 1130 ) and the Public Record Office in 1844 ( the rolls for 1155 – 58 ) . The Commission 's edition of the 1130 roll has now been superseded by a new edition ( with English translation ) published by the Pipe Roll Society in 2012 . 
 In 1883 the Pipe Roll Society ( a text publication society ) was founded by the Public Record Office , on the initiative of Walford Dakin Selby and his colleague James Greenstreet , to establish a systematic publishing programme for the Pipe rolls . It published its first volume in 1884 , and has now published all the rolls from 1158 to 1224 . Besides the continuous series , it has also published the roll for 1230 . The Pipe rolls for 1241 were published in 1918 by the Yale University Press . Various county record societies have published parts of the rolls for various years that relate to their particular county . The Pipe Roll Society 's earliest volumes ( to 1900 ) were printed in " record type " , designed to produce a near @-@ facsimile of the original manuscript , including its scribal abbreviations . This policy was abandoned in 1903 , and all volumes since have been published in normal type with abbreviations extended . 
 The Pipe Roll Society has also published numerous related texts , including the Chancellor 's Roll for 1196 and the Norman Pipe Rolls of Henry II . Rolls for the Irish Exchequer and the Norman Exchequer have also been published . 
 = 1991 protest in Split = 
 The 1991 protest in Split was a street protest against the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) held in Split , Croatia on 6 May 1991 . The protest was organised by the Croatian Trade Union Association in the Brodosplit Shipyard and joined in by workers from other companies in the city and other residents of Split after radio broadcast appeals for help while the protesters marched through the streets . Ultimately , the protest drew 100 @,@ 000 supporters . 
 The march ended in a picket in front of the Banovina building , where the JNA had its headquarters in Split at the time . The protesters demanded an end to the JNA @-@ imposed blockade of the village of Kijevo . <unk> broke out in front of the building , and a JNA soldier was killed by a gunshot reportedly fired from the crowd . Four organisers of the protest were arrested a month later by the JNA , tried in a military court and convicted . They were released months later in a prisoner exchange . The protest caused the JNA to withdraw a portion of military equipment previously based in Split to more secure locations and increase its combat readiness there . The blockade of Kijevo was lifted through negotiations days after the protest . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) then confiscated the weapons of Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana ) in order to minimize resistance . On 17 August , tensions escalated into an open revolt of the Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina and eastern Croatia . After two unsuccessful attempts by Serbia , supported by Montenegro and Serbia 's provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo to obtain the Yugoslav Presidency 's approval to deploy the JNA to disarm Croatian security forces in January 1991 , and a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March , the JNA itself , supported by Serbia and its allies , asked the federal Presidency to grant it wartime powers and declare a state of emergency . The request was denied on 15 March , and the JNA came under the control of Serbian President Slobodan Milošević . Milošević , preferring a campaign to expand Serbia rather than the preservation of Yugoslavia , publicly threatened to replace the JNA with a Serbian army and declared that he no longer recognized the authority of the federal Presidency . The threat caused the JNA to gradually abandon plans to preserve Yugoslavia in favour of expanding Serbia . By the end of the month , the conflict had escalated to its first fatalities . The JNA intervened on the side of the insurgents , and prevented the Croatian police from taking action . In early April , the leaders of the Serb revolt in Croatia declared their intent to integrate the area under their control , viewed by the Government of Croatia as a breakaway region , with Serbia . 
 In the beginning of 1991 , Croatia had no regular army . In an effort to bolster its defences , it doubled police personnel to about 20 @,@ 000 . The most effective part of the force was the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police . The Croatian view of the JNA 's role in the Serb revolt gradually evolved from January 1991 . The initial plan of Croatian President Franjo Tuđman was to win support from the European Community ( EC ) and the United States for Croatia , and he disregarded advice to seize JNA barracks and storage facilities in the country . Tuđman 's stance was motivated by his belief that Croatia could not win a war against the JNA . 
 = = Protest = = 
 The immediate cause for a confrontation with the JNA in Split was a blockade of the village of Kijevo , where Croatian authorities had established a new police station , imposed on 29 April . The village was surrounded by the JNA , commanded by Colonel Ratko Mladić , and the Serb insurgent forces , cutting access and preventing delivery of supplies . Tuđman called on the public to bring the siege to its end . 
 The protest took place on 6 May 1991 in Split , organised by the Croatian Trade Union Association in Brodosplit Shipyard , in response to Tuđman 's earlier statement . The protest started out with 10 @,@ 000 shipyard workers , but ultimately drew approximately 100 @,@ 000 people , from the shipyard and other factories in Split to a protest march through the city , carrying Croatian flags . The protest march grew in number as more citizens joined in , following radio broadcast messages calling for support . In order to prevent the Yugoslav Navy from intervening using ships equipped with water cannons , Jadrolinija ships were used to obstruct access to the port . The protesters picketed around the Banovina building , which housed the command centres of the JNA Military @-@ Maritime District and the Yugoslav Navy at the time . The protesters demanded lifting of the blockade of Kijevo , withdrawal of armoured personnel carriers parked in front of the Banovina building and hoisting of a Croatian flag on the building itself . 
 During the protest , the crowd assaulted a JNA armoured personnel carrier and managed to remove a machine gun mounted on the vehicle , while one of the protesters , Ivica <unk> , hoisted a Croatian flag at the building to singing of the Croatian anthem by the crowd . In a scuffle which broke out in front of the building , <unk> Gešovski , a JNA conscript from Macedonia , was killed by a shot fired from the crowd . By the end of the afternoon , the crowd removed the Yugoslav flag from the building , moved away and dispersed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Besides Gešovski , there were no fatalities , but several JNA soldiers were wounded . Gešovski 's death sparked demonstrations in the Macedonian capital , Skopje , in June . Protesters accused Tuđman of being responsible for the murder . The Croatian Government refused to express regret for Gešovski 's killing , and the Serbian media pointed to the young Macedonian 's death as proof that Tuđman 's government had revived the fascist Ustaše , which controlled Croatia during World War II . 
 Then @-@ mayor of Split <unk> <unk> claimed that Gešovski was fired upon from the Banovina building . However , the Croatian State Attorney 's Office contradicted him , claiming that Gešovski was killed by someone in the crowd picketing in front of the building . An investigation was launched but the case was dropped because of lack of evidence . The JNA 's security service in Split , run by Colonel Ljubiša Beara , identified Mato <unk> , Ivan <unk> , Roland <unk> and Branko <unk> as organisers of the protest where the killing occurred and arrested them on 5 June . They were put on trial at a military court in Sarajevo on 19 August , convicted and sentenced to one and a half to eight years in prison . The group was imprisoned in Foča until 25 November , when they were exchanged for JNA prisoners of war . The protest is commemorated annually in Split and a monograph covering the event was issued in 2011 . 
 In the wake of the protest , the JNA increased combat readiness of its garrison in Split and elsewhere in Dalmatia and withdrew a part of artillery and personnel from Split to its bases located away from the coast . Furthermore , the Military @-@ Maritime District of the JNA ordered its garrisons to stock up potable water and prepare power generators for use if the supply of electricity were cut . The JNA evacuated itself from Split by 4 January 1992 , pursuant to agreements ending the Battle of the Barracks . 
 The siege of Kijevo was lifted days after the protest through negotiations and two weeks after the JNA blockaded the village . However , the arrangement proved short @-@ lived as JNA units , again led by Mladić , attacked Kijevo and destroyed a substantial part of the village . The attack began when Croatian forces refused to surrender to Croatian Serb leader Milan Martić . It was one of the first instances where the JNA openly sided with the insurgent Serbs in the rapidly escalating Croatian War of Independence . 
 = Rwandan Revolution = 
 The Rwandan Revolution , also known as the Social Revolution or Wind of Destruction ( Kinyarwanda : <unk> ) , was a period of ethnic violence in Rwanda from 1959 to 1961 between the Hutu and the Tutsi , two of the three ethnic groups in Rwanda . The revolution saw the country transition from a Belgian colony with a Tutsi monarchy to an independent Hutu @-@ dominated republic . 
 Rwanda had been ruled by a Tutsi monarchy since at least the 18th century , with entrenched pro @-@ Tutsi and anti @-@ Hutu policies . Germany and Belgium successively controlled Rwanda through the early 20th century , with both European nations ruling through the kings and perpetuating a pro @-@ Tutsi policy . After 1945 a Hutu counter @-@ elite developed , leading to the deterioration of relations between the groups . The Tutsi leadership agitated for speedy independence to cement their power , and the Hutu elite called for the transfer of power from Tutsi to Hutu ( a stance increasingly supported by the Roman Catholic Church and the colonial government ) . 
 The revolution began in November 1959 , with a series of riots and arson attacks on Tutsi homes following false reports of the murder of a Hutu sub @-@ chief by Tutsi activists . Violence quickly spread throughout the country . The king and Tutsi politicians attempted a counterattack to seize power and ostracise the Hutu and the Belgians but were thwarted by Belgian colonel Guy Logiest , who was brought in by the colonial governor . Logiest reestablished law and order , beginning a programme to promote and protect the Hutu elite . The Belgians then replaced many Tutsi chiefs and sub @-@ chiefs with Hutu , consigning King Kigeli V to figurehead status ; Kigeli later fled the country . Despite continued anti @-@ Tutsi violence , Belgium organised local elections in mid @-@ 1960 . Hutu parties gained control of nearly all communes , effectively ending the revolution . Logiest and Hutu leader Grégoire Kayibanda declared Rwanda an autonomous republic in 1961 , and the country became independent in 1962 . 
 The revolution caused at least 336 @,@ 000 Tutsi to flee to neighbouring countries , where they lived as refugees . Although the exiles agitated for an immediate return to Rwanda , they were split between those seeking negotiation and those wishing to overthrow the new regime . Some exiles formed armed groups ( called inyenzi , or " cockroaches " , by the Hutu government ) , who launched attacks into Rwanda . The largest occurred in late 1963 , when a surprise attack approached Kigali . The government fought back , defeating the inyenzi and killing thousands of the remaining Tutsi in Rwanda . No further threat was posed by the refugees until the 1990s , when a civil war initiated by the Tutsi @-@ refugee Front Patriotique <unk> ( FPR ) forced the Hutu government into negotiations . This led to a rise in Hutu extremism and the 1994 genocide , in which hundreds of thousands of Tutsi were killed before the FPR took control . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Precolonial Rwanda = = = 
 The earliest inhabitants of what is now Rwanda were the Twa , a group of aboriginal pygmy hunter @-@ gatherers who settled the area between 8000 and 3000 BC and remain in the country today . Between 700 BC and 1500 AD , a number of Bantu groups migrated into Rwanda and began clearing forests for agriculture . After losing much of their habitat , the forest @-@ dwelling Twa moved to the mountains . Historians have several theories about the Bantu migrations . According to one , the first settlers were Hutu ; the Tutsi migrated later and formed a distinct racial group , possibly of Cushitic origin . An alternative theory is that the migration was slow and steady , with incoming groups integrating into ( rather than conquering ) the existing society . In this theory the Hutu @-@ Tutsi distinction arose later as a class distinction , rather than a racial one . 
 The population coalesced , first into clans ( <unk> ) and into about eight kingdoms by 1700 . The country was fertile and densely populated , with its kingdoms strictly controlled socially . The Kingdom of Rwanda , ruled by the Tutsi <unk> clan , became increasingly dominant beginning in the mid @-@ 18th century . From its origins as a small <unk> near Lake <unk> the kingdom expanded through conquest and assimilation , reaching its zenith under King ( Mwami ) Kigeli Rwabugiri between 1853 and 1895 . Rwabugiri expanded the kingdom west and north , implementing administrative reforms which included ubuhake ( where Tutsi patrons ceded cattle — and privileged status — to Hutu or Tutsi clients in exchange for economic and personal service ) and uburetwa ( a corvée system in which Hutu were forced to work for Tutsi chiefs ) . Rwabugiri 's reforms developed a rift between the Hutu and Tutsi populations . 
 = = = Colonisation = = = 
 The Berlin Conference of 1884 assigned the territory to Germany , with imprecise boundaries . When Gustav Adolf von Götzen explored the country ten years later , he discovered that the Kingdom of Rwanda included a fertile region east of Lake Kivu . Germany wanted this region , which was also claimed by Leopold II as part of his own Congo Free State ( annexed by Belgium to form the Belgian Congo in 1908 ) . To justify its claim , Germany began a policy of ruling through the Rwandan monarchy and supporting Tutsi chiefs ; this system allowed colonisation with few European troops . <unk> V <unk> , who emerged as king after a succession crisis following the death of his father Rwabugiri and a struggle with Belgian troops , welcomed the Germans and used them to consolidate his power . The territory became the western border of German East Africa . German rule allowed Rwabugiri 's centralisation policy to continue , and the rift between Tutsi and Hutu deepened . 
 Belgian forces took control of Rwanda and Burundi during World War I , and the country came under Belgian control in a 1919 League of Nations mandate , named Ruanda @-@ Urundi . Although Belgium initially continued the German method of government through the monarchy , in 1926 , it began a policy of direct colonial rule in line with the norm in the Congo . Reforms included simplifying the complex three @-@ chieftain system , so one chief ( usually Tutsi ) instead of three ( typically split between Tutsi and Hutu ) ruled a local area . Belgian reforms also extended uburetwa ( forced labour by Hutus for Tutsi chiefs ) to individuals , not just communities , and to regions not previously covered by the system . Tutsi chiefs began a process of land reform with Belgian support ; grazing areas traditionally controlled by Hutu collectives were seized by Tutsi and privatised with minimal compensation . 
 Beginning in the late 1920s , the role of the Catholic Church grew . This was encouraged by the Belgian government , since the priests knew the country well and facilitated its administration . Many Rwandans ( including elite Tutsi ) converted , since Catholicism was an increasing prerequisite for social advancement . King <unk> refused to convert , and in 1931 he was deposed by the Belgian administration ; his eldest son , Mutara III Rudahigwa , succeeded him and eventually became Rwanda 's first Christian king . During the 1930s the Belgians introduced large @-@ scale projects in education , health , public works and agricultural supervision , including new crops and agricultural techniques to improve food supply . Rwanda had been modernised but Tutsis remained in power , leaving the Hutu disenfranchised and subject to large @-@ scale forced labour . In 1935 Belgium introduced identity cards , labelling an individual as Tutsi , Hutu , Twa or Naturalised . Although wealthy Hutu had previously been able to become honorary Tutsi , the identity cards ended further social mobility . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Hutu counter @-@ elite = = = 
 Belgium continued to rule Rwanda as a UN Trust Territory after World War II , with a mandate to oversee its eventual independence . The economic landscape had changed considerably during the war ; a cash economy grew , and with it the demand for labourers in the Congolese mines of Katanga and the coffee and sugar plantations of Uganda . There was a simultaneous shift in the Catholic Church ; prominent figures in the early Rwandan church , who were from a wealthy and conservative background ( such as Léon @-@ Paul Classe ) , were replaced by younger clergy of working @-@ class origin . Of these , a greater proportion were Flemish rather than Walloon Belgians and sympathised with the plight of the Hutu . Economic conditions and the seminary education provided by the church gave the Hutu a social mobility not previously possible , allowing the development of an elite group of Hutu leaders and intellectuals . This group , consisting of Hutu from the precolonial Kingdom of Rwanda , was joined by prominent citizens of kingdoms acquired during colonialism ( including the <unk> ) . 
 The best @-@ known figure in the movement was Grégoire Kayibanda . Like most of the Hutu counter @-@ elite Kayibanda had trained for the priesthood at the <unk> seminary , although he was not ordained . After completing his education in 1948 , he became a primary @-@ school teacher . In 1952 Kayibanda succeeded Alexis Kagame as editor of the Catholic magazine , L 'Ami . During the late 1950s he was a Travail , Fidélité , <unk> ( <unk> ) food @-@ cooperative board member , edited the pro @-@ Hutu Catholic magazine <unk> and founded the Mouvement Social <unk> ( MSM ) . 
 The second major figure of the Hutu elite was Joseph Gitera , another ex @-@ seminarian based in the south of the country who had left the church to establish a small brickworks . Gitera founded the Association for Social Promotion of the Masses ( APROSOMA ) party . Religious historians Ian and Jane Linden described him as " more passionate and perhaps compassionate " than Kayibanda and other Hutu ex @-@ seminarians , but " often erratic and sometimes fanatical " . Unlike Kayibanda , Gitera called for forceful action against the " oppression " of the monarchy as early as 1957 ; however , his rhetoric focussed less on the Hutu @-@ Tutsi divide than on the emancipation of the poor . 
 = = = Deterioration of Hutu – Tutsi relations = = = 
 The monarchy and prominent Tutsi , who had assumed that power would be transferred to them at independence , sensed the growing Hutu influence and began agitating for immediate independence . In 1956 King Rudahigwa and the Tutsi @-@ dominated Conseil Superieur proposed new ministries of finance , education , public works and the interior run by them , independent of Belgium . Kayibanda and the counter @-@ elite , fearing that the new ministries would cement Tutsi preeminence in post @-@ independence Rwanda , began work on the <unk> Manifesto and it was published in 1957 . The manifesto criticised indirect Belgian rule , calling for the abolition of ubuhake and the development of a middle class . The first document referring to the Tutsi and Hutu as separate races , it called for a transfer of power from the former to the latter based on " statistical law " . 
 In 1958 , Joseph Gitera visited the king at his palace in Nyanza . Although Gitera had considerable respect for the monarchy , Rudahigwa treated him contemptuously ; at one point he grabbed Gitera 's throat , calling him and his followers <unk> ( haters of Rwanda ) . This humiliation prompted the MSM , APROSOMA and the pro @-@ Hutu Catholic publications to take a firmer stance against the monarchy . <unk> published a detailed report of Rudahigwa 's treatment of Gitera , refuting his semi @-@ divine image and accusing him of pro @-@ Tutsi racism . The magazine also published stories citing the origin myths of the Hutu , Tutsi and Twa , calling the king 's policies inconsistent with them . The articles did not immediately challenge the king 's authority over the Hutu peasants , but their exposure of Rudahigwa 's outburst led to a permanent schism between him , the Hutu counter @-@ elite and Belgian authorities . In 1958 the Belgian colonial ministry tried to strip Rudahigwa of his power , reducing him to a figurehead , but his popularity with the regional chiefs and the Tutsi ( who feared the growing Hutu movement ) sparked a series of strikes and protests . 
 = = = Death of Rudahigwa and formation of UNAR = = = 
 In early 1959 Belgium convened a parliamentary commission to examine options for democratisation and eventual independence , scheduling elections for the end of the year . With the Belgians and most clergy on their side , <unk> and Gitera began a campaign targeting Kalinga : the royal drum , one of the monarchy 's most potent symbols . Rudahigwa became increasingly fearful , smuggling the drum out of the country and drinking heavily . He died of a cerebral haemorrhage in July 1959 while seeking medical treatment in <unk> , Burundi . Many Rwandans believed that Rudahigwa was lethally injected by the Belgians ; although an autopsy was never performed because of objections from the queen mother , an evaluation by independent doctors confirmed the original diagnosis of haemorrhage . The Tutsi elite , believing that Rudahigwa was murdered by the church with the help of the Belgians , immediately began a campaign against both . Rudahigwa 's brother Kigeli V <unk> was installed , without Belgian involvement and against their wishes ; Linden and Linden have described this succession as a " minor Tutsi coup " . 
 After Kigeli V 's coronation , several Tutsi chiefs and palace officials desiring rapid independence formed the Union Nationale <unk> ( UNAR ) party . Although UNAR was pro @-@ monarchy , it was not controlled by the king ; the party was anti @-@ Belgian , which attracted support from the Communist bloc . UNAR immediately began a campaign promoting Rwandan nationalism , vowing to replace European history in schools with the study of Rwabugiri 's conquests and calling for the removal of whites and missionaries . This rhetoric prompted the Catholic Church ( and many of its Rwandan students , who credited the church with raising them from poverty ) to call UNAR anti @-@ Catholic . Gitera , in turn , used the church 's anti @-@ UNAR stance to falsely claim its support for APROSOMA . The colonial government moved to limit UNAR 's power , attempting to depose three chiefs who were prominent in the party and opening fire on protesters at a rally . Kayibanda registered the MSM as an official party , renaming it the Parti du Mouvement de l <unk> Hutu ( PARMEHUTU ) . He began mobilising cells of supporters across the country , calling for an independent Hutu state under a constitutional monarchy . Historian Catharine Newbury described the situation in late 1959 as a " simmering <unk> " ; by late October , with the parliamentary report due and elections approaching , tensions had reached the breaking point . 
 = = Revolution = = 
 = = = Attack on Mbonyumutwa and Hutu uprising = = = 
 On 1 November 1959 Dominique Mbonyumutwa , one of the few Hutu sub @-@ chiefs and a PARMEHUTU activist , was attacked after Mass by nine members of UNAR 's youth wing near his home in Gitarama Province . Mbonyumutwa had refused to join UNAR in condemning the Belgian removal of the three Tutsi chiefs . Although Mbonyumutwa fought off the attackers and survived , rumours began to spread that he had been killed ; according to American theology professor James Jay Carney , Mbonyumutwa may have started the rumours himself . The next day a Hutu protest occurred in the district headquarters of <unk> , and on 3 November a large group of Hutu killed two Tutsi and forced the local chief into hiding . The protests quickly turned to riots , with violence at this stage consisting primarily of arson rather than killing ( except when the Tutsi tried to fight back ) . First in <unk> and then across the country , Hutu burned Tutsi homes to the ground with ignited paraffin ( widely available for use in lamps ) . The arsonists recruited local peasants to their ranks , ensuring the rapid spread of the revolt . Many Hutu still believed that the king was superhuman , and claimed that they carried out the attacks on his behalf . By 9 November violence had spread across the country , except for Gitera 's home province of <unk> ( Butare ) and the far southwest and east . Rioting was heaviest in the northwest ; in Ruhengeri , every Tutsi home was destroyed by fire . 
 King Kigeli was the first to mount a counterattack against the rioters , defying Belgian refusal of permission to form his own army . <unk> thousands of loyal militia , Kigeli ordered the arrest or killing of a number of prominent Hutu leaders in the hope of quashing the peasant revolt ; Joseph Gitera 's brother , a prominent member of APROSOMA , was among the dead . Many of those arrested were brought to the king 's palace at Nyanza , where they were tortured by UNAR officials . Kayibanda , who was in hiding and Gitera , under Belgian protection in <unk> , were not captured . Although Kigeli and UNAR remained more powerful and better equipped than the Hutu parties , they knew that the Belgians now strongly supported the latter ; given enough time , the Hutu would gain the upper hand . Therefore , UNAR sought to ostracise Belgium from power and gain independence as soon as possible . 
 = = = Arrival of Guy Logiest = = = 
 Before the revolution began Ruanda @-@ Urundi governor Jean @-@ Paul Harroy asked his friend , Guy Logiest ( a Belgian army colonel working in the Congo ) , to come to Rwanda to evaluate Belgium 's military options in the colony . On 4 November , after the outbreak of violence , Logiest arrived with a number of soldiers and paratroopers and began re @-@ establishing civil order . After Kigeli and UNAR 's retaliation against the Hutu , Logiest and his troops prioritised the protection of Hutu leaders ( including Gitera ) . On 12 November , after Harroy 's declaration of a state of emergency , Logiest was appointed Special Military Resident with a mandate to re @-@ establish order in Rwanda . He immediately began installing Hutu in senior administrative positions with Harroy 's support , ostensibly to counter the threat of speedy independence posed by UNAR and the Tutsi leadership , and saw as his options a Tutsi @-@ dominated independent kingdom or a Hutu republic . Logiest decided to encourage the latter by favouring the Hutu over the Tutsi , believing that to be best for the peasants . 
 After this decision , he took a series of actions which ensured the permanence of the revolution begun by the Hutu uprisings . Logiest replaced more than half the country 's Tutsi chiefs ( and many sub @-@ chiefs ) with Hutu , most from the PARMEHUTU party . Although many UNAR members were tried and convicted for crimes committed during the Tutsi counter @-@ revolution , their Hutu compatriots from PARMEHUTU and APROSOMA who were guilty of inciting the Hutu arson escaped without charge . In December Logiest was appointed to the new post of special civil resident , replacing more @-@ conservative colonial resident André Preud 'homme . The Belgian government empowered him to depose the king and veto his decisions , making Logiest a de facto constitutional monarch . 
 = = = PARMEHUTU 's rise to power = = = 
 After the November 1959 violence , Belgium postponed the communal elections scheduled for January 1960 until June . This move was partly a response to a request from PARMEHUTU , which ( despite Logiest 's large @-@ scale installation of Hutu leaders across the country ) claimed it needed more time for the Hutu people to become " sufficiently emancipated to defend their rights effectively . " In March 1960 , a United Nations delegation visited Rwanda to assess the country 's progress towards independence . The major political parties encouraged street demonstrations , which deteriorated into fresh outbreaks of violence , during the UN visit . Tutsi homes were burnt in view of the delegation , leading them to declare in April that Belgian plans for June elections were unworkable . Instead , they proposed a roundtable discussion involving all four political parties to end the violence . 
 Despite the UN suggestion to postpone the elections , Belgian authorities pressed ahead and they were held in June and July . The result was an overwhelming victory for PARMEHUTU , which took 160 of 229 seats ; Tutsi parties controlled only 19 . The communal authorities immediately took local power from the traditional chiefs ; many implemented feudal policies similar to that of the Tutsi elite , but favouring Hutu rather than Tutsi . Although after the elections Guy Logiest announced that " the revolution is over " , tensions remained high and local massacres of Tutsi continued throughout 1960 and 1961 . King Kigeli , living under virtual arrest in southern Rwanda , fled the country in July 1960 and lived for several decades in locations across East Africa before settling in the United States . 
 = = = Independence = = = 
 Rwanda settled into the new reality of Hutu dominance after the 1960 elections ; Belgium and Logiest supported PARMEHUTU , and Tutsi influence dwindled . The United Nations Trusteeship Commission , dominated by countries allied with Communist ones and favouring the anti @-@ Belgian , Tutsi UNAR party , lobbied for independently monitored elections . The commission sponsored General Assembly resolutions 1579 and 1580 , calling for elections and a referendum on the monarchy ; Logiest dismissed the efforts as " perfectly useless " , and made little effort to implement them . A National Reconciliation Conference was held in Belgium in January 1961 , which ended in failure . Logiest and Kayibanda then convened a meeting of the country 's local leaders , at which a " sovereign democratic Republic of Rwanda " was proclaimed with Dominique Mbonyumutwa its interim president . The UN published a report that an " oppressive system has been replaced by another one " , but its ability to influence events had ended . PARMEHUTU won control of the legislature in September 1961 ; Kayibanda assumed the presidency , and Rwanda became fully independent in July 1962 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Tutsi refugees and inyenzi attacks = = = 
 As the revolution progressed , many Tutsi left Rwanda to escape Hutu purges . The exodus , which began during the November 1959 arson attacks , continued steadily throughout the revolution . An official , late @-@ 1964 total of 336 @,@ 000 Tutsi settled primarily in the four neighbouring countries of Burundi , Uganda , Tanganyika ( later Tanzania ) and Congo @-@ Léopoldville . The exiles , unlike the ethnic Rwandans who migrated during the pre @-@ colonial and colonial eras , were seen as refugees by their host countries and began almost immediately to agitate for a return to Rwanda . Their aims differed ; some sought reconciliation with Kayibanda and the new regime , some affiliated with the exiled King Kigeli and others wished to oust the new PARMEHUTU regime from power and establish a socialist republic . 
 Beginning in late 1960 armed groups of Tutsi exiles ( called inyenzi or " cockroaches " by the Hutu government ) launched attacks into Rwanda from neighbouring countries , with mixed success . The inyenzi in Burundi , supported by that country 's newly installed , independent Tutsi republic , caused some disruption in southern Rwanda . Refugees in the Congo , Uganda and Tanzania were less able to organise military operations because of local conditions ; exiles in Tanzania were treated well by local authorities and many settled permanently , giving up aspirations to return to Rwanda . The inyenzi attacks themselves propelled more refugees across the borders , since the government often responded with further attacks on the Tutsi still living in Rwanda . 
 In December 1963 the Burundi inyenzi launched a large @-@ scale surprise attack , seizing <unk> and advancing to positions near Kigali . The ill @-@ equipped and poorly @-@ organised invaders were easily defeated by the government , whose response to the attack was the largest killing of Tutsi to date : an estimated 10 @,@ 000 in December 1963 and January 1964 , including all Tutsi politicians still in the country . The international community did little in response , and President Kayibanda 's domestic power was reinforced . Infighting and the defeat put an end to the inyenzi , who were no further threat to Rwanda after 1964 . 
 = = = Post @-@ revolution Rwanda = = = 
 After the 1963 – 64 Tutsi massacre and defeat of the inyenzi Kayibanda and PARMEHUTU ruled Rwanda unchecked for the next decade , overseeing a Hutu hegemony justified by the mantra of " demographic majority and democracy " . The regime did not tolerate dissent , ruling in a top @-@ down manner similar to the pre @-@ revolution feudal monarchy and promoting a deeply Catholic , virtuous ethos . By the early 1970s this policy had isolated Rwanda from the rest of the world , and a rebellion began within the Hutu elite . In 1973 senior army commander Juvénal Habyarimana organised a coup , killing Kayibanda and assuming the presidency . 
 In 1990 the Front Patriotique <unk> ( FPR ) , a rebel group composed primarily of Tutsi refugees , invaded northern Rwanda ; this began the Rwandan Civil War . Although neither side gained a decisive advantage in the war , by 1992 Habyarimana 's authority had weakened ; mass demonstrations forced him into a coalition with the domestic opposition and to sign the 1993 Arusha Accords with the FPR . The cease @-@ fire ended on 6 April 1994 , when Habyarimana 's plane was shot down near Kigali Airport and he was killed . Habyarimana 's death was the catalyst for the Rwandan Genocide , which began a few hours later . In about 100 days , 500 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Tutsi and politically @-@ moderate Hutu were killed in well @-@ planned attacks ordered by the interim government . The Tutsi FPR under Paul Kagame restarted their offensive and methodically regained Rwanda , controlling the whole country by mid @-@ July . As of 2015 Kagame and the FPR remain in control , restoring growth in Rwanda 's economy , its number of tourists and the country 's Human Development Index . 
 = The Spy Who Loved Me ( novel ) = 
 The Spy Who Loved Me is the ninth novel and tenth book in Ian Fleming 's James Bond series , first published by Jonathan Cape on 16 April 1962 . It is the shortest and most sexually explicit of Fleming 's novels , as well as a clear departure from previous Bond novels in that the story is told in the first person by a young Canadian woman , Vivienne Michel . Bond himself does not appear until two thirds of the way through the book . Fleming wrote a prologue to the novel giving Michel credit as a co @-@ author . 
 Due to the reactions by critics and fans , Fleming was not happy with the book and attempted to suppress elements of it where he could : he blocked a paperback edition in the United Kingdom and only gave permission for the title to be used when he sold the film rights to Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli , rather than any aspects of the plots . However , the character of Jaws is loosely based on one of the characters in the book and a British paperback edition was published after his death . 
 A heavily adapted version of The Spy Who Loved Me appeared in the Daily Express newspaper in daily comic strip format in 1967 – 1968 . In 1977 the title was used for the tenth film in the Eon Productions series . It was the third to star Roger Moore as Bond and used no plot elements from the novel . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Fleming structured the novel in three sections — " Me " , " Them " and " Him " to describe the phases of the story . 
 Me 
 Vivienne " Viv " Michel , a young Canadian woman narrates her own story , detailing her past love affairs , the first being with Derek Mallaby , who took her virginity in a field after being thrown out of a cinema in Windsor for indecent exposure . Their physical relationship ended that night and Viv was subsequently rejected when Mallaby sent her a letter from Oxford University saying he was forcibly engaged to someone else by his parents . Viv 's second love affair was with her German boss , Kurt Rainer , by whom she would eventually become pregnant . She informed Rainer and he paid for her to go to Switzerland to have an abortion , telling her that their affair was over . After the procedure , Viv returned to her native Canada and started her journey through North America , stopping to work at " The Dreamy Pines Motor Court " in the Adirondack Mountains for managers Jed and Mildred <unk> . 
 Them 
 At the end of the vacation season , the <unk> entrust Viv with looking after the motel for the night before the owner , Mr. Sanguinetti , can arrive to take inventory and close it up for the winter . Two mobsters , " Sluggsy " Morant and Sol " Horror " Horowitz , both of whom work for Sanguinetti , arrive and say they are there to look over the motel for insurance purposes . The two have been hired by Sanguinetti to burn down the motel so that Sanguinetti can make a profit on the insurance . The blame for the fire would fall on Viv , who was to perish in the incident . The mobsters are cruel to Viv and , when she says she does not want to dance with them , they attack her , holding her down and starting to remove her top . They are about to continue the attack with rape when the door buzzer stops them . 
 Him 
 British secret service agent James Bond appears at the door asking for a room , having had a tyre puncture while passing . Bond quickly realises that Horror and Sluggsy are mobsters and that Viv is in danger . <unk> the two men , he eventually gets the gangsters to agree to provide him a room . Bond tells Michel that he is in America in the wake of Operation Thunderball and was detailed to protect a Russian nuclear expert who defected to the West and who now lives in Toronto , as part of his quest to ferret out SPECTRE . That night Sluggsy and Horror set fire to the motel and attempt to kill Bond and Michel . A gun battle ensues and , during their escape , Horror and Sluggsy 's car crashes into a lake . Bond and Michel retire to bed , but Sluggsy is still alive and makes a further attempt to kill them , before Bond shoots him . 
 Viv wakes to find Bond gone , leaving a note in which he promises to send her police assistance and which he concludes by telling her not to dwell too much on the ugly events through which she has just lived . As Viv finishes reading the note , a large police detachment arrives . After taking her statement , the officer in charge of the detail reiterates Bond 's advice , but also warns Viv that all men involved in violent crime and espionage , regardless of which side they are on — including Bond himself — are dangerous and that Viv should avoid them . Viv reflects on this as she motors off at the end of the book , continuing her tour of America , but despite the officer 's warning still devoted to the memory of the spy who loved her . 
 = = Characters and themes = = 
 Continuation Bond author Raymond Benson sees Vivienne Michel as the best realised female characterisation undertaken by Fleming , partly because the story is told in the first person narrative . Academic Jeremy Black notes that Michel is the closest Fleming gets to kitchen sink realism in the Bond canon : she has been a victim of life in the past , but is wilful and tough , too . 
 The other characters in the novel are given less attention and Vivienne 's second lover , Kurt , is a caricature of a cruel German , who forces her to have an abortion before finishing their affair . According to Black , the two thugs , Sluggsy and Horror , are " comic @-@ book villains with comic @-@ book names " . Their characters are not given the same status as other villains in Bond stories , but are second @-@ rate professional killers , which makes them more believable in the story . 
 As with Casino Royale , the question of morality between Bond and the villains is brought up , again by Bond , but also by the police officer involved . Benson argues that this runs counter to another theme in the novel , which had also appeared in a number of other Bond books including Goldfinger : the concept of Bond as Saint George against the dragon . In this Black agrees , who sees The Spy Who Loved Me as being " an account of the vulnerable under challenge , of the manipulative nature of individuals and of the possibility of being trapped by evil " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Spy Who Loved Me was written in Jamaica at Fleming 's Goldeneye estate in January and February 1961 and was the shortest manuscript Fleming had produced for a novel , being only 113 pages long . Fleming found the book the easiest for him to write and apologised to his editor at Jonathan Cape for the ease . The Spy Who Loved Me has been described by Fleming biographer Andrew Lycett as Fleming 's " most sleazy and violent story ever " , which may have been indicative of his state of mind at the time . 
 Fleming borrowed from his surroundings , as he had done with all his writing up to that point , to include places he had seen . One such location was a motel in the Adirondacks in upstate New York , which Fleming would drive past on the way to Ivar Bryce 's Black Hollow Farm ; this became the Dreamy Pines Motel . Similarly , he took incidents from his own life and used them in the novel : Vivienne Michel 's seduction in a box in the Royalty Kinema , Windsor , mirrors Fleming 's loss of virginity in the same establishment . A colleague at The Sunday Times , Robert Harling , gave his name to a printer in the story while another minor character , Frank Donaldson , was named after Jack Donaldson , a friend of Fleming 's wife . One of Fleming 's neighbours in Jamaica was Vivienne Stuart , whose first name Fleming purloined for the novel 's heroine . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Spy Who Loved Me was published on 16 April 1962 in the UK as a hardcover edition by publishers Jonathan Cape ; it was 221 pages long and cost 15 shillings . Artist Richard Chopping once again undertook the cover art , and raised his fee from the 200 guineas he had charged for Thunderball , to 250 guineas . The artwork included a commando knife which was borrowed from Fleming 's editor , Michael Howard at Jonathan Cape . The Spy Who Loved Me was published in the US by Viking Books on 11 April 1962 with 211 pages and costing $ 3 @.@ 95 . 
 The reception to the novel was so bad that Fleming wrote to Michael Howard at Jonathan Cape , to explain why he wrote the book : " I had become increasingly surprised to find my thrillers , which were designed for an adult audience , being read in schools , and that young people were making a hero out of James Bond ... So it crossed my mind to write a cautionary tale about Bond , to put the record straight in the minds particularly of younger readers ... the experiment has obviously gone very much awry " . 
 Fleming subsequently requested that there should be no reprints or paperback version of the book and for the British market no paperback version appeared until after Fleming 's death . Because of the heightened sexual writing in the novel , it was banned in a number of countries . In the US the story was also published in Stag magazine , with the title changed to Motel Nymph . 
