 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Broadly the critics did not welcome Fleming 's experiment with the Bond formula and academic Christoph Linder pointed out that The Spy Who Loved Me received the worst reception of all the Bond books . The Daily Telegraph , for example , wrote " Oh Dear Oh Dear Oh Dear ! And to think of the books Mr Fleming once wrote ! " while The Glasgow Herald thought Fleming finished : " His ability to invent a plot has deserted him almost entirely and he has had to substitute for a fast @-@ moving story the sorry misadventures of an upper @-@ class tramp , told in dreary detail . " Writing in The Observer , Maurice Richardson described the tale as " a new and regrettable if not altogether unreadable variation " , going on to hope that " this doesn 't spell the total eclipse of Bond in a blaze of <unk> " . Richardson ended his piece by berating Fleming , asking : " why can 't this cunning author write up a bit instead of down ? " The critic for The Times was not dismissive of Bond , who they describe as " less a person than a cult " who is " ruthlessly , fashionably efficient in both love and war " . Rather the critic dismisses the experiment , writing that " the novel lacks Mr. Fleming 's usual careful construction and must be written off as a disappointment . " John Fletcher thought that it was " as if Mickey Spillane had tried to gatecrash his way into the Romantic Novelists ' Association " 
 Philip Stead , writing in The Times Literary Supplement considered the novel to be " a morbid version of that of Beauty and the Beast " . The review noted that once Bond arrives on the scene to find Michel threatened by the two thugs , he " solves [ the problem ] in his usual way . A great quantity of ammunition is expended , the zip @-@ fastener is kept busy and the customary sexual consummation is associated with the kill . " Stead also considered that with the words of the police captain " Mr. Fleming seems to have summarized in this character 's remarks some of the recent strictures on James Bond 's activities . " Vernon Scannell , as critic for The Listener , considered The Spy Who Loved Me to be " as silly as it is unpleasant " . What aggrieved him most , however , was that " the worst thing about it is that it really is so unremittingly , so grindingly boring . " 
 The critic for Time lamented the fact that " unaccountably lacking in The Spy Who Loved Me are the High @-@ Stake Gambling Scene , the Meal @-@ Ordering Scene , the Torture Scene , the battleship @-@ grey Bentley , and Blades Club . " The critic also bemoaned the fact that " among the shocks and disappointments 1962 still has in store ... is the discovery that the cruel , handsome , scarred face of James Bond does not turn up until more than halfway through Ian Fleming 's latest book . Anthony Boucher meanwhile wrote that the " author has reached an unprecedented low " . 
 Not all reviews were negative . Esther Howard wrote in The Spectator , " Surprisingly Ian Fleming 's new book is a romantic one and , except for some early sex in England ( rather well done , this ) only just as nasty as is needed to show how absolutely thrilling it is for ... the narrator to be rescued from both death and worse – than by a he @-@ man like James Bond . Myself , I like the Daphne du Maurier touch and prefer it this way but I doubt his real fans will . " 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Comic Strip ( 1967 – 1968 ) 
 Fleming 's original novel was adapted as a daily comic strip which was published in the British Daily Express newspaper and syndicated around the world . The adaptation ran from 18 December 1967 to 3 October 1968 . The adaptation was written by Jim Lawrence and illustrated by Yaroslav Horak . It was the last Ian Fleming work to be adapted as a comic strip . The strip was reprinted by Titan Books in The James Bond Omnibus Vol . 2 , published in 2011 . 
 The Spy Who Loved Me ( 1977 ) 
 In 1977 the title was used for the tenth film in the Eon Productions series . It was the third to star Roger Moore as British Secret Service agent Commander James Bond . Although Fleming had insisted that no film should contain anything of the plot of the novel , the steel @-@ toothed character of Horror was included , although under the name Jaws . 
 = Battle of Kaiapit = 
 The Battle of Kaiapit was an action fought in 1943 between Australian and Japanese forces in New Guinea during the Markham and Ramu Valley – Finisterre Range campaign of World War II . Following the landings at Nadzab and at Lae , the Allies attempted to exploit their success with an advance into the upper Markham Valley , starting with Kaiapit . The Japanese intended to use Kaiapit to threaten the Allied position at Nadzab , and to create a diversion to allow the Japanese garrison at Lae time to escape . 
 The Australian 2 / 6th Independent Company flew in to the Markham Valley from Port Moresby in 13 USAAF C @-@ 47 Dakotas , making a difficult landing on a rough airstrip . Unaware that a much larger Japanese force was also headed for Kaiapit , the company attacked the village on 19 September to secure the area so that it could be developed into an airfield . The company then held it against a strong counterattack . During two days of fighting the Australians defeated a larger Japanese force while suffering relatively few losses . 
 The Australian victory at Kaiapit enabled the Australian 7th Division to be flown in to the upper Markham Valley . It accomplished the 7th Division 's primary mission , for the Japanese could no longer threaten Lae or Nadzab , where a major airbase was being developed . The victory also led to the capture of the entire Ramu Valley , which provided new forward fighter airstrips for the air war against the Japanese . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 The Markham Valley is part of a flat , elongated depression varying from 8 to 32 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 to 19 @.@ 9 mi ) wide that cuts through the otherwise mountainous terrain of the interior of New Guinea , running from the mouth of the Markham River near the port of Lae , to that of the Ramu River 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) away . The two rivers flow in opposite directions , separated by an invisible divide about 130 kilometres ( 81 mi ) from Lae . The area is flat and suitable for airstrips , although it is intercut by many tributaries of the two main rivers . Between the Ramu Valley and Madang lies the rugged and aptly named Finisterre Ranges . 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 Following the landing at Nadzab , General Sir Thomas Blamey , the Allied Land Forces commander , intended to exploit his success with an advance into the upper Markham Valley , which would protect Nadzab from Japanese ground attack , and serve as a jumping off point for an overland advance into the Ramu Valley to capture airfield sites there . On 16 September 1943 — the same day that Lae fell — Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring , commander of I Corps , Major General George Alan Vasey , commander of the 7th Division , and Major General Ennis Whitehead , commander of the Advanced Echelon , Fifth Air Force , met at Whitehead 's headquarters . Whitehead wanted fighter airstrips established in the Kaiapit area by 1 November 1943 in order to bring short @-@ range fighters within range of the major Japanese base at Wewak . The 7th Division 's mission was to prevent the Japanese at Madang from using the Markham and Ramu valleys to threaten Lae or Nadzab . Vasey and Herring considered both an overland operation to capture Dumpu , and an airborne operation using paratroops of the US Army 's 503rd Parachute Infantry Regiment . Blamey did not agree with their idea of capturing Dumpu first , insisting that Kaiapit be taken beforehand . 
 Until a road could be opened from Lae , the Kaiapit area could only be supplied by air and there were a limited number of transport aircraft . Even flying in an airborne engineer aviation battalion to improve the airstrip would have involved taking aircraft away from operations supporting the 7th Division at Nadzab . Moreover , Whitehead warned that he could not guarantee adequate air support for both Kaiapit and the upcoming Finschhafen operation at the same time . However , Herring calculated that the 7th Division had sufficient reserves at Nadzab to allow maintenance flights to be suspended for a week or so after the capture of Kaiapit . He planned to seize Kaiapit with an overland advance from Nadzab by independent companies , the Papuan Infantry Battalion , and the 7th Division 's 21st Infantry Brigade . 
 Fifth Air Force commander Lieutenant General George Kenney later recalled that Colonel David W. " Photo " Hutchison , who had been the air task force commander at <unk> and had moved over to Nadzab to take charge of air activities there , was told to work out the problem with Vasey : " I didn 't care how it was done but I wanted a good forward airdrome about a hundred miles further up the Markham Valley . Photo Hutchison and Vasey were a natural team . They both knew what I wanted and Vasey not only believed that the air force could perform miracles but that the 7th Division and the Fifth Air Force working together could do anything . " 
 The airstrip at Kaiapit was reconnoitred on 11 September 1943 by No. 4 Squadron RAAF , which reported that it was apparently in good condition , with the Kunai grass recently cut . Lieutenant Everette E. Frazier , USAAF , selected a level , burned @-@ off area near the Leron River , not far from Kaiapit , and landed in an L @-@ 4 Piper Cub . He determined that it would be possible to land C @-@ 47 Dakota aircraft there . On 16 September , Hutchison approved the site for Dakotas to land . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The 2 / 6th Independent Company arrived in Port Moresby from Australia on 2 August 1943 . The unit had fought in Papua in 1942 in the Battle of Buna – Gona and had since conducted intensive training in Queensland . The company was under the command of Captain Gordon King , who had been its second in command at Buna . King received a warning order on 12 September alerting him to prepare for the capture of Kaiapit , and had access to detailed aerial photographs of the area . 
 An independent company at this time had a nominal strength of 20 officers and 275 other ranks . Larger than a conventional infantry company , it was organised into three platoons , each of three sections , each of which contained two subsections . It had considerable firepower . Each subsection had a Bren light machine gun . The gunner 's two assistants carried rifles and extra 30 @-@ round Bren magazines . A sniper also carried a rifle , as did one man equipped with rifle grenades . The remaining four or five men carried Owen submachine guns . Each platoon also had a section of 2 @-@ inch mortars . 
 The company was self @-@ supporting , with its own engineer , signals , transport , and quartermaster sections . The signals section had a powerful but cumbersome Wireless Set No. 11 for communicating with the 7th Division . Powered by lead @-@ acid batteries which were recharged with petrol generators , it required multiple signallers to carry and the noise was liable to attract the attention of the enemy . The platoons were equipped with the new Army No. 208 Wireless Sets . These were small , portable sets developed for the communication needs of units on the move in jungle warfare . However , the 2 / 6th Independent Company had not had time to work with them operationally . 
 For three days in a row , the 2 / 6th Independent Company prepared to fly out from Port Moresby , only to be told that its flight had been cancelled due to bad weather . On 17 September 1943 , 13 Dakotas of the US 374th Troop Carrier Group finally took off for Leron . King flew in the lead plane , which was piloted by Captain Frank C. Church , whom Kenney described as " one of Hutchison 's ' hottest ' troop carrier pilots " . As it came in to land , King spotted patrols from the Papuan Infantry Battalion in the area . 
 One of the Dakotas blew a tyre touching down on the rough airstrip ; another tried to land on one wheel . Its undercarriage collapsed and it made a belly landing . The former was subsequently salvaged , but the latter was a total loss . King sent out patrols that soon located Captain J. A. Chalk 's B Company , Papuan Infantry Battalion , which was operating in the area . That evening Chalk and King received airdropped messages from Vasey instructing them to occupy Kaiapit as soon as possible , and prepare a landing strip for troop @-@ carrying aircraft . Vasey informed them that only small Japanese parties that had escaped from Lae were in the area , and their morale was very low . Vasey flew in to Leron on 18 September to meet with King . Vasey 's orders were simple : " Go to Kaiapit quickly , clean up the Japs and inform division . " 
 As it happened , the Japanese commander , Major General <unk> Nakai of the 20th Division , had ordered a sizeable force to move to Kaiapit under the command of Major Yonekura Tsuneo . Yonekura 's force included the 9th and 10th Companies of the 78th Infantry Regiment , the 5th Company of the 80th Infantry Regiment , a heavy machine @-@ gun section , a signals section and an engineer company — a total of about 500 troops . From Kaiapit it was to threaten the Allied position at Nadzab , creating a diversion to allow the Japanese garrison at Lae time to escape . The main body left <unk> in the Finisterre Range on 6 September but was delayed by heavy rains that forced the troops to move , soaking wet , through muddy water for much of the way . Only the advance party of this force had reached Kaiapit by 18 September , by which time Lae had already fallen . Yonekura 's main body , moving by night to avoid being sighted by Allied aircraft , was by this time no further from Kaiapit than King , but had two rivers to cross . Since both were heading for the same objective , a clash was inevitable . 
 = = Battle = = 
 King assembled his troops at Sangan , about 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Kaiapit , except for one section under Lieutenant E. F. Maxwell that had been sent ahead to scout the village . On the morning of 19 September , King set out for Kaiapit , leaving behind his quartermaster , transport and engineering sections , which would move the stores left behind at the Leron River first to Sangan and then to Kaiapit on the 20th . He took one section of Papuans with him , leaving Chalk and the rest of his men to escort the native carriers bringing up the stores . 
 King 's men walked for fifty minutes at a time and then rested for ten . The going was relatively easy insofar as the ground was fairly flat , but the 2 @-@ metre ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high Kunai grass trapped the heat and humidity and the men were heavily loaded with ammunition . The company reached <unk> , a village within striking distance of Kaiapit , at 14 : 45 . While his men had a brief rest , King attempted to contact the large Army No. 11 Wireless Set he had left behind at Sangan — and from there Vasey back at Nadzab — with the new Army No. 208 Wireless Sets he had brought with him . Unfortunately , King found that their range was insufficient . He also heard shots being fired in the distance and guessed that Maxwell 's section had been discovered . 
 The 2 / 6th Independent Company formed up at 15 : 15 in Kunai grass about 1 @,@ 200 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 yd ) from Kaiapit . As the company advanced it came under fire from foxholes on the edge of the village . A 2 @-@ inch mortar knocked out a light machine gun . The foxholes were outflanked and taken out with hand grenades and bayonets . The Japanese withdrew , leaving 30 dead behind . The Australians suffered two killed and seven wounded , including King , who was lightly wounded . 
 The company established a defensive position for the night . While they were doing so , Lieutenant D. B. Stuart , the commander of one of the Papuan platoons , arrived . They had become concerned when radio contact had been lost and he had been sent to find out what was going on . King ordered him to bring the Papuans up from Sangan with extra ammunition and the No. 11 set . At around 17 : 30 , a native appeared with a message for the Japanese commander . The paper was taken from him and he was shot when he tried to escape . Later , a Japanese patrol returned to Kaiapit , unaware that it was now in Australian hands . They were killed when they stumbled across a Bren gun position . Four more Japanese soldiers returned after midnight . One of them escaped . 
 Yonekura and his men had reached Kaiapit after an exhausting night march . Yonekura was aware that the Australians had reached Kaiapit but his main concern was not to be caught in the open by Allied aircraft . Spotting Australian positions in the pre @-@ dawn light , the Japanese column opened fire . A torrent of fire descended on the Australians , who replied sporadically , attempting to conserve their ammunition . Although he was running low on ammunition , King launched an immediate counter @-@ attack on the Japanese , which took them by surprise . 
 Lieutenant Derrick Watson 's C Platoon set out at around 06 : 15 and advanced to the edge of Village 3 , a distance of about 200 yards ( 180 m ) , before becoming pinned down by heavy Japanese fire . King then sent Captain Gordon Blainey 's A Platoon around the right flank , towards the high ground on Mission Hill which overlooked the battlefield . It was secured by 07 : 30 . In the meantime , some of the 2 / 6th Independent Company 's signallers and headquarters personnel gathered together what ammunition they could , and delivered it to C Platoon at around 07 : 00 . C Platoon then fixed bayonets and continued its advance . 
 The commander of No. 9 Section of C Platoon , Lieutenant Bob <unk> , was nicked by a bullet , apparently fired by one of his own men . He led his section in an advance across 70 yards ( 64 m ) of open ground , and attacked three Japanese machine gun posts with hand grenades . He was later awarded the Military Cross for his " high courage and leadership " . Lieutenant Reg Hallion led his No. 3 Section of A Platoon against the Japanese positions at the base of Mission Hill . He was killed in an attack on a machine gun post , but his section captured the position and killed twelve Japanese . By 10 : 00 , the action was over . 
 After the action , King 's men counted 214 Japanese bodies , and estimated that another 50 or more lay dead in the tall grass . Yonekura was among the dead . The Australians suffered 14 killed and 23 wounded . Abandoned equipment included 19 machine guns , 150 rifles , 6 grenade throwers and 12 Japanese swords . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 The 2 / 6th Independent Company had won a significant victory , but now had 23 wounded and was very low on ammunition . Frazier landed on the newly captured airstrip in his Piper Cub at 12 : 30 . He rejected the airstrip as unsuitable for Dakotas , and oversaw the preparation of a new airstrip on better ground near Mission Hill . This was still a difficult approach , as aircraft had to land upwind while avoiding Mission Hill . Although it was not known if the airstrip would be ready , Hutchison flew in for a test landing there the next day , 21 September , at 15 : 30 . He collected the wounded and flew them to Nadzab , and returned an hour later with a load of rations and ammunition . He also brought with him Brigadier Ivan Dougherty , the commander of the 21st Infantry Brigade , and his headquarters , who took charge of the area . Around 18 : 00 , six more transports arrived . 
 Vasey was concerned about the security of the Kaiapit area , as he believed that the Japanese were inclined to continue with a plan once it was in motion . Taking advantage of good flying weather on 22 September , 99 round trips were made between Nadzab and Kaiapit . Most of the 2 / 16th Infantry Battalion and some American engineers were flown in . The 2 / 14th Infantry Battalion and a battery of the 2 / 4th Field Regiment arrived on 25 September , and Brigadier Kenneth Eather 's 25th Infantry Brigade began to arrive two days later , freeing Dougherty to advance on Dumpu . 
 = = = Base development = = = 
 Kaiapit did not become an important airbase . By the time engineering surveys of the area had been completed , as a direct consequence of the victory at Kaiapit , Dougherty 's men had captured Gusap . There , the engineers found a well @-@ drained area with soil conditions suitable for the construction of all @-@ weather airstrips , an unobstructed air approach and a pleasant climate . It was therefore decided to limit construction at the swampy and malarial Kaiapit and concentrate on Gusap , where the US 871st , <unk> and 875th Airborne Aviation Engineer Battalions constructed ten airstrips and numerous facilities . Although some equipment was carried on the trek overland , most had to be flown in and nearly all of it was worn out by the time the work was completed . The first P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighter squadron began operating from Gusap in November and an all @-@ weather fighter runway was completed in January 1944 . The airstrip at Gusap " paid for itself many times over in the quantity of Japanese aircraft , equipment and personnel destroyed by Allied attack missions projected from it . " 
 = = = War crimes = = = 
 Three natives were found at Kaiapit who had been tied with rope to the uprights of a native hut and had then been bayoneted . As a result of the Moscow Declaration , the Minister for External Affairs , Dr. H. V. Evatt , commissioned a report by William Webb on war crimes committed by the Japanese . Webb took depositions from three members of the 2 / 6th Independent Company about the Kaiapit incident which formed part of his report , which was submitted to the United Nations War Crimes Commission in 1944 . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 The 2 / 6th Independent Company had defeated the vanguard of Nakai 's force and stopped his advance down the Markham Valley dead in its tracks . The Battle of Kaiapit accomplished Vasey 's primary mission , for the Japanese could no longer threaten Nadzab . It opened the gate to the Ramu Valley for the 21st Infantry Brigade , provided new forward fighter airstrips for the air war against the Japanese , and validated the Australian Army 's new training methods and the organisational emphasis on firepower . 
 Vasey later told King that " We were lucky , we were very lucky . " King countered that " if you 're inferring that what we did was luck , I don 't agree with you sir because I think we weren 't lucky , we were just bloody good . " Vasey replied that what he meant was that he , Vasey , was lucky . He confided to Herring that he felt that he had made a potentially disastrous mistake : " it is quite wrong to send out a small unit like the 2 / 6th Independent Company so far that they cannot be supported . " 
 The Japanese believed that they had been attacked by " an Australian force in unexpected strength " . One Japanese historian , Tanaka <unk> , went so far as to argue that the mission of the Nakai Detachment — to threaten Nadzab so as to draw Allied attention away from the troops escaping from Lae — was achieved ; this argument passed over the fact that Nakai fully intended to hold Kaiapit , just as the Allies planned to secure it as a base for future operations . The Australian historian , David Dexter , concluded that the " leisurely Nakai was outwitted by the quick @-@ thinking and aggressive Vasey . " In the end , Vasey had moved faster , catching the Japanese off balance . The credit for getting to Kaiapit went first to the USAAF aircrews that managed to make a difficult landing on the rough airstrip at Leron . The 2 / 6th Independent Company proved to be the ideal unit for the mission , as it combined determined leadership with thorough training and effective firepower . 
 For his part in the battle , King was awarded the Distinguished Service Order on 20 January 1944 . He considered it a form of unit award , and later regretted not asking Whitehead for an American Distinguished Unit Citation , such as was awarded to D Company of the 6th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment , for a similar action in the Battle of Long Tan in 1966 . 
 = Jannik Hansen = 
 Jannik Hansen ( 15 March 1986 ) is a Danish professional ice hockey right winger currently playing for the Vancouver Canucks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Hansen began playing professionally at the age of 16 with both the Rødovre Mighty Bulls of the Danish league and the Malmö Redhawks of the Swedish J20 SuperElit and HockeyAllsvenskan leagues . He played three seasons with Rødovre , during which time he was selected 287th overall by the Canucks in the 2004 NHL Entry Draft . A year after his selection , he moved to North America to play major junior hockey with the Portland Winterhawks of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) for one season . In 2006 – 07 , Hansen began playing with the Canucks ' minor league affiliate , the Manitoba Moose of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . That season , he was called up by the Canucks and became the first Danish citizen to play and register a point in an NHL playoff game . After another campaign spent primarily with Manitoba , Hansen earned a full @-@ time roster spot with the Canucks . 
 Internationally , Hansen has competed for the Danish national team in four World Championships . At the junior level , he represented Denmark in both Division I and main tournament play at the IIHF World U18 and U20 Championships . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hansen was born in Herlev , Denmark , a suburb of Copenhagen . His father , Bent Hansen , was a carpenter and a member of the Danish national hockey team . Guided by his father , Hansen began skating at the age of two , but did not begin playing hockey until age 11 . Growing up , hockey attracted a low @-@ profile in Denmark ( football is the country 's national sport ) . At the time , no Dane had ever played in the NHL . Hansen has recalled neither he or any of his peers ever having any realistic aspiration to make the NHL , describing " Everyone grew up wanting to play in Sweden , or Germany , or Finland " instead . 
 Hansen and his wife Karen had twin boys , Lucas and Daniel , on 3 March 2013 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Europe and junior = = = 
 Hansen developed with the Rødovre Mighty Bulls of the Danish <unk> League , joined the senior team at age 16 . He played in Rødovre for a season @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half , then was invited to play for the Swedish Malmö Redhawks 's under @-@ 18 team in 2002 – 03 . Hansen played the remainder of the season in Malmö , then returned to Rødovre the following season . After recording 19 points over 35 games in 2003 – 04 with Rødovre , Hansen was selected by the Vancouver Canucks , 287th overall , in the 2004 NHL Entry Draft . Despite his success the previous season , his selection was delayed to the latter stages of the draft due to his small stature and a traditional lack of NHL players coming out of Denmark . Hansen stayed with Rødovre another season following his draft and recorded a Danish career @-@ high 32 points in 34 games . 
 Selected by the Portland Winter Hawks of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) 33rd overall in the 2005 Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) Import Draft , Hansen moved to North America and joined the club for the 2005 – 06 season . Hansen 's proficiency in English played a part in Winter Hawks general manager Ken Hodge selecting him . Canucks management also wanted him playing major junior in order to better his transition to the more physical North American style of play . Becoming the first Danish player to compete in the WHL , Hansen scored at a point @-@ per @-@ game pace , leading all rookies with 64 points . He continued his scoring pace in the playoffs with 13 points in 12 games as Portland was eliminated in the second round . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 In July 2006 , Hansen signed a three @-@ year , entry @-@ level contract with the Vancouver Canucks . Playing the 2006 – 07 season with the Canucks ' minor league affiliate , the Manitoba Moose of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , he scored 12 goals and 34 points over 72 games , leading all team rookies in scoring . 
 During the 2007 Stanley Cup playoffs , Hansen was called up by the Canucks . He became the first born @-@ and @-@ raised Danish player to compete and register a point in the NHL post @-@ season — Frans Nielsen had played and scored the first point by a born @-@ and @-@ raised Dane in the regular season earlier that year . The point was scored in Game 3 of the first round against the Dallas Stars by assisting on a goal by Jan Bulis . The Canucks advanced past the Stars in seven games to meet the Anaheim Ducks in the second round . In Game 5 of the series , with the Canucks facing elimination in overtime , Hansen played an instrumental part on the ice when the Ducks scored . Attempting to carry the puck out of the defensive zone , he was hit to the ice by Ducks forward Rob Niedermayer . While Canucks goaltender Roberto Luongo had his arm up in the direction of the referee , protesting the lack of penalty , the puck came loose to Ducks defenceman Scott Niedermayer , who scored past the distracted Luongo . Following the Canucks ' elimination , Hansen was sent back to the Moose for their 2007 Calder Cup playoffs . Back in the AHL , he was pointless in six games as the Moose were defeated by the Hamilton Bulldogs in the second round . 
 The following season , Hansen was plagued by injuries , initially suffering a broken thumb in the pre @-@ season with the Canucks . After recovering , he was assigned to the Moose in early @-@ October , but was re @-@ called by the Canucks within a month . In January 2008 , Hansen was re @-@ injured , suffering a concussion . Later in the campaign , he earned his second call @-@ up of the season in April . Finishing the season with the Moose , he finished with 43 points in 50 games for the third @-@ highest point @-@ per @-@ game average on the club , as well as a team @-@ high plus @-@ minus rating of + 23 . In NHL play , he was pointless in five games . 
 Hansen played his first full season with the Canucks in 2008 – 09 , making the roster out training camp and establishing himself as a third @-@ line forward . He became known as a player for his speed and work ethic , lending to his effectiveness in puck @-@ pursuit and forechecking . Also responsible defensively , he began to be used consistently on the penalty kill . Hansen has recalled the transition to the NHL requiring a change in his style of play to incorporate more physicality and abrasiveness . Prior to making the NHL , he relied more on skill and finesse , having been a go @-@ to offensive player for teams up to that point . 
 Hansen scored his first NHL regular season point on 11 October 2008 , an assist on a Ryan Kesler goal against the Calgary Flames . He scored his first NHL goal two games later against goaltender Chris Osgood in a 4 – 3 win against the Detroit Red Wings . Midway through the season , Hansen was briefly sent back to Manitoba for the Canucks to make room on the roster for the recently acquired Mats Sundin . He was , however , recalled within three days . In late @-@ February , he broke his finger and was sidelined for 14 games . He completed the season with 21 points in 55 games , ranking 26th in scoring among NHL rookies . In the off @-@ season , he became a restricted free agent before re @-@ signing with the Canucks to a one @-@ year , two @-@ way contract worth a reported US $ 550 @,@ 000 . 
 The following 2009 pre @-@ season , Hansen injured his hand during a fight against Edmonton Oilers forward Gilbert Brulé , He returned to the lineup in mid @-@ November 2008 after missing 19 games . On 1 January 2009 , he was assigned for to the Moose for 10 days on a conditioning assignment , scoring two assists in five games . Back in Vancouver , Hansen completed the season with nine goals and 15 points over 47 games . He added three points in 12 playoff games , while playing through a sprained ankle suffered in the second round against the Chicago Blackhawks . 
 Becoming a restricted free agent for the second consecutive summer , Hansen was taken to salary arbitration by the Canucks . Following his hearing on 20 July 2010 , he was awarded a one @-@ year , one @-@ way deal worth $ 850 @,@ 000 , which the Canucks agreed to . Recording career @-@ highs of 9 goals , 20 assists and 29 points over 82 games in 2010 – 11 , Hansen received the Canucks ' Fred J. Hume Award as the team 's " unsung hero " ( voted by the Canucks ' booster club ) . He added three goals and nine points over 25 games in the 2011 playoffs as the Canucks advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals , where they were defeated in seven games by the Boston Bruins . In the off @-@ season , Hansen filed for salary arbitration . Prior to his hearing , Hansen and the Canucks avoided arbitration by agreeing to a three @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 05 million contract . Many in the media , including those from the local Province newspaper , suggested that he ceded to the Canucks ' negotiations , to which Hansen responded , " If you want to be in a position to win , you have to make some sacrifices . " 
 In the first month of the 2011 – 12 season , Hansen was hit from behind by defenceman Shea Weber in a game against the Nashville Predators on 20 October 2011 . While he was uninjured on the play , Weber was fined $ 2 @,@ 500 — the maximum allowable financial penalty — by the League the following day . The following month , Hansen earned a brief stint playing on the Canucks ' first line with Daniel and Henrik Sedin , replacing Alexandre Burrows . Enjoying a career season , he surpassed his previous personal best of nine goals in the NHL by December 2011 . He continued to play the majority of the campaign on the Canucks ' checking line and finished with 16 goals and 39 points over 82 games . Although Vancouver won their second consecutive Presidents ' Trophy in 2011 – 12 , they lost in the first round of the playoffs to the Los Angeles Kings . Hansen had one goal in the five @-@ game series . 
 Hansen earned praise from local and league @-@ wide media amidst a strong start to the lockout @-@ shortened 2012 – 13 season . He finished the campaign scoring at the most prolific rate of his career , with 10 goals and 27 points over 47 games , ranking third in team scoring behind Daniel and Henrik Sedin . Playing the San Jose Sharks in the first round of the 2013 playoffs , Hansen failed to record a point in four games as the Canucks were swept . On 29 September 2013 , Hansen signed a four @-@ year deal with the Canucks . On 23 November 2014 , Hansen recorded his first career hat @-@ trick in a 4 – 1 victory over the Chicago Blackhawks . 
 = = International play = = 
 Hansen made his international debut with Denmark in Division I play of the 2002 IIHF World U18 Championships , held in Slovenia . At 16 years old , he was the second @-@ youngest player on the under @-@ 18 team ; he went pointless in four games . Denmark narrowly avoided relegation to Division II , beating out Japan on goal @-@ differential by one . At the 2003 IIHF World U18 Championships , Denmark finished first in their Division I group , earning a promotion to the main tournament for the following year . In Hansen 's second tournament appearance , he tied for sixth in Group A scoring with seven points over five games . 
 Hansen advanced to the under @-@ 20 level , playing in Division I of the 2004 World Junior Championships , held in Berlin . He registered an assist in three games as Denmark finished second in their group to Germany , missing out on a promotion to the main tournament for the following year . He returned to the under @-@ 18 team for a third time later that year . Competing in the main tournament , Denmark finished in seventh place . Hansen scored seven points in six games , third in team @-@ scoring . At the 2005 World Junior Championships , Hansen helped Denmark to a third @-@ place finish in their five @-@ team Division I group . He led his team with four goals and added an assist for five points over five games . 
 In February 2005 , Hansen made his debut with the Danish men 's team , competing in qualification play for the 2006 Winter Olympics . He notched an assist over three games as Denmark finished third in their group , failing to qualify for the Olympics . He returned to the men 's team for the 2005 World Championships , going pointless in four games . Denmark finished in 14th place out of 16 teams . 
 The following year , Hansen made his third and final appearance for the under @-@ 20 team at the 2006 World Junior Championships . With four points in four games , he helped Denmark to a second @-@ place finish in Group A of Division I play . Several months later , he competed in his second Men 's World Championships in Riga , Latvia . Denmark finished in 13th place out of 16 teams in the top pool ; Hansen scored twice in six games . He again joined the Danish national team in the 2008 World Championships , held in Quebec City and Halifax , Canada . He played in six games in the tournament , scoring two goals and adding two assists , as Denmark finished in 12th place . Hansen missed the opportunity to play in the 2010 World Championships after having sprained his ankle during the NHL playoffs with the Canucks . 
 Unavailable for the 2011 IIHF World Championship due to a run to the Stanley Cup Finals with the Canucks , Hansen rejoined Denmark the following year in Finland and Sweden . He was named Denmark 's player of the game after recording four shots on goal in a 2 – 0 preliminary loss to the Czech Republic . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = Battle of Loc Ninh = 
 The Battle of Lộc Ninh was a major battle fought during the Easter Offensive during the Vietnam War , which took place in Bình Long Province , South Vietnam between 4 – 7 April 1972 . Towards the end of 1971 , North Vietnamese leaders decided to launch a major offensive against South Vietnam , with the objective of destroying Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) units and capturing as much territory as possible , in order to strengthen their bargaining position in the Paris Peace Accords . On 30 March 1972 , two North Vietnamese Army divisions smashed through the Demilitarized Zone , marking the commencement of the Easter Offensive . They quickly overwhelmed South Vietnamese units in the I Corps Tactical Zone . With the rapid collapse of South Vietnamese forces in the northern provinces of South Vietnam , North Vietnamese and Việt Cộng forces began preparing for their next offensive , targeting Bình Long Province in the Mekong Delta region . On 4 April , the Việt Cộng 's 5th Division opened their attack on Lộc Ninh , defended by the ARVN 9th Infantry Regiment . After three days of fighting , the vastly outnumbered South Vietnamese forces , though well supported by American air power , were forced to abandon their positions in Lộc Ninh . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 1971 , following the defeat of South Vietnamese forces during Operation Lam Son 719 , North Vietnamese leadership in Hanoi decided to launch a major military offensive against South Vietnam . In what became known as the Easter Offensive , the combined North Vietnamese and Việt Cộng forces employed combined arms tactics using heavy weapons that were a radical departure from the low @-@ intensity guerrilla warfare of previous years . Although North Vietnam eventually used the equivalent of 14 army divisions , its leaders did not seek to win the war outright . Rather , their objective was to gain as much territory and destroy as many units of the South Vietnamese military as possible , in order to strengthen their bargaining position at the Paris Peace Talks . 
 The Easter Offensive began on 30 March 1972 , when the 304th and 308th North Vietnamese Divisions drove across the DMZ and attacked South Vietnamese positions in the I Corps Tactical Zone , which consisted of South Vietnam 's northernmost provinces . Caught by surprise , South Vietnamese General Vũ Văn Giai ordered his newly created 3rd Infantry Division to withdraw towards the Cua Viet River , where it could reorganize . On 2 April , ARVN Colonel Pham Van Dinh surrendered his 56th Infantry Regiment at Camp Carroll , which enabled the North Vietnamese to take the former American fire base without a fight . Quảng Trị City was captured by the North Vietnamese army on 28 April , following several counterattacks by South Vietnamese units around Đông Hà . 
 With the northern provinces of South Vietnam under their control , North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces turned their attention to the Mekong Delta region , which formed part of the ARVN III Corps Tactical Zone . During the Offensive , the objective of the combined Communist forces in the zone was the capture of An Lộc , capital of Bình Long Province . The Viet Cong committed three infantry divisions to the mission ( 5th , 7th and 9th Divisions ) . North Vietnamese support came in the form of one artillery formation ( 69th Artillery Command ) , one armored regiment ( 203rd Armored Regiment ) , two independent regiments ( 205th and 101st Regiment ) , and one sapper unit ( 429th Sapper Group ) . The Viet Cong 's 5th Division was to initiate the offensive by taking Lộc Ninh , while the 9th Division was assigned to An Lộc . The 7th Division was ordered to block National Highway 13 to prevent reinforcements from reaching An Lộc . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In late December 1971 , ARVN intelligence in the III Corps Tactical Zone had detected the buildup of North Vietnamese and Viet Cong formations across the border in neighbouring Cambodia . Even though it was obvious that preparations for a major Communist offensive were under way , South Vietnamese commanders were unable to predict their enemies ' intentions . In January 1972 , the Viet Cong 5th Division was reported to have taken up positions in Snuol , a Cambodian city located about 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) west of Lộc Ninh . South Vietnamese intelligence also detected the presence of the Viet Cong 's 7th and 9th Divisions in <unk> and Chup respectively . Between January and May 1971 , the South Vietnamese army mounted Operation Toan Thang <unk> , with the aim of destroying Viet Cong main force divisions based in Cambodia , specifically in the Snuol area . But due to the death of General Đỗ Cao Trí , the commander of the ARVN III Corps Tactical Zone , in a helicopter accident , the South Vietnamese were forced to retreat from Snuol without achieving their objective . 
 In February and March 1972 , South Vietnamese units patrolling the international border with Cambodia detected increased Communist activity in the Fishhook area , most notably the presence of the Viet Cong 5th Division in an area north of Bình Long Province . On 13 March , a South Vietnamese mechanized task force operating in Cambodia discovered a huge depot which contained large quantities of assault rifles , machine guns , rockets , anti @-@ aircraft guns and ammunition in Base Area 354 ( Svay Rieng Province ) and Base Area 708 ( Kampong Cham Province ) . On 27 March , a Việt Cộng deserter from a reconnaissance company of the 7th Division revealed that his unit was surveying a portion of road between Tây Ninh and Bình Long in preparation for its next move . Between 27 March and 1 April , more enemy prisoners and documents were captured by the South Vietnamese army , which revealed that the Viet Cong 's 7th and 9th Divisions were coordinating their efforts against an unidentified target . 
 The movements of Communist forces near the Cambodian @-@ South Vietnamese border during the first three months of 1972 clearly indicated that a major offensive was in the making . However , the whereabouts of the next Communist thrust was the topic which concerned South Vietnamese and U.S. intelligence officers the most . In previous offensives , the Communist had used Tây Ninh as an invasion route , as it was surrounded by Viet Cong bases in War zone C , the Iron Triangle and the Parrot 's Beak , Cambodia . South Vietnamese and U.S. military intelligence reached a consensus that Tây Ninh would be the next target for the Communist Easter Offensive . To reinforce that perception , on 2 April , the Viet Cong 24th Independent Regiment overran Fire Support Base Lac Long , defended by elements of the ARVN 49th Infantry Regiment , 5th Infantry Division , about 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) northwest of Tây Ninh . 
 The attacks on Lac Long and other outposts in Tây Ninh were a diversion designed to cover the main thrust into Bình Long Province . To initiate the campaign in Bình Long , the Viet Cong 's 5th Division ( numbering about 9 @,@ 230 soldiers ) was ordered to take Lộc Ninh , Bình Long 's northernmost town . The Viet Cong were supported by the North Vietnamese 69th Artillery Command ( 3 @,@ 830 soldiers ) and the 203rd Armored Regiment ( 800 soldiers ) . In 1972 , Lộc Ninh was a small district town situated on Route 13 , home to about 4 @,@ 000 people , mostly members of the various Montagnard tribes . The task of defending Lộc Ninh was entrusted to the ARVN 9th Infantry Regiment , 5th Infantry Division , commanded by Colonel Nguyễn Công Vinh . It was supported by the 1st Cavalry Squadron , 1st Regional Force Battalion , and elements of the 74th Ranger Battalion . 
 Prior to the battle , the 9th Infantry Regiment had occupied the former U.S. Special Forces compound at the south end of the airfield , which was about 0 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ) west of the district center . The district headquarters was defended by more than 200 South Vietnamese Regional Forces soldiers , who operated from a Japanese @-@ built fortified bunker system located north of the airfield . To assist the 9th Infantry Regiment , the U.S. military provided seven advisers . The U.S. advisory team at 9th Regimental Headquarters was led by Lieutenant Colonel Richard R. Schott , who was assisted by Major Albert E. Carlson and Captain Mark A. Smith , and two communication specialists , Sergeant First Class Howard B. Hull and Sergeant Kenneth Wallingford . Additionally , Captain George Wanat and Major Thomas Davidson operated from the north end of the airfield , attached to the district headquarters . 
 = = Fall of Lộc Ninh = = 
 From the beginning of April , there was a sharp increase in Viet Cong activities along National Highway 13 , which connects Bình Long Province with Saigon . Between 3 – 4 April , South Vietnamese Regional Force units clashed several times with the Viet Cong , resulting in more than twenty Viet Cong fatalities . Also , the French owner of the <unk> Rubber Plantation in Lộc Ninh reported that the Communists had established field telephone lines northwest of the district . However , ARVN Colonel Colonel Nguyễn Công Vinh was reluctant to send reconnaissance patrols to that area . On 4 April , the ARVN 9th Reconnaissance Company operating west of Lộc Ninh was destroyed when it came into contact with elements of the Viet Cong main force units . On the same evening , the 3rd Battalion , ARVN 9th Infantry Regiment captured two enemy soldiers during an ambush operation . The Viet Cong prisoners revealed that they were from the 272nd Regiment , 9th Division , and that their unit was moving south to prepare for an assault on An Lộc . 
 At around 6 : 50 am on 5 April , the Viet Cong 5th Division moved across the Cambodian border to stage the main attack on Lộc Ninh . The Viet Cong assault opened with a heavy barrage of artillery , rocket and mortar fire targeting the headquarters of the ARVN 9th Infantry Regiment and the Lộc Ninh district compound . The Viet Cong simultaneously mounted other attacks throughout the ARVN 5th Infantry Division 's areas of operations in Lai Khê and <unk> Lợi . There was also indirect fire on South Vietnamese positions in Phước Long Province , mainly targeting Phước Vinh , Sông Bé , and Bo Duc . Following the artillery barrage , Viet Cong infantry , supported by about 25 tanks , attacked Lộc Ninh from the west . In the initial assault , they tried to overrun the South Vietnamese regimental compound located at the south end of the airstrip . Despite the ferocity of the onslaught , South Vietnamese soldiers held their ground and fought desperately to hold the enemy at bay ; South Vietnamese artillerymen lowered the muzzles of their 105mm howitzers and fired directly at enemy infantry formations moving through the rubber trees . 
 Even though the situation was stabilized , the South Vietnamese were forced to retreat into small compounds at the north and south ends of the town . The intensity of the attack on Lộc Ninh revealed the true intentions of the Communists ; ARVN Lieutenant General Nguyễn Văn Minh , commander of the III Corps Tactical Zone , and his American advisor Major General James F. Hollingsworth realized that Bình Long , not Tây Ninh , would be the focus of the Communist offensive . In order to halt the Communist advance , Minh and Hollingsworth directed all available tactical support aircraft towards Lộc Ninh . Almost immediately , South Vietnamese air force F @-@ 5 and A @-@ 1 fighter @-@ bombers , United States Air Force ( USAF ) A @-@ 37s from the 8th Special Operations Squadron based at Biên Hòa , attack aircraft from the aircraft carrier USS Constellation , and USAF F @-@ 4 and AC @-@ 130 aircraft from Thailand began flying over the skies of Lộc Ninh . U.S. and South Vietnamese tactical support aircraft were directed against Viet Cong and North Vietnamese formations by American advisers on the ground . As the fighting intensified , Colonel Nguyễn Công Vinh ordered the 1st Cavalry Squadron — commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Nguyen Huu Duong — to withdraw from Fire Support Base Alpha to reinforce Lộc Ninh . However , Duong refused , saying he would surrender his unit to the Viet Cong instead . Angered , Captain Mark A. Smith reportedly threatened to destroy the 1st Cavalry Squadron with American air power if the squadron didn 't fight . 
 Schott , in recognition of Smith 's combat experience and knowledge of the Vietnamese language , allowed him to take control of the situation . From that point on , Smith virtually controlled the South Vietnamese forces . A few moments later , elements of the ARVN 74th Ranger Battalion and the 3rd Battalion , ARVN 9th Infantry Regiment notified the regimental command post that they had broken out and were fighting their way back towards Lộc Ninh . Meanwhile , the 1st Cavalry Squadron began moving west towards the Cambodian border with the Viet Cong , with the rest of their tanks and armored personnel carriers . 
 On the afternoon of 5 April , the Viet Cong 's 5th Division launched another major ground assault on Lộc Ninh from the west to try to break through the defenses of the southern compound . American AC @-@ 130 and AH @-@ 1 Cobra gunships stopped the Viet Cong formations in their tracks , as supporting North Vietnamese tanks were either destroyed or forced to pull back . Despite having suffered many casualties as a result of U.S. air strikes , the Viet Cong continued their assaults well into the evening . In order to deal with the onslaught , Smith continued to direct the AC @-@ 130 Spectres against targets around Lộc Ninh . Vinh , on the other hand , was either planning to surrender or desert when he ordered two of his soldiers to open the gates of the command compound at around 10 pm . Throughout the night , the North Vietnamese 69th Artillery Command continued bombarding South Vietnamese positions around Lộc Ninh , as the Viet Cong massed for another assault . 
 On the morning of 6 April , South Vietnamese forces reported hearing the sound of tanks moving toward the southern end of the district airfield . At about 5 : 30 am , the Viet Cong launched another attack from southern Lộc Ninh , with the support of about 25 T @-@ 54 and PT @-@ 76 tanks . Viet Cong infantry initially managed to breach the South Vietnamese lines , but the attack soon stalled , and neither side gained a clear advantage . In the afternoon , elements of the Viet Cong E6 Regiment forced their way through the compound gates , but air strikes from U.S. AC @-@ 130s stopped them from advancing any further . By that stage , however , the ARVN 9th Infantry Regiment had absorbed a significant number of casualties ; it only had 50 soldiers left , while another 150 wounded were in the hospital bunker . The defenders in Lộc Ninh were cut off from outside help since heavy @-@ calibre North Vietnamese anti @-@ aircraft guns effectively prevented resupply and medivac flights into the area . 
 In an attempt to save Lộc Ninh , Brigadier General Lê Văn Hưng — commander of the ARVN 5th Infantry Division — ordered Task Force 52 to move north to reinforce the beleaguered 9th Infantry Regiment . Task Force 52 consisted of the 2nd Battalion , 52nd Infantry Regiment , and the 1st Battalion , 48th Infantry Regiment ; both units had been transferred from the ARVN 18th Infantry Division in late March to serve as a border screen for General Hưng 's forces . Lieutenant Colonel Nguyễn Bá <unk> — commander of Task Force 52 — ordered the 2nd Battalion to advance towards Lộc Ninh . The unit was ambushed at the junction of National Highway 13 and Route 17 . Unable to withstand the Viet Cong 's superior firepower , it was forced to withdraw . To prevent Task Force 52 from evacuating to either Lộc Ninh or An Lộc , the Viet Cong pursued Task Force 52 and bombarded their bases with heavy artillery throughout the day . 
 Meanwhile , on the afternoon of 6 April , the South Vietnamese inside Lộc Ninh were slightly reinforced by the 3rd Battalion , ARVN 9th Infantry Regiment , along with the men of the 1st Cavalry Squadron at FSB Alpha who had refused to surrender . Furthermore , wounded South Vietnamese soldiers who were still able to fight made their way back to the defensive perimeter to await the next wave of attacks . During the night , the South Vietnamese compound descended into chaos when North Vietnamese artillery scored a direct hit on the hospital bunker , killing a large number of wounded men . Later on , another round of rockets struck the South Vietnamese artillery compound , striking the ammunition storage bunker , which exploded . From the eastern side of the district , the Viet Cong tried to penetrate the defense line at Lộc Ninh , but were beaten off . Realizing that the situation had become hopeless , Vinh took off his uniform and told his to surrender . 
 At 7 am on 7 April , the Viet Cong massed for another ground assault from the north and west of Lộc Ninh , with support from heavy artillery , tanks and armored personnel carriers . As the Viet Cong closed in , Vinh and his bodyguards ran out the opened gate and surrendered . Several South Vietnamese soldiers also tried to surrender , but they all returned to their positions after Smith stopped a South Vietnamese officer from raising a white T @-@ shirt up the flagpole . By 8 am , the ARVN 9th Infantry Regiment was completely overwhelmed when the Viet Cong overran the southern compound with their superior numbers . At around 10 am , all tactical air support was called off in order to clear the way for B @-@ 52 strikes against Viet Cong formations west of Lộc Ninh . However , the B @-@ 52 strikes could not prevent the Viet Cong from overrunning Lộc Ninh . By 16 : 30 , the Viet Cong were in complete control of Lộc Ninh District . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The fight cost both sides dearly . The true extent of Viet Cong and North Vietnamese casualties is largely unknown , but due to their exposure to American firepower , the Communist forces undoubtedly suffered heavy losses . Nonetheless , the successful capture of Loc Ninh exceeded Communist expectations , as they had thought that the South Vietnamese would hold out longer . Lộc Ninh became the seat of the Provisional Revolutionary Government , the capital of Communist @-@ occupied territories in South Vietnam . The South Vietnamese , in their efforts to hold the district , lost more than three thousand soldiers killed or captured ; only about fifty soldiers actually reached An Lộc . The Viet Cong also captured all seven American advisers and an embedded French journalist , Yves @-@ Michel <unk> , in Lộc Ninh ; they were taken to a prison camp in Kratié Province , Cambodia . <unk> was released on 14 July 1972 . On 12 February 1973 , the Americans were released in accordance with the Paris Peace Accord . 
 As Lộc Ninh was succumbing , other Communist formations turned their attention to the provincial capital of An Lộc . At 9 am on 7 April , Brigadier General Lê Văn Hưng ordered Task Force 52 to abandon its bases , destroy all heavy weapons and vehicles , and withdraw to An Lộc , following their failed attempt at reinforcing the 9th Infantry Regiment . As Task Force 52 tried to break through National Highway 13 , they ran into another large Viet Cong ambush . It would take the soldiers of Task Force 52 about a week to reach An Lộc , infiltrating through Viet Cong and North Vietnamese positions along the main road . Late on 7 April , the Viet Cong 's 9th Division attacked Quan Loi airfield , just 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) north of An Lộc . Elements of the ARVN 7th Infantry Regiment defending the area were unable to hold off the Viet Cong , so they were ordered to destroy their equipment and join other South Vietnamese units in the provincial capital . The next step in the North Vietnamese offensive was the " Battle of An Lộc " . 
 = U.S. Route 30 in Indiana = 
 U.S. Route 30 ( US 30 ) is a road in the United States Numbered Highway System that runs from Astoria , Oregon to Atlantic City , New Jersey . In Indiana , the route runs from the Illinois state line at Dyer to the Ohio state line east of Fort Wayne and New Haven . The 155 @.@ 96 miles ( 250 @.@ 99 km ) of US 30 that lie within Indiana serve as a major conduit . The entire length of U.S. Route 30 in Indiana is included in the National Highway System ( NHS ) . The highway includes four @-@ lane , rural sections , an urbanized , four @-@ lane divided expressway , and several high @-@ traffic , six @-@ lane areas . First designated as a US Highway in 1926 , US 30 replaced the original State Road 2 ( SR 2 ) and SR 44 designation of the highway which dated back to the formation of the Indiana State Road system . A section of the highway originally served as part of the Lincoln Highway . Realignment and construction projects have expanded the highway to four lanes across the state . There are over 40 traffic signals between I @-@ 65 at Merrillville and I @-@ 69 at Fort Wayne . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 30 enters Dyer from Lynwood , Illinois along the original alignment of the Lincoln Highway , as a four @-@ lane divided highway . At Moeller Street , the roadway becomes a four @-@ lane highway with a center turn lane before reaching an at @-@ grade intersection with CSX railroad tracks . Thereafter , the road returns to four @-@ lane divided highway before a traffic light at US 41 in <unk> and passing under Norfolk Southern railroad tracks . After US 41 , the original alignment of the Lincoln Highway leaves US 30 and continues along the same route as old State Road 330 ( SR 330 ) . US 30 begins to curve towards the southeast , still as a four @-@ lane divided highway . The highway has a traffic light at SR 55 , heading east as the roadway enters Merrillville , where the route becomes a six @-@ lane divided highway and has an interchange at Interstate 65 ( I @-@ 65 ) . At Colorado Street in Merrillville , the road narrows back to a four @-@ lane divided highway . 
 After a traffic light at the southern terminus of SR 51 in Hobart , the original alignment of the Lincoln Highway rejoins US 30 . The highway passes through a mix of farmland and residential properties on the way to Valparaiso , entering the city and passing through commercial properties . The highway has a traffic light at SR 2 at the western end of the concurrency of the two roads . From there , the road crosses railroad tracks , passes south of Valparaiso University , and has a traffic light at the eastern terminus of SR 130 . After passing the traffic light at SR 130 , the road has a full interchange with SR 49 and the eastern terminus of the SR 2 and US 30 concurrency . Continuing east , the road passes the Porter County Municipal Airport and proceeds east @-@ southeast from Valparaiso , towards Plymouth . Along this segment , US 30 passes through rural farmland , with an intersection at US 421 and an at @-@ grade railroad crossing with the Chesapeake and Indiana Railroad . East of the railroad tracks is an intersection with SR 39 and an interchange at US 35 . 
 US 30 runs along the north side of Plymouth , passing through an interchange with the northern terminus of SR 17 and near the Plymouth Municipal Airport . The route curves around the northeast side of the city , having an interchange with US 31 and heading southeast towards Warsaw . At Bourbon , the highway has an interchange with SR 331 . The road curves east before entering Warsaw and has an interchange with SR 15 , south of the Warsaw Municipal Airport . After passing the airport , the road enters a mix of commercial and residential properties and has a traffic light at an old alignment of the Lincoln Highway , before passing north of Winona Lake and heading towards Columbia City . At Columbia City , the road turns southeast and has traffic lights at SR 109 , SR 9 , and SR 205 . After SR 205 , US 30 heads east towards Fort Wayne , paralleling the Chicago , Fort Wayne and Eastern Railroad . The route crosses into Allen County at a traffic light at County Line Road . 
 The highway enters Fort Wayne with a traffic light at <unk> Road and a trumpet interchange with US 33 , at the western terminus of US 33 's concurrency with US 30 , and proceeds east @-@ southeast towards an interchange with I @-@ 69 as a six @-@ lane divided highway . At the diamond interchange with I @-@ 69 , US 33 runs south on I @-@ 69 , while US 30 continues north , concurrent with both I @-@ 69 and US 24 ; the road itself continues east as SR 930 and as Goshen Road . US 30 's concurrency with I @-@ 69 is a six @-@ lane urban interstate with interchanges at Lima Road ( US 27 and SR 3 ) and Coldwater Road ( formerly SR 327 and US 27 ) . At the interchange of I @-@ 69 and I @-@ 469 , US 30 heads east concurrent with I @-@ 469 around the north and east sides of Fort Wayne , towards New Haven . The highway is a four @-@ lane interstate passing through a mix of farmland and residential properties . Proceeding east , the interstate crosses the St. Joseph River and has an interchange at <unk> Road before turning south around the northeast side of Fort Wayne to subsequent interchanges with SR 37 followed by US 24 . After the US 24 interchange , the highway crosses the Maumee River and Norfolk Southern railroad tracks before leaving I @-@ 469 east of downtown New Haven at the eastern terminus of SR 930 . After I @-@ 469 , US 30 heads southeast away from New Haven , passing through rural farmland as a four @-@ lane divided highway . The route has an intersection at SR 101 before entering Ohio , heading toward Van Wert . 
 The entire length of U.S. Route 30 in Indiana is included in the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of highways that are identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the United States . The highway is maintained by the Indiana Department of Transportation ( INDOT ) , similar to all other U.S. Highways in the state . The department tracks the traffic volumes along all state highways as a part of its maintenance responsibilities using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , calculated along a segment of roadway for any average day of the year . In 2010 , INDOT figured that lowest traffic levels were 10 @,@ 870 vehicles and 4 @,@ 750 commercial vehicles used the highway daily between US 31 and SR 331 . The peak traffic volumes were 69 @,@ 280 vehicles and 12 @,@ 660 commercial vehicles AADT along the section of US 30 that is concurrent with I @-@ 69 , between the Lima Road and Coldwater Road exits in Fort Wayne . 
 = = History = = 
 The Lincoln Highway was planned in 1913 to run west to east across Indiana , including to South Bend and Fort Wayne . In 1915 , the highway opened and passed through downtown Fort Wayne on its route through Indiana , and was assigned the designation of Main Market route number 2 in 1917 . Further designations saw the route become SR 2 from the Illinois state line to Valparaiso , SR 44 Valparaiso to Fort Wayne and SR 2 from Fort Wayne to the Ohio state line . In the early 1920s , the Lincoln Highway was moved south between Valparaiso and Fort Wayne , to what is now known mostly as Old US 30 , passing through Plymouth and Warsaw . A section of US 30 in Dyer known as the " ideal section " of the Lincoln Highway was opened in 1923 and rebuilt in the 1990s . In 1924 , the sections of the road that were part of the original Lincoln Highway was paved , followed by the paving of the rest of US 30 , which was commissioned in 1926 . In 1927 , a small realignment between Hanna and SR 29 ( current US 35 ) took place . During the 1950s , US 30 in Fort Wayne was rerouted to Coliseum Boulevard , constructed as a " <unk> " highway to bypass Fort Wayne . In 1998 , US 30 in Fort Wayne was again rerouted onto I @-@ 69 and I @-@ 469 , bypassing most of Fort Wayne and New Haven on the north and east side of the two towns . The Coliseum Boulevard routing was assigned the SR 930 designation as a result , when INDOT could not give the route over to local control . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = It Takes a Village Idiot , and I Married One = 
 " It Takes a Village Idiot , and I Married One " is the 17th episode of the fifth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 13 , 2007 . The episode features Lois after she runs for Mayor of Quahog against incumbent Mayor Adam West , once she notices how polluted the local lake has become . Lois is elected as mayor and successfully cleans the lake , but quickly succumbs when the toxic @-@ dump owner pressures her to let him resume dumping toxins into the lake . 
 The episode was written by Alex Borstein and directed by Zac Moncrief . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 21 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Jeff Bergman , Gary Cole , Jackson Douglas , Keith Ferguson , Carrie Fisher , Masam Holden , Don Most , Gary Newman , Keith Olbermann , and Fred Tatasciore , along with several of the series ' recurring guest @-@ voice actors . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Griffin family decides to take a vacation at Quagmire 's cabin at Lake Quahog . When they go swimming in the lake , they discover that an oil refinery is dumping toxic waste into it ; as they flee the lake their hair falls out , forcing them to wear powdered wigs until it grows back . Lois complains to Mayor Adam West , who admits that he sanctioned the dumping in exchange for free hair oil . Outraged , Lois decides to run against West in the upcoming mayoral election . Peter and his friends become strong supporters of Lois 's campaign , realizing that they 'd be able to get away with almost everything should she become mayor . But Lois 's campaign soon falters as Mayor West proves more politically savvy . While Lois bores voters with detailed plans to improve the city , Mayor West uses glittering generalities and statements completely unrelated to the questions posed to him . Following Brian 's advice to give short , simple answers , Lois resorts to similar tactics , dropping controversial terms such as " Jesus " and " 9 / 11 " in meaningless ways . She eventually gains the populace 's support and wins the election . 
 After taking office , Lois begins to use fear tactics to raise funds to clean up the lake . Her efforts are successful and life returns to the clean lake . She even has leftover cash afterwards , so she embezzles $ 600 to purchase a purse , much to Brian 's disappointment . Peter has also succumbed to the perks of being the mayor 's husband : he has rerouted the town 's electrical system and caused rolling blackouts to bring late comedian Jim Varney back from the dead ( he does nothing but talk , playing his character Ernest , and repeatedly refer to " Vern " . ) He then remembers he actually wanted John Belushi and takes Varney outside to shoot him , only for Varney to end up taking the gun from him and Peter running away from him warning Brian . Later , Lois is tempted to buy a $ 4 @,@ 300 fur coat , and Bob <unk> , president of the local oil company , offers to buy it for her if she will allow him to dump his oil runoff in the lake . Lois reluctantly accepts his offer , but as the opening of the new runoff pipe begins , Lois realizes the error of her ways and closes the valve to the pipe and resigns her position as mayor , stating that she was consumed by money and power , which led her to become the very same things she set out to destroy . Lois then allows West to have his job as mayor back , but a random bystander points out that neither Lois nor Mayor West has any jurisdiction to do so , and that the city has to have a whole new election to decide who gets to be the mayor of Quahog . This prompts West to pull out a gun and shoot him , as well as two others whom he believes objected . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Alex Borstein , under the pen name of " <unk> " , and directed by Zac Moncrief . The story is based on a one @-@ woman show Borstein worked on , entitled Women and Jews : Why We 'll Never Be President . The storyline came out when she felt that a woman " will never be president , " stating , " I had these fantasies about a woman president that would be fair and there 'd be no corruption . That 's a bunch of bullshit fantasy . " Borstein called the episode " kind of my homage to Hillary Clinton . " The staff enjoyed the episode 's storyline so much , that Borstein and fellow writer Cherry Chevapravatdumrong wrote a novelization of the episode . Borstein called the book a " companion piece poking fun " at Clinton 's book It Takes a Village . 
 Gary Newman , President of 20th Century Fox , voiced a man in the audience when Lois held a press conference . Newman is responsible for Family Guy being renewed after its cancellation , and he had wanted to do a line on the show . In addition to Newman and the regular cast , voice actors Jeff Bergman , Keith Ferguson , and Fred Tatasciore , actors Gary Cole , Jackson Douglas , Carrie Fisher , Masam Holden , and Don Most , and news anchor and political commentator Keith Olbermann , also supplied voices . Recurring voice actors Lori Alan , Johnny Brennan , and Alex Breckenridge , and writers Mark Hentemann , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , and John Viener made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the episode 's opening scene , the Griffins are traveling to Quagmire 's cabin in the woods ; Peter notes that it will be a better vacation than when they appeared in the American game show The Price Is Right pricing game Cliff Hangers . Cleveland is also shown playing the pricing game <unk> . As Stewie and Brian decide to go berry @-@ picking in the forest , actor Don Most slowly rises from the fog nearby as a chorus sings about his role as Ralph on the ABC sitcom Happy Days to the melody of the title song from Brigadoon . 
 Having lost their hair from the lake 's pollution , the Griffins are at home wearing powdered wigs , an effect that compels Stewie to play several classical compositions , including those by Joseph Haydn and Georg Friedrich Handel , with Peter appearing as Antonio Salieri . The scene is a reference to the 1984 film Amadeus . 
 Preparing for Quahog 's upcoming mayoral election , both Lois and incumbent Mayor Adam West participate in a debate hosted by Quahog 5 News . As Lois begins her second response , after first running out of time , she uses the September 11 attacks and Jesus to form her answers . The crowd reacts positively to her answers , with a live @-@ action clip of " The Crying Girl " from season six of the American reality show American Idol also appearing on screen . Once Lois is elected , Brian mentions Lois 's ability to connect with the citizens of Quahog , just as Disney is able to connect with their audience , with the 2004 film Home on the Range being shown . Going on to propose a " modest tax increase " to pay for the cleanup of the local lake , Lois resorts to fear tactics , by stating that Adolf Hitler and the Legion of Doom are planning to assassinate Jesus , using the lake as their base . 
 Abusing his wife 's power as mayor , Peter begins by rerouting the city 's electricity , causing rolling blackouts . When Brian questions Peter 's actions , Peter reveals that he 's been using the power to reanimate actor Jim Varney 's corpse ( he 'd actually wanted to bring back actor and Saturday Night Live alumnus John Belushi ) . 
 Horror @-@ movie legend Jason Voorhees from the Friday the 13th movie series appeared twice in this episode , carrying his trademark blood @-@ drenched machete . First , Quahog news reporter Tricia Takanawa is interviewing him by the lake , during which he kills two bathing @-@ suit @-@ clad women . The scene references Camp Crystal Lake , Jason 's traditional haunt . Later he appears as the boss of the store where Lois tries to buy her expensive coat ; he threatens to kill his employee if she " screws up . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast in the United States , the episode was watched by 7 @.@ 21 million households and achieved a 3 @.@ 5 rating and 9 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . It ultimately finished third in its timeslot , after Desperate Housewives on ABC and a two @-@ hour season finale of Survivor : Fiji on CBS . The episode attracted 740 @,@ 000 fewer viewers than the previous episode , but made Family Guy the highest rated show in the Animation Domination block , ahead of King of the Hill , The Simpsons and American Dad ! . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from critics . Brett Love of TV Squad noted that the story was very similar to the season two episode " Running Mates " , but thought it was " pretty solid " with " some great moments . " Ahsan Haque of IGN stated the episode had " quite a few funny jokes , " but the storyline was " predictably unoriginal , " and felt the " political statement [ ... ] was stretched too thin , " giving the episode a 6 @.@ 8 out of 10 . 
 = Sukhoi Su @-@ 9 ( 1946 ) = 
 The Sukhoi Su @-@ 9 , or Samolyet K ( Russian : Aircraft K ) , ( USAF / DOD designation : Type 8 ) , was an early jet fighter built in the Soviet Union shortly after World War II . The design began in 1944 and was intended to use Soviet @-@ designed turbojet engines . The design was heavily influenced by captured German jet fighters and it was subsequently redesigned to use a Soviet copy of a German turbojet . The Su @-@ 9 was slower than competing Soviet aircraft and it was cancelled as a result . A modified version with different engines and a revised wing became the Su @-@ 11 ( Samolyet KL ) , but this did not enter production either . The Su @-@ 13 ( Samolyet KT ) was a proposal to re @-@ engine the aircraft with Soviet copies of the Rolls @-@ Royce Derwent turbojet as well as to modify it for night fighting , but neither proposal was accepted . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = Su @-@ 9 = = = 
 In 1944 , the Sukhoi design bureau ( OKB ) began designing a twin @-@ engined fighter powered by two Lyulka TR @-@ 1 turbojets , known internally as the Samolyet or Izdeliye ( item or product ) K. The ultimate design was very probably influenced by a captured Messerschmitt Me 262 , but the Su @-@ 9 was not a copy of the German aircraft . The Su @-@ 9 had an oval cross @-@ section , all @-@ metal stressed skin monocoque fuselage that housed a single cockpit . The pilot was protected by armor plates to his front , an armored seat back and a bulletproof windscreen for the bubble canopy . He was provided with an ejection seat , copied from that used in the Heinkel He 162 . The aircraft carried a total of 1 @,@ 350 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 980 lb ) of fuel in two bladder tanks , one each ahead and behind the pilot . The low @-@ mounted , straight wing had a single @-@ spar and a slight dihedral of 4 ° 20 ' . The outer flaps were split and could act as air brakes . The Su @-@ 9 was the first Soviet aircraft to use hydraulic powered controls . A Soviet copy of the Junkers Jumo <unk> turbojet , known as the RD @-@ 10 , was hung under each wing in a streamlined nacelle . The aircraft had a tricycle undercarriage that retracted into the fuselage . The Su @-@ 9 was designed with a very high wing loading which increased the aircraft 's speed and reduced its dimensions . This consequently increased the take @-@ off and landing speeds so it was equipped with a provision for two JATO bottles ( 11 @.@ 27 kN ( 530 lbf ) thrust for 8 seconds ) mounted on the sides of the fuselage . These reduced the take @-@ off distance by nearly 50 percent and a braking parachute was fitted to reduce the landing distance . 
 The nose housed the armament of one 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Nudelman N @-@ 37 autocannon and two 23 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) Nudelman @-@ Suranov NS @-@ 23 autocannon . The N @-@ 37 could be replaced by a 45 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) Nudelman N @-@ 45 . The aircraft carried 100 rounds for each NS @-@ 23 and 40 rounds for the N @-@ 37 . Two 250 @-@ kilogram ( 550 lb ) FAB @-@ 250 high explosive bombs could be carried underneath the forward fuselage , but the N @-@ 37 had to be dismounted to do so . 
 As the TR @-@ 1 engines originally intended for the Su @-@ 9 were not yet ready for flight testing in late 1945 , Pavel Sukhoi suggested substituting a pair of Jumo 004 engines and this was approved on 15 December . The full @-@ scale mockup was found to be acceptable on 16 February 1946 and the Council of People 's Commissars issued an order on 26 February that the manufacturer 's flight testing was to begin on 1 November . This goal was not met because the OKB was heavily committed to other projects like the trainer version of the Tupolev Tu @-@ 2 bomber , inexperience with JATO units , and late delivery of RD @-@ 10 engines . The first prototype was completed in mid @-@ October and made its first flight on 13 November . The test pilots found the aircraft easy to fly , but the control forces were very high at speed and it lacked enough directional stability . <unk> the vertical stabilizer cured this last problem and hydraulic boosters were fitted for the control system . 
 The aircraft was revealed to the general public on 3 August 1947 at a flypast at Moscow 's Tushino Airfield and the aircraft began its state acceptance trials three days later . Flight testing was completed by 25 May 1948 after 136 flights had been completed . It demonstrated a top speed of 885 kilometers per hour ( 550 mph ) at an altitude of 8 @,@ 000 meters ( 26 @,@ 250 ft ) and an endurance of one hour and 44 minutes . It had very docile handling qualities with one engine inoperative . The aircraft was recommended for production , but it was significantly slower than the Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 9 and Yakovlev Yak @-@ 15 . The government declined to do so and the program was terminated . 
 A two @-@ seat trainer version , the Su @-@ <unk> , was planned during 1946 , but it too was cancelled . The cockpit for the student would have been positioned ahead of the instructor 's cockpit and each would have had a separate canopy . The armament would have been reduced to a pair of 20 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Berezin B @-@ 20 autocannon , each with a hundred rounds of ammunition . The armor would have been removed to save weight . 
 = = = Su @-@ 11 = = = 
 Another prototype was begun in 1946 , but this aircraft was intended to use the Yakovlev @-@ designed version of the afterburning RD @-@ 10F engine . However , wind tunnel testing of the Su @-@ 9 in September revealed that drag could be reduced if the engine nacelles were mounted in the wing rather than underneath it , and the wing tips were redesigned to use a different airfoil that significantly reduced Mach tuck . These changes required that the entire wing be redesigned ; the wing spar was bent into an inverted U to accommodate the engines and slotted flaps replaced the simple flaps previously used . The tailplane was given a 5 ° dihedral to move it out of the engine exhaust . 
 Before the prototype was finished , Sukhoi was ordered to use the Lyulka TR @-@ 1 turbojets originally intended for the Su @-@ 9 . This aircraft was designated the Su @-@ 11 and was called Samolyet KL by the OKB . Each TR @-@ 1 developed only 12 @.@ 7 kN ( 2 @,@ 865 lbf ) thrust each , rather than the 15 kN ( 3300 lbf ) required . The aircraft made its first flight on 28 May 1947 and also participated in the flypast at Tushino in August . It had a maximum speed of 940 km / h ( 580 mph ) at sea level , but flight testing revealed that it lacked longitudinal stability at high speeds . Modifications of the wing / nacelle fillets and lengthening the engine nacelles failed to cure these problems . Coupled with the unavailability of mature TR @-@ 1 engines , these problems caused the program to be cancelled . 
 = = = Su @-@ 13 = = = 
 The Su @-@ 13 , ( Samolyet KT ) , was the final attempt to further increase performance of the basic Su @-@ 9 design , using wing sections reduced from 11 % to 9 % thickness / chord ratio and swept tailplanes . The aircraft was also fitted with a pair of Klimov RD @-@ 500 ( unlicensed copies of the Rolls @-@ Royce Derwent ) engines with 15 @.@ 6 kN ( 3 @,@ 500 lbf ) thrust each . The armament was changed to three 37 mm Nudelman N @-@ 37 cannon , while drop tanks could be fitted underneath the wingtips . A night fighter version with a Torii radar was also proposed , but this required major structural changes to accommodate the radar . Neither version made it off the drawing board . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Soviet Union 
 Soviet Air Force 
 = = Variants = = 
 Su @-@ <unk> – Planned two @-@ seat trainer version , never built . 
 Su @-@ 11 ( Samolyet KL ) – Modified Su @-@ 9 with new wings and Lyulka TR @-@ 1 engines . One prototype built . 
 Su @-@ 13 ( Samolyet KT ) – Su @-@ 9 with Klimov RD @-@ 500 engines . Night fighter version also proposed . Neither version was built . 
 = = Specifications ( Su @-@ 9 ) = = 
 Data from Early Soviet Jet Fighters 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 10 @.@ 546 m ( 34 ft 7 in ) 
 Wingspan : 11 @.@ 2 m ( 36 ft 9 in ) 
 Height : 3 @.@ 4 m ( 11 ft 2 in ) 
 Wing area : 20 @.@ 2 m2 ( 217 sq ft ) 
 Empty weight : 4 @,@ 060 kg ( 8 @,@ 951 lb ) 
 Gross weight : 5 @,@ 890 kg ( 12 @,@ 985 lb ) 
 Fuel capacity : 1350 kg 
 Powerplant : 2 × RD @-@ 10 turbojets , 9 kN ( 2 @,@ 000 lbf ) thrust each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 885 km / h ( 550 mph ; 478 kn ) 
 Range : 1 @,@ 200 km ( 746 mi ; 648 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 12 @,@ 800 m ( 41 @,@ 995 ft ) 
 Armament 
 1 × 37 mm Nudelman N @-@ 37 cannon with 40 rounds ( a 45 mm Nudelman N @-@ 45 could be fitted instead ) 
 2 × 23 mm Nudelman @-@ Suranov NS @-@ 23 cannon with 200 rpg 
 Up to 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 102 lb ) of bombs 
 = West Cornwall Covered Bridge = 
 The West Cornwall Covered Bridge ( an earlier incarnation was known as the Hart Bridge ) is a wooden covered lattice truss bridge carrying the Sharon @-@ Goshen Turnpike over the Housatonic River in the town of Cornwall , Connecticut . Records indicate that a bridge may have been in place in this location as early as 1762 . A previous bridge was destroyed in the flood of 1837 and a new bridge was constructed in 1841 . This bridge would also be destroyed and the current bridge would be completed circa 1864 . Utilizing the central pier from the previous incarnation , despite the Town lattice being able to withstand the weight and single span , the bridge has two spans . The later addition of queen trusses and supports gives the bridge an unusual appearance . Modernization of the bridge in 1968 and 1973 has continued to let the bridge handle traffic . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1975 . 
 = = History = = 
 Located at the north @-@ south and east @-@ west roadway section of the riverside town of Cornwall , Connecticut , numerous bridges have been built at this location . As early as 1762 , a bridge may have been in service here . The lifespan of these bridges was not a long term one , for floods and ice would demolish them frequently . Peter Vermilyea , author of Hidden History of Litchfield County , states that wooden bridges had typical life spans of seven to ten years . Town records list expenditures for repair and placement . For many decades the current West Cornwall bridge was believed to have been constructed in 1841 , as a replacement for an earlier bridge that washed away in the flood of 1837 . The 1841 date was even included on the National Register of Historic Places nomination and was claimed to have been supervised by Ithiel Town himself . At least one , but possibly several incarnations of these earlier bridges were known as the Hart Bridge , after a settler of West Cornwall . Local tradition states that Selectman Marcus Smith traveled to North Adams , Massachusetts to choose the timber for the bridge . The 1841 bridge may have been overseen by Ithiel Town , but the current bridge dates to about 1864 according to research by Michael R. Gannett for the Cornwall Historical Society . The center pier which supports of the middle bridge was likely reused from the previous bridge . In 1968 , the State of Connecticut added the bridge to the state system and considered replacing it . A local committee in West Cornwall was created and organized to save the covered bridge , through their efforts the Connecticut Department of Transportation decided to renovate the bridge . The bridge was raised up an additional two feet and steel supports were inserted to support the roadway . In 1973 , the roadway was reinforced with the addition of a concealed steel deck to support the weight of traffic . This project would win the Federal Highway Administration 's award for outstanding historic preservation . 
 Throughout its history , the bridge has endured against a series of disasters that threatened to demolish it . Flooding as a result of the 1938 New England hurricane and the flood of 1955 , caused by the combined effects of both Hurricane Connie and Hurricane Diane , threatened to wash the bridge away . In 1961 , a severe ice jam threatened to destroy the bridge , but the jam was successfully dynamited . The bridge also had to be repaired in 1945 after a 20 @-@ ton oil truck fell through the bridge floor . 
 = = Description = = 
 Constructed in 1864 , the West Cornwall covered bridge is 172 feet ( 52 m ) long , 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide and supports one lane of vehicle traffic for the Sharon @-@ Goshen Turnpike ( Connecticut Route 128 ) . The bridge 's Town lattice truss is constructed of red @-@ spruce timbers secured by treenails and the span is made of native oak . A secondary queen @-@ post truss was added to the bridge at a later date , with one source stating that this was in 1887 . The addition of the queen @-@ post truss was likely to stiffen the bridge because wooden trusses have a tendency to sag . Prior to 1946 , the bridge had a square port with a flat top , but this was modified to a gable roof which remains today . In 1957 , the bridge was painted red for the first time . 
 The bridge consists of two spans , 64 @.@ 1 feet and 81 @.@ 10 feet , with a 3 @.@ 2 feet gap between them . The combined trussed portions of the bridge are 149 @.@ 1 feet long . The bridge 's Town lattice is an unusual design choice , but the later addition of the queen trusses are also unusual , resulting in a unique visual appearance by the bridge 's unequal spans . This gives the appearance of <unk> within the <unk> . Since the addition of the steel I @-@ beam flooring in 1973 , the trusses have supported nothing but themselves . The State of Connecticut 's lists the bridge as CT 1338 and the May 2012 inspection of the bridge found the deck and superstructure conditions to be satisfactory and condition of the substructure to be fair . The West Cornwall Covered bridge has been appraised as functionally obsolete . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The West Cornwall covered bridge is very significant and important as one of only three surviving covered bridges in the state of Connecticut . The bridge 's modification from the original Town lattice represents a unique design that is not repeated in either the Comstock 's Bridge or Bull 's Bridge . The covered bridge is perhaps best known for being featured on postcards of New England villages . Terry Miller and Ronald Knapp assert that Charles Ives passed by the bridge on the way to the Berkshires which inspired the third movement in the Three Places in New England . The bridge appeared in the opening scenes of the movie , Valley of the Dolls a 1967 American drama film based on the 1966 novel of the same name by Jacqueline Susann . This brief scene occurs near the 2 minute mark of the film , during the opening credits . The bridge was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1975 . 
 Numerous photos , including photos from before the 20th @-@ century renovations , are contained in Connecticut and Rhode Island Covered Bridges . 
 = Ask and Embla = 
 In Norse mythology , Ask and Embla ( from Old Norse Askr ok Embla ) — male and female respectively — were the first two humans , created by the gods . The pair are attested in both the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In both sources , three gods , one of whom is Odin , find Ask and Embla and bestow upon them various corporeal and spiritual gifts . A number of theories have been proposed to explain the two figures , and there are occasional references to them in popular culture . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Old Norse <unk> literally means " ash tree " but the etymology of embla is uncertain , and two possibilities of the meaning of embla are generally proposed . The first meaning , " elm tree " , is problematic , and is reached by deriving * Elm @-@ la from * <unk> and subsequently to <unk> ( " elm " ) . The second suggestion is " vine " , which is reached through * <unk> , which may be related to the Greek term <unk> , itself meaning " vine , liana " . The latter etymology has resulted in a number of theories . 
 According to Benjamin Thorpe " Grimm says the word embla , <unk> , signifies a busy woman , from <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , assiduous labour ; the same relation as <unk> and <unk> , the ancient Persian names of the first man and woman , who were also formed from trees . " 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In stanza 17 of the Poetic Edda poem Völuspá , the völva reciting the Poem states that Hœnir , <unk> and Odin once found Ask and Embla on Land . The <unk> says that the two were capable of very little , lacking in <unk> and says that they were given three gifts by the three Gods : 
 The meaning of these gifts has been a matter of scholarly disagreement and translations therefore vary . 
 According to chapter 9 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , the three brothers <unk> , Vé , and Odin , are the creators of the first man and woman . The brothers were once walking along a beach and found two trees there . They took the wood and from it created the first human beings ; Ask and Embla . One of the three gave them the breath of life , the second gave them movement and intelligence , and the third gave them shape , speech , hearing and sight . Further , the three gods gave them clothing and names . Ask and Embla go on to become the progenitors of all humanity and were given a home within the walls of Midgard . 
 = = Theories = = 
 = = = Indo @-@ European origins = = = 
 A Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European basis has been theorized for the duo based on the etymology of embla meaning " vine . " In Indo @-@ European societies , an analogy is derived from the drilling of fire and sexual intercourse . Vines were used as a flammable wood , where they were placed beneath a drill made of harder wood , resulting in fire . Further evidence of ritual making of fire in Scandinavia has been theorized from a depiction on a stone plate on a Bronze Age grave in <unk> , Scania , Sweden . 
 Jaan <unk> comments that " ancient myths teem with trite ' first couples ' of the type of Adam and his by @-@ product Eve . In Indo @-@ European tradition , these range from the Vedic Yama and <unk> and the Iranian <unk> and <unk> to the Icelandic Askr and Embla , with trees or rocks as preferred raw material , and dragon 's teeth or other bony substance occasionally thrown in for good measure " . 
 In his study of the comparative evidence for an origin of mankind from trees in Indo @-@ European society , Anders <unk> observes that " myths of the origin of mankind from trees or wood seem to be particularly connected with ancient Europe and Indo @-@ Europe and Indo @-@ European @-@ speaking peoples of Asia Minor and Iran . By contrast the cultures of the Near East show almost exclusively the type of <unk> stories that derive man 's origin from clay , earth or blood by means of a divine creation act " . 
 = = = Other potential Germanic analogues = = = 
 Two wooden figures — the Braak Bog Figures — of " more than human height " were unearthed from a peat bog at Braak in Schleswig , Germany . The figures depict a nude male and a nude female . Hilda Ellis Davidson comments that these figures may represent a " Lord and Lady " of the Vanir , a group of Norse gods , and that " another memory of [ these wooden deities ] may survive in the tradition of the creation of Ask and Embla , the man and woman who founded the human race , created by the gods from trees on the seashore " . 
 A figure named <unk> ( Old English " ash tree " ) appears as the son of Hengest in the Anglo @-@ Saxon genealogy for the kings of Kent . This has resulted in an amount of theories that the figures may have had an earlier basis in pre @-@ Norse Germanic mythology . 
 Connections have been proposed between Ask and Embla and the Vandal kings Assi and Ambri , attested in Paul the Deacon 's 7th century AD work Origo Gentis Langobardorum . There , the two ask the god Godan ( Odin ) for victory . The name Ambri , like Embla , likely derives from * <unk> . 
 = = = Catalog of dwarfs = = = 
 A preceding stanza to the account of the creation of Ask and Embla in Völuspá provides a catalog of dwarfs , and stanza 10 has been considered as describing the creation of human forms from the earth . This may potentially mean that dwarfs formed humans , and that the three gods gave them life . Carolyne Larrington theorizes that humans are metaphorically designated as trees in Old Norse works ( examples include " trees of jewellery " for women and " trees of battle " for men ) due to the origin of humankind stemming from trees ; Ask and Embla . 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 Ask and Embla have been the subject of a number of references and artistic depictions . A sculpture depicting the two stands in the southern Swedish city of Sölvesborg , created in 1948 by Stig Blomberg . Ask and Embla are depicted on two of the sixteen wooden panels found on the Oslo City Hall in Oslo , Norway , by <unk> <unk> . In 2003 , Faroese artist Anker Eli Petersen included a depiction of the couple in his series of Faroe Islands stamps . In A.S. Byatt 's novel Possession , one of the characters is a poet who writes a series of verses about Ask and Embla . 
 = Nugroho Notosusanto = 
 Brigadier General Raden Panji Nugroho Notosusanto ( 15 July 1930 – 3 June 1985 ) was an Indonesian short story writer turned military historian who served as professor of history at the University of Indonesia . Born to a noble family in Central Java , he exhibited a high degree of nationalism from a young age . During the Indonesian National Revolution from 1945 to 1949 he saw active service as a member of the Student Army , working reconnaissance . Despite wanting to remain in the military , under influence by his father he continued his education , eventually enrolling in the faculty of literature at the University of Indonesia . During the 1950s he wrote extensively and was active in numerous political and academic groups , finally graduating with a degree in history in 1958 . 
 After a failed attempt to study at the University of London , in the early 1960s Notosusanto – by then a lecturer – was contacted by General Abdul Haris Nasution and tasked with writing a history of the revolution and Madiun Affair . By 1964 he had become head of the Indonesian Army 's history division , holding an honorary rank . Continuing to teach , he wrote extensively on the revolution and other military events , including the first book on the 30 September Movement of 1965 . Between 1983 and his death Notosusanto served concurrently as rector of the University of Indonesia and Minister of Education and Culture . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nugroho Notosusanto was born in Rembang , Central Java , Dutch East Indies , on 15 July 1930 , the first of three children born to <unk> Notosusanto , a professor of Islamic law and later one of the founders of Gadjah Mada University , and his wife . The family was well connected , and several of Nugroho Notosusanto 's relatives were <unk> ( regents ) ; his grandfather , <unk> , was likewise connected to the nobility . While still a child Nugroho Notosusanto began writing short stories ; his father later recalled that they were filled with themes of struggle and nationalism . Another of Notosusanto 's relatives , Budi Darma , later recalled that he had always stood at attention , " like a soldier " , when the future national anthem " Indonesia Raya " was played . 
 Nugroho Notosusanto began his elementary education at a Dutch @-@ run school in Malang , East Java , in 1937 . The following year he transferred to a school for native Indonesians in the colony 's capital at Batavia ( now Jakarta ) , graduating in 1942 . He completed his junior high school studies in Pati . 
 During the Indonesian National Revolution from 1945 to 1949 Nugroho Notosusanto 's family lived in the temporary national capital at Yogyakarta so that his father could work for the Ministry of Law . The younger Notosusanto fought for the revolutionaries . He first joined the 17th Brigade of Student Army ( Tentara <unk> ) , later transferring to the People 's Security Army ( Tentara Keamanan Rakjat ) . During this period he exclusively did reconnaissance and often slept at the homes of local villagers . Historian Katherine McGregor suggests that this influenced his later short stories , which took humanist themes . 
 = = Post @-@ revolution = = 
 After the end of the revolution , Notosusanto was given a choice between resuming his studies or going to Breda in the Netherlands for further military training . Influenced by his father 's disapproval of the military , he finished his senior high school education , despite wanting to continue with the army . After graduating senior high school in 1951 , he immediately enrolled with the faculty of literature at the University of Indonesia ( Universitas Indonesia , or UI ) . However , he continued to resent the older generation and political leadership . 
 During the 1950s Notosusanto wrote extensively , focusing on essays but also writing poems and , later , short stories ; the last of his creative works were written around 1956 . He published four short story anthologies between 1958 and 1963 . The first , <unk> <unk> ( Morning Rain ) , consisted of six short stories . It dealt with the struggle against the Dutch colonists during the revolution . His second anthology , Tiga Kota ( Three Cities ) , was published the following year and followed events in three cities : Rembang , Yogyakarta , and Jakarta . The others , and his numerous stories which were published outside of anthologies , mostly dealt with the war and the positive effects of revolution . 
 Aside from his writing , Notosusanto was active in student and political organisations , the student press , and academic conferences . With other students he picketed the British and French embassies in Jakarta , supporting independence for Egypt and Algiers . He also travelled extensively , visiting Malaysia , Singapore , the Philippines , Japan , and the US on academic sorties . He completed his bachelour 's degree in history from UI in 1958 , becoming a lecturer at UI after graduation . On 12 December 1960 he married Irma <unk> <unk> ( better known as <unk> ) . Together they had three children : <unk> Smita , <unk> Sukma , and <unk> . 
 = = Historian = = 
 By the early 1960s Notosusanto had abandoned his literary career , focusing instead on history . In 1960 he received a scholarship from the Rockefeller Foundation to study at the School of Oriental and African Studies at the University of London , England . He dropped out in 1961 , and returned to Indonesia in 1962 . Around this time he was recruited by General Abdul Haris Nasution to provide a version of the revolution amenable to the Indonesian Army and counter a Communist Party of Indonesia @-@ backed history which ignored the Madiun Affair of 1948 . In 1964 he was chosen as head of the Department of Military History . He also worked as a lecturer at UI . 
 During the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1960s Notosusanto wrote extensively on the military history of Indonesia , including a book on <unk> 's anti @-@ Japanese rebellion in 1945 and the Battle of Surabaya . His 1968 book on the 30 September Movement coup in 1965 , written in collaboration with Ismail Saleh and entitled The Coup Attempt of the 30 September Movement in Indonesia , was the first on the subject to be published . It was later used as the basis for the pro @-@ Suharto film Pengkhianatan G30S / PKI ( Treachery of G30S / PKI ; 1984 ) , for which Notosusanto received a writing credit . 
 Sometime after 1968 Notosusanto conceived of Satria Mandala Museum in Jakarta as a modern museum showcasing the military 's role in the country 's history . The museum , modeled after the Australian War Memorial in Canberra and the Museo Nacional de Historia in Mexico City , Mexico , opened in 1972 and contained numerous dioramas . In a later pamphlet Notosusanto wrote that dioramas were necessary as " the habit of reading is still developing ... [ thus ] historical visualisation remains an effective way to express the identity of ABRI " . In existing museums he revised the dioramas to better suit the needs of the New Order government . 
 During this period Notosusanto continued to teach , although he also became involved with administrative work at UI . He served as assistant dean at the university 's faculty of literature between 1963 and 1964 , later serving as assistant rector from 1964 to 1967 . After writing his thesis on " The Peta Army During the Japanese Occupation in Indonesia " , Notosusanto received his doctorate in 1977 from UI ; the thesis was translated into Indonesian and published in 1979 by Gramedia . Two years later he was made a full professor . 
 Notosusanto was made a member of the Fourth Development Cabinet when it was formed on 16 March 1983 , replacing outgoing minister Daud Jusuf and taking office three days later . During his two years as minister he worked on several programmes , including compulsory education and student selection systems . He also instituted a new curriculum , replacing the one which had been in use since 1975 and promoting the humanities . Concurrently with his work as Minister of Education and Culture , Notosusanto served as rector of UI ; students were disapproving of his selection , considering him a military official sent to limit their freedom . He died at his Jakarta home on 3 June 1985 after suffering a cerebral hemorrhage and was buried at Kalibata Heroes ' Cemetery . At the time he was a brigadier general , the highest rank then available for civilians in military service . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 For his military and civilian service , Notosusanto received several awards from the Indonesian government , including the Bintang Dharma , Bintang Gerilya , Bintang <unk> , Dharma <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . McGregor describes him as " the central propagandist of the New Order regime " , writing that he worked " tirelessly " to support the military . She argues that he controlled a " cult of personality " built around President Suharto , giving the reorganisation of history museums as an example . According to McGregor , Notosusanto relegated the country 's first president , Sukarno , to a background role while he " inserted Suharto , together with other military men , into new places " , legitimising the New Order government . 
 = = Selected bibliography = = 
 = = = Short story collections = = = 
 Notosusanto , Nugroho ( 1958 ) . <unk> <unk> [ Morning Rain ] . Jakarta : Balai Pustaka . OCLC <unk> . 
 Notosusanto , Nugroho ( 1959 ) . Tiga Kota [ Three Cities ] . Jakarta : Balai Pustaka . OCLC <unk> . 
 Notosusanto , Nugroho ( 1961 ) . Rasa <unk> [ This Love ] . Jakarta : Pembangunan . OCLC <unk> . 
 Notosusanto , Nugroho ( 1963 ) . <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> [ Green of My Land , Green of My Shirt ] . Jakarta : Balai Pustaka . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = Historical works = = = 
 Notosusanto , Nugroho ; Saleh , Ismail ( 1971 ) . The Coup Attempt of the September 30 Movement in Indonesia . Jakarta : <unk> Masa . OCLC <unk> . 
 Notosusanto , Nugroho ( 1971 ) . The Peta Army in Indonesia , 1943 @-@ 1945 . Jakarta : Centre for Armed Forces History . OCLC <unk> . 
 Notosusanto , Nugroho ( 1974 ) . The Revolt Against the Japanese of a Peta Battalion in Blitar , February 14 , 1945 . Jakarta : Centre for Armed Forces History . OCLC <unk> . 
 Notosusanto , Nugroho ( 1975 ) . The National Struggle and the Armed Forces in Indonesia . Jakarta : Centre for Armed Forces History . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Keggy the Keg = 
 Keggy the Keg is the unofficial mascot of Dartmouth College , an Ivy League university in Hanover , New Hampshire , United States . Keggy is an anthropomorphic beer keg , created in 2003 by members of the college humor magazine the Dartmouth Jack @-@ O @-@ Lantern , to fill the mascot void that followed the abolition of the Indian mascot in 1971 . Due to its nature , the mascot was controversial on Dartmouth 's campus , and it was reported on in a variety of national media . With time , however , it has become an " ingrained part of Dartmouth culture " . 
 = = Context and creation = = 
 After dropping the mascot of the Indian , Dartmouth had no official mascot . Dartmouth continued to be known by its nickname of " The Big Green , " but , citing the ambiguity , lack of dynamism , and intangibility of having no mascot , the Dartmouth Student Assembly proposed a student poll in spring 2003 to decide upon a new mascot . While the Moose came in first in this poll , many students remained dissatisfied with the choice , and the moose lost a final poll to " no mascot . " Chris <unk> and Nic Duquette , students at the Jack @-@ O @-@ Lantern humor magazine , expressed interest in creating a mascot that " wasn 't racist , biased or sexist , yet [ was ] entirely unacceptable . " In an effort to force the administration to adopt a more interesting mascot , they created Keggy , an anthropomorphic keg that represents " the most obvious Dartmouth stereotype : the beer @-@ swilling Animal House fraternity culture . " 
 = = Reactions = = 
 Reaction to Keggy 's introduction was mixed : the student body president personally endorsed Keggy in the mascot search , while the College newspaper The Dartmouth reported a mixed student reaction and published opposing opinions . The paper also reported on " flak " over the mascot from College administrators , though the Dean of the College lauded the students ' capacity to " come up with imaginative and creative ideas . " 
 Keggy subsequently received media attention beyond the College at other Ivy League newspapers and on several national media outlets . Michael Wilbon of ESPN 's Pardon the Interruption called Keggy " some stupid beer thing , " and Playboy magazine published a feature on Keggy as part of a " Mascots Talk Back " series . A posting of a photo of Keggy on CollegeHumor was popular enough to receive status as a National Pick . In August , 2012 Yahoo Sports ranked Keggy the Keg as the # 1 Most Unique Mascot . 
 = = History = = 
 Shortly after Keggy 's introduction in 2003 , a group of students stole the Keggy costume from its home in the Sigma Nu fraternity library and sent threatening notes to Keggy 's creators , including photographs of the mascot bound and gagged with one black eye . Some thought this to be a publicity stunt by the creators , but the mascot had truly been stolen . Keggy was eventually returned with minor damage to the costume . 
 Keggy continued to make occasional appearances at Dartmouth sporting events , and became an " ingrained part of Dartmouth culture " : at Dartmouth 's 2005 Winter Carnival celebration , students named the snow sculpture of a large ship " Captain Keggy 's Carnival Cruiser . " In early 2006 , College officials denied Keggy entrance to a sold @-@ out hockey game ( officials cited fire code concerns with the capacity crowd ) , prompting a Jack @-@ O @-@ Lantern @-@ penned editorial in The Dartmouth condemning the incident ; the Jack @-@ O @-@ Lantern website alleged " anti @-@ keg racism . " A similar incident occurred in October 2006 when Keggy was not permitted on the field at halftime of the Homecoming football game , again resulting in further complaints in The Dartmouth and on the Jack @-@ O @-@ Lantern website . 
 The costume disappeared before the fall term of 2008 and has not been seen or returned since . The Jack @-@ O @-@ Lantern built a replacement costume and unveiled it at the 2009 Winter Carnival . 
 = 1346 = 
 Year 1346 ( <unk> ) was a common year starting on Sunday ( link will display the full calendar ) of the Julian calendar . It was a year in the 14th century , in the midst of a period known in European history as the Late Middle Ages . In Asia that year , the Black Plague came to the troops of the Golden Horde Khanate ; the disease also affected the Genoese Europeans they were attacking , before spreading to the rest of Europe . In Central and East Asia , there was a series of revolts after Kazan Khan was killed in an uprising , and the Chagatai Khanate began to splinter and fall ; several revolts in China began what would eventually lead to the overthrow of the Yuan dynasty . The Indian kingdom of Vijayanagara won several victories over Muslim conquerors in the north in this year as well . 
 In Eastern Europe , Stefan Dušan was proclaimed Tsar of Serbia on April 16 ( Easter Sunday ) at Skopje . In the nearby Byzantine Empire , the Ottoman emir Orhan married Byzantine princess Theodora as part of an alliance between her father John VI Kantakouzenos and the Ottomans . Ongoing civil wars in both Bulgaria and Byzantium continued . Denmark sold its portion of Northern Estonia to the Livonian Order of the Teutonic Knights after finally quelling the St. George 's Night Uprising . In Central Europe , Charles IV of Luxembourg was elected Holy Roman Emperor on July 11 . A number of banking families in Italy , including the Bardi family , faced bankruptcy in this year , and much of Italy suffered a famine . The Hundred Years ' War between the Kingdom of France and the Kingdom of England continued in Western Europe , as Edward III of England led an invasion onto the continent and won a number of victories . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = January – December = = = 
 Spring – a severe Black Death epidemic begins in the Crimea . 
 March 18 – the French prepare to defend channel coasts . 
 April – The French besiege Aiguillon . 
 April 16 – the Serbian Empire is proclaimed in Skopje by <unk> Silni , occupying much of South @-@ Eastern Europe . 
 May – June – an English invasion fleet assembles at Portsmouth . 
 June 9 – Battle of St Pol de Léon : English army defeats Charles of Blois in Brittany . 
 June 20 – the English win a small victory at La Roche @-@ <unk> in Brittany . 
 June 24 – the leaders of Ghent , Bruges and Ypres agree to support Edward III . 
 July – Edward III orders the closing of English ports to stop information from reaching France . 
 July 3 – the English fleet attempts to sail from Portsmouth to Normandy but is forced back by contrary winds . 
 July 11 – Charles IV , Count of Luxembourg and King of Bohemia , is elected King of the Romans . 
 July 11 – 12 – Edward III and the English army cross the English Channel and begin an invasion of France . 
 July 12 – July 18 – the English raid and burn neighbouring towns and villages in the Cotentin Peninsula . 
 August 26 – Battle of Crécy , in which the English defeat the French . 
 September 4 – the English begin the siege of Calais . 
 October 17 – Battle of Neville 's Cross : the English army defeats the Scots . 
 October – November – several Mongol towns in the Crimea are cleared of inhabitants by the Black Death . 
 = = = Date unknown = = = 
 Repairs are made in the Hagia Sophia . 
 = = Asia = = 
 = = = Western Asia = = = 
 The Golden Horde 's siege of Kaffa continued through 1346 , despite a number of obstacles . They were struck with the Black Plague and forced to retreat , although not until the following year . As one Russian historian records : 
 In the same year [ 1346 ] , God 's punishment struck the people in the eastern lands , in the town <unk> , and in <unk> , and in Sarai , and in <unk> , and in other towns in those lands ; the mortality was great among the <unk> , and among the Tartars , and among the Armenians and the <unk> , and among the Jews , and among the European foreigners , and among the Circassians , and among all who lived there , so that they could not bury them . 
 The many areas and peoples listed here represent much of Western Asia and the Caucasus . The " European foreigners " are those fighting with the Tartars in the Mongol @-@ led siege of Kaffa . These Europeans would return to Europe the following year , carrying the plague with them . Travellers returning from the Crimea also carried the plague to Byzantium and Arabia , according to Greek and Arab scholars of the time . 
 Another account of the events in the Crimea reads : 
 It seemed to the besieged Christians as if arrows were shot out of the sky to strike and humble the pride of the infidels who rapidly died with marks on their bodies and lumps in their joints and several part , followed by putrid fever ; all advice and help of the doctors being of no avail . Whereupon the Tartars , worn out by this pestilential disease , and falling on all sides as if thunderstruck , and seeing that they were perishing hopelessly , ordered the corpses to be placed upon their engines and thrown into the city of Kaffa . Accordingly were the bodies of the dead hurled over the walls , so that the Christians were not able to hide or protect themselves from this danger , although they carried away as many dead as possible and threw them into the sea . But soon the whole air became infected , and the water poisoned , and such a pestilence grew up that scarcely one out of a thousand was able to escape . 
 Modern scholars consider this one of the earliest , and most deadly , biological attacks in world history , though in the end the Mongols were forced to retreat . Early sources state that the plague began its spread in the spring of 1346 at the River Don near the Black Sea , then spread throughout Russia , the Caucasus , and the Genovese provinces within the year . 
 Further south in Georgia , King George the Brilliant died and was succeeded by King David IX . King George V had managed to increase the Georgian realm to all of Transcaucasia . However , after 1346 the Kingdom began to decline , caused by George 's death and the devastating spread of the plague throughout the area soon afterwards . 
 = = = Central and East Asia = = = 
 Central Asia was marked in 1346 by the continued disintegration of the Mongol 's domains , as well as by Muslim expansion . Kazan Khan , emperor of the Chagatai Khanate , was killed by the forces of <unk> in this year , putting an end to the <unk> Khanate 's status as a unified empire . <unk> was the leader of the group of Turkish nobles opposed to Mongol rule . <unk> had been wounded by Kazan 's forces earlier in the year , but rather than taking advantage of his opponent 's weakness , Kazan retreated and many of his troops abandoned him . 
 To the east , Kashmir was conquered by Shah Mir , the first Muslim to rule the area . Kathmandu was also conquered in this year . However , Muslim expansion did suffer some defeats in southern India . The Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagara in India conquered the Hoysalas and celebrated its " festival of victory " , strengthening their status as a legitimate Hindu empire in opposition to Muslim rule in the north . The leader of the Delhi Sultanate in Northern India , <unk> bin Tughluq , had a particular disdain not only for Hinduism , but for the Deccan culture of the south . Telugu chieftains gathered in opposition to the Sultan in this year and celebrated victory . 
 Further east , Ibn Battuta traveled from Southeast Asia to Khanbaliq ( Beijing ) in China . Although the Muslim leaders there extended him a warm welcome , they advised him to leave the city soon . A civil war had caused the Khan to flee the city , and riots were becoming more and more widespread . Meanwhile , T 'aigo <unk> , a Korean Buddhist monk , traveled to China to receive training under the guidance of Buddhist leader Shih @-@ wu . T 'aigo later founded the T 'aigo sect of Korean Buddhism . 
 = = Europe = = 
 = = = Scandinavia = = = 
 In 1346 Denmark sold Northern <unk> ( Danish Estonia ) to the Teutonic Knights following the end of an uprising and conflict between the pro @-@ Danish party ( bishop Olaf of <unk> ) and the pro @-@ German party ( captain Marquard <unk> ) , called the St. George 's Night Uprising . The Danish dominions in were sold for 10 @,@ 000 marks to the Livonian Order , ignoring the promise by Christopher II in 1329 never to abandon or sell its Estonian territories . The King of Denmark even made a public statement " repenting " for that broken promise , and asked forgiveness from the pope . 
 = = = Balkans and Asia Minor = = = 
 In the Balkans , on April 16 ( Easter Sunday ) , Stefan Dušan was crowned in Skopje as Tsar of the new Serbian Empire , which now occupied much of southeastern Europe . Also in 1346 , both Bulgaria and Byzantium ( which at this time covered most of Greece ) were in the middle of a series of civil wars . At the same time , the Christian @-@ held islands and possessions around the Aegean Sea were subject to Turkish raids . 
 Orhan , the Ottoman Turkish prince of Bithynia was married to Theodora , daughter of Emperor John VI Kantakouzenos . The Greek clergy believed that the marriage of a Christian princess and a prominent Muslim would increase the region 's power . Orhan already had several other wives , and although Theodora was permitted to keep her religion , she was required to spend the rest of her life in an Islamic harem . Kantakouzenos hoped that Orhan would become his ally in any future wars , but Orhan , like his fellow Turks , became his enemy in the Genoese war . As part of the alliance , the Ottoman prince was permitted to sell the Christians he had captured at Constantinople as slaves in the public market . 
 = = = Central = = = 
 On July 11 , Charles IV of Luxembourg was elected emperor of the Holy Roman Empire . In consequence of an alliance between his father and Pope Clement VI , the relentless enemy of the emperor Louis IV , Charles was chosen Roman king in opposition to Louis by some of the princes at <unk> . He had previously promised to be subservient to Clement , he confirmed the papacy in the possession of wide territories , promised to annul the acts of Louis against Clement , to take no part in Italian affairs , and to defend and protect the church . 
 Charles IV was at this time in a very weak position in Germany . Owing to the terms of his election , he was derisively referred to by some as a " priest 's king " ( <unk> ) . Many bishops and nearly all of the Imperial cities remained loyal to Louis the Bavarian . Charles further endangered his high position when he backed the losing side in the Hundred Years ' War . He lost his father and many of his best knights at the Battle of Crécy in August 1346 . He himself was wounded on the same field . 
 Meanwhile , in Italy a number of banks in Florence collapsed due to internal problems in Florence , contributed by King Edward III of England defaulting on some of his loans . Most notably , the Bardi family went bankrupt in this year . Italy also suffered a famine , making it difficult for the Papacy to recruit troops for the attack on Smyrna . The Venetians , however , organized an alliance uniting several European parties ( Sancta Unio ) , composed notably of the Knights Hospitaller , which carried out five consecutive attacks on İzmir and the Western Anatolian coastline controlled by Turkish states . In the realm of technology , papermaking reached Holland , and firearms made their way to Northern Germany in this year . The earliest records in the area place them in the city of Aachen . 
 = = = Western Europe = = = 
 On or around July 7 , King Edward III crossed the English Channel to Normandy with 1 @,@ 600 ships . He took the ports of La Hogue and Barfleur with overwhelming force and continued inland towards Caen , taking towns along the way . The French mounted a defence at Caen , but were ultimately defeated . The French had been planning to cross the channel and invade England with a force of about 14 @,@ 000 led by Jean le Franc , but Edward 's attack forced them onto the defensive . 
 The French king , Phillippe , destroyed several bridges to prevent Edward 's advance , but the English took the town of Poissy in August and repaired its bridge in order to advance . The French king mounted a defence near the forest at Crécy , which ended in another English victory . Edward then proceeded to Calais , laying siege to the city from September 4 . Meanwhile , Jean de France , King Phillippe 's son , besieged the city of <unk> , but with no success . King Phillippe also urge the Scots to continue the fight against England to the north . The Scots , believing that the English were preoccupied with Calais , marched into England toward Durham in October , but were met and defeated by an English force of knights and clergymen at the Battle of Neville 's Cross , and King David of Scotland was captured . The Irish also mounted a brief resistance , but were similarly defeated . Before the end of the year , Edward also captured <unk> and the towns surrounding <unk> @-@ Charente . 
 For his role in the Battle of Crécy , Edward , the Black Prince honoured the bravery of John I , Count of Luxemburg and King of Bohemia ( also known as John the Blind ) by adopting his arms and motto : " Ich Dien " or " I Serve " . John 's decades of fighting had already made his name widely known throughout Europe , and his death at Crécy became the legendary subject of several writings , including this passage by Froissart : 
 ... for all that he [ John I ] was nigh blind , when he understood the order of the battle , he said to them about him : ... ' Sirs , ye are my men , my companions and friends in this journey : I require you bring me so far forward , that I may strike one stroke with my sword . ' ... they tied all their reins of their bridles each to other and set the king before to accomplish his desire , and so they went on their enemies ... The king ... was so far forward that he strake a stroke with his sword , yea and more than four , and fought valiantly and so did his company ; and they adventured themselves so forward , that they were there all slain , and the next day they were found in the place about the king , and all their horses tied each to other . 
 = = Births = = 
 July 20 – Margaret , Countess of Pembroke , daughter of King Edward III of England ( d . 1361 ) 
 date unknown – Eustache Deschamps , French poet ( d . 1406 ) 
 = = Deaths = = 
 February 10 – Blessed Clare of Rimini ( b . 1282 ) 
 March 28 – <unk> of Bergamo , Dominican preacher ( b . 1304 ) 
 August – Muhammad <unk> , leader of the <unk> of <unk> ( alternative date is September ) 
 August 26 – killed in the Battle of Crécy : 
 Charles II , Count of Alençon ( b . 1297 ) 
 Louis I , Count of Flanders ( b . 1304 ) 
 Louis II , Count of Blois 
 John of Bohemia ( b . 1296 ) 
 Rudolph , Duke of Lorraine ( b . 1320 ) 
 October 17 – killed in the Battle of Neville 's Cross : 
 John Randolph , 3rd Earl of Moray 
 Maurice de Moravia , Earl of Strathearn 
 November 14 – <unk> I da <unk> , Lord of Ravenna ( assassinated ) 
 November 27 – St Gregory of Sinai ( b. c . 1260 ) 
 date unknown 
 Eustace <unk> , English outlaw 
 <unk> de Villeneuve , Grand Master of the Knights of St John 
 = Christian Streit White = 
 Christian Streit White ( March 10 , 1839 – January 28 , 1917 ) was an American military officer , lawyer , court clerk , <unk> , and politician in the U.S. states of Virginia and West Virginia . 
 During the American Civil War , White served as a Sergeant Major and Captain in the Confederate States Army and headed a bureau of the Confederate States Department of the Treasury . White served under the commands of Stonewall Jackson and Jubal Early and was responsible for the safekeeping of Hampshire County 's land registration records from destruction by Union Army forces . From 1864 to 1865 , White was in command of Company C of the 23rd Virginia Volunteer Cavalry Regiment . 
 White served as the Clerk of Court for Hampshire County , West Virginia , for 29 years ( 1873 – 1902 ) , and also served as the Clerk of Circuit Court for Hampshire County ( 1873 – 1876 ) . He was the chairman of the Hampshire County Democratic Executive Committee in the 1870s , and during this leadership , registered members of the West Virginia Democratic Party grew from 449 to 1 @,@ 369 in 1876 . White was appointed by West Virginia Governor John J. Jacob as one of the inaugural commissioners of the West Virginia Fish Commission . He established the Maguire Springs fish hatchery near Romney , and for a time , served as the commission 's president . 
 White was a member of the White political family of Virginia and West Virginia and was the son of John Baker White ( 1794 – 1862 ) , a grandson of prominent Virginia judge Robert White ( 1759 – 1831 ) , and a great @-@ nephew of United States House Representative Francis White ( 1761 – 1826 ) . He was a younger brother of West Virginia Attorney General Robert White ( 1833 – 1915 ) . 
 = = Family and background = = 
 Christian Streit White was born on March 10 , 1839 in Romney , Virginia ( present @-@ day West Virginia ) . He was the second @-@ eldest son of Hampshire County Clerk of Court John Baker White ( 1794 – 1862 ) and his second wife Frances Ann Streit White ( c . 1809 – 1879 ) and a grandson of prominent Virginia judge Robert White ( 1759 – 1831 ) . His older brother Robert White ( 1833 – 1915 ) later served as Attorney General of West Virginia . He was likely named for his maternal grandfather Reverend Christian Streit , a Lutheran minister of Winchester , Virginia , who was of Swiss descent . White received his education at Potomac Seminary in Romney . 
 = = American Civil War service = = 
 On April 19 , 1861 , following the outbreak of the American Civil War , White enlisted as a Private in the Hampshire Guards , which later became Company K within the 13th Virginia Volunteer Infantry Regiment of the Army of Virginia . While Company K was under the command of Captain John B. Sherrard , White was promoted to Third Sergeant . White 's company under the command of Sherrard departed Romney in June 1861 . Within four to five months , White was successively promoted through the non @-@ commissioned officer ranks to Sergeant Major and acting Adjutant of the 13th Virginia Infantry . He was further promoted to Adjutant , but White did not receive a commission . White served in the 13th Virginia Infantry for a little over a year until he was discharged from his service on account of a disability . White had developed typhoid fever and was ordered to recover in a hospital in Staunton . 
 Following his recovery and during his convalescence in the winter of 1862 and 1863 , White first served as a clerk in the Confederate States Department of the Treasury in Richmond , and he later received a post as head of an entire bureau of the department . White 's father John Baker White also served in the Confederate States Department of the Treasury until his death on October 9 , 1862 . In spring 1863 , White had recovered enough from his disability to serve in the cavalry , although he was still unable to serve in the infantry . 
 White resigned from his post as head of a bureau in the Confederate States Department of the Treasury when he received a commission of Captain from Confederate States President Jefferson Davis . Under the terms of his commission from President Davis , White raised a company of 200 cavalrymen for " special service " from within Union @-@ controlled areas of Virginia . The " special service " company was to include reconnaissance scouts or espionage personnel . White began recruitment of his company from several Virginia counties and neighboring states within Union control . His company was charged with reconnaissance within the mountainous region of Virginia spanning Greenbrier , Pocahontas , Highland , Pendleton , Randolph , Hardy , and Hampshire counties . The " special service " company under White 's command became Company C of the 23rd Virginia Volunteer Cavalry Regiment . White 's company initially consisted of 20 men from the Confederate States Department of the Treasury in Richmond , and after further recruitment , he raised a company numbering 300 men , although he was only permitted to retain 120 men . The remaining recruits sought service under D. E. Beall of Hampshire County , and subsequently joined the cavalry of General John D. Imboden . His brother , Alexander White , served as the company 's First Lieutenant and J. R. Baker served as the company 's Second Lieutenant . White declined subsequent promotions , and remained in command of his company until the conclusion of the American Civil War in 1865 . 
 White and his company saw combat from early 1864 through the early 1865 . During the summer of 1865 alone , White 's company participated in 56 battles and skirmishes , including picket fights , with two men killed , 26 men wounded ( four of which later died as a result of their wounds ) , and ten men taken prisoner . By October 1 , 1864 , White 's company had 15 serviceable horses and 70 that were not serviceable . Between 1863 and 1865 , White received one severe wound ( from June 21 , 1864 ) and two minor wounds from various campaigns . White felt the effects of these wounds for the remainder of his life . Throughout his military service during the American Civil War , White served under the commands of Stonewall Jackson and Jubal Early . 
 Following the surrender of General Robert E. Lee on April 9 , 1865 , White and the remaining part of his company traveled to North Carolina to join Confederate Army forces under the command of General Joseph E. Johnston , but Johnston and his forces had already surrendered before White and his troops could reach them . White and the remnants of his company disbanded without surrendering or being paroled , and White returned to Romney around June 1 , 1865 . 
 = = = Preservation of Hampshire County land records = = = 
 White 's father , Hampshire County Clerk of Court John Baker White , learned of the advancement of Union Army forces on Romney , and became concerned for the safety of the county 's records . His father proceeded to load land registration records ledger books onto wagons and had them transported to Winchester , Virginia for safekeeping . In 1863 , when Winchester was no longer a safe location for the storage of Hampshire County 's land records and they again risked destruction by Union Army forces , Christian Streit White took responsibility for the records and transferred them to Front Royal . When Front Royal became endangered by advancing Union Army forces , White had the records moved to Luray Caverns where they remained for several months . In fall 1864 , the county 's record books were rescued by White and his company as Union Army troops were in the process of destroying them . White 's company loaded about 150 record books into a wagon and they were taken to North Carolina where they remained safely for the duration of the war . Hampshire County 's land records survived and were returned to the courthouse following the conclusion of the American Civil War , likely by a soldier returning to the area from North Carolina . Had White 's father John Baker White not separated the records and sent the bound volumes away for safekeeping , Hampshire County would have lost all its records during the course of the war , as those that remained in the courthouse were destroyed . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Clerk of Court for Hampshire County = = = 
 Following his return from the war to his hometown of Romney in June 1865 , White was unable to recommence his practice of law or hold a public office due to the existing state laws of the Constitution of West Virginia which disbarred former Confederate States government and military personnel . White 's situation was further complicated , as he had not been pardoned or paroled by the United States for his service in the Confederate States Army . White rented a farm in Hampshire County and engaged in successful agricultural pursuits until the disenfranchisement of former Confederates was struck from the state 's constitution in 1872 . In 1872 , White was elected to the position of Clerk of Court for Hampshire County and began his term the following year in 1873 . During his tenure as Clerk of Court for Hampshire County , White also served one term as Clerk of the Circuit Court between 1873 and 1876 , but declined to run for a second term in that office . Prior to the American Civil War , White 's father John Baker White had also served as the county 's Clerk of Court for 47 years between 1815 and 1861 . White served as Clerk of Court for Hampshire County for 29 years until 1902 . He and his father served in the position a combined total of 76 years . Also following the war , White was elected as a member of the Romney Literary Society . 
 = = = Hampshire County Democratic Executive Committee = = = 
 By 1876 , White was serving as the chairman of the Hampshire County Democratic Executive Committee . While holding this post , White organized and carried out extensive campaigning for West Virginia Democratic Party membership and political candidates . Through his efforts , the number of registered Democrats in Hampshire County swelled from 449 in the preceding election year to 1 @,@ 369 . 
 During the West Virginia Democratic Party Senatorial Convention held at Moorefield in August 1886 , White proposed and advocated the first tariff reform and anti @-@ monopoly resolutions ever passed and adopted by a West Virginia Democratic Party Convention . Prior to its passage at the convention , White 's proposal received strong opposition . Tariff reform and anti @-@ monopoly resolutions similar to White 's proposal were adopted by the national Democratic Party as part of its 1888 platform . White had been among the first Democratic Party members in Hampshire County to openly declare his opposition to the fiscal policies of the administration of United States President Grover Cleveland . Under White 's leadership , Hampshire County 's Democratic delegation was the first Democratic county organization in West Virginia to hold public meetings in opposition to Cleveland 's fiscal policies . As the county executive committee chairman , White was the first Democrat in Hampshire County to deliver a public speech denouncing these policies . By 1897 , White had participated as a delegate from Hampshire County to most of the Senatorial and Congressional Democratic Party conventions in West Virginia , and every state Gubernatorial convention with the exception of one . 
 White was described by George W. Atkinson in his Prominent Men of West Virginia ( 1890 ) as " a consistent , but liberal Democrat " and by historians Roberta R. <unk> and Wilmer L. Kerns in their Hampshire County , West Virginia , 1754 – 2004 ( 2004 ) as " a self @-@ proclaimed liberal Democrat . " West Virginia historians Hu Maxwell and Howard Llewellyn Swisher in their History of Hampshire County ( 1897 ) stated that White was " independent in thought and character and fearless in following his convictions , he has never been a follower of party leaders . " 
 = = = West Virginia Fish Commission = = = 
 On February 20 , 1877 , an act entitled " Act to increase the supply of food fishes in the rivers and waters of this State " was passed by the West Virginia Legislature creating the West Virginia Fish Commission for the purpose of propagating <unk> for the stocking of streams in West Virginia to transform them into viable fisheries . White was appointed by West Virginia Governor John J. Jacob as one of the inaugural commissioners on June 1 , 1877 along with John W. Harris of Greenbrier County and Henry B. Miller of Wheeling . White was appointed for a term of four years . The newly appointed commission convened on July 17 , 1877 , and White was elected its secretary and Harris as its president . White and his two commissioner colleagues were " dedicated to their cause , " but their beginning efforts faced opposition from public officials who did not understand the importance of the fish commission . 
 White embarked upon a search for potential locations for a state fish hatchery , and in the summer of 1877 , he purchased the Maguire Springs and 2 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 @.@ 0 ha ) near Romney from Charles Harmison of Valley View . At the Maguire Springs , White " erected and equipped " a fish hatchery costing $ 700 at his own expense , and by 1878 , the hatchery was in " successful operation " and 600 @,@ 000 fishes had been distributed from it . The West Virginia Fish Commission later purchased from White the Maguire Springs and the surrounding 0 @.@ 75 acres ( 0 @.@ 30 ha ) for $ 550 . In 1880 , the Maguire Springs hatchery was vastly improved and expanded with the construction of ponds and the erection of a fence around the hatchery facility . In 1885 , a residence was constructed at the hatchery for the facility 's manager . Following Miller 's resignation from the commission , White was appointed as the President of the West Virginia Fish Commission in June 1885 . By June 1886 , the hatchery ponds at the Maguire Springs were enlarged and in 1891 , a hatching house was built along with additions to the manager 's residence , all under White 's direction . White also personally served as the manager of the Maguire Springs fish hatchery during hiatuses between manager appointments . By 1893 , fish populations within the streams of West Virginia became self @-@ sustaining and the hatchery operations at Maguire Springs were discontinued . 
 In 1877 , United States Fish Commissioner Spencer Fullerton Baird requested that West Virginia introduce the Chinook salmon into its streams . The West Virginia Fish Commission 's " first and most expensive efforts " involved the hatching and stocking of the salmon in West Virginia 's streams . To accomplish this feat , White designed and built charcoal raceways to culture the salmon . The salmon were released into the South Branch Potomac River where they flourished and were caught by fishermen from Romney to Washington , D.C. The salmon introduced by White and the commission migrated to the Chesapeake Bay , but did not return to West Virginia 's streams to spawn . Between 1877 and 1882 , the West Virginia Fish Commission successfully hatched and distributed salmon , trout , black bass , shad , carp , gray bass , pike perch , silver perch , jack , and blue catfish , as well as mill pond roach as food for the bass . In a report to the United States Fish Commission on the quality of the hatchery 's carp , White wrote : " One small scale carp , accidentally killed in draining the pond , was fried as pan @-@ fish , eaten in my family , and pronounced good . " 
 Over a decade after his appointment to the commission , White and his colleagues continued to perform their duties of office without pay from the West Virginia Legislature . The legislature continued to authorize $ 500 annually for the hatching and stocking of fish in West Virginia 's streams . White was reappointed as a commissioner by each succeeding Democratic governor . For the majority of his tenure serving on the West Virginia Fish Commission , White held the post of the commission 's President . 
 = = Confederate memorial activities = = 
 In spring 1866 while at the residence of his brother Robert White in Romney , White , his brother Robert and his wife , his sister Fannie White , and Bessie Jane Schultze ( later White 's wife ) originated the idea of erecting a monument memorializing the Confederate dead . This discussion led to the first decoration of Confederate graves at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney on June 1 , 1866 and to the subsequent erection of the Confederate Memorial at Indian Mound Cemetery which was dedicated on September 26 , 1867 . 
 From its formation until June 1897 , White served as the Commander of Camp Hampshire Number 446 of the United Confederate Veterans , the first camp organized in West Virginia . At the United Confederate Veterans headquarters in New Orleans on August 24 , 1895 , White was appointed by General John Brown Gordon as one of the inaugural members of the committee for the Confederate Memorial Association , which was charged with organizing and consolidating the association and selecting its chairman . White and the committee was also responsible for the erection of a " great building or memorial hall " known as the " Battle Abbey of the South , " which had been proposed by former Confederate States Army private Charles Broadway <unk> . White and the committee nominated General George H. Steuart as the chairman of the Confederate Memorial Association at Gate City Guard Armory in Atlanta on October 19 , 1865 , where Colonel J. O. Murray served as White 's proxy . White 's failing health caused him to resign from his position on the committee in early 1897 and upon the acceptance of his resignation , his brother Robert White was appointed to replace him . 
 = = Business pursuits = = 
 On February 23 , 1871 , the West Virginia Legislature passed an act incorporating the South Branch Railway Company , responsible for the construction and operation of a branch line connecting Romney with the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad main line at Green Spring . White was named by the legislature as one of the commissioners of the South Branch Railway Company , charged with the responsibility of signing up investors to purchase capital stock in the company . 
 In 1890 , White was a shareholder in two corporations operating in Romney . As one of five corporators , White held one share , valued at $ 130 , in the Hampshire Building and Loan Association No. 1 , which raised money for the purpose of providing loans for the purchase of property , home improvement or construction , and the liquidation of liens on property . Hampshire Building and Loan Association No. 1 was incorporated by West Virginia Secretary of State Henry S. Walker on March 11 , 1890 . White was one of six corporators , with two shares ( $ 35 each ) , of the Romney Manufacturing , Land and Improvement Company , which was created for the acquisition of land near Romney for the establishment of a hotel or summer resort and the development of residential real estate . The Romney Manufacturing , Land and Improvement Company was incorporated by Walker 's successor , William A. <unk> , on July 10 , 1890 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 White continued to serve in public office late into his life , and by 1916 , he was serving as a chancery commissioner for Hampshire County along with his son Robert and Joshua Soule Zimmerman . White also continued to operate a law practice with his son Robert in Romney . White died in Hampshire County on January 28 , 1917 at the age of 77 . He was interred next to his first wife Bessie Jane Schultze and second wife Catharine Steele in the White family plot at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 A practicing member of the Presbyterian faith , White was a Mason in the Clinton Lodge of Romney , where he had served as a Master . He resided at 332 East Main Street in Romney . 
 = = = Marriage and issue = = = 
 White was married on July 25 , 1867 , in Hampshire County to Elizabeth " Bessie " Jane Schultze , the daughter of Dr. Robert Schultze and his wife Elizabeth " Bessie " Armstrong Schultze . Schultze was born on November 18 , 1837 , in Rotterdam , Netherlands and was of Scottish descent . Her father , Dr. Robert Schultze , was a professor of foreign languages at the University of Edinburgh . Schultze 's father also served in the British Diplomatic Service . White and his wife Bessie had one child , a son : 
 Following the death of his first wife , Bessie , on June 24 , 1869 , White again married on May 26 , 1873 , to Catharine Steele . Steele was born in Belfast or Dublin and was the daughter of Thomas G. Steele in Fairmont , West Virginia , at the time of her marriage to White . Steele arrived in the United States at the age of seven and was raised in Fairmont . Steele 's father was a native of Dublin and was the first secretary of the Grand Lodge of Odd Fellows of West Virginia . White and his wife Catharine had four children , two sons and two daughters : 
 White 's second wife , Catharine , died in 1911 in Romney and was interred at Indian Mound Cemetery . 
 = = Personal possessions = = 
 White had in his possession a number of antiques and pieces of furniture of significant historical value . Among these were items once possessed by Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron including a pair of <unk> with heavy brass heads and a fender , possibly in use at Lord Fairfax 's Greenway Court estate . White also possessed a richly inlaid table made of several types of wood , which once belonged to his grandfather , Virginia judge Robert White . Beneath the table 's framework was pasted a small slip of paper on which Robert White signed his name and the date , 1789 . Historian Hu Maxwell noted the similarity between the handwriting of White , his father John Baker White , and his grandfather Robert White . White also owned a sugar bowl from Switzerland that had originated in China and had been in the possession of the Streit and White families for over two centuries . 
 = Dalhousie University = 
 Dalhousie University ( commonly known as Dal ) is a public research university in Nova Scotia , Canada , with three campuses in Halifax , a fourth in Bible Hill , and a fifth in Saint John New Brunswick . Dalhousie offers more than 4 @,@ 000 courses and 180 degree programs in twelve undergraduate , graduate , and professional faculties . The university is a member of the U15 , a group of research @-@ intensive universities in Canada . 
 Dalhousie was established as a nonsectarian college in 1818 by the eponymous Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia , George Ramsay , 9th Earl of Dalhousie . The college did not hold its first class until 1838 , until then operating sporadically due to financial difficulties . It reopened for a third time in 1863 following a reorganization that brought a change of name to " The Governors of Dalhousie College and University " . The university formally changed its name to " Dalhousie University " in 1997 through provincial legislation , the same legislation that merged the institution with the Technical University of Nova Scotia . 
 The university 's notable alumni include a Nobel Prize winner , two Canadian Prime Ministers , two Herzberg Prize winners , a NASA astronaut who was the first American woman to walk in space , 89 Rhodes Scholars , and a range of other top government officials , academics , and business leaders . The university ranked 235th in the 2014 QS World University Rankings , 226 @-@ 250th in the 2014 @-@ 2015 Times Higher Education World University Rankings , and 201 – 300th in the 2014 Academic Ranking of World Universities . Dalhousie is a centre for marine research , and is host to the headquarters of the Ocean Tracking Network . 
 The Dalhousie library system operates the largest library in Atlantic Canada , and holds the largest collection of agricultural resource material in the region . The university operates a total of fourteen residences . There are currently two student unions that represent student interests at the university : the Dalhousie Student Union and the Dalhousie Association for Graduate Students . Dalhousie 's varsity teams , the Tigers , compete in the Atlantic University Sport conference of Canadian Interuniversity Sport . Dalhousie 's Faculty of Agriculture varsity teams are called the Dalhousie Rams , and compete in the <unk> and CCAA . Dalhousie is a coeducational university with more than 18 @,@ 000 students and 110 @,@ 000 alumni . 
 = = History = = 
 Dalhousie was founded as the Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia George Ramsay , 9th Earl of Dalhousie desired a non @-@ denominational college in Halifax . Financing largely came from customs duties collected by a previous Lieutenant Governor , John Coape Sherbrooke , during the War of 1812 occupation of Castine , Maine ; Sherbrooke invested GBP £ 7 @,@ 000 as an initial endowment and reserved £ 3 @,@ 000 for the physical construction of the college . The college was established in 1818 , though it faltered shortly after as Ramsay left Halifax to serve as the Governor General of British North America . The school was structured upon the principles of the University of Edinburgh , where lectures were open to all , regardless of religion or nationality . The University of Edinburgh was located near Ramsay 's home in Scotland . 
 In 1821 Dalhousie College was officially incorporated by the Nova Scotia House of Assembly under the 1821 Act of Incorporation . The college did not hold its first class until 1838 ; operation of the college was intermittent and no degrees were awarded . In 1841 an Act of the Nova Scotia House of Assembly conferred university powers on Dalhousie . 
 In 1863 the college opened for a third time and was reorganized by another legislative act , which added " University " to the school 's name : " The Governors of Dalhousie College and University " . Dalhousie reopened with six professors and one tutor . When it awarded its first degrees in 1866 the student body consisted of 28 students working toward degrees and 28 occasional students . The first female graduate was Margaret Florence Newcome from Grafton , Nova Scotia , who earned her degree in 1885 . Despite the reorganization and an increase in students , money continued to be a problem for the institution . In 1879 , amid talks of closure due to the university 's dire financial situation , a wealthy New York publisher with Nova Scotian roots , George Munro , began to donate to the university ; Munro was brother @-@ in @-@ law to Dalhousie 's Board of Governors member John Forrest . Munro is credited with rescuing Dalhousie from closure , and in honour of his contributions Dalhousie observes a university holiday called George Munro Day on the first Friday of each February . 
 Originally located at the space now occupied by Halifax City Hall , the college moved in 1886 to Carleton Campus and spread gradually to Studley Campus . Dalhousie grew steadily during the 20th century . From 1889 to 1962 the Halifax Conservatory was affiliated with and awarded degrees through Dalhousie . In 1920 several buildings were destroyed by fire on the campus of the University of King 's College in Windsor , Nova Scotia . Through a grant from the Carnegie Foundation , King 's College relocated to Halifax and entered into a partnership with Dalhousie that continues to this day . 
 Dalhousie expanded on 1 April 1997 when provincial legislation mandated an amalgamation with the nearby Technical University of Nova Scotia . This merger saw reorganization of faculties and departments to create the Faculty of Engineering , Faculty of Computer Science and the Faculty of Architecture and Planning . From 1997 to 2000 , the Technical University of Nova Scotia operated as a constituent college of Dalhousie called Dalhousie Polytechnic of Nova Scotia ( <unk> ) until the collegiate system was dissolved . The legislation that merged the two schools also formally changed the name of the institution to its present form , Dalhousie University . On 1 September 2012 the Nova Scotia Agricultural College merged into Dalhousie to form a new Faculty of Agriculture , located in Bible Hill , Nova Scotia . 
 = = Campuses = = 
 Dalhousie has three campuses within the Halifax Peninsula and a fourth , the Agricultural Campus , in Bible Hill , Nova Scotia . The largest , Studley Campus , serves as the primary campus ; it houses the majority of the university 's academic buildings such as faculties , athletic facilities , and the university 's Student Union Building . The campus is largely surrounded by residential neighbourhoods . Robie Street divides it from the adjacent Carleton Campus , which houses the faculties of dentistry , medicine , and other health profession departments . The campus is adjacent to two large teaching hospitals affiliated with the school : the <unk> Health Centre and the Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre . 
 Sexton Campus in Downtown Halifax hosts the engineering , architecture and planning faculties . Sexton Campus served as the campus of the Technical University of Nova Scotia prior to amalgamation . The Agricultural Campus in Bible Hill , a suburban community of Truro , Nova Scotia , served as the campus for the Nova Scotia Agricultural College prior to its merger with Dalhousie in 2011 . 
 The buildings at Dalhousie vary in age from Hart House , which was completed in 1864 , to the Collaborative Health Education Building , completed in 2015 . The original building of Dalhousie University was completed in 1824 on Halifax 's Grand Parade . It was demolished in 1885 when the university outgrew the premises , and the City of Halifax sought possession of the entire Grand Parade . Halifax City Hall presently occupies the site of the original Dalhousie College . 
 = = = Libraries and museums = = = 
 The university has five libraries . The largest , Killam Memorial Library , opened in 1971 . It is the largest academic library in Atlantic Canada with over one million books and 40 @,@ 000 journals . The library 's collection largely serves the faculties of arts and social sciences , sciences , management , and computer science . The W. K. Kellogg Health Science Library provides services largely for the faculties of dentistry , medicine , and other health professions . The Sexton Design & Technology Library is located within Sexton Campus . Its collection largely serves those in the faculties of engineering , architecture and planning , and houses the university 's rare books collection . The Sir James Dunn Law Library holds the university 's collection of common law materials , legal periodicals , as well as books on international law , health law , and environmental law . MacRae Library is located at the university 's Agricultural Campus , and has the largest collection of agricultural resource material in Atlantic Canada . The Dalhousie University Archives houses official records of , or relating to , or people / activities connected with Dalhousie University and its founding institutions . The archives also houses material related to theatre , business and labour in Nova Scotia . The collection consists of manuscripts , texts , photographs , audio @-@ visual material , microfilm , music , and artifacts . 
 The biology department operates the Thomas McCulloch Museum . The most notable of the museum 's exhibits is its preserved birds collection . Other exhibits include its collection of <unk> ceramic mushrooms , its coral and shell collection , and its butterfly and insect collection . The museum 's namesake Thomas McCulloch was a Scottish Presbyterian minister who served as Dalhousie 's first president and created the Audubon mounted bird collection which is now housed at the museum . 
 The Dalhousie Art Gallery is both a public gallery and an academic support unit housed since 1971 on the lowest level of the Dalhousie Arts Centre . Admission is free of charge . It is host to a permanent collection of over 1000 works . Some of the outdoor sculptures around the campus are part of this collection , such as the distinctive Marine Venus which has sat in the median of University Avenue since 1969 . A notable exhibition from the Dalhousie Art Gallery includes " Archives of the Future " ( March – April 2016 ) exploring the relationship between art creation and commerce with work by artists Zachary Gough , Dawn Georg , Sharlene <unk> , Katie Vida and Dana Claxton . 
 = = = Housing and student facilities = = = 
 The university has eleven student residences throughout its Halifax campuses : Eliza Ritchie Hall , Gerard Hall , Howe Hall , <unk> Place , Mini Rez , O 'Brien Hall , Residence Houses , Risley Hall , Shirreff Hall , <unk> Apartments , and Graduate House . The largest , Howe Hall in Studley Campus , houses 716 students during the academic year . Howe Hall 's most recent addition to the residence is called Fountain . It is the only residence in Howe Hall to have a sink in every room . The university also operates three residences in its Agricultural Campus : Chapman House , Fraser House , and Truman House . The largest residence in the Agricultural Campus is Chapman House , housing 125 students during the academic year . The residences are represented by a Residence Council responsible for resident concerns , providing entertainment services , organizing events , and upholding rules and regulations . 
 The Student Union Building serves as the main student activity centre . Completed in 1968 , it is located in the Studley Campus . The Student Union building hosts a number of student societies and organization offices , most notably the Dalhousie Student Union . The building houses five restaurants , both independently owned and international franchises such as Tim Hortons . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 Dalhousie University is actively involved in sustainability issues and has received a number of sustainability awards and recognition for academic programs , university operations , and research . In 2015 , Dalhousie received a GOLD rating from <unk> STARS ( Version 2 @.@ 0 ) . In 2009 , the university signed the University and College Presidents ’ Climate Change Statement of Action for Canada to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases . Dalhousie is also a signatory of UNEP 's International Declaration on Cleaner Production . In 1999 , the university signed the Talloires Declaration , which committed Dalhousie and other higher education institutions to developing , creating , supporting , and maintaining sustainability . 
 In 2008 , the College of Sustainability , the Office of Sustainability , and the Dalhousie Student Union Sustainability Office were formed . During 2008 , the President ’ s Advisory Council on Sustainability was also created . The council meets quarterly to discuss pan @-@ university sustainability issues [ 48 ] . Dalhousie ’ s international award @-@ winning College of Sustainability offers an undergraduate Major in Environment , Sustainability and Society ( ESS ) integrating with seven bachelor 's degrees and forty subjects across five faculties . The College of Sustainability offers a virtual and a physical space for the intersection of interdisciplinary collaboration , conversation , and teaching with a core of cross @-@ appointed Dalhousie faculty members joined by visiting fellows , distinguished guest lecturers , community leaders , and environmental advocates . In addition , the Sustainability Leadership Certificate program offers students the opportunity to participate in an engaged exploration of personal and group leadership and empowers their sense of personal agency to address environmental and social change . 
 The Office of Sustainability spearheads a number of campus sustainability plans and policies including the Climate Change Plan , Natural Environment Plan , and Green Building policy . A number of initiatives have been developed and implemented with campus partners including numerous energy and water retrofits , residence Eco @-@ Olympics competition , an Employee Sustainability Leadership Program , and an Employee Bus Pass . The Dalhousie Student Union Sustainability Office promotes awareness and behaviour change . <unk> hosts “ Green Week , ” the “ Green Gala ” and the “ <unk> Awards ” to celebrate campus accomplishments on sustainability . A number of student societies are also active in sustainability issues from on @-@ campus gardening and food security to environmental law . 
 = = Administration = = 
 University governance is conducted through the Board of Governors and the Senate , both of which were given much of their present power in the Unofficial Consolidation of an Act for the Regulation and Support of Dalhousie College in Chapter 24 of the Acts of 1863 . This statute replaced ones from 1820 , 1823 , 1838 , 1841 and 1848 , and has since been supplemented 11 times , most recently in 1995 . The Board is responsible for conduct , management , and control of the university and of its property , revenues , business , and affairs . Board members , known as Governors of the Board , include the university 's chancellor , president , and 25 other members . Members include people from within the university community such as four approved representatives from Dalhousie Student Union , and those in the surrounding community , such as the Mayor of Halifax . The Senate is responsible for the university 's academics , including standards for admission and qualifications for degrees , diplomas , and certificates . The Senate consists of 73 positions granted to the various faculty representatives , academic administrators , and student representatives . 
 The president acts as the chief executive officer and is responsible to the Board of Governors and to the Senate for the supervision of administrative and academic <unk> <unk> is the 11th president of the university , and has served since 2013 . Thomas McCulloch served as the first president when the office was created in 1838 . John Forrest was the longest @-@ serving president , holding the office from 1885 to 1911 . 
 = = = Affiliated institutions = = = 
 The University of King 's College is a post @-@ secondary institution in Halifax affiliated with Dalhousie . Established in 1789 , it was the first post @-@ secondary institution in English Canada and the oldest English @-@ speaking Commonwealth university outside the United Kingdom . The University of King 's College was formerly an independent institution located in Windsor , Nova Scotia , until 1920 , when a fire ravaged its campus . To continue operation , the University of King 's College accepted a generous grant from the Carnegie Foundation , although the terms of the grant required that it move to Halifax and enter into association with Dalhousie . Under the agreement , King 's agreed to pay the salaries of a number of Dalhousie professors , who in turn were to help in the management and academic life of the college . Students at King 's were to have access to all of the amenities Dalhousie , and the academic programs at King 's would fold into the College of Arts and Sciences at Dalhousie . Presently , students of both institutions are allowed to switch between the two throughout their enrolment . In spite of the shared academic programs and facilities , the University of King 's College maintains its own scholarships , bursaries , athletics programs , and student residences . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 The university completed the 2011 – 12 year with revenues of $ 573 @.@ 597 million and expenses of $ 536 @.@ 451 million , yielding a surplus of $ 37 @.@ 146 million . The largest source of revenue for the university was provincial operational grants , which made up 32 percent of revenue . Tuition fees generated $ 123 @.@ 2 million in the 2011 – 12 fiscal year , making up 21 percent of revenue . As of 31 March 2012 , Dalhousie 's endowment was valued at $ 400 @.@ 6 million . 
 = = Academics = = 
 Dalhousie is a publicly funded research university , and a member of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada , as well as the U15 , a group of Canadian research @-@ intensive universities . As of 2011 , there were 18 @,@ 220 students enrolled at the university and 3 @,@ 700 courses in over 190 degree programs . Dalhousie offers more than 3 @,@ 700 courses and 190 degree programs in twelve undergraduate , graduate , and professional faculties . The requirements for admission differ between students from Nova Scotia , students from other provinces in Canada , and international students due to lack of uniformity in marking schemes . The requirements for admission also differ depending on the program . In 2011 , the secondary school average for incoming first @-@ year undergraduate students was 85 percent . 
 Canadian students may apply for financial aid such as the Nova Scotia Student Assistance Program and Canada Student Loans and Grants through the federal and provincial governments . Financial aid may also be provided in the form of loans , grants , bursaries , scholarships , fellowships , debt reduction , interest relief , and work programs . 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 The 2015 @-@ 2016 Times Higher Education World University Rankings placed Dalhousie 201 – 250th in the world . The 2014 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 235th . According to the 2014 Academic Ranking of World Universities rankings , the university ranked 201 – 300 in the world and 8 – 17th in Canada . In terms of national rankings , Maclean 's ranked Dalhousie 7th in their 2014 Medical Doctoral university rankings . Dalhousie was ranked in spite of having opted out — along with several other universities in Canada — of participating in Maclean 's graduate survey since 2006 . 
 A number of Dalhousie 's individual programs and faculties have gained accolades nationally and internationally . In Maclean 's 2013 common law school rankings , the Schulich School of Law placed 6th in Canada . In the QS rankings of law programs , the university placed 51 – 100 in the world . The Rowe School of Business was named the most innovative business school in Canada by European CEO magazine on 17 November 2010 . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 Dalhousie University is a member of the U15 , a group that represents 15 of Canada ’ s most research @-@ intensive universities . Out of 50 universities in Canada , Research Infosource ranked Dalhousie University the 16th most research @-@ intensive for 2011 , with a sponsored research income of $ 125 @.@ 147 million , averaging $ 124 @,@ 500 per faculty member . In 2003 and 2004 , The Scientist placed Dalhousie among the top five places in the world outside the United States for postdoctoral work and conducting scientific research . In 2007 Dalhousie topped the list of The Scientist ’ s “ Best Places to Work in Academia ” . The annual list divides research and academic institutions into American and international lists ; Dalhousie University ranked first in the international category . According to a survey conducted by The Scientist , Dalhousie was the best non @-@ commercial scientific institute in which to work in Canada . 
 In terms of research performance , High Impact Universities 2010 ranked Dalhousie 239th out of 500 universities , and 12th in Canada . The university was ranked 194th out of 500 universities and 12th in the country for research performance in the fields of medicine , dentistry , pharmacology , and health sciences . The Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan ( HEEACT ) ranked Dalhousie 279th in the world and 12th in Canada for its 2011 scientific paper 's performances . HEEACT had also ranked Dalhousie 86th in the world and fourth nationally for research performance in <unk> in its 2010 rankings . 
 Marine research at Dalhousie has become a large focus of the university , with many of the university 's faculty members involved in some form of marine research . Notably , Dalhousie is the headquarters of the Ocean Tracking Network , a research effort using implanted acoustic transmitters to study fish migration patterns . Dalhousie houses a number of marine research pools , a wet laboratory , and a benthic flume , which are collectively known as the <unk> laboratory . Dalhousie is one of the founding members of the Halifax Marine Research Institute , founded on 2 June 2011 . The institute , which is a partnership between a number of private industries , government , and post @-@ secondary institutions , was designed to help increase the scale , quality , internationalization and impact of marine research in the region . In 2011 , the university , along with WWF @-@ Canada , created the Conservation Legacy For Oceans , which aimed at providing scholarships , funding , curriculum development , and work placements for students and academics dedicated to marine research , law , management , and policy making . 
 Many of Dalhousie 's faculties and departments focus on marine research . The Faculty of Engineering operates the Ocean Research Centre Atlantic , which is dedicated to research and tests in naval and off @-@ shore engineering . Schulich School of Law also operates the Marine & Environmental Law Institute , which carries out research and conducts consultancy activities for governmental and non @-@ governmental organizations . The school 's Department of Political Science similarly operates the Centre for Foreign Policy Studies , which is primarily concerned with the fields of Canadian and American foreign , security , and defence policy , including maritime security policy . 
 = = Student life = = 
 The student body of Dalhousie is currently represented by two student unions ; the Dalhousie Student Union , which represents the general student population , and the Dalhousie Association for Graduate Students , which represents the interests of graduate students specifically . Dalhousie Student Union began as the Dalhousie Student Government in 1863 , and was renamed the University Student Council before taking its present name . The student union recognizes more than 100 student organizations and societies . The organizations and clubs accredited at Dalhousie cover a wide range of interests including academics , culture , religion , social issues , and recreation . Accredited extracurricular organizations at the university fall under the jurisdiction of the Dalhousie Student Union , and must conform to its by @-@ laws . As of 2011 , there were three sororities ( Omega Pi , Iota Beta Chi , and Alpha Gamma Delta ) and three fraternities ( Phi Delta Theta , Sigma Chi , and Phi Kappa Pi ) . They operate as non @-@ accredited organizations and are not recognized by the Dalhousie Student Union . 
 The university 's student population operates a number of media outlets . The main student newspaper , The Dalhousie Gazette , claims to be the oldest student @-@ run newspaper in North America . It is published Thursdays , and is distributed to over 100 locations around the Halifax area . The newspaper 's offices are in the Student Union building . Dalhousie 's student population runs a radio station which began as a radio club in 1964 , and began to broadcast and operate as <unk> in 1975 ; it began FM frequency broadcasting in 1985 . <unk> acquired its present frequency 88 @.@ 1 in 2006 alongside an upgrading of its transmitting power . 
 = = = Clubs and societies = = = 
 In addition to the efforts made by the Dalhousie Student Union ( <unk> ) Council , Dalhousie students have created and participated in over 320 clubs / societies . The Management Society , for example , is a group of students in the Faculty of Management who group together to enhance the experience of students in that faculty by hosting events , providing assistance and giving back . Dalhousie offers a website named " Tiger Society " which lists all current clubs and societies that are available for students to join . Through this website , students can request to join a society . Dalhousie also holds a Society Fair at the beginning of each fall and winter semester , in which all societies are given the opportunity to display their purpose / efforts and recruit new members . Student societies partake in a range of activities from simple gatherings , study groups , bake sales , intramural sports teams , to organizing larger scale fundraising events . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 Dalhousie 's sports teams are called the Tigers . The Tigers varsity teams participate in the Atlantic University Sport ( AUS ) of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport ( CIS ) . There are teams for basketball , hockey , soccer , swimming , track and field , cross country running , and volleyball . The Tigers garnered a number of championships in the first decade of the 20th century , winning 63 AUS championships and 2 CIS championships . More than 2 @,@ 500 students participate in competitive clubs , intramural sport leagues , and tournaments . Opportunities are offered at multiple skill levels across a variety of sports . Dalhousie has six competitive sports clubs and 17 recreational clubs . Dalhousie 's Agricultural Campus operates its own varsity team , called the Dalhousie Rams . The Rams varsity team participates in the Atlantic Collegiate Athletic Association , a member of the Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association . The Rams varsity teams include badminton , basketball , rugby , soccer , volleyball , and woodsmen . 
 Dalhousie has a number of athletic facilities open to varsity teams and students . <unk> is the largest main fitness and recreational facility . It houses a large fieldhouse , an Olympic @-@ sized swimming pool , an indoor running track , weight rooms , courts and other facilities . Wickwire Field , with a seating capacity of up to 1 @,@ 200 , is the university 's main outdoor field and is host to the varsity football , soccer , field hockey , lacrosse and rugby teams . Other sporting facilities include the Studley Gymnasium , and the Sexton Gymnasium and field . The Memorial Arena , home to the varsity hockey team , was demolished in 2012 . The school is working to build a new arena jointly with nearby Saint Mary 's University , whose facility is also aging . The Agricultural Campus has one athletic facility , the <unk> Athletic Centre . 
 As of 2010 , through the efforts of alumni and devoted volunteers , the Dalhousie Football Club was reinstated . Playing in the AFL ( Atlantic Football League ) , the team operates on donations and registration from its players . The team plays its home games at Wickwire Field . Additionally , the university boasts the first quidditch team in Atlantic Canada . As of 2014 , the Dalhousie Tigers Quidditch varsity club is the top @-@ ranked team in the area and , though still developing , is showing great promise for regional and national bids in the future . 
 = = Insignia and other representations = = 
 = = = Seal = = = 
 The Dalhousie seal is based on the heraldic achievement of the Clan Ramsay of Scotland , of which founder George Ramsay was clan head . The heraldic achievement consists of five parts : shield , coronet , crest , supporters , and motto . One major difference between the Ramsay coat of arms and the university seal is that the Ramsay seal features a griffin and greyhound , and the Dalhousie seal has two dragons supporting the eagle @-@ adorned shield . Initially , the Ramsay coat of arms was used to identify Dalhousie , but the seal has evolved with the amalgamations the university has undergone . The seal was originally silver @-@ coloured , but in 1950 , the university 's Board of Governors changed it to gold to match the university 's colours , gold and black . These colours were adopted in 1887 , after the rugby team led the debate about college colours for football jerseys . The shield and eagle of Dalhousie 's seal have been used as the logo since 1987 , with the present incarnation in use since 2003 , which includes the tagline " inspiring minds " . 
 = = = Motto and song = = = 
 The university motto Ora et <unk> translates from Latin as " pray and work " ; it adopted in 1870 from the Earl of Dalhousie 's motto to replace the university 's original one , which the administration believed did not convey confidence . The original motto was <unk> , which <unk> as Perhaps , and first appeared in the first Dalhousie Gazette of 1869 . It was from Virgil 's epic poem Aeneid , Book 1 , line 203 , <unk> et haec olim <unk> <unk> , which translates as " Perhaps the time may come when these difficulties will be sweet to remember " . 
 A number of songs are commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement , convocation , and athletic contests , including " Carmina <unk> " , written in Halifax in 1882 . The Dalhousie University songbook was compiled by Charles B. <unk> in 1904 . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Dalhousie graduates have found success in a variety of fields , serving as heads of a diverse array of public and private institutions . Dalhousie University has over 110 @,@ 000 alumni . Throughout Dalhousie 's history , faculty , alumni , and former students have played prominent roles in many fields , and include 89 Rhodes Scholars . 
 Dalhousie has also educated Nobel laureates . Astrophysicist and Dalhousie alumni Arthur B. McDonald ( BSc ’ 64 , MSc ’ 65 ) received the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physics for identifying neutrino change identities and mass . McDonald is one of only four Canadians awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics . McDonald was also previously awarded the Herzberg Prize and the Benjamin Franklin Prize in physics . 
 Notable politicians who have graduated from Dalhousie include two Prime Ministers of Canada , R. B. Bennett and Joe Clark . Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney attended Dalhousie Law School , though he failed after his first year . Eight graduates have served as Lieutenant Governors : John Crosbie , Myra Freeman , Clarence Gosse , John Keiller MacKay , Henry Poole <unk> , John Robert Nicholson , Fabian O 'Dea , and Albert Walsh . Twelve graduates have served as provincial premiers : Allan Blakeney , John Buchanan , Alex Campbell , Amor De Cosmos , Darrell Dexter , Joe <unk> , John Hamm , Angus Lewis Macdonald , Russell MacLellan , Gerald Regan , Robert Stanfield , Clyde Wells , and Danny Williams . The first woman appointed to the Supreme Court of Canada , Bertha Wilson , was a graduate from Dalhousie Law School . 
 Prominent business leaders who studied at Dalhousie include Jamie Baillie , former CEO of Credit Union Atlantic , Graham Day , former CEO of British Shipbuilders , Sean <unk> , former CEO of WestJet , and Charles Peter <unk> , former president and CEO of Xerox . Other notable graduates of Dalhousie includes Donald O. Hebb , who helped advance the field of neuropsychology , and Kathryn D. Sullivan , the first American woman to walk in space . 
 Michel Trudeau ( 1975 @-@ 1998 ) , deceased brother of Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau , and son of the 15th Prime Minister of Canada , Pierre Elliott Trudeau , studied microbiology at Dalhousie . 
 = Roekiah = 
 Roekiah ( Perfected Spelling : <unk> ; born 1917 – died 2 September 1945 ) , often credited as Miss Roekiah , was an Indonesian kroncong singer and film actress . The daughter of two stage performers , she began her career at the age of seven ; by 1932 she had become well known in Batavia , Dutch East Indies ( now Jakarta , Indonesia ) , as a singer and stage actress . Around this time she met Kartolo , whom she married in 1934 . The two acted in the 1937 hit film Terang Boelan , in which Roekiah and Rd Mochtar played young lovers . 
 After the film 's commercial success , Roekiah , Kartolo , and most of the cast and crew of Terang Boelan were signed to Tan 's Film , first appearing for the company in their 1938 production Fatima . They acted together in two more films before Mochtar left the company in 1940 ; through these films , Roekiah and Mochtar became the colony 's first on @-@ screen couple . Mochtar 's replacement , Rd Djoemala , acted with Roekiah in four films , although these were less successful . After the Japanese invaded the Indies in 1942 , Roekiah took only one more film role before her death ; most of her time was used entertaining Japanese forces . 
 During her life Roekiah was a fashion and beauty icon , featuring in advertisements and drawing comparisons to Dorothy Lamour and Janet Gaynor . Though most of the films in which she appeared are now lost , she has continued to be cited as a film pioneer , and a 1969 article stated that " in her time [ Roekiah ] reached a level of popularity which , one could say , has not been seen since " . Of her five children with Kartolo , one – Rachmat Kartolo – entered acting . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Roekiah was born in Bandoeng ( now known as Bandung ) , West Java , Dutch East Indies , in 1917 to Mohammad Ali and Ningsih , actors with the Opera <unk> Indra <unk> troupe ; Ali was originally from Belitung , while Ningsih was of Sundanese descent and came from Cianjur . Though Roekiah learned acting mainly from her parents , she also studied the craft with other members of their troupe . The trio were constantly travelling , leaving Roekiah with no time for a formal education . By the mid @-@ 1920s they were with another troupe , the Opera <unk> . 
 Roekiah insisted on becoming an actress , despite the opposition of her family , and asked her mother for permission to perform on stage . Ningsih agreed , with one condition : Roekiah could only perform once . When the seven @-@ year @-@ old Roekiah took to the stage for the first time , Mohammad Ali – unaware of the agreement between his wife and daughter – rushed on stage and insisted that Roekiah stop singing . Afterwards , she refused to eat until her parents ultimately relented . Roekiah performed regularly afterwards with the troupe . 
 By 1932 , the year she joined Palestina Opera in Batavia ( modern @-@ day Jakarta ) , Roekiah had become a well @-@ known stage actress and singer of kroncong music ( traditional music with Portuguese influences ) . She was admired not only for her voice , but her beauty . While with Palestina she met Kartolo , an actor , pianist , and songwriter with the troupe ; they married later that year . The new couple soon left Palestina , then took a month 's hiatus before joining the group <unk> on a tour in Singapore . They returned to the Indies in 1936 . 
 = = = Film career = = = 
 = = = = Partnership with Rd Mochtar = = = = 
 In 1937 Roekiah made her first film appearance as the leading lady in Albert Balink 's Terang Boelan ( Full Moon ) . She and her co @-@ star Rd Mochtar played two lovers who elope so that Roekiah 's character need not marry an opium smuggler ; Kartolo also had a small role . The film was a commercial success , earning over 200 @,@ 000 Straits dollars during its international release ; the Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran credited Roekiah as the " dynamite " which led to this positive reception . 
 Despite the success of Terang Boelan , its production company Algemeen Nederlandsch Indisch Filmsyndicaat stopped all work on fiction films . Now jobless and depressed after the death of her mother , according to journalist W. <unk> , Roekiah " kept silent , constantly musing as if she were mentally disturbed " . In order to distract his wife , Kartolo gathered the other cast members from Terang Boelan and established the Terang Boelan Troupe , which toured to Singapore to popular acclaim ; this snapped Roekiah out of her melancholy . After the troupe returned to the Indies , most of the cast switched to Tan 's Film , including Roekiah and Kartolo ; the two also performed with the Lief Java kroncong group . 
 With Tan 's , the Terang Boelan cast appeared in the 1938 hit Fatima , starring Roekiah and Rd Mochtar . The film , in which Roekiah played the title role – a young woman who must fend away the advances of a gang leader while falling in love with a fisherman ( Rd Mochtar ) – closely followed the formula established by Terang Boelan . Roekiah 's acting received wide praise . One reviewer in the Batavia @-@ based Het Nieuws van den dag voor Nederlandsch @-@ Indië wrote that Roekiah 's " sober personification of injustice in the Malay adat wedding captivates even the European spectator " , while another , in the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad , found that Roekiah 's performance was appreciated by everyone . 
 Fatima was a massive commercial hit , earning 200 @,@ 000 gulden on a 7 @,@ 000 gulden budget . Following the film 's success , Tan 's continued to cast Roekiah with Rd Mochtar . They became the colony 's first on @-@ screen celebrity couple and were termed the Indies ' Charles Farrell – Janet Gaynor . The popularity of Roekiah – Rd Mochtar as a screen couple led other studios to follow with their own romantic pairings . The Teng Chun 's Java Industrial Film , for instance , paired Mohamad Mochtar and Hadidjah in Alang @-@ Alang ( Grass , 1939 ) . 
 In order to keep their new star , Tan 's Film spent a large amount of money . Roekiah and Kartolo received a monthly holding fee of 150 gulden and 50 gulden respectively , twice as much as they had been given for Terang Boelan . They were also given a house in Tanah Rendah , Batavia . Roekiah and Kartolo , for their part , continued to act for the company ; Kartolo often had small , comedic , roles , and Roekiah sang songs her husband had written . In 1939 they appeared together , again with Rd Mochtar as Roekiah 's romantic foil , in the Zorro @-@ influenced Gagak Item . Though not as successful as Roekiah 's previous works , the film was still profitable . A reviewer for the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad praised Roekiah 's " demure " acting . 
 Roekiah 's last film with Rd Mochtar , Siti Akbari , was released in 1940 . Possibly inspired by a poem of the same name by Lie Kim Hok , the film featured Roekiah in the title role , portraying a long @-@ suffering wife who remains faithful to her husband despite his infidelity . The film was well @-@ received , earning 1 @,@ 000 gulden on its first night in Surabaya , but was ultimately unable to return profits similar to Terang Boelan or Fatima . 
 = = = = Partnership with Djoemala = = = = 
 Amidst a wage dispute , Rd Mochtar left Tan 's for their competitor Populair Films in 1940 . Accordingly , the company began looking for a new on @-@ screen partner for Roekiah . Kartolo asked an acquaintance , a tailor @-@ cum @-@ entrepreneur named Ismail Djoemala to take the part ; though Djoemala had never acted before , he had sung with the group Malay <unk> in 1929 . After Kartolo asked him six times to act for Tan 's , Djoemala agreed . The company found the tall and good @-@ looking Djoemala a suitable replacement , and hired him , giving him the stage name Rd Djoemala . 
 Roekiah and Djoemala made their first film together , Sorga Ka Toedjoe ( Seventh Heaven ) , later that year . In the film , Roekiah played a young woman who , with the help of her lover , is able to reunite her blind aunt ( Annie Landouw ) with her estranged husband ( Kartolo ) . This film was a commercial success , and the reviews were positive . One , for the Soerabaijasch Handelsblad , opined that Djoemala was as good as , if not better , than Rd Mochtar . Another review , for the Singapore Free Press , wrote that " Roekiah fills the part of the heroine in a most praiseworthy manner " . In April of the following year Tan 's released <unk> , starring Roekiah as a young woman who goes to the city to earn money for her ailing family , ultimately marrying . Her performance received praise from the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad , which wrote that she had performed well in the difficult role . 
 Later in 1941 Roekiah and Djoemala completed <unk> <unk> ( Buried Treasure ) , an action @-@ filled film which followed two groups – the rightful heirs ( Roekiah being one of them ) and a band of criminals – in a race to find treasure buried in Banten . Roekiah and Djoemala worked on their final film together , Koeda Sembrani ( The Enchanted Horse ) , in early 1942 . In the film , adapted from One Thousand and One Nights , Roekiah took the role of Princess Shams @-@ al @-@ Nahar and was shown flying on a horse . The film was still incomplete when the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies began in March 1942 , though it was screened by October 1943 . 
 Altogether Roekiah and Djoemala acted in four films in two years . Biran argues this is evidence the company " wasted their treasure " , as its competitors used their stars more often ; Java Industrial Film , for instance , completed six films starring <unk> . Mochtar in 1941 alone . Though Roekiah 's films continued to be financial successes , they did not earn as large a profit as her earlier works . 
 = = = Japanese occupation and death = = = 
 Film production in the Indies declined after the Japanese occupation began in early 1942 ; the overlords forced all but one studio to close . In their place , the Japanese opened their own studio in the Indies , Nippon Eigasha , to produce propaganda for the war effort . Kartolo acted in the studio 's only feature film , Berdjoang ( Hope of the South ) , without Roekiah in 1943 . After a hiatus of several years , Roekiah also acted for the studio , taking a role in the short Japanese propaganda film Ke Seberang ( To the Other Side ) in 1944 . However , much of her time was spent touring Java with a theatrical company , entertaining Japanese troops . 
 Roekiah fell ill in February 1945 , not long after completing Ke Seberang . Despite this , and a miscarriage , she was unable to rest ; the Japanese forces insisted that she and Kartolo go on tour to Surabaya , in eastern Java . Upon her return to Jakarta , her condition became worse . After several months of treatment , she died on 2 September 1945 , mere weeks after Indonesia proclaimed its independence . Roekiah was buried in Kober Hulu , Jatinegara , Djakarta . Her funeral was attended by several luminaries , including the Minister of Education Ki Hajar Dewantara . 
 = = Family = = 
 Roekiah said that she felt Kartolo was a good match with her , stating that the marriage brought them " great fortune " . The two had had five children . After Roekiah 's death , Kartolo brought the children to his hometown at Yogyakarta . In order to support the family , he took a job with Radio Republik Indonesia , beginning in 1946 . There he spent most of the ongoing Indonesian National Revolution , an armed conflict and diplomatic struggle between newly proclaimed Indonesia and the Dutch Empire in which the newly proclaimed country attempted to receive international recognition of its independence . After the Dutch military launched Operation Kraai on 19 December 1948 , capturing Yogyakarta , Kartolo refused to collaborate with the returning colonial forces . Without a source of income , he fell ill , and died on 18 January 1949 . 
 One of the couple 's children died in Yogyakarta , aged ten . The remaining children were brought to Jakarta after the Indonesian National Revolution ended in 1950 , where they were raised by Kartolo 's close friend <unk> . One , Rachmat Kartolo , went on to be a singer and actor active up through the 1970s , known for songs such as " <unk> Hati " ( " Heartbroken " ) and films such as <unk> <unk> ( Tiger of Kemayoran ; 1965 ) and <unk> dalam Lumpur ( Breathing in the Mud ; 1970 ) . Two other sons , Jusuf and Imam , played in a band with their brother before finding careers elsewhere . The couple 's daughter , Sri <unk> , did not enter the entertainment industry . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The press viewed Roekiah fondly , and her new releases consistently received positive reviews . At the peak of Roekiah 's popularity , fans based their fashion decisions on what Roekiah wore on @-@ screen . Roekiah appeared regularly in advertisements , and numerous records with her vocal performances were available on the market . One fan , in a 1996 interview , recalled that Roekiah was " every man 's idol " , while others christened Roekiah as Indonesia 's Dorothy Lamour . Another fan , recalling a performance he had witnessed over fifty years earlier , stated : 
 Roekiah always left her audiences riveted to their seats when she began crooning her kroncong songs . She always got applause , before or after singing . Not only from the native [ Indonesians ] . Many Dutchmen diligently watched her performances ! 
 After Roekiah 's death , the Indonesian film industry searched for a replacement . The film scholar <unk> Imanjaya notes one instance where a film was advertised with the line " Roekiah ? No ! But Sofia in a new Indonesian film , Air Mata Mengalir di Tjitarum " . Roekiah 's films were screened regularly , but most are now lost . Movies in the Indies were recorded on highly @-@ flammable nitrate film , and after a fire destroyed much of Produksi Film Negara 's warehouse in 1952 , old films shot on nitrate were deliberately destroyed . Of Roekiah 's œuvre , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia only records Koeda Sembrani as being stored at Indonesia 's film archive , Sinematek Indonesia . 
 Writings about Roekiah after her death often cite her as an idol of Indonesia 's film industry . Imanjaya describes her as one of the industry 's first beauty icons ; he also credits her and Rd <unk> with introducing the concept of bankable stars to domestic cinema . Moderna magazine , in 1969 , wrote that " in her time [ Roekiah ] reached a level of popularity which , one could say , has not been seen since " . In 1977 Keluarga magazine styled her one of Indonesia 's " pioneering film stars " , writing that hers was " a natural talent , a combination of her personality and the tenderness and beauty of her face , always filled with romance " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Terang Boelan ( Full Moon ; 1937 ) 
 Fatima ( 1938 ) 
 Gagak Item ( Black Raven ; 1939 ) 
 Siti Akbari ( 1940 ) 
 Sorga Ka Toedjoe ( Seventh Heaven ; 1940 ) 
 <unk> ( 1940 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( Buried Treasure ; 1941 ) 
 Koeda Sembrani ( The Enchanted Horse ; 1942 ) 
 Ke Seberang ( To the Other Side ; 1944 ; short film ) 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Hypacrosaurus = 
 Hypacrosaurus ( meaning " near the highest lizard " [ Greek <unk> , hypo- = less + <unk> , akros , high ] , because it was almost but not quite as large as Tyrannosaurus ) was a genus of duckbill dinosaur similar in appearance to Corythosaurus . Like Corythosaurus , it had a tall , hollow rounded crest , although not as large and straight . It is known from the remains of two species that spanned 75 to 67 million years ago , in the Late Cretaceous of Alberta , Canada , and Montana , USA , and is the latest hollow @-@ crested duckbill known from good remains in North America . It was an obscure genus until the discovery in the 1990s of nests , eggs , and hatchlings belonging to H. stebingeri . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hypacrosaurus is most easily distinguished from other hollow @-@ crested duckbills ( lambeosaurines ) by its tall neural spines and the form of its crest . The neural spines , which project from the top of the vertebrae , are 5 to 7 times the height of the body of their respective vertebrae in the back , which would have given it a tall back in profile . The skull 's hollow crest is like that of Corythosaurus , but is more pointed along its top , not as tall , wider side to side , and has a small bony point at the rear . Unlike other lambeosaurines , the passages for the airways do not form an S @-@ curve in the crest ( at least not in H. altispinus ) . The animal is estimated to have been around 9 @.@ 1 meters ( 30 feet ) long , and to have weighed up to 4 @.@ 0 tonnes ( 4 @.@ 4 tons ) . As with most duckbills , its skeleton is otherwise not particularly remarkable , although some pelvic details are distinctive . Like other duckbills , it was a bipedal / quadrupedal herbivore . The two known species , H. altispinus and H. stebingeri , are not differentiated in the typical method , of unique characteristics , as H. stebingeri was described as transitional between the earlier Lambeosaurus and later Hypacrosaurus . Photographs of an adult H. stebingeri skull show an animal that looks very similar to H. altispinus . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Hypacrosaurus was a lambeosaurine hadrosaurid , and has been recognized as such since the description of its skull . Within the Lambeosaurinae , it is closest to Lambeosaurus and Corythosaurus , with Jack Horner and Phil Currie ( 1994 ) suggesting that H. stebingeri is transitional between Lambeosaurus and H. altispinus , and Michael K. Brett @-@ Surman ( 1989 ) suggesting that Hypacrosaurus and Corythosaurus are the same genus . These genera , particularly Corythosaurus and Hypacrosaurus , are regarded as the " helmeted " or " hooded " branch of the lambeosaurines , and the clade they form is sometimes informally designated Lambeosaurini . Although Suzuki et al . ' s 2004 redescription of Nipponosaurus found a close relationship between Nipponosaurus and Hypacrosaurus stebingeri , indicating that Hypacrosaurus may be paraphyletic , this was rejected in a later , more comprehensive reanalysis of lambeosaurines , which found the two species of Hypacrosaurus to form a clade without Nipponosaurus , with Corythosaurus and Olorotitan being the closest relatives . 
 The following cladogram illustrating the relationships of Hypacrosaurus and its close relatives was recovered in a 2012 phylogenetic analysis by Albert Prieto @-@ Márquez , Luis M. Chiappe and Shantanu H. Joshi . 
 = = Discovery and history = = 
 The type remains of Hypacrosaurus remains were collected in 1910 by Barnum Brown for the American Museum of Natural History . The remains , a partial postcranial skeleton consisting of several vertebrae and a partial pelvis ( AMNH <unk> ) , came from along the Red Deer River near Tolman Ferry , Alberta , Canada , from rocks of what is now known as the Horseshoe Canyon Formation ( early Maastrichtian , Upper Cretaceous ) . Brown described these remains , in combination with other postcranial bones , in 1913 as a new genus that he considered to be like Saurolophus . No skull was known at this time , but two skulls were soon discovered and described . 
 During this period , the remains of small hollow @-@ crested duckbills were described as their own genera and species . The first of these that figure into the history of Hypacrosaurus was Cheneosaurus <unk> , based on a skull and assorted limb bones , vertebrae , and pelvic bones from the Horseshoe Canyon Formation . Not long after , Richard Swann Lull and Nelda Wright identified an American Museum of Natural History skeleton ( AMNH <unk> ) from the Two Medicine Formation of Montana as a specimen of Procheneosaurus . These and other taxa were accepted as valid genera until the 1970s , when Peter Dodson showed that it was more likely that the " <unk> " were the juveniles of other established lambeosaurines . Although he was mostly concerned with the earlier , Dinosaur Park Formation genera Corythosaurus and Lambeosaurus , he suggested that Cheneosaurus would turn out to be composed of juvenile individuals of the contemporaneous Hypacrosaurus altispinus . This idea has become accepted , although not formally tested . The Two Medicine Procheneosaurus , meanwhile , was not quite like the other Procheneosaurus specimens studied by Dodson , and for good reason : it was much more like a species that would not be named until 1994 , H. stebingeri . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 H. altispinus , the type species , is known from 5 to 10 articulated skulls with some associated skeletal remains , from juvenile to adult individuals found in the Horseshoe Canyon Formation . H. stebingeri is known from an unknown but substantial number of individuals , with an age range of embryos to adults . The hypothesis that H. altispinus and H. stebingeri form a natural group excluding other known hadrosaur species may be incorrect , as noted in Suzuki et al . ' s 2004 redescription of Nipponosaurus ; their phylogenetic analysis found that <unk> was more closely related to H. altispinus than H. stebingeri was to H. altispinus . This was rejected by Evans and Reisz ( 2007 ) , though . 
 The new species Hypacrosaurus stebingeri was named for a variety of remains , including hatchlings with associated eggs and nests , found near the top of the late Campanian ( Upper Cretaceous ) Two Medicine Formation in Glacier County , Montana , and across the border in Alberta . These represent " the largest collection of baby skeletal material of any single species of hadrosaur known " . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 H. altispinus shared the Horseshoe Canyon Formation with fellow hadrosaurids Edmontosaurus and Saurolophus , hypsilophodont Parksosaurus , ankylosaurid Anodontosaurus , nodosaurid Edmontonia , horned dinosaurs <unk> , Anchiceratops , Arrhinoceratops , and Pachyrhinosaurus , pachycephalosaurid Stegoceras , ostrich @-@ mimics Ornithomimus and Struthiomimus , a variety of poorly known small theropods including troodontids and dromaeosaurids , and the tyrannosaurs Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus . The dinosaurs from this formation are sometimes known as Edmontonian , after a land mammal age , and are distinct from those in the formations above and below . The Horseshoe Canyon Formation is interpreted as having a significant marine influence , due to an encroaching Western Interior Seaway , the shallow sea that covered the midsection of North America through much of the Cretaceous . H. altispinus may have preferred to stay more landward . 
 The slightly older Two Medicine Formation , home to H. stebingeri , was also populated by another well @-@ known nesting hadrosaur , Maiasaura , as well as the troodontid Troodon , which is also known from nesting traces . The tyrannosaurid Daspletosaurus , caenagnathid Chirostenotes , dromaeosaurids Bambiraptor and Saurornitholestes , armored dinosaurs Edmontonia , <unk> , and Scolosaurus , hypsilophodont Orodromeus , hadrosaur Prosaurolophus , and horned dinosaurs Achelousaurus , Brachyceratops , Einiosaurus , and Rubeosaurus were also present . This formation was more distant from the Western Interior Seaway , higher and drier , with a more terrestrial influence . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 As a hadrosaurid , Hypacrosaurus would have been a bipedal / quadrupedal herbivore , eating a variety of plants . Its skull permitted a grinding motion analogous to chewing , and its teeth were continually replacing and packed into dental batteries that contained hundreds of teeth , only a relative handful of which were in use at any time . Plant material would have been cropped by its broad beak , and held in the jaws by a cheek @-@ like organ . Its feeding range would have extended from the ground to about 4 m ( 13 ft ) above . 
 = = = Nests and growth = = = 
 H. stebingeri laid roughly spherical eggs of 20 by 18 @.@ 5 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 by 7 @.@ 3 in ) , with embryos 60 cm ( 24 in ) long . Hatchlings were around 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) long . Young and embryonic individuals had deep skulls with only slight expansion in the bones that would one day form the crest . Growth was faster than that of an alligator and comparable to ratite growth , for several years , based on the amount of bone growth seen between lines of arrested growth ( analogous to growth rings in trees ) . Research by Lisa Cooper and colleagues on H. stebingeri indicates that this animal may have reached reproductive maturity at the age of 2 to 3 years , and reached full size at about 10 to 12 years old . The circumference of the thigh bone at postulated reproductive maturity was about 40 % that of its circumference at full size . The postulated growth rate of H. stebingeri outpaces those of tyrannosaurids ( predators of <unk> ) such as Albertosaurus and Tyrannosaurus ; rapidly growing <unk> would have had a better chance to reach a size large enough to be of defensive value , and beginning reproduction at an early age would also have been advantageous to a prey animal . Secondary cartilage has been found in the skull of a hatchling specimen of H. stebingeri . 
 = = = Crest functions = = = 
 The hollow crest of Hypacrosaurus most likely had social functions , such as a visual signal allowing individuals to identify sex or species , and providing a resonating chamber for making noises . The crest and its associated nasal passages have also figured in the debate about dinosaur endothermy , specifically in discussions about nasal turbinates . 
 <unk> are thin bones or cartilages that come in two types , with two functions . Nasal olfactory turbinates are found in all living tetrapods and function in smell . Respiratory turbinates function to prevent water loss through evaporation and are found only in birds and mammals , modern endotherms ( warm @-@ blooded animals ) who could lose a great deal of water while breathing because they breathe more often than comparably sized ectotherms ( cold @-@ blooded animals ) to support their higher metabolism . Ruben and others in 1996 concluded that respiratory turbinates were probably not present in Nanotyrannus , Ornithomimus or Hypacrosaurus based on CT scanning , thus there was no evidence that those animals were warm @-@ blooded . 
 = = = Paleopathology = = = 
 The discovery of tooth marks in the fibula of a Hypacrosaurus specimen inflicted by a bite from the teeth of Tyrannosaurus indicated that this , and other hadrosaurids were either preyed upon or scavenged by large theropod dinosaurs during the Late Cretaceous period . 
 = = = Thermoregulation = = = 
 Examining the oxygen @-@ isotope ratio from the bones from different parts of an extinct animal 's body should indicate which thermoregulation mode an animal used during its lifetime . An endothermic ( warm @-@ blooded ) animal should maintain a very similar body temperature throughout its entire body ( which is called homeothermy ) and therefore there should be little variation in the oxygen @-@ isotope ratio when measured in different bones . Alternatively , the oxygen @-@ isotope ratio differs considerably when measured throughout the body of an organism with an ectothermic ( cold @-@ blooded ) physiology . Oxygen @-@ isotope ratios calculated for Hypacrosaurus suggesting that the ratios varied little , indicating that Hypacrosaurus was a <unk> , and likely was endothermic . This is in contrast to the Ruben et al . ( 1996 ) finding that Hypacrosaurus was not warm @-@ blooded , which was based on the absence of nasal turbinates ( see Crest functions subsection , above ) . 
 = = Taphonomy = = 
 Taphonomy is the study of the processes an organism ’ s body undergoes after it dies , which includes a study of preservation , the cause of death , and the circumstances of burial . The large , monospecific assemblage of Hypacrosaurus stebingeri in Montana was interpreted as a group of dinosaurs that was killed by a volcanic ashfall . This assemblage is considered autochthonous , meaning that the remains are thought to have been buried on or near the same spot where the individuals died . The variety of ages in this group supports that this was a <unk> an actual life assemblage of animals . The cause of death in a volcanic ashfall is suffocation by the ash and by the gases released from volcanic eruptions . The preservation of this diverse group of dinosaurs provides researchers with a growth series , which is a sequence of growth stages from juvenile to adult . 
 = Bussard @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Bussard class of unprotected cruisers were built for the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) in the late 1880s and early 1890s . The class comprised six ships : Bussard , the lead ship , Falke , Seeadler , Cormoran , Condor , and Geier . Designed for service in Germany 's colonial empire , the class emphasized a long @-@ range cruising radius and relatively heavy armament ; they were also the last cruisers in the Kaiserliche Marine to be equipped with an auxiliary sailing rig . The ships were equipped with eight 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns . 
 All six ships served abroad for the majority of their careers , primarily in Africa and the south Pacific , where they <unk> in the suppression of uprisings such as the Boxer Rebellion in China and the Sokehs Rebellion in the Caroline Islands . Cormoran participated in the seizure of the Kiautschou Bay concession in China in 1897 , and Falke was involved in the Venezuela Crisis of 1902 – 03 . Bussard and Falke were broken up for scrap in 1912 , but the remaining four ships were still in service following the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 . 
 Cormoran was based in Tsingtao with unusable engines ; she was scuttled in the harbor since she was no longer operational . Geier briefly operated against British shipping in the Pacific before having to put into Hawaii for internment by the then @-@ neutral United States . After the United States entered the war in April 1917 , she was seized and commissioned into the US Navy as USS Schurz ; she served as an escort until she was accidentally sunk following a collision with a freighter in June 1918 . Seeadler and Condor , meanwhile , had been converted into mine storage hulks after the start of the war . Seeadler was destroyed by an accidental explosion in 1917 . Condor was the only member of the class to survive the war , and she was scrapped in 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Bussard class was designed for service abroad in Germany 's colonial possessions , and were an improvement over the preceding Schwalbe class of unprotected cruisers . The design for the Bussard class was prepared in 1888 . The ships were significantly larger and faster than the Schwalbe class , but mounted the same battery of guns — though only Bussard carried the same type of guns — the rest carried a newer , quick @-@ firing model . They were also the last cruiser class in the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) to be equipped with a sailing rig ; the subsequent unprotected cruiser Gefion was entirely steam @-@ powered . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Bussard class all differed slightly in their characteristics . The first two ships , Bussard and Falke , were 79 @.@ 62 meters ( 261 @.@ 2 ft ) long at the waterline and 82 @.@ 60 m ( 271 @.@ 0 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 12 @.@ 50 m ( 41 @.@ 0 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 45 m ( 14 @.@ 6 ft ) forward and 5 @.@ 63 m ( 18 @.@ 5 ft ) aft . They displaced 1 @,@ 559 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 534 long tons ) as designed and up to 1 @,@ 868 t ( 1 @,@ 838 long tons ) at full combat load . The next three ships , Seeadler , Condor , and Cormoran , were 79 @.@ 62 m ( 261 @.@ 2 ft ) long at the waterline and had the same overall length as their earlier sister ships . They had a beam of 12 @.@ 70 m ( 41 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 42 m ( 14 @.@ 5 ft ) forward and 5 @.@ 35 m ( 17 @.@ 6 ft ) aft . They displaced 1 @,@ 612 t ( 1 @,@ 587 long tons ) as designed and 1 @,@ 864 t ( 1 @,@ 835 long tons ) at full load . The last ship , Geier , was 79 @.@ 62 m long at the waterline and 83 @.@ 90 m ( 275 @.@ 3 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 10 @.@ 60 m ( 34 @.@ 8 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 74 m ( 15 @.@ 6 ft ) forward and 5 @.@ 22 m ( 17 @.@ 1 ft ) aft . 
 The cruisers ' hulls were constructed with transverse steel frames with yellow pine planking up to the upper deck . A layer of Muntz metal sheathing covered the hull to protect the wood from shipworm . The stem and <unk> were constructed with steel and timber . A bronze naval ram was fitted at the bow . The hull was divided into ten watertight compartments , and a double bottom was installed below the boiler rooms . The ships were good sea boats , but they rolled badly and the sponsons for the main guns caused severe vibration . Since Geier was laid down after the other five ships entered service , she was redesigned slightly to discard the sponsons , and so she did not suffer from bad vibration . They were very maneuverable , except for turns into the wind when steaming at low speed . The ships had a crew of 9 officers and 152 enlisted men . They carried a number of smaller boats , including one picket boat , one cutter , two yawls , and two dinghies . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Their propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 3 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines powered by four coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers ; the engines were rated at 2 @,@ 800 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 100 kW ) and were placed in their own engine rooms . The engines drove a pair of 3 @-@ bladed screws that were 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wide in diameter . The boilers were divided into two boiler rooms and were trunked into a single funnel . The ships were fitted with an auxiliary schooner barque rig with a total surface area of 856 to 877 m2 ( 9 @,@ 210 to 9 @,@ 440 sq ft ) . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . Each ship was equipped with a pair of electricity generators with a combined output of 24 kilowatts ( 32 hp ) at 67 volts . 
 The propulsion system provided a top speed of 15 @.@ 5 kn ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) , though all six ships exceeded their design speeds while on sea trials , reaching between 15 @.@ 7 to 16 @.@ 9 knots ( 29 @.@ 1 to 31 @.@ 3 km / h ; 18 @.@ 1 to 19 @.@ 4 mph ) . The ships carried between 170 to 205 t ( 167 to 202 long tons ; 187 to 226 short tons ) of coal as designed , and they could accommodate up to 305 to 320 t ( 300 to 315 long tons ; 336 to 353 short tons ) of coal using additional storage spaces . This provided a range of between 2 @,@ 990 to 3 @,@ 610 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 540 to 6 @,@ 690 km ; 3 @,@ 440 to 4 @,@ 150 mi ) at 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The first ship was armed with eight 10 @.@ 5 cm K L / 35 guns in single pedestal mounts , supplied with 800 rounds of ammunition in total . They had a range of 8 @,@ 200 m ( 26 @,@ 900 ft ) . The five subsequent ships were equipped with newer quick @-@ firing SK L / 35 versions of the 10 @.@ 5 cm guns . These newer guns also had a longer range , of 10 @,@ 800 m ( 35 @,@ 400 ft ) . Two guns were placed side by side on the forecastle , two on each broadside — one in a sponson and the other in a gun port — and two side by side on the quarterdeck . Geier did not use sponsons for the second pair of guns , instead simply mounting them on the upper deck . The gun armament was rounded out by five revolver cannon . The first five ships were also equipped with two 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , both of which were mounted on the deck . Geier instead had larger 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . Each ship carried five torpedoes . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 All six ships of the class spent the majority of their careers abroad , primarily in Germany 's colonial possessions in Africa and the Pacific . Seeadler visited the United States in March 1893 , along with the protected cruiser Kaiserin Augusta , for the belated celebrations for the 400th anniversary of Columbus 's crossing of the Atlantic . In July of that year , while assigned to the East Asia Division , Bussard and Falke assisted in the suppression of Mata 'afa Iosefo 's revolt in Samoa , along with a British corvette . Throughout the 1890s , Seeadler was assigned to Germany 's colonies in East Africa and Southwest Africa , where she suppressed local uprisings . 
 In November 1897 , Cormoran took part in the seizure of the Kiautschou Bay concession in the Shandong Peninsula in Qing China . Geier was present in the Caribbean during the Spanish – American War in 1898 , though she took no active role in the conflict . Between 1898 and 1900 , Bussard and Seeadler were modernized in Germany . In 1900 , Seeadler participated in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion in China , including a blockade of the Chinese coast . In December 1902 , Falke and the protected cruiser Vineta joined British forces in the Venezuela Crisis of 1902 – 03 after Venezuelan forces seized a British merchant ship . The two cruisers helped British warships bombard Venezuelan coastal fortifications and blockade the coast . 
 Cormoran and Geier were modernized between 1907 and 1909 ; only Falke and Condor never returned for major dockyard work . Condor and Cormoran suppressed the Sokehs Rebellion in the Caroline Islands in January 1911 , along with the light cruiser Leipzig . In 1912 , when the Second Balkan War broke out , Geier was stationed in the eastern Mediterranean Sea to observe the hostilities . Both Bussard and Falke were stricken from the naval register on 25 October 1912 and broken up the following year , at Hamburg and the Kaiserliche Werft in Danzig , respectively . 
 After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Seeadler was converted into a mine storage hulk in Wilhelmshaven . An accidental explosion in April 1917 destroyed the ship , and her wreck was never raised . Condor was used for the same purpose in Kiel ; she survived the war and was broken up for scrap in 1921 in Hamburg . Cormoran , still stationed in Tsingtao , was scuttled in the harbor because her engines were in poor condition . Geier meanwhile operated against British merchant shipping in the Pacific following the onset of hostilities . By October , she was running low on coal and had been isolated from any sources of support ; she therefore steamed to Hawaii , where she was interned by the US Navy . After the United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917 , she was seized and commissioned as USS Schurz for use as an escort vessel . She was sunk after colliding with a merchant ship in June 1918 . 
 = Spiritual Machines = 
 Spiritual Machines is the fourth studio album by the Canadian alternative rock band Our Lady Peace , released by Columbia Records in December 2000 . Although not initially intended , the project evolved into a conceptual interpretation of futurist and inventor Raymond Kurzweil 's 1999 book The Age of Spiritual Machines . Short tracks of spoken dialog from Kurzweil himself are interspersed among the actual songs on the album . The Kurzweil <unk> keyboard , one of his inventions , was utilized throughout the recording of the album . 
 The album was written and recorded in two months while the band was still on tour in support of their previous record , Happiness ... Is Not a Fish That You Can Catch , which had only been released 14 months prior . A combination of lead singer @-@ songwriter Raine Maida 's prolific songwriting at the time and lead @-@ guitarist Mike Turner 's discovery of The Age of Spiritual Machines in a bookstore hurried the completion of the album . The band only took a break from recording to organize and perform at Summersault in 2000 . Unlike their previous releases , this one features a more organic , acoustic sound , and less obvious layering and electronic texturing . 
 Spiritual Machines has been noted as being the end of an era for Our Lady Peace , as it was the last album produced by the band 's longtime producer Arnold Lanni , the last to feature original guitarist Mike Turner in full , and the last studio album to feature art model Saul Fox on its cover . It was also the last album to feature Maida 's high @-@ falsetto singing voice prominently . The album peaked at number five in Canada , where it is certified double platinum . 
 = = Background = = 
 While touring rigorously in support of Happiness ... in mid @-@ 2000 , Mike Turner came across The Age of Spiritual Machines , a 1999 book by inventor and futurist Ray Kurzweil . " I happened to be lucky enough to discover a really shiny book cover in a book store . " Turner stated , " I wish I could say it was like , ' Well , I 've been on this intellectual quest . ' I picked it up , read it and went mental . " Becoming fascinated by the futuristic ideology of the book , he proceeded to share it with the other band members , reading them passages on their tour bus over the next several months . 
 Lead singer Raine Maida first brought up the idea of a concept album after excerpts from the book began influencing his songwriting . Passing time on the road , he had amassed a backlog of songs and had begun to record demos . He jokingly suggested an album title of Kurzweil . " That was not the most graceful sounding name in the world , so we went with Spiritual Machines instead , " Turner said . While the other band @-@ members were less enthusiastic about the idea due to its weighty subject matter , Maida and Turner decided to pursue it and Turner contacted Ray Kurzweil via email to ask for permission to use the title of his book for their project . Kurzweil 's excitement at the prospect prompted them to invite him to record spoken excerpts from his book for the album and a correspondence developed . “ I think it ’ s amazing that Ray Kurzweil sent us a bunch of pieces , and for whatever reason , they really tie in with what we were trying to say on this record , ” said Maida . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Unlike the band 's three previous albums , most of the songs on Spiritual Machines were written solely by Maida . “ I think that because this record happened quickly , we just ended up using a lot more of my songs this time , ” stated Maida . “ Whatever happens , happens , and if there are good ideas lying around , we use them . ” Also unlike on their previous albums , this one was recorded sporadically piece by piece with songs being added as others were discarded . Raine had made several vocal demos at his new home recording studio before the Spiritual Machines idea had come into play . Many of these demos were used for the final recordings and Raine was given production credits . “ It was more a means to an end . " he explained , " I would start off with a 4 @-@ track , then move to an 8 @-@ track , then go to digital . I have a ProTools system set up in my basement , so I just try to finish songs and get them out of the way so I don ’ t build up this backlog of ideas . We just sift through that stuff , as well as the stuff we do in rehearsal and just pick the best ideas and go . It wasn 't like I said I wanted to be a producer or anything , it ’ s just that the demos I was making came closer to the finished product on one or two occasions , so now , I ’ m a producer . ” 
 Jamie Edwards , who had helped record and tour for Happiness ... was heavily utilized during the recording process and was becoming a big part of the band , considered by some to be the unofficial fifth member of the band at that time . Taggart recounted in 2010 , " He ’ s an amazing guitar player , and he played on the record . People don ’ t know that he had a lot to do with that stuff . He was very influential . We had him in all our writing sessions . It was a very creative time that was cool because we were all in a room , kind of working together . ” 
 By the time the band was set to perform at Summersault in August 2000 , about eight songs , including " Life " and " Everyone 's a Junkie " , had been recorded as demos while the band was on the road touring . Guitarist Turner noted : " After we were done we brought them in for the record company to hear , with an eye to making plans for next year . They heard what we were doing and said , ' Well , let 's finish the album you 're working on . ' And we thought , ' Album ? We 're just demoing . ' But they told us what we had was great , so we went back into the studio with Arn [ old Lanni ] and did just that . " Over the next two months , the band worked to complete the album with Arnold Lanni at <unk> Studios in Toronto as well as Avatar Studios in New York City . Rumors had surfaced that , while in New York , Our Lady peace had dropped Lanni as producer to work with The Smashing Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan . These rumors were later debunked by Maida . The first songs to be played live were " Life " and " Everyone 's a Junkie " , which debuted during Summersault in August 2000 shortly after they were first recorded . In an August 2000 interview with <unk> Raine revealed that a song titled " Yesterday " ( later to become " Middle of Yesterday " ) was almost guaranteed to be the first single for Spiritual Machines . 
 Towards the end of recording Spiritual Machines , percussionist Jeremy Taggart suffered a serious ankle injury during a mugging while walking his dog . While he recovered , Taggart 's friend Matt Cameron , former drummer for Soundgarden and current drummer for Pearl Jam , filled in for Taggart on the tracks " Right Behind You ( Mafia ) " and " Are You Sad ? " , which Taggart had already written the drum parts for . When the final tracks were ready for mixing , the band shopped around before finding a producer they wanted . The album was mixed in Atlanta , Georgia by Brendan O 'Brien , Pearl Jam 's long time producer . " It was an amazing experience working with Brendan , someone who immediately understood what we were trying to do and was able to capture exactly how we heard this album , " noted Maida . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The songs for Spiritual Machines were written and partially recorded during a year in which the band was doing extensive touring of Canada , the United States , and Europe . According to lead singer Maida , the live stage @-@ context inspired the band to " keep it really basic and not try to add too many textures ... to not overdo it . " and giving the technically inclined record an ironically acoustic feel at times . According to Maida , half of the record was completed before the book and its ideas even entered the equation . During an interview in late 2001 , he stated , " ... even though it seems quite intrinsic to the record , really , it only represents about four or five songs . " While the lyrics of several songs were inspired by the futuristic theories of Kurzweil , they were also written as a response to them , saying that the human spirit would always prevail . " Lyrically , this album is about finding the spirituality within ourselves . " This is the case with the opening song , " Right Behind You ( Mafia ) " , which Raine said , " .. [ is ] not an ' f @-@ you ' to Kurzweil . It 's like ' I believe [ much of ] what you 're saying , but we 're going to fight it as well because there is a soul and there is a spirit . ' " Following " Mafia " is the song " In Repair " , which muses on how the human body can be " repaired , " whether through heart surgery or after an accident . This song is countered by the following track , " Life " which , explained Maida , " recognizes the pain our minds can experience . " 
 During a 2001 interview with Gary Graff from Wall of Sound Magazine , Maida recounted the inspiration for the lyrics of " Are You Sad " . He was in New York recording " In Repair " at the old Hit Factory studio , which was later known as Avatar Studios . Following those sessions , Maida attempted to call his younger brother from his hotel room but couldn 't get through . " When you 're making a record , you kind of go into hiding , especially when I 'm writing lyrics or writing music ; I tend not to keep in touch with any friends or family or stuff . But my brother and I have a good relationship , and I want to keep it good . I couldn 't get a hold of him for , like , a week , and I knew he was going through a shitty time — typical young @-@ 20s , no job , having a tough life . I wanted to talk to him desperately , and this song just came out of me , " Are You Sad ? " It came out really quickly on a shitty travel guitar " . The meaning of " If You Believe " was revealed in a 2001 interview with <unk> , " That song 's about having an out @-@ of @-@ body experience and seeing that the afterlife is real , " Maida confirms , " and telling people that there 's something machines can 't have , and we 've got it . 
 Spiritual Machines concludes with the track " The Wonderful Future " , which is one of the songs on the album that features minimal instrumentation . Raine explained that the song embraces the outcome of Kurzweil 's future and accepts it as something new and exciting . It is about a woman who builds her " own satellite from an old rusted chair " who will one day realize that a man of flesh and tears can satisfy her future . " That 's one of my favourite songs , for that reason , " said Maida . " That song 's about building the perfect human – this cyber @-@ human – and realizing that you can 't really compete . " Following several minutes of silence after " The Wonderful Future " , there is a hidden track with Ray Kurzweil communicating with ' Molly ' . Molly is a robot from 2099 , who at the beginning of the book was a 23 @-@ year @-@ old woman who knew nothing about what Kurzweil was trying to explain , and then started to evolve in the way Kurzweil predicted . 
 In a March 2010 interview with The Montreal Gazette , Maida looked back fondly on the making of the album and while saying it took a while to get it right both musically and lyrically , he said " I appreciate the work I did lyrically ; it does all tie together . As I sing these songs , it has that feeling of fixing things , and kind of where Ray was going in terms of being able to fix anything and possibly living beyond the realm of any human being and whatever anyone could think of a human living . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Following a virtual listening party on the band 's website where the full ten songs from the record were made available to listen to , Spiritual Machines was released in Canada on 12 December 2000 . For those who pre @-@ ordered the album , a limited edition version of the CD was released in a black jewel case in which the artwork was not visible , only the band 's name and logo in embossed lettering . Spiritual Machines sold 36 @,@ 394 copies in its debut week , and would sell a total of 100 @,@ 000 units in the first month after its release , making it their fastest selling album to date . It went on to be certified 2X Platinum in Canada . As was common practice , the album was released several months later in the United States on 13 March 2001 . Upon release in the United States , it spent a total of four weeks on the Billboard 200 charts , peaking at number 81 . In the United States , the album has yet to be certified by the RIAA . It was released to Asian and European markets on May 9 , 2001 under the Epic Records label . The record was re @-@ released in 2008 under the Sony 's Special Markets division . 
 The lead off single for Spiritual Machines was " In Repair " . It was only promoted in Canada and though reaching number one on the Canadian Rock Radio charts , quickly fell off the charts shortly after its November 15 , 2000 release . While the single was a failure in the United States , the music video , directed by Oli Goldsmith won multiple awards at the MuchMusic Video Awards including Best Video and Best Director . The second single was " Life " , released shortly after the album 's Canadian release in December 2000 . It was the only single that was commercially released , in Australia ( EPK <unk> ) . It fared better on the charts , reaching number 27 on the U.S. Modern Rock Tracks chart on 10 March 2001 after 13 weeks . In Canada , the song peaked at number two on the Canadian Rock Radio charts while the music video eventually reached number one on the MuchMusic Countdown . The third and final single was " Right Behind You ( Mafia ) " . By this time , Spiritual Machines was proving itself to be commercial failure in the States . The release of the single , set to be in June 2001 , was aborted and the promotional copies were instead distributed to the band 's fan club . The Oli Goldsmith directed music video 's release was also cancelled and the video has not been seen until recently when it was released on the band 's official website . 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 The band contacted local Toronto artist Oli Goldsmith who happened to be reading the same book , to create the artwork for the upcoming album . In total , he made around 200 paintings relating to the project , many of which were used for the album art , promotional singles and the band 's website . Based on the success of that commission , the record label asked him to also create and direct music videos for the singles " In Repair " and " Right Behind You ( Mafia ) " , which took his paintings and brought them to life with animation and stylized live motion . His artwork was described as " Integrating photographs , logos , television images , signs , as well as a variety of written forms , such as epigrams and poetry , Goldsmith 's art juxtaposes the unexpected , resulting in pieces that are bold , colourful , and energetic . " When the album insert is unfolded , it reveals a surrealistic panorama that appears to be set in a hospital . The official photo shoot for Spiritual Machines took place on October 7 , 2000 on the sixth floor of St. Joseph 's Health Centre in Toronto , formerly an intensive @-@ care unit . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Although Spiritual Machines was not as successful as Our Lady Peace 's previous three albums , it was highly praised by fans and critics alike as being one of Our Lady Peace 's finest releases , and has also been proclaimed as being the height of their artistic creativity . Selena Gomez of the University Star of Texas State University – San Marcos called the album incredible , but also pointed out that it was a commercial disaster due to it being " flighty and difficult to palate . " MacKenzie Wilson of Allmusic gave the album 4 out of 5 stars saying that " They can still deliver pinch @-@ hitting licks and the brash attitude they did when they first formed in 1993 , but they are a little older and a little wiser . " A review from the Hamilton Spectator noted that the album 's concluding tracks " If You Believe " and " The Wonderful Future " demonstrated a particular facility for mixing sonic textures and that there were " actually moments when vocalist Raine Maida varies from his impersonation of a singing head cold . " Ashley Bird of Kerrang ! noted that the album was packed with crisp , clean songwriting , odd searing post @-@ grunge riffs and Raine Maida 's nasal croon . He went on to say that the song " Life " " is one of the most perfectly weighted slices of pop @-@ rock you 'll hear . " 
 Eddie Fournier of The New Hampshire reviewed Spiritual Machines positively but said that " The spoken word sections are intriguing , but in a way , they detract from the overall strength of the album , breaking up the momentum created by the powerful 10 songs . " He concluded by saying " Overall , Spiritual Machines is a lovely album from start to finish , and even better , it is an album that will make you wonder . " Cheryl Hunter of the Hartford Courant said that " It may sound formulaic , yet Maida 's intelligent songwriting and nasally , but forthright vocals make Our Lady Peace more than just another faceless modern rock band . " Bartley <unk> of Winnipeg Free Press gave the album 31 ⁄ 2 stars out of 5 , saying that Our Lady Peace had finally gotten control of their sound and calling it " easily the finest thing they 've ever created . " 
 = = Touring = = 
 = = = Original tours ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Our Lady Peace toured in support of Spiritual Machines from November 2000 until September 2001 . The first leg of the tour began with a university warm @-@ up tour in Ontario , then a cross @-@ Canadian fan club appreciation tour from Vancouver , BC to Ste @-@ Foy , Quebec in which members of their fan club received free tickets . The tour continued into the United States in March , 2001 with American Hi @-@ Fi joining them as an opening act . During May 2001 , the band debuted a new song they had written for WWF pro @-@ wrestler Chris Benoit that would be included on the soundtrack WWF <unk> Entry much to the chagrin of Maida . The song had been recorded in early March and was mixed in Seattle . 
 Several shows during the Summer leg had to be rescheduled or canceled after Maida contracted a throat infection . A cancer scare which turned out to be harmless caused bassist Duncan Coutts to miss six weeks of touring following the shoot for the " Life " video in February . Rob Higgins of the band Change of Heart filled in for him while he recovered from surgery . Coutts would also miss several shows in June after breaking his wrist in a biking accident . The band wrapped up the tour with a performance at Music Without Borders at Toronto 's Air Canada Centre on October 21 , 2001 . This would be their last live performance with Mike Turner . Several songs were recorded live by the band in Syracuse , New York with hopes of releasing a live album with producer Bob Rock and then to continue touring for the album . The live tracks were instead spread across various promos and singles and the band decided to record a full length album , Gravity , with Rock . 
 = = = Recreation tour ( 2010 ) = = = 
 In December 2009 , after a poll on Facebook , the band announced that they would be " recreating " both Spiritual Machines and their 1997 record Clumsy by performing them live in their entireties throughout a new tour that began in March 2010 ; nine months before the 10 @-@ year anniversary of the release of Spiritual Machines . Prior to this tour , the song " All My Friends " had never been played live and many more songs had never been played by present guitarist Steve Mazur , having joined the band in 2002 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Raine Maida . 
 " The Wonderful Future " ends at 4 : 30 , and is followed by roughly 12 minutes of silence , after which a hidden conversation between R.K. and Molly is heard . 
 Studio outtakes 
 Several known outtakes from the Spiritual Machines sessions were demos carried over from the Happiness ... sessions , such as " Ordinary Day " and " Sleeping In " . " Ordinary " is seen being played during demo sessions for Happiness ... on the band 's 1998 holiday fan club video . The lyrics were published in the Pied Piper 's Union Christmas 1998 newsletter . A poor quality recording of the latter is available on YouTube as well as in trading circles . Other song names such as " La Bra " and " A Waste of Violence " ( or The Weight of Violence ) were revealed on web casts of the recording sessions or seen on original artwork by Oli Goldsmith . A narrative outtake by Ray Kurzweil titled " R.K. Jack " was included as an intro to the track " Life " on A Decade . 
 In an August 18 , 2000 article , it was revealed at that point that 8 songs were complete with four more being recorded in the past five weeks . This was before heading to New York to record " In Repair " and " Are You Sad " , among others . Turner even noted " We 've got so much music , we could even put another ( album ) out . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 As listed in liner notes . 
 = No. 285 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 285 Squadron is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) training squadron . Controlled by No. 84 Wing , the squadron was formed in August 1999 and is responsible for training the RAAF 's Lockheed Martin C @-@ 130J Hercules aircrew and ground support staff . No. 285 Squadron does not control any flying aircraft but manages the flight simulator used for converting aircrew to the C @-@ 130Js operated by No. 37 Squadron . It is also allocated decommissioned Hercules airframes for training purposes , as well as flying aircraft from No. 37 Squadron when required . Since its formation , No. 285 Squadron has been located at RAAF Base Richmond in the western suburbs of Sydney . 
 = = Role and equipment = = 
 No. 285 Squadron is responsible for training aircrew and maintenance staff to operate the Lockheed Martin C @-@ 130J Hercules transport aircraft of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . It is located at RAAF Base Richmond , New South Wales , and controlled by No. 84 Wing , which is part of Air Mobility Group . No. 285 Squadron 's motto is " Aspire " . 
 Twelve C @-@ 130Js are operated by No. 37 Squadron , also based at Richmond under No. 84 Wing . The aircraft are generally crewed by two pilots and a loadmaster , and are tasked with medium tactical airlift in Australia and overseas , transporting troops and cargo , and conducting medical evacuation , search @-@ and @-@ rescue , and airdrop missions . No. 285 Squadron manages the full @-@ flight mission simulator ( FFMS ) used to convert aircrew to the C @-@ 130J , as well as decommissioned Hercules airframes used for loadmaster training . It also employs computer @-@ based training tools and is allocated flying aircraft from No. 37 Squadron when required . As well as training aircrew new to the C @-@ 130J , the FFMS ( maintained by CAE Australia ) is employed for existing aircrew to maintain their currency . 
 No. 285 Squadron generally holds two pilot and navigator conversion courses per year . Each six @-@ month course includes approximately 120 hours in the FFMS and 30 hours in flying aircraft . It culminates in an airborne operation module , which includes formation flying , airdrops , night landings with night @-@ vision goggles , and simulated combat utilising the C @-@ 130 's self @-@ defence systems to prepare the aircrew for conditions in Middle East deployments . Following this exercise , the new C @-@ 130 aircrew are posted to No. 37 Squadron . No. 285 Squadron may run 30 or more courses each year for ground support staff ; these courses can last from one day to five weeks . 
 = = History = = 
 No. 285 Squadron was formed on 24 August 1999 at RAAF Base Richmond under the command of Squadron Leader Peter " Zip " Szypula . Coming under the control of the newly re @-@ formed No. 85 Wing , the squadron took over the training functions of No. 33 Squadron ( operating Boeing 707s ) , No. 36 Squadron ( C @-@ 130H Hercules ) , No. 37 Squadron ( C @-@ 130J Hercules ) and No. 503 Wing ( aircraft maintenance ) . It was equipped with three flight simulators ; one 707 , one C @-@ 130H and one C @-@ 130J . The squadron began operating a full @-@ flight mission simulator ( FFMS ) for the C @-@ 130Hs in 2003 , coinciding with the deployment of C @-@ 130Hs to the Middle East . Replacing a more basic C @-@ 130H simulator , the FFMS was used to train pilots , navigators and flight engineers . By mid @-@ 2006 , No. 85 Wing had been disbanded and No. 285 Squadron was under the control of No. 84 Wing at Richmond . RAAF Hercules operations were concentrated in No. 37 Squadron in November 2006 , when No. 36 Squadron transferred its C @-@ 130Hs prior to re @-@ equipping with Boeing C @-@ 17 Globemaster III heavy airlifters and relocating to RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland . 
 The Boeing 707 was retired from service in June 2008 . In April 2009 , No. 285 Squadron was named the most proficient RAAF training unit of the previous year . No. 37 Squadron joined No. 285 Squadron under No. 84 Wing in October 2010 , when it was transferred from No. 86 Wing . The C @-@ 130Hs were retired in 2012 , and with them No. 285 Squadron 's C @-@ 130H simulator ; the simulator remained at Richmond until 2016 , when it was sent to Jakarta to support training for the Indonesian Air Force 's fleet of ex @-@ RAAF C @-@ 130Hs . No. 285 Squadron was jointly responsible ( with No. 33 Squadron ) for training flight attendants for the RAAF 's VIP jets until 2015 , when No. 34 Squadron established its own training section and took over the task . The C @-@ 130J FFMS was networked to a virtual exercise in August 2015 , allowing aircrew operating the simulator at No. 285 Squadron to interact for the first time with other exercise participants in Australia , the US and the UK . By February 2016 , according to No. 285 Squadron 's commanding officer , ninety per cent of C @-@ 130 flying training was conducted in the FFMS . In March , a commemorative cairn and garden was unveiled at Richmond in tribute to the squadron 's inaugural commanding officer , " Zip " Szypula , who died in March 2001 with his partner and her daughter in an avalanche in the Himalayas , while preparing to climb Mount Everest . 
 = Radio ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Radio " is a song by American recording artist Beyoncé taken from her third studio album , I Am … Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . The uptempo electropop , dance song was composed by Beyoncé , Rico Love , Dwayne Nesmith and Jim Jonsin . Composed in the key of D major and built essentially on bouncy beat , " Radio " also displays influences of the 1980s synthpop , Europop , and house . It is instrumentally complete with a Roland TR @-@ 808 drum , bass instruments , and synthesizers . The song 's lyrics describe the love of Beyoncé in her childhood for the songs she used to listen on the radio as she grew into an adult . 
 " Radio " received positive reviews from contemporary music critics , who generally praised Knowles 's departure from her usual R & B style . Some of them also complimented the believability as well as the originality of the song and chose it as the standout track of I Am ... Sasha Fierce . In September 2009 , " Radio " was used to promote Dutch radio station Radio 538 , and it subsequently charted for six weeks on the Dutch Top 40 chart , where it peaked at number 14 . It also reached number five on its urban chart . " Radio " was part of Beyoncé 's set list on her I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) and was included on the live album I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Radio " was written by James Scheffer , Rico Love , Dwayne Nesmith , and Beyoncé . Production was handled by Jim Jonsin , who also produced of " Sweet Dreams " ( 2009 ) . " Radio " is different from the usual R & B material for which Beyoncé is known ; It is a electropop , dance song that exhibits influences of 1980s synthpop , Europop , and house . Following the release of I Am ... Sasha Fierce , Beyoncé explained the concept behind the song on her official website : 
 It just seems like a feel @-@ good record but when you really listen to the lyrics , it 's about me growing up . In my household , I didn 't go all of the parties and I didn 't do all the things that a lot of the other teenage girls did because I was so in love with my radio and my music . I was so in love with this radio and my parents were happy that I was into something positive . 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , " Radio " is an uptempo song set in common time , written in the key of D major . It follows the chord progression of Bm – G – D – A / C ♯ and Beyoncé 's vocals span from the note of A3 to E5 . Built on a bouncy beat , " Radio " is instrumentally complete with a Roland TR @-@ 808 drum , bass instruments , and synthesizers . Several music critics , including Ben Westhoff of OC Weekly , noted that " Radio " bears resemblance to Rihanna 's single " Umbrella " ( 2007 ) as they are both set to 1980s @-@ style synthesizers . " Similarly , James Reed of The Boston Globe wrote that " Radio " seems to be like the latest electro @-@ pop confection from Rihanna . Darryl Sterdan of the Canadian website Jam ! wrote that " Radio " sounds like a record Madonna would sing because of its electropop and dance @-@ pop musical styles . 
 The believability of the song 's lyrics , which conveys love testaments as well as its timeless endurance , sung on sensual vocal arrangements by Beyoncé , who additionally adopts a sneering attitude , demonstrates her alter ego Sasha Fierce . Lyrically , " Radio " explores the relationship between Beyoncé as the female protagonist and the songs played on the radio , shown in the lyrics : " You 're the only one that Papa allowed in my room with the door closed / We 'd be alone / And Mama never freaked out when she heard it go boom / ' Cause she knew we were in the zone " . Amy Linden of Vibe magazine felt that " Radio " could make an ideal " valentine " song because of its lyrical content . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Radio " received generally positive reviews from contemporary critics , who praised Knowles 's brief departure from usual R & B style as well as the believability and originality of the song . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian noted that though the 1980s synthpop mode of " Radio " may not be as well suited to Beyoncé 's voice as the old soul samples contained in " Crazy in Love " ( 2003 ) and " Suga Mama " ( 2007 ) " , there is no denying that " Radio " is an " irresistible pop song " . Colin McGuire of PopMatters highlighted Knowles 's diversion from her usual R & B style , writing that " Radio " is " a bit of a novelty act " which takes Beyoncé in a new direction . He further wrote that the different elements of dance music present in the song makes it feel refreshing , before adding that " it might even suggest a more expansive , experimental side of the songstress on her follow @-@ up " . Talia Kraines of BBC Music wrote that " wild " " Radio " makes it the standout track on I Am ... Sasha Fierce . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine chose " Radio " as the highlight of both the standard and deluxe editions of I Am ... Sasha Fierce , writing that it is the most convincing love song on the album . 
 James Reed of The Boston Globe described " Radio " as fun , bouncy , and ideal for a night at the club . Similarly , Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the " spiky , Europop throb " of " Radio " expertly taunt the boys and fill the dance floor . Darryl Sterdan of Jam ! was surprised by the new musical direction of Beyoncé but concluded that " ... you better believe it ... it kinda works " . Daniel Brockman of The Phoenix described " Radio " as the most believable song on the album , and complimented its " amid bland testaments to love 's timeless endurance and the smut and <unk> [ g ] of the ' Sasha Fierce ' persona , [ which ] is one with sensual overtones sung to an electronic device that , unlike men , ' never lets me down ' " . Echoing Brockman 's sentiments , Amy Linden of Vibe magazine , who wrote that 1980 's electropop and the sleek Valentine music of " Radio " tells the story of Beyoncé 's alter ego . Similarly , Nana Ekua Brew @-@ Hammond of The Village Voice wrote that " Radio " " show [ s ] [ that ] Sasha [ is ] just a good girl playing fierce " . By contrast , Matos Michaelangelo of The A.V. Club said that " Radio " sounds like " shameless target @-@ marketing " aiming at programming directors . On The Village Voice ' 2008 year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " Radio " was ranked at number 443 . 
 = = Promotion and chart performance = = 
 Beyoncé performed " Radio " on her I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . The song was subsequently included on the live album I Am ... World Tour , as the thirteenth track . In early September 2009 , " Radio " was used to promote Dutch radio station ' Radio 538 ' . On September 19 , 2009 , " Radio " debuted on the Dutch Top 40 at number 31 after it was used to promote the local radio station . After three weeks , it peaked of number 14 on October 10 , 2009 , and charted for six weeks . " Radio " also peaked at number five on the Dutch urban chart . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Richard Butler , Jr . – producer , publisher , vocals producer , writer 
 Jim Caruana – recorder , vocals recorder 
 Matt Green – mixer assistant 
 Beyoncé Beyoncé – vocals , writer 
 Dwayne Nesmith – writer 
 James Scheffer – producer , recorder , writer 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – mixer 
 Source : 
 = Weather map = 
 A weather map displays various meteorological features across a particular area at a particular point in time and has various symbols which all have specific meanings . Such maps have been in use since the mid @-@ 19th century and are used for research and weather forecasting purposes . Maps using isotherms show temperature gradients , which can help locate weather fronts . <unk> maps , analyzing lines of equal wind speed , on a constant pressure surface of 300 mb or 250 mb show where the jet stream is located . Use of constant pressure charts at the 700 and 500 hPa level can indicate tropical cyclone motion . Two @-@ dimensional streamlines based on wind speeds at various levels show areas of convergence and divergence in the wind field , which are helpful in determining the location of features within the wind pattern . A popular type of surface weather map is the surface weather analysis , which plots isobars to depict areas of high pressure and low pressure . Cloud codes are translated into symbols and plotted on these maps along with other meteorological data that are included in synoptic reports sent by professionally trained observers . 
 = = History = = 
 The use of weather charts in a modern sense began in the middle portion of the 19th century in order to devise a theory on storm systems . During the Crimean War a storm devastated the French fleet at Balaklava , and the French scientist Urbain Le Verrier was able to show that if a chronological map of the storm had been issued , the path it would take could have been predicted and avoided by the fleet . 
 In England , the scientist Francis Galton heard of this work , as well as the pioneering weather forecasts of Robert Fitzroy . After gathering information from weather stations across the country for the month of October 1861 , he plotted the data on a map using his own system of symbols , thereby creating the world 's first weather map . He used his map to prove that air circulated clockwise around areas of high pressure ; he coined the term ' anticyclone ' to describe the phenomenon . He was also instrumental in publishing the first weather map in a newspaper , for which he modified the pantograph ( an instrument for copying drawings ) to inscribe the map onto printing blocks . The Times began printing weather maps using these methods with data from the Meteorological Office . 
 The introduction of country @-@ wide weather maps required the existence of national telegraph networks so that data from across the country could be gathered in real time and remain relevant for subsequent analysis . The first such use of the telegraph for gathering data on the weather was the Manchester Examiner newspaper in 1847 : 
 ... led us to inquire if the electric telegraph was yet extended far enough from Manchester to obtain information from the eastern counties ... inquiries were made at the following places ; and answers were returned , which we append ... 
 It was also important for time to be standardized across time zones so that the information on the map should accurately represent the weather at a given time . A standardized time system was first used to coordinate the British railway network in 1847 , with the inauguration of Greenwich Mean Time . 
 In the USA , The Smithsonian Institution developed its network of observers over much of the central and eastern United States between the 1840s and 1860s once Joseph Henry took the helm . The U.S. Army Signal Corps inherited this network between 1870 and 1874 by an act of Congress , and expanded it to the west coast soon afterwards . At first , not all the data on the map was used due to a lack of time standardization . The United States fully adopted time zones in 1905 , when Detroit finally established standard time . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 The use of frontal zones on weather maps began in the 1910s in Norway . Polar front theory is attributed to Jacob Bjerknes , derived from a coastal network of observation sites in Norway during World War I. This theory proposed that the main inflow into a cyclone was concentrated along two lines of convergence , one ahead of the low and another trailing behind the low . The convergence line ahead of the low became known as either the steering line or the warm front . The trailing convergence zone was referred to as the squall line or cold front . Areas of clouds and rainfall appeared to be focused along these convergence zones . The concept of frontal zones led to the concept of air masses . The nature of the three @-@ dimensional structure of the cyclone would wait for the development of the upper air network during the 1940s . Since the leading edge of air mass changes bore resemblance to the military fronts of World War I , the term " front " came into use to represent these lines . The United States began to formally analyze fronts on surface analyses in late 1942 , when the WBAN Analysis Center opened in downtown Washington , D.C. 
 In addition to surface weather maps , weather agencies began to generate constant pressure charts . In 1948 , the United States began the Daily Weather Map series , which at first analyzed the 700 hPa level , which is around 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) above sea level . By May 14 , 1954 , the 500 hPa surface was being analyzed , which is about 5 @,@ 520 metres ( 18 @,@ 110 ft ) above sea level . The effort to automate map plotting began in the United States in 1969 , with the process complete in the 1970s . Hong Kong completed their process of automated surface plotting by 1987 . 
 By 1999 , computer systems and software had finally become sophisticated enough to allow for the ability to underlay on the same workstation satellite imagery , radar imagery , and model @-@ derived fields such as atmospheric thickness and frontogenesis in combination with surface observations to make for the best possible surface analysis . In the United States , this development was achieved when Intergraph workstations were replaced by n @-@ AWIPS workstations . By 2001 , the various surface analyses done within the National Weather Service were combined into the Unified Surface Analysis , which is issued every six hours and combines the analyses of four different centers . Recent advances in both the fields of meteorology and geographic information systems have made it possible to devise finely tailored products that take us from the traditional weather map into an entirely new realm . Weather information can quickly be matched to relevant geographical detail . For instance , icing conditions can be mapped onto the road network . This will likely continue to lead to changes in the way surface analyses are created and displayed over the next several years . 
 = = Plotting of data = = 
 A station model is a symbolic illustration showing the weather occurring at a given reporting station . Meteorologists created the station model to plot a number of weather elements in a small space on weather maps . Maps filled with dense station @-@ model plots can be difficult to read , but they allow meteorologists , pilots , and mariners to see important weather patterns . A computer draws a station model for each observation location . The station model is primarily used on surface @-@ weather maps , but can also be used to show the weather aloft . A completed station @-@ model map allows users to analyze patterns in air pressure , temperature , wind , cloud cover , and precipitation . 
 Station model plots use an internationally accepted coding convention that has changed little since August 1 , 1941 . Elements in the plot show the key weather elements , including temperature , dewpoint , wind , cloud cover , air pressure , pressure tendency , and precipitation . Winds have a standard notation when plotted on weather maps . More than a century ago , winds were plotted as arrows , with feathers on just one side depicting five knots of wind , while feathers on both sides depicted 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) of wind . The notation changed to that of half of an arrow , with half of a wind barb indicating five knots , a full barb ten knots , and a pennant flag fifty knots . 
 Because of the structure of the SYNOP code , a maximum of three cloud symbols can be plotted for each reporting station that appears on the weather map . All cloud types are coded and transmitted by trained observers then plotted on maps as low , middle , or high @-@ étage using special symbols for each major cloud type . Any cloud type with significant vertical extent that can occupy more than one étage is coded as low ( cumulus and cumulonimbus ) or middle ( nimbostratus ) depending on the altitude level or étage where it normally initially forms aside from any vertical growth that takes place . The symbol used on the map for each of these étages at a particular observation time is for the genus , species , variety , mutation , or cloud motion that is considered most important according to criteria set out by the World Meteorological Organization ( WMO ) . If these elements for any étage at the time of observation are deemed to be of equal importance , then the type which is predominant in amount is coded by the observer and plotted on the weather map using the appropriate symbol . Special weather maps in aviation show areas of icing and turbulence . 
 = = Types = = 
 = = = Aviation maps = = = 
 Aviation interests have their own set of weather maps . One type of map shows where VFR ( visual flight rules ) are in effect and where IFR ( instrument flight rules ) are in effect . Weather depiction plots show ceiling height ( level where at least half the sky is covered with clouds ) in hundreds of feet , present weather , and cloud cover . <unk> maps depict areas where icing can be a hazard for flying . Aviation @-@ related maps also show areas of turbulence . 
 = = = Constant pressure charts = = = 
 Constant pressure charts normally contain plotted values of temperature , humidity , wind , and the vertical height above sea level of the pressure surface . They have a variety of uses . In the mountainous terrain of the western United States and Mexican Plateau , the 850 hPa pressure surface can be a more realistic depiction of the weather pattern than a standard surface analysis . Using the 850 and 700 hPa pressure surfaces , one can determine when and where warm advection ( coincident with upward vertical motion ) and cold advection ( coincident with downward vertical motion ) is occurring within the lower portions of the troposphere . Areas with small dewpoint depressions and are below freezing indicate the presence of icing conditions for aircraft . The 500 hPa pressure surface can be used as a rough guide for the motion of many tropical cyclones . <unk> tropical cyclones , which have experienced vertical wind shear , tend to be steered by winds at the 700 hPa level . 
 Use of the 300 and 200 hPa constant pressure charts can indicate the strength of systems in the lower troposphere , as stronger systems near the Earth 's surface are reflected as stronger features at these levels of the atmosphere . Isotachs are drawn at these levels , which a lines of equal wind speed . They are helpful in finding maxima and minima in the wind pattern . <unk> in the wind pattern aloft are favorable for tropical cyclogenesis . Maxima in the wind pattern at various levels of the atmosphere show locations of jet streams . Areas colder than − 40 ° C ( − 40 ° F ) indicate a lack of significant icing , as long as there is no active thunderstorm activity . 
 = = = Surface weather analysis = = = 
 A surface weather analysis is a type of weather map that depicts positions for high and low @-@ pressure areas , as well as various types of synoptic scale systems such as frontal zones . Isotherms can be drawn on these maps , which are lines of equal temperature . Isotherms are drawn normally as solid lines at a preferred temperature interval . They show temperature gradients , which can be useful in finding fronts , which are on the warm side of large temperature gradients . By plotting the freezing line , isotherms can be useful in determination of precipitation type . Mesoscale boundaries such as tropical cyclones , outflow boundaries and squall lines also are analyzed on surface weather analyses . 
 Isobaric analysis is performed on these maps , which involves the construction of lines of equal mean sea level pressure . The innermost closed lines indicate the positions of relative maxima and minima in the pressure field . The minima are called low @-@ pressure areas while the maxima are called high @-@ pressure areas . Highs are often shown as H 's whereas lows are shown as L 's . Elongated areas of low pressure , or troughs , are sometimes plotted as thick , brown dashed lines down the trough axis . <unk> are commonly used to place surface boundaries from the horse latitudes poleward , while streamline analyses are used in the tropics . A streamline analysis is a series of arrows oriented parallel to wind , showing wind motion within a certain geographic area . C 's depict cyclonic flow or likely areas of low pressure , while A 's depict anticyclonic flow or likely positions of high @-@ pressure areas . An area of confluent streamlines shows the location of shearlines within the tropics and subtropics . 
 = Tropical Storm Beryl ( 2012 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Beryl was the strongest off @-@ season Atlantic tropical cyclone on record to make landfall in the United States . The second tropical cyclone of the 2012 Atlantic hurricane season , Beryl developed on May 26 from a low @-@ pressure system offshore North Carolina . Initially subtropical , the storm slowly acquired tropical characteristics as it tracked across warmer sea surface temperatures and within an environment of decreasing vertical wind shear . Late on May 27 , Beryl transitioned into a tropical cyclone less than 120 miles ( 190 km ) from North Florida . Early the following day , the storm moved ashore near Jacksonville Beach , Florida , with peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . It quickly weakened to a tropical depression , dropping heavy rainfall while moving slowly across the southeastern United States . A cold front turned Beryl to the northeast , and the storm became extratropical on May 30 . 
 The precursor to Beryl produced heavy rainfall in Cuba , causing flooding , mudslides and two deaths . Torrential rain also affected south Florida and the Bahamas . After forming , Beryl produced rough surf along the US southeastern coast , leaving one person from Folly Beach , South Carolina missing . Upon making landfall in Florida , the storm produced strong winds that left 38 @,@ 000 people without power . High rains alleviated drought conditions and put out wildfires along the storm 's path . A fallen tree killed a man driving in Orangeburg County , South Carolina . In northeast North Carolina , Beryl spawned an EF1 tornado that snapped trees and damaged dozens of homes near the city of Peletier . Overall damage was minor , estimated at $ 148 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Beryl were from a trough that developed over the Yucatán Peninsula on May 16 . It drifted eastward into the northwestern Caribbean Sea , spawning a low pressure area on May 18 . For the next three days , it remained nearly stationary without development , until the system became better defined on May 22 when it began moving to the northeast . On May 23 , the elongated low had an area of disorganized convection . While passing over the Cuban Island of Isla de la Juventud , an exposed center of circulation and transient convection was noted due to the effects of high wind shear across the region . The next day , the system moved through the Florida Keys , and the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted the potential for increasingly favorable conditions over the next two days . The low became better defined as its cloud pattern consolidated . It moved further into the western Atlantic over the next 24 hours , and a band of convection extended across the Bahamas and Cuba to wrap around the southwestern edge of the circulation . On May 25 , the system interacted with a mid- to upper @-@ level low , causing the center to reform further to the northeast . After the system attained gale @-@ force winds near the center and sufficiently organized convection , the NHC initiated advisories on Subtropical Storm Beryl at 0300 UTC on May 26 , while the cyclone was 305 mi ( 490 km ) east of Charleston , South Carolina . Post @-@ season analysis indicated that Beryl developed three hours prior . 
 Following Beryl 's formation , there was a receding trough over New England that initially created a weak steering environment . Marginally warm waters and dry air were expected to prevent significant intensification , and convection remained minimal through May 26 . Later that day , a building ridge caused Beryl to begin a steady southwest motion . By that time , the low @-@ level center became vertically aligned with the upper @-@ level center . The environment near the storm 's center became moister and the system began to pass over warmer sea surface temperatures , allowing convection to increase . On May 27 , the storm began to transition into a tropical cyclone , which it completed by 1800 UTC that day . As Beryl approached northeastern Florida , it became better organized , with increased convection in bands around the center . Late on May 27 , the Hurricane Hunters observed flight @-@ level winds of 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) , suggesting maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) ; this would be Beryl 's peak intensity . It is possible , however , that Beryl briefly reached hurricane intensity early in the evening of May 27 based on Doppler radar velocities , although the data is inconclusive according to the post @-@ season report . At roughly <unk> UTC on May 28 , the storm made landfall near Jacksonville Beach , Florida , with winds of about 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) after weakening slightly on the final approach . 
 After moving ashore , Beryl quickly weakened to a tropical depression . It slowed due to the weakening ridge to its north , and an approaching cold front turned it to the north and northeast on May 29 . Despite being well inland , Beryl retained enough convection to remain a tropical cyclone . As Beryl approached the Atlantic Ocean on May 30 , its convection increased to the south and east of the center , although the intrusion of dry air resulted in a ragged appearance on satellite imagery . Based on reports from ships , Beryl was upgraded to a tropical storm on May 30 near the South Carolina coastline . The approaching front caused the storm to accelerate northeastward . Beryl 's circulation became elongated and its associated convection spread northward , suggesting the transition into an extratropical cyclone . By late on May 30 , Beryl became extratropical , prompting the NHC to discontinue advisories . The storm continued to the northeast , later turning to the east @-@ southeast . On June 2 , a larger extratropical storm absorbed the remnants of Beryl to the southeast of Newfoundland . 
