 = = Preparations , impact , and records = = 
 When Beryl made landfall in Jacksonville Beach , Florida with 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , it became the strongest tropical cyclone at landfall in the U.S. outside of the official Atlantic hurricane season . Beryl was also the second tropical storm to form before the start of the season , which marked only the fifth such occurrence since records began in 1851 ; the other four occurrences were in 1887 , 1908 , 1951 and 2016 . 
 = = = Cuba and The Bahamas = = = 
 Before becoming a tropical cyclone , Beryl produced heavy rainfall over Cuba , especially Sancti Spíritus Province , where rainfall peaked at 21 @.@ 93 in ( 557 mm ) . The rains caused mudslides and forced more than 8 @,@ 500 people to evacuate their homes . Two people died after trying to cross flooded rivers . Flooding damaged 1 @,@ 109 houses and destroyed 47 others . Although the rains flooded widespread areas of crop fields , the precipitation was beneficial in refilling reservoirs in drought @-@ struck areas of the country . 
 A band of thunderstorms and heavy rainfall moved across The Bahamas and dropped about 9 @.@ 7 in ( 250 mm ) of precipitation in Freeport , Grand Bahama . Low @-@ lying areas in New Providence experienced flooding . Residents reported that a tornado touched down in Murphy Town , Abaco , downing power and telephone lines , overturning vehicles and damaging the roofs of three buildings . Rain from the system also affected the Berry Islands , Abaco , and Bimini , as well as several smaller island groups . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Prior to being classified as a tropical cyclone , the precursor to Beryl produced locally heavy rainfall in South Florida , reaching 9 @.@ 7 in ( 250 mm ) at Miami International Airport . The total was the second highest daily rainfall ever recorded in the month of May at the station . The rain caused extensive street flooding , especially in Sweetwater and Doral , stranding drivers and afternoon commuters . Miami Dade College was forced to cancel morning classes on May 23 . 
 When the NHC issued their first advisory , the agency also issued a tropical storm warning from the Brevard / Volusia county line in Florida to Edisto Beach , South Carolina . A tropical storm watch was issued northward to the mouth of the Santee River in South Carolina . A state of emergency was issued in Jacksonville , Florida , causing the early ending of a jazz festival and Memorial Day events . When Beryl moved ashore , airports around Jacksonville canceled all flights except for JetBlue Airways and Delta Air Lines . 
 A teenager died in high seas in Daytona Beach , Florida . High surf and rip currents caused lifeguards in the region to restrict swimming in the ocean . The highest storm surge was 3 @.@ 73 ft ( 1 @.@ 14 m ) at Fernandina Beach . When the storm moved ashore , Beryl produced strong winds along the coast , peaking at 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) at Huguenot Park in Jacksonville ; nearby Buck Island reported a peak wind gust of 72 mph ( 117 km / h ) . The winds prompted the Mathews Bridge and <unk> Bridge to close . <unk> power lines left about 38 @,@ 000 residences in Jacksonville without power . In Jacksonville , flash flooding affected areas along <unk> Creek , and waves damaged a seawall and some docks . The waters entered a condominium and three vehicles . Flash flooding covered a portion of U.S. Route 129 in Suwannee County . Damage in Jacksonville was estimated at $ 20 @,@ 000 . South of Jacksonville , the outer circulation of Beryl spawned a short @-@ lived EF0 tornado in Port Saint Lucie that caused minor damage to two homes . Damage from the tornado was estimated at $ 20 @,@ 000 . Another tornado was reported in Yankeetown . Due to its slow motion , Beryl dropped heavy rainfall across Florida , peaking at 15 @.@ 0 in ( 380 mm ) in Wellborn . Just South of Wellborn , a motorcyclist in Taylor County , <unk> was killed when a car hydroplaned on the flooded highway and struck him head @-@ on . First responders noted that it took them 20 minutes to cover the ten miles due to the nonexistent visibility . Gainesville reported 3 @.@ 25 in ( 83 mm ) on May 28 , which broke the previous daily rainfall record . Hernando County Airport broke its daily rainfall record on May 29 with a total of 3 @.@ 65 in ( 93 mm ) , which was also the greatest daily rainfall to date in 2012 . The rains extinguished 80 percent of the 25 wildfires in northern Florida . In Levy County , a waterspout dissipated while moving onshore . The high rains flooded several homes in Citrus County , causing about $ 108 @,@ 000 in damage . 
 = = = Georgia , South Carolina , and North Carolina = = = 
 Hours before the storm moved ashore on May 27 , officials in Cumberland Island , Georgia mandated that all campers evacuate the island . Although the storm made landfall in Florida , its storm surge flooded portions of St. Marys , Georgia . Rainfall in the state peaked at 7 @.@ 04 in ( 179 mm ) at Woodbine . Beryl 's rainfall was beneficial in alleviating drought conditions , despite causing some minor flooding . Wind gusts along the Georgia coastline peaked at 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) at Jekyll Island , and sustained tropical force winds extended into the state . Downed trees damaged two homes in McIntosh County , and in Orangeburg County , South Carolina , a falling tree killed a man driving on a state highway . This was the only direct death due to the storm ; the others were indirectly related . The highest wind gust in South Carolina was 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) in Fort Johnson , although stronger winds occurred just offshore . Rains in the state peaked at 6 @.@ 00 in ( 152 mm ) in Jasper County . High tides in Charleston Harbor sank a boat , forcing the crew to be rescued by the Coast Guard . In Folly Beach , South Carolina , one person went missing after swimming in rough surf , but it was not included in the overall death toll . After Beryl began accelerating to the northeast , it dropped heavy rainfall in the Carolinas , causing isolated flooding near Wilmington , North Carolina . Farther north in Peletier , the storm spawned an EF1 tornado on the Enhanced Fujita scale that damaged 67 homes and destroyed 3 others . Moisture from the storm spread northward into Maryland and West Virginia . 
 = Battle of Sharon = 
 The Battle of Sharon fought between 19 and 25 September 1918 , began the set piece Battle of Megiddo half a day before the Battle of Nablus , in which large formations engaged and responded to movements by the opposition , according to pre @-@ existing plans , in the last months of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of World War I. The fighting took place over a wide area from the Mediterranean Sea east to the Rafat salient in the Judean Hills . Here the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) XXI Corps with the French brigade sized Détachment Français de Palestine et de Syrie attacked the Yildirim Army Group Eighth Army 's XXII Corps and German Asia Corps . The Battle of Sharon extended well behind the Ottoman front lines when the Desert Mounted Corps rode through a gap in the front line across the Plain of Sharon to occupy the Esdraelon Plain . Meanwhile , during the Battle of Nablus the XX Corps attacked Nablus while Chaytor 's Force held the right flank in the Jordan Valley before advancing to secure bridges and fords across the Jordan River , to continue the encirclement the defenders in the Judean Hills . Subsequently Chaytor 's Force advanced against the Fourth Army to capture Es Salt and Amman after the Second Battle of Amman . 
 The Battle of Sharon began on 19 September with a Western Front style bombardment during which two thirds of the mainly ground based heavy artillery , supported by the firepower of two destroyers pounded Ottoman positions , while one third of the heavy artillery fired creeping barrages to cover the infantry assaults . The XXI Corps infantry attacked simultaneously along the front line from the Mediterranean coast where the 60th Division , launched an attack on the western coastal section of the front line defended by the Eighth Army 's XXII Corps . During this Battle of Tulkarm the 60th Division breached the front and second line trenches to eventually capture Tulkarm , the site of the Eighth Army headquarters . On their right , the main Tabsor system of trenches held by the Ottoman XXII Corps was attacked and eventually captured during the Battle of Tabsor , by the 3rd ( Lahore ) , 7th ( Meerut ) , and the 75th Divisions . These three divisions subsequently advanced , despite the Ottoman XXII Corps being reinforced , to capture Et Tire and Masudiye Station . In the process of the battles for Tulkarm and Tabsor the 7th ( Meerut ) and 60th Divisions created a gap in the front line , for the Desert Mounted Corps to ride through . They rode north and eastwards to the rear to capture the defending Ottoman armies ' lines of communication . The right flank of the attacking XXI Corps was protected from the Eighth Army 's Asia Corps , by the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division and the French Colonial Détachment Français de Palestine et de Syrie holding and pivoting on the Rafat salient , during the Battle of Arara as the infantry battle progressed . 
 The cavalry phase of the Battle of Sharon began as soon as the gap was made during the infantry attacks . The 5th Cavalry Division led the way north up along the Plain of Sharon followed by the 4th Cavalry Division with the Australian Mounted Division in reserve . These divisions subsequently rode across the Mount Carmel Range through two passes , to occupy the Esdraelon Plain , on 20 September . Here they cut the main Ottoman lines of communication . Units of the 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions converged to capture Afulah with the 4th Cavalry Division capturing Beisan in the afternoon . The Australian Mounted Division captured Jenin along with thousands of prisoners when they captured the main line of retreat from Nablus to Damascus . On 20 September Nazareth , the site of the Ottoman Army 's Yildirim Army Group headquarters , was unsuccessfully attacked by the 5th Cavalry Division . During the Battle of Nazareth the Ottoman Commander in Chief , Otto Liman von Sanders , was forced to escape . The 5th Cavalry Division captured the town the following day and several days later this division also captured Haifa and Acre following the Battle of Haifa . On the last day of the Battle of Sharon , the Australian Mounted Division attacked a German reinforced rearguard garrison at Samakh , which had been put on the alert by Liman von Sanders during his escape from Nazareth . The Australian Light Horse victory at the Battle of Samakh and the subsequent Capture of Tiberias ended the Battle of Sharon and the Battle of Megiddo . As a result of the battles of Sharon and Nablus , known collectively as the Battle of Megiddo , much territory and many prisoners were captured . The Final Offensive of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign began the day after the Battle of Megiddo ended , with the pursuit to Damascus , which was captured on 1 October . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the series of Central Powers defeats in Palestine at the end of 1917 , at Beersheba , at Gaza , at Mughar Ridge , and with the loss of large areas of southern Palestine during the subsequent retreats of the Seventh and Eighth Armies back into the Judean Hills , and following the loss of Jerusalem , several of the German and Ottoman army commanders in the region were replaced . General Erich von Falkenhayn commanding the Yildirim Army Group was replaced by General Otto Liman von Sanders and Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein , commander of the Eighth Army was replaced by Djevad Pasha . Cemal Pasha appointed Cemal Kucjuk Pasha to command the Fourth Army . The commander of the Seventh Army , Mustafa Kemal who had previously resigned his command , was reinstated early in September 1918 . 
 The focus of the Ottoman Army 's war effort in 1918 turned from Palestine to Anatolia , to the provinces and territories lost by their empire between 1877 and 1878 during the Russo @-@ Turkish War . This change of direction was heavily influenced by the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk , signed in March 1918 which ended the war on the Eastern Front between Imperial Russia and the Central Powers . As a result , the Ottoman Army embarked on a series of territorial conquests in the Caucasus . Erzerum , which had been captured by the Russians during the Erzerum Offensive in 1916 , was retaken on 24 March 1918 , followed by Van on 5 April and later Batum , Kars and Tiflis . The reoccupation of these former Ottoman possessions , however , brought little strategic advantage , compared with the potential benefits of military success in Palestine . 
 Also in March 1918 , major offensive operations in Palestine became a low priority for the British Army when the spectacular successes of Erich Ludendorff 's Spring Offensive in France seriously threatened the British Expeditionary Force . By July , it had become clear that this German offensive on the Western Front , had failed . In August , a brief return to the battle of attrition in the trenches ensued until the Hundred Days Offensive , coinciding with preparations for a renewal of the campaign in Palestine , began in August . General Edmund Allenby was " very anxious to make a move in September " when he expected to overrun the German and Ottoman front line , capture the headquarters of the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies at Nablus and Tulkarm , advance to the Wadi el Fara road , and capture Jisr ed Damieh and Es Salt . In addition to defeating the enemy and capturing a large area of their territory , Allenby had an ulterior motive : " Another reason for moving to this line is that it will encourage both my own new Indian troops and my Arab Allies . " 
 Before the Spring Offensive on the Western Front began , the War Office had decided to substitute British units in the EEF with British Indian Army units . The relieved British units were to be retained in Egypt as reinforcements . When the Spring Offensive was launched these British units were quickly redeployed to the Western Front . 
 = = = Battlefield = = = 
 By September 1918 the front line was being held by EEF infantry from close to sea level on the Mediterranean coast , about 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of Jaffa and Arsuf . From this point , the line extended in the XXI Corps area about 15 miles ( 24 km ) south @-@ eastward across the Plain of Sharon , before rising up to a height of 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 460 – 610 m ) above sea level in the Judean Hills for about 15 miles ( 24 km ) , into the XX Corps ' battle of Nablus area . From this height the front line dropped precipitously down to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) below sea level , into the area patrolled by infantry and mounted infantry in Chaytor 's Force . Here the line crossed the Jordan Valley in the Third Transjordan attack area , for approximately 18 miles ( 29 km ) , ending east of the Dead Sea in the foothills of the Mountains of Gilead / Moab . 
 The Seventh and Eighth Armies Ottoman defenders were supplied by two railways which crisscrossed the battlefield . A railway ran from Haifa on the Mediterranean coast to join the main railway from Istanbul to Deraa , which crossed the Jordan River before passing Beisan to enter the Judean Hills at Jenin . There were also good roads from Haifa and Damascus , via Nazareth and Jenin . From Deraa the extensive railway network , branched into two lines . The southern line known as the Hejaz railway continued east of the Jordan River to supply the Ottoman Fourth Army headquarters at Amman , the garrisons at Shunet Nimrin and Es Salt and the forces scattered along several hundred miles of the southern Hejaz railway . The western line known as the Palestine Railways crossed the Jordan River at Jisr Mejamie to become the Jezreel Valley railway , as it ran southwards down the west bank of the Jordan River to Beisan , on the western edge of the Esdrealon Plain . From there it turned westward to run parallel to the front line in the Judean Hills , to Afulah . Here the railway branched again into two lines , one line running north – westerly to Haifa on the Mediterranean coast , while the main line turned south across the Esdrealon Plan to Jenin . From Jenin the railway wound through a narrow pass in the foothills to climb to Messudieh Junction in the Judean Hills where it again branched . One line continued south – eastward to Nablus the Seventh Army headquarters , located on the main road to Jenin , Nazareth and Damascus , while the second line ran westward to Tulkarm and the Eighth Army headquarters before turning south to reach railhead behind the Eighth Army ' front line on the coastal plain . 
 The advance by the Desert Mounted Corps ' cavalry would take them north on the coastal Plain of Sharon and across the Mount Carmel Range . This rugged mountain range , approximately 7 miles ( 11 km ) wide , stretching northward from the Judean Hills to end just to the south of Haifa , could be crossed by the mounted force through two passes . The northern pass linked the Plain of Sharon via Abu <unk> to arrive on the Esdrealon Plain south – east of Nazareth , while the southern pass linked the coast via Musmus to arrive at Megiddo on the plain . However , the mountainous terrain made the passes easily defended by a relatively small force which would be hard to capture . If the cavalry encountered such defences in these passes , a protracted campaign would require another large infantry attack . 
 The quick occupation of the Esdraelon Plain , 40 miles ( 64 km ) behind the Ottoman front line , would place Desert Mounted Corps in the rear of the two Ottoman armies fighting in the Judean Hills and in control of their lines of communication . The EEF cavalry would then be in a position to quickly control three lowland areas forming a semicircle around the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies in the Judean Hills , from the Plain of Sharon , across the Esdrealon Plain to the Jordan Valley . They would then control the important Ottoman communications hubs at Afulah and Beisan . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Attacking force = = = 
 The XXI Corps commanded by the British Lieutenant General Edward S. Bulfin consisted of the 3rd ( Lahore ) , 7th ( Meerut ) , 54th ( East Anglian ) , 60th and 75th Divisions with the Détachment Français de Palestine et de Syrie . These units were supported by Corps Troops ' Composite Regiment ( one squadron Duke of Lancashire Yeomanry and two squadrons of 1 / 1st Herts . Yeomanry ) and the artillery of the <unk> , <unk> , 100th , and 102nd Brigades RGA , and the VIII and IX Mountain Brigades RGA . 
 The Desert Mounted Corps commanded by the Australian Lieutenant General Henry Chauvel , consisted of the 4th and 5th Cavalry and the Australian Mounted Divisions . Armoured car support was provided by Nos. 11 and 12 Light Armoured Motor Batteries and Nos. 1 and 7 Light Car Patrols from the Machine Gun Corps . 
 A total of 54 @,@ 800 beds were set aside in Palestine and Egypt , including convalescence and clearing hospitals . There were 22 @,@ 524 hospital beds available in Egypt . A hospital centre in the Deir el Belah and Gaza area along with stationary hospitals between Kantara and Ludd , could accommodate another 15 @,@ 000 casualties . By August , casualty clearing stations or clearing hospitals were located at Ludd , Jaffa and Jerusalem , supported by medical stores depots at Ludd and Jerusalem . However , the Australian Stationary Hospital at Moascar only had a few beds available . No. 14 Australian General Hospital on the Suez Canal was full of malaria cases from the Jordan Valley with the overflow being treated in the No. 31 British General Hospital at Abbassia , Cairo . 
 = = = = Aircraft = = = = 
 On 18 September , the Royal Air Force 's 5th ( Corps ) Wing , and the 40th ( Army ) Wing , both headquartered at Ramle , were deployed to the area . They were responsible for cooperation with artillery and contact patrols , tactical and strategic reconnaissance , photography , escorts , offensive patrols and bombing operations . No. 1 Squadron Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) , No. 111 Squadron RAF and a flight of No. 145 Squadron RAF , were based at Ramle , and No. 144 Squadron RAF was based at Junction Station . 
 Tactical reconnaissance up to 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) in advance of the XXI Corps was provided by corps squadrons . No. 113 Squadron RAF along with No. 21 Balloon Company were also assigned to XXI Corps , operating out of Sarona . No. 142 Squadron RAF ( less one flight ) assigned to the Desert Mounted Corps was also based at Sarona . 
 The Bristol F.2 Fighters in No. 1 Squadron ( AFC ) were to carry out bombing and strategic reconnaissance , as well as providing general oversight of the battlefield and reporting developments . Nos. 111 and 145 Squadrons of <unk> aircraft were to conduct day @-@ long patrols over the main Jenin aerodrome , bombing and machine gunning all targets in the area to prevent any aircraft leaving the aerodrome . No. 144 Squadron , consisting of Airco DH.9 biplane bombers , were to bomb the Afulah telephone exchange and railway station , and the Messudieh Junction railway lines as well as the Ottoman Seventh Army headquarters and telephone exchange at Nablus . The newly arrived Handley – Page O @-@ 400 heavy bomber ( armed with 16 112 @-@ pound ( 51 kg ) bombs ) and piloted by Australian Ross Smith was to support No. 144 Squadron 's bombing of Afulah . 
 = = = = EEF deployment = = = = 
 On the first quarter of the front line , stretching from the Mediterranean some 15 miles ( 24 km ) inland , 35 @,@ 000 infantry , 9 @,@ 000 cavalry and 383 guns were preparing for the attack . The remaining three quarters of the front line across the Judean Hills to the Dead Sea , was covered by 22 @,@ 000 infantry , 3 @,@ 000 cavalry and 157 artillery guns . 
 The XXI Corps was deployed without a corps reserve . The 60th Division was positioned on the coast with the 7th ( Meerut ) Division on their right , then the 75th Division with the longest frontage , was followed by the 3rd ( Lahore ) Division . On their right , at the eastern end of the XXI Corps and the Battle of Sharon 's front line in the Judean Hills , the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division with the Détachment Français de Palestine et de Syrie , held the Rafat salient . 
 The final deployment by XXI Corps was made during 35 minutes of darkness , between the moon setting and dawn on 19 September , when each division took up a position at right angles to the direction of their frontal attack . They were deployed across a distance of about 10 miles ( 16 km ) , leaving stretches of the front line which did not favour a frontal attack , uncovered . Altogether , these stretches amounted to about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) . The sections of the front line which were not part of the initial attack , were to be captured as the attack developed . This would occur during a planned right flanking movement , which aimed to bring all the divisions together and any enemy caught behind would be cut off . 
 Desert Mounted Corps ' 5th Cavalry Division which was to lead the corps advance , was concentrated north @-@ west of Sarona , 8 miles ( 13 km ) from the front , with the 4th Cavalry Division waiting in orange groves east of Sarona , 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the front . The Australian Mounted Division was located near Ramle and Ludd ( Lydda ) 17 miles ( 27 km ) from the front line . These divisions and their horses were camouflaged from aircraft , in olive and orange groves , where the irrigation channels were used to water the horses . James Calderwood Jones with the Lowland Brigade , Royal Field Artillery Ammunition Column , described the scene at 21 : 00 on 18 September 1918 in his diary : " What a mass of horses & transport . Stand – to all night , lie down with our equipment on ... horses being hooked – up to the wagons . " 
 All movement had been restricted to nighttime , culminating in a general move forward on the night of 18 / 19 September . " The night ... was fine and still . " The 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions were close behind the infantry , while the Australian Mounted Division moved up to Sarona . Desert Mounted Corps concentrated , with their supplies being carried in massed horse – drawn transport and on endless strings of camels , clogging every road . The light horsemen " loaded their horses with three days ' food , rations an extra water bottle slung on the saddle , and extra <unk> around the horse 's neck ... the 4 kilograms weight of .303 rifle ... [ in ] its bucket close behind the right hand . " " All surplus equipment had been discarded in huge dumps " . 
 = = = = Plan of attack = = = = 
 The Ottoman front line was to be breached quickly by massed infantry in overwhelming strength , supported by the greatest possible weight of artillery at the point in the line where the gap was to be made , while other sections of the front line would be lightly held . After the successful infantry breakthrough , the mass of cavalry would quickly move northwards , avoiding contact so as to reach the rear with as strong a force as possible . The cavalry was to enter the Esdraelon Plain , 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the north , behind the Judean Hills , where reconnaissance had reported an absence of major defensive works . 
 " Concentration , surprise , and speed were key elements in the blitzkrieg warfare planned by Allenby . " Success depended on 
 Making the infantry attack in terrain which favoured the attack and the movement of large mounted formations around the battlefield 
 Sufficiently intense and creeping artillery barrages to cover the concentrated infantry attacks , 
 Destroying or dominating German aircraft to stop reconnaissances revealing the weak sections of the front line and alerting Liman von Sanders to the approaching cavalry , 
 Holding the territory captured by the infantry and cavalry corps which would be dependent on rations more than 50 miles ( 80 km ) from their supply bases , 
 Deception in the Jordan Valley disguised the move of Desert Mounted Corps from the valley to the coast . Rumours included a race meeting planned for the first day of battle . 
 Tactical improvements in the British artillery and infantry attack . 
 On a tactical level , Allenby 's battle plans were similar except for the use of horses instead of tanks , to the British Fourth Army 's attack on the Western Front during the Battle of Amiens six weeks before the Battle of Megiddo . The similarities include 
 Before both battles , the uneven deployments were kept secret by controlling aerial reconnaissance through British air superiority . 
 The initial attacks at Megiddo and Amiens were by infantry divisions deployed two brigades abreast , with a third in reserve . 
 Both battles began within ten minutes of each other at 04 : 20 and 04 : 30 , when two thirds of the heavy artillery engaged in counter @-@ battery work . At the same time a carefully coordinated short artillery barrage by the remaining one third of the available heavy artillery , " lifted and shifted , " to the enemy 's rear to accommodate the forward movement of the assaulting infantry . 
 At both battles , as the infantry attacks developed they bypassed and isolated strong points . 
 At Amiens , about 400 tanks supported the Fourth Army 's advance of about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) when they broke three German trench lines , killing or wounding 9 @,@ 000 Germans and capturing over 15 @,@ 000 prisoners and 374 guns . At Megiddo between 19 and 22 September , Chauvel 's Desert Mounted Corps cavalry exploited the infantry 's success , advancing 65 miles ( 105 km ) . Both the infantry and cavalry corps captured " at least 25 @,@ 000 prisoners and 260 guns . " The Desert Mounted Corps advance , " without the presence of a single tank was to bear a closer relationship to the Blitzkrieg than either Amiens or Cambrai " . 
 Aircraft were also an integral part of the battle plan laid out in Force Order No. 68 when instructions were issued separately . 
 = = = Defending force = = = 
 By August 1918 , the Yildirim Army Group 's 40 @,@ 598 front line infantrymen were organised into twelve divisions . They were deployed on a 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) long front line armed with 19 @,@ 819 rifles , 273 light and 696 heavy machine guns . The high number of machine guns reflected the Ottoman Army 's new tables of organization , and the high machine gun component of the German Asia Corps . 
 The Eighth Army 's 10 @,@ 000 soldiers were commanded by Cevat <unk> . With headquarters at Tulkarm , this force was organised into two corps . The XXII Corps commanded by Colonel Refet Bey consisted of the 7th , 20th and 46th Infantry Divisions . The Asia Corps , also known as the " Left Wing Group " commanded by German Colonel Gustav von Oppen , consisted of the 16th and 19th Infantry Divisions and three German battalion groups from the German Pasha II Brigade . The Eighth Army , supported by 157 artillery guns held a line from the Mediterranean coast just north of Arsuf to Furkhah in the Judean Hills . The 2nd Caucasian Cavalry Division was available for reserve duty at the operational level in the Eighth Army area . 
 = = = = Ottoman deployment = = = = 
 Two infantry divisions in the XXII Corps held the shortest frontages of the entire Yildirim Army Group . The 7th Division covered the first 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) of trenches from the Mediterranean coast . On their left , the 20th Infantry Division covered 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) of trenches which was the doctrinal template laid down by contemporary Ottoman tactics . The 19th Infantry Division ( Asia Corps ) on their left , covered 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) , of trenches further inland . In Eighth Army reserve , the 46th Division ( XXII Corps ) was located 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) behind the front line . 
 These divisions facing the EEF 's XXI Corps , were highly regarded veteran Ottoman Army formations . The 7th and 19th Infantry Divisions , had fought with distinction during the Gallipoli Campaign as part of Esat Pasa 's III Corps . The 20th Infantry Division was also a highly regarded regular army division raised and stationed in Palestine . Sometimes referred to as an ' Arab ' division , it had fought in the latter phases of the Gallipoli Campaign and had served for a year in Galicia on the Eastern Front fighting Imperial Russia . 
 The adjacent Seventh Army of 7 @,@ 000 soldiers commanded by General Mustafa Kemal Pasa , was headquartered at Nablus . It was made up of the III Corps ' 1st and 11th Infantry Divisions and the XXIII Corps ' 26th and 53rd Infantry Divisions , supported by 111 guns . The Seventh Army held the line in the Judean Hills from Furkhah eastwards towards the Jordan Valley in the Battle of Nablus sector , against the XX Corps ' two divisions commanded by Lieutenant General Philip Chetwode . 
 = = = = Other views of this force = = = = 
 The Ottoman armies were under strength , overstretched , " haemorrhaging " deserters , suffering greatly from strained lines of communication , and were overwhelmingly outnumbered by a factor of two to one , by the EEF . Their supply system was so bad in February 1918 , that the normal daily ration for the Yildirim Army Group in Palestine consisted of 125 grains ( 0 @.@ 29 oz ) of bread and boiled beans three times a day , without oil or any other condiment . 
 The fighting strength of the three Ottoman Armies ' ( including the Fourth Army deployed east to the Jordan River in the Third Transjordan attack area ) has been estimated at 26 @,@ 000 infantry , 2 @,@ 000 mounted troops and 372 artillery guns . The nine infantry battalions in Asia Corps ' 16th Infantry Division , had effective strengths equal to a British infantry company of between 100 and 250 men . While 150 to 200 men were " assigned " to the Asia Corps ' 19th Infantry Division battalions , which had had between 500 and 600 men at Beersheba . 
 On the 15 miles ( 24 km ) line stretching inland from the Mediterranean Sea where Allenby deployed 35 @,@ 000 infantry , 9 @,@ 000 cavalry and 383 guns they faced " only 8 @,@ 000 infantry with 130 guns " . The defenders were deployed in a rectangle 45 miles ( 72 km ) in length and 12 miles ( 19 km ) in depth , with Afulah and Beisan 45 and 60 miles ( 72 and 97 km ) respectively , from Allenby 's front line . 
 A single trench system was relied on for defence . This inflexible defence meant that " every inch of ground had to be fought for when a more flexible system would have better suited the situation . " " [ A ] t the point where Allenby struck the Turks themselves achieved a fair degree of concentration of their scant resources ... [ but ] there was no secondary lines of defence nor were there any fall – back positions in the event of a retreat . The Yildirim army intended to fight it out or die . " 
 = = = = Deception issue = = = = 
 Despite the lack of aerial reconnaissance , Liman von Sanders had fairly accurate knowledge on 17 September 1918 , regarding the forces deployed against his Fourth , Seventh and Eighth Armies . He understood there to be five infantry divisions and a French detachment facing the Eighth Army with another two divisions facing the Seventh Army and two mounted divisions facing the Fourth Army . Liman von Sanders was not surprised by the strength and location of the attack . He shifted all his available reserves and reinforcements to the west , not to the east . The strategically vital coastal plain was the most strongly defended sector of the front line . Here Liman von Sanders deployed his most experienced infantry divisions supported by heavy artillery . 
 The position of the Yildirim Army Group 's heavy artillery , which should have moved eastwards if Allenby 's deception plan had worked , did not change . They remained primarily in the Eighth Army sector . " [ T ] hree of five Ottoman Army heavy artillery batteries ( the 72nd , 73rd and 75th ) available in Palestine were deployed in the Eighth Army sector . The remaining two heavy artillery ... [ batteries ] were assigned to the adjacent Seventh Army . Significantly , no Ottoman heavy artillery ... [ batteries ] were positioned on the Jordan River front , although an Austrian heavy artillery battery served there . " 
 If Allenby 's deception plan had been effective " Ottoman reserves should have been drawn to the Jordan River front ; in fact , exactly the reverse happened , " when Liman von Sander sent his only reinforcement , the 2nd Caucasian Cavalry Division to support the Eight Army . This division began arriving near Tulkarm on 16 September and the 46th Infantry Division , in reserve near the Eighth Army 's headquarters at Tulkarm moved 13 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) to the south – west on 17 September to a new reserve position at Et Tire , to reinforce the XXII Corps holding the coastal sector . Further , " regiments on the front line were alerted that a major attack was imminent . " 
 It was not surprise as a result of a successful deception which caused the front line to break during the infantry attacks , but a failure to have sufficient reserves available to mount effective counterattacks . The loss of " situational awareness caused by the breakdown in communications , " was complicated by a change in the " organisational architecture " of the infantry divisions , when assault battalions were added . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Preliminary attacks = = = 
 Deraa was attacked on 16 and 17 September by RAF aircraft when sections of the railway to the north and west of the Deraa junction were bombed . The railway south of Deraa was attacked on 17 September by a Sherifial Arab Column supported by British armoured cars and a French mountain battery . They left Qasr el ' <unk> 50 miles ( 80 km ) east of Amman to destroying a bridge and a section of the rail line . By 23 September communications to the west , between Deraa and Samakh and also to the north of Deraa , had been restored . 
 On the E. of Jordan , the Arabs and the <unk> are up ; and they have cut the Hedjaz railway , N.S. , and W. of Deraa . Deraa is the junction , where the railway into Palestine leaves the Damascus – Medina line ; so , Liman von Sanders has lost his only railway communications with the outer world . I really don 't know what he can do ; and I am beginning to think that we may have a very great success . The weather is perfect ; not too hot , and very clear . 
 In the Judean Hills a preliminary attack took place in the Battle of Nablus section of the front line on 18 September . The 53rd Division ( XX Corps ) attempted to capture the Samieh basin , which overlooked an Ottoman road system near the front line . This section of the front line was required as quickly as possible , so that a linking road could be construction , to connect the EEF and Ottoman road systems . While some objectives were captured during 18 September , the main position known to the British as " Nairn Ridge , " remained in Ottoman hands until late in the afternoon of 19 September . ( See Battle of Nablus ( 1918 ) # Preliminary attack for a full description of this operation . ) 
 = = = Bombardment = = = 
 The infantry will advance to the assault under an artillery barrage which will be put down at the hour at which the infantry leave their positions of deployment . This hour will be known as the ' XXI Corps Zero Hour . ' There will be no preliminary bombardment . 
 The artillery bombardment began the battle at 04 : 30 on 19 September , with trench mortars and machine guns , firing at the German and Ottoman front line and second line trenches . Three siege batteries targeted opposing batteries , while the destroyers HMS Druid and HMS Forester opened fire on the trenches on the coast , north of the Nahr el Faliq . The guns fired a half @-@ hour @-@ long bombardment , deployed one to every 50 yards ( 46 m ) of front . This concentrated fire resembled a Western Front style bombardment , where more heavy guns would normally be deployed with one gun placed every 10 yards ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) . 
 In preparation for the bombardment the artillery was organised by weight and targets . Heavy artillery was aimed at enemy batteries , with some guns and howitzers shelling headquarters and telephone exchanges beyond the range of the field artillery , as well as places where the infantry advance was held up . One 6 @-@ inch Mark VII gun , three batteries of siege howitzers , and two 60 @-@ pounder batteries were able , without moving forward , to fire on the line from Et Tire to the sea . They could be reinforced by one siege battery and one heavy battery , which would be able to fire on the line Et Tire to the sea within two hours of moving forward , while one siege and one heavy battery were held in reserve . The field artillery targeted the German and Ottoman front line until the EEF infantry approached , when the 18 – pounders and the Royal Horse Artillery 's 13 @-@ pounder batteries , lifted to form a creeping barrage in front of the advancing troops , eventually extending out to their extreme range . This creeping barrage lifted and moved forward at a rate of 50 yards ( 46 m ) , 75 yards ( 69 m ) and 100 yards ( 91 m ) per minute in front of the advancing infantry . The 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch howitzers fired on targets beyond the barrage , augmented by the guns of the two destroyers , firing from the Mediterranean Sea . 
 When the bombardment began , the artillery range was 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) and by 08 : 00 , it had been extended out to 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . As no attempt at systematic wire @-@ cutting was made by the artillery , the leading soldiers either cut it by hand or carried some means of crossing it . 
 = = = XXI Corps attacks = = = 
 = = = = Ottoman front line breached = = = = 
 By the evening of 18 September commander Major General J. S. M. Shea 's 60th Division ( XXI Corps ) was deployed with the 180th Brigade in front , ready to attack near the coast with the 181st Brigade in support some 16 miles ( 26 km ) from their objective of Tulkarm . The 179th Brigade was in reserve . The recently formed 5th Light Horse Brigade attached to the 60th Division from Desert Mounted Corps , was deployed behind the 7th ( Meerut ) Division ( XXI Corps ) with orders to advance directly on Tulkarm and capture the town . 
 By 07 : 20 on 19 September the 180th Brigade had captured the front line defences and about 600 prisoners , one company establishing a bridgehead across the mouth of the Nahr el Faliq 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) behind the Ottoman front line . In the process they created a gap for Desert Mounted Corps to advance northwards . The infantry division then turned north @-@ east towards Tulkarm and the Eighth Army headquarters , with the 5th Light Horse Brigade covering the right flank . When this brigade circled around to cut the Tulkarm to Nablus Road from the north , they captured over 2 @,@ 000 prisoners and some guns . The 181st Brigade marching from the south , captured the town at 17 : 00 along with 800 prisoners . 
 = = = = Attack on the Tabsor defences = = = = 
 The Tabsor defences consisted of the only continuous trench and redoubt system on this front . Here , the defenders had dug two or three lines of trenches and redoubts , varying in depth from 1 – 3 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 8 km ) . These trenchers were centered on the Tabsor village , and stretched from Jaljulye in the east through Tabsor to the coast . Another less well developed system of defences was located 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) behind . There was also the beginnings of a third system of defences stretching from Tulkarm across the Plain of Sharon to the Nahr Iskanderun . The objectives of the 3rd ( Lahore ) , 7th ( Meerut ) and 75th Divisions were to assault the first line defences and then to advance to attack the second line which ran from Jiljulieh to Kalkilieh , before advancing to capture Et Tire . 
 The 75th Division had captured Et Tire by 11 : 00 on 19 September and the 7th ( Meerut ) Division captured Taiyibe by 18 : 00 . The 3rd ( Lahore ) Division captured Jaljulye , the railway redoubt and Qalqilye . By then the Ottoman 7th and 20th Divisions had been reduced to small groups of survivors conducting a fighting retreat . On 20 September the 3rd ( Lahore ) Division captured ' Azzun , <unk> and by 15 : 10 were north of <unk> Hajja , while the 7th ( Meerut ) Division captured Beit Lid at 18 : 15 after a hard fought day @-@ long battle . On 21 September the 7th ( Meerut ) Division captured Masudiye Station before advancing towards Sebustiye while the 3rd ( Lahore ) Division advanced to Rafidia , 200 yards ( 180 m ) west of Nablus . By this time the Seventh and Eighth Armies were in full retreat . 
 = = = = Attack in the Judean Hills = = = = 
 Beyond a wide gap of open plain which did not favour a frontal attack , and on the extreme right of the XXI Corps , the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division attacked northwards with the 7th Battalion , 1st Tirailleurs <unk> , 9th Battalion , 2nd Tirailleurs <unk> , 1st and 2nd Battalions <unk> of the Détachment Français de Palestine et de Syrie ( also known as the French contingent or the French detachment ) on their right . This force secured the right flank , pivoting to cover the infantry divisions as they advanced towards Tulkarm and Tabsor . All objectives were won despite these British and French units fighting against the German Asia Corps ( Eighth Army ) also known as the Left Wing Group which included three German battalions from Pasha II . On their right the Battle of Nablus was being fought . Here the XX Corps ' 10th and 53rd Divisions were supported by Corps Troops ' 1 / 1st Worcester Yeomanry , the XCVII Brigade RGA , the 103rd Brigade RGA , the 39th Indian Mountain Battery , and the Hong Kong and Singapore Mountain Battery were opposed by the Seventh Army . This subsidiary battle began at 19 : 45 in the evening of 19 September after the Nairn Ridge was captured . 
 When the sun appeared the noise of the field guns in front of my point of observation had to a large extent stopped . The field @-@ artillery batteries were moving forward , and that fact alone was sufficient to indicate that the whole line had been carried in one grand impetuous rush , and that the day was ours . 
 The intensity of the infantry battle varied considerably along the line . On the coast , the 60th Division made rapid progress advancing some 7 @,@ 000 yards ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) in two and a half hours , while the attached 5th Light Horse Brigade protecting their right flank , rode north – east towards Tulkarm . By the end of the day , the 60th Division had captured Tulkarm , after a march of 17 miles ( 27 km ) . On the right the 75th Division fought its way towards the Tabsor defences and Et Tire which they captured , while the 7th ( Meerut ) Division , on the 75th Division 's right , advanced further north of Et Tire , before turning to attack the western Tabsor defences . The 3rd ( Lahore ) Division , on the right of the 7th ( Meerut ) Division , advanced rapidly to capture the first line of defences between Bir Adas and the Hadrah road , before turning eastwards to make a flank attack on Jiljulieh and Kalkilieh defences . Meanwhile , the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division , on the right of the 3rd ( Lahore ) Division , with the Détachment Français de Palestine et de Syrie on its left , pivoted to cover the right flank of the 60th , 75th , 7th and 3rd Divisions ' advances , despite being strongly opposed . 
 During the first 36 hours of the Battle of Sharon between 04 : 30 on 19 September and 17 : 00 on 20 September , the EEF infantry continued fighting and marching forward , forcing the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies in the Judean Hills to retreat . The Eighth Ottoman Army virtually ceased to exist , excepting its Asia Corps , which together with the Seventh Ottoman Army was still in the Judean Hills between Nablus and Beisan , having lost most of their transport . The XXI Corps continued their advanced north – east to drive the enemy into and through the foothills towards Messudieh Junction , and then down the road to Jenin where they were captured by Australian light horse during the night of 20 September . 
 By 24 : 00 on 20 September the front of the XXI Corps described a virtual straight line , stretching from the Détachment Français de Palestine et de Syrie at Rafat to the northwest , to Tulkarm . The 54th ( East Anglian ) Division held <unk> , Kh . Kefar Thilth and Azzun through Jiyus . On their left the 3rd ( Lahore ) Division was at Felamiye with the 7th ( Meerut ) Division at Et Taiyibe , <unk> . They had taken the village of Beit Lid and controlled the cross roads at Deir Sheraf , while the 60th Division was at Tulkarm and Anebta with the 5th Light Horse Brigade across the railway line to the south of Arrabe . At this time the 75th Division came into XXI Corps reserve at Et Tire . 
 During these two days of fighting , the XXI Corps suffered casualties of 3 @,@ 378 including 446 killed . They killed or wounded 3 @,@ 000 enemy combatants , captured 12 @,@ 000 prisoners , 149 guns and vast quantities of ammunition and transport . Motor ambulances of the 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions helped transport the wounded in the Tulkarm area , before rejoining their divisions on the Esdrealon Plain , on 22 September . 
 = = = Desert Mounted Corps attacks = = = 
 The objectives of Desert Mounted Corps were to advance to the north of the Nahr Iskanderune to the Tulkarm to Haifa road , between Qaqun and Liktera , to protect the left flank of the XXI Corps . Subsequently they were to advance across the Mount Carmel Range , occupy the Esdrealon Plain and capture Afulah and Nazareth . Their successful advance would give Desert Mounted Corps control of the Ottoman lines of communications . By 10 : 00 on 19 September , the Desert Mounted Corps ' 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions , followed by the Australian Mounted Division had advanced through the gap created by infantry , and were riding north over the Plain of Sharon . 
 Chauvel commanding Desert Mounted Corps , ordered the 5th Cavalry Division to cross the Mount Carmel Range by the more northerly track from Sindiane to Abu Shusheh , while the 4th Cavalry Division followed by the Australian Mounted Division , rode through the southerly Musmus Pass . On reaching the Esdraelon Plain on the morning of 20 September , the 5th Cavalry Division was ordered to attack Nazareth and capture the Commander in Chief of Yildirim Army Group , Liman von Sanders and his headquarters 70 miles ( 110 km ) away . This division was to then clear the plain to Afulah , while the 4th Cavalry Division 's objective was to capture Afulah . Subsequently the 4th Cavalry Division were ordered to advance across the <unk> Plain to occupy Beisan on the eastern edge of the plain and capture the bridges to the north which crossed the Jordan River . The division was to hold or destroy the Jisr Mejamieh bridge 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of Beisan , and 97 miles ( 156 km ) from their starting point . The Australian Mounted Division ( less the 5th Light Horse Brigade ) was ordered to send the 3rd Light Horse Brigade to capture Jenin on the main line of retreat from the Judean Hills , 68 miles ( 109 km ) from their starting point , while the 4th Light Horse Brigade garrisoned El Lejjun ( also known as Megiddo ) and carried out various escort and guard duties . 
 Between 1 and 30 September 1918 Desert Mounted Corps suffered 125 killed and 408 wounded or missing . 
 = = = = 5th Cavalry Division = = = = 
 Because of the condition of the northerly pass it was decided to leave divisional artillery to follow in the morning , guarded by the 15th ( Imperial Service ) Cavalry Brigade . So it was that only the 13th and 14th Cavalry Brigades of the 5th Cavalry Division which entered the Esdrealon Plain on the morning of 20 September . Despite orders to the contrary , the 14th Cavalry Brigade advanced directly towards Afulah , the objective of the 4th Cavalry Division . Only the 13th Cavalry Brigade was therefore available to attack 5th Cavalry Division 's objective at Nazareth . This brigade was not sufficiently strong to capture the town and the Yildirim Army Group headquarters and Liman von Sanders escaped . The next day , after the German and Ottoman garrison had retreated , Nazareth was occupied by the 13th Cavalry Brigade . 
 Subsequently Chauvel ordered the 5th Cavalry Division to capture Haifa and Acre 12 miles ( 19 km ) away . As the 18th Lancers ( 13th Cavalry Brigade ) advanced towards Acre shortly after midnight on 21 / 22 September they were attacked by an Ottoman battalion which was routed . On 22 September the Haifa Annexation Expedition was stopped by a strong rearguard with machine guns and supported by effectively positioned artillery controlling the approach road to Haifa . On 23 September , after a successful cavalry charge , the strong Ottoman rearguard position was captured by the Jodhpur and Mysore Imperial Service Lancer Regiments ( 15th Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade ) , with a squadron of 1 / 1st Sherwood Rangers Yeomanry ( 14th Cavalry Brigade ) attached . Together the Jodhpur and Mysore Lancers captured 1 @,@ 350 German and Ottoman prisoners . 
 = = = = 4th Cavalry Division = = = = 
 The 4th Cavalry Division following the 5th Division , rode up the Plain of Sharon as far as Nahr el Mefjir . Here the division attacked and captured an entrenched Ottoman defensive position , which stretched from Jelameh , through El Mejdel and Liktera to the sea near the mouth of the Nahr el Mefjir . Afterwards , the 2nd Lancers ( 10th Cavalry Brigade ) led by the 11th Light Armoured Motor Battery , entered the Musmus Pass and crossed the Mount Carmel Range to El Lejjun during the night of 19 / 20 September . They continued their advance in the early morning of 20 September , to capture Afulah , in the center of the Plain . Leaving the 5th Cavalry Division to garrison Afulah , the 4th Cavalry Division continued their advance eastwards in the afternoon to capture Beisan , having ridden 85 miles ( 137 km ) in 36 hours . The 19th Lancers ( 12th Cavalry Brigade ) advanced directly from Afulah to the north east to capture the Jisr Mejamieh bridge across the Jordan River to the north of Beisan . 
 On 20 September Allenby wrote : 
 This morning my cavalry occupied Afuleh , and pushed thence rapidly south – eastwards , entered Beisan this evening , thus closing to the enemy his last line of escape ... The same bombing of fugitives , on crowded roads , continues today . I think I ought to capture all the Turks ' guns and the bulk of his Army . ... My losses are not heavy , in proportion to the results gained . I hope to motor out , tomorrow , to see the Cavalry in Esdraelon . The Cavalry Headquarters are at Armageddon , at the present moment . 
 An aerial reconnaissance reported a gap of about 20 miles ( 32 km ) of unguarded Jordan River crossings , north from the Jisr ed Damieh bridge . This bridge had been captured on the morning of 22 September by Chaytor 's Force before it turned east to capture Es Salt and capture Amman during the Second Battle of Amman . Chauvel ordered Barrow 's 4th Cavalry Division at Beisan to advance southwards along the banks of the Jordan River on 23 September to cut this line of retreat . The encirclement of what remained of the Seventh and Eighth Armies , still west of the Jordan River in the Judean Hills , was complete on 25 September . 
 = = = = Australian Mounted Division = = = = 
 The Australian Mounted Division followed the 4th Cavalry Division through the Musmus Pass to Lejjun . The 3rd Light Horse Brigade was ordered to attack and capture Jenin and to cut the Nablus to Nazareth road , while the 4th Light Horse Brigade 's 4th Light Horse Regiment guarded Desert Mounted Corps ' headquarters , the 11th and 12th Light Horse Regiments were deployed to escort artillery and transport columns . The cavalry were required to garrison the captured positions , many miles from base . Here they would be dependent on rations for the three cavalry divisions , being quickly and efficiently transported forward , along their extended supply lines . 
 Leaving the 8th Light Horse Regiment at Lejjun , the 9th and 10th Light Horse Regiments ( 3rd Light Horse Brigade ) approached Jenin from two different directions , before charging into the town . After a two @-@ hour @-@ long battle the town along with the main line of retreat out of the Judean Hills were captured . Jenin had also been the main supply and ordnance depot for the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies . Among the captures were " very large quantities of valuable stores of all sorts , " workshops , three hospitals , locomotives and rolling stock at the station . With two aerodromes , Jenin had also been the main German air base . Here 24 burnt aircraft were counted among the captures . By the evening of 20 September Australian Mounted Division controlled Jenin and patrolled the plain between the 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions . All the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies main lines of retreat were controlled by Desert Mounted Corps except the Hedjaz railway to the east of the Jordan River . 
 After being forced out of his Yildirim Army Group headquarters at Nazareth on the morning of 20 September , Liman von Sanders drove via Tiberias to Samakh to organise the establishment of a strong rearguard at Samakh . The 4th Light Horse Brigade was ordered to move to Beisan from Afulah at 08 : 30 on 24 September and was subsequently ordered at 13 : 45 to advance to capture Samakh . This town was strategically important to both sides as it controlled a direct road to Damascus . On 25 September , the 11th Light Horse Regiment supported by part of the 12th Light Horse Regiment charged in the pre @-@ dawn while the German and Australian machine – gunners conducted a firefight . After an hour @-@ long battle the light horse forced the garrison to surrender , capturing 350 prisoners at the station and in the town , suffering 14 killed and 29 wounded . 
 Units of the 4th Light Horse Brigade subsequently advanced along the western shore of the Sea of Galilee , to jointly occupy the town of Tiberias with units from the 3rd Light Horse Brigade , which advanced from Nazareth over the hills . These victories concluded the Battle of Sharon and the Battle of Megiddo . 
 = = = EEF aerial attacks = = = 
 = = = = 19 September = = = = 
 Airmen of the Palestine Brigade of the RAF , including No. 1 Squadron , Australian Flying Corps , flew bombing raids on 19 September attacking key communication centers at the Seventh and Eighth Army headquarters at Nablus and Tulkarm , which cut communications with the Yildirim Army Group headquarters at Nazareth . They also bombed the main German air base at Jenin and " harassed retreating Turkish troops on the roads . " 
 At 01 : 15 the Handley @-@ Page bomber piloted by the Australian Ross Smith took off carrying 16 , 112 @-@ lb bombs to bomb Afulah railway junction and smash the central telephone exchange . At 05 : 20 Bristol Fighters flying over Afulah saw labourers working to repair the railway station , while at Bir el <unk> , an Ottoman infantry battalion was seen moving southward to reinforce the front line . Flying west of the railway line , initial movements northward near Bir <unk> , already indicated the beginnings of a retreat . At 06 : 00 a bombing raid by <unk> attacked Afulah again . Later two Bristol Fighters reported 5 @,@ 000 infantry , 2 @,@ 000 cavalry , guns and 600 transport , retiring in disorder near Et Tire . On this massed Ottoman force , 20 small bombs were dropped and over 2 @,@ 000 machine gun bullets were fired . At 10 : 00 the Nablus area appeared quiet , while shortly afterwards Jenin was bombed . At 11 : 30 the pilot reported having seen the leading cavalry division of Desert Mounted Corps , approaching Liktera on the Plain of Sharon . On the cavalry ’ s right rear at Kakon , Ottoman units were reported alarmed and beginning to move , while further south at <unk> the roads were full of retreating army units . 
 Five Bristol Fighters in bombing formation , took off at 11 : 40 with eight bombs each , which were dropped on retreating columns between Et Tire and Tulkarm . They also fired hundreds of machine gun bullets , scattering the retreating force towards Kakon and Tulkarm . At this time , machine gun fire from the ground aimed at the aircraft was fairly heavy , causing a number of casualties to the air crews . At 12 : 30 , a second formation of three aircraft repeated the attack on the same retreating Ottoman column , which had reached the corner on the Tulkarm road . Six aircraft took off in the afternoon , two pursuing the retreating columns north of Kakon heading towards Baka , while four aircraft found soldiers , transport , artillery , horses , and camels moving from Tulkarm to Anebta . These they bombed and machine gunned , in a section of the road where it passed the little Wadi <unk> , through a gorge with steep hills on either side . Before the column could escape , another formation of seven Bristol Fighters attacked them , at about 17 : 00 west of Anebta . The evening patrols reported the Ottoman Seventh Army headquarters still at Nablus , but the entire Eighth Army appeared to be in retreat , with their Tulkarm headquarters already captured . At the crossroads of the Afulah and the coast roads at <unk> , a supply base with hospital and grain dump was in flames and its inhabitants were seen retreating into the hills . 
 Reports reached Allenby throughout the day , describing the aircraft " spreading destruction , death , and terror behind the enemy 's lines . " More than 11 tons of bombs were dropped , and 66 @,@ 000 machine gun bullets fired from the air , particularly on the road from Tulkarm , via Anebta and through the narrow defile at Messudieh , to Nablus . The defile was twice blocked by smashed transport and dead horses , and later cleared . Those who survived abandoned their transport to seek cover in the hills . Over a period of four hours of repeated aerial attacks , the road from Nablus to Beisan about 8 miles ( 13 km ) north east of Nablus " in a narrow defile " was bombed by EEF aircraft . The area became covered with the wreckage of 90 guns , 50 motor lorries and more than 1 @,@ 000 other vehicles and unknown casualties . 
 Meanwhile , in the area to the east of the Jordan River garrisoned by the Ottoman Fourth Army , two Bristol Fighters reporting early in the day all Ottoman camps in the area , were quiet . After attacking a mass of cavalry at Ain es Sir they returned to base by flying over the Wadi Fara road . Here they dropped their remaining bombs on a column of 50 motor lorries , moving eastwards along the road towards the Jisr ed Damieh bridge over the Jordan River . A direct hit on one of the lorries blocked the road and in the late afternoon another two Bristol Fighters continued this attack . 
 = = = = 20 – 23 September = = = = 
 During the evening of 19 September and early the next morning , Ross Smith in the Handley @-@ Page bombed the Jenin aerodrome and railway station , leaving the aerodrome looking like " a rubbish @-@ heap " . A second dawn patrol reported a column of about 200 vehicles spread along 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of the Wady el Fara road moving from Nablus in the direction of the Jisr ed Damieh bridge . This column was bombed by Bristol Fighters , three making " direct hits " on transport , which blocked the road . Another five bombs were dropped on this target as well as machine gun fire which " created mayhem . " Early morning reconnaissance flights reported the effects of the previous day 's bombing , in particular between Anebta and Deir Sheraf , where all Ottoman camps were either burnt or empty . From this region northwards , Ottoman troops were seen retreating along the road and railway towards Jenin . At <unk> railway station two trains were being loaded and from <unk> northwards the road was full of carts , camels and soldiers . Afulah was a blackened wreck after 24 hours of bombing . Here four trains of carriages without engines were in the station and at the aerodrome four aircraft being prepared for flight were bombed . 
 Aerial attacks began at 09 : 00 on the Samaria to Afulah road , when five aircraft dropped 40 bombs and fired 4 @,@ 000 machine gun bullets at several retreating columns . Between <unk> and Jenin , nearly every bomb fell among retreating soldiers , on " congested bodies of troops ... [ who ] suffered terrible casualties " . When they ran out of ammunition , the aircraft returned for supplies before repeating their bombing and machine gunning near Arrabe . Those who survived the aerial attack to continue their retreat towards Damascus , would be captured later that night at Jenin , by the 3rd Light Horse Brigade . The last reconnaissance of the day reported fires burning at Nablus and at Ottoman army dumps at Balata , indicating the whole Ottoman line from El Lubban to the Jordan , was in retreat . 
 Allenby described the destruction : 
 I was at <unk> today , and went along the Nablus road . It is strewn with broken lorries , wagons , dead Turks , horses and oxen ; mostly killed and smashed by our bombing aeroplanes . The same bombing of fugitives , on crowded roads , continues today . I think I ought to capture all the Turks ' guns and the bulk of his Army . 
 An early morning patrol of the upper Wady el Fara road from Nablus to Jisr ed Damieh , reported on 21 September a mass of enemy transport , moving along a section of the old Roman road which formed a big ' S ' . This stretch of the road from Ain Shibleh to the Jordan River passed along the Jordan cliffs . Here there was a precipice on one side and steep hills on the other . The airmen counted about 600 horse @-@ drawn wagons and guns between Balata and Khurbet <unk> , a further 200 wagons beyond them , and from Ain Shibleh a mass of cavalry and transport , heading northeast . Five bombs were dropped on these formations along with 600 machine gun rounds , marking the beginning of another " massacre " as the aerial bombardment , which had commenced at 06 : 30 with the arrival of the first Australian and British aircraft , was continued during the day . These aircraft dropped six tons of bombs and fired 44 @,@ 000 machine gun rounds . Two days later 87 guns , 55 motor lorries , 4 motor cars , 75 carts , 837 wagons , water carts and field kitchens representing most , if not all of the Seventh Army 's transport , were found destroyed and abandoned . 
 On 22 and 23 September small groups of soldiers , remnants of the Yildirim Army Group , were attacked by aircraft on the Shibleh to Beisan road near the Jordan River . Shortly afterwards a column of several thousand Ottoman soldiers were seen marching back under a white flag along the Wady el Fara road . Meanwhile , east of the Jordan River , three German Pfalz scout aircraft and a number of <unk> two – seater aircraft from Deraa aerodrome were attacked by three Bristol Fighters over Um es <unk> . During the aerial fight a German two – seater was shot down near Mafrak , another aircraft was forced to land near the railway and an Ottoman outpost , while the third aircraft was chased back to Deraa . Deraa aerodrome was attacked in the early morning of 23 September , by aircraft flying from Ramle . It was attacked again that night by the Handley @-@ Page , which ended the enemy 's use of that aerodrome . 
 = = = Yildirim Army Group reactions = = = 
 = = = = 19 September = = = = 
 By 05 : 45 telephone communication to Ottoman front line units had been cut and five minutes later all German and Ottoman reserves had been ordered forward . All telephone , telegraph and wireless communications from the Eighth Army headquarters at Tulkarm were cut at 07 : 00 . Although the Eighth Army headquarters survived the EEF infantry onslaught , they had lost contact with the 7th and 19th Divisions ( XXII Corps ) . Liman von Sanders ordered the 46th Infantry Division ( Eighth Army reserve ) forward towards Et Tire . The division 's two regiments were ordered forward at 08 : 00 . One regiment reinforced the 20th Division 's position at <unk> Tepe while the second regiment fortified <unk> Tepe , near XXII Corps headquarters . By 09 : 00 Seventh Army communications with Yildirim Army Group at Nazareth had also been cut . Liman von Sanders learned at that time , from the Asia Corps at ' Azzun via the Seventh Army headquarters , that the trench lines on the coastal sector had been breached and cavalry were advancing northwards . By 10 : 00 the weight of the EEF infantry and artillery attack had forced the XXII Corps to retreat and Yildirim Army Group had no combat formations in position to stop the cavalry advance up the coast . 
 The Asia Corps commanded by von Oppen had expected an attack during the night of 18 / 19 September . The corps ' 47th and 48th Infantry Regiments ( 16th Division ) held the front line in the Judean Hills strongly supported by a local reserve consisting of the 1st Battalion 125th Infantry Regiment , part of the 48th Regiment 's machine gun company , and divisional assault , engineer , and cavalry companies . Along with the 19th Division , they were attacked at 04 : 50 by the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division and the Détachment Français de Palestine et de Syrie , a brigade – sized force of French colonial and Armenian troops . Liman von Sanders ordered the remainder of the Asia Corps to reinforce the XXII Corps by attacking westwards towards Tulkarm . Von Oppen had already ordered the German 701st Battalion and a German cavalry squadron to move through Jiyus to Felamiye , with a reserve battalion of the Ottoman 72nd Regiment and the 19th Divisional Cavalry Squadron , taking up a position east of Qalqilye . At 10 : 00 , the 1st Battalion 125th Infantry Regiment and the cavalry troop reinforced the line to the north of ' Azzun Ibn ' <unk> . These reinforcements , along with the 46th Division at Et Tire , caused serious difficulties for the EEF 's XXI Corps infantry . Von Oppen dispatched a German lieutenant with clerks , orderlies and transport personnel armed with some machine guns , to Kh . Kefar Thilth to rally the retreating 19th Division , which had been near Jaljulye . The 16th Division continued to maintain its positions , holding the front line but by 17 : 00 all reserves had been committed . Not long afterwards they were forced to retreat to conform with the XXII Corps withdrawals on its right flank . Von Oppen withdrew his baggage , guns and headquarters to El Funduq and at 18 : 30 , having previously issued orders , withdrew at dusk . He withdrew to a line stretching from 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of ' Azzun , through Kh Kefar Thilth , along the heights south of the Wadi Qana through Deir Estia , to rendezvous with the Seventh Army at Kefar Haris . 
 The whole of the Ottoman Eighth Army 's right flank forces holding the front line defences had rapidly collapsed . By the end of the day only remnant survivors were withdrawing across the coastal plain , along the main line of retreat in the direction of Tulkarm and Messudieh Junction . This road was subjected to continuous aerial attacks and aerial bombardments , becoming blocked in the afternoon of 19 September when many casualties were inflicted on the retreating columns . 
 Liman von Sanders ordered the Seventh Army commander Mustafa Kemal to withdraw northwards , and to send a battalion of the 110th Regiment at Nablus and any other spare troops , to stop the EEF advance to the Tulkarm to Nablus road , at an easily defended narrow , steep sided pass near ' Anebta . At 12 : 30 Liman von Sanders had also taken steps to defend the Musmus Pass entry onto the Esdrealon Plain . He ordered the 13th Depot Regiment based at Nazareth and the military police ; a total of six companies and 12 machine guns to " occupy the mouth of the Musmus Pass at El Lajjun . " Meanwhile , the Ottoman Fourth Army to the east of the Jordan River , remained in position holding their ground on the Ottoman left flank . 
 = = = = 20 September = = = = 
 Liman von Sanders was forced to withdraw from Nazareth in the early morning when the 5th Cavalry Division unsuccessfully attacked the town . During his journey to Deraa , Liman von Sanders ordered the establishment of a rearguard line running from Deraa down the Yarmuk River Valley , across the Jordan River and west to Samakh , around the shore of the Sea of Galilee to Tiberias and northwards to Lake <unk> . If this line , across the two main roads and railway lines to Damascus could be held , time could be gained for the consolidation of the retreating columns into a strong defence of Damascus . 
 His journey took him to Tiberias and Samakh , where he reestablished contact with his three armies . He continued on to Deraa on the morning of 21 September , which he found to be " fairly secure " and placed its commandant , Major <unk> in temporary command of the whole front from Deraa to Samakh . While there , Liman von Sanders received a report from the Fourth Army , which he ordered to withdraw to the Yarmuk , Irbid , Deraa line , without waiting for the southern Hedjaz troops . During the evening Liman von Sanders met with leaders of several thousand <unk> who agreed to remain neutral . 
 Meanwhile , after the loss of ' Azzun at 11 : 45 on 20 September and as a consequence of the EEF infantry advances through ' Anebta , von Oppen 's Asia Corps was ordered by the Eighth Army headquarters then at Masudiye Station , " to fall back to a line from Beit Lid , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) west north west of Deir Sheraf , to <unk> , 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) south south west of Deir Sheraf " . Asia Corps was to cover the junction of the Tulkarm and El Funduq roads with the Damascus road for as long as possible before continuing their retreat along the Damascus road to 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) north of Masudiye Station . Von Oppen ordered units from the 16th and 19th Divisions ( Asia Corps ) to take up a rearguard position either side of the El Funduq to Deir Sheraf road while Asia Corps bivouacked near Balata . During the night of 20 / 21 von Oppen was ordered to send his German troops back to Deir Sheraf to cover the Seventh Army retreat , but he refused . The 16th Division conducted a fighting retreat on 20 and 21 September , during which most of their artillery was lost . 
 Remnants of the XXII Corps ( Eighth Army ) which had retreated north along the main Damascus road during 20 September , were captured that night by the 3rd Light Horse Brigade at Jenin . 
 = = = = 21 September = = = = 
 During the night , the Asia Corps lost touch with the 16th and 19th Divisions , but following the direct orders of Liman von Sanders , these divisions withdrew to the west of Nablus . Here von Oppen got in contact with them during the morning of 21 September . At that time the remains of the 702nd and 703rd Battalions were reformed into one battalion , supported by a rifle company , a machine gun company and a trench mortar detachment . The 701st Battalion with its machine gun company of six guns , a troop of cavalry , an infantry @-@ artillery platoon with two mountain guns or howitzers and a trench mortar section with four mortars and a cavalry squadron , remained intact . 
 Meanwhile , the bulk of the Seventh Army was retreating down the Wadi el Fara road , towards the Jordan River . Here it was heavily bombed and strafed by machine guns , from aircraft . During these aerial attacks the Seventh Army guns and transport were destroyed , leaving the road blocked . The survivors were forced to turn north at ' Ain Shible in order to continue their retreat towards Beisan . Having got through before the road was blocked , the 53rd Division continued down the Wadi el Fara road , but was attacked and captured by Chaytor 's Force on 22 September , during their attack on the Jisr ed Damieh bridge . The Asia Corps also withdrawing down the Wadi el Fara road towards the Jordan River , was forced to turn north @-@ east at ' Ain Shible , south east of Tammun , towards Beisan . At 10 : 00 von Oppen had been informed that the EEF was closing in on Nablus and the Wadi el Fara road was blocked . He decided to retreat via Beit Dejan 7 miles ( 11 km ) east southeast of Nablus to the Jordan River at Jisr ed Damieh , but found this route also cut . He then ordered a retreat via Mount Ebal , leaving behind all wheeled transport , including guns and baggage . During this withdrawal , the column suffered casualties from artillery fire . The 701st and the combined 702nd and 703rd Battalions bivouacked that night at Tammun with the 16th and 19th Divisions at Tubas . 
 The Eighth Army headquarters at Nablus was abandoned at 15 : 00 on 21 September , when Jevad join the Seventh Army headquarters , accompanied by his chief of staff and some staff officers . This move signalled the end of the Ottoman Eighth Army . The 20th and 21st Regiments existed only until the afternoon . All surviving remnants were in retreat and threatened with encirclement , including the Asia Corps . Von Oppen with 700 German and 1 @,@ 300 Ottoman soldiers of the 16th and 19th Divisions , was retreating northwards towards Beisan when he learned it had fallen . He decided to advance during the night of 22 September to Samakh where he correctly guessed Liman von Sanders would order a rearguard action . However , Jevad , ( also known as <unk> Pasa and Cevat Pasa ) the commander of the Eighth Army ordered him to cross the Jordan River . 
 = = = = 22 – 24 September = = = = 
 Between 21 and 23 September , the 1st and 11th Divisions III Corps ( Seventh Army ) fought rearguard actions from Tubas to the Jordan River , which delayed the EEF cavalry encirclement , and covered the retreat of the remaining units of the Ottoman Seventh Army across the Jordan River . The Seventh Army lost 1 @,@ 500 prisoners , captured by the XX Corps cavalry on 23 and 24 September during the Battle of Nablus . 
 By 22 September , the Asia Corps ' 16th Infantry Division had been reduced to less than 280 officers and men and two days later , on 24 September they were relying on machine guns for defence , when " enemy horse units [ were ] everywhere . " Their divisional headquarters joined the surviving headquarters elements of the 19th Division only to be attacked and overrun by EEF cavalry . However , the 16th Division 's 2nd and 3rd Battalions of the 125th Infantry Regiment with their combined assault and engineers company survived to fight a delaying action to Damascus . They were captured there on 1 October 1918 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The King congratulated Allenby : 
 It is with feelings of pride and admiration that we at home have received the news of the ably conceived and brilliantly carried out operations in which the British Indian and Allied forces under your command with the support of the Royal Navy have gained a complete victory over the enemy ... 
 In a congratulatory telegram from the Chief of the General Staff at the War Office on 23 September , Allenby had been asked to consider a " cavalry raid on Aleppo . " Sir Henry Wilson the then Chief of the General Staff went on to describe the effect such an advance would have on the campaign in the Caucasus and in North West Persia , and the moral and political consequences for the Ottoman Empire . He assured Allenby that the War Office would accept the risks involved in such a venture . At this early stage in operations , Allenby 's focus remained on the battle of Megiddo then unfolding , and on the pursuit to Damascus by Desert Mounted Corps which would be the next step . 
 The 7th Brigade of the 3rd ( Lahore ) Division was detached to the Desert Mounted Corps to garrison the areas occupied by the mounted corps . This infantry brigade marched via Jenin to Nazareth and on to Samakh , arriving there on 28 September , while Desert Mounted Corps was in pursuit of the remnants Yildirim Army Group towards Damascus . By 29 September , the 7th ( Meerut ) Division was concentrated at Haifa with the XXI Corps Cavalry Regiment at Acre in preparation for their march to Beirut and on to Tripoli during the Pursuit to Haritan . 
 = = = Ottoman and German prisoners = = = 
 Between 19 and 21 September 15 @,@ 000 prisoners had been captured . Some of these were guarded by the 7th Brigade , 3rd ( Lahore ) Division which had been detached to Desert Mounted Corps to garrison the Esdrealon Plain . They took over responsibility for a compound of 300 prisoners from Australian light horsemen . Shortly afterwards , another 200 Germans arrived followed by large numbers of Turks , Armenian , Arabs , Jews and Bedouins prisoners . During the night of 26 / 27 September a further 3 @,@ 500 prisoners were added into the compound and " packed in shoulder to shoulder . All sanitary discipline had vanished and <unk> excrement covered every open space . " Three lorries arrived with rations of army biscuits , bully beef and onions for the prisoners , and after they had all been fed , an escort arrived to move them . 
 = = = Spanish Flu = = = 
 With the rapid advance , " disorganization and improvisation in the medical service are inevitable , " with clearing stations lacking " the most elementary comforts . " These problems were multiplied by the huge numbers of prisoners , among whom many became ill with Spanish Flu . In a hospital located in a convent in Haifa about 3 @,@ 000 sick were treated . " It is the survival of the fittest , if one is able to be up & about there is a chance of getting something to eat , but if stretcher case , you get no attention whatever , the staff can 't cope with the numbers . " 
 There are too many sick to go under the scanty canvas [ in a field ambulance ] . The majority are Turkish prisoners . You will see them herded under tarpaulins beyond the marquees ; and where no tarpaulins are available , they lie sick in the sun . Sandfly fever , relapsing fever , influenza and malaria ( malignant and benign ) , dysentery , have hit the spent Turkish Army hard . So have they ours ; but not to the same degree . The Turks are “ dying like flies ” , as they say . The more acute cases are put in limbers , G.S. wagons , lorries , and pushed down . A cot full of comatose Turks , sick unto death , lumbering along in the dust , is a common sight . Even our own sick are evacuated in any vehicle that passes the station . There are not motor ambulances for all , and there are no ambulance trains on this route . An orderly in the road stops all down @-@ passing vehicles and demands if they can carry sick . Of wounded there are almost none . 
 With a temperature of 103 ° F ( 39 ° C ) , Warrant Officer Patrick M. Hamilton , serving with the 4th Light Horse Field Ambulance , ( Australian Mounted Division ) became one of the earlier cases of Spanish flu , being reported sick on 20 September . At 18 : 00 on 21 September he was evacuated from Jenin , sitting up in one of the returning supply lorries , to the Australian Receiving Station at Tulkarm . He became very sick the next day " with pains all over , especially in the back " and became a stretcher case just before the receiving station was taken over by the 4th Cavalry Divisional Receiving Station , where he remained until 24 September . From Tulkarm he was evacuated to the 15th British Casualty Clearing Station at <unk> in a motor ambulance , then by train to the 26th British Casualty Clearing Station at Ludd , before arriving by troop train back at the 47th Stationary Hospital at Gaza on 27 September , seven days after falling ill . Here he slowly recovered , before being evacuated once more , by train on 1 October back across the Sinai 120 miles ( 190 km ) , to be admitted to the 24th British Stationary Hospital at Kantara , where he recovered . He rejoined the 4th Light Horse Field Ambulance in the middle of November , arriving by boat at Tripoli . 
 = Battle of White Plains = 
 The Battle of White Plains was a battle in the New York and New Jersey campaign of the American Revolutionary War fought on October 28 , 1776 , near White Plains , New York . Following the retreat of George Washington 's Continental Army northward from New York City , British General William Howe landed troops in Westchester County , intending to cut off Washington 's escape route . Alerted to this move , Washington retreated farther , establishing a position in the village of White Plains but failed to establish firm control over local high ground . Howe 's troops drove Washington 's troops from a hill near the village ; following this loss , Washington ordered the Americans to retreat farther north . 
 Later British movements chased Washington across New Jersey and into Pennsylvania . Washington then crossed the Delaware and surprised a brigade of Hessian troops in the December 26 Battle of Trenton . 
 = = Background = = 
 British General William Howe , after evacuating Boston in March 1776 , regrouped in Halifax , Nova Scotia , and embarked in June on a campaign to gain control of New York City . The campaign began with an unopposed landing on Staten Island in early July . British troops made another unopposed landing on Long Island on August 22 , south of the areas where General George Washington 's Continental Army had organized significant defenses around Brooklyn Heights . 
 After losing the Battle of Long Island on August 27 , General Washington and his army of 9 @,@ 000 troops escaped on the night of August 29 – 30 to York Island ( as Manhattan was then called ) . General Howe followed up with a landing on Manhattan on September 15 , but his advance was checked the next day at Harlem Heights . After an abortive landing at <unk> 's Neck , he landed troops with some resistance at Pell 's Point on October 18 to begin an encircling maneuver that was intended to trap Washington 's army between that force , his troops in Manhattan , and the Hudson River , which was dominated by warships of the Royal Navy . Howe established a camp at New Rochelle , but advance elements of his army were near Mamaroneck , only 7 miles ( 11 km ) from White Plains , where there was a lightly defended Continental Army supply depot . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 On October 20 , General Washington sent Colonel Rufus Putnam out on a reconnaissance mission from his camp at Harlem Heights . Putnam discovered the general placement of the British troop locations and recognized the danger to the army and its supplies . When he reported this to Washington that evening , Washington immediately dispatched Putnam with orders to Lord Stirling , whose troops were furthest north , to immediately march to White Plains . They arrived at White Plains at 9 am on October 21 , and were followed by other units of the army as the day progressed . Washington decided to withdraw most of the army to White Plains , leaving a garrison of 1 @,@ 200 men under Nathanael Greene to defend Fort Washington on Manhattan . General Howe 's army advanced slowly , with troops from his center and right moving along the road from New Rochelle to White Plains , while a unit of Loyalists occupied Mamaroneck . The latter was attacked that night by a detachment of Lord Stirling 's troops under John Haslet , who took more than thirty prisoners as well as supplies , but suffered several killed and 15 wounded . As a result , Howe moved elements of his right wing to occupy Mamaroneck . On October 22 , Howe was reinforced by the landing at New Rochelle of an additional 8 @,@ 000 troops under the command of Wilhelm von Knyphausen . 
 Washington established his headquarters at the Elijah Miller House in North White Plains on October 23 , and chose a defensive position that he fortified with two lines of entrenchments . The trenches were situated on raised terrain , protected on the right by the swampy ground near the Bronx River , with steeper hills further back as a place of retreat . The American defenses were 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) long . Beyond that , on the right , was Chatterton 's Hill , which commanded the plain over which the British would have to advance . The hill was initially occupied by militia companies numbering several hundred , probably including John Brooks ' Massachusetts militia company . 
 On October 24 and 25 , Howe 's army moved from New Rochelle to Scarsdale , where they established a camp covering the eastern bank of the Bronx River . This move was apparently made in the hopes of catching Charles Lee 's column , which had to alter its route toward White Plains and execute a forced march at night to avoid them . Howe remained at Scarsdale until the morning of October 28 , when his forces marched toward White Plains , with British troops on the right under General Henry Clinton , and primarily Hessian troops on the left under General von Heister . 
 = = Battle = = 
 While Washington was inspecting the terrain to determine where it was best to station his troops , messengers alerted him that the British were advancing . Returning to his headquarters , he ordered the 2nd Connecticut Regiment under Joseph Spencer out to slow the British advance , and sent Haslet and the 1st Delaware Regiment , along with Alexander McDougall 's brigade ( <unk> <unk> 's 3rd New York Regiment , Charles Webb 's 19th Continental Regiment , William Smallwood 's 1st Maryland Regiment , and the 1st New York Regiment and 2nd New York Regiments ) to reinforce Chatterton Hill . 
 Spencer 's force crossed the Bronx River , set up behind a stone wall , and exchanged fire with the Hessians led by Colonel Johann Rall that were at the head of the British left column . Eventually forced to retreat when Clinton 's column threatened their flank , these companies retreated across the Bronx River , while fire from the troops on Chatterton Hill covered their move . Rall 's troops attempted to gain the hill , but were repelled by fire from Haslet 's troops and the militia , and retreated to a nearby hilltop on the same side of the river . This concerted defense brought the entire British Army , which was maneuvering as if to attack the entire American line , to a stop . 
 While Howe and his command conferred , the Hessian artillery on the left opened fire on the hilltop position , where they succeeded in driving the militia into a panicked retreat . The arrival of McDougall and his brigade helped to rally them , and a defensive line was established , with the militia on the right and the Continentals arrayed along the top of the hill . Howe finally issued orders , and while most of his army waited , a detachment of British and Hessian troops was sent to take the hill . 
 The British attack was organized with Hessian regiments leading the assault . Rall was to charge the American right , while a Hessian battalion under Colonel Carl von Donop ( consisting of the Linsing , <unk> , <unk> , and Kochler grenadiers , and Donop 's own chasseur regiment ) was to attack the center . A British column under General Alexander Leslie ( consisting of the 5th , 28th , 35th , and 49th Foot ) was to attack the right . Donop 's force either had difficulty crossing the river , or was reluctant to do so , and elements of the British force were the first to cross the river . Rall 's charge scattered the militia on the American right , leaving the flank of the Maryland and New York regiments exposed as they poured musket fire onto the British attackers , which temporarily halted the British advance . The exposure of their flank caused them to begin a fighting retreat , which progressively forced the remainder of the American line , which had engaged with the other segments of the British force , to give way and retreat . Haslet 's Delaware regiment , which anchored the American left , provided covering fire while the remaining troops retreated to the north , and were the last to leave the hill . The fighting was intense , and both sides suffered significant casualties before the Continentals made a disciplined retreat . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 John Fortescue 's History of the British Army says that Howe 's casualties numbered 214 British and 99 Hessians . However , Rodney Atwood points out that Fortescue 's figure for the Hessians includes the entire Hessian casualties from 19 – 28 October and that in fact only 53 of these casualties were incurred at the Battle of White Plains . This revised figure would give a total of 267 British and Hessians killed , wounded or missing at White Plains . Henry Dawson , on the other hand , gives Howe 's loss as 47 killed , 182 wounded and 4 missing . The American loss is uncertain . Theodore <unk> and J. David Dameron give a range of 150 @-@ 500 killed , wounded and captured . Samuel Roads numbers the casualties of 47 killed and 70 wounded . Henry Dawson estimates 50 killed , 150 wounded and 17 missing for McDougall 's and Spencer 's commands but has no information on the losses in Haslet 's regiment . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The two generals remained where they were for two days , while Howe reinforced the position on Chatterton Hill , and Washington organized his army for retreat into the hills . With the arrival of additional Hessian and Waldeck troops under Lord Percy on October 30 , Howe planned to act against the Americans the following day . However , a heavy rain fell the whole next day , and when Howe was finally prepared to act , he awoke to find that Washington had again eluded his grasp . 
 Washington withdrew his army into the hills to the north on the night of October 31 , establishing a camp near North Castle . Howe chose not to follow , instead attempting without success to draw Washington out . On November 5 , he turned his army south to finish evicting Continental Army troops from Manhattan , a task he accomplished with the November 16 Battle of Fort Washington . 
 Washington eventually crossed the Hudson River at Peekskill with most of his army , leaving New England regiments behind to guard supply stores and important river crossings . Later , British movements chased him across New Jersey and into Pennsylvania , and the British established a chain of outposts across New Jersey . Washington , seeing an opportunity for a victory to boost the nation 's morale , crossed the Delaware and surprised Rall 's troops in the December 26 Battle of Trenton . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Each year on or near the anniversary date , the White Plains Historical Society hosts a commemoration of the event at the Jacob Purdy House in White Plains , New York . Two ships in the United States Navy were named for the Battle of White Plains . CVE @-@ 66 was an escort carrier in World War II . AFS @-@ 4 was a combat stores ship that was decommissioned in 1995 after suffering extensive damage in 1992 's Typhoon Omar . 
 According to some historians , the Headless Horseman depicted in Washington Irving 's short story " The Legend of Sleepy Hollow " was inspired by a real @-@ life Hessian soldier who lost his head by cannon fire during this battle . 
 = Gospel of John = 
 The Gospel According to John ( Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , translit . To kata <unk> <unk> ; also called the Gospel of John , the Fourth Gospel , or simply John ) is one of the four canonical gospels in the New Testament . It traditionally appears fourth , after the synoptic gospels of Matthew , Mark , and Luke . John begins with the witness and affirmation of John the Baptist and concludes with the death , burial , resurrection , and post @-@ resurrection appearances of Jesus . 
 The author is identified as " the Disciple whom Jesus loved " , whom early Christian tradition identified as John the Apostle , one of Jesus ' Twelve Apostles . The gospel is so closely related in style and content to the three surviving Johannine epistles that commentators treat the four books , along with the Book of Revelation , as a single corpus of Johannine literature , but there are some arguments made by modern scholars who believe John the Apostle was not the author of any of these books . 
 C. K. Barrett , and later Raymond E. Brown , suggested that a tradition developed around the " Johannine Community " , and that this tradition gave rise to the gospel . The discovery of a large number of papyrus fragments of manuscripts with Johannine themes has led more scholars to recognize that the texts were among the most influential in the early Church . 
 The discourses contained with this gospel seem to be concerned with issues of the church – synagogue debate at the time of composition . It is notable that in John , the community appears to define itself primarily in contrast to Judaism , rather than as part of a wider Christian community . Though Christianity started as a movement within Judaism , it gradually separated from Judaism because of mutual opposition between the two religions . 
 = = Structure and content = = 
 The Gospel of John can be divided into four sections : a prologue ( 1 : 1 – 18 ) , a Book of Signs ( 1 : 19 – 12 : 50 ) , a Book of Glory ( 13 : 1 – 20 : 31 ) , and an epilogue ( 21 ) . The structure is highly schematic : there are seven " signs " culminating in the raising of Lazarus ( foreshadowing the resurrection of Jesus ) , and seven " I am " sayings and discourses , culminating in Thomas 's proclamation of Jesus as " my lord and my God " — the same title ( dominus et deus ) claimed by Roman Emperor Domitian . 
 = = = Prologue = = = 
 Jesus is placed in his cosmic setting as the eternal Logos made flesh who reveals God and gives salvation to believers ; John the Baptist , Andrew , and Nathanael bear witness to him as the Lamb of God , the Son of God , and the Christ . 
 = = = Book of Signs = = = 
 The narrative of Jesus ' public ministry , beginning with the introduction of the first disciples of Jesus . It consists of seven miracles , or " signs " , interspersed with long dialogues , discourses , " Amen , amen " sayings , and " I Am " sayings , culminating with the raising of Lazarus from the dead . In John it is this , and not the cleansing of the Temple , that prompts the authorities to have Jesus executed . The seven signs consist of Jesus ' miracle at the wedding at Cana , his healing the royal official 's son , his healing the paralytic at Bethesda , his feeding the 5 @,@ 000 , his walking on water , his healing the man born blind , and his raising Lazarus from the dead . Other incidents recounted in this segment of the gospel include the cleansing of the Temple ; Jesus ' conversation with the Pharisee Nicodemus , wherein he explains the importance of spiritual rebirth ; his conversation with the Samaritan woman at the well , wherein he gives the Water of Life Discourse ; the Bread of Life Discourse , which prompted many of his disciples to leave ; the Pericope Adulterae ; Jesus ' claims to be the Light of the World ; the veritas <unk> vos ; the Good Shepherd <unk> ; Jesus ' rejection by the Jews ; the Jesus wept ; the plot to kill Jesus ; the anointing of Jesus by Mary Magdalene ; Jesus ' triumphal entry into Jerusalem ; the prediction of the glorification of the Son of Man ; and the prediction of the Last Judgment . 
 = = = Book of Glory = = = 
 The narrative of Jesus ' Passion , Resurrection , and post @-@ Resurrection appearances . The Passion narrative opens with an account of the Last Supper that differs significantly from that found in the synoptics , with Jesus washing the disciples ' feet instead of ushering in a new covenant of his body and blood . This is followed by Jesus ' Farewell Discourse , an account of his betrayal , arrest , trial , death , burial , post @-@ Resurrection appearances , and final commission for his followers . It also includes Peter 's denial , the institution of the New Commandment and the New Covenant , the promise of the Paraclete , the allegory of the True Vine , the High Priestly Prayer , the ut omnes unum <unk> , the What is truth ? , Jesus ' mocking and crowning with thorns , the Ecce homo , the discovery of the empty tomb , the noli me <unk> , the Great Commission , and the incredulity of Thomas . The section ends with a conclusion on the purpose of the gospel : " that [ the reader ] may believe that Jesus is the Christ , the Son of God , and that believing you may have life in his name . " 
 = = = Epilogue = = = 
 The narrative of Jesus ' post @-@ Resurrection appearance to his disciples by the lake , the miraculous catch of fish , the prophecy of the crucifixion of Peter , the restoration of Peter , and the fate of the Beloved Disciple . A large majority of scholars believes this chapter to be an addition to the gospel . 
 = = Composition and setting = = 
 = = = Authorship , date , and origin = = = 
 The Gospel of John is anonymous , its author only identified as " the Disciple whom Jesus loved " . The evangelist was always called John , and Church tradition identified the Beloved Disciple as John the Apostle . This latter identification , however , is rejected by the majority of modern biblical scholars . Scholars believe that the text went through two to three " editions " before reaching its current form . 
 Nevertheless , a significant minority consider the traditional account of John the Apostle 's authorship to be genuine . Scholars have argued that the stylistic unity of John is a significant barrier to theories of multiple stages of editing , with D. A. Carson and Douglas J. Moo arguing that " stylistically it is cut from one cloth " . In addition , the ancient external attestation for Johannine authorship is strong and consistent . As Craig Blomberg has noted , " No orthodox writer ever proposes any other alternative for the author of the Fourth Gospel and the book is accepted in all of the early canonical lists , which is all the more significant given the frequent heterodox misinterpretations of it . " 
 John is usually dated to AD 90 – 110 . It arose in a Jewish Christian community in the process of breaking from the Jewish synagogue . 
 John , which regularly describes Jesus ' opponents simply as " the Jews " , is more consistently hostile to " the Jews " than any other body of New Testament writing . Historian and former Roman Catholic priest James Carroll states : " The climax of this movement comes in chapter 8 of John , when Jesus is portrayed as denouncing ' the Jews ' as the offspring of Satan . " In John 8 : 44 Jesus tells the Jews : " You are of your father the devil , and the desires of your father you will do . He was a murderer from the beginning , and he stood not in the truth ; because truth is not in him . " In 8 : 38 and 11 : 53 , " the Jews " are depicted as wishing to kill Jesus . However , Carroll cautions that this and similar statements in the Gospel of Matthew and the First Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians should be viewed as " evidence not of Jew hatred but of sectarian conflicts among Jews " in the early years of the Christian church . 
 As noted by New Testament scholar <unk> M. Hendricks , Jr . : " Although its scathing portrayal of the Jews has opened John to charges of anti @-@ Semitism , a careful reading reveals ' the Jews ' to be a class designation , not a religious or ethnic grouping ; rather than denoting adherents to Judaism in general , the term primarily refers to the hereditary Temple religious authorities . " In later centuries , John was used to support anti @-@ Semitic polemics , but the author of the gospel regarded himself as a Jew , championed Jesus and his followers as Jews , and probably wrote for a largely Jewish community . 
 = = = Historical reliability = = = 
 Chapters 19 and 21 of John hint that " the Disciple whom Jesus loved " , or " the Beloved Disciple " , was an eyewitness to Jesus ' ministry , but the majority of scholars are cautious of accepting this at face value . With the exception of the " Johannine Thunderbolt " passages , the teachings of Jesus found in the synoptic gospels are very different from those recorded in John , and since the 19th century some scholars have argued that these discourses in Johannine style are less likely to be historical , and more likely to have been written for theological purposes . 
 Scholars usually agree that John is not entirely without historical value . It has become generally accepted that certain sayings in John are as old or older than their synoptic counterparts . His representation of the topography around Jerusalem is often superior to that of the synoptics , his testimony that Jesus was executed before , rather than on , Passover , might well be more accurate , and his presentation of Jesus in the garden and the prior meeting held by the Jewish authorities are possibly more historically plausible than their synoptic parallels . 
 = = = Textual history and position in the New Testament = = = 
 Rylands Library Papyrus <unk> , a Greek papyrus fragment with John 18 : 31 – 33 on one side and 18 : 37 – 38 on the other , commonly dated to the first half of the 2nd century , is the oldest New Testament manuscript known . A substantially complete text of John exists from the beginning of the 3rd century at the latest , so that the textual evidence for this gospel is commonly accepted as both earlier and more reliable than that for any other . John stands fourth in the standard ordering of the gospels , after Matthew , Mark and Luke , but in the earliest surviving gospel collection , Papyrus 45 of the 3rd century , they are in the order Matthew , John , Luke and Mark , while in <unk> it is placed third in the order Matthew , Mark , John and Luke . 
 = = Theology = = 
 = = = Christology = = = 
 The Gospel of John presents a " high Christology , " depicting Jesus as divine , and yet , according to some unorthodox interpretations , subordinate to the one God . However , in his Summa <unk> , Thomas Aquinas flatly rejects any denial of equality among the persons of the Trinity , including denials based Johannine passages . John 's gospel gives more focus to the relationship of the Son to the Father than the synoptics . It also focuses on the relation of the Redeemer to believers , the announcement of the Holy Spirit as the Comforter and Advocate ( Greek : <unk> , translit . <unk> , lit . ' Paraclete ' ; Latin : <unk> , from the Greek ) , and the prominence of love as an element in Christian character . 
 = = = = Jesus ' divine role = = = = 
 In the synoptics , Jesus speaks often about the Kingdom of God ; his own divine role is obscured ( see Messianic Secret ) . In John , Jesus talks openly about his divine role . He echoes the Father 's own statement of identity , i.e. " I Am Who Am " , with several " I Am " declarations that also identify him with symbols of major significance . He says " I am " : 
 = = = = Logos = = = = 
 In the prologue , John identifies Jesus as the Logos ( Word ) . In Ancient Greek philosophy , the term logos meant the principle of cosmic reason . In this sense , it was similar to the Hebrew concept of Wisdom , God 's companion and intimate helper in creation . The Hellenistic Jewish philosopher Philo merged these two themes when he described the Logos as God 's creator of and mediator with the material world . The evangelist adapted Philo 's description of the Logos , applying it to Jesus , the incarnation of the Logos . 
 The opening verse of John is translated as " the Word was with God and the Word was God " in all " orthodox " English Bibles . There are alternative views . The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures of Jehovah 's Witnesses has " The Word was with God , and the Word was a god . " The Scholars Version of the gospel , developed by the Jesus Seminar , loosely translates the phrase as " The Logos was what God was , " offered as a better representation of the original meaning of the evangelist . 
 = = = Sacraments = = = 
 Among the most controversial areas of interpretation of John is its sacramental theology . Scholars ' views have fallen along a wide spectrum ranging from anti @-@ sacramental and non @-@ sacramental , to sacramental , to ultra @-@ sacramental and hyper @-@ sacramental . Scholars disagree both on whether and how frequently John refers to the sacraments at all , and on the degree of importance he places upon them . Individual scholars ' answers to one of these questions do not always correspond to their answer to the other . 
 = = = = Frequency of allusion = = = = 
 According to Rudolf Bultmann , there are three sacramental allusions : one to baptism ( 3 : 5 ) , one to the Eucharist ( 6 : 51 – 58 ) , and one to both ( 19 : 34 ) . He believed these passages to be later interpolations , though most scholars now reject this assessment . Some scholars on the weaker @-@ sacramental side of the spectrum deny that there are any sacramental allusions in these passages or in the gospel as a whole , while others see sacramental symbolism applied to other subjects in these and other passages . Oscar Cullmann and Bruce Vawter , a Protestant and a Catholic respectively , and both on the stronger @-@ sacramental end of the spectrum , have found sacramental allusions in most chapters . Cullmann found references to baptism and the Eucharist throughout the gospel , and Vawter found additional references to matrimony in 2 : 1 – 11 , anointing of the sick in 12 : 1 – 11 , and penance in 20 : 22 – 23 . Towards the center of the spectrum , Raymond Brown is more cautious than Cullmann and Vawter but more lenient than Bultmann and his school , identifying several passages as containing sacramental allusions and rating them according to his assessment of their degree of certainty . 
 = = = = Importance to the evangelist = = = = 
 Most scholars on the stronger @-@ sacramental end of the spectrum assess the sacraments as being of great importance to the evangelist . However , perhaps counterintuitively , some scholars who find fewer sacramental references , such as Udo Schnelle , view the references that they find as highly important as well . Schnelle in particular views John 's sacramentalism as a counter to <unk> anti @-@ sacramentalism . On the other hand , though he agrees that there are anti @-@ <unk> passages , James Dunn views the absence of a Eucharistic institution narrative as evidence for an anti @-@ sacramentalism in John , meant to warn against a conception of eternal life as dependent on physical ritual . 
 = = = Individualism = = = 
 In comparison to the synoptic gospels , the Fourth Gospel is markedly individualistic , in the sense that it places emphasis more on the individual 's relation to Jesus than on the corporate nature of the Church . This is largely accomplished through the consistently singular grammatical structure of various aphoristic sayings of Jesus throughout the gospel . According to <unk> , emphasis on believers coming into a new group upon their conversion is conspicuously absent from John . There is also a theme of " personal <unk> " , that is , the intimate personal relationship between the believer and Jesus in which the believer " abides " in Jesus and Jesus in the believer . According to Moule , the individualistic tendencies of the Fourth Gospel could potentially give rise to a realized eschatology achieved on the level of the individual believer ; this realized eschatology is not , however , to replace " orthodox " , futurist eschatological expectations , but is to be " only [ their ] correlative . " 
 = = = John the Baptist = = = 
 John 's account of the Baptist is different from that of the synoptic gospels . In this gospel , John is not called " the Baptist . " The Baptist 's ministry overlaps with that of Jesus ; his baptism of Jesus is not explicitly mentioned , but his witness to Jesus is unambiguous . The evangelist almost certainly knew the story of John 's baptism of Jesus and he makes a vital theological use of it . He subordinates the Baptist to Jesus , perhaps in response to members of the Baptist 's sect who regarded the Jesus movement as an offshoot of their movement . 
 In John 's gospel , Jesus and his disciples go to Judea early in Jesus ' ministry before John the Baptist was imprisoned and executed by Herod . He leads a ministry of baptism larger than John 's own . The Jesus Seminar rated this account as black , containing no historically accurate information . According to the biblical historians at the Jesus Seminar , John likely had a larger presence in the public mind than Jesus . 
 = = = Gnostic elements = = = 
 Although not commonly understood as Gnostic , many scholars , including Bultmann , have forcefully argued that the Gospel of John has elements in common with Gnosticism . Christian Gnosticism did not fully develop until the mid @-@ 2nd century , and so 2nd @-@ century Proto @-@ Orthodox Christians concentrated much effort in examining and refuting it . To say John 's gospel contained elements of Gnosticism is to assume that Gnosticism had developed to a level that required the author to respond to it . Bultmann , for example , argued that the opening theme of the Gospel of John , the pre @-@ existing Logos , was actually a Gnostic theme . Other scholars , e.g. Raymond E. Brown have argued that the pre @-@ existing Logos theme arises from the more ancient Jewish writings in the eighth chapter of the Book of Proverbs , and was fully developed as a theme in Hellenistic Judaism by Philo <unk> . 
 Comparisons to Gnosticism are based not in what the author says , but in the language he uses to say it , notably , use of the concepts of Logos and Light . Other scholars , e.g. Raymond E. Brown , have argued that the ancient Jewish Qumran community also used the concept of Light versus Darkness . The arguments of Bultmann and his school were seriously compromised by the mid @-@ 20th @-@ century discoveries of the Nag Hammadi library of genuine Gnostic writings ( which are dissimilar to the Gospel of John ) as well as the Qumran library of Jewish writings ( which are often similar to the Gospel of John ) . 
 Gnostics read John but interpreted it differently from the way non @-@ Gnostics did . Gnosticism taught that salvation came from gnosis , secret knowledge , and Gnostics did not see Jesus as a savior but a revealer of knowledge . Barnabas <unk> asserts that the gospel teaches that salvation can only be achieved through revealed wisdom , specifically belief in ( literally belief into ) Jesus . 
 Raymond Brown contends that " The Johannine picture of a savior who came from an alien world above , who said that neither he nor those who accepted him were of this world , and who promised to return to take them to a heavenly dwelling could be fitted into the gnostic world picture ( even if God 's love for the world in 3 : 16 could not ) . " It has been suggested that similarities between John 's gospel and Gnosticism may spring from common roots in Jewish Apocalyptic literature . 
 = = Comparison with the synoptics = = 
 The Gospel of John is significantly different from the synoptic gospels , with major variations in material , theological emphasis , chronology , and literary style . There are also some discrepancies between John and the synoptics , some amounting to contradictions . 
 = = = Material = = = 
 John lacks scenes from the synoptics such as Jesus ' baptism , the calling of the Twelve , exorcisms , parables , the Transfiguration , and the Last Supper . Conversely , it includes scenes not found in the synoptics , including Jesus turning water into wine at the wedding at Cana , the resurrection of Lazarus , Jesus washing the feet of his disciples , and multiple visits to Jerusalem . The Fourth Gospel contains no account of the Nativity of Jesus , unlike Matthew and Luke , and his mother Mary , while frequently mentioned , is never identified by name . John does assert that Jesus was known as the " son of Joseph " in 6 : 42 . In contrast to Matthew and Luke , and in agreement with Mark , in John Jesus comes from Nazareth rather than the messianic town of Bethlehem . For John , Jesus ' town of origin is irrelevant , for he comes from beyond this world , from God the Father . While John makes no direct mention of Jesus ' baptism , he does quote John the Baptist 's description of the descent of the Holy Spirit as a dove , as happens at Jesus ' baptism in the synoptics . Major synoptic speeches of Jesus are absent , including the Sermon on the Mount and the Olivet Discourse , and the exorcisms of demons are never mentioned as in the synoptics . During the Last Supper narrative , Jesus washes the disciples ' feet instead of celebrating the first Eucharist as in the synoptics . No other women are mentioned going to the tomb with Mary Magdalene , whereas in the synoptics she is accompanied by Mary of Clopas , Mary , mother of James , " the other Mary " , and / or Salome . John never lists all of the Twelve Disciples and names at least one disciple , Nathanael , whose name is not found in the synoptics . Nathanael appears to parallel Bartholomew found in the synoptics , as both are paired with Philip in the respective gospels . While James , son of Zebedee and John are prominent disciples in the synoptics , John mentions them only in the epilogue , where they are referred to not by name but as the " sons of Zebedee . " Thomas is given a personality beyond a mere name , described as " Doubting Thomas " . 
 = = = Theological emphasis = = = 
 Jesus is identified with the Word ( " Logos " ) , and the Word is identified with <unk> ( " god " in Greek ) ; no such identification is made in the synoptics . In Mark , Jesus urges his disciples to keep his divinity secret , but in John he is very open in discussing it , even referring to himself as " I AM " , the title God gives himself in Exodus at his self @-@ revelation to Moses . In the synoptics the chief theme is the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Heaven ( the latter specifically in Matthew ) , while John 's theme is Jesus as the source of eternal life and the Kingdom is only mentioned twice . In contrast to the synoptic expectation of the Kingdom ( using the term <unk> , meaning " coming " ) , John presents a more individualistic , realized eschatology . 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 In the synoptics the ministry of Jesus takes a single year , but in John it takes three , as evidenced by references to three <unk> . Events are not all in the same order : the date of the crucifixion is different , as is the time of Jesus ' anointing in Bethany , and the cleansing of the temple occurs in the beginning of Jesus ' ministry rather than in the beginning . 
 = = = Literary style = = = 
 In the synoptics , quotations from Jesus are usually in the form of short , pithy sayings ; in John , longer quotations are often given . The vocabulary is also different , and filled with theological import : in John , Jesus does not work " miracles " ( Greek : <unk> , <unk> <unk> , sing. <unk> , { { | transl | el | <unk> } } ) , but " signs " ( Greek : <unk> , <unk> <unk> , sing. <unk> , <unk> ) which unveil his divine identity . Most scholars consider John not to contain any parables . Rather it contains metaphorical stories or allegories , such as those of the Good Shepherd and of the True Vine , in which each individual element corresponds to a specific person , group , or thing . Some scholars , however , find some such parables as the short story of the childbearing woman ( 16 : 21 ) or the dying grain ( 12 : 24 ) . 
 = = = Discrepancies = = = 
 According to the synoptics , the arrest of Jesus was a reaction to the cleansing of the temple , while according to John it was triggered by the raising of Lazarus . The Pharisees , portrayed as more uniformly legalistic and opposed to Jesus in the synoptic gospels , are instead portrayed as sharply divided ; they debate frequently in John 's accounts . Some , such as Nicodemus , even go so far as to be at least partially sympathetic to Jesus . This is believed to be a more accurate historical depiction of the Pharisees , who made debate one of the tenets of their system of belief . John the Baptist publicly proclaims Jesus to be the Lamb of God . The Baptist recognizes Jesus secretly in Matthew , and not at all in Mark or Luke . The Gospel of John also has the Baptist deny that he is Elijah , whereas Mark and Matthew identify him with Elijah . The Cleansing of the Temple appears towards the beginning of Jesus ' ministry . In the synoptics this occurs soon before Jesus is crucified . 
 = = Representations = = 
 The Gospel of John has influenced Impressionist painters , Renaissance art , literature , and other depictions of Jesus , with influences on Greek , Jewish and European history . 
 It has been depicted in live narrations and dramatized in productions , skits , plays , and Passion Plays , as well as in film . The most recent such portrayal is the 2014 film ' The Gospel of John ' , directed by David Batty and narrated by David Harewood and Brian Cox , with Selva <unk> as Jesus . The 2003 film The Gospel of John , was directed by Philip Saville , narrated by Christopher Plummer , with Henry Ian Cusick as Jesus . 
 Parts of the gospel have been set to music . One such setting is Steve Warner 's power anthem " Come and See " , written for the 20th anniversary of the Alliance for Catholic Education and including lyrical fragments taken from the Book of Signs . Additionally , some composers have made settings of the Passion as portrayed in the gospel , most notably the one composed by Johann Sebastian Bach , although some verses are borrowed from Matthew . 
 = Berlin Stadtbahn = 
 The Berlin Stadtbahn ( " city railway " ) is a major railway thoroughfare in the German capital Berlin , which runs through Berlin from east to west . It connects the eastern district of Friedrichshain with Charlottenburg in the west via 11 intermediate stations including Hauptbahnhof . The Berlin Stadtbahn is often also defined as the slightly longer route between <unk> and Westkreuz , although this is not technically correct . 
 The line was originally built in the 1880s . It is 12 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) in length , and is entirely elevated above the city 's streets . The four track route carries S @-@ Bahn , Regionalbahn , Regional @-@ Express , Intercity , EuroCity and Intercity @-@ Express trains . 
 = = Operation = = 
 = = = Structure and tracks = = = 
 The Stadtbahn line is an elevated rail line with viaducts totalling 8 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) in length and including 731 masonry viaduct arches . A further 2 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of the line are situated on 64 bridges , that cross adjoining streets and ( three times ) the River Spree . The remaining length of the line is on an embankment . 
 The line carries four tracks , in two pairs . The northern pair are reserved for use by the S @-@ Bahn , and are <unk> using a third rail carrying <unk> DC . The S @-@ Bahn tracks have platforms at all eleven stations along the Stadtbahn . 
 The southern pair of tracks are used by Regionalbahn , Regional @-@ Express , Intercity , EuroCity and Intercity @-@ Express trains , and are electrified using the German standard of 15 kV at 16 @.@ 7 Hz AC , supplied by overhead line . Six of the Stadtbahn stations have platforms on these tracks , although not all trains stop at all stations , depending on the class and route of the train . 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 From east to west , the Stadtbahn has stations at : 
 Ostbahnhof 
 Jannowitzbrücke ( S @-@ Bahn only ) 
 Alexanderplatz 
 Hackescher Markt ( S @-@ Bahn only ) 
 Friedrichstraße 
 Hauptbahnhof 
 Bellevue ( S @-@ Bahn only ) 
 Tiergarten ( S @-@ Bahn only ) 
 Zoologischer Garten 
 <unk> ( S @-@ Bahn only ) 
 Charlottenburg 
 = = = Routes = = = 
 The S @-@ Bahn tracks of the Stadtbahn currently carry routes S5 ( Strausberg Nord to Spandau ) , S7 ( <unk> to Potsdam ) and <unk> ( <unk> to Westkreuz ) . 
 The longer distance tracks carry Regionalbahn and Regional @-@ Express routes <unk> ( Magdeburg to <unk> ) , RE2 ( <unk> to Cottbus ) , <unk> ( Dessau to <unk> @-@ <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> to Berlin Schönefeld Airport ) . Although most InterCity and Intercity @-@ Express trains now use the north @-@ south tunnel route via Hauptbahnhof , some trains do still remain on the Stadtbahn 's long distance tracks . These trains , mainly those heading toward Hanover and Cologne , usually call at Hauptbahnhof and Ostbahnhof . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 In 1871 , eight main line railways existed in Berlin , with terminal stations at the city 's edge or outside the city limits . This was very impractical for many passengers , who were forced to use hackney carriages to transfer from one train to another . Therefore , a railway line was planned to connect these terminuses with each other . 
 In 1872 , the Deutsche <unk> ( German Railway Construction Company - DEG ) filed the planning application for a railway line through the city , connecting the then @-@ Schlesischer Bahnhof ( today Berlin Ostbahnhof ) to Charlottenburg , and continuing to Potsdam . In December 1873 , the state of Prussia as well as the private rail enterprises Berlin @-@ Potsdamer Eisenbahn , Magdeburg @-@ <unk> Eisenbahn and Berlin @-@ Hamburger Bahn bought shares in the DEG , and jointly founded the Berliner <unk> ( Berlin City Railway Company ) . However , things did not go as expected and the DEG went into bankruptcy in 1878 , which forced the Prussian state government to take over operations , pay for the construction of the line with state money and to reimburse the former private owners of the DEG . The state 's interest in the line was attributed to the military , which after the 1870 @-@ 1871 Franco @-@ Prussian War was of the opinion that the railway networks would hinder mobilisation when not properly interconnected . 
 On 15 July 1878 the Königliche <unk> der Berliner <unk> ( Royal Directorate of Berlin City Railways ) , under the management of Ernst <unk> , was commissioned to manage the site . The directorate at first reported to the Prussian Ministry of Transport and later became a subsidiary of the Ministry of Public Operations . 
 The planned railway had two tracks each for freight and passenger traffic . Having taken similar projects in London and New York City into consideration , passenger traffic received priority over freight trains . Furthermore , the new railway line was not only to serve as a connection between the mainline terminii in Berlin , but would also offer connections to the Berlin Ringbahn and the suburban rail lines . 
 The traffic routing was not only influenced by the location of the already existing stations the line was supposed to connect , but also by land availability in the city centre . One of the original drafts , which called for building the line along Leipziger Straße , had to be scrapped because of overly high land prices . The moat of the 17th century Berlin Fortress was filled up between Hackescher Markt and Jannowitzbrücke stations and , since it was public land , was used for building the railway line . This explains some of the curvy sections on the Stadtbahn , especially between Alexanderplatz and Jannowitzbrücke stations . 
 Its elevated nature sets the Stadtbahn apart from the previous Berliner <unk> , built in 1851 , which was built at street level and was a hindrance to travel . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Work on the line started in 1875 and the Stadtbahn was opened on 7 February 1882 for local traffic ; it opened on 15 May the same year for long @-@ distance trains . The costs of construction , including purchase of the land , were estimated at about 5 million Goldmark per kilometre . The line would later become the core route of the Berlin S @-@ Bahn . The Stadtbahn was originally equipped with longitudinal iron sleepers on the <unk> system , however these were replaced with wooden sleepers in the early 20th century . 
 The original stations , seen from west to east , were : 
 Charlottenburg 
 Zoologischer Garten 
 Bellevue 
 Lehrter <unk> ( today Berlin Hauptbahnhof ) 
 Friedrichstraße 
 <unk> ( Marx @-@ Engels @-@ Platz in period of the GDR , and since 1992 Hackescher Markt ) 
 Alexanderplatz 
 Jannowitzbrücke 
 Schlesischer Bahnhof ( named Berlin Hauptbahnhof in the 1980s and early 90s , today Ostbahnhof ) 
 Since 1 May 1888 the Stadtbahn also connected to <unk> @-@ Rummelsburg ( <unk> since 1933 ) in the east and Westend ( via Westkreuz ) in the west . 
 Two stations were later added 
 <unk> ( 1 August 1896 ) between Charlottenburg and Zoologischer Garten , and 
 Tiergarten ( 5 January 1885 ) between Zoologischer Garten and Bellevue 
 = = = Initial operation = = = 
 = = = = Suburban trains = = = = 
 Suburban trains operated on the local tracks , the so @-@ called city track . At first , these were either services to the suburbs or connections to the Berlin Ringbahn , running as " half ring trains " , using the Stadtbahn and either the northern or the southern Ringbahn . The trains were pulled by locomotives , which ran on coke to minimise the smell . Doors on the train compartments had to be opened by the passengers themselves and stations were not called out on the train . 
 These trains ran from 4 o 'clock in the morning to 1 o 'clock at night , typically at intervals between two and five minutes , depending on the time of day . Fares in the early 20th century were 10 pfennig in 3rd class and 15 pfennig in 2nd class . 
 = = = = Freight traffic = = = = 
 The freight traffic to the central market at Alexanderplatz was carried by seven special trains per day , of which four ran at night , two during the day and one in the evening . Apart from this , the Stadtbahn carried no freight ; normal freight traffic instead used the freight stations Charlottenburg , <unk> , Wedding , <unk> , <unk> , Frankfurter Allee , <unk> , Tempelhof , Wilmersdorf @-@ <unk> and <unk> on the ring line . 
 = = = = Long @-@ distance trains = = = = 
 In the first years of the Stadtbahn , many trains previously terminating at the old terminuses Lehrter Bahnhof , <unk> Bahnhof or Potsdamer Bahnhof operated via the Stadtbahn to reduce the load on the terminus stations . By the end of the 19th century , however , most of these train runs had to terminate at their old destination stations again due to the increasing local traffic on the Stadtbahn . 
 The remaining traffic on the Stadtbahn mostly consisted of express trains to Hanover and Cologne via the Lehrter Bahn , <unk> trains to Dessau , trains to Königsberg and Danzig on the <unk> <unk> and trains to Frankfurt / Oder and Breslau . Suburban trains to Spandau and Strausberg also ran on the Stadtbahn 's long @-@ distance tracks until 1928 . 
 Trains heading west usually left from the Schlesischer Bahnhof station , those heading east from Charlottenburg . Depots were situated in Rummelsburg ( then called <unk> <unk> ) and Grunewald . 
 = = = Station expansions and viaducts = = = 
 In 1914 , the Friedrichstraße station was rebuilt ; the long @-@ distance section of the station was expanded to four tracks and the current station hall was built . Between 1922 and 1932 , the Stadtbahn viaduct was thoroughly modernised in order to handle the ever increasing train weight . Also , the train sheds of Alexanderplatz and Schlesischer Bahnhof were replaced . The suburban line 's platforms were raised to a height of 96 centimetres . 
 A second long @-@ distance platform and a new hall were built at Zoo station from 1934 to 1940 . The station hall was only glazed in the 1950s , however . The notable terraced vestibule dates from the same time . 
 = = = Electric operation = = = 
 On 11 June 1928 the suburban line Potsdam @-@ Stadtbahn @-@ <unk> was fully equipped with DC third rail gear . Five trains of the new DRG Class ET 165 – the type appropriately named Stadtbahn – went into service , still sharing the track with steam trains . By November 1928 all lines leading toward the Stadtbahn , namely the lines from <unk> , Spandau and Grünau as well as the Berlin Ringbahn , were fully electrified . Therefore , suburban services to Spandau could be moved from the long @-@ distance tracks to the local tracks . The last steam trains disappeared in 1929 when the ring became fully operated by electric trains . Half @-@ ring trains operated only as peak time services . In December 1930 the term S @-@ Bahn and the symbol of a white S on a green circle were introduced for the city , ring and suburban services . 
 = = = Post @-@ War situation = = = 
 After World War II , the Stadtbahn lay devastated by bombs , but was rebuilt very quickly . Because Joseph Stalin wanted to travel by train to the Potsdam Conference , the Stadtbahn was converted to the Russian 1 @,@ 524 mm ( 5 ft ) broad gauge in 1945 . The national importance had diminished with the loss of eastern Germany ; only a few trains ran towards the western zones . Some trains from the Soviet zone terminated on the Stadtbahn . 
 During the Berlin Blockade , the long @-@ distance traffic came to an almost complete halt . The Stadtbahn was useful for the re @-@ established S @-@ Bahn , however , now with connections to places line Königs <unk> , Strausberg , Staaken and <unk> . 
 From 18 May 1952 , when all Berlin terminal stations and all other long @-@ distance stations in West Berlin were closed , the station Zoologischer Garten remained the only long @-@ distance station for the western part of the city . The last domestic train of the GDR ( East German ) railways ran on the Stadtbahn in 1953 . 
 After the Berlin Wall was built in 1961 , Zoologischer Garten became the West Berlin and Ostbahnhof the East Berlin de facto central station . The station Friedrichstraße now was the terminal point of the separated West and East Berlin S @-@ Bahn lines and departure point for the <unk> ( Inter @-@ zone train ) services between West Berlin and West Germany . Friedrichstraße station was separated into Eastern and Western parts with steel walls , and enabled West Berliners to change to S @-@ Bahn trains running on the Nord @-@ Süd @-@ Bahn and the <unk> line of the Berlin U @-@ Bahn without passing through GDR border controls . The station also featured a border crossing into East Berlin . Through trains between Zoo and Ostbahnhof only existed in international traffic , for example the Paris to Warsaw trains . Later , through coaches and shuttle trains connecting to the night trains to Scandinavia crossed the intra @-@ German border on the Stadtbahn as well . 
 Due to a quirk in legislation , the West Berlin parts of the Stadtbahn belonged to the Deutsche Reichsbahn , which made it ( and therefore the GDR government ) one of the largest landowners in West Berlin . Regular quarrels erupted between the DR , the GDR government , the West Berlin Senate and the Allied occupation powers . 
 Prices for the West Berlin S @-@ Bahn were kept slightly below the fares of the West Berlin <unk> . In East Berlin , a flat fee of 0 @.@ 20 Mark was charged until 1991 . West Berlin politics and most of the populace fully boycotted the S @-@ Bahn , which was run by the East German railways , and introduced bus and U @-@ Bahn lines running parallel to the S @-@ Bahn network and the Stadtbahn . 
 = = = Restoration during the Cold War = = = 
 Despite problems , the Deutsche Reichsbahn made improvements to the line and reconstructed at great expense the Westkreuz railway station which had been built on swamp land . 
 Meanwhile , the number of S @-@ Bahn lines running in West Berlin was reduced to just three as a consequence of a strike carried out by the Deutsche Reichsbahn 's West Berlin @-@ based employees in September 1980 . 
 On 9 January 1984 a treaty between the GDR and the West Berlin Senate came into force and turned over the responsibility for operation of the S @-@ Bahn in West Berlin to the West Berlin transport authority , the Berliner <unk> . Soon thereafter , talks with the GDR commenced regarding improvements of the Stadtbahn in West Berlin as well as the modernisation of the Zoologischer Garten station . The Lehrter <unk> was also carefully restored to its original 1880s look and became a listed building . In East Berlin , the Ostbahnhof was partially rebuilt and renamed to Hauptbahnhof , in time for the 750th anniversary of Berlin 's founding in 1987 . 
 = = = After reunification = = = 
 The fall of the Berlin Wall and German reunification made for a sudden spike of importance for the Stadtbahn . The first <unk> train ran to Cologne in 1990 . Since 1991 , Intercity trains to Karlsruhe , Cologne and Hamburg used the Stadtbahn . The Hamburg line was soon extended to Dresden and Prague , and the former <unk> trains from Munich were converted to InterCity trains and now ran on the Stadtbahn as well . 
 The western part of the Stadtbahn was electrified on 4 July 1993 up to Zoologischer Garten station . The eastern part of the line up to Ostbahnhof had been electrified since 1987 . As soon as electrification reached the Zoo station , ICE trains began to use the station . 
 = = = Modernisation from 1994 = = = 
 In October 1994 a large @-@ scale modernisation programme was started on the Stadtbahn . The viaducts were checked and strengthened , and the tracks were bedded in concrete to improve durability and comfort . Almost all stations saw large financial investments and were thoroughly modernised . Long @-@ distance traffic between Zoo and Ostbahnhof stations was interrupted during the construction period and the S @-@ Bahn trains temporarily used the long @-@ distance line . On 24 March 1998 the Stadtbahn was reopened , now carrying up to three ICE and IC lines as well as five <unk> lines . Part of the Stadtbahn was realigned as part of the construction of the new Berlin Hauptbahnhof , with construction commencing in 2001 and completed in July 2002 . The realigned section consisted of two 450 m @-@ long bridges spanning the station and the adjacent <unk> port . 
 Until the summer of 2006 , the Stadtbahn was the main thoroughfare for long @-@ distance trains , which usually stopped at Zoologischer Garten and Ostbahnhof ( which was renamed in 1998 ) . When the new Hauptbahnhof opened on 28 May 2006 the importance of the line diminished slightly , as many trains now would use the new north @-@ south line connected to the Hauptbahnhof . The remaining intercity trains on the Stadtbahn , mainly those heading toward Hanover and Cologne , now usually call at Hauptbahnhof and Ostbahnhof . 
 = 4th Parachute Brigade ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 4th Parachute Brigade was an airborne , specifically a parachute infantry , brigade formation of the British Army during the Second World War . Formed in late 1942 in the Mediterranean and Middle East , the brigade was composed of three parachute infantry units , the 10th , 11th and 156th Parachute Battalions . 
 The brigade was assigned to the 1st Airborne Division , just prior to the Allied invasion of Sicily , but played no part in the invasion . Instead the brigade first saw action in September 1943 , during Operation Slapstick , an amphibious landing at the port of Taranto , as part of the early stages of the Allied invasion of Italy . Largely unopposed , the brigade captured the ports of Brindisi and Bari before being withdrawn . By the end of the year , the 4th Parachute Brigade was in England , preparing for the Allied invasion of North @-@ West Europe . The brigade did not see action in France , being instead placed on standby for an emergency during the Normandy landings . Between June and August 1944 the speed of the subsequent Allied advance obviated the need to deploy airborne forces . 
 In September 1944 , the brigade formed part of the second day 's parachute landings at the Battle of Arnhem , part of Operation Market Garden . Problems reaching the bridges in Arnhem forced the divisional commander , Major @-@ General Roy Urquhart , to divert one of the brigade 's battalions to assist the 1st Parachute Brigade . After a short delay the brigade headed out for its objective . When only halfway there , however , the remaining two battalions were confronted by prepared German defences . The brigade , having suffered heavy losses , was eventually forced to withdraw . The next day , weakened by fighting at close quarters and now numbering around 150 men , the brigade eventually reached the divisional position at Oosterbeek . 
 After a week of being subjected to almost constant artillery , tank and infantry attacks , the remnants of the brigade were evacuated south of the River Rhine . During the battle of Arnhem , the brigade 's total casualties amounted to seventy @-@ eight per cent , and the 4th Parachute Brigade was disbanded rather than reformed , the survivors being posted to the 1st Parachute Brigade . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Impressed by the successful German airborne operations , during the Battle of France , the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , directed the War Office to investigate the possibility of creating a corps of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . On 22 June 1940 , No. 2 Commando was turned over to parachute duties and , on 21 November , re @-@ designated the 11th Special Air Service Battalion , with a parachute and glider wing . This was later to become the 1st Parachute Battalion . It was these men who took part in the first British airborne operation , Operation Colossus , on 10 February 1941 . The success of the raid prompted the War Office to expand the existing airborne force , setting up the Airborne Forces Depot and Battle School in Derbyshire , and creating the Parachute Regiment , as well as converting a number of infantry battalions into airborne battalions . These battalions were assigned to the 1st Airborne Division with the 1st Parachute Brigade and the 1st Airlanding Brigade . The first General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) of the division , Major @-@ General Frederick Arthur Montague " Boy " Browning , expressed his opinion that the fledgling force must not be sacrificed in " penny packets " and urged the formation of more brigades . 
 The 4th Parachute Brigade was formed at RAF Kibrit in the Middle East on 1 December 1942 . Upon formation it consisted of the brigade headquarters , signals company , defence platoon and three parachute battalions . The battalions assigned were the 156th Parachute Battalion ( 156 Para ) , raised from British servicemen in India , the 10th Parachute Battalion ( 10 Para ) , formed around a cadre from the 2nd Battalion , Royal Sussex Regiment , and the 11th Parachute Battalion ( 11 Para ) , created from a cadre of 156 Para . The brigade 's battalions all had the same composition : three rifle companies , each comprising a company headquarters , and three platoons . Each had a Support Company of mortar , machine gun and carrier platoons , along with a Headquarters Company . The brigade 's first commander , Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Smyth , was replaced by Brigadier John Hackett on 4 January 1943 . 
 Facilities and weather conditions at <unk> proved to be unsuitable for airborne operations , so the brigade moved to RAF Ramat David in Palestine to continue their training . The brigade came to full strength in May 1943 , and in June was sent to Tripoli , where it joined the 1st Airborne Division . Also assigned to the division were the 1st and 2nd Parachute Brigades and the glider infantry of the 1st Airlanding Brigade . 
 In 1944 , the brigade also had under their command 133 Parachute Field Ambulance , Royal Army Medical Corps , 2nd Airlanding Light Battery , Royal Artillery , 2nd ( Oban ) Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery , Royal Artillery and 4th Parachute Squadron , Royal Engineers . 
 = = Italy = = 
 In 1943 , the 4th Parachute Brigade , although still part of the 1st Airborne Division , was kept out of the Allied invasion of Sicily by a shortage of transport aircraft . The 1st Airlanding Brigade took part in Operation Ladbroke and the 1st Parachute Brigade in Operation Fustian . Both brigades suffered heavy casualties , so that by the time Operation Slapstick was proposed , only the 2nd and 4th Parachute Brigades were up to strength . Slapstick was in part a deception operation to divert German forces from the main Allied landings and also an attempt to seize intact the Italian ports of Taranto , Bari and Brindisi . 
 The lack of air transport meant that the division 's two available brigades had to be transported by sea . They would cross the Mediterranean in four Royal Navy cruisers with their escorts . If the landing was successful , the British 78th Infantry Division in Sicily and the 8th Indian Infantry Division in the Middle East , under the command of British V Corps , under Lieutenant General Charles Walter <unk> , would be sent to reinforce the landings . 
 With 11 Para still in Palestine , the 4th Parachute Brigade only had 10 and 156 Para available to take part in the landings . On 9 September 1943 , the same day as the Salerno landings by Lieutenant General Mark Clark 's U.S. Fifth Army , the brigade landed at Taranto unopposed . Their first objective was the airfield of Gioia del Colle 30 miles ( 48 km ) inland . En route to the airfield near the town of Castellaneta , 10 Para came up against a German roadblock defended by a Fallschirmjäger unit of the German 1st Parachute Division . During the battalion 's assault on the roadblock , Major General George Frederick Hopkinson , the General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) 1st Airborne Division , observing the action , was hit by a burst of machine gun fire and killed . At the same time , 156 Para at San Basilio , carried out a successful flank attack on Fallschirmjäger defending the town . Two days later , having been only involved in minor skirmishes , the brigade occupied Bari and Brindisi . 
 By 19 September 1943 the 4th Para Brigade had reached Foggia , the northernmost point of their advance , before being ordered back to Taranto . Playing no further part in operations in Italy , the brigade was withdrawn by sea to the United Kingdom , arriving in November 1943 . The 4th Parachute Brigade 's casualties during the fighting in Italy amounted to 11 officers and 90 other ranks killed in action . In December 1943 , 11 Para , which had been working independently in the Mediterranean , rejoined the brigade . The only operation they had been involved in was a company sized parachute assault on the Greek island of Kos . The Italian garrison surrendered and the company was relieved by men of the 1st Battalion , Durham Light Infantry and the RAF Regiment . 
 = = England = = 
 In England the brigade trained for operations in North @-@ West Europe under the supervision of the I Airborne Corps . Although they were not scheduled to take part in the Normandy landings , under Operation Tuxedo the brigade would be parachuted in to support operations if any of the five invasion beaches experienced difficulties . Tuxedo was the only operation planned where the brigade would act as an independent formation whereas 13 other operations were prepared which would have deployed the entire 1st Airborne Division . However , the speed of the Allied advance towards the River Seine and then onwards from Paris northwards , was accomplished without airborne assistance and the plans were cancelled . 
 The brigade 's next operation was scheduled for early September 1944 . Codenamed Comet , the plan called for the 1st Airborne Division 's three brigades to land in the Netherlands and capture three river crossings . The first of these was the bridge over the River Waal at Nijmegen , the second the bridge over the River Maas at Grave and finally the River Rhine at Arnhem . The objective of the 4th Parachute Brigade would be the bridge at Grave . Planning for Comet was well advanced when on the 10 September the mission was cancelled . Instead , a new operation , Market Garden , was proposed whose objectives were the same as those of Comet but would this time be carried out by three divisions of the 1st Allied Airborne Army . 
 = = Arnhem = = 
 Landings by the 1st Allied Airborne Army 's three divisions began in the Netherlands on 17 September 1944 . Although allocation of aircraft for each division was roughly similar , the U.S. 101st Airborne Division landing at Nijmegen would use only one lift . The U.S. 82nd Airborne Division at Grave required two lifts while the British 1st Airborne Division at Arnhem would need three lifts . Whereas the two American divisions delivered at least three quarters of their infantry in their first lift , the 1st Airborne 's similar drop used only half its infantry capacity and the remainder to deliver vehicles and artillery . 
 The 1st Airborne Division had the required airlift capacity to deliver all three parachute brigades with their glider borne anti @-@ tank weapons or two of the parachute brigades and the airlanding brigade on day one . However , instead the vast majority of the division 's vehicles and heavy equipment , plus 1st Parachute Brigade , most of 1st Airlanding Brigade and divisional troops would be on the first lift . The airlanding brigade would remain at the landing grounds and defend them during the following day 's lifts , while the parachute brigade set out alone to capture the bridges and ferry crossing on the River Rhine . 
 On the second day , 4th Parachute Brigade 's lift of ninety @-@ two C @-@ 47s ( for the paratroops ) , forty @-@ nine Horsa and nine Hamilcar gliders ( for the artillery , vehicles and crews ) , were scheduled to arrive furthest away from Arnhem on <unk> Heath drop zone ' Y ' , as early as possible on Monday 18 September 1944 . The brigade 's objective was to capture the high ground north @-@ west of Arnhem . In their last briefing before departure , Brigadier Hackett dismissed all officers except for the battalion commanders and the brigade staff and told them ; 
 " They could forget what they had been told . Being put down where we were , with surprise gone and the opposition alerted , and given the German capability for a swift and violent response to any threat to what really mattered , they could expect their hardest fighting and worst casualties , not in defence of the final perimeter , but in trying to get there . " 
 The division 's fourth unit , the 1st Polish Parachute Brigade , were to arrive on day three , dropping their glider troops in the north and their paratroops south of the river . Once all units were in place , the division was to form a defensive ring around the Arnhem bridges until relieved by the advance of XXX Corps 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the south . 
 = = = 18 September = = = 
 Although the first day 's landings on 17 September were successful , over the night of 17 – 18 September , divisional commander Major @-@ General Roy Urquhart was reported missing so Brigadier Philip Hicks of 1st Airlanding Brigade assumed command of the division on September 18 . Subsequent problems in Arnhem forced Hicks to change the divisional plan . Only the 2nd Parachute Battalion had reached the road bridge as strong German defences had stopped the other battalions . Hicks decided that the 2nd Battalion , South Staffordshire Regiment and 11 Para would link up with the 1st Parachute Brigade in an attempt to reach their objective . 
 On 18 September , day two of the operation , bad weather over England kept the second lift on the ground and the first troops did not arrive in the Netherlands until 15 : 00 . The delay gave the Germans time to approach the northern landing grounds and engage the defenders from the 7th Battalion , King 's Own Scottish Borderers ( KOSB ) . Elsewhere German attacks were only stopped by bombardments from the division 's 75 mm artillery guns . The 4th Parachute Brigade 's paratroops jumped from between 800 and 100 feet ( 244 and 30 m ) through German machine gun fire , yet despite the enemy having encroached to within range of the drop zone , the brigade landed with only minor casualties . 
 Once the brigade arrived , many of the Germans around the drop zone withdrew or offered no further resistance . The first unit on the ground , 10 Para , attacked and destroyed the Dutch SS <unk> while Brigadier Hackett personally captured ten Germans shortly after landing . When Hackett arrived at brigade headquarters , he was informed by Lieutenant Colonel Mckenzie of the division 's staff about the change in plans , explaining that 11 Para was to be detached from his brigade to support the push into Arnhem . At the same time the KOSB , until then responsible for defending the northern side of the landing grounds , were attached to 4th Parachute Brigade to replace 11 Para . Meanwhile , the KOSB still had to defend landing @-@ zone ' L ' , to protect gliders arriving on day three . While Hackett formulated a new plan , Mckenzie returned to divisional headquarters , to be informed on his arrival that 60 German tanks were approaching Arnhem from the north . Transport aircraft passing over occupied channel ports had confirmed German suspicions of a second lift such that they were able to give their troops at Arnhem forty @-@ five minutes advance notice of the allies ' arrival . Prepared in advance for such an eventuality , a Waffen SS mobile unit had been dispatched towards the likely landing grounds . 
 Hackett decided the brigade would advance between the railway line and the Ede – Arnhem road , in order to capture their three objectives , first the high ground overlooking Johanna <unk> farm , next the woods near to <unk> House and finally the high ground at <unk> . The delay in England meant it was 17 : 00 before the brigade started moving . With the element of surprise gone and no intelligence on the German dispositions , 156 Para headed for the first objective . Followed by 10 Para slightly behind and to their left . Bringing up the rear was the brigade reserve 4th Field Squadron , Royal Engineers , acting in an infantry role . 
 Three hours later 156 Para had covered about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) , and as darkness fell they came up against a strong German defensive position which they were unable to outflank in the dark . The battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel des Voeux , out of contact with brigade headquarters , decided to stay where they were for the night and continue the advance in daylight . 
 = = = 19 September = = = 
 Early the next day an attack by German 88 mm guns destroyed some of 10 Para 's transport . The battalion counterattacked , capturing the guns and a nearby farm building they were using . The brigade advance restarted at 07 : 00 , but by now the 9th SS Panzer Division had established a blocking position between Oosterbeek and the Ede – Arnhem road across the brigade 's expected route . Repeated assaults by both battalions could not find a way through . Advancing through heavy woodland , 156 Para were confronted by infantry supported by mortars , self propelled guns ( SP gun ) as well as fighter aircraft , and the battalion suffered heavy losses . At one stage ' A ' Company penetrated the German line , but before they could dig in , all their officers were killed or wounded . Short of ammunition , the remaining men were counter @-@ attacked by the Germans and driven back . 
 In Arnhem at around 03 : 30 , the leading units of 11 Para reached 1st Parachute Brigade and the 2nd South Staffords , just as they started a new attempt to fight through to the bridge . As the battalion had just arrived and had no appreciation of the ground , it was held in reserve and played no part in the attack . By dawn and under intense fire , the attack faltered and 11 Para were ordered to carry out a left flanking attack to relieve the pressure on the South Staffords . Only the intervention of Major @-@ General Urquhart , just freed from where he had been trapped , stopped the 11 Para assault . Having recognised the futility of the battle Urquhart was not prepared to reinforce failure . At 11 : 00 the Major @-@ General ordered 11 Para still in the outskirts of Arnhem to support the advance of 4th Parachute Brigade by occupying the high ground on the north @-@ west outskirts of Arnhem . At 14 : 30 the battalion was caught in the open and subjected to a mortar attack . The attacked caused heavy casualties including the commanding officer lieutenant @-@ Colonel George Lea , unable to proceed around 150 of the survivors were forced to withdraw towards Oosterbeek . 
 By 14 : 00 the 4th Parachute Brigade was no further forward . With casualties mounting , Brigadier Hackett asked General Urquhart 's permission to withdraw south of the railway line . His intention was to move through Wolfheze and into Oosterbeek where the division 's support units waited . The change of direction was further complicated by the lack of vehicle crossings along the railway line — there were only two , one at Wolfheze and the other at Oosterbeek . 
 Both battalions were still in contact with the Germans during the withdrawal with 10 Para to the north having the furthest to travel to reach the relative safety of the rail crossing . By 15 : 00 it became obvious that the Germans were already in front of the battalion . Now , as well as fighting a rearguard action , they had to capture positions between themselves and the railway line . Captain Lionel Queripel of 10 Para was awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross , the highest British military decoration , for his actions while in command of the battalion 's rear guard . 
 As both battalions headed for the railway line , gliders carrying the 1st Polish Parachute Brigade 's vehicles and artillery arrived at landing zone ' L ' . The KOSB still defending the area were holding out against repeated German attacks but the landing ground was in range of the Germans guns . At the same time 10 Para , closely followed by German armoured vehicles and under mortar fire , reached the clearing . The leading companies had just cleared the woods and started across open ground when the gliders arrived . In the confusion , with both groups under fire , each thought the other was the enemy and began shooting back . The Polish anti @-@ tank battery was virtually destroyed and although some vehicles got away the majority of their guns were trapped in the burning gliders . Some of the pursuing German troops tried to cross the landing zone only to suffer heavy casualties at the hands of the defending KOSB companies . In the confusion , ' A ' Company KOSB , covering the withdrawal of 10 Para , was cut off and eventually forced to surrender . 
 The buildup of vehicles and men trying to use the crossing at Wolfheze caused a bottleneck and made progress slow . Rather than wait , brigade headquarters , the KOSB and 156 Para chose to head up and over the railway embankment on foot . Once south of the railway line Support and ' B ' Company , 156 Para became mixed up with 10 Para making towards Wolfheze , while the battalion headquarters and other two companies headed further south . At 20 : 30 divisional headquarters issued orders for all units to fall back on a position around the Hartenstein Hotel in Oosterbeek . The Germans continued to pressure 4th Parachute Brigade and 10 Para dug in around Wolfheze . 156 Para to their south came under constant attack leading to fighting at close quarters throughout the night and into the next morning . 
 = = = 20 September = = = 
 In the east about 400 men , the remnants of 11 Para , the 1st Parachute Brigade and the 2nd South Staffordshires , having failed to break through to the trapped 2nd Parachute Battalion were trickling back towards Oosterbeek . They were gathered together and eventually placed under the command of Major Richard Lonsdale of 11 Para . Known as " Lonsdale Force " , in the following day 's fighting two of its men would be awarded the Victoria Cross , Lance @-@ Sergeant John Baskeyfield , and Major Robert Cain . 
 At daylight 4th Parachute Brigade started moving east towards the division at Oosterbeek , where the KOSB , moving through the night , had already arrived . Only the parachute battalions and brigade troops remained outside of the village . The order of march was 10 Para followed by brigade troops then 156 Para bringing up the rear . Virtually surrounded , the brigade fought a running hand @-@ to @-@ hand battle with German infantry supported by armour as they attempted to break through . During the fighting commanding officer Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Des Voeux and the second in command of 156 Para were killed in action . Another high ranking casualty was the commanding officer of 10 Para Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Ken Smyth , who was wounded and became a prisoner of war . With 156 Para leading , the remnants of the brigade carried out a bayonet charge and cleared the Germans from a large hollow which provided some shelter for the exhausted troops . Pinned down all day and with their numbers dwindling , at 17 : 00 Brigadier Hackett led a charge towards the divisions position , only the Brigadier and 150 men made it . 
 The battalions were then allocated positions on the eastern side of the perimeter , but by now they were battalions in name only . 156 Para had just 53 men under Major Geoffrey Powell , while 10 Para were only slightly better off with 60 men although all its battalion officers were missing . As a result , Captain Peter Barron of the brigade 's anti @-@ tank battery was given command of 10 Para . One of the official war photographers inside the perimeter wrote : 
 " This is the fourth day of fighting and camera work is almost out of the question . All day we have been under shell , mortar and machine gun fire . We are completely surrounded and our perimeter is becoming smaller every hour , now it is a matter of fighting for our lives . If our land forces don 't make contact with us soon then we 've had it " . 
 = = = 21 September = = = 
 After holding out in Arnhem for four nights and three days , the 2nd Parachute Battalion surrendered overnight . At Oosterbeek there was around 3 @,@ 000 men of the 1st Airborne Division dug in to form a perimeter . Everything including ammunition was now in short supply and most of the men had not eaten for over twenty @-@ four hours . 
 Headquarters 4th Parachute Brigade began to function again and a small number of stragglers from the parachute battalions were reunited with their units . The brigade was now responsible for all units in the eastern half of the perimeter . In descending order from north to south were the 1st Airborne Reconnaissance Squadron , 156 Para , ' D ' Squadron GPR , 10 Para at the Oosterbeek crossroads , ' C ' Squadron GPR , 21st Independent Parachute Company , the RASC Detachment and finally Lonsdale Force . 
 In the south @-@ east Lonsdale Force 's Major Cain armed with a PIAT anti @-@ tank projectile engaged in a fight with German armoured vehicles for which he would be awarded the Victoria Cross . Elsewhere around the brigade 's positions the Germans mounted a number of small attacks , at times supported by armour . Shortage of ammunition made the defenders hold fire until the Germans got within 20 yards ( 18 m ) . The tactic was successful and time after time the Germans were beaten back . In between German infantry attacks , the defenders came under almost constant mortar and artillery bombardment , which was responsible for the destruction of the divisional ammunition dump . At one stage Major Powell of 156 Para discovered that he and his men were surrounded when the British units on either side of them pulled back without informing them . Asking for permission to withdraw , he gained the impression that headquarters had forgotten about them or thought they had been wiped out . The gaps in the perimeter did allow individual German snipers to infiltrate brigade positions and the Glider Pilots had to send out dedicated anti @-@ sniper patrols to hunt them down . Patrols from both sides moved around the brigade 's area and anyone caught in the open during daylight was liable to be confronted by the other side and shot . Touring his brigade positions , Brigadier Hackett , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Thompson of the artillery and the Brigade Major Tiny Maddon , were caught in the open by mortar fire . Maddon was killed outright while Hackett and Thompson were both wounded and taken to the house of Mrs Kate ter Horst for treatment . 
 Two days later than expected , the parachute battalions of the 1st Polish Parachute Brigade landed south of the River Rhine to the east of Driel . Although unable to cross the river , the Poles at least relieved the pressure on the troops at Oosterbeek , when the Germans diverted 2 @,@ 400 troops to contain them . By now the division had made first contact with XXX Corps 11 miles ( 18 km ) to the south and could call upon the guns of 64 Medium Regiment , Royal Artillery to break up German attacks . The Poles arrival rejuvenated the Germans , at 18 : 40 Lonsdale Force was attacked . The next attack came at 19 : 05 in the west and 10 Para were attacked at 20 : 10 . First , houses holding 10 Para were set alight then assaulted by German infantry , but they continued to hold out . 
 = = = 22 September = = = 
 The previous day 's attacks had contracted the division 's perimeter ; it was now about 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) wide at the river , stretching north for 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) where it widened out to around 1 @,@ 200 yards ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) . The brigade 's three original parachute battalions now consisted of five officers and sixty men in 156 Para . Two officers with one hundred men in 11 Para and thirty men in 10 Para . With their losses in men and vehicles beginning to tell , German troops attacking the perimeter changed tactics and now tended to rely more on artillery and mortars than on infantry and armour to break through the British line . However , in the attacks on Lonsdale Force , the Germans persisted in attacking in company strength supported by one or two armoured vehicles . The method employed by the Germans was a tank or SP gun would move up and down a street blowing holes in the house walls . This would be followed up by supporting infantry who would try and use the holes to gain entry to the houses . During the day men from Lonsdale Force and the 21st Independent Company stalked and destroyed two SP guns then engaged the supporting infantry . 
 South of the river , the first unit from the Guards Armoured Division , the Household Cavalry , had fought through and linked up with the Poles at Driel . That night the brigade made the first attempt to get men of the Polish Parachute Brigade across the Rhine . Under the command of Captain Harry Brown of the brigade 's engineer squadron , fifteen men with a makeshift fleet of six boats , managed to transport fifty @-@ five Poles across the river . 
 = = = 23 September = = = 
 The day began with a four @-@ hour artillery and mortar bombardment and all indications were of an attack in force on 156 Para and ' D ' Squadron GPR . At 07 : 42 the attack started and at 07 : 50 , by now under intense pressure , Brigade headquarters called down artillery fire almost on top of their own positions which broke up the assault . Attacks continued all morning and a shortage of hand held anti @-@ tank weapons allowed German tanks to safely approach the brigade 's positions . The tanks targeted the houses shooting up a room at a time , forcing the defenders out and into trenches dug in the gardens . Both units managed to hold out , however their situation was officially described as " grim " . The numbers of British casualties exhausted all available medical supplies and wound dressings . Those wounded who required urgent treatment were now directed to the <unk> Hotel , which was in German hands . 
 A fresh German assault on Lonsdale Force in the south @-@ east saw the Germans demolish defended houses with high explosives or set them on fire with incendiary shells . At midday a German officer under a white flag asked to speak to Brigadier Hackett . He explained they were about to attack the area supported by an artillery and mortar barrage . He knew there were wounded in the nearby Casualty Clearing Station ( CCS ) and suggested that the brigade 's forward positions were moved 600 yards ( 550 m ) back . Hackett refused to move , not least because to do so would have placed divisional headquarters 200 yards ( 180 m ) behind the new German front line . Although the expected artillery barrage did arrive , no rounds landed in the area of the CCS . 
 = = = 24 September = = = 
 Overnight a second attempt was made to reinforce 1st Airborne Division with Polish paratroops using boats belonging to the 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division . Those men that did cross the river were to go into the line under command of the 4th Parachute Brigade . Despite the urgent need for reinforcements , the operation did not begin until 03 : 00 . Only twelve boats were available and by dawn , 200 Poles had been carried across the river . While en route to reinforce ' D ' Squadron GPR , the Poles were caught in the open by machine @-@ gun fire , killing their commander , Captain <unk> , and another man . Pinned down all day , the Poles only reached the glider pilots ' position after dark . After welcoming the Poles to the brigade , Brigadier Hackett departed for headquarters and was caught in the open during a mortar barrage and wounded again . The seriously injured Hackett was taken to the CCS in the Hartenstein Hotel , and command of 4th Parachute Brigade given to Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Iain Murray of the Glider Pilot Regiment . That afternoon a truce was agreed to allow evacuation of British wounded from inside the perimeter . Over 450 wounded including Brigadier Hackett were taken into German captivity . 
 = = = 25 September = = = 
 By now the perimeter along the river was only about 700 yards ( 640 m ) wide . In the south @-@ east a large force of Germans managed to break through the brigade 's perimeter and overran one of the division 's artillery batteries , located at the rear of Lonsdale Force . The other artillery batteries opened fire on the Germans from a range of 50 yards ( 46 m ) and requested infantry as well as anti @-@ tank weapons to come to their assistance . The German force including two Panther tanks and SP guns , came close to cutting the defenders off from the river and were only defeated by the artillery , followed up by bayonet and grenade counter @-@ attacks . Lonsdale Force spent the rest of the day in close quarters battles with Waffen SS infantry . The fight was likened to a " snowball fight with grenades " and at least one tank was destroyed with a Gammon bomb . In the afternoon , more Germans managed to infiltrate the perimeter . Only intervention by the guns of 64 Medium Regiment firing on the British positions prevented the division 's headquarters from being overrun . 
 South of the river Lieutenant @-@ General Brian Horrocks , commander of XXX Corps and Lieutenant @-@ General Frederick Browning of I Airborne Corps , decided not to reinforce the position north of the Rhine . Instead they ordered the Corps staff to prepare a plan to withdraw the division ( Operation Berlin ) . The evacuation of the surviving 2 @,@ 500 men able to make the crossing was to begin at 20 : 45 . The evacuation would be from north to south , and was modelled on the evacuation from Gallipoli in the First World War . During the day 's fighting , some units had become isolated and never received the order to evacuate . Those capable of taking part were formed into groups of fourteen ( the maximum capacity of the boats ) and guided to the river by men from the Glider Pilot Regiment who during the day had reconnoitred and marked out two routes to the river . Under cover of an artillery barrage the evacuation started at 22 : 00 . German infiltration of the perimeter caused problems during the withdrawal and some groups got into fire fights or were captured . When they reached the river , priority was given to the wounded and regardless of rank the soldiers waited in line for their turn to get into the boats . 
 The crossing was not secure and when the Germans realised something was happening they opened fire with machine @-@ guns and targeted the south bank with artillery fire , sinking some boats or killing their crews . At dawn the evacuation ended with around 500 men still waiting on the north bank . A small number of men tried to swim across and some made it to the far bank . Of the men left behind , 200 evaded capture and reached the safety of the south bank over the following days . 
 = = = Outcome = = = 
 The 1st Airborne Division had taken 11 @,@ 500 men to Arnhem where 1 @,@ 440 were killed and just over half , some 5 @,@ 960 men , were prisoners of war of whom 3 @,@ 000 had been wounded before capture . Of the 4th Parachute Brigade 's 2 @,@ 170 men who arrived in Arnhem , 252 were killed , 462 were evacuated and 1 @,@ 456 were missing or prisoners of war . Their total casualties amounted to seventy @-@ eight per cent , and while severe they were not the highest in the division . The 1st Airlanding Brigade suffered eighty – one per cent casualties , slightly lower than the eighty – eight per cent figure for the overall division . The 4th Parachute Brigade never recovered from the battle of Arnhem and was disbanded , those men who had been evacuated were used to reform the battalions of the 1st Parachute Brigade . 
 = = Territorial Army = = 
 In 1947 , a new 4th Parachute Brigade was raised as part of Territorial Army and assigned to the 16th Airborne Division . It was composed of the 10th Battalion , Parachute Regiment , the 11th Battalion , Parachute Regiment and the 14th Battalion , Parachute Regiment . In 1950 , the brigade was renumbered the 44th Parachute Brigade ( TA ) . 
 = = Brigade composition = = 
 = = = Commanding officers = = = 
 Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Kenneth Smyth 
 Brigadier John Hackett 
 Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Iain Murray 
 = = = Units = = = 
 10th Parachute Battalion Lieutenant @-@ Colonel K. Smyth 
 11th Parachute Battalion Lieutenant @-@ Colonel G. Lea 
 156th Parachute Battalion Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Sir W. de <unk> des Voeux 
 133rd ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance , Royal Army Medical Corps Lieutenant @-@ Colonel W. Alford 
 2nd ( Oban ) Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery , Royal Artillery Major A. Haynes 
 4th Parachute Squadron , Royal Engineers Major A. Perkins 
 Royal Army Service Corps detachment 
 = History of malaria = 
 The history of malaria stretches from its prehistoric origin as a zoonotic disease in the primates of Africa through to the 21st century . A widespread and potentially lethal human infectious disease , at its peak malaria infested every continent , except Antarctica . Its prevention and treatment have been targeted in science and medicine for hundreds of years . Since the discovery of the parasites which cause it , research attention has focused on their biology , as well as that of the mosquitoes which transmit the parasites . 
 References to its unique , periodic fevers are found throughout recorded history beginning in 2700 BC in China . 
 For thousands of years , traditional herbal remedies have been used to treat malaria . The first effective treatment for malaria came from the bark of cinchona tree , which contains quinine . After the link to mosquitos and their parasites were identified in the early twentieth century , mosquito control measures such as widespread use of DDT , swamp drainage , covering or oiling the surface of open water sources , indoor residual spraying and use of insecticide treated nets was initiated . <unk> quinine was prescribed in malaria endemic areas , and new therapeutic drugs , including chloroquine and artemisinins , were used to resist the scourge . 
 Malaria researchers have won multiple Nobel Prizes for their achievements , although the disease continues to afflict some 200 million patients each year , killing more than 600 @,@ 000 . 
 Malaria was the most important health hazard encountered by U.S. troops in the South Pacific during World War II , where about 500 @,@ 000 men were infected . According to Joseph Patrick Byrne , " Sixty thousand American soldiers died of malaria during the African and South Pacific campaigns . " 
 At the close of the 20th century , malaria remained endemic in more than 100 countries throughout the tropical and subtropical zones , including large areas of Central and South America , Hispaniola ( Haiti and the Dominican Republic ) , Africa , the Middle East , the Indian subcontinent , Southeast Asia , and Oceania . Resistance of Plasmodium to anti @-@ malaria drugs , as well as resistance of mosquitos to insecticides and the discovery of zoonotic species of the parasite have complicated control measures . 
 = = Origin and prehistoric period = = 
 The first evidence of malaria parasites was found in mosquitoes preserved in amber from the Palaeogene period that are approximately 30 million years old . Human malaria likely originated in Africa and coevolved with its hosts , mosquitoes and non @-@ human primates . Malaria protozoa are diversified into primate , rodent , bird , and reptile host lineages . Humans may have originally caught Plasmodium falciparum from gorillas . P. vivax , another malarial Plasmodium species among the six that infect humans , also likely originated in African gorillas and chimpanzees . Another malarial species recently discovered to be transmissible to humans , P. knowlesi , originated in Asian macaque monkeys . While P. malariae is highly host specific to humans , there is spotty evidence that low level non @-@ symptomatic infection persists among wild chimpanzees . 
 About 10 @,@ 000 years ago , malaria started having a major impact on human survival , coinciding with the start of agriculture in the Neolithic revolution . Consequences included natural selection for sickle @-@ cell disease , <unk> , glucose @-@ 6 @-@ phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency , Southeast Asian <unk> , <unk> and loss of the <unk> antigen ( <unk> C ) and the Duffy antigen on the erythrocytes , because such blood disorders confer a selective advantage against malaria infection ( balancing selection ) . The three major types of inherited genetic resistance ( sickle @-@ cell disease , <unk> , and glucose @-@ 6 @-@ phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency ) were present in the Mediterranean world by the time of the Roman Empire , about 2000 years ago . 
 Molecular methods have confirmed the high prevalence of P. falciparum malaria in ancient Egypt . The Ancient Greek historian Herodotus wrote that the builders of the Egyptian pyramids ( circa 2700 - 1700 BCE ) were given large amounts of garlic , probably to protect them against malaria . The Pharaoh Sneferu , the founder of the Fourth dynasty of Egypt , who reigned from around 2613 – <unk> BCE , used bed @-@ nets as protection against mosquitoes . Cleopatra VII , the last Pharaoh of Ancient Egypt , similarly slept under a mosquito net . However , whether the mosquito nets were used for the purpose of malaria prevention , or for more mundane purpose of avoiding the discomfort of mosquito bites , is unknown . The presence of malaria in Egypt from circa 800 BCE onwards has been confirmed using DNA @-@ based methods . 
 = = Classical period = = 
 Malaria became widely recognized in ancient Greece by the 4th century BCE , and is implicated in the decline of many city @-@ state populations . The term <unk> ( Greek for miasma ) : " stain , pollution " , was coined by Hippocrates of Kos who used it to describe dangerous fumes from the ground that are transported by winds and can cause serious illnesses . Hippocrates ( 460 – 370 BCE ) , the " father of medicine " , related the presence of intermittent fevers with climatic and environmental conditions and classified the fever according to periodicity : Gk . : <unk> <unk> / L. : febris <unk> ( fever every third day ) , and Gk . : <unk> <unk> / L. : febris <unk> ( fever every fourth day ) . 
 The Chinese Huangdi <unk> ( The Inner Canon of the Yellow Emperor ) dating from ~ 300 BCE - 200 CE apparently refers to repeated paroxysmal fevers associated with enlarged <unk> and a tendency to epidemic occurrence . Around 168 BCE , the herbal remedy Qing @-@ hao ( <unk> ) ( Artemisia annua ) came into use in China to treat female hemorrhoids ( <unk> 'er <unk> translated as " Recipes for 52 kinds of diseases " unearthed from the Mawangdui tombs ) . Qing @-@ hao was first recommended for acute intermittent fever episodes by Ge Hong as an effective medication in the 4th @-@ century Chinese manuscript Zhou hou bei ji fang , usually translated as " Emergency <unk> kept in one 's Sleeve " . His recommendation was to soak fresh plants of the <unk> herb in cold water , wring it out and ingest the expressed bitter juice in its raw state . 
 <unk> fever ' refers to a particularly deadly strain of malaria that affected the Roman Campagna and the city of Rome throughout various epochs in history . An epidemic of Roman fever during the fifth century AD may have contributed to the fall of the Roman empire . The many remedies to reduce the spleen in Pedanius Dioscorides 's De Materia Medica have been suggested to have been a response to chronic malaria in the Roman empire . 
 In 835 , the celebration of <unk> was moved from May to November at the behest of Pope Gregory IV , on the " practical grounds that Rome in summer could not accommodate the great number of pilgrims who flocked to it " , and perhaps because of public health considerations regarding Roman Fever , which claimed a number of lives of pilgrims during the sultry summers of the region . 
 = = Middle Ages = = 
 During the Middle Ages , treatments for malaria ( and other diseases ) included blood @-@ letting , inducing vomiting , limb amputations and trepanning . Some turned to witchcraft and astrology . Physicians and surgeons as well as folk @-@ healers administered ineffective and often deadly herbs - Belladonna , for example . 
 = = = European Renaissance = = = 
 The name malaria derived from mal aria ( ' bad air ' in Medieval Italian ) . This idea came from the Ancient Romans who thought that this disease came from the horrible fumes in the swamps . The word malaria has its roots in the miasma theory , as described by historian and chancellor of Florence Leonardo Bruni in his Historiarum <unk> populi libri XII , which was the first major example of Renaissance historical writing : 
 <unk> i <unk> questo fortissimo castello e <unk> di <unk> <unk> , <unk> fra <unk> <unk> fosse da fare . <unk> alcuni a ' <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> e <unk> a <unk> lo <unk> , e <unk> <unk> <unk> per la <unk> e per la mala <unk> per <unk> e difficile <unk> nel tempo dell <unk> e in <unk> <unk> , e <unk> ancora ch <unk> era <unk> assai per la <unk> <unk> a molti <unk> capitano di <unk> <unk> : <unk> , nel tempo che <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> a <unk> <unk> , molti , o per <unk> del <unk> o per paura d <unk> , <unk> <unk> e <unk> <unk> da lui ( <unk> 1476 ) . 
 After the Florentines had conquered this stronghold , after putting good guardians on it they were discussing among themselves how to proceed . For some of them it appeared most useful and necessary to reduce the army , more so as it was extremely stressed by disease and bad air , and due to the long @-@ lasting and difficult camps in unhealthy places during the autumn . They ( the Florentines ) further considered that the army was reduced in numbers due to the leave permits granted to many soldiers by their officers . In fact , during the siege , many soldiers had asked and obtained leave permits due to the camp hardships and fear of illness [ translated from medieval Italian , <unk> dialect ] . 
 The coastal plains of southern Italy fell from international prominence when malaria expanded in the sixteenth century . At roughly the same time , in the coastal marshes of England , mortality from " marsh fever " or " tertian ague " ( ague : via French from medieval Latin acuta ( febris ) , acute fever ) was comparable to that in sub @-@ Saharan Africa today . William Shakespeare was born at the start of the especially cold period that climatologists call the " Little Ice Age " , yet he was aware enough of the ravages of the disease to mention it in eight of his plays . 
 Medical accounts and ancient autopsy reports state that tertian malarial fevers caused the death of four members of the prominent Medici family of Florence . These claims have been confirmed with more modern methodologies . 
 = = Spread to the Americas = = 
 Malaria was not referenced in the " medical books " of the Mayans or Aztecs . European settlers and their West African slaves likely brought malaria to the Americas in the 16th century . 
 In the book ″ 1493 , ″ the author Charles Mann , cites sources that speculate that the reason African slaves were brought to the British Americas was because of their immunity to malaria . Britain did not have large number of African slaves , there were plenty of unemployed workers who could come as indentured servants . In the area above the Mason @-@ Dixon line , the malaria protozoa did not fare well , the English @-@ speaking indentured servant proved more profitable as he would work toward his freedom and hence worked with less supervision and coercion . As malaria spread , places such as the tidewater of Virginia and South Carolina which had previously been habitable by white people became endemic with malaria . Small white landholders were at a disadvantage to plantation owners , as they risk complete economic ruin when they were sick , while plantation owners relied on more malaria resistant West African slaves . Malaria caused huge losses to British forces in the South during the revolutionary war as well as to Union forces during the Civil War . Malaria also helped weaken the native American population and make them more susceptible to other diseases . 
 = = = Cinchona tree = = = 
 Spanish missionaries found that fever was treated by Amerindians near <unk> ( Peru ) with powder from Peruvian bark ( later established to be from any of several trees of genus Cinchona ) . It was used by the Quechua Indians of Peru to reduce the shaking effects caused by severe chills . Jesuit Brother Agostino <unk> ( 1561 – 1642 ) , who lived in Lima and was an apothecary by training , observed the Quechua using the bark of the cinchona tree for that purpose . While its effect in treating malaria ( and hence malaria @-@ induced shivering ) was unrelated to its effect in controlling shivering from cold , it was nevertheless effective for malaria . The use of the “ fever tree ” bark was introduced into European medicine by Jesuit missionaries ( Jesuit 's bark ) . Jesuit Bernabé de Cobo ( 1582 – 1657 ) , who explored Mexico and Peru , is credited with taking cinchona bark to Europe . He brought the bark from Lima to Spain , and then to Rome and other parts of Italy , in 1632 . Francesco <unk> wrote in 1712 that only “ intermittent fever ” was amenable to the fever tree bark . This work finally established the specific nature of cinchona bark and brought about its general use in medicine . 
 It would be nearly 200 years before the active principles , quinine and other alkaloids , of cinchona bark were isolated . Quinine , a toxic plant alkaloid , is , in addition to its anti @-@ malarial properties , an effective muscle relaxant , as the modern use for nocturnal leg cramps suggests ( corroborating its use for shivering by the Peruvian Indians ) . 
 = = = Clinical indications = = = 
 In 1717 , the dark pigmentation of a postmortem spleen and brain was published by the epidemiologist Giovanni Maria <unk> in his malaria text book De <unk> <unk> <unk> eorumque <unk> . This was one of the earliest reports of the characteristic enlargement of the spleen and dark color of the spleen and brain which are the most constant post @-@ mortem indications of chronic malaria infection . He related the prevalence of malaria in swampy areas to the presence of flies and recommended swamp drainage to prevent it . 
 = = 19th century = = 
 In the nineteenth century , the first drugs were developed to treat malaria and parasites were first identified as its source . 
 = = = Antimalarial drugs = = = 
 = = = = Quinine = = = = 
 French chemist Pierre Joseph Pelletier and French pharmacist Joseph <unk> <unk> separated in 1820 the alkaloids <unk> and quinine from powdered fever tree bark , allowing for the creation of standardized doses of the active ingredients . Prior to 1820 , the bark was simply dried , ground to a fine powder and mixed into a liquid ( commonly wine ) for drinking . 
 An English trader , Charles Ledger , and his Amerindian servant spent four years collecting cinchona seeds in the Andes in Bolivia , highly prized for their quinine but whose export was prohibited . Ledger managed to get seeds out ; in 1865 , the Dutch government cultivated 20 @,@ 000 trees of the Cinchona <unk> in Java ( Indonesia ) . By the end of the nineteenth century , the Dutch had established a world monopoly over its supply . 
 = = = = ' Warburg 's Tincture ' = = = = 
 In 1834 , in British Guiana , a German physician , Carl Warburg , invented an antipyretic medicine : ' Warburg 's Tincture ' . This secret , proprietary remedy contained quinine and other herbs . Trials were made in Europe in the 1840s and 1850s . It was officially adopted by the Austrian Empire in 1847 . It was considered by many eminent medical professionals to be a more efficacious antimalarial than quinine . It was also more economical . The British Government supplied Warburg 's Tincture to troops in India and other colonies . 
 = = = = Methylene blue = = = = 
 In 1876 , methylene blue was synthesized by German chemist Heinrich Caro . Paul Ehrlich in 1880 described the use of " neutral " dyes – mixtures of acidic and basic dyes for the differentiation of cells in peripheral blood smears . In 1891 Ernst Malachowski and Dmitri <unk> <unk> independently developed techniques using a mixture of <unk> Y and modified methylene blue ( methylene azure ) that produced a surprising hue <unk> to either staining component : a shade of purple . Malachowski used alkali @-@ treated methylene blue solutions and <unk> used methylene blue solutions which were molded or aged . This new method differentiated blood cells and demonstrated the nuclei of malarial parasites . Malachowski 's staining technique was one of the most significant technical advances in the history of malaria . 
 In 1891 , Paul Guttmann and Ehrlich noted that methylene blue had a high affinity for some tissues and that this dye had a slight antimalarial property . Methylene blue and its congeners may act by preventing the <unk> of heme . 
 = = = Etiology : Identification of Plasmodium and Anopheles = = = 
 In 1848 , German anatomist Johann Heinrich Meckel recorded black @-@ brown pigment granules in the blood and spleen of a patient who had died in a mental hospital . Meckel was thought to have been looking at malaria parasites without realizing it ; he did not mention malaria in his report . He hypothesized that the pigment was melanin . The causal relationship of pigment to the parasite was established in 1880 , when French physician Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran , working in the military hospital of Constantine , Algeria , observed pigmented parasites inside the red blood cells of malaria sufferers . He witnessed the events of <unk> and became convinced that the moving flagella were parasitic microorganisms . He noted that quinine removed the parasites from the blood . Laveran called this microscopic organism <unk> malariae and proposed that malaria was caused by this protozoan . This discovery remained controversial until the development of the oil immersion lens in 1884 and of superior staining methods in 1890 – 1891 . 
 In 1885 , Ettore Marchiafava , Angelo Celli and Camillo Golgi studied the reproduction cycles in human blood ( Golgi cycles ) . Golgi observed that all parasites present in the blood divided almost simultaneously at regular intervals and that division coincided with attacks of fever . In 1886 Golgi described the morphological differences that are still used to distinguish two malaria parasite species Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium malariae . Shortly after this Sakharov in 1889 and Marchiafava & Celli in 1890 independently identified Plasmodium falciparum as a species distinct from P. vivax and P. malariae . In 1890 , Grassi and Feletti reviewed the available information and named both P. malariae and P. vivax ( although within the genus <unk> . ) By 1890 , Laveran 's germ was generally accepted , but most of his initial ideas had been discarded in favor of the taxonomic work and clinical pathology of the Italian school . Marchiafava and Celli called the new microorganism Plasmodium . H. vivax was soon renamed Plasmodium vivax . In 1892 , Marchiafava and Bignami proved that the multiple forms seen by Laveran were from a single species . This species was eventually named P. falciparum . Laveran was awarded the 1907 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine " in recognition of his work on the role played by protozoa in causing diseases " . 
 Dutch physician Pieter Pel first proposed a tissue stage of the malaria parasite in 1886 , presaging its discovery by over 50 years . This suggestion was reiterated in 1893 when Golgi suggested that the parasites might have an undiscovered tissue phase ( this time in endothelial cells ) . Pel in 1896 supported <unk> 's latent phase theory . 
 The establishment of the scientific method from about the mid @-@ 19th century on demanded testable hypotheses and verifiable phenomena for causation and transmission . Anecdotal reports , and the discovery in 1881 that mosquitos were the vector of yellow fever , eventually led to the investigation of mosquitos in connection with malaria . 
 An early effort at malaria prevention occurred in 1896 in Massachusetts . An Uxbridge outbreak prompted health officer Dr. Leonard White to write a report to the State Board of Health , which led to a study of mosquito @-@ malaria links and the first efforts for malaria prevention . Massachusetts state pathologist , Theobald Smith , asked that White 's son collect mosquito specimens for further analysis , and that citizens add screens to windows , and drain collections of water . 
 Britain 's Sir Ronald Ross , an army surgeon working in Secunderabad India , proved in 1897 that malaria is transmitted by mosquitoes , an event now commemorated via World Mosquito Day . He was able to find pigmented malaria parasites in a mosquito that he artificially fed on a malaria patient who had crescents in his blood . He continued his research into malaria by showing that certain mosquito species ( Culex <unk> ) transmit malaria to sparrows and he isolated malaria parasites from the salivary glands of mosquitoes that had fed on infected birds . He reported this to the British Medical Association in Edinburgh in 1898 . 
 Giovanni Battista Grassi , professor of Comparative Anatomy at Rome University , showed that human malaria could only be transmitted by Anopheles ( Greek <unk> : good @-@ for @-@ nothing ) mosquitoes . Grassi along with coworkers Amico Bignami , Giuseppe Bastianelli and Ettore Marchiafava announced at the session of the Accademia dei Lincei on 4 December 1898 that a healthy man in a non @-@ malarial zone had contracted tertian malaria after being bitten by an experimentally infected Anopheles <unk> specimen . 
 In 1898 @-@ 99 , Bastianelli , Bignami and Grassi were the first to observe the complete transmission cycle of P. falciparum , P. vivax and P. malaria from mosquito to human and back in A. <unk> . 
 A dispute broke out between the British and Italian schools of <unk> over priority , but Ross received the 1902 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for " his work on malaria , by which he has shown how it enters the organism and thereby has laid the foundation for successful research on this disease and methods of combating it " . 
 = = = Synthesis of quinine = = = 
 William Henry Perkin , a student of August Wilhelm von Hofmann at the Royal College of Chemistry in London , unsuccessfully tried in the 1850s to synthesize quinine in a commercial process . The idea was to take two equivalents of N @-@ <unk> ( C 
 <unk> 
 <unk> ) and three atoms of oxygen to produce quinine ( C 
 20H 
 24N 
 2O 
 2 ) and water . Instead , Perkin 's mauve was produced when attempting quinine total synthesis via the oxidation of N @-@ <unk> . Before Perkin 's discovery , all dyes and pigments were derived from roots , leaves , insects , or , in the case of Tyrian purple , molluscs . 
 Quinine wouldn 't be successfully synthesized until 1918 . Synthesis remains elaborate , expensive and low yield , with the additional problem of separation of the stereoisomers . Though quinine is not one of the major drugs used in treatment , modern production still relies on extraction from the cinchona tree . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 = = = Etiology : Plasmodium tissue stage and reproduction = = = 
 Relapses were first noted in 1897 by William S. Thayer , who recounted the experiences of a physician who relapsed 21 months after leaving an endemic area . He proposed the existence of a tissue stage . Relapses were confirmed by Patrick Manson , who allowed infected Anopheles mosquitoes to feed on his eldest son . The younger Manson then described a relapse nine months after his apparent cure with quinine . 
 Also , in 1900 Amico Bignami and Giuseppe Bastianelli found that they could not infect an individual with blood containing only gametocytes . The possibility of the existence of a chronic blood stage infection was proposed by Ronald Ross and David Thompson in 1910 . 
 The existence of asexually @-@ reproducing avian malaria parasites in cells of the internal organs was first demonstrated by Henrique de Beaurepaire <unk> in 1908 . 
 Three possible mechanisms of relapse were proposed by <unk> in 1926 ( i ) parthenogenesis of <unk> : ( ii ) persistence of <unk> in small numbers in the blood where immunity inhibits multiplication , but later disappears and / or ( iii ) reactivation of an encysted body in the blood . James in 1931 proposed that sporozoites are carried to internal organs , where they enter reticuloendothelial cells and undergo a cycle of development , based on quinine 's lack of activity on them . Huff and Bloom in 1935 demonstrated stages of avian malaria that transpire outside blood cells ( exoerythrocytic ) . In 1945 Fairley et al. reported that inoculation of blood from a patient with P. vivax may fail to induce malaria , although the donor may subsequently exhibit the condition . <unk> disappeared from the blood stream within one hour and reappeared eight days later . This suggested the presence of forms that persist in tissues . Using mosquitoes rather than blood , in 1946 Shute described a similar phenomenon and proposed the existence of an ' x @-@ body ' or resting form . The following year <unk> proposed a link between relapse and a tissue stage not yet discovered . Garnham in 1947 described exoerythrocytic schizogony in <unk> ( Plasmodium ) <unk> . In the following year Shortt and Garnham described the liver stages of P. cynomolgi in monkeys . In the same year a human volunteer consented to receive a massive dose of infected sporozoites of P. vivax and undergo a liver biopsy three months later , thus allowing Shortt et al. to demonstrate the tissue stage . The tissue form of Plasmodium ovale was described in 1954 and that of P. malariae in 1960 in experimentally infected chimpanzees . 
 The latent or dormant liver form of the parasite ( <unk> ) , apparently responsible for the relapses characteristic of P. vivax and P. ovale infections , was first observed in the 1980s . The term <unk> was coined by Miles B. Markus while a student . In 1976 , he speculated : " If sporozoites of Isospora can behave in this fashion , then those of related <unk> , like malaria parasites , may have the ability to survive in the tissues in a similar way . " In 1982 , <unk> et al reported identification of P. vivax hypnozoites in liver cells of infected chimpanzees . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the early twentieth century , before antibiotics , patients with tertiary syphilis were intentionally infected with malaria to induce a fever ; this was called malariotherapy . In 1917 , Julius Wagner @-@ Jauregg , a Viennese psychiatrist , began to treat <unk> with induced Plasmodium vivax malaria . Three or four bouts of fever were enough to kill the temperature @-@ sensitive syphilis bacteria ( <unk> pallida also known as Treponema pallidum ) . P. vivax infections were terminated by quinine . By accurately controlling the fever with quinine , the effects of both syphilis and malaria could be minimized . While about 15 % of patients died from malaria , this was preferable to the almost @-@ certain death from syphilis . Therapeutic malaria opened up a wide field of chemotherapeutic research and was practised until 1950 . Wagner @-@ Jauregg was awarded the 1927 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discovery of the therapeutic value of malaria inoculation in the treatment of dementia <unk> . 
 Henry Heimlich has advocated malariotherapy as a treatment for AIDS , and some studies of malariotherapy for HIV infection have been performed in China . The CDC does not recommend the use of malariotherapy for HIV . 
 = = = Panama Canal and vector control = = = 
 In 1881 , Dr. Carlos Finlay , a Scottish physician practising in Havana , theorized that yellow fever was transmitted by a specific mosquito , later designated Aedes aegypti . The theory remained controversial for twenty years until confirmed in 1901 by Walter Reed . This was the first scientific proof of a disease being transmitted exclusively by an insect vector , and demonstrated that control of such diseases necessarily entailed control or eradication of its insect vector . 
 Yellow fever and malaria among workers had seriously delayed construction of the Panama Canal . Mosquito control instituted by William C. Gorgas dramatically reduced this problem . 
 = = = Antimalarial drugs = = = 
 = = = = Chloroquine = = = = 
 Johann " Hans " <unk> and colleagues synthesized and tested some 12 @,@ 000 compounds , eventually producing Resochin ® as a substitute for quinine in the 1930s . It is chemically related to quinine through the possession of a quinoline nucleus and the <unk> side chain . Resochin ( 7 @-@ chloro @-@ 4- 4- ( <unk> ) – 1 – <unk> amino quinoline ) and a similar compound <unk> ( 3 @-@ methyl Resochin ) were synthesized in 1934 . In March 1946 , the drug was officially named Chloroquine . Chloroquine is an inhibitor of <unk> production through <unk> . Quinine and chloroquine affect malarial parasites only at life stages when the parasites are forming <unk> @-@ pigment ( <unk> ) as a byproduct of hemoglobin degradation . Chloroquine @-@ resistant forms of P. falciparum emerged only 19 years later . The first resistant strains were detected around the Cambodia ‐ Thailand border and in Colombia , in the 1950s . In 1989 , chloroquine resistance in P. vivax was reported in Papua New Guinea . These resistant strains spread rapidly , producing a large mortality increase , particularly in Africa during the 1990s . 
 = = = = Artemisinins = = = = 
 Systematic screening of traditional Chinese medical herbs was carried out by Chinese research teams , consisting of hundreds of scientists in the 1960s and 1970s . <unk> , later named artemisinin , was cold @-@ extracted in a neutral milieu ( pH 7 @.@ 0 ) from the dried leaves of Artemisia annua . 
 Artemisinin was isolated by pharmacologist Tu Youyou ( Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine , 2015 ) . Tu headed a team tasked by the Chinese government with finding a treatment for <unk> @-@ resistant malaria . Their work was known as Project 523 , named after the date it was announced – 23 May 1967 . The team investigated more than 2000 Chinese herb preparations and by 1971 had made 380 extracts from 200 herbs . An extract from qinghao ( Artemisia annua ) was effective but the results were variable . Tu reviewed the literature , including Zhou hou bei ji fang ( A handbook of prescriptions for emergencies ) written in 340 BC by Chinese physician Ge Hong . This book contained the only useful reference to the herb : " A handful of qinghao immersed with two litres of water , wring out the juice and drink it all . " Tu 's team subsequently isolated a nontoxic , neutral extract that was 100 % effective against <unk> in animals . The first successful trials of artemisinin were in 1979 . 
 Artemisinin is a sesquiterpene lactone containing a peroxide group , which is believed to be essential for its anti @-@ malarial activity . Its derivatives , artesunate and artemether , have been used in clinics since 1987 for the treatment of drug @-@ resistant and drug @-@ sensitive malaria , especially cerebral malaria . These drugs are characterized by fast action , high efficacy and good tolerance . They kill the asexual forms of P. berghei and P. cynomolgi and have transmission @-@ blocking activity . In 1985 , Zhou <unk> and his team combined artemether and lumefantrine into a single tablet , which was registered as a medicine in China in 1992 . Later it became known as “ <unk> ” . Artemisinin combination treatments ( ACTs ) are now widely used to treat uncomplicated falciparum malaria , but access to ACTs is still limited in most malaria @-@ endemic countries and only a minority of the patients who need artemisinin @-@ based combination treatments receive them . 
 In 2008 White predicted that improved agricultural practices , selection of high @-@ yielding hybrids , microbial production , and the development of synthetic peroxides would lower prices . 
 = = = Insecticides = = = 
 Efforts to control the spread of malaria suffered a major setback in 1930 . Entomologist Raymond Corbett Shannon discovered imported disease @-@ bearing Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes living in Brazil ( DNA analysis later revealed the actual species to be A. <unk> ) . This species of mosquito is a particularly efficient vector for malaria and is native to Africa . In 1938 , the introduction of this vector caused the greatest epidemic of malaria ever seen in the New World . However , complete eradication of A. gambiae from northeast Brazil and thus from the New World was achieved in 1940 by the systematic application of the arsenic @-@ containing compound Paris green to breeding places , and of <unk> spray @-@ killing to adult resting places . 
 = = = = DDT = = = = 
 Austrian chemist Othmar Zeidler is credited with the first synthesis of DDT ( <unk> ) in 1874 . The insecticidal properties of DDT were identified in 1939 by chemist Paul Hermann Müller of <unk> Pharmaceutical . For his discovery of DDT as a contact poison against several arthropods , he was awarded the 1948 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine . In the fall of 1942 , samples of the chemical were acquired by the United States , Britain and Germany . Laboratory tests demonstrated that it was highly effective against many insects . 
 Rockefeller Foundation studies showed in Mexico that DDT remained effective for six to eight weeks if sprayed on the inside walls and ceilings of houses and other buildings . The first field test in which residual DDT was applied to the interior surfaces of all habitations and outbuildings was carried out in central Italy in the spring of 1944 . The objective was to determine the residual effect of the spray upon <unk> density in the absence of other control measures . Spraying began in Castel Volturno and , after a few months , in the delta of the Tiber . The unprecedented effectiveness of the chemical was confirmed : the new insecticide was able to eradicate malaria by eradicating mosquitoes . At the end of World War II , a massive malaria control program based on DDT spraying was carried out in Italy . In Sardinia – the second largest island in the Mediterranean – between 1946 and 1951 , the Rockefeller Foundation conducted a large @-@ scale experiment to test the feasibility of the strategy of " species eradication " in an endemic malaria vector . Malaria was effectively eliminated in the United States by the use of DDT in the National Malaria Eradication Program ( 1947 – 52 ) . The concept of eradication prevailed in 1955 in the Eighth World Health Assembly : DDT was adopted as a primary tool in the fight against malaria . 
 In 1953 , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) launched an antimalarial program in parts of Liberia as a pilot project to determine the feasibility of malaria eradication in tropical Africa . However , these projects encountered difficulties that foreshadowed the general retreat from malaria eradication efforts across tropical Africa by the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 DDT was banned in the US in 1972 , after the discussion opened in 1962 by Silent Spring , written by American biologist Rachel Carson , which launched the environmental movement in the West . The book catalogued the environmental impacts of indiscriminate DDT spraying and suggested that DDT and other pesticides cause cancer and that their agricultural use was a threat to wildlife . The U.S. Agency for International Development supports indoor DDT spraying as a vital component of malaria control programs and has initiated DDT and other insecticide spraying programs in tropical countries . 
 = = = = Pyrethrum = = = = 
 Other insecticides are available for mosquito control , as well as physical measures , such as draining the wetland breeding grounds and the provision of better sanitation . Pyrethrum ( from the flowering plant Chrysanthemum [ or <unk> ] <unk> ) is an economically important source of natural insecticide . <unk> attack the nervous systems of all insects . A few minutes after application , the insect cannot move or fly , while female mosquitoes are inhibited from biting . The use of <unk> in insecticide preparations dates to about 400 BCE . <unk> are biodegradable and break down easily on exposure to light . The majority of the world 's supply of pyrethrin and Chrysanthemum <unk> comes from Kenya . The flower was first introduced into Kenya and the highlands of Eastern Africa during the late 1920s . The flowers of the plant are harvested shortly after blooming ; they are either dried and powdered , or the oils within the flowers are extracted with solvents . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 = = = = Avian , mouse and monkey models = = = = 
 Until the 1950s , screening of anti @-@ malarial drugs was carried out on avian malaria . Avian malaria species differ from those that infect humans . The discovery in 1948 of Plasmodium berghei in wild rodents in the Congo and later other rodent species that could infect laboratory rats transformed drug development . The short hepatic phase and life cycle of these parasites made them useful as animal models , a status they still retain . Plasmodium cynomolgi in rhesus monkeys ( Macaca mulatta ) were used in the 1960s to test drugs active against P. vivax . 
 Growth of the liver stages in animal @-@ free systems was achieved in the 1980s when pre @-@ erythrocytic P. berghei stages were grown in <unk> , a human embryonic lung cell line ( cells cultured from one specimen ) . This was followed by their growth in human <unk> line <unk> . Both P. falciparum and P. vivax have been grown in human liver cells ; partial development of P. ovale in human liver cells was achieved ; and P. malariae was grown in chimpanzee and monkey liver cells . 
 The first successful continuous malaria culture was established in 1976 by William Trager and James B. Jensen , which facilitated research into the molecular biology of the parasite and the development of new drugs . By using increasing volumes of culture medium , <unk> was grown to higher <unk> levels ( above 10 % ) . 
 = = = = Diagnostics = = = = 
 The use of antigen @-@ based malaria rapid diagnostic tests ( RDTs ) emerged in the 1980s . In the twenty @-@ first century Giemsa microscopy and RDTs became the two preferred diagnostic techniques . Malaria RDTs do not require special equipment and offer the potential to extend accurate malaria diagnosis to areas lacking microscopy services . 
 = = = A zoonotic malarial parasite = = = 
 Plasmodium knowlesi has been known since the 1930s in Asian macaque monkeys and as experimentally capable of infecting humans . In 1965 a natural human infection was reported in a U.S. soldier returning from the Pahang Jungle of the Malaysian peninsula . 
 = Casino Royale ( novel ) = 
 Casino Royale is the first novel by the British author Ian Fleming . Published in 1953 , it is the first James Bond book , and it paved the way for a further eleven novels and two short story collections by Fleming , followed by numerous continuation Bond novels by other authors . 
 The story concerns the British secret agent James Bond , gambling at the casino in Royale @-@ les @-@ Eaux to bankrupt Le Chiffre , the treasurer of a French union and a member of the Russian secret service . Bond is supported in his endeavours by Vesper Lynd , a member of his own service , as well as Felix Leiter of the CIA and René Mathis of the French Deuxième Bureau . Fleming used his wartime experiences as a member of the Naval Intelligence Division , and the people he met during his work , to provide plot elements ; the character of Bond also reflected many of Fleming 's personal tastes . Fleming wrote the draft in early 1952 at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica while awaiting his marriage . He was initially unsure whether the work was suitable for publication , but was assured by his friend , the novelist William Plomer , that the novel had promise . 
 Within the spy storyline , Casino Royale deals with themes of Britain 's position in the world , particularly the relationship with the US in light of the defections to the Soviet Union of the British traitors Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean . The book was given broadly positive reviews by critics at the time and sold out in less than a month after its UK release on 13 April 1953 , although US sales upon release a year later were much slower . 
 Since publication Casino Royale has appeared as a comic strip in a British national newspaper , The Daily Express . It has been also adapted for the screen three times : a 1954 episode of the CBS television series Climax ! with Barry Nelson as an American Bond , a 1967 film version with David Niven playing " Sir James Bond " , and a 2006 film in the Eon Productions film series starring Daniel Craig as James Bond . 
 = = Plot = = 
 M , the Head of the British Secret Service , assigns James Bond , 007 , to play against and bankrupt Le Chiffre , the paymaster for a SMERSH @-@ controlled trade union , in a high @-@ stakes baccarat game at the Royale @-@ les @-@ Eaux casino in northern France . As part of Bond 's cover as a rich Jamaican playboy , M also assigns as his companion Vesper Lynd , personal assistant to the Head of Section S ( Soviet Union ) . The CIA and the French Deuxième Bureau also send agents as observers . The game soon turns into an intense confrontation between Le Chiffre and Bond ; Le Chiffre wins the first round , cleaning Bond out of his funds . As Bond contemplates the prospect of reporting his failure to M , the CIA agent , Felix Leiter , gives him an envelope of money and a note : " Marshall Aid . Thirty @-@ two million francs . With the compliments of the USA . " The game continues , despite the attempts of one of Le Chiffre 's minders to kill Bond . Bond eventually wins , taking from Le Chiffre eighty million francs belonging to SMERSH . 
 Desperate to recover the money , Le Chiffre kidnaps Lynd and subjects Bond to brutal torture , threatening to kill them both if he does not get the money back . During the torture session , a SMERSH assassin enters and kills Le Chiffre as punishment for losing the money . The agent does not kill Bond , saying that he has no orders to do so , but cuts a Cyrillic ' Ш ' ( sh ) to signify the <unk> ( Russian for spy ) into Bond 's hand so that future SMERSH agents will be able to identify him as such . 
 Lynd visits Bond every day as he recuperates in hospital , and he gradually realises that he loves her ; he even contemplates leaving the Secret Service to settle down with her . When he is released from hospital they spend time together at a quiet guest house and eventually become lovers . One day they see a mysterious man named Gettler tracking their movements , which greatly distresses Lynd . The following morning , Bond finds that she has committed suicide . She leaves behind a note explaining that she had been working as an unwilling double agent for the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs . SMERSH had kidnapped her lover , a Polish Royal Air Force pilot , who had revealed information about her under torture ; SMERSH then used that information to blackmail her into helping them undermine Bond 's mission , including her own faked kidnapping . She had tried to start a new life with Bond , but upon seeing Gettler — a SMERSH agent — she realised that she would never be free of her tormentors , and that staying with Bond would only put him in danger . Bond informs his service of Lynd 's duplicity , coldly telling his contact , " The bitch is dead now . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Ian Fleming , born in 1908 , was a son of Valentine Fleming , a wealthy banker and MP who died in action on the Western Front in May 1917 . Educated at Eton , Sandhurst and , briefly , the universities of Munich and Geneva , Fleming moved through several jobs before he was recruited by Rear Admiral John Godfrey , the Director of Naval Intelligence , to become his personal assistant . Fleming joined the organisation full @-@ time in August 1939 , with the codename " 17F " , and worked for them throughout the war . Early in 1939 he began an affair with Ann O 'Neill ( née Charteris ) , who was married to the 3rd Baron O 'Neill . 
 In 1942 Fleming attended an Anglo @-@ American intelligence summit in Jamaica and , despite the constant heavy rain during his visit , he decided to live on the island once the war was over . His friend Ivar Bryce helped find a plot of land in Saint Mary Parish where , in 1945 , Fleming had a house built , which he named Goldeneye . The name of the house and estate has many possible sources . Fleming mentioned both his wartime Operation Goldeneye and Carson McCullers ' 1941 novel Reflections in a Golden Eye , which described the use of British naval bases in the Caribbean by the US Navy . 
 Upon Fleming 's demobilisation in May 1945 , he became the Foreign Manager in the Kemsley newspaper group , which at the time owned The Sunday Times . In this role he oversaw the paper 's worldwide network of correspondents . His contract allowed him to take two months holiday every winter in Jamaica . In 1948 Charteris gave birth to Fleming 's daughter , Mary , who was stillborn ; Charteris and Fleming became engaged shortly in 1951 . 
 Fleming had previously mentioned to friends that he wanted to write a spy novel , but it was not until early 1952 , to distract himself from his forthcoming nuptials , that he began to write Casino Royale at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica on 17 February ; he typed out 2 @,@ 000 words in the morning , directly from his own experiences and imagination , and finished work on the manuscript in March 1952 . It was a pattern he retained for future Bond books . In May 1963 he wrote a piece for Books and Bookmen magazine in which he said : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " 
 Back in London , Fleming had his manuscript — which he described as his " dreadful oafish opus " — retyped by Joan Howe , his red @-@ haired secretary at The Times on whom the character Miss Moneypenny was partly based . Clare Blanchard , a former girlfriend , advised him not to publish the book , or at least to do so under a pseudonym . During the book 's final draft stages , Fleming allowed his friend , and later editor , William Plomer to see a copy , and remarked " I really am thoroughly ashamed of it ... after rifling through this muck you will probably never speak to me again , but I have got to take that chance . " Despite this , Plomer thought the book had sufficient promise and sent a copy to the publishing house Jonathan Cape . At first they were unenthusiastic , but were persuaded to publish on the recommendation of Fleming 's older brother , Peter , an established travel writer whose books they managed . 
 Although Fleming provided no dates within his novels , two writers have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom have written books on behalf of Ian Fleming Publications — put the events of Casino Royale in 1951 ; Griswold allows a possible second timeframe and considers the story could have taken place in either May to July 1951 , or May to July 1952 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Plot inspirations = = = 
 Casino Royale was inspired by certain incidents that took place during Fleming 's wartime career at the Naval Intelligence Division ( NID ) , or by events of which he was aware . On a trip to Portugal , en route to the United States , Fleming and the NID Director , Admiral Godfrey , went to the Estoril Casino . Because of Portugal 's neutral status , Estoril 's population had been swelled by spies and agents from the warring regimes . Fleming claimed that while there he was cleaned out by a " chief German agent " at a table playing chemin de fer . Admiral Godfrey told a different story : that Fleming only played Portuguese businessmen , and afterwards fantasised about playing against German agents . 
 The failed attempt to kill Bond while at Royale @-@ Les @-@ Eaux was inspired by Fleming 's knowledge of the attempted assassination of Franz von Papen , Vice @-@ Chancellor of Germany and an ambassador under Hitler . Both Papen and Bond survived their assassination attempts , carried out by Bulgarians , because trees protected them from the blasts . The torture scene in which Bond 's genitals are thrashed while he is strapped to a bottomless chair was a version of a French @-@ Moroccan torture technique , passer à la mandolin , in which the steel string of a mandolin was used to slice in half the testicles of British wartime agents . 
 Fleming also included four references in the novel to " Red Indians " , including twice on last page , which came from a unit of commandos , known as No. 30 Commando or 30 Assault Unit ( 30AU ) , composed of specialist intelligence troops . The unit was Fleming 's idea , and he nicknamed the troops his " Red Indians " , although they disliked the name . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The lead character of Casino Royale is James Bond , an agent of the Secret Service . Fleming initially named the character James Secretan before he appropriated the name of James Bond , author of the ornithology guide , Birds of the West Indies . Fleming explained to the ornithologist 's wife " that this brief , unromantic , Anglo @-@ Saxon and yet very masculine name was just what I needed , and so a second James Bond was born " . He further explained that " When I wrote the first one in 1953 , I wanted Bond to be an extremely dull , uninteresting man to whom things happened ; I wanted him to be a blunt instrument ... when I was casting around for a name for my protagonist I thought by God , [ James Bond ] is the dullest name I ever heard . " 
 Fleming decided that Bond should resemble both the American singer Hoagy Carmichael and himself , and in the novel Lynd remarks that " Bond reminds me rather of Hoagy Carmichael , but there is something cold and ruthless . " According to Andrew Lycett , Fleming 's biographer , " within the first few pages ... [ Fleming ] had introduced most of Bond 's idiosyncrasies and trademarks " , which included his looks , his Bentley and his smoking and drinking habits . The full details of Bond 's martini were kept until chapter seven of the book and Bond eventually named it " The Vesper " , after Lynd . Bond 's order , to be served in a deep champagne goblet , was for " three measures of Gordon 's , one of vodka , half a measure of Kina Lillet . Shake it very well until it 's ice @-@ cold , then add a large thin slice of lemon peel . " 
 Speaking of Bond 's origins , Fleming said that " he was a compound of all the secret agents and commando types I met during the war " , although the author gave many of his own traits to the character . Bond 's tastes are often taken from Fleming 's own , as is some of his behaviour : Fleming used the casino to introduce Bond in his first novel because " skill at gambling and knowledge of how to behave in a casino were seen ... as attributes of a gentleman " . Lycett sees much of Bond 's character as being " wish fulfilment " by Fleming . 
 Bond 's superior , M , was largely based on Godfrey , Fleming 's NID superior officer ; Godfrey was known for his bellicose and irascible temperament . One of the likely models for Le Chiffre was the influential English occultist , astrologer , mystic and ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley , on whose physical features Fleming based Le Chiffre 's . Crowley 's tastes , especially in sado @-@ masochism , were also ascribed to Le Chiffre ; as Fleming 's biographer Henry Chancellor notes , " when Le Chiffre goes to work on Bond 's testicles with a carpet @-@ beater and a carving knife , the sinister figure of Aleister Crowley is there lurking in the background . " 
 = = Style = = 
 Fleming later said of his work , " while thrillers may not be Literature with a capital L , it is possible to write what I can best describe as ' thrillers designed to be read as literature ' " . He used well @-@ known brand names and everyday details to produce a sense of realism , which the author Kingsley Amis called " the Fleming effect " . Amis describes it as " the imaginative use of information , whereby the pervading fantastic nature of Bond 's world ... [ is ] bolted down to some sort of reality , or at least counter @-@ balanced . " Within the text the novelist Raymond Benson — who later wrote a series of Bond novels — identifies what he described as the " Fleming Sweep " , the use of " hooks " at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next . The hooks combine with what the novelist Anthony Burgess calls " a heightened journalistic style " to produce " a speed of narrative , which hustles the reader past each danger point of mockery " . 
 The semiotician and essayist , Umberto Eco , in his 1979 examination of the Bond books , " The Narrative Structure of Ian Fleming " , considered that Fleming " has a rhythm , a polish , a certain sensuous feeling for words . That is not to say that Fleming is an artist ; yet he writes with art . " When examining the passage relating to the death of Le Chiffre , Eco wrote that " there is a ... baroque feeling for the image , a total adaptation off the image without emotional comment , and a use of words that designate things with accuracy " , and he went on to conclude that " Fleming is more literate than he gives one to understand . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Casino Royale was written after , and was heavily influenced by , the Second World War ; Britain was still an imperial power , and the Western and Eastern blocs were engaged in the Cold War . The journalist William Cook observes that with the decline in power of the British Empire , " Bond pandered to Britain 's inflated and increasingly insecure self @-@ image , flattering us with the fantasy that Britannia could still punch above her weight . " The cultural historians Janet Woollacott and Tony Bennett agree , and consider that " Bond embodied the imaginary possibility that England might once again be placed at the centre of world affairs during a period when its world power status was visibly and rapidly declining . " 
 In 1953 parts of central London , including Oxford Street and High Holborn still had uncleared bomb sites and , while sweets had ceased being rationed , coal and other food items were still regulated . According to The Times journalist and historian Ben Macintyre , Bond was " the ideal antidote to Britain 's postwar austerity , rationing and the looming premonition of lost power " . 
 Casino Royale deals with the question of Anglo @-@ American relations , reflecting the real @-@ world central role of the US in the defence of the West . The academic Jeremy Black points to the 1951 defections of two members of MI6 — Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean — to the Soviet Union as having a major impact on how Britain was poorly viewed in US intelligence circles ; Fleming was aware of this tension between the two countries , but he did not focus on it too strongly , and Bond and Leiter 's warm relationship did not reflect the reality of the US @-@ UK relationship . 
 Amis , in his exploration of Bond in The James Bond Dossier , pointed out that Leiter is " such a nonentity as a piece of characterization ... he , the American , takes orders from Bond , the Britisher , and that Bond is constantly doing better than he " . The journalist and author Christopher Hitchens observed that " the central paradox of the classic Bond stories is that , although superficially devoted to the Anglo @-@ American war against communism , they are full of contempt and resentment for America and Americans " . David Seed , in his examination of spy fiction , disagrees , and writes that while Bond beats Le Chiffre , his " activities are constantly supported by American agencies , financing and know @-@ how " . 
 The treachery of Le Chiffre , with the overtones of a fifth column , struck a chord with the largely British readership as Communist influence in the trade unions had been an issue in the press and parliament at the time . Britain had also suffered from defections to the Soviet Union from two MI5 operatives who were part of the Cambridge Five spy ring that betrayed Western secrets to the Soviets . Thus Lycett observes that Casino Royale can be seen as Fleming 's " attempt to reflect the disturbing moral ambiguity of a post @-@ war world that could produce traitors like Burgess and Maclean " . The journalist and writer Matthew Parker observes that with the defections of the two spies so recent to the publication , it was " perhaps the closest Fleming came to a [ John ] le Carré @-@ style spy story " . Chancellor sees the moral ambiguity of the Cold War reflected in the novel . 
 Benson considers the most obvious theme of the novel to be good versus evil . Parker agrees , and highlights a conversation between Bond and <unk> in the chapter titled " The Nature of Evil " , in which Bond says : " By ... [ Le Chiffre 's ] evil existence ... he was creating a norm of badness by which , and by which alone , an opposite norm of goodness could exist . " The subject was also dealt with by the academic Beth Butterfield , in an examination of Bond from an existentialist viewpoint . In light of Bond 's conversation , Butterfield identifies a crisis of confidence in Bond 's character , where he has " moved beyond good and evil " to the point where he does his job not because of principles , but to pursue personal battles . Eco comes to the same conclusion , stating that Bond " abandon [ s ] the treacherous life of moral mediation and of psychological anger , with all the dangers they entail . " 
 Black also identifies a mechanism Fleming uses in Casino Royale — and in subsequent Bond novels — which is to use the evil of his opponents both as a justification of his actions , and as a device to foil their own plans . Black refers to the episode of the attempted assassination of Bond by Bulgarian assassins which results in their own deaths . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 Casino Royale was first released on 13 April 1953 in the UK as a hardback edition by publishers Jonathan Cape , with a cover devised by Fleming . Cape printed 4 @,@ 728 copies of Casino Royale , which sold out in less than a month ; a second print run the same month also sold out , as did a third run of more than 8 @,@ 000 books published in May 1954 . The sales figures were strong enough for Cape to offer Fleming a three @-@ book deal . In April 1955 Pan Books issued a paperback version and sold 41 @,@ 000 copies in the first year . 
 In the US three publishers turned the book down before Macmillan Publishing Co offered Fleming a deal . Casino Royale was published on 23 March 1954 in the US , but sales were poor , totalling only 4 @,@ 000 copies across the entire US during the course of the year . When the novel was released as a US paperback in 1955 , it was re @-@ titled by publisher American Popular Library ; Fleming 's suggestions for a new title , The Double @-@ O Agent and The Deadly Gamble , were disregarded in favour of You Asked for It , but this marketing ploy failed to raise the interest . The Popular Library version also changed Bond 's name , calling him " Jimmy Bond " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Hugh I <unk> <unk> , writing in The Manchester Guardian , thought that Casino Royale was " a first @-@ rate thriller ... with a breathtaking plot " . Although he considered the book to be " schoolboy stuff " , he felt the novel was " galvanised into life by the hard brilliance of the telling " . Alan Ross , writing in The Times Literary Supplement wrote that Casino Royale was " an extremely engaging affair " , and that " the especial charm ... is the high poetry with which he invests the green baize lagoons of the casino tables " . He concluded that the book was " both exciting and extremely civilized " . Reviewing for The Listener , Simon Raven believed that Fleming was a " kind of supersonic John Buchan " , but he was somewhat dismissive of the plot , observing that it is " a brilliant but improbable notion " that includes " a deal of champagne @-@ drinking , bomb @-@ throwing , relentless pitting of wits etc ... with a cretinous love @-@ affair " . Raven also dismissed Bond as an " infantile " creation , but did allow that " Fleming tells a good story with strength and distinction ... his creation of a scene , both visually and emotionally , is of a very high order indeed . " 
 John Betjeman , writing in The Daily Telegraph , considered that " Ian Fleming has discovered the secret of the narrative art ... which is to work up to a climax unrevealed at the end of each chapter . Thus the reader has to go on reading " . Publishers Jonathan Cape included many of the reviews on their advertisements for the book , which appeared in a number of national newspapers ; the reviews included those from The Sunday Times , which concluded that Fleming was " the best new English thriller @-@ writer since [ Eric ] Ambler " and The Observer , which advised their readers : " don 't miss this " . 
 The critic for Time magazine examined Raymond Chandler 's The Long Goodbye alongside Casino Royale ; he praised Casino Royale , saying that " Fleming keeps his incidents and characters spinning through their paces like juggling balls . " The Time reviewer went on to say that " As for Bond , he might be [ Philip ] Marlowe 's younger brother except that he never takes coffee for a bracer , just one large Martini laced with vodka . " 
 Writing for The New York Times , Anthony Boucher wrote that the book belongs " pretty much to the private @-@ eye school " of fiction . He praised the first part , saying that Fleming " manages to make baccarat clear even to one who 's never played it and produced as exciting a gambling sequence as I 've ever read . But then he decides to pad out the book to novel length and leads the weary reader through a set of tough clichés to an ending which surprises nobody save Operative 007 . You should certainly begin this book ; but you might as well stop when the baccarat game is over . " 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1954 CBS paid Ian Fleming $ 1 @,@ 000 to adapt Casino Royale into a one @-@ hour television adventure as part of its Climax ! series . The episode aired live on 21 October 1954 and starred Barry Nelson as secret agent " Card Sense " James ' Jimmy ' Bond and Peter Lorre as Le Chiffre . A brief tutorial on baccarat is given at the beginning of the show by the presenter of the programme , William Lundigan , to enable viewers to understand a game which was not popular in America at the time . For this Americanised version of the story , Bond is an American agent , described as working for " Combined Intelligence " , while the character Leiter from the original novel is British , renamed " Clarence Leiter " . The agent for Station S. , Mathis , does not appear as such ; his surname is given to the leading lady , named Valérie Mathis instead of Vesper Lynd . 
 In March 1955 Ian Fleming sold the film rights of Casino Royale to the producer Gregory Ratoff for $ 6 @,@ 000 . After Ratoff 's death , producer Charles K. Feldman represented Ratoff 's widow and obtained the rights to make a film version . Feldman decided the best way to profit from the film rights was to make a satirical version , which was produced and released in 1967 by Columbia Pictures . The film , which cast David Niven as Bond , was made with five credited directors ( plus one uncredited ) and a cast that included Peter Sellers , Ursula Andress , Orson Welles and Woody Allen . The 1967 version is described by the British Film Institute as " an incoherent all @-@ star comedy " . 
 Casino Royale was the first James Bond novel to be adapted as a daily comic strip ; it was published in The Daily Express and syndicated worldwide . The strip ran from 7 July 1958 to 13 December 1958 , and was written by Anthony Hern and illustrated by John McLusky . To aid The Daily Express in illustrating Bond , Fleming commissioned an artist to create a sketch of what he believed James Bond to look like . McLusky felt that Fleming 's 007 looked too " outdated " and " pre @-@ war " and changed Bond to give him a more masculine look . 
 Following the 1967 adaptation , the rights to the film remained with Columbia Films until 1989 when the studio , and the rights to their intellectual property portfolio was acquired by the Japanese company Sony . In 1999 , following legal action between Sony Pictures Entertainment and MGM / UA , Sony traded the rights to Casino Royale for MGM 's partial @-@ rights to Spider @-@ Man . This led to Eon Productions making the 2006 film Casino Royale . The film stars Daniel Craig as Bond , supported by Eva Green as Vesper Lynd and Mads Mikkelsen as Le Chiffre ; Judi Dench returned for her fifth Bond film as Bond 's superior , M. Casino Royale is a reboot , showing Bond at the beginning of his career as a 00 @-@ agent and overall stays true to the original novel . 
 A direct graphic novel adaptation of Casino Royale is planned for hardcover release on 22 November 2016 , to be published by Dynamite Entertainment as a standalone installment ( separate from their ongoing James Bond series ) , adapted by Van Jensen and illustrated by Matthew Southworth . 
 = Mangrove whipray = 
 The mangrove whipray or whitetail stingray ( Himantura granulata ) is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae . It is widely distributed in the Indo @-@ Pacific region from the Red Sea to northern Australia and Micronesia . A benthic inhabitant of shallow inshore waters , juvenile mangrove whiprays favor mangrove and estuarine habitats , while adults favor sandy to rocky areas in lagoons and coral reefs . This species can be identified by its thick , oval pectoral fin disc that is dark gray above with numerous white flecks , and by its relatively short , whip @-@ like tail that is white past the stinging spine . It grows up to 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) across . 
 Solitary in nature , the mangrove whipray preys mainly on small , bottom @-@ dwelling bony fishes and invertebrates . It is , like other stingrays , aplacental viviparous , with the females nourishing their unborn young via histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . The mangrove whipray is caught for its meat , skin , and cartilage across much of its range . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed it as Near Threatened globally and as Endangered in Southeast Asia , where its population has declined substantially due to intensive artisanal and commercial fisheries as well as widespread habitat degradation . In particular , juvenile rays have been disproportionately targeted by fishers and affected by the large @-@ scale destruction of mangrove forests . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Australian zoologist William John Macleay published the first scientific account of the mangrove whipray , a brief description of an immature female 86 cm ( 34 in ) long caught off Port Moresby , Papua New Guinea , in an 1883 volume of Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales . He named it Trygon granulata , as he noted that the specimen 's head and back were " covered with small granules " . In 1928 , Gilbert Percy Whitley moved this species to the genus Himantura . It belongs to the <unk> species complex , along with H. chaophraya , H. <unk> , H. <unk> , H. <unk> , and H. <unk> . Other common names for this ray include mangrove ray , whitetail whipray , and Macleay 's coachwhip ray . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pectoral fin disc of the mangrove whipray is very thick and oval in shape , measuring 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 0 times as wide as long . The anterior margins of the disc are nearly straight and converge at a broad angle on the snout tip . The medium @-@ sized , widely spaced eyes are immediately followed by the spiracles . Between the long , thin nostrils is a short , broad curtain of skin with a finely fringed posterior margin . The lower jaw is bow @-@ shaped , and there are 0 – 5 papillae across the floor of the mouth . The teeth are arranged in a quincunx pattern and number 40 – 50 rows in the upper jaw and 38 – 50 rows in the lower jaw . There are five pairs of gill slits beneath the disc . The pelvic fins are small and narrow . 
 The tail is thick at the base and measures 1 @.@ 5 – 2 times longer than the disc width . One or two dorsally positioned serrated stinging spines are located in the first third of the tail . Past the sting , the tail becomes thin and whip @-@ like , without fin folds . The upper surface of the body and tail are roughened by tiny dermal denticles , which become larger towards the midline of the back and tail . In addition , one or two irregular rows of thorns are present along the dorsal midline from the head to the sting . The mangrove whipray is dark brown to gray above with many white dots and flecks , which become denser with increasing size . The dark coloration is due to a layer of mucus , without which the body is light orange @-@ gray . The underside is white with small dark spots towards the disc margin . The tail abruptly becomes white past the sting . This species grows to 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) across and over 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) long . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Although uncommon , the mangrove whipray seems to be widely distributed in the Indo @-@ Pacific ; it has been reported from the Red Sea , South Asia including the Maldives and the Andaman Islands , the Gulf of Thailand , the Malay Archipelago ( except Sumatra ) , New Guinea and northern Australia , and various islands including Guam , Fiji , the Solomon Islands , and Micronesia . This bottom @-@ dwelling species typically inhabits shallow water close to shore , though adults have also been recorded offshore to at least a depth of 85 m ( 279 ft ) . Juvenile rays frequent brackish habitats such as mangroves and estuaries . By contrast , adults prefer areas of sand , sand and rock rubble , or hard bottom , and are often found in lagoons or on coral reefs . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Unlike many of its relatives , the mangrove whipray is reportedly solitary in nature . It is relatively inactive during the day , often resting half @-@ buried in sand or atop coral heads , and actively forages for food at night . The electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini of this species have a sensitivity of 4 nV / cm and an effective range of 25 cm ( 10 in ) , enabling it to locate buried prey . Juveniles feed mainly on small crustaceans , including prawns and crabs . Adults prey on small benthic bony fishes , including <unk> , gobies , blennies , wrasses , and damselfishes , as well as invertebrates , including peanut worms , crabs , octopuses , and bivalves . As in all stingrays , the mangrove whipray is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos being sustained by nutrient @-@ rich histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . The newborns measure 14 – 28 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 – 11 @.@ 0 in ) across , and males reach sexual maturity at 55 – 65 cm ( 22 – 26 in ) across . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworm Rhinebothrium <unk> , and another undescribed species in the same genus . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The mangrove whipray is capable of injuring a human with its venomous sting . It is occasionally caught in tangle nets and bottom trawls , and to a lesser extent on longlines ; it is marketed for its meat , skin , and cartilage . Because of its inshore habitat preferences , this naturally uncommon species is highly susceptible to intensive artisanal and commercial fishing occurring across much of its range . In Southeast Asia , immature rays have been particularly affected by local fishing , as well as by habitat degradation from the widespread loss of mangrove forests . Additionally , the numbers of this species in the Arafura Sea have dropped significantly due to an Indonesian gillnet fishery targeting wedgefishes ( Rhynchobatus ) , which involves over 600 vessels and has been increasingly operating illegally in Australian waters . These factors have led to an inferred decline of the Southeast Asian population by over 50 % , leading the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) to give it a regional assessment of Endangered . The mangrove whipray is minimally threatened off northern Australia , where it is caught incidentally by the Northern Prawn Fishery ( NPF ) but only in small numbers following the mandatory adoption of Turtle Exclusion Devices ( TEDs ) . As a result , the IUCN assessment for the Australian population is Least Concern . Globally , the IUCN has listed this species as Near Threatened . 
 = John N. Shive = 
 John Northrup Shive ( February 22 , 1913 – June 1 , 1984 ) was an American physicist and inventor . He made notable contributions in electronic engineering and solid @-@ state physics during the early days of transistor development at Bell Laboratories . In particular , he produced experimental evidence that holes could diffuse through bulk germanium and not just along the surface as previously thought . This paved the way from Bardeen and Brattain 's point contact transistor to Shockley 's more robust junction transistor . Shive is best known for inventing the <unk> in 1948 , a device that combines the sensitivity to light of a <unk> and the current gain of a transistor , and for the Shive wave machine in 1959 , an educational apparatus used to illustrate wave motion . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 John N. Shive was born in Baltimore , Maryland , on February 22 , 1913 , and grew up in New Jersey . Shive graduated from Rutgers University with a B.S. in physics and chemistry in 1934 . He also earned a Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins University , submitting a dissertation Practice and theory of the modulation of Geiger counters in 1939 . Shive became a fellow of the American Physical Society , a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science , and was a member of the Phi Beta Kappa and Sigma Xi fraternities . 
 = = Scientific career = = 
 John N. Shive joined Bell Telephone Laboratories in 1939 . Shive worked initially on physical research , device development and later on education and training . After retirement from industry , he worked as an adjunct professor of physics at Georgian Court University . The spherical sundial on campus , in front of the bookstore and next to the library , is dedicated to his memory for his lifelong desire and service toward improving the teaching of physics . 
 = = = Transistor development = = = 
 On January 30 , 1948 Shive discovered that gold @-@ plated tungsten point contacts on a p @-@ type layer of germanium grown on an n @-@ type substrate gave " a terrific triode effect . " On February 13 of the same year he also discovered that a transistor consisting of bronze contacts on the surface of an n @-@ type substrate without a p @-@ layer gave " gains up to 40 × in power ! " He leveraged this discovery to build a point contact transistor with bronze contacts on the front and back of thin wedge of germanium , proving that holes could diffuse through bulk germanium and not just along the surface as previously thought . This confirmed William Shockley 's idea that it should be possible to build a junction transistor , an idea that hitherto he had kept secret from the rest of the team . Shockley later admitted that the workings of the team were " mixture of cooperation and competition . " He also admitted that he kept some of own work secret until his " hand was forced " by Shive 's 1948 advance . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 1948 Shive invented the <unk> that used a beam of light , instead of a wire , as the emitter of a point contact transistor , generating holes that flow to the collector . It wasn 't announced until 1950 . This invention embodies the modern day nationwide direct distance dialing system . 
 = = = Shive wave machine = = = 
 Shive was a gifted lecturer and became Director of Education & Training at Bell Telephone Laboratories . In this role he was responsible for curriculum and administration of educational programs provided to employees of Bell Laboratories . 
 In this new role , he invented the Shive wave machine ( also known as the Shive wave generator ) . The wave generator illustrates wave motion using a series of steel rods joined by a thin torsion wire . The torsion wire transmits energy from one rod to the next . The high moment of inertia of each rod ensures the wave takes several seconds to traverse the entire series of rods , making the dynamics easily visible . The motion is analogous to high @-@ frequency waves that are invisible to the human eye , such as electromagnetic waves on a transmission line . The wave generator could illustrate wave reflection , standing waves , resonance , partial reflection and impedance matching . Shive made two educations films in which he demonstrated the machine , Simple Waves and Similarities in Wave Behavior , and wrote a book with the same name as the latter . Exploratorium Exhibit Services manufactures a large scale version of the machine for use in science museums . 
 = = = Patents = = = 
 Shive held several patents including Selenium rectifier and method of making it , Directly heated thermocouple , <unk> translating device , Selenium rectifier including tellurium and method of making it , Apparatus for and method of treating selenium rectifiers , Semiconductor photoelectric device , Conditioning of semiconductor translators , Semiconductor amplifier , and Alternating gate current . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Shive authored three books during his career , beginning with The Properties , Physics , and Design of Semiconductor Devices ( 1959 ) , a book about semiconductor devices . This was followed by Similarities of Wave Behavior ( 1961 ) , a book designed to help college professors teach students about waves using the machine he invented . His last book , Similarities in Physics ( 1982 ) , was coauthored with Robert L. Weber . He was also one of the editors of Transistor Technology , Volume 1 . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 John N. Shive was a fellow of the American Physical Society and a Senior Member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers . He was also a chairman of the Advisory Committee on the Pre @-@ College Physics Project of the American Institute of Physics . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Shive was married to Helen Shive . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 J. N. Shive , Physical Review , vol . 75 , p . 318 , 1949 . 
 J. N. Shive , Physical Review , vol . 75 , p . 689 , 1949 . 
 J. A. Becker and J. N. Shive , " The Transistor – A New Semiconductor Amplifier , " The Electrical Engineer . , vol 68 , no . 3 , pp. 215 – 221 , Mar. 1949 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1109 / <unk> 
 J. N. Shive , " The Properties of Germanium <unk> " , <unk> , vol . 43 , no . 4 , pp. 239 – 243 , 1953 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1364 / <unk> 
 John N. Shive and Robert L. Weber , Similarities in Physics . New York , NY : Wiley , 1982 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 = Moondance = 
 Moondance is the third studio album by Northern Irish singer @-@ songwriter Van Morrison . After recording his commercially unsuccessful 1968 album Astral Weeks , Morrison moved with his wife to an artistic hamlet in upstate New York and began writing songs for Moondance . There , he met the musicians he would record the album with at New York City 's A & R Studios in 1969 . 
 Morrison abandoned the abstract folk compositions of Astral Weeks in favor of more formally composed songs on Moondance , which he wrote and produced himself . Its lively rhythm and blues music was the style he would become most known for in his career . The music incorporated soul , jazz , pop , and Irish folk sounds into ballads and songs about finding spiritual renewal and redemption in worldly matters such as nature , music , and romantic love . 
 After Moondance was released in 1970 by Warner Bros. Records , it became both a critical and commercial success , helping establish Morrison as a major artist in popular music . It has since been cited by critics as one of the greatest albums of all time . In 2013 , the album 's remastered deluxe edition was released to similar acclaim . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After leaving the rock band Them , Morrison met record producer Bert Berns in New York City and recorded his first solo single , " Brown Eyed Girl " , in 1967 . When it became a hit , Morrison was offered a recording contract from Warner Bros. Records and recorded his first album for the label , Astral Weeks , in 1968 . Although it was later acclaimed by critics , its collection of lengthy , acoustic , and revelatory folk @-@ jazz songs was not well received by consumers at the time and the album proved to be a commercial failure . 
 After recording Astral Weeks , Morrison moved with his wife to a home on a mountain top in the Catskills near Woodstock , a hamlet in upstate New York with an artistic community . Because of the album 's poor sales figures , Morrison wanted to produce a third record that would be more accessible and appealing to listeners : " I make albums primarily to sell them and if I get too far out a lot of people can 't relate to it . I had to forget about the artistic thing because it didn 't make sense on a practical level . One has to live . " He began writing songs for Moondance in July 1969 . The musicians who went on to record the album with Morrison were recruited from nearby . 
 Morrison recorded Moondance from August to November 1969 . He entered A & R Studios in New York City with only the basic song structures written down and the songs ' arrangements in his memory , developing the compositions throughout the album 's recording . Without any musical charts , he received help with developing the music from band members Jef Labes , Jack Schroer , and Collin Tilton . According to biographer Ritchie Yorke , all of the " tasteful frills " were generated spontaneously and developed at the studio . Most of Morrison 's vocals were recorded live , although he later said that he would have preferred to cut the entire album live . 
 Moondance was the first album where he was listed as producer . He later said of the role , " No one knew what I was looking for except me , so I just did it . " Lewis Merenstein , the album 's executive producer , had brought in Richard Davis , Jay Berliner , and Warren Smith , Jr. from Astral Weeks for the first recording session , but Morrison , according to John Platania , " sort of manipulated the situation " and " got rid of them all . For some reason he didn 't want those musicians . " According to Shelly <unk> , the album 's recording engineer , Morrison was " very quiet and really introverted " during the sessions , only recalling when Morrison asked him to put " more bottom on his voice " while being recorded . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 For Moondance , Morrison abandoned the abstract folk compositions of Astral Weeks in favor of a rhythm and blues sound and more formally composed songs , with more distinct arrangements that included a horn section and chorus of singers as an accompaniment . According to Paul Evans in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 1992 ) , the album 's " horn @-@ driven , bass @-@ heavy " music featured upbeat soul music , elements of jazz , and ballads . Rob Sheffield said it marked the appearance of the musical style he would become known for , a " mellow , piano @-@ based " fusion of jazz , pop , and Irish folk styles . In the opinion of Robert Christgau , the album showed Morrison integrating his style of Irish poetry into popular song structure while expanding on his " folk @-@ jazz swing " with lively brass instruments , innovative hooks , and a strong backbeat . 
 Morrison 's lyrics dealt with themes of spiritual renewal and redemption . Unlike his discursive , stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness narratives on Astral Weeks , Moondance balanced his spiritual ideas with more worldly subject matter , which biographer Johnny Rogan felt offered the record a quality of " earthiness " . As the " yang to Astral Weeks ' yin " , AllMusic critic Jason Ankeny believed it " retains the previous album 's deeply spiritual thrust but transcends its bleak , cathartic intensity " by rejoicing in " natural wonder " . According to Christgau , the essence of Morrison 's spirit was , much like the African @-@ American music that inspired him , " mortal and immortal simultaneously : this is a man who gets stoned on a drink of water and urges us to turn up our radios all the way into the mystic . " 
 The opening song , " And It Stoned Me " , according to the singer , depicts a true tale of a day in his childhood . The lyrics show that the setting of the song is rural , including references to a county fair and mountain stream . The title song is mostly acoustic but also includes electric bass and piano , guitar , saxophone , and a flute over @-@ dub played softly behind Morrison 's voice , which imitates a saxophone towards the song 's end . Musicologist Brian Hinton says , " This is a rock musician singing jazz not a jazz singer though the music itself has a jazz swing . " " Crazy Love " was recorded with Morrison 's voice so close to the microphone that it captured the click of Morrison 's tongue hitting the roof of his mouth as he sang . He sings in falsetto , producing what Hinton felt was a sense of intense intimacy , with the backing of a female chorus . " Caravan " is about gypsy life , which fascinated Morrison , and also about the radio . The song opens with Jef Labes trilling on piano , the drum kit then comes in , whilst Morrison sings the line " And the caravan is on its way " . The non @-@ lexical <unk> " la la la la , la la la " is sung by him and the band as the song 's chorus . John Platania then improvises around Morrison 's voice with softly plucked guitar notes . Journalist and Morrison biographer Erik Hage called the song " a joyful celebration of communal spirit , the music of radio , and romantic love " . 
 According to Morrison , " Into the Mystic " was originally called " Into the Misty " but as he had thought there was " an ethereal feeling to it " he changed the name . Morrison has also said that some of the songs lyrics could have more than one meaning : " I was born before the Wind " could also be " I was borne before the wind " as well as " Also younger than the son , Ere the bonny boat was one " being " All so younger than the son , Ere the bonny boat was won " . The song includes Collin Tilton 's tenor saxophone imitating a foghorn blowing , and ends with the words " Too Late to Stop Now " – a phrase he would famously use to conclude concert endings in the 1970s . After a dynamic stop @-@ start ending to " Cyprus Avenue " , Morrison would bellow this phrase and then stalk from the stage . This phrase also served as the title to his acclaimed 1974 live album . These lyrics have also been used at the end of " Friday 's Child " in his concerts . According to Evans , " Into the Mystic " reconciles Moondance 's R & B style with the more orchestrated folk music of Astral Weeks , along with " the complimentary sides of Morrison 's psyche " . 
 " Come Running " was described by Morrison as " a very light type of song . It 's not too heavy ; it 's just a happy @-@ go @-@ lucky song . " The song starts with Jef Labes improvising on piano . The two saxophones then split apart , playing different rhythms during the chorus , and come back together for " You gotta rainbow if you run to me " . According to Hinton , " These Dreams of You " manages to be simultaneously accusatory and reassuring . The lyrics cover such dream sequences as Ray Charles being shot down , paying dues in Canada , and " his angel from above " cheating while playing cards in the dark , slapping him in the face , ignoring his cries , and walking out on him . Morrison said he was inspired to write " Brand New Day " after hearing The Band on FM radio playing either " The Weight " or " I Shall Be Released " : " I looked up at the sky and the sun started to shine and all of a sudden the song just came through my head . I started to write it down , right from ' When all the dark clouds roll away ' . " Ritchie Yorke quoted Morrison as saying in 1973 that " Brand New Day " was the song that worked best to his ear and the one with which he felt most in touch . 
 " Everyone " opens with Jef Labes ' clavinet in 6 / 8 time . A flute comes in , playing the melody after Morrison has sung four lines , with Jack Schroer playing the harmony underneath on soprano saxophone . Although Morrison says the song is just a song of hope , Hinton says its lyrics suggest a more troubled meaning , as 1969 was the year in which The Troubles broke out in Belfast . The album 's closing song , " Glad Tidings " , has a bouncy beat but the lyrics , like " Into the Mystic " , remain largely impenetrable , according to Hinton . In his opinion , " the opening line and closing line , ' and they 'll lay you down low and easy ' , could be either about murder or an act of love . " According to biographer Erik Hage , " ' Glad Tidings ' was a premonition of the future , as for the next four decades , Morrison would continue to use a song here and there to vent about the evils of the music industry and the world of celebrity . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Moondance was released by Warner Bros. on 27 January 1970 in the United Kingdom and on 28 February 1970 in the United States . Its original vinyl release was packaged with an album cover that folded out revealing A Fable , the short tale written by Morrison 's then @-@ wife Janet Planet , about a young man and his gifts . The cover photo was taken by Elliot Landy , the official 1969 Woodstock Festival photographer . After the commercial failure of Astral Weeks , Moondance was seen by contemporary music journalists as a record that redeemed Morrison , establishing him as a young , commercially successful , and artistically independent singer @-@ songwriter with great promise . The album reached the top 30 of the American albums chart , and although it never topped the charts , it sold continuously for the next forty years of its release , particularly after its digitally remastered reissue in 1990 . In 1996 , it was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , having shipped three million copies in the US . 
 When Moondance was released , it received widespread acclaim from critics . Greil Marcus and Lester Bangs jointly reviewed the album in Rolling Stone , hailing it as a work of " musical invention and lyrical confidence ; the strong moods of ' Into the Mystic ' and the fine , epic brilliance of ' Caravan ' will carry it past many good records we 'll forget in the next few years . " In the San Francisco Chronicle , Ralph J. Gleason wrote of Morrison 's singing as a focal point of praise : " He wails as the jazz musicians speak of wailing , as the gypsies , as the Gaels and the old folks in every culture speak of it . He gets a quality of intensity in that wail which really hooks your mind , carries you along with his voice as it rises and falls in long , soaring lines . " Jon Landau found his vocals overwhelming : " Things fell into place so perfectly I wished there was more room to breathe . Morrison has a great voice and on Moondance he found a home for it . " Robert Christgau , writing for The Village Voice , argued that he had finally fulfilled his potential : " Forget Astral <unk> is a brilliant , catchy , poetic , and completely successful LP . " 
 According to Acclaimed Music , Moondance is the 102nd most ranked record in critics ' all @-@ time lists . In 1978 , it was voted the 22nd best album of all time in Paul Gambaccini 's poll of 50 prominent American and English rock critics . Christgau , one of the critics polled , named it the 7th best album of the 1970s in The Village Voice the following year . In a retrospective review , Nick Butler from Sputnikmusic cited it as the peak of Morrison 's career and " maybe of non @-@ American soul in general " , while Spin called it " the great white soul album " in an essay accompanying the magazine 's 1989 list of the all @-@ time 25 greatest albums , in which Moondance was ranked 21st . In 1999 , the album was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame , and in 2003 , it was placed at number 65 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . Time included the record in its 2006 list of " The All @-@ Time 100 Albums " , and the following year , the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame named it as one of their " Definitive 200 " albums , ranking it 72nd . In 2009 , Hot Press polled numerous Irish recording artists and bands , who voted Moondance the 11th best Irish album of all time . 
 On 22 October 2013 , Warner Bros. released a deluxe edition of Moondance . It featured a newly remastered version of the original album , three CDs with previously unreleased music from the sessions , and a Blu @-@ ray disc with high @-@ resolution , surround sound audio of the original album . It was packaged in a linen @-@ wrapped folio and a booklet with liner notes written by music journalist Alan Light and Elliot Scheiner , one of the album 's original engineers . The deluxe edition was met with highly positive reviews from critics , including Record Collector , who called it an aural " marvel " , and The Independent , who said the remastering " strips away centuries of digital compression and makes the music sound as if you ’ ve never heard it properly " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Van Morrison . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Judy Clay – backing vocals ( tracks 3 and 8 ) 
 Emily Houston – backing vocals ( tracks 3 and 8 ) 
 John Klingberg – bass 
 Jef Labes – organ , piano , clavinet 
 Gary Mallaber – drums , vibraphone 
 Guy Masson – conga 
 Van Morrison – vocals , guitar , rhythm guitar , tambourine , harmonica , producer 
 John Platania – guitar , rhythm guitar 
 Jack Schroer – alto and soprano saxophones 
 Collin Tilton – flute , tenor saxophone 
 Jackie Verdell – backing vocals ( tracks 3 and 8 ) 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Bob Cato – designer 
 Steve Friedberg – engineer 
 Elliot Landy – photographer 
 Tony May – engineer 
 Lewis Merenstein – executive producer 
 Neil Schwartz – engineer 
 Elliot Scheiner – engineer 
