 = = = Conflict with the House of Valois = = = 
 In 1328 Charles IV of France died without a male heir . Queen Isabella made a claim to throne of France on behalf of her son Edward on the grounds that he was a matrilineal grandson of Philip IV of France . However , the precedents set by Philip V 's succession over his niece Joan II of Navarre and Charles IV 's succession over his nieces meant that the senior grandson of Philip III in the male line , Phillip of Valois , became king . Not yet in power , Edward paid homage to Phillip as Duke of Aquitaine . 
 In 1337 Phillip confiscated Aquitaine and Ponthieu from Edward alleging he was harbouring Phillip ’ s fugitive cousin and enemy , Robert of Artois . In response , Edward proclaimed himself king of France to encourage the Flemish to rise in open rebellion against the French king . The conflict , later known as the Hundred Years ' War , included a significant English naval victory at the Battle of Sluys , and a victory on land at Crécy , leaving Edward free to capture the important port of Calais . A subsequent victory against Scotland at the Battle of Neville 's Cross resulted in the capture of David II and reduced the threat from Scotland . The Black Death brought a halt to Edward 's campaigns by killing perhaps a third of his subjects . The only Plantagenet known to have died from the Black Death was Edward III 's daughter Joan in Bordeaux . 
 Edward , the Black Prince resumed the war with destructive chevauchées starting from Bordeaux . His army was caught by a much larger French force at Poitiers , but the ensuing battle was a decisive English victory resulting in the capture of John II of France . John agreed a treaty promising the French would pay a four million écus ransom . The subsequent Treaty of Brétigny was demonstrably popular in England , where it was both ratified in parliament and celebrated with great ceremony . To reach agreement , clauses were removed that would have had Edward renounce his claim to the French crown in return for territory in Aquitaine and the town of Calais . These were entered in another agreement to be effected only after the transfer of territory by November 1361 but both sides prevaricated over their commitments for the following nine years . Hostages from the Valois family were held in London while John returned to France to raise his ransom . Edward had restored the lands of the former Angevin Empire holding Normandy , Brittany , Anjou , Maine and the coastline from Flanders to Spain . When the hostages escaped back to France , John was horrified that his word had been broken and returned to England , where he eventually died . 
 Fighting in the Hundred Years ' War spilled from the French and Plantagenet lands into surrounding realms , including the dynastic conflict in Castile between Peter of Castile and Henry II of Castile . The Black Prince allied himself with Peter , defeating Henry at the Battle of Nájera . Edward and Peter fell out when Peter was unable to reimburse Edward ’ s military expenses leaving him bankrupt . The Plantagenets continued to interfere , and John of Gaunt , 1st Duke of Lancaster , the Black Prince 's brother , married Peter 's daughter Constance , claiming the Crown of Castile in her name . He invaded with an army of 5000 men . Fighting was inconclusive before Gaunt agreed a treaty with King Juan of Castile . Terms of the treaty included the marriage of John of Gaunt 's daughter Katherine to Juan 's son , Enrique . 
 Charles V of France maintained the terms of the treaty of Brétigny but encouraged others in Aquitaine to challenge the authority of the Plantagenets in Aquitaine . The prince , who had suffered a debilitating illness for nearly a decade which often restricted his movement to being carried in a litter , returned to England , where he soon died . John of Gaunt assumed leadership in France with limited success , and peace negotiations over several years were inconclusive . 
 = = = Descendants of Edward III = = = 
 The marriage of Edward III and Philippa of Hainault produced thirteen children and thirty @-@ two grandchildren : 
 Edward ( 1330 – 1376 ) — married his cousin Joan of Kent , a granddaughter of Edward I , with whom he had two sons : 
 Edward ( 1365 – 1371 / 2 ) 
 Richard ( 1367 – 1400 ) 
 Isabella ( 1332 – 1382 ) — married Enguerrand II , Lord of Coucy , and had two daughters : 
 Marie 
 Philippa 
 Joan ( 1335 – 1348 ) 
 William ( 1334 / 6 – 1337 ) 
 Lionel ( 1338 – 1368 ) — had one daughter with Elizabeth de Burgh : 
 Philippa ( 1355 – 1378 / 81 ) — through Philippa , the House of York , by cognatic kinship , asserted that its claim to the throne was superior to the House of Lancaster 's . Philippa 's granddaughter and heir , Anne Mortimer , married Richard of Conisburgh , 3rd Earl of Cambridge , the Duke of York 's heir . The earls of Northumberland and Clifford , significant supporters of the Lancasters during the Wars of the Roses , were descendants of Philippa through her other daughter , Elizabeth Mortimer . 
 John of Gaunt ( 1340 – 1399 ) — married Blanche of Lancaster , the heiress to the duchy of Lancaster and a direct descendent of Henry III , and had six children with her : 
 Philippa ( 1360 – 1415 ) — married John I of Portugal . 
 John ( c . 1362 / 1364 ) — died as an infant . 
 Elizabeth ( 1364 – 1426 ) — married John Hastings , 3rd Earl of Pembroke , John Holland , 1st Duke of Exeter , and John Cornwall , 1st Baron Fanhope , respectively . 
 Edward of Lancaster ( 1365 – 1365 ) 
 John of Lancaster ( 1366 ) — died as an infant . 
 Henry ( 1367 – 1413 ) 
 Isabella of Lancaster ( b . 1368 ) — died as a child . 
 After Blanche 's death in 1369 , John married Constance of Castile , trying unsuccessfully to obtain the throne of Castile . The marriage produced two children : 
 Catherine of Lancaster ( 1372 – 1418 ) — married Henry III of Castile , with whom she was a great @-@ grandmother of Catherine of Aragon , first wife of Henry VIII of England . 
 John ( 1374 – 1375 ) 
 Constance died in 1394 , after which John married Katherine Swynford on 13 January 1396 . Their four children were born before they married . The pope legitimised them in 1396 , as did Richard II by charter , on the condition that their children could not ascend the throne : 
 John ( c . 1371 / 1372 – 1410 ) — grandfather of Margaret Beaufort , Henry VII 's mother . 
 Henry ( 1375 – 1447 ) 
 Thomas ( 1377 – 1427 ) 
 Joan ( 1379 – 1440 ) — Joan 's son , Richard Neville , 5th Earl of Salisbury , and her grandson , Richard Neville , 16th Earl of Warwick , were leading supporters of the House of York . 
 Edmund ( 1341 – 1402 ) — founder of the House of York . He had three children with Isabella of Castile : 
 Edward ( 1373 – 1415 ) — killed at the Battle of Agincourt . 
 Constance ( 1374 – 1416 ) 
 Richard — ( 1375 – 1415 ) 
 Blanche ( 1342 ) — died as a child . 
 Mary of Waltham ( 1344 – 1362 ) — married John V , Duke of Brittany . No issue . 
 Margaret ( 1346 – 1361 ) — married John Hastings , 2nd Earl of Pembroke . No issue . 
 Joan ( b . 1351 ) 
 Thomas ( 1355 – 1397 ) — murdered or executed for treason by order of Richard II ; his daughter , Anne , married Edmund Stafford . 
 Edward ’ s long reign had forged a new national identity , reinforced by Middle English beginning to establish itself as the spoken and written language of government . As a result he is considered by many historians in cultural respects the first ‘ English ’ post @-@ conquest ruler . 
 = = = Demise of the main line = = = 
 The Black Prince 's ten @-@ year @-@ old son succeeded as Richard II of England on the death of his grandfather , nominally exercising all the powers of kingship supported by various councils . His government levied poll taxes to finance military campaigns and combined with the poor state of the economy resulted in the Peasants ' Revolt in 1381 , followed by brutal reprisals against the rebels . 
 The king 's uncle Thomas of Woodstock , 1st Duke of Gloucester , Richard FitzAlan , 11th Earl of Arundel , and Thomas de Beauchamp , 12th Earl of Warwick , became known as the Lords Appellant when they sought to impeach five of the king 's favourites and restrain what was increasingly seen as tyrannical and capricious rule . Later they were joined by Henry Bolingbroke , the son and heir of John of Gaunt , and Thomas de Mowbray , 1st Duke of Norfolk . Initially , they were successful in establishing a commission to govern England for one year , but they were forced to rebel against Richard , defeating an army under Robert de Vere , Earl of Oxford , at the skirmish of Radcot Bridge . 
 Richard was reduced to a figurehead with little power . As a result of the Merciless Parliament , de Vere and Michael de la Pole , 1st Earl of Suffolk , who had fled abroad , were sentenced to death in their absence . Alexander Neville , Archbishop of York , had all his possessions confiscated . Several of Richard 's council were executed . On John of Gaunt 's return from Spain , Richard was able to re @-@ establish his power , having Gloucester murdered in captivity in Calais . Warwick was stripped of his title . Bolingbroke and Mowbray were exiled . 
 When John of Gaunt died in 1399 , Richard disinherited John 's son , Henry , who invaded England in response with a small force that quickly grew in numbers . Meeting little resistance , Henry deposed Richard to have himself crowned Henry IV of England . Richard died in captivity early the next year , probably murdered , bringing an end to the main Plantagenet line . None of Henry 's heirs were free from challenge on the grounds of not being the true heir of Richard II and that the Lancastrian dynasty had gained the throne by an act of usurpation . 
 = = House of Lancaster = = 
 Henry married his Plantagenet cousin Mary de Bohun , who was paternally descended from Edward I and maternally from Edmund Crouchback . They had seven children : 
 Edward ( b . 1382 ; died as a child ) — buried at Monmouth Castle , Monmouth . 
 Henry ( 1386 – 1422 ) — had one son : 
 Henry ( 1421 – 1471 ) — also had one son : 
 Edward ( 1453 – 1471 ) 
 Thomas ( 1387 – 1421 ) — killed at the Battle of Baugé . His marriage to Margaret Holland proved childless ; he had an illegitimate son named John , also known as the Bastard of Clarence . 
 John ( 1389 – 1435 ) — had two childless marriages : to Anne of Burgundy , daughter of John the Fearless , and Jacquetta of Luxembourg . John had an illegitimate son and daughter , named Richard and Mary , respectively . 
 Humphrey ( 1390 – 1447 ) — died under suspicious circumstances while imprisoned for treason against Henry VI ; his death may have been the result of a stroke . 
 Blanche ( 1392 – 1409 ) — married Louis III , Count Palatine of the Rhine , in 1402 . 
 Philippa ( 1394 – 1430 ) — married Eric of Pomerania , king of Denmark , Norway and Sweden , in 1406 . 
 Henry went to convoluted legal means to justify his succession . Many Lancastrians asserted that his mother had had legitimate rights through her descent from Edmund Crouchback , who it was claimed was the elder son of Henry III of England , set aside due to deformity . As the grandson of Lionel of Antwerp , 1st Duke of Clarence , Edmund Mortimer , Earl of March , was the heir presumptive to Richard II and Henry used multiple rationales stressing his Plantagenet descent , divine grace , powerful friends , and the Richard 's misgovernment . In fact Mortimer never showed interest in the throne . The later marriage of his granddaughter Anne to Richard 's son consolidated his descendants ' claim to the throne with that of the more junior House of York . Henry planned to resume war with France , but was plagued with financial problems , declining health and frequent rebellions . He defeated a Scottish invasion , a serious rebellion by Henry Percy , 1st Earl of Northumberland in the North and Owain Glyndŵr 's rebellion in Wales . Many saw it as a punishment from God when Henry was later struck down with unknown but chronic illnesses . 
 Henry IV died in 1413 . His son and successor , Henry V of England , aware that Charles VI of France 's mental illness had caused instability in France , invaded to assert the Plantagenet claims and won a near total victory over the French at the Battle of Agincourt . In subsequent years Henry recaptured much of Normandy and secured marriage to Catherine of Valois . The resulting Treaty of Troyes stated that Henry 's heirs would inherit the throne of France , but conflict continued with the Dauphin . When Henry died in 1422 , his nine @-@ month @-@ old son succeeded him as Henry VI of England . During the minority of Henry VI the war caused political division among his Plantagenet uncles , Bedford , Humphrey of Lancaster , 1st Duke of Gloucester , and Cardinal Beaufort . Humphrey 's wife was accused of treasonable necromancy after two astrologers in her employ unwisely , if honestly , predicted a serious illness would endanger Henry VI 's life , and Humphrey was later arrested and died in prison . 
 <unk> stemming from the Black Death led to increased wages , static food costs and a resulting improvement in the standard of living for the peasantry . However , under Henry misgovernment and harvest failures depressed the English economy to a pitiful state known as the Great Slump . The economy was in ruins by 1450 , a consequence of the loss of France , piracy in the channel and poor trading relations with the Hanseatic League . The economic slowdown began in the 1430s in the north of the country , spreading south in the 1440s , with the economy not recovering until the 1480s . It was also driven by multiple harvest failures in the 1430s and disease amongst livestock , which drove up the price of food and damaged the wider economy . Certain groups were particularly badly affected : cloth exports fell by 35 per cent in just four years at the end of the 1440s , collapsing by up to 90 per cent in some parts of the South @-@ West . The Crown 's debts reached £ 372 @,@ 000 , Henry 's deficit was £ 20 @,@ 000 per annum , and tax revenues were half those of his father . 
 = = House of York = = 
 Edward III made his fourth son Edmund the first duke of York in 1362 . Edmund was married to Isabella , a daughter of King Peter of Castile and María de Padilla and the sister of Constance of Castile , who was the second wife of Edmund 's brother John of Gaunt . Both of Edmund 's sons were killed in 1415 . Richard became involved in the Southampton Plot , a conspiracy to depose Henry V in favour of Richard 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Edmund Mortimer . When Mortimer revealed the plot to the king , Richard was executed for treason . Richard 's childless older brother Edward was killed at the Battle of Agincourt later the same year . Constance of York was Edmund 's only daughter and was an ancestor of Queen Anne Neville . The increasingly interwoven Plantagenet relationships were demonstrated by Edmund 's second marriage to Joan Holland . Her sister Alianore Holland was mother to Richard 's wife , Anne Mortimer . Margaret Holland , another of Joan 's sisters , married John of Gaunt 's son . She later married Thomas of Lancaster , John of Gaunt 's grandson by King Henry IV . A third sister , Eleanor Holland , was mother @-@ in @-@ law to Richard Neville , 5th Earl of Salisbury — John 's grandson by his daughter Joan Beaufort , Countess of Westmorland . These sisters were all granddaughters of Joan of Kent , the mother of Richard II , and therefore Plantagenet descendants of Edward I. 
 Edmund 's son Richard was married to Anne Mortimer , the daughter of Roger Mortimer , 4th Earl of March and Eleanor Holland and great @-@ granddaughter of Edward III 's second surviving son Lionel . Anne died giving birth to their only son in September 1411 . Richard 's execution four years later left two orphans : Isabel , who married into the Bourchier family , and a son who was also called Richard . Although his earldom was forfeited , Richard ( the father ) was not attainted , and the four @-@ year @-@ old orphan Richard was his heir . Within months of his father 's death , Richard 's childless uncle , Edward Duke of York , was killed at Agincourt . Richard was allowed to inherit the title of Duke of York in 1426 . In 1432 he acquired the earldoms of March and Ulster on the death of his maternal uncle Edmund Mortimer , Earl of March , who had died campaigning with Henry V in France , and the earldom of Cambridge which had belonged to his father . Being descended from Edward III in both the maternal and the paternal line gave Richard a significant claim to the throne if the Lancastrian line should fail , and by cognatic primogeniture arguably a superior claim . He emphasised the point by being the first to assume the Plantagenet surname in 1448 . Having inherited the March and Ulster titles , he became the wealthiest and most powerful noble in England , second only to the king himself . Richard married Cecily Neville , a granddaughter of John of Gaunt , and had thirteen or possibly fifteen children : 
 Joan ( b . 1438 ; died as a child ) 
 Anne of York ( 1439 – 1476 ) — Mitochondrial DNA taken from a descendant of her second daughter , Anne St Leger , Baroness de Ros , was used in the identification of the remains of Richard III , which were found in 2012 . 
 Henry ( b . 1441 ; died as a child ) 
 Edward ( 1442 – 1483 ) 
 Edmund ( 1443 – 1460 ) 
 Elizabeth ( 1444 – 1503 ) — married John de la Pole , 2nd Duke of Suffolk ; she was the mother of several claimants to the throne . 
 Margaret ( 1446 – 1503 ) — married Charles the Bold , Duke of Burgundy . 
 William ( b . 1447 ; died as a child ) 
 John ( b . 1448 ; died as a child ) 
 George ( 1449 – 1478 ) 
 Thomas ( b . 1450 / 51 ; died as a child ) 
 Richard ( 1452 – 1485 ) 
 Ursula ( b . 1455 ; died as a child ) 
 In her will , Cecily stated that Katherine and Humphrey were her children , but they may have been her grandchildren through de la Pole . 
 When Henry VI had a mental breakdown , Richard was named regent , but the birth of a male heir resolved the question of succession . When Henry 's sanity returned , the court party reasserted its authority , but Richard of York and the Nevilles defeated them at a skirmish called the First Battle of St Albans . The ruling class was deeply shocked and reconciliation was attempted . York and the Nevilles fled abroad , but the Nevilles returned to win the Battle of Northampton , where they captured Henry . When Richard of York joined them he surprised Parliament by claiming the throne and forcing through the Act of Accord , which stated that Henry would remain as king for his lifetime , but would be succeeded by York . Margaret found this disregard for her son 's claims unacceptable , and so the conflict continued . York was killed at the Battle of Wakefield and his head set on display at Micklegate Bar along with those of Edmund , Earl of Rutland , and Richard Neville , Earl of Salisbury , who had been captured and beheaded . The Scottish queen Mary of Guelders provided Margaret with support but London welcomed York 's son Edward , Earl of March and Parliament confirmed that Edward should be made king . He was crowned after consolidating his position with victory at the Battle of Towton . 
 Edward 's preferment of the former Lancastrian @-@ supporting Woodville family , following his marriage to Elizabeth Woodville , led Warwick and Clarence to help Margaret depose Edward and return Henry to the throne . Edward and Richard , Duke of Gloucester , fled , but on their return , Clarence switched sides at the Battle of Barnet , leading to the death of the Neville brothers . The subsequent Battle of Tewkesbury brought the demise of the last of the male line of the Beauforts . The battlefield execution of Edward of Westminster , Prince of Wales , and the later probable murder of Henry VI extinguished the House of Lancaster . 
 By the mid @-@ 1470s , the victorious House of York looked safely established , with seven living male princes : Edward IV and his two sons , his brother George and George 's son , his brother Richard and Richard 's son . Edward and Elizabeth Woodville themselves had ten children , seven of whom survived him : 
 Elizabeth ( 1466 – 1503 ) — queen consort to Henry VII of England 
 Mary ( 1467 – 1482 ) 
 Cecily ( 1469 – 1507 ) — initially married John Welles , 1st Viscount Welles , and later married Thomas Kyme ( or <unk> ) following John 's death . 
 Edward ( 1470 – c . 1483 ) — briefly succeeded his father as King Edward V. 
 Margaret ( 1472 ; died that year ) 
 Richard ( 1473 – c . 1483 ) 
 Anne ( 1475 – 1511 ) — married Thomas Howard 
 George ( 1477 – 1479 ) 
 Catherine of York ( 1479 – 1527 ) — married William Courtenay , 1st Earl of Devon . 
 Bridget of York ( 1480 – 1517 ) — became a nun — possibly had an illegitimate daughter called Agnes of Eltham 
 Dynastic infighting and misfortune quickly brought about the demise of the House of York . George Plantagenet , 1st Duke of Clarence , plotted against his brother and was executed . Following Edward 's premature death in 1483 , his brother Richard had Parliament declare Edward 's two sons illegitimate on the pretext of an alleged prior pre @-@ contract to Lady Eleanor Talbot , leaving Edward 's marriage invalid . Richard seized the throne , and the Princes in the Tower were never seen again . Richard 's son predeceased him and Richard was killed in 1485 after an invasion of foreign mercenaries led by Henry Tudor , who claimed the throne through his mother Margaret Beaufort . Tudor assumed the throne as Henry VII , founding the Tudor dynasty and bringing the Plantagenet line of kings to an end . 
 = = House of Tudor and other Plantagenet descendants = = 
 = = = Tudor = = = 
 When Henry Tudor seized the throne there were eighteen Plantagenet descendants who might today be thought to have a stronger hereditary claim , and by 1510 this number had been increased further by the birth of sixteen Yorkist children . Henry mitigated this situation with his marriage to Elizabeth of York . She was the eldest daughter of Edward IV , and all their children were his cognatic heirs . Indeed , Polydore Vergil noted Henry VIII 's pronounced resemblance to his grandfather Edward : " For just as Edward was the most warmly thought of by the English people amongst all English kings , so this successor of his , Henry , was very like him in general appearance , in greatness of mind and generosity and for that reason was the most acclaimed and approved of all . " 
 This did not deter Margaret of York , Duchess of Burgundy — Edward 's sister and Elizabeth 's aunt — and members of the de la Pole family — children of Edward 's sister and John de la Pole , 2nd Duke of Suffolk — from frequent attempts to destabilise Henry 's regime . Henry imprisoned Margaret 's nephew Edward , Earl of Warwick , the son of her brother George , in the Tower of London , but in 1487 Margaret financed a rebellion led by Lambert Simnel pretending to be Edward . John de la Pole , 1st Earl of Lincoln , joined the revolt , probably anticipating that it would further his own ambitions to the throne , but he was killed in the suppression of the uprising at the Battle of Stoke Field in 1487 . Warwick was implicated by two further failed invasions supported by Margaret using Perkin Warbeck pretending to be Edward IV 's son Richard of Shrewsbury , and Warbeck 's later planned escape for them both ; Warwick was executed in 1499 . Edward 's execution may simply have been a precondition for the marriage of Arthur , Prince of Wales to Katherine of Aragon in 1501 . 
 = = = De La Pole = = = 
 John de la Pole 's attainder meant that his brother Edmund inherited their father 's titles , but much of the wealth of the duchy of Suffolk was forfeit . Edmund did not possess sufficient finances to maintain his status as a duke , so as a compromise he accepted the title of earl of Suffolk . Financial difficulties led to frequent legal conflicts and Edmund 's indictment for murder in 1501 . He fled with his brother Richard , while their remaining brother , William , was imprisoned in the Tower — where he would remain until his death 37 years later — as part of a general suppression of Edmund 's associates Philip the Fair had been holding Edmund and in 1506 he returned him to Henry . Edmund was imprisoned in the Tower . In 1513 , he was executed after Richard de la Pole , whom Louis XII of France had recognised as king of England the previous year , claimed the kingship in his own right . Richard , known as the White Rose , plotted an invasion of England for years but was killed in 1525 at the Battle of Pavia while fighting as the captain of the French landsknechts during François I of France 's invasion of Italy . 
 = = = Pole = = = 
 Warwick 's sister , and therefore Edward IV 's niece , Margaret Pole , Countess of Salisbury , was executed by Henry VIII in 1541 . By then , the cause was more religious and political rather than dynastic . The attainder of her father , Clarence , was a legal bar to any claims to the throne by his children . Additionally her marriage , arranged by Henry VII , to Sir Richard Pole , his half @-@ cousin and trusted supporter , was not auspicious . Nevertheless , it did allow the couple to be closely involved in court affairs . Margaret 's fortunes improved under Henry VIII and in February 1512 she was restored to the earldom of Salisbury and all the Warwicks ' lands . This made her the first and , apart from Anne Boleyn , the only woman in 16th @-@ century England to hold a peerage title in her own right . 
 Her daughter Ursula married the son of Edward Stafford , 3rd Duke of Buckingham . Buckingham 's fall after arguments with the king over property , and Margaret 's open support for Catherine of Aragon and Princess Mary began the Poles ' estrangement from the king . Hope of reconciliation was dashed by De <unk> , the letter that Margaret 's son Reginald Pole wrote to Henry VIII , in which Reginald declared his opposition to the royal supremacy . In 1538 evidence came to light that Pole family members in England had been in communication with Reginald . Margaret 's sons Geoffrey and Henry were arrested for treason along with several friends and associates , including Henry 's wife and brother @-@ in @-@ law — Edward Neville . Among those arrested was the king 's cousin Henry Courtenay , 1st Marquess of Exeter , his wife and 11 @-@ year @-@ old son . Courteney 's wife was released two years later , but their son spent 15 years in the Tower until Queen Mary released him . Except for the surviving Geoffrey Pole , all the others implicated were beheaded . 
 Margaret was attainted . The possibility of an invasion involving Reginald via her south coast estates and her embittered relationship with Henry VIII precluded any chance of pardon . However , the decision to execute her seems a spontaneous , rather than a premeditated , act . According to the Calendar of State Papers her execution was botched at the hands of " a wretched and blundering youth ... who literally hacked her head and shoulders to pieces in the most pitiful manner " . In 1886 she was beatified by Pope Leo XIII on the grounds she had laid down her life for the Holy See " and for the truth of the orthodox Faith " . 
 = = = Stafford = = = 
 Edward Stafford , Duke of Buckingham , combined multiple lines of Plantagenet descent : from Edward III by his son Thomas of Woodstock , from Edward III via two of his Beaufort children , and from Edward I from Joan of Kent and the Holland family . His father failed in his rebellion against Richard III in 1483 but was restored to his inheritance on the reversal of his father 's attainder late in 1485 . His mother married Henry VII 's uncle Jasper Tudor , and his wardship was entrusted to the king 's mother , Lady Margaret Beaufort . In 1502 , during Henry VII 's illness , there was debate as to whether Buckingham or Edmund de la Pole should act as regent for Henry VIII . There is no evidence of continuous hostility between Buckingham and Henry VIII , but there is little doubt of the duke 's dislike of Thomas Wolsey , whom he believed to be plotting to ruin the old nobility . Therefore , Henry VIII instructed Wolsey to watch Buckingham , his brother Henry Stafford , 1st Earl of Wiltshire , and three other peers . Neither Henry VIII nor his father planned to destroy Buckingham because of his lineage and Henry VIII even allowed Buckingham 's son and heir , Henry Stafford , 1st Baron Stafford , to marry Ursula Pole , giving the Staffords a further line of royal blood descent . Buckingham himself was arrested in April 1521 ; he was found guilty on 16 May and executed the next day . Evidence was provided that the duke had been listening to prophecies that he would be king and that the Tudor family lay under God 's curse for the execution of Warwick . This was said to explain Henry VIII 's failure to produce a male heir . Much of this evidence consisted of ill @-@ judged comments , speculation and bad temper , but it underlined the threat presented by Buckingham 's descent . 
 = = = Tudor succession = = = 
 As late as 1600 , with the Tudor succession in doubt , older Plantagenet lines remained as possible claimants to a disputed throne , and religious and dynastic factors gave rise to complications . Thomas Wilson wrote in his report The State of England , Anno Domini 1600 that there were 12 " competitors " for the succession . At the time of writing ( about 1601 ) , Wilson had been working on intelligence matters for Lord Buckhurst and Sir Robert Cecil . The alleged competitors included five descendants of Henry VII and Elizabeth , including the eventual successor James I of England , but also seven from older Plantagenet lines : 
 Henry Hastings , 3rd Earl of Huntingdon 
 George Hastings , 4th Earl of Huntingdon 
 Charles Neville , 6th Earl of Westmorland 
 Henry Percy , 9th Earl of Northumberland 
 António , Prior of Crato 
 Ranuccio I Farnese , Duke of Parma 
 Philip III of Spain and his infant daughter 
 Ranulph Crewe , Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , argued that by 1626 the House of Plantagenet could not be considered to remain in existence in a speech during the Oxford Peerage case , which was to rule on who should inherit the earldom of Oxford . It was referred by Charles I of England to the House of Lords , who called for judicial assistance . Crewe said : 
 I have labored to make a covenant with myself , that affection may not press upon judgment ; for I suppose there is no man that hath any apprehension of gentry or nobleness , but his affection stands to the continuance of a house so illustrious , and would take hold of a twig or twine @-@ thread to support it . And yet time hath his revolutions ; there must be a period and an end to all temporal things — <unk> rerum — an end of names and dignities , and whatsoever is <unk> ; and why not of de Vere ? For where is Bohun ? Where is Mowbray ? Where is Mortimer ? Nay , which is more , and most of all , where is Plantagenet ? They are entombed in the urns and sepulchres of mortality ! yet let the name of de Vere stand so long as it pleaseth God . 
 = = Further information = = 
 = Russian battleship Georgii Pobedonosets = 
 Georgii Pobedonosets ( Russian : Георгий <unk> Saint George the Victorious ) was a battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy , the fourth and final ship of the Ekaterina II class . She was , however , only a half @-@ sister to the others as her armor scheme was different and she was built much later than the earlier ships . She participated in the pursuit of the mutinous battleship Potemkin in June 1905 , but her crew mutinied themselves . However , loyal crew members regained control of the ship the next day and they ran her aground when Potemkin threatened to fire on her if she left Odessa harbor . She was relegated to second @-@ line duties in 1908 . She fired on SMS Goeben during her bombardment of Sevastopol in 1914 , but spent most of the war serving as a headquarters ship in Sevastopol . She was captured by both sides during the Russian Civil War , but ended up being towed to Bizerte by the fleeing White Russians where she was eventually scrapped . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Georgii Pobedonosets was originally intended as a version of Sinop rearmed with three 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) and four 9 @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) guns , but this changed when the decision was made to provide her with three twin 12 @-@ inch turrets rather than the barbettes used by her sisters . The turrets were significantly heavier than the barbette mountings so the armour scheme was revised in compensation . However this revised design was still deemed overweight and rejected . The Naval Ministry held a competition for a replacement , but these were rejected by the Naval Technical Committee in turn . So a modified version of Sinop , with barbettes , was chosen again as the most readily available choice . The height of her armour was lowered to reduce the overweight condition of her half @-@ sisters . Other changes were made while building , but they came early in the process and did not seriously delay her completion past her contractual date of 13 September 1893 . These changes included smaller mountings for her main guns that eliminated the sponsons needed in her sisters for the forward barbettes , the substitution of 35 @-@ calibre guns for the older 30 @-@ calibre guns and steel armor imported from <unk> et Cie of France replaced the compound armour used in her half @-@ sisters . 
 Georgii Pobedonosets was 347 feet 6 inches ( 105 @.@ 9 m ) long at the waterline and 339 feet 4 inches ( 103 @.@ 4 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 68 feet 11 inches ( 21 @.@ 0 m ) and a draft of 27 feet 11 inches ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . She displaced 11 @,@ 032 long tons ( 11 @,@ 209 t ) at load , over 700 long tons ( 710 t ) more than her designed displacement of 10 @,@ 280 long tons ( 10 @,@ 440 t ) . 
 She had two 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines driving screw propellers 16 feet 5 inches ( 5 @.@ 0 m ) in diameter . Sixteen cylindrical boilers provided steam to the engines . The engines and boilers were both imported from Maudslay and Sons of the United Kingdom and were 114 long tons ( 116 t ) overweight . The engines had a total designed output of 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) , but they only produced 9 @,@ 843 ihp ( 7 @,@ 340 kW ) on trials and gave a top speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ; 19 @.@ 0 mph ) . At full load she carried 900 long tons ( 910 t ) of coal that provided her a range of 2 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km ; 3 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) and 1 @,@ 367 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 532 km ; 1 @,@ 573 mi ) at 14 @.@ 5 knots ( 26 @.@ 9 km / h ; 16 @.@ 7 mph ) . 
 Her main armament consisted of three pairs of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Obukhov Model 1886 35 @-@ calibre guns mounted in two twin barbette mounts side by side forward and one aft of the superstructure . They had a maximum elevation of 15 ° and could depress to − 2 ° . Each of the forward mounts could traverse 30 ° across the bow and 35 ° abaft the beam , or a total of 155 ° . The rear mount could traverse 202 ° . Their rate of fire was one round every four minutes , fifty seconds , including training time . They fired a 731 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 331 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 090 ft / s ( 640 m / s ) to a range of 11 @,@ 600 yards ( 10 @,@ 600 m ) at maximum elevation . They also had a ' heavy ' shell available that weighed 1 @,@ 003 lb ( 455 kg ) that was fired at a velocity of 2 @,@ 000 ft / s ( 610 m / s ) although the range is not available . 
 The seven 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Model 1877 35 @-@ calibre guns were mounted on broadside pivot mounts in hull embrasures , except for one gun mounted in the stern in the hull . The eight 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) single @-@ barrelled Hotchkiss guns were mounted on the battery deck to defend the ship against torpedo boats . Ten 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss guns were mounted in the fighting top . She carried seven above @-@ water 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , three tubes on each broadside and a tube in the stern . 
 In contrast to her half @-@ sisters the armour used on Georgii Pobedonosets was steel . The belt armor had a maximum thickness of 16 inches ( 410 mm ) which reduced , in 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) steps , down to 6 inches ( 150 mm ) forward and down to 8 inches ( 200 mm ) aft . Its height was reduced by 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) in comparison to the other ships of the class to 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) to reduce weight . However this left only six inches of her belt above her load waterline as she was still overweight , a decrease of 7 inches ( 180 mm ) from her half @-@ sisters . The deck armour was 2 @.@ 25 inches ( 57 mm ) outside the citadel and reduced to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) over it . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Georgii Pobedonosets was named after Saint George the Victorious . She was built by the Russian Steam Navigation Company ( RoPIT ) at Sevastopol . She was laid down on 5 May 1891 , launched on 9 March 1892 , and completed in 1893 , although her trials lasted until mid @-@ 1895 . She spent her career in the Black Sea Fleet . She began her trials in September 1893 , but they were not completed until the middle of 1895 . 
 In 1905 , Georgii Pobedonosets briefly joined the Potemkin mutiny . On 29 June 1905 , the ship was one of eight vessels ( three battleships , a cruiser and four torpedo boats ) sent to capture the Potemkin in Odessa . The next day the fleet approached Potemkin , then suddenly retreated . She then followed them , deliberately goading the officers to order the sailors to fire on their comrades . The crew of Georgii Pobedonosets refused : " We won 't fire ! We won 't man the guns ! We refuse to engage the Potemkin . " Her sailors cheered the rebel sailors ' bravery . <unk> Koshuba , a member of the revolutionary sailors ' organisation Tsentralka , broke into the armoury , ordered Captain Ilya <unk> to halt the ship , pushing him away when he refused . The ship halted , <unk> pleaded with the sailors to go to Sevastopol , even offering to let the 70 revolutionaries onto Potemkin . Afanasi Matushenko , the leader of Potemkin 's crew , arrived with several revolutionaries who made a speech that inspired the sailors to arrest the officers . This was enough to make his second @-@ in @-@ command , Lieutenant <unk> , blow his own brains out . Apart from this , the seizure was bloodless . The sailors elected a committee ( Koshuba and nine others ) , locked the officers in the stateroom and ripped off their epaulettes . The officers were put ashore in Odessa . It was decided that the petty officers should be put ashore too the next day . Senior Boatswain A. O. <unk> became captain . 
 The next day , however , loyal crew members regained control of the ship and they ran her aground and surrendered to the authorities . In August 1905 , 75 mutineers were tried . Koshuba and two others were executed and 19 sailors got 185 years of hard labour . 
 In 1907 , the Naval General Staff made a proposal for a radical reconstruction that was similar to the proposals to reconstruct Chesma and Sinop made before the Russo @-@ Japanese War that involved cutting her down by one deck and replacing her armament with two twin @-@ gun turrets equipped with 12 @-@ inch 40 @-@ calibre guns and the compound armor replaced by Krupp armor . This new proposal differed from the older one in that eight 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns replaced the ten six @-@ inch guns originally planned . This was rejected as she still would have lacked the speed to stay with the main fleet and the hull protection required to withstand high @-@ explosive shell fire . 
 She became a training ship in 1908 and her 6 @-@ inch 35 @-@ calibre guns were replaced by modern 6 @-@ inch 45 @-@ calibre guns . She was modified as a harbour guard ship in 1911 and her 12 @-@ inch guns were removed . Six more six @-@ inch guns were added for a total of fourteen . She fired three rounds , missing each time , at the German battlecruiser Goeben during her bombardment of Sevastopol on 29 October 1914 , but spent the bulk of World War I as a static headquarters ship in Sevastopol . After the Russian Revolution , she joined the Red Black Sea Fleet in December 1917 . She was captured by the Germans in 1918 in Sevastopol and was handed over to the Allies in December 1918 . The British sabotaged her engines on 25 April 1919 . She was captured by both sides in the Russian Civil War , but eventually became part of Wrangel 's fleet and was towed to Bizerte in 1920 . She was sold for scrap between 1930 and 1936 . 
 = Bolton = 
 Bolton ( / <unk> / or locally [ <unk> ̩ ] ) is a town in Greater Manchester in North West England . A former mill town , Bolton has been a production centre for textiles since Flemish weavers settled in the area in the 14th century , introducing a wool and cotton @-@ weaving tradition . The urbanisation and development of the town largely coincided with the introduction of textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution . Bolton was a 19th @-@ century boomtown , and at its zenith in 1929 its 216 cotton mills and 26 bleaching and dyeing works made it one of the largest and most productive centres of cotton spinning in the world . The British cotton industry declined sharply after the First World War , and by the 1980s cotton manufacture had virtually ceased in Bolton . 
 Close to the West Pennine Moors , Bolton is 10 miles ( 16 km ) northwest of Manchester . It is surrounded by several smaller towns and villages that together form the Metropolitan Borough of Bolton , of which Bolton is the administrative centre . The town of Bolton has a population of 139 @,@ 403 , whilst the wider metropolitan borough has a population of 262 @,@ 400 . Historically part of Lancashire , Bolton originated as a small settlement in the moorland known as Bolton le Moors . In the English Civil War , the town was a Parliamentarian outpost in a staunchly Royalist region , and as a result was stormed by 3 @,@ 000 Royalist troops led by Prince Rupert of the Rhine in 1644 . In what became known as the Bolton Massacre , 1 @,@ 600 residents were killed and 700 were taken prisoner . 
 Football club Bolton Wanderers play home games at the Macron Stadium and the WBA World light @-@ welterweight champion Amir Khan was born in the town . Cultural interests include the Octagon Theatre and the Bolton Museum and Art Gallery , as well as one of the earliest public libraries established after the Public Libraries Act 1850 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 Bolton is a common Northern English name derived from the Old English <unk> @-@ tun , meaning a settlement with a dwelling . The first recorded use of the name , in the form <unk> , dates from 1185 to describe Bolton le Moors , though this may not be in relation to a dwelling . It was recorded as <unk> in 1212 , <unk> in 1257 , Boulton in 1288 , and Bolton after 1307 . Later forms of <unk> were <unk> , <unk> @-@ le @-@ Moors , <unk> , <unk> , Bolton @-@ super @-@ Moras , Bolton @-@ in @-@ ye @-@ Moors , Bolton @-@ le @-@ Moors . The town 's motto of <unk> Moras means " overcome difficulties " ( or " delays " ) , and is a pun on the Bolton @-@ super @-@ Moras version of the name meaning literally , " Bolton on the moors " . 
 = = = Early history to the Civil War = = = 
 There is evidence of human existence on the moors around Bolton since the early part of the Bronze Age , including a stone circle on Cheetham Close above Egerton , and Bronze Age burial mounds on Winter Hill . A Bronze Age mound was excavated in Victorian times outside Haulgh Hall . The Romans built roads from Manchester to Ribchester to the east and a road along what is now the A6 to the west . It is claimed that Agricola built a fort at Blackrod by clearing land above the forest . Evidence of a Saxon settlement exists in the form of religious objects found when the Victorian parish church was built . 
 In 1067 Great Bolton was the property of Roger de Poitou and after 1100 , of Roger de <unk> . It became the property of the Pilkingtons who forfeited it in the Civil War and after that the Stanleys who became Earls of Derby . Great Bolton and Little Bolton were part of the Marsey fee , in 1212 Little Bolton was held by Roger de Bolton as plough @-@ land , by the service of the twelfth part of a knight 's fee to Randle de Marsey . The parish church in Bolton has an early foundation although the exact date is unknown ; it was given by the lord of the manor to the Gilbertine canons of <unk> Priory in Nottinghamshire , founded by Roger de Marsey . 
 A charter to hold a market in Churchgate was granted on 14 December 1251 by King Henry III of England . Bolton became a market town and borough by a charter from the Earl of Derby , William de Ferrers , on 14 January 1253 , and a market was held until the 18th century . <unk> plots were laid out on Churchgate and Deansgate in the centre of the medieval town close to where Ye Olde Man & Scythe public house , dating from 1251 , is situated today . In 1337 Flemish weavers settled and introduced the manufacture of woollen cloth . More Flemish weavers , fleeing the Huguenot persecutions , settled here in the 17th century . The second wave of settlers wove fustian , a rough cloth made of linen and cotton . Digging sea coal was recorded in 1374 . There was an outbreak of the plague in the town in 1623 . 
 During the English Civil War , the people of Bolton were Puritans and supported the Parliamentarian cause . A parliamentary garrison in the town was attacked twice without success but on 28 May 1644 Prince Rupert 's Royalist army with troops under the command of the Earl of Derby attacked again . The attack became known as the Bolton Massacre in which 1 @,@ 500 died , 700 were taken prisoner and the town plundered . At the end of the Civil War Lord Derby was tried as a traitor at Chester and condemned to death . When his appeal for pardon to parliament was rejected he attempted to escape but was recaptured and executed for his part in the massacre outside Ye Olde Man & Scythe Inn at Bolton on 15 October 1651 . 
 = = = Industrial revolution onward = = = 
 A tradition of cottage spinning and weaving and improvements to spinning technology by local inventors , Richard Arkwright and Samuel Crompton , led to rapid growth of the textile industry in the 19th century . Crompton , whilst living at Hall i ' th ' Wood , invented the spinning mule in 1779 . Streams draining the surrounding moorland into the River Croal provided the water necessary for bleach works that were a feature of this area . Bleaching using chlorine was introduced in the 1790s by the <unk> at Halliwell <unk> . Bolton and the surrounding villages had more than thirty bleachworks including the Lever Bank Bleach Works in the Irwell Valley . The mule revolutionised cotton spinning by combining the roller drafting of Arkwright 's water frame with the carriage drafting and spindle tip twisting of James Hargreaves 's spinning jenny , producing a high quality yarn . Self @-@ acting mules were used in Bolton mills until the 1960s producing fine yarn . The earliest mills were situated by the streams and river as at Barrow Bridge , but steam power led to the construction of the large multi @-@ storey mills and their chimneys that dominated Bolton 's skyline , some of which survive today . 
 Growth of the textile industry was assisted by the availability of coal in the area . By 1896 John Fletcher had coal mines at Ladyshore in Little Lever ; The Earl of Bradford had a coal mine at Great Lever ; the Darcy Lever Coal Company had mines at Darcy Lever and there were also coal mines at Tonge , Breightmet , Deane and <unk> . Some of these pits were close to the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal providing the owners with markets in Bolton and Manchester . Coal mining declined in the 20th century . 
 Important transport links contributed to the growth of the town and the textile industry ; the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal constructed in 1791 , connected the town to Bury and Manchester providing transport for coal and other basic materials . The Bolton and Leigh Railway was the oldest in Lancashire , opening to goods traffic in 1828 and Great Moor Street station opened to passengers in 1831 . The railway initially connected Bolton to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal in Leigh , an important link with the port of Liverpool for the import of raw cotton from America , but was extended in 1829 to link up with the Manchester to Liverpool Line . Local firms built locomotives for the railway , in 1830 " Union " was built by Rothwell , Hick and Co. and two locomotives , " Salamander " and " Veteran " were built by Crook and Dean . 
 Bolton 's first Mayor , Charles James Darbishire was sympathetic to Chartism and a supporter of the Anti @-@ Corn Law League . In August 1839 Bolton was besieged by Chartist rioters and the Riot Act was read and special constables sworn in . The mayor accompanied soldiers called to rescue special constables at Little Bolton Town Hall , which was besieged by a mob , and the incident ended without bloodshed . 
 By 1900 Bolton was Lancashire 's third largest engineering centre after Manchester and Oldham . About 9 @,@ 000 men were employed in the industry , half of them working for Dobson and Barlow in Kay Street . The firm made textile machinery . Another engineering company Hick , Hargreaves & Co based at the Soho Foundry made Lancashire boilers and heavy machinery . Thomas Ryder and Son of Turner Bridge manufactured machine tools for the international motor industry . Wrought iron was produced for more than 100 years at Thomas Walmsley and Sons ' Atlas Forge . 
 By 1911 the textile industry in Bolton employed about 36 @,@ 000 people . The last mill to be constructed was Sir John Holden 's Mill in 1927 . The cotton industry declined from the 1920s . A brief upturn after the Second World War was not sustained , and the industry had virtually vanished by the end of the 20th century . 
 During the night of 26 September 1916 , Bolton was the target for an aerial offensive . L21 , a Zeppelin commanded by Oberleutnant Kurt <unk> of the Imperial German Navy , dropped twenty @-@ one bombs on the town , five of them on the working class area of Kirk Street , killing thirteen residents and destroying six houses . Further attacks followed on other parts of the town , including three <unk> dropped close to the Town Hall . 
 = = = Lord Leverhulme = = = 
 In 1899 William Lever , Lord Leverhulme , bought Hall i 'th ' Wood as a memorial to Samuel Crompton inventor of the spinning mule . Lever restored the dilapidated building and presented it to the town in 1902 , having turned it into a museum furnished with household goods typical of domestic family life in the 16th and 17th centuries . Lever re @-@ endowed Bolton Schools , giving land and his house on Chorley New Road . He presented the town with 67 acres ( 270 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land for a public park which the corporation named Leverhulme Park in 1914 . In 1902 he gave the people of Bolton Lever Park at Rivington . In 1911 , Lever consulted Thomas Mawson , landscape architect and lecturer in Landscape Design at the University of Liverpool , regarding town planning in Bolton . Mawson published " Bolton – a Study in Town Planning and Civic Art " and gave lectures entitled " Bolton Housing and Town Planning Society " which formed the basis of an illustrated book " Bolton – as it is and as it might be " . In 1924 , Leverhulme presented Bolton Council with an ambitious plan to rebuild the town centre based on Mawson 's designs funded partly by himself . The council declined in favour of extending the town hall and building the civic centre . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Lying within the county boundaries of Lancashire , until the early 19th century , Great Bolton and Little Bolton were two of the eighteen townships of the ecclesiastical parish of Bolton le Moors . These townships were separated by the River Croal , Little Bolton on the north bank and Great Bolton on the south . Bolton Poor Law Union was formed on 1 February 1837 . It continued using existing poorhouses at Fletcher Street and Turton but in 1856 started to build a new workhouse at <unk> Farm in Farnworth . <unk> Hospital was built on the site which is now Royal Bolton Hospital . 
 In 1838 Great Bolton , most of Little Bolton and the Haulgh area of Tonge with Haulgh were incorporated under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 as a municipal borough , the second to be created in England . Further additions were made adding part of Rumworth in 1872 and part of Halliwell in 1877 . In 1889 Bolton was granted County Borough status and became self @-@ governing and independent from Lancashire County Council jurisdiction . In 1898 , the borough was extended further by adding the civil parishes of Breightmet , Darcy Lever , Great Lever , the rest of Halliwell , Heaton , Lostock , Middle Hulton , the rest of Rumworth which had been renamed Deane in 1894 , Smithills , and Tonge plus Astley Bridge Urban District , and part of Over Hulton civil parish . The County Borough of Bolton was abolished in 1974 and became a constituent part of the Metropolitan Borough of Bolton in Greater Manchester . Bolton unsuccessfully applied for city status in 2011 . 
 Bolton Metropolitan Borough Council is divided into twenty wards , each of which elects three councillors for a term of up to four years . As of 2014 there are forty Labour councillors , sixteen Conservatives and three Liberal Democrats , with one seat remaining vacant . 
 Under the Reform Act of 1832 , a Parliamentary Borough was established . The Bolton constituency was represented by two Members of Parliament . The Parliamentary Borough continued until 1950 when it was abolished and replaced with two parliamentary constituencies , Bolton East and Bolton West , each with one Member of Parliament . In 1983 Bolton East was abolished and two new constituencies were created , Bolton North East , and Bolton South East covering most of the former Farnworth constituency . At the same time major boundary changes also took place to Bolton West , which took over most of the former Westhoughton constituency . Under the town twinning scheme the local council have twinned Bolton with Le Mans in France , since 1967 , and Paderborn in Germany , since 1975 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Bolton is a town in Greater Manchester , in the North West of England . Close to the West Pennine Moors , it is 10 miles ( 16 km ) northwest of the city of Manchester and surrounded by several smaller towns and villages which together form the Metropolitan Borough of Bolton , of which Bolton is the administrative centre . 
 The early name , Bolton le Moors , described the position of the town amid the low hills on the edge of the West Pennine Moors southeast of Rivington Pike ( 456 m ) . Bolton lies on relatively flat land on both sides of the clough or steep @-@ banked valley through which the River Croal flows in a southeasterly direction towards the River Irwell . The geological formation around Bolton consists of sandstones of the Carboniferous series and Coal Measures ; in the northern part of Bolton the lower Coal Measures are mixed with underlying Millstone Grit . 
 Climate in the Greater Manchester area is generally similar to the climate of England , although owing to protection from the mountains in North Wales it experiences slightly lower than average rainfall except during the summer months , when rainfall is higher than average . Bolton has mild differences between highs and lows , and there is adequate rainfall year round . The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is " Cfb " ( Marine West Coast Climate / Oceanic climate ) . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , according to the Office for National Statistics , the Urban Subdivision of Bolton was part of the Greater Manchester Urban Area and had a total resident population of 139 @,@ 403 , of which 67 @,@ 823 ( 48 @.@ 7 % ) were male and 71 @,@ 580 ( 51 @.@ 3 % ) were female , living in 57 @,@ 827 households . The settlement occupied 4 @,@ 446 hectares ( 17 @.@ 17 sq mi ) , compared with 2 @,@ 992 hectares ( 11 @.@ 55 sq mi ) in the 1991 census , though it should be noted that the 2001 Urban census area contains a large rural area to the south of the town . Its population density was 31 @.@ 35 people per hectare compared with an average of 40 @.@ 20 across the Greater Manchester Urban Area . The median age of the population was 35 , compared with 36 within the Greater Manchester Urban Area and 37 across England and Wales . 
 The majority of the population of Bolton were born in England ( 87 @.@ 10 % ) ; 2 @.@ 05 % were born elsewhere within the United Kingdom , 1 @.@ 45 % within the rest of the European Union , and 9 @.@ 38 % elsewhere in the world . 
 Data on religious beliefs across the town in the 2001 census show that 67 @.@ 9 % declared themselves to be Christian , 12 @.@ 5 % stated that they were Muslim , 8 @.@ 6 % said they held no religion , and 3 @.@ 4 % reported themselves as Hindu . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 = = Economy = = 
 At the time of the 2001 Census , there were 56 @,@ 390 people in employment who were resident within Bolton . Of these , 21 @.@ 13 % worked in the wholesale and retail trade , including repair of motor vehicles ; 18 @.@ 71 % worked within manufacturing industry ; 11 @.@ 00 % worked within the health and social work sector and 6 @.@ 81 % were employed in the transport , storage and communication industries . 
 In the last quarter of the 20th century heavy industry was replaced by service @-@ based activities including data processing , call centres , hi @-@ tech electronics and IT companies . The town retains some traditional industries employing people in paper @-@ manufacturing , packaging , textiles , transportation , steel foundries and building materials . Missiles were produced at the British Aerospace ( BAe ) factory in Lostock , now closed . The Reebok brand 's European headquarters are located at the Reebok Stadium . Bolton is also the home of the family bakery , Warburtons , established in 1876 on Blackburn Road . On 13 February 2003 , Bolton was granted Fairtrade Town status . 
 Bolton attracts visitors to its shopping centres , markets , public houses , restaurants and cafes in the town centre as well retail parks and leisure facilities close to the town centre and in the surrounding towns and suburbs . Tourism plays a part in the economy , visitor attractions include Hall i ' th ' Wood , Smithills Hall and Country Park , Last Drop Village , Barrow Bridge and the Bolton Steam Museum . 
 There are several regeneration projects planned for Bolton over the next ten years , including Church Wharf by Ask Developments and Bluemantle and Merchant 's Quarter by local developer Charles Topham group , which together will contribute 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 @,@ 000 m2 ) of business space . The Bolton Innovation Zone is a large £ 300 million development with the University of Bolton at its core . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Situated in the town centre on the site of a former market is the Grade II * listed town hall , an imposing neoclassical building designed by William Hill and opened in June 1873 by Albert Edward , Prince of Wales . In the 1930s the building was extended by Bradshaw Gass & Hope . Within the Town Hall are the Albert Halls and several function rooms . The original , single Albert Hall was destroyed by fire on 14 November 1981 . After rebuilding work , it was replaced by the present Albert Halls , which were opened in 1985 . 
 The Great Hall of Smithills Hall was built in the 14th century when William de Radcliffe received the Manor of Smithills from the <unk> , the chapel dates from the 16th century and was extended during the 19th . Smithills Hall was where , in 1555 , George Marsh was tried for heresy during the Marian Persecutions . After being " examined " at Smithills , according to local tradition , George Marsh stamped his foot so hard to re @-@ affirm his faith , that a footprint was left in the stone floor . It is a Grade I listed building and is now a museum . 
 Hall i ' th ' Wood , now a museum , is a late mediaeval yeoman farmer 's house built by Laurence Brownlow . Around 1637 it was owned by the Norris family , who added the stone west wing . In the 18th century it was divided up into tenements . Samuel Crompton lived and worked there . In the 19th century it deteriorated further until in 1895 it was bought by industrialist William Hesketh Lever , who restored it and presented it to Bolton Council in 1900 . 
 Bolton 's 26 conservation areas contain 700 listed buildings , many of which are in the town centre , and there is parkland including the Victorian Queen 's Park , Leverhulme Park and other open spaces in the surrounding area . These include Le Mans Crescent , Ye Olde Man & Scythe , Little Bolton Town Hall , the Market Place , Wood Street and Holy Trinity Church . The Market Hall of 1854 is a Grade II listed building . Outside the town centre can be found Mere Hall , Firwood Fold , Haulgh Hall , Park Cottage , St Mary 's Church , Deane , Lostock Hall Gatehouse and All Souls Church . Notable mills still overlooking parts of the town are Sir John Holden 's Mill and Swan Lane Mills . 
 Most views northwards are dominated by Rivington Pike and the Winter Hill TV Mast on the West Pennine Moors above the town . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Bolton is well served by the local road network and national routes . The A6 , a major north – south trunk road , passes to the west through Hunger Hill and Westhoughton . The <unk> dual carriageway ( sometimes referred to as the Devil 's Highway because of its numeric designation ) , is a spur from the M61 / M60 motorway interchange through the town centre to Astley Bridge , Egerton , Darwen and Blackburn . The M61 has three dedicated junctions serving the borough . 
 A network of local buses coordinated by Transport for Greater Manchester serves the Bolton district and beyond ; bus operators include Arriva North West , First Greater Manchester , Diamond Bus North West and Maytree Travel . Bolton is also served by the National Express coach network . The bus station on Moor Lane is scheduled to be replaced by a new interchange in the town centre next to the railway station by the end of 2014 , at a cost of £ 48 million . 
 Bolton Interchange is located on the Manchester loop of the West Coast Mainline which was served by Virgin West Coast trains passing through Manchester Piccadilly station . Managed by Northern , the station is part of a town @-@ centre transport interchange with services to Manchester , Wigan , Southport , Blackburn and intermediate stations operated by TransPennine Express and Northern trains . 
 = = Education = = 
 Bolton School , an independent day school , was founded on a site next to the parish church in 1524 as a grammar school for boys ; it merged around 1656 with a free grammar school that had been founded shortly after 1641 . In 1898 , it moved to its present site in Chorley New Road , and in 1913 merged with Bolton Girls ' Day School . In 1855 the Bolton Church Institute was founded by Canon James Slade near to the parish church . The school became Canon Slade School , which has since relocated to Bradshaw . The town 's other secondary schools include Bolton St Catherine 's Academy , <unk> High School , Sharples School , Smithills School , <unk> Salesian College and UTC Bolton . Bolton College provides further education from sites throughout the borough . Bolton Sixth Form College comprises the Town Centre Campus and Farnworth Campus . The Bolton TIC ( Technical Innovation Centre ) , opened in 2006 , supports local schools by providing additional technical training . The University of Bolton , formerly the Bolton Institute of Higher Education , gained university status in 2005 . 
 = = Religion = = 
 There is evidence from Saxon times of Christian churches and at the time of the Civil War a Puritan and nonconformist presence in the town . The Unitarians were among the early dissenting congregations which eventually included Methodists , Baptists , Seventh Day Adventist and other denominations . More than forty churches were built during the Victorian era , but some have now been closed , demolished or converted to other uses . 
 Today , the parish of Bolton @-@ le @-@ Moors covers a small area in the town centre , but until the 19th century it covered a much larger area , divided into eighteen chapelries and townships . The neighbouring ancient parish of Deane centred around St Mary 's Church once covered a large area to the west and south of Bolton , and the township of Great Lever was part of the ancient parish of Middleton . 
 The Church of St Peter , commonly known as Bolton Parish Church , is an example of the gothic revival style . Built between 1866 and 1871 of Longridge stone to designs by Paley , the church is 67 ft ( 20 @.@ 4 m ) in width , 156 ft ( 47 @.@ 5 m ) in length , and 82 ft ( 25 @.@ 0 m ) in height . The tower is 180 ft ( 54 @.@ 9 m ) high with 13 bells . The first church on the same site was built in Anglo @-@ Saxon times . It was rebuilt in Norman times and again in the early 15th century . Little is known of the first two earlier churches , but the third building was a solid , squat building with a sturdy square tower at the west end . It was modified over the years until it fell into disrepair and was demolished in 1866 . Fragments of stone and other artefacts from these first three buildings are displayed in the museum corner of the present church . 
 St Mary 's Deane , once the only church in a parish of ten townships in the hundred of Salford , is a church established in Saxon times . The current building dates from 1250 with extensions and restoration in the 19th century and is a Grade II * listed building . 
 St George 's Church was built between 1794 and 1796 when Little Bolton was a separate township . Built by Peter Rothwell and paid for by the Ainsworth <unk> in 1975 it was leased to Bolton Council , and became a craft centre in 1994 . St Patrick 's Roman Catholic Church on Great Moor Street , was built in 1861 . 
 The New Zakaria Mosque , the first mosque in Bolton , served the Muslim community from Pakistan and India from the 1960s . The first place of worship for Hindus was in the former St Barnabus Church , converted into a Hindu temple . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Bolton Wanderers F.C. is an English Football League club which was formed in 1874 and for 102 years played at Burnden Park . The club moved to the Reebok Stadium in Horwich in 1997 . The club has won four FA Cups , the most recent in 1958 , and spent 73 seasons in the top division of the English league – more than any club never to have been league champions . 
 Bolton Hockey Club fields women 's men 's and junior teams and has more than 120 playing members . The town has two local cricket leagues , the Bolton Cricket League , and the Bolton Cricket Association . Bolton also has a rugby union club , Bolton RUFC formed in 1872 situated on Avenue Street . The club operates four senior teams , as well as women 's and junior sections . Bolton Robots of Doom is a baseball club started in 2003 , playing home games at Stapleton Avenue . In addition to the adult team there is a junior team , Bolton Bears . Baseball in Bolton dates back to 1938 with a team called Bolton Scarlets . An American football team , the Bolton Bulldogs , plays home games at Smithills School operating varsity and junior varsity teams . Speedway racing , known as Dirt Track Racing , was staged at Raikes Park in the pioneering days of 1928 , but the venue was short @-@ lived . 
 = = Culture and society = = 
 According to a survey of the British Association for the Advancement of Science <unk> are the friendliest people in Britain . Humphrey Spender photographed Bolton calling it <unk> for the Mass @-@ Observation Project , a social research organisation which aimed to record everyday life in Britain . His photographs provide a record of ordinary people living and working in a British pre @-@ War industrial town . 
 Bolton has several theatres including the Octagon and independent groups such as Bolton Little Theatre and the Phoenix Theatre Company . Inside the Town Hall there is a theatre and conference complex , the Albert Halls . Le Mans Crescent , home to the central library , museum , art gallery , aquarium , magistrates ' court and town hall , is to be the centre of a new Cultural Quarter . The library and museum are to be extended into the area now occupied by the Magistrates Court . Bolton Museum and Art Gallery houses a collection of local and international art , including work by the Bolton @-@ born American artist Thomas <unk> Steam Museum houses a variety of preserved steam engines in part of the old Atlas Mill . 
 Bolton Central Library was one of the earliest public libraries established after the Public Libraries Act 1850 , opening in October 1853 in the Exchange Building on the old market square ( Victoria Square ) before moving to Le Mans Crescent in July 1938 . The Bolton Symphony Orchestra performs regular concerts at the Albert Halls and Victoria Hall in the town centre . The 2008 BBC Radio 3 Adult Choir of the Year and five times gold @-@ medal winning barbershop chorus The <unk> Chorus is based in Bolton . 
 The town 's daily newspaper is The Bolton News , formerly the Bolton Evening News . There is a weekly free paper , the Bolton Journal and Bolton Council 's monthly newspaper , Bolton Scene . The town is part of the BBC North West and ITV Granada television regions , served by the Winter Hill transmitter near Belmont . Local radio is provided by Tower FM , which broadcasts across Bolton and Bury ; Bolton FM began broadcasting in 2009 . 
 The fictional village of <unk> in Benjamin Disraeli 's novel Coningsby was based in part on the industrial village of Barrow Bridge . Spring and Port Wine by playwright , Bill Naughton was filmed and set in Bolton and The Family Way based on Naughton 's play All in Good Time was also filmed and set in the town . Peter Kay filmed comedy TV series That Peter Kay Thing in the town . 
 Bolton buildings have stood in for other towns and cities . Le Mans Crescent has featured as a London street in the Jeremy Brett version of Sherlock Holmes and a Russian secret service building in the 1990s comedy series Sleepers . The 1990s BBC drama Between the Lines filmed an episode in Victoria Square . 
 In A grammar of the dialect of the Bolton area by linguist Graham <unk> , the local dialect is described as being distinct from those of nearby Salford and Manchester . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Bolton is policed by the Bolton Central Division of Greater Manchester Police , which covers the town centre , Rumworth and Halliwell . Great Lever and Little Lever are covered by Farnworth Police Station , Astley Bridge Police Station covers Tonge and The Haulgh , Breightmet and Crompton while Heaton and Lostock , and Smithills are covered by Horwich Police ( Middlebrook ) . The statutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service , from Bolton Central , Bolton North , Horwich and Farnworth Fire Stations . Hospital services are provided by the Royal Bolton Hospital NHS Foundation Trust , which provides Accident and Emergency and other services at Royal Bolton Hospital in Farnworth . Community health services , including GPs , district and community nurses , dentists and pharmacists , are co @-@ ordinated by the Bolton Primary Care Trust . Waste management is co @-@ ordinated by the Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority . Bolton 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is Electricity North West Ltd . United Utilities manage Bolton 's drinking and waste water . 
 See also Healthcare in Greater Manchester 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Among the notable people born in Bolton are the Protestant martyr George Marsh , 1515 – 55 , the inventor of the spinning mule that revolutionised the textile industry , Samuel Crompton , 1753 – 1827 , and industrialist Lord Leverhulme of Bolton @-@ le @-@ Moors , 1851 – 1925 . 
 More recently , people born and raised in Bolton include Fred Dibnah , a steeplejack who became a popular television historian of Britain 's industrial past ; world champion boxer Amir Khan , who became the WBA World light @-@ welterweight champion on 18 July 2009 at the age of 22 , making him Britain 's third @-@ youngest world champion boxer ; comedian Peter Kay ; and President of the International Paralympic Committee Philip Craven . Playwright and author Bill Naughton was born in Ireland but brought up in Bolton from an early age . 
 = Black bean aphid = 
 The black bean aphid ( Aphis fabae ) is a small black insect in the Aphis genus , with a broad , soft body , a member of the order Hemiptera . Other common names include <unk> , bean aphid and beet leaf aphid . In the warmer months of the year it is found in large numbers on the undersides of leaves and on the growing tips of host plants , including various agricultural crops and many wild and ornamental plants . Both winged and wingless forms exist and at this time of year , they are all females . They suck sap from stems and leaves and cause distortion of the shoots , stunted plants , reduced yield and spoiled crops . This aphid also acts as a vector for viruses that cause plant disease and the honeydew it secretes may encourage the growth of sooty mould . It breeds profusely by live birth but its numbers are kept in check , especially in the later part of the summer , by various predatory and parasitic insects . Ants feed on the honeydew it produces and take active steps to remove the aphid 's enemies . It is a widely distributed pest of agricultural crops and can be controlled by chemical or biological means . In the autumn , winged forms move to different host plants where both males and females are produced . These mate and the females lay eggs which overwinter . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The specific name of the black bean aphid , " fabae " comes from the Latin faba meaning a " bean " , a plant on which this aphid often feeds . Aphis fabae is in the superfamily <unk> and the subgenus Aphis . 
 Fauna Europaea lists six subspecies : 
 A. f. <unk> 
 A. f. <unk> 
 A. f. <unk> 
 A. f. fabae 
 A. f. <unk> 
 A. f. <unk> 
 = = Description = = 
 The black bean aphid is a small , soft @-@ bodied insect that has specialised piercing and sucking mouthparts which are used to suck the juice from plants . This aphid is usually seen in large numbers and is a tiny , plump insect about two millimetres long with a small head and bulbous abdomen . The body is blackish or dark green in colour . Many adults are devoid of wings , a state known as <unk> . Winged forms , known as alates , are longer and more slender than <unk> and have shiny black heads and <unk> . The membranous wings of the alates are held angled over the body . The antennae are less than two @-@ thirds of the length of the body and both they and the legs are pale yellow in colour with black tips . The tibiae of the hind legs are swollen in egg @-@ laying females . Near the rear of the abdomen are a pair of slender , elongated tubes known as <unk> or <unk> . Their function is the production of a defensive waxy secretion . They are twice as long as the finger @-@ like tail and both are brownish @-@ black . 
 = = Lifecycle = = 
 The black bean aphid has both sexual and asexual generations in its life cycle . It also alternates hosts at different times of year . The primary host plants are woody shrubs , and eggs are laid on these by winged females in the autumn . The adults then die and the eggs overwinter . The aphids that hatch from these eggs in the spring are wingless females known as stem mothers . These are able to reproduce asexually , giving birth to live offspring , nymphs , through parthenogenesis . The lifespan of a parthenogenetic female is about 50 days and during this period , each can produce as many as 30 young . The offspring are also females and able to reproduce without mating , but further generations are usually winged forms . These migrate to their secondary host plants , completely different species that are typically herbaceous plants with soft , young growth . 
 Further parthenogenesis takes place on these new hosts on the undersides of leaves and on the growing tips . All the offspring are female at this time of year and large populations of aphids develop rapidly with both winged and wingless forms produced throughout the summer . Winged individuals develop as a response to overcrowding and they disperse to new host plants and other crops . By midsummer , the number of predators and parasites has built up and aphid populations cease to expand . As autumn approaches , the winged forms migrate back to the primary host plants . Here , both males and sexual females are produced <unk> , mating takes place , and these females lay eggs in crevices and under lichens to complete the lifecycle . Each female can lay six to ten black eggs which can survive temperatures as low as − 32 ° C ( − 26 ° F ) . More than 40 % of the eggs probably survive the winter but some are eaten by birds or flower bugs , and others fail to hatch in the spring . 
 = = Host plants = = 
 The black bean aphid can feed on a wide variety of host plants . Its primary hosts on which the eggs overwinter are shrubs such as the spindle tree ( Euonymus europaeus ) , Viburnum species , or the mock @-@ orange ( Philadelphus species ) . Its secondary hosts , on which it spends the summer , include a number of crops including sugar beets , spinach , beans , runner beans , celery , potatoes , sunflowers , carrots , artichokes , tobacco , and tomatoes . It colonises more than two hundred different species of cultivated and wild plants . Among the latter , it shows a preference for poppies ( <unk> species ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , fat @-@ hen ( Chenopodium album ) , saltbush ( Atriplex rosea ) , chamomile ( <unk> <unk> ) , thistles ( Cirsium <unk> ) , and docks ( <unk> spp . ) . 
 Two conflicting factors are involved in host preferences , the species and the age of the leaf . Offered spindle and beet leaves on growing plants throughout the year , winged aphids moved from one to the other depending on the active growth state of each and the senescence of each host plant . Thus in late summer and autumn , the beet leaves were old and unattractive to the aphids in comparison with the leaves of the spindle , whereas in spring , the young unfolding leaves of the beet were more attractive than those of the spindle . 
 = = Damage = = 
 The black bean aphid is a major pest of sugar beet , bean and celery crops with large numbers of aphids cause stunting of the plants . Beans suffer damage to flowers and pods which may not develop properly . Early @-@ sown crops may avoid significant damage if they have already flowered before the number of aphids builds up in the spring . Celery can be heavily infested . The plants are stunted by the removal of sap , the stems are distorted , harmful viruses are transmitted , and aphid residues may contaminate the crop . As a result of infestation by this aphid , leaves of sugar beet become swollen , roll , and cease developing . The roots grow poorly and the sugar content is reduced . In some other plants the leaves do not become distorted but growth is affected and flowers abort due to the action of the toxic saliva injected by the aphid to improve the flow of sap . 
 To obtain enough protein , aphids need to suck large volumes of sap . The excess sugary fluid , honeydew , is secreted by the aphids . It adheres to plants where it promotes growth of sooty molds . These are unsightly , reduce the surface area of the plant available for photosynthesis and may reduce the value of the crop . These aphids are also the vectors of about thirty plant viruses , mostly of the <unk> variety . The aphids may not be the original source of infection but are instrumental in spreading the virus through the crop . Various chemical treatments are available to kill the aphids and organic growers can use a solution of soft soap . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Natural predators of black bean aphids include both adults and larvae of ladybirds and lacewings and the larvae of hoverflies . Certain species of tiny parasitic wasps lay their eggs inside aphids and the developing wasp larvae devour their hosts from inside . Members of the wasp genera <unk> and <unk> behave in this way and may provide a measure of control of the aphids . 
 Ants climb the host plants and feed on the honeydew secreted by the aphids . Many species of ants have developed behaviours to enable them to protect and encourage their aphids . Black garden ants ( Lasius niger ) , for example , remove predators such as ladybirds from the vicinity of aphids , thus keeping their " milch cows " safe . On a test plot of field beans ( Vicia faba ) , plants without black bean aphids yielded an average of 56 seeds per plant , those with aphids and no ants yielded 17 seeds , and those with both ants and aphids averaged eight seeds per plant . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The black bean aphid may have originated in Europe and Asia but it is now one of the most widely distributed species of aphids . It is found throughout temperate areas of Western Europe , Asia and North America and in the cooler parts of Africa , the Middle East and South America . In the warmer parts of its range , <unk> individuals can survive the winter and they may continue to reproduce asexually all year round . 
 = Chika Ideal = 
 " Chika Ideal " ( English : " Ideal Girl " ) is a song by Puerto Rican recording artist Ivy Queen from her fourth studio album Real ( 2004 ) . It was written by Martha Ivelisse Pesante , produced by Rafi Mercenario and released as the lead single from the album in May 2004 on Universal Music Latino and Perfect Image . 
 Lyrically , the song follows the protagonist talking to her lover , assuring him that she is going to be with him . Queen performed the song for the first time on Don Francisco Presenta . Furthermore , the video for the song reached the top of the music video countdown hosted by Terra Networks . 
 = = Background = = 
 Queen 's 2003 third studio recording , Diva , was a factor in reggaetón 's mainstream exposure in 2004 ( with Daddy Yankee 's Barrio Fino and Tego Calderon 's El Enemy de los Guasíbiri ) , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . Queen released a platinum edition of the album with extra tracks , including " Papi Te Quiero " and " Tu No Puedes " , and began recording her next album . Her fourth studio album was originally planned to be Queen 's debut full @-@ length English language album after she received recording contract offerings from multiple record labels including Sony . She said it was a good opportunity to reach and take over the competitive market of English hip hop music after becoming popular in Latin American countries . Queen signed a deal to record an English @-@ language album after Sony contacted her and notified her that her albums from when she was with the label six years prior are now being heard in cities like London . This was because of the success of Diva . Despite her concerns over her poor English pronunciation , she continued with the project . She recorded songs with many of hip hop 's biggest MCs including American rapper Fat Joe , who recorded a song in English for her debut English album in support of her . The song was later turned into " Quítate Two " and included on Real , while American hip hop producer Swizz Beatz handled production of " Soldados " showcasing her crossover appeal . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 According to an editor for Rolling Stone , the album contains " raspy braggadocio and sexy rhymes " which complement Queen 's raspy vocals . Queen said " I really think this album is for people to really just sit down and listen to it " . She explained that " there are times that the songs will make you want to dance " but their lyrical content was more meaningful . Queen wanted the overall feeling of the album to express that she is a well – rounded artist . Furthermore , describing the album : " [ the songs ] are always going to be real because they are feelings that people have , " she asserts . " The hits that I have now , the girls love them because they are real . If I am feeling hurt and need to curse to express that , then I will . I am going to be real all the way because that 's what made Ivy Queen . " This is prominent on " Chika Ideal " , where she assures the protagonists ' lover that she wants to be with him and fulfill his fantasies . 
 Ivy Queen appeared on " Don Francisco Presenta " where she performed " Chika Ideal " in promotion of the album . Queen performed on the " Reggaeton Tour 2004 " which also featured other artist including Aldo Ranks and La Factoria in various South American countries including Ecuador where she performed songs such as " Papi Te Quiero " and " Chika Ideal " , promoting both Diva and Real . At the end of the month , Queen appeared on a special network television news segment detailing her career and struggle for respect within the genre of reggaetón . This occurred during studio recording sessions for the album . In February 2005 , she performed " Chika Ideal " , among other songs , at the " Festival of Puerto Rican Stars " , which was a historic achievement for reggaetón , as no other performer from the genre was invited to attend the event . In June 2005 , she appeared on the " Invasion Del Reggaetón Tour " with Daddy Yankee , which grossed $ 817 @,@ 220 for the week of June 18 . She also attended and performed at the Billboard Bash ! , the night before the 2005 Billboard Latin Music Awards . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While reviewing the reggaetón compilation album , Jamz TV Hits , Vol . 3 , an editor for Allmusic listed " Chika Ideal " as an selected " Allmusic Pick " . The song was also selected as one of the hits from " The Golden Era of Reggaetón " which lasted from 2003 until 2007 by Jesus Trivino of Latina magazine . Terra Networks named the music video for " Chika Ideal " as one of the hottest of the summer and claimed the song to show " why she is the queen of reggaetón " . 
 Despite not charting in Billboard magazine , the video reached the Top 10 for four consecutive weeks on Terra Networks ' Top Music Video countdown . In the music video for the song , Queen is video taped showing sensual scenes by several cameras from different angles . Scenes alternate between a dance in a darkened room and Queen is a record studio and the cameras . She is surrounded by multiple computers and flat screen television sets which display the feeds from the cameras . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from album 's liner notes . 
 Executive Production – Goguito " Willy " Guadalupe , Omar Navarro 
 Co @-@ Executive Production – " La Diva " Ivy Queen 
 Audio Production – Rafi Mercenario 
 Musical Production – Rafi Mercenario 
 Mastering – Esteban Piñero 
 Mixing – Dennis Nieves 
 Engineer – Dennis Nieves 
 Arranging – Dennis Nieves 
 Vocals – Ivy Queen , Noriega 
 Recording – Marroneo Studios in Bayamón , Puerto Rico 
 Record Label – Universal Music Latino 
 Representation – Goguito " Willy " Guadalupe 
 Publishing – Perfect Image Music Publishing / EMI 2004 
 Photography – Dr. Mannix Guillaera 
 Footwear – Steve Maden from Plaza Las Américas in San Juan , Puerto Rico 
 Graphic Art – <unk> 
 = Tasmanian devil = 
 The Tasmanian devil ( Sarcophilus harrisii ) is a carnivorous marsupial of the family <unk> , now found in the wild only on the Australian island state of Tasmania . The size of a small dog , it became the largest carnivorous marsupial in the world following the extinction of the thylacine in 1936 . It is characterised by its stocky and muscular build , black fur , pungent odour , extremely loud and disturbing screech , keen sense of smell , and ferocity when feeding . The Tasmanian devil 's large head and neck allow it to generate among the strongest bite per unit body mass of any extant mammal land predator , and it hunts prey and scavenges carrion as well as eating household products if humans are living nearby . Although it usually is solitary , it sometimes eats with other devils and defecates in a communal location . Unlike most other dasyurids , the devil <unk> effectively and is active during the middle of the day without overheating . Despite its rotund appearance , the devil is capable of surprising speed and endurance , and can climb trees and swim across rivers . 
 It is believed that ancient marsupials migrated from what is now South America to Australia tens of millions of years ago during the time of Gondwana , and that they evolved as Australia became more arid . Fossils of species similar to modern devils have been found , but it is not known whether they were ancestors of the contemporary species , or whether the current devils co @-@ existed with these species . The date that the Tasmanian devil became locally extinct from the Australian mainland is unclear ; most evidence suggests they had contracted to three relict populations around 3000 years ago . A tooth found in Augusta , Western Australia has been dated to 430 years ago , but archaeologist Oliver Brown disputes this and considers the devil 's mainland extinction to have occurred around 3000 years ago . This disappearance is usually blamed on dingoes , which are absent from Tasmania . Because they were seen as a threat to livestock and animals that humans hunted for fur in Tasmania , devils were hunted and became endangered . In 1941 , the devils , which were originally seen as implacably vicious , became officially protected . Since then , scientists have contended that earlier concerns that the devils were the most significant threat to livestock were overestimated and misplaced . 
 Devils are not monogamous , and their reproductive process is very robust and competitive . Males fight one another for the females , and then guard their partners to prevent female infidelity . Females can ovulate three times in as many weeks during the mating season , and 80 % of two @-@ year @-@ old females are seen to be pregnant during the annual mating season . Females average four breeding seasons in their life and give birth to 20 – 30 live young after three weeks ' gestation . The newborn are pink , lack fur , have indistinct facial features and weigh around 0 @.@ 20 g ( 0 @.@ 0071 oz ) at birth . As there are only four nipples in the pouch , competition is fierce and few newborns survive . The young grow rapidly and are ejected from the pouch after around 100 days , weighing roughly 200 g ( 7 @.@ 1 oz ) . The young become independent after around nine months , so the female spends most of her year in activities related to birth and rearing . 
 Since the late 1990s , devil facial tumour disease has drastically reduced the devil population and now threatens the survival of the species , which in 2008 was declared to be endangered . Programs are currently being undertaken by the Government of Tasmania to reduce the impact of the disease , including an initiative to build up a group of healthy devils in captivity , isolated from the disease . While the thylacine was extant it preyed on the devil , which targeted young and unattended thylacine cubs in their dens . Localised populations of devils have also been severely reduced by collisions with motor vehicles , particularly when they are eating roadkill . 
 The devil is an iconic symbol of Tasmania and many organisations , groups and products associated with the state use the animal in their logos . It is seen as an important attractor of tourists to Tasmania and has come to worldwide attention through the Looney Tunes character of the same name . Starting in 2013 , Tasmanian devils are again being sent to zoos around the world as part of the Australian government 's Save the Tasmanian Devil Program . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Believing it to be a type of opossum , naturalist George Harris wrote the first published description of the Tasmanian devil in 1807 , naming it Didelphis <unk> , due to its bearlike characteristics such as the round ear . He had earlier made a presentation on the topic at the Zoological Society of London . However , that particular binomial name had been given to the common wombat ( later reclassified as <unk> ursinus ) by George Shaw in 1800 , and was hence unavailable . In 1838 a specimen was named Dasyurus laniarius by Richard Owen , but by 1877 he had relegated it to Sarcophilus . The modern Tasmanian devil was named Sarcophilus harrisii ( " Harris 's meat @-@ lover " ) by French naturalist Pierre <unk> in 1841 . A later revision of the devil 's taxonomy , published in 1987 , attempted to change the species name to Sarcophilus laniarius based on mainland fossil records of only a few animals . However , this was not accepted by the taxonomic community at large ; the name S. harrisii has been retained and S. laniarius relegated to a fossil species . " Beelzebub 's pup " was an early vernacular name given to it by the explorers of Tasmania , in reference to a religious figure who is a prince of hell and an assistant of Satan ; the explorers first encountered the animal by hearing its far @-@ reaching vocalisations at night . Related names that were used in the 19th century were Sarcophilus <unk> ( " Satanic <unk> " ) and Diabolus ursinus ( " bear devil " ) , all due to early misconceptions of the devil as implacably vicious . 
 The Tasmanian devil ( Sarcophilus harrisii ) belongs to the family <unk> . The genus Sarcophilus contains two other species , known only from Pleistocene fossils : S. laniarius and S. <unk> . The relationships between the three species are not clear . Phylogenetic analysis shows that the devil is most closely related to quolls . 
 The roots of Australian marsupials are thought to trace back tens of millions of years to when much of the current Southern Hemisphere was part of the supercontinent of Gondwana ; marsupials are believed to have originated in what is now South America and migrated across Antarctica , which had a temperate climate at the time . As soil degradation took hold , it is believed that the marsupials adapted to the more basic flora of Australia . According to Pemberton , the possible ancestors of the devil may have needed to climb trees to acquire food , leading to a growth in size and the hopping gait of many marsupials . He speculated that these adaptations may have caused the contemporary devil 's peculiar gait . The specific lineage of the Tasmanian devil is theorised to have emerged during the Miocene , molecular evidence suggesting a split from the ancestors of quolls between 10 and 15 million years ago , when severe climate change came to bear in Australia , transforming the climate from warm and moist to an arid , dry ice age , resulting in mass extinctions . As most of their prey died of the cold , only a few carnivores survived , including the ancestors of the quoll and thylacine . It is speculated that the devil lineage may have arisen at this time to fill a niche in the ecosystem , as a scavenger that disposed of carrion left behind by the selective @-@ eating thylacine . The extinct <unk> <unk> of the Pliocene age has been dubbed an intermediate species between the quoll and devil . 
 Fossil deposits in limestone caves at Naracoorte , South Australia , dating to the Miocene include specimens of S. laniarius , which were around 15 % larger and 50 % heavier than modern devils . Older specimens believed to be 50 – 70 @,@ 000 years old were found in Darling Downs in Queensland and in Western Australia . It is not clear whether the modern devil evolved from S. laniarius , or whether they coexisted at the time . Richard Owen argued for the latter hypothesis in the 19th century , based on fossils found in 1877 in New South Wales . Large bones attributed to S. <unk> have been found in New South Wales , and it has been conjectured that these two extinct larger species may have hunted and scavenged . It is known that there were several genera of thylacine millions of years ago , and that they ranged in size , the smaller being more reliant on foraging . As the devil and thylacine are similar , the extinction of the co @-@ existing thylacine genera has been cited as evidence for an analogous history for the devils . It has been speculated that the smaller size of S. laniarius and S. <unk> allowed them to adapt to the changing conditions more effectively and survive longer than the corresponding thylacines . As the extinction of these two species came at a similar time to human habitation of Australia , hunting by humans and land clearance have been mooted as possible causes . Critics of this theory point out that as indigenous Australians only developed boomerangs and spears for hunting around 10 @,@ 000 years ago , a critical fall in numbers due to systematic hunting is unlikely . They also point out that caves inhabited by Aborigines have a low proportion of bones and rock paintings of devils , and suggest that this is an indication that it was not a large part of indigenous lifestyle . A scientific report in 1910 claimed that Aborigines preferred the meat of herbivores rather than carnivores . The other main theory for the extinction was that it was due to the climate change brought on by the most recent ice age . 
 While dingoes are seen as the main reason for the disappearance of devils from the mainland , another theory is that the increasing aridity of the mainland caused it , while the population in Tasmania has been largely unaffected as the climate remains cool and moist . According to this theory , the dingo was only a secondary cause . 
 As the devil is the thylacine 's closest relative , there has been speculation that the thylacine could be revived by combining DNA from museum samples of thylacines with ova of the devil . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 The Tasmanian devil 's genome was sequenced in 2010 by the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute . Like all dasyurids , the devil has 14 chromosomes . Devils have a low genetic diversity compared to other Australian marsupials and placental carnivores ; this is consistent with a founder effect as allelic size ranges were low and nearly continuous throughout all subpopulations measured . <unk> diversity was measured at 2 @.@ 7 – 3 @.@ 3 in the subpopulations sampled , and heterozygosity was in the range 0 @.@ 386 – 0 @.@ 467 . According to a study by Menna Jones , " gene flow appears extensive up to 50 km ( 31 mi ) " , meaning a high assignment rate to source or close neighbour populations " in agreement with movement data . At larger scales ( 150 – 250 km or 90 – 200 mi ) , gene flow is reduced but there is no evidence for isolation by distance " . Island effects may also have contributed to their low genetic diversity . Periods of low population density may also have created moderate population bottlenecks , reducing genetic diversity . Low genetic diversity is thought to have been a feature in the Tasmanian devil population since the mid @-@ Holocene . Outbreaks of devil facial tumour disease ( DFTD ) cause an increase in inbreeding . A sub @-@ population of devils in the north @-@ west of the state is genetically distinct from other devils , but there is some exchange between the two groups . 
 One strand conformation polymorphism analysis ( <unk> ) on the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class I domain taken from various locations across Tasmania showed 25 different types , and showed a different pattern of MHC types in north @-@ western Tasmania to eastern Tasmania . Those devils in the east of the state have less MHC diversity ; 30 % are of the same type as the tumour ( type 1 ) , and 24 % are of type A. Seven of every ten devils in the east are of type A , D , G or 1 , which are linked to DFTD ; whereas only 55 % of the western devils fall into these MHC categories . Of the 25 MHC types , 40 % are exclusive to the western devils . Although the north @-@ west population is less genetically diverse overall , it has higher MHC gene diversity , which allows them to mount an immune response to DFTD . According to this research , mixing the devils may increase the chance of disease . Of the fifteen different regions in Tasmania surveyed in this research , six were in the eastern half of the island . In the eastern half , Epping Forest had only two different types , 75 % being type O. In the Buckland @-@ Nugent area , only three types were present , and there were an average of 5 @.@ 33 different types per location . In contrast , in the west , Cape Sorell yielded three types , and <unk> North @-@ Christmas Hills yielded six , but the other seven sites all had at least eight MHC types , and West Pencil Pine had 15 types . There was an average of 10 @.@ 11 MHC types per site in the west . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Tasmanian devil is the largest surviving carnivorous marsupial . It has a squat , thick build , with a large head and a tail which is about half its body length . Unusually for a marsupial , its forelegs are slightly longer than its hind legs , and devils can run up to 13 km / h ( 8 @.@ 1 mph ) for short distances . The fur is usually black , often with irregular white patches on the chest and rump ( although approximately 16 % of wild devils do not have white patches ) . These markings suggest that the devil is most active at dawn and dusk , and they are thought to draw biting attacks toward less important areas of the body , as fighting between devils often leads to a concentration of scars in that region . Males are usually larger than females , having an average head and body length of 652 mm ( 25 @.@ 7 in ) , a 258 mm ( 10 @.@ 2 in ) tail and an average weight of 8 kg ( 18 lb ) . Females have an average head and body length of 570 mm ( 22 in ) , a 244 mm ( 9 @.@ 6 in ) tail and an average weight of 6 kg ( 13 lb ) , although devils in western Tasmania tend to be smaller . Devils have five long toes on their forefeet , four pointing to the front and one coming out from the side , which gives the devil the ability to hold food . The hind feet have four toes , and the devils have non @-@ retractable claws . The stocky devils have a relatively low centre of mass . 
 Devils are fully grown at two years of age , and few devils live longer than five years in the wild . Possibly the longest @-@ lived Tasmanian devil recorded was <unk> , a male devil which lived in captivity for more than seven years . Born in January 1997 at the Cincinnati Zoo , <unk> died in May 2004 at the Fort Wayne Children 's Zoo . 
 The devil stores body fat in its tail , and healthy devils have fat tails . The tail is largely non @-@ prehensile and is important to its physiology , social behaviour and locomotion . It acts as a counterbalance to aid stability when the devil is moving quickly . An ano @-@ genital scent gland at the base of its tail is used to mark the ground behind the animal with its strong , pungent scent . 
 The male has external testes in a pouch @-@ like structure formed by lateral <unk> folds of the abdomen , which partially hides and protects them . The testes are <unk> in shape and the mean dimensions of 30 testes of adult males was 3 @.@ 17 cm × 2 @.@ 57 cm ( 1 @.@ 25 in × 1 @.@ 01 in ) . The female 's pouch opens backwards , and is present throughout its life , unlike some other dasyurids . 
 The Tasmanian devil has an exceptionally strong bite for its size , generating a force of over 553 N ( 124 lbf ) . The jaw can open to 75 – 80 degrees , allowing the devil to generate the large amount of power to tear meat and crush bones — sufficient force to allow it to bite through thick metal wire . The power of the jaws is in part due to its comparatively large head . The teeth and jaws of Tasmanian devils resemble those of hyenas , an example of convergent evolution . <unk> teeth resemble those of primitive marsupials . Like all dasyurids , the devil has prominent canines and cheek teeth . It has three pairs of lower incisors and four pairs of upper incisors . These are located at the top of the front of the devil 's mouth . Like dogs , it has 42 teeth , however , unlike dogs , its teeth are not replaced after birth but grow continuously throughout life at a slow rate . It has a " highly carnivorous dentition and trophic adaptations for bone consumption " . The devil has long claws that allow it to dig burrows and seek subterranean food easily and grip prey or mates strongly . The teeth and claw strength allow the devil to attack wombats up to 30 kg ( 66 lb ) in weight . The large neck and <unk> that give the devil its strength also cause this strength to be biased towards the front half of the body ; the lopsided , awkward , shuffling gait of the devil is attributed to this . 
 The devil has long whiskers on its face and in clumps on the top of the head . These help the devil locate prey when foraging in the dark , and aid in detecting when other devils are close during feeding . The whiskers can extend from the tip of the chin to the rear of the jaw and can cover the span of its shoulder . Hearing is its dominant sense , and it also has an excellent sense of smell , which has a range of 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) . The devil , unlike other marsupials , has a " well @-@ <unk> , saddle @-@ shaped ectotympanic " . Since devils hunt at night , their vision seems to be strongest in black and white . In these conditions they can detect moving objects readily , but have difficulty seeing stationary objects . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Devils are found in all habitats on the island of Tasmania , including the outskirts of urban areas , and are distributed throughout the Tasmanian mainland and on Robbins Island ( which is connected to mainland Tasmania at low tide ) . The north @-@ western population is located west of the Forth River and as far south as Macquarie Heads . Previously , they were present on Bruny Island from the 19th century , but there have been no records of them after 1900 , and they were introduced to Badger Island in the mid @-@ 1990s but are thought to have died out by 2005 . A study has modelled the reintroduction of DFTD @-@ free Tasmanian devils to the mainland in areas where dingoes are sparse . It is proposed that devils would have fewer impacts on both livestock and native fauna than dingoes , and that the mainland population could act as an additional insurance population . In September 2015 , 20 immunised captive @-@ bred devils were released into Narawntapu National Park , Tasmania . Two later died from being hit by cars . 
 The " core habitat " of the devils is considered to be within the " low to moderate annual rainfall zone of eastern and north @-@ western Tasmania " . Tasmanian devils particularly like dry sclerophyll forests and coastal woodlands . Although they are not found at the highest altitudes of Tasmania , and their population density is low in the button grass plains in the south @-@ west of the state , their population is high in dry or mixed sclerophyll forests and coastal heaths . Devils prefer open forest to tall forest , and dry rather than wet forests . They are also found near roads where roadkill is prevalent , although the devils themselves are often killed by vehicles while retrieving the carrion . According to the Threatened Species Scientific Committee , their versatility means that habitat modification from destruction is not seen as a major threat to the species . 
 The devil is directly linked to the <unk> robusta , a tapeworm which is classified as Rare under the Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act 1995 . This tapeworm is found only in devils . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The Tasmanian devil is a nocturnal and crepuscular hunter , spending the days in dense bush or in a hole . It has been speculated that <unk> may have been adopted to avoid predation by eagles and humans . Young devils are predominantly crepuscular . There is no evidence of torpor . 
 Young devils can climb trees , but this becomes more difficult as they grow larger . Devils can scale trees of trunk diameter larger than 40 cm ( 16 in ) , which tend to have no small side branches to hand onto , up to a height of around 2 @.@ 5 – 3 m ( 8 @.@ 2 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . Devils that are yet to reach maturity can climb shrubs to a height of 4 metres ( 13 @.@ 1 ft ) , and can climb a tree to 7 m ( 23 ft ) if it is not vertical . Adult devils may eat young devils if they are very hungry , so this climbing behaviour may be an adaptation to allow young devils to escape . Devils can also swim and have been observed crossing rivers that are 50 metres ( 160 ft ) in width , including icy cold waterways , apparently enthusiastically . 
 Tasmanian devils do not form packs , but rather spend most of their time alone once weaned . Classically considered as solitary animals , their social interactions were poorly understood . However , a field study published in 2009 shed some light on this . Tasmanian devils in Narawntapu National Park were fitted with proximity sensing radio collars which recorded their interactions with other devils over several months from February to June 2006 . This revealed that all devils were part of a single huge contact network , characterised by male @-@ female interactions during mating season , while female @-@ female interactions were the most common at other times , although frequency and patterns of contact did not vary markedly between seasons . Previously thought to fight over food , males only rarely interacted with other males . Hence , all devils in a region are part of a single social network . They are considered to be non @-@ territorial in general , but females are territorial around their dens . This allows a higher total mass of devils to occupy a given area than territorial animals , without conflict . Tasmanian devils instead occupy a home range . In a period of between two and four weeks , devils ' home ranges are estimated to vary between 4 and 27 km2 ( 990 and 6 @,@ 670 acres ) , with an average of 13 km2 ( 3 @,@ 200 acres ) . The location and geometry of these areas depend on the distribution of food , particularly wallabies and <unk> nearby . 
 Devils use three or four dens regularly . Dens formerly owned by wombats are especially prized as maternity dens because of their security . Dense vegetation near creeks , thick grass tussocks , and caves are also used as dens . Adult devils use the same dens for life . It is believed that , as a secure den is highly prized , some may have been used for several centuries by generations of animals . Studies have suggested that food security is less important than den security , as habitat destruction that impacts the latter has had more effect on mortality rates . Young pups remain in one den with their mother , and other devils are mobile , changing dens every 1 – 3 days and travelling a mean distance of 8 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 3 mi ) every night . However , there are also reports that an upper bound can be 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) per night . They choose to travel through lowlands , saddles and along the banks of creeks , particularly preferring carved @-@ out tracks and livestock paths and eschewing steep slopes and rocky terrain . The amount of movement is believed to be similar throughout the year , except for mothers who have given birth recently . The similarity in travel distances for males and females is unusual for sexually dimorphic , solitary carnivores . As a male needs more food , he will spend more time eating than travelling . Devils typically make circuits of their home range during their hunts . In areas near human habitation , they are known to steal clothes , blankets and pillows and take them for use in dens in wooden buildings . 
 While the dasyurids have similar diet and anatomy , differing body sizes affect thermoregulation and thus behaviour . In ambient temperatures between 5 and 30 ° C ( 41 and 86 ° F ) , the devil was able to maintain a body temperature between 37 @.@ 4 and 38 ° C ( 99 @.@ 3 and 100 @.@ 4 ° F ) . When the temperature was raised to 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) , and the humidity to 50 % , the devil 's body temperature spiked upwards by 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) within 60 minutes , but then steadily decreased back to the starting temperature after a further two hours , and remained there for two more hours . During this time , the devil drank water and showed no visible signs of discomfort , leading scientists to believe that sweating and evaporative cooling is its primary means of heat dissipation . A later study found that devils pant but do not sweat to release heat . In contrast , many other marsupials were unable to keep their body temperatures down . As the smaller animals have to live in hotter and more arid conditions to which they are less well @-@ adapted , they take up a nocturnal lifestyle and drop their body temperatures during the day , whereas the devil is active in the day and its body temperature varies by 1 @.@ 8 ° C ( 35 @.@ 2 ° F ) from its minimum at night to the maximum in the middle of the day . 
 The standard metabolic rate of a Tasmanian devil is 141 kJ / kg ( 15 @.@ 3 kcal / lb ) per day , many times lower than smaller marsupials . A 5 @-@ kilogram ( 11 lb ) devil uses 712 kilojoules ( 170 kcal ) per day . The field metabolic rate is 407 kJ / kg ( 44 @.@ 1 kcal / lb ) . Along with quolls , Tasmanian devils have a metabolic rate comparable to non @-@ carnivorous marsupials of a similar size . This differs from placental carnivores , which have comparatively high basal metabolic rates . A study of devils showed a loss of weight from 7 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 1 kilograms ( 17 to 16 lb ) from summer to winter , but in the same time , daily energy consumption increased from 2 @,@ 591 to 2 @,@ 890 kilojoules ( 619 to 691 kcal ) . This is equivalent to an increase in food consumption from 518 to 578 grams ( 18 @.@ 3 to 20 @.@ 4 oz ) . The diet is protein @-@ based with 70 % water content . For every 1 gram ( 0 @.@ 035 oz ) of insects consumed , 3 @.@ 5 kilojoules ( 0 @.@ 84 kcal ) of energy are produced , while a corresponding amount of wallaby meat generated 5 @.@ 0 kilojoules ( 1 @.@ 2 kcal ) . In terms of its body mass , the devil eats only a quarter of the eastern quoll 's intake , allowing it to survive longer during food shortages . 
 The devil is a keystone species in the ecosystem of Tasmania . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Tasmanian devils can take prey up to the size of a small kangaroo , but in practice they are opportunistic and eat carrion more often than they hunt live prey . Although the devil favours wombats because of the ease of predation and high fat content , it will eat all small native mammals such as bettong and <unk> , domestic mammals ( including sheep ) , birds , fish , fruit , vegetable matter , insects , tadpoles , frogs and reptiles . Their diet is widely varied and depends on the food available . Before the extinction of the thylacine , the Tasmanian devil ate thylacine cubs left alone in dens when their parents were away . This may have helped to hasten the extinction of the thylacine , which also ate devils . They are known to hunt water rats by the sea and forage on dead fish that have been washed ashore . Near human habitation , they can also steal shoes and chew on them , and eat the legs of otherwise robust sheep when they have slipped in wooden shearing sheds , leaving their legs dangling below . Other unusual matter observed in devil scats includes collars and tags of devoured animals , intact echidna spines , pencil , plastic and jeans . Although devils can bite through metal traps , they tend to reserve their strong jaws for escaping captivity rather than breaking into food storage . Due to their relative lack of speed , they can not run down a wallaby or a rabbit , but they can attack animals that have become slow due to illness . They survey flocks of sheep by sniffing them from 10 – 15 m away and attack if the prey is ill . The sheep stamp their feet in a show of strength . 
 Despite their lack of extreme speed , there have been reports that devils can run at 25 km / h for 1 @.@ 5 km , and it has been conjectured that , before European immigration and the introduction of livestock , vehicles and roadkill , they would have had to chase other native animals at a reasonable pace to find food . Pemberton has reported that they can average 10 km / h for " extended periods " on several nights per week , and that they run for long distances before sitting still for up to half an hour , something that has been interpreted as evidence of ambush predation . 
 Devils can dig to forage corpses , in one case digging down to eat the corpse of a buried horse that had died due to illness . They are known to eat animal cadavers by first ripping out the digestive system , which is the softest part of the anatomy , and they often reside in the resulting cavity while they are eating . 
 On average , devils eat about 15 % of their body weight each day , although they can eat up to 40 % of their body weight in 30 minutes if the opportunity arises . This means they can become very heavy and lethargic after a large meal ; in this state they tend to waddle away slowly and lie down , becoming easy to approach . This has led to a belief that such eating habits became possible due to the lack of a predator to attack such bloated individuals . 
 Tasmanian devils can eliminate all traces of a carcass of a smaller animal , devouring the bones and fur if desired . In this respect , devils have earned the gratitude of Tasmanian farmers , as the speed at which they clean a carcass helps prevent the spread of insects that might otherwise harm livestock . Some of these dead animals are disposed of when the devils haul off the excess feed back to their residence to continue eating at a later time . 
 The diet of a devil can vary substantially for males and females , and seasonally , according to studies at Cradle Mountain . In winter , males prefer medium mammals over larger ones , with a ratio of 4 : 5 , but in summer , they prefer larger prey in a 7 : 2 ratio . These two categories accounted for more than 95 % of the diet . Females are less inclined to target large prey , but have the same seasonal bias . In winter , large and medium mammals account for 25 % and 58 % each , with 7 % small mammals and 10 % birds . In summer , the first two categories account for 61 % and 37 % respectively . 
 Juvenile devils are sometimes known to climb trees ; in addition to small vertebrates and invertebrates , juveniles climb trees to eat grubs and birds ' eggs . Juveniles have also been observed climbing into nests and capturing birds . Throughout the year , adult devils derive 16 @.@ 2 % of their biomass intake from arboreal species , almost all of which is possum meat , just 1 @.@ 0 % being large birds . From February to July , subadult devils derive 35 @.@ 8 % of their biomass intake from arboreal life , 12 @.@ 2 % being small birds and 23 @.@ 2 % being possums . Female devils in winter source 40 @.@ 0 % of their intake from arboreal species , including 26 @.@ 7 % from possums and 8 @.@ 9 % from various birds . Not all of these animals were caught while they were in trees , but this high figure for females , which is higher than for male spotted @-@ tailed quolls during the same season , is unusual , as the devil has inferior tree climbing skills . 
 Although they hunt alone , there have been unsubstantiated claims of communal hunting , where one devil drives prey out of its habitat and an accomplice attacks . Eating is a social event for the Tasmanian devil . This combination of a solitary animal that eats communally makes the devil unique among carnivores . Much of the noise attributed to the animal is a result of raucous communal eating , at which up to 12 individuals can gather , although groups of two to five are common ; it can often be heard several kilometres away . This has been interpreted as notifications to colleagues to share in the meal , so that food is not wasted by rot and energy is saved . The amount of noise is correlated to the size of the carcass . The devils eat in accordance with a system . Juveniles are active at dusk , so they tend to reach the source before the adults . Typically , the dominant animal eats until it is satiated and leaves , fighting off any challengers in the meantime . Defeated animals run into the bush with their hair and tail erect , their conqueror in pursuit and biting their victim 's rear where possible . Disputes are less common as the food source increases as the motive appears to be getting sufficient food rather than oppressing other devils . When quolls are eating a carcass , devils will tend to chase them away . This is a substantial problem for spotted @-@ tailed quolls , as they kill relatively large possums and cannot finish their meal before devils arrive . In contrast , the smaller eastern quolls predate much smaller victims , and can complete feeding before devils turn up . This is seen as a possible reason for the relatively small population of spotted @-@ tailed quolls . 
 A study of feeding devils identified twenty physical postures , including their characteristic vicious yawn , and eleven different vocal sounds that devils use to communicate as they feed . They usually establish dominance by sound and physical posturing , although fighting does occur . The white patches on the devil are visible to the night @-@ vision of its colleagues . Chemical gestures are also used . Adult males are the most aggressive , and scarring is common . They can also stand on their hind legs and push each other 's shoulders with their front legs and heads , similar to sumo wrestling . Torn flesh around the mouth and teeth , as well as punctures in the rump , can sometimes be observed , although these can also be inflicted during breeding fights . 
 Digestion is very fast in dasyurids and , for the Tasmanian devil , the few hours taken for food to pass through the small gut is a long period in comparison to some other <unk> . Devils are known to return to the same places to defecate , and to do so at a communal location , called a devil latrine . It is believed that the communal defecation may be a means of communication that is not well understood . Devil scats are very large compared to body size ; they are on average 15 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long , but there have been samples that are 25 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) in length . They are characteristically grey in colour due to digested bones , or have bone fragments included . 
 Owen and Pemberton believe that the relationship between Tasmanian devils and thylacines was " close and complex " , as they competed directly for prey and probably also for shelter . The thylacines preyed on the devils , the devils scavenged from the thylacine 's kills , and the devils ate thylacine young . Menna Jones hypothesises that the two species shared the role of apex predator in Tasmania . Wedge @-@ tailed eagles have a similar carrion @-@ based diet to the devils and are regarded as competitors . Quolls and devils are also seen as being in direct competition in Tasmania . Jones believed that the quoll has evolved into its current state in just 100 – 200 generations of around two years as determined by the equal spacing effect on the devil , the largest species , the spotted @-@ tail quoll , and the smallest species , the eastern quoll . Both the Tasmanian devil and the quolls appears to have evolved up to 50 times faster than the average evolutionary rate amongst mammals . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Females start to breed when they reach sexual maturity , typically in their second year . At this point , they become fertile once a year , producing multiple ova while in heat . As prey is most abundant in spring and early summer , the devil 's reproductive cycle starts in March or April so that the end of the weaning period coincides with the maximisation of food supplies in the wild for the newly roaming young devils . Occurring in March , mating takes places in sheltered locations during both day and night . Males fight over females in the breeding season , and female devils will mate with the dominant male . Females can ovulate up to three times in a 21 @-@ day period , and copulation can take five days ; one instance of a couple being in the mating den for eight days has been recorded . Devils are not monogamous , and females will mate with several males if not guarded after mating ; males also reproduce with several females during a season . Females have been shown to be selective in an attempt to ensure the best genetic offspring , for example , fighting off the advances of smaller males . Males often keep their mates in custody in the den , or take them along if they need to drink , lest they engage in infidelity . Males can produce up to 16 offspring over their lifetime , while females average four mating seasons and 12 offspring . Theoretically this means that a devil population can double on an annual basis and make the species insulated against high mortality . The pregnancy rate is high ; 80 % of two @-@ year @-@ old females were observed with newborns in their pouches during the mating season . More recent studies of breeding place the mating season between February and June , as opposed to between February and March . 
 Gestation lasts 21 days , and devils give birth to 20 – 30 young standing up , each weighing approximately 0 @.@ 18 – 0 @.@ 24 grams ( 0 @.@ 0063 – 0 @.@ <unk> oz ) . At birth , the front limb has well @-@ developed digits with claws ; unlike many marsupials , the claws of baby devils are not deciduous . As with most other marsupials , the forelimb is longer ( 0 @.@ 26 – 0 @.@ 43 cm or 0 @.@ 10 – 0 @.@ 17 in ) than the rear limb ( 0 @.@ 20 – 0 @.@ 28 cm or 0 @.@ 079 – 0 @.@ 110 in ) , the eyes are spots , and the body is pink . There are no external ears or openings . Unusually , the gender can be determined at birth , with an external scrotum present . 
 Tasmanian devil young are variously called " pups " , " joeys " , or " imps " . When the young are born , competition is fierce as they move from the vagina in a sticky flow of mucus to the pouch . Once inside the pouch , they each remain attached to a nipple for the next 100 days . The female Tasmanian devil 's pouch , like that of the wombat , opens to the rear , so it is physically difficult for the female to interact with young inside the pouch . Despite the large litter at birth , the female has only four nipples , so there are never more than four babies nursing in the pouch , and the older a female devil gets , the smaller her litters will become . Once the young have made contact with the nipple , it expands , resulting in the oversized nipple being firmly clamped inside the newborn and ensuring that the newborn does not fall out of the pouch . On average , more females survive than males , and up to 60 % of young do not survive to maturity . 
 Milk replacements are often used for devils that have been bred in captivity , for orphaned devils or young who are born to diseased mothers . Little is known about the composition of the devil 's milk compared to other marsupials . 
 Inside the pouch , the nourished young develop quickly . In the second week , the rhinarium becomes distinctive and heavily pigmented . At 15 days , the external parts of the ear are visible , although these are attached to the head and do not open out until the devil is around 10 weeks old . The ear begins blackening after around 40 days , when it is less than 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) long , and by the time the ear becomes erect , it is between 1 @.@ 2 and 1 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 47 and 0 @.@ 63 in ) . <unk> are apparent at 16 days , whiskers at 17 days , and the lips at 20 days . The devils can make squeaking noises after eight weeks , and after around 10 – 11 weeks , the lips can open . Despite the formation of eyelids , they do not open for three months , although eyelashes form at around 50 days . The young — up to this point they are pink — start to grow fur at 49 days and have a full coat by 90 days . The fur growing process starts at the snout and proceeds back through the body , although the tail attains fur before the rump , which is the last part of the body to become covered . Just before the start of the <unk> process , the colour of the bare devil 's skin will darken and become black or dark grey in the tail . 
 The devils have a complete set of facial vibrissae and ulnar carpels , although it is devoid of <unk> vibrissae . During the third week , the <unk> and <unk> are the first to form . Subsequently , the infraorbital , interramal , supraorbital and <unk> vibrissae form . The last four typically occur between the 26th and 39th day . 
 Their eyes open shortly after their fur coat develops — between 87 and 93 days — and their mouths can relax their hold of the nipple at 100 days . They leave the pouch 105 days after birth , appearing as small copies of the parent and weighing around 200 grams ( 7 @.@ 1 oz ) . Zoologist Eric Guiler recorded its size at this time as follows : a crown @-@ snout length of 5 @.@ 87 cm ( 2 @.@ 31 in ) , tail length of 5 @.@ 78 cm ( 2 @.@ 28 in ) , pes length 2 @.@ 94 cm ( 1 @.@ 16 in ) , manus 2 @.@ 30 cm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) , shank 4 @.@ 16 cm ( 1 @.@ 64 in ) , forearm 4 @.@ 34 cm ( 1 @.@ 71 in ) and crown @-@ rump length is 11 @.@ 9 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) . During this period , the devils lengthen at a roughly linear rate . 
 After being ejected , the devils stay outside the pouch , but they remain in the den for around another three months , first venturing outside the den between October and December before becoming independent in January . During this transitional phase out of the pouch , the young devils are relatively safe from predation as they are generally accompanied . When the mother is hunting they can stay inside a shelter or come along , often riding on their mother 's back . During this time they continue to drink their mother 's milk . Female devils are occupied with raising their young for all but approximately six weeks of the year . The milk contains a higher amount of iron than the milk of placental mammals . In Guiler 's 1970 study , no females died while rearing their offspring in the pouch . After leaving the pouch , the devils grow by around 0 @.@ 5 kg ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) a month until they are six months old . While most pups will survive to be weaned , Guiler reported that up to three fifths of devils do not reach maturity . As juveniles are more crepuscular than adults , their appearance in the open during summer gives the impression to humans of a population boom . A study into the success of translocated devils that were orphaned and raised in captivity found that young devils who had consistently engaged with new experiences while they were in captivity survived better than young who had not . 
 Embryonic diapause does not occur . 
 Guiler has reported that consecutive hermaphroditism ( sex change ) has occurred in captured devils , while Pemberton and Mooney recorded in 2004 the case of an animal with a scrotum and a non @-@ functional pouch . 
 In an apparent response to reduced competition caused by devil facial tumour disease , female devils in regions with the disease are now more likely to begin breeding at the age of one year . The disease has also led to the reproductive season being less well @-@ defined , with births more spread out throughout the year . Litters born to mothers with DFTD have more female pups than male pups . 
 A slow @-@ release hormonal contraceptive implant for female devils is being developed and tested in a joint program between the Save the Tasmanian Devil program , the Zoo and Aquarium Association , the Taronga Conservation Society and the University of Sydney . This wildlife contraceptive program is aimed to help the devils continue with their wild behaviour by mating freely , but without certain females contributing too much to the next generation , which " can have long @-@ term genetic consequences for the insurance population " . Contraceptive trials in male devils showed that their testosterone increased , instead of decreasing as other male mammals ' testosterone does . Early studies suggest that the female contraception has been successful , and the female contraceptive implants will be tested in the Maria Island insurance population . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Widespread across Australia in the Pleistocene , the Tasmanian devil had declined and become restricted to three relict populations during the mid @-@ Holocene period around 3 @,@ 000 years ago . Rock art and a single fossil near Darwin point to a northern population , and remains in the southeast signify a southeastern population ranging from the mouth of the Murray River eastwards to the vicinity of Port Phillip in Victoria . This population had contracted from northern Victoria and New South Wales . The rising sea levels in the Holocene also cut it off from Tasmanian populations . The third population was from southwest Western Australia . Fossil evidence from this last location has proven controversial . As with many native animals , ancient devils were larger than their contemporary descendants . In 1972 , Mike Archer and Alex Baynes found a devil tooth at the foot of a cliff near Augusta in Western Australia and dated it to 430 ± 160 years of age , a figure widely circulated and cited . Australian archaeologist Oliver Brown has disputed this , stating that the authors ' uncertainty about the origins of the tooth casts doubts on its age , especially as other remains all date to around 3 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 The cause of their disappearance from the mainland is unclear , but their decline seems to coincide with the expansion across the mainland of indigenous Australians and dingoes . However , whether it was direct hunting by people , competition with dingoes , changes brought about by the increasing human population , who by 3000 years ago were using all habitat types across the continent , or a combination of all three , is unknown ; devils had coexisted with dingoes on the mainland for around 3000 years . Brown has also proposed that the El Niño @-@ Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) grew stronger during the Holocene , and that the devil , as a scavenger with a short life span , was highly sensitive to this . In dingo @-@ free Tasmania , carnivorous marsupials were still active when Europeans arrived . The extermination of the thylacine after the arrival of the Europeans is well known , but the Tasmanian devil was threatened as well . 
 Thylacines preyed on devils , and devils attacked thylacine young ; devils may have hastened the thylacine 's extinction . While the thylacine was extant , apart from hunting devils , it may also have put pressure on the devil for survival , by competing for scarce food and dens ; both animals sought caves and burrows . It has been speculated that devils may have become more predacious and presided over larger home ranges to fill in the vacancy left by the thylacine . 
 Habitat disruption can expose dens where mothers raise their young . This increases mortality , as the mother leaves the disturbed den with her pups clinging to her back , making them more vulnerable . 
 Cancer in general is a common cause of death in devils . In 2008 , high levels of potentially carcinogenic flame retardant chemicals were found in Tasmanian devils . Preliminary results of tests ordered by the Tasmanian government on chemicals found in fat tissue from 16 devils have revealed high levels of <unk> ( <unk> ) and " reasonably high " levels of <unk> ether ( <unk> ) . The Save the Tasmanian Devil Appeal is the official fundraising entity for the Save the Tasmanian Devil Program . The priority is to ensure the survival of the Tasmanian devil in the wild . For more information <unk> 
 Since 1999 , all devils caught in the field have had ear biopsies taken , providing samples of DNA . As of September 2010 , there are 5 @,@ 642 samples in this collection . 
 = = = Population declines = = = 
 At least two major population declines , possibly due to disease epidemics , have occurred in recorded history : in 1909 and 1950 . The devil was also reported as scarce in the 1850s . It is difficult to estimate the size of the devil population . In the mid @-@ 1990s , the population was estimated at 130 @,@ 000 – 150 @,@ 000 animals , but this is likely to have been an overestimate . The Tasmanian devil 's population has been calculated in 2008 by Tasmania 's Department of Primary Industries and Water as being in the range of 10 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 individuals , with 20 @,@ 000 to 50 @,@ 000 mature individuals being likely . Experts estimate that the devil has suffered a more than 80 % decline in its population since the mid @-@ 1990s and that only around 10 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 remain in the wild as of 2008 . 
 The species was listed as vulnerable under the Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act 1995 in 2005 and the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 in 2006 , which means that it is at risk of extinction in the " medium term " . The IUCN classified the Tasmanian devil in the lower risk / least concern category in 1996 , but in 2009 they reclassified it as endangered . 
 = = = Culling = = = 
 The first Tasmanian settlers ate Tasmanian devil , which they described as tasting like veal . As it was believed devils would hunt and kill livestock , possibly due to strong imagery of packs of devils eating weak sheep , a bounty scheme to remove the devil from rural properties was introduced as early as 1830 . However , Guiler 's research contended that the real cause of livestock losses was poor land management policies and feral dogs . In areas where the devil is now absent , poultry has continued to be killed by quolls . In earlier times , hunting possums and wallabies for fur was a big business — more than 900 @,@ 000 animals were hunted in 1923 — and this resulted in a continuation of bounty hunting of devils as they were thought to be a major threat to the fur industry , even though quolls were more adept at hunting the animals in question . Over the next 100 years , trapping and poisoning brought them to the brink of extinction . 
 After the death of the last thylacine in 1936 , the Tasmanian devil was protected by law in June 1941 and the population slowly recovered . In the 1950s , with reports of increasing numbers , some permits to capture devils were granted after complaints of livestock damage . In 1966 , poisoning permits were issued although attempts to have the animal unprotected failed . During this time environmentalists also became more outspoken , particularly as scientific studies provided new data suggesting the threat of devils to livestock had been vastly exaggerated . Numbers may have peaked in the early 1970s after a population boom ; in 1975 they were reported to be lighter , possibly due to overpopulation and consequent lack of food . Another report of overpopulation and livestock damage was reported in 1987 . The following year , Trichinella spiralis , a parasite which kills animals and can infect humans , was found in devils and minor panic broke out before scientists assured the public that 30 % of devils had it but that they could not transmit it to other species . Control permits were ended in the 1990s , but illegal killing continues to a limited extent , albeit " locally intense " . This is not considered a substantial problem for the survival of the devil . Approximately 10 @,@ 000 devils were killed per year in the mid @-@ 1990s . A selective culling program has taken place to remove individuals affected with DFTD , and has been shown to not slow the rate of disease progression or reduced the amount of animals dying . A model has been tested to find out whether culling devils infected with DFTD would assist in the survival of the species , and it has found that culling would not be a suitable strategy to employ . 
 = = = Foxes = = = 
 The decline in devil numbers is also seen as an ecological problem , since its presence in the Tasmanian forest ecosystem is believed to have prevented the establishment of the red fox , illegally introduced to Tasmania around the turn of the 21st century , and has limited the number of foxes , feral cats and dogs because devils eat carrion that would otherwise feed these creatures , as well as killing adult foxes and young foxes in dens . Foxes are a problematic invasive species in all other Australian states and , if established in Tasmania , they would both hinder the recovery of the Tasmanian devil and prey on many other vertebrate species . It is believed that Tasmanian devil young would be vulnerable to red fox predation and that devils and foxes would directly compete for habitat and dens . One common means of trying to stop the foxes is to use meat baits laced with sodium fluoroacetate . As devils and other native animals can also be attracted to the poisoned meat , which is placed inside an M @-@ 44 ejector device , adaptations have been made to the geometry of the device so that the force and jaw geometry needed to open it fits those of the fox but not the native species . Foxes are not yet sufficiently established in Tasmania to pose a threat to the Tasmanian devil . 
 = = = Road mortality = = = 
 Motor vehicles are a threat to localised populations of non @-@ abundant Tasmanian mammals , and a 2010 study showed that devils were particularly vulnerable . A study of nine species , mostly marsupials of a similar size , showed that devils were more difficult for drivers to detect and thus avoid . At high beam , devils had the lowest detection distance , 40 % closer than the median . This requires a 20 % reduction in speed for a motorist to avoid the devil . For low beam , the devils are the seventh worst in terms of detection distance , 16 % below the median . For avoidance of roadkill to be feasible , motorists would have to drive at around half the current speed limit in rural areas . A study in the 1990s on a localised population of devils in a national park in Tasmania recorded a halving of the population after a hitherto gravel access road was upgraded , surfaced with bitumen and widened . At the same time , there was a large increase in deaths caused by vehicles along the new road ; there had been none in the preceding six months . The vast majority of deaths occurred in the sealed portion of the road , believed to be due to an increase in speeds . It was also conjectured that the animals were harder to see against the dark bitumen instead of the light gravel . The devil and quoll are especially vulnerable as they often try to retrieve roadkill for food and travel along the road . To alleviate the problem , traffic slowing measures , man @-@ made pathways that offer alternative routes for devils , education campaigns , and the installation of light reflectors to indicate oncoming vehicles have been implemented . They are credited with decreases in roadkill . Devils have often been victims of roadkill when they are retrieving other roadkill . Work by scientist Menna Jones and a group of conservation volunteers to remove dead animals from the road resulted in a significant reduction in devil traffic deaths . It was estimated that 3 @,@ 392 devils , or between 3 @.@ 8 and 5 @.@ 7 % of the population , were being killed annually by vehicles in 2001 – 04 . In 2009 , the Save the Tasmanian Devil group launched the " Roadkill Project " , which allowed members of the public to report sightings of devils which had been killed on the road . On 25 September 2015 , 20 immunised devils were microchipped and released in Narawntapu National Park . By 5 October , 4 had been hit by cars , prompting Samantha Fox , leader of Save the Tasmanian Devil , to describe roadkill as being the biggest threat to the Tasmanian devil after DFTD . A series of solar @-@ powered alarms have been trialled that make noises and flash lights when cars are approaching , warning the animals . The trial ran for 18 months and the trial area had two @-@ thirds less deaths than the control . 
 = = = Devil facial tumour disease = = = 
 First seen in 1996 in Mount William in northeastern Tasmania , devil facial tumour disease ( DFTD ) has ravaged Tasmania 's wild devils , and estimates of the impact range from 20 % to as much as an 80 % decline in the devil population , with over 65 % of the state affected . The state 's west coast area and far north @-@ west are the only places where devils are tumour free . Individual devils die within months of infection . 
 The disease is an example of a transmissible cancer , which means that it is contagious and passed from one animal to another . Short of a cure , scientists are removing the sick animals and quarantining healthy devils in case the wild population dies out . Because Tasmanian devils have extremely low levels of genetic diversity and a chromosomal mutation unique among carnivorous mammals , they are more prone to the infectious cancer . 
 Wild Tasmanian devil populations are being monitored to track the spread of the disease and to identify changes in disease prevalence . Field monitoring involves trapping devils within a defined area to check for the presence of the disease and determine the number of affected animals . The same area is visited repeatedly to characterise the spread of the disease over time . So far , it has been established that the short @-@ term effects of the disease in an area can be severe . Long @-@ term monitoring at replicated sites will be essential to assess whether these effects remain , or whether populations can recover . Field workers are also testing the effectiveness of disease suppression by trapping and removing diseased devils . It is hoped that the removal of diseased devils from wild populations should decrease disease prevalence and allow more devils to survive beyond their juvenile years and breed . 
 Research published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences on 27 June 2011 , suggests picking a genetically diverse breeding stock , defined by the genome sequence , for conservation efforts . In 2011 , it was estimated that it would cost $ 11 million to preserve the Tasmanian devil species . 
 Research by Professor Greg Woods from the University of Tasmania 's Menzies Institute for Medical Research has shown encouraging evidence for the potential development of a vaccine using dead devil facial tumour disease cells to trigger an immune response in healthy devils . Field testing of the vaccine is being undertaken as a collaborative project between the Menzies Institute for Medical Research and the Save the Tasmanian Devil Program under the Wild Devil Recovery program , and aims to test the immunization protocol as a tool in ensuring the devil 's long term survival in the wild . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 At Lake Nitchie in western New South Wales in 1970 , a male human skeleton wearing a necklace of 178 teeth from 49 different devils was found . The skeleton is estimated to be 7000 years old , and the necklace is believed to be much older than the skeleton . Archeologist Josephine Flood believes the devil was hunted for its teeth and that this contributed to its extinction on mainland Australia . Owen and Pemberton note that few such necklaces have been found . Middens that contain devil bones are rare — two notable examples are Devil 's Lair in the south @-@ western part of Western Australia and Tower Hill in Victoria . 
 In Tasmania , local Aborigines and devils sheltered in the same caves . Tasmanian Aboriginal names for the devil recorded by Europeans include " <unk> " , " <unk> " , and " par @-@ loo @-@ mer @-@ <unk> " . According to Fritz <unk> , the Secretary of the Royal Society of Tasmania in 1910 , there was no evidence that Tasmanian Aborigines ate any carnivorous animals . Owen and Pemberton feel this may have contributed to the devil 's survival prior to European settlement . Convicts at the time when Hobart was being settled in made a meal of Tasmanian devils and it was claimed to be not unlike veal . 
 It is a common belief that devils will eat humans . While they are known to eat the bodies of murder victims or people who have committed suicide , there are prevalent myths that they eat living humans who wander into the bush . Despite outdated beliefs and exaggerations regarding their disposition , many , although not all , devils will remain still when in the presence of a human ; some will also shake nervously . They can bite and scratch out of fear when held by a human , but a firm grip will cause them to remain still . Although they can be tamed , they are asocial and are not considered appropriate as pets ; they have an unpleasant odour and neither demonstrate nor respond to affection . 
 Until recently , the devil was not studied much by academics and naturalists . At the start of the 20th century , Hobart zoo operator Mary Roberts , who was not a trained scientist , was credited for changing people 's attitudes and encouraging scientific interest in native animals such as the devil that were seen as fearsome and abhorrent , and the human perception of the animal changed . Theodore Thomson Flynn was the first professor of biology in Tasmania and carried out some research during the period around World War I. In the mid @-@ 1960s Professor Guiler assembled a team of researchers and started a decade of systematic fieldwork on the devil . This is seen as the start of modern scientific study of it . However , the devil was still negatively depicted , including in tourism material . The first doctorate awarded for research into the devil came in 1991 . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 Early attempts to breed Tasmanian devils in captivity had limited success . The animal activist Mary Roberts , who was known for her work in presenting a less hostile image of the devil to the public and wrote about it in academic journals , bred a pair at Beaumaris Zoo which she named Billy and <unk> in 1913 . However , although advised to remove Billy , Roberts found <unk> too distressed by his absence , and returned him . The first litter was presumed eaten by Billy , but a second litter in 1914 survived after Billy was removed . Roberts wrote an article on keeping and breeding the devils for the London Zoological Society . Even by 1934 , successful breeding of the devil was rare . In a study on the growth of young devils in captivity , some developmental stages were very different from those reported by Guiler . The pinnae were free on day 36 , and eyes opened later , on days 115 – 121 . 
 In general , females tend to retain more stress after being taken into captivity than males . 
 A plan to create " insurance populations " of disease @-@ free devils has been ongoing since 2005 . As of June 2012 , the insurance population has reached a combined total of 500 animals and representing over 98 % of the genetic diversity of this species . Most of these devils are living in Australian zoos and wildlife reserves . Beginning in November 2012 however , in an effort to create a population that is both wild and disease @-@ free , Tasmanian devils have been relocated to Maria Island , a mountainous island off the east coast of Tasmania . The Maria Island population has grown from a starting population of twenty @-@ eight to 90 and experts will soon begin transferring healthy devils back to the mainland population . 
 Tasmanian devils were displayed in various zoos around the world from the 1850s onwards . In the 1950s several animals were given to European zoos . In October 2005 the Tasmanian government sent four devils , two male and two female , to the Copenhagen Zoo , following the birth of the first son of Frederik , Crown Prince of Denmark and his Tasmanian @-@ born wife Mary . Due to restrictions on their export by the Australian government , at the time these were the only devils known to be living outside Australia . In June 2013 , due to the successes of the insurance population program , it was planned to send devils to other zoos around the world in a pilot program . San Diego Zoo Global and Albuquerque <unk> were selected to participate in the program , and Wellington Zoo and Auckland Zoo soon followed . In the United States , four additional zoos have since been selected as part of the Australian government 's Save the Tasmanian Devil program , the zoos selected were : the Fort Wayne Children 's Zoo , the Los Angeles Zoo , the Saint Louis Zoo , and the Toledo Zoo . Captive devils are usually forced to stay awake during the day to cater to visitors , rather than following their natural nocturnal style . 
 There have been reports and suspicions of illegal trading in the past . In 1997 , a devil turned up in Western Australia ; it had not escaped from any licensed keeper . During the 1990s there were internet sites in the US that were advertising devil sales , and rumours that some US Navy personnel had tried to buy them illegally during a visit to Tasmania . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 The devil is an iconic animal within Australia , particularly Tasmania ; it is the symbol of the Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service , and the former Tasmanian Australian rules football team which played in the Victorian Football League was known as the Devils . The Hobart Devils were once part of the National Basketball League . The devil has appeared on several commemorative coins in Australia over the years . Cascade Brewery in Tasmania sells a ginger beer with a Tasmanian devil on the label . In 2015 , the Tasmanian devil was chosen as Tasmania 's state emblem . 
 Tasmanian devils are popular with tourists , and the director of the Tasmanian Devil Conservation Park has described their possible extinction as " a really significant blow for Australian and Tasmanian tourism " . There has also been a multimillion @-@ dollar proposal to build a giant 19 m @-@ high , 35 m @-@ long devil in Launceston in northern Tasmania as a tourist attraction . Devils began to be used in tourism from the 1970s , when studies showed that the animals were often the only things known about Tasmania overseas and suggested that they should therefore be the centrepiece of marketing efforts , resulting in some devils being taken on promotional tours . 
 With their unique personality , the Tasmanian devil has been the subject of numerous documentaries , fiction and non @-@ fiction children 's books . Royalties from Margaret Wild 's Ruby Roars , about a Tasmanian devil , are going to research into DFTD . A 2005 Australian documentary on the Tasmanian devil , Terrors of Tasmania , directed and produced by David Parer and Elizabeth Parer @-@ Cook , follows a female devil called <unk> through breeding season and the birth and rearing of her young . The documentary also looks at the effect of devil facial tumour disease and the conservation measures being taken to ensure survival of the Tasmanian devil . It has screened on television in Australia and in the United States on the National Geographic Channel . 
 The Tasmanian devil is probably best known internationally as the inspiration for the Looney Tunes cartoon character the Tasmanian Devil , or " Taz " in 1954 . Little known at the time , the loud hyperactive cartoon character has little in common with the real life animal . After a few shorts between 1957 and 1964 , the character was retired until the 1990s , when he gained his own show , Taz @-@ Mania , and again became popular . In 1997 , a newspaper report noted that Warner Bros. had " trademarked the character and registered the name Tasmanian Devil " , and that this trademark " was policed " , including an eight @-@ year legal case to allow a Tasmanian company to call a fishing lure " Tasmanian Devil " . Debate followed , and a delegation from the Tasmanian government met with Warner Bros. Ray Groom , the Tourism Minister , later announced that a " verbal agreement " had been reached . An annual fee would be paid to Warner Bros. in return for the Government of Tasmania being able to use the image of Taz for " marketing purposes " . This agreement later disappeared . In 2006 , Warner Bros. permitted the Government of Tasmania to sell stuffed toys of Taz with profits funnelled into research on DFTD . 
 There is a DC Comics superhero called Tasmanian Devil who is a member of the Global Guardians team . <unk> , a character in the Transformers Beast Wars storyline , had the alternate form of a Tasmanian devil . Tasmanian Kid from Beast Wars II could also transform into a Tasmanian devil . 
 Researchers have named a genetic @-@ mutant mouse " the Tasmanian Devil " . It is defective in the development of sensory @-@ hair cells of the ear , leading it to abnormal behaviours including head @-@ tossing and circling , more like the cartoon " Taz " than the actual Tasmanian devil . 
 For the 2 @.@ 6 @.@ 29 release of the Linux kernel , Linus <unk> temporarily replaced the Tux mascot with a Tasmanian devil named " <unk> " , in support of the Save the Tasmanian Devil Campaign . 
 A catamaran , called the Devil Cat , was named for , and based on , the Tasmanian devil . Operating on the world 's longest distance high speed ferry service , the catamaran crossed Bass Strait between George Town in Tasmania , and Station Pier , at Port Phillip , Port Melbourne in Victoria , during 1997 – 2002 . 
 = Clam dip = 
 Clam dip is a dipping sauce and condiment prepared with clams , sour cream or cream cheese , and seasonings as primary ingredients . Various additional ingredients can be used . It is usually served chilled , although it is sometimes served hot or at room temperature . It is used as a dip for potato chips , crackers , bread , and <unk> . After a recipe for the dip was presented during a popular U.S. radio show , canned clams in New York City sold out in 24 hours . Commercial varieties of clam dip are mass @-@ produced by some companies and marketed to consumers in grocery stores and supermarkets . 
 = = History = = 
 In the early 1950s in the United States , the first televised recipe for clam dip appeared on the Kraft Music Hall show , a well @-@ known and popular radio and television variety program that ran from 1933 to 1971 . After the recipe segment aired , canned clams in New York City sold out within 24 hours . The ingredients used in this recipe were minced , canned clams , cream cheese , lemon juice , Worcestershire sauce , garlic , salt and pepper . Clam dip remained popular throughout the 1960s in the U.S. , at which time prepared manufactured clam dips were available in U.S. supermarkets . As salsa became more popular among American consumers , the popularity of clam dip declined . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Clam dip is typically prepared using chopped or minced clams , sour cream or cream cheese , and various seasonings , and usually served chilled . It is used as a dip for potato chips , bread , crackers , and <unk> . It has a creamy texture and <unk> . Canned , cooked , and frozen or fresh clams may be used , the latter of which can be cooked by steaming or pan cooking . Canned clams may be drained , or the liquid may be retained and used as an ingredient . After refrigeration , the dip may thicken , and the liquid from canned clams can be used to thin the dip . Milk is also sometimes used to thin clam dip . When refrigerated and left to sit overnight , the flavors of the ingredients intermingle more greatly , resulting in a more flavorful dip . Smoked clams are sometimes used , which imbues a distinct smoky flavor to the dish . The clams may be smoked in the shell and then minced afterward . 
 Additional ingredients can be used , such as lemon juice , Worcestershire sauce , onion , scallions , shallots , chives , garlic , and hot sauce . The ingredients can be mixed using a food processor . It is sometimes served as a hot dip , which may be kept warm using a chafing dish , and melted cheese may be used as an ingredient in hot versions . It is also sometimes served at room temperature . Clam dip can be served in a hollowed @-@ out loaf of bread , such as sourdough . It can be garnished with ingredients such as parsley , scallions and paprika . <unk> to accompany the dish can include red peppers , carrots , radishes , and cauliflower , among others . Prepared clam dip can be preserved by storing it in a freezer . 
 = = Commercial varieties = = 
 Some companies mass @-@ produce commercial varieties of prepared clam dip and market them to consumers in grocery stores and supermarkets . Commercial varieties are typically packaged in plastic tubs . Prepared clam dip mixes have also been commercially manufactured and marketed to consumers . One such product comes packaged with dried sour cream that is reconstituted using water . 
 = = Nutrition information = = 
 A one @-@ <unk> serving of clam dip using the recipe that aired in the early 1950s on the Kraft Music Hall show contains 71 calories , 1 g carbohydrate , 5 g protein , 5 g total fat ( with 3 g saturated fat ) , 25 mg cholesterol and 136 mg sodium . 
 = Christmas Tree ( Lady Gaga song ) = 
 " Christmas Tree " is a song by American singer Lady Gaga . It was released on December 16 , 2008 for digital download . It was written and produced by Gaga , Martin Kierszenbaum , and Space Cowboy , who also provides guest vocals . Musically , " Christmas Tree " is a Christmas song with dance @-@ pop and synthpop influences . It samples the classic Christmas song " Deck the Halls " , as well as briefly using the lyrics " Rum pum pum pum " from the Christmas song " The Little Drummer Boy " in its intro . Lyrically , the song uses sexual innuendos . 
 The song received mixed reviews from music critics , with some commending its creativity and individuality from other Christmas songs and others criticizing its sexual innuendos and deeming it " not for the family " . Due to strong digital sells , it reached number 79 on the Canadian Hot 100 in January 2009 . It also reached number 18 on the Japanese RIAJ Digital Track Chart and number 23 on the Billboard Holiday / Seasonal Digital Songs chart in late 2010 . In December 2009 , it was available for free download on Amazon as a part of their " 25 Days of Free " promotion . It has been included in several Christmas compilation albums , including Now That 's What I Call Christmas ! 4 . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Christmas Tree " is a Christmas music @-@ themed song , featuring vocals from Gaga and Space Cowboy . It was written and produced by Gaga , Space Cowboy and Martin Kierszenbaum . Space Cowboy , whose real name is Nick <unk> , and Gaga were introduced in Los Angeles by Martin Kierszenbaum , the head of Gaga 's label , Cherrytree Records , an imprint of Interscope Records . Kierszenbaum recommended a collaboration between them after hearing Space Cowboy 's single " My Egyptian Lover " , released in January 2007 and featuring vocalist Nadia Oh . Kierszenbaum contacted Space Cowboy during December 2007 and Space Cowboy first spoke to Gaga by phone on New Year 's Eve , " [ getting ] along so well right away " talking about sequins , disco balls , Prince , David Bowie and body paint . The pair worked together in Los Angeles to create " Christmas Tree " and " Starstruck " , a song from some editions of Lady Gaga 's then @-@ current album The Fame . Space Cowboy commented of working with Lady Gaga : 
 We figured out that we shared pretty much the same experiences ; we ’ d been doing similar things on opposite sides of the Atlantic . Then I got invited to the studio to write some songs with Lady Gaga ; we did “ Starstruck ” , we did a song called “ Christmas Tree ” She ’ s super @-@ creative , she ’ s amazing — the best writer I ’ d ever seen , and best performer . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Christmas Tree " is a version of the traditional Christmas song " Deck the Halls " , with the same melody but with lyrics changed to be sexually suggestive , with many sexual innuendos and metaphors . Lyrically , the song is " <unk> celebratory " with lines such as " Light me up put me on top / Let 's fa @-@ la @-@ la @-@ la @-@ <unk> , la @-@ la , la , la " . In an analysis by Stelios <unk> of the Washington Square News , <unk> jokes that the meaning of the song is closer to the original version of " Deck the Halls " , a Welsh folk song called " Nos Galan " ( Welsh for " New Year 's Eve " ) traditionally sung at New Year 's Eve , than the English Christmas version . He cites the original first line , " Cold is the man who can 't love " , and says that Gaga " seeks not to warn against becoming a cold , loveless man , but to prevent that fate by way of some hot lovin ' " . 
 The Christmas song contains dance @-@ pop and synthpop music with synthesizers and a " pounding , grind @-@ worthy beat " . Space Cowboy described the song as " futuristic " . Referenced in the song lyrics is producer Kierszenbaum 's nickname of " Cherry Cherry Boom Boom " . Describing the song in episode 25 of her YouTube broadcast series Gaga @-@ vision , Gaga said : " " Christmas Tree " is about the spirit of celebrating the most joyous holiday and I 'll tell you why : because Christmas is the holiday that most makes boys and girls feel randy . " 
 = = Release = = 
 " Christmas Tree " was released as a digital download @-@ only single on December 16 , 2008 on Interscope Records while Gaga 's first single " Just Dance " , was charting . It was made available as an MP3 from Amazon.com and iTunes Store . The song was not included in Gaga 's album The Fame . One year later , in December 2009 , it was one of the songs free to download from Amazon.com as part of its " 25 Days of Free " offer , whereby for the first twenty @-@ five days in December a Christmas @-@ themed song is made free to download from the website . " Christmas Tree " was made available on December 6 . The song was included on several compilation albums : Canadian compilation album NOW ! Christmas 4 , Taiwanese compilation album Christmas 101 and the seasonal compilation album It 's Christmas Time , all released for Christmas 2009 . It was also included in the compilation albums Merry Xmas ! and Now That 's What I Call Christmas ! 4 , part of the Now That 's What I Call Music series of compilation albums , both released for Christmas 2010 . " Christmas Tree " was also included on The Singles , a box set of CD singles released exclusively in Japan in December 2010 . It is on the ninth and last CD , which also includes the three live tracks from The Cherrytree Sessions . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Christmas Tree " received mixed reviews from critics . Alex Rawls of <unk> gave a positive review as part of the " 25 Days of Free " offer from Amazon.com. Joking that the artists of the more religious songs must be " praying " for Lady Gaga , Rawls described the song as " not so po @-@ faced " as the five songs released before it was made available on December 6 , 2009 . Estrella <unk> , the music editor of Nouse , gave the song a positive review , complimenting its " synth beats and numerous yuletide innuendos " . Ryan Brockington of the New York Post praised the song , describing it as a " favorite holiday jam " and a " subliminal lady parts pine @-@ tree jingle " . A reviewer from <unk> described the song as " merry " and a " naughty choice " , praising its " dark decadence " . Gino <unk> Paz of The Philippine Star described the song as going from " zero to crazy " and Diana <unk> of The Weekly Observer called the song " plain naughty and wacky " . Jason Lewis for Fast Forward Weekly called the song " charmingly ludicrous " and called it among " the best “ new ” holiday music out there " . Chad Bullock of MTV included " Christmas Tree " in a list of " excellent " new Christmas music , describing it as " non @-@ traditional and vaguely sexual " . 
 Molly Gamble of Marquette Tribune gave " Christmas Tree " a negative review , criticising the song 's " poorly veiled metaphor " for sex and calling the song " shameless " . She commented that " Christmas Tree " is not a song one can listen to in the presence of family and that it " makes Christmas feel dirty " . Katie Hasty and Melinda Newman of HitFix gave the song a very negative review , calling it " stupendously stupid and awful " and the " most terrible Christmas song ever in the whole wide world ever " , criticising its obvious sexual metaphors . <unk> Baber of Observer @-@ Dispatch listed the song on list of " Horrible holiday hits " , criticising it for being " sexualized " and calling it " not for the kids " . 
 The song was described as " porn @-@ tastic " in a review for Now ! Christmas 4 by Eye Weekly reviewer Chris Bilton , quoting the lyric " My Christmas tree is delicious " . Bilton also called it one of few tracks on the album that make it a " worthy stocking <unk> " . Also in a review for Now ! Christmas 4 , Charlottetown Guardian reviewer Doug Gallant called " Christmas Tree " a " dreadful offering " . Beverley Lunney , a reviewer for Winnipeg Free Press , gave the song a negative review , commenting that listeners would be " offended " by the song 's " truly <unk> metaphors " and called it one of a " sea of unbearable original tunes " on Now ! Christmas 4 . Darryl Sterdan of the Ottawa Sun called the song " the only reason to buy " Now ! Christmas 4 and recommended downloading it . In a review of Now ! Christmas 4 , John Lucas of The Georgia Straight described the song as a " filthy electro banger " and " so blatantly about [ sex ] that you have to wonder how in the hell it got past the usually vigilant Now ! gatekeepers " , calling it the " single exception " to an otherwise bland album . In a review for It 's Christmas Time , Chester Chronicle reviewer Polly Weeks called the song something that " will keep teenagers happy " . In a review for Now That 's What I Call Christmas ! 4 , J Matthew Cobb of HiFi Magazine called " Christmas Tree " part of a " good list " of new material and described it as " naughty , but nice " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Due to high digital downloads , " Christmas Tree " entered the Canadian Hot 100 chart at number seventy @-@ nine in the first week of January 2009 , remaining on the chart for one week . In November 2010 , " Christmas Tree " charted on the RIAJ Digital Track Chart of Japan , entering at position eighteen , its peak . The song then dropped to positions 51 , 74 , 81 and 100 before leaving the chart . Also in November 2010 , " Christmas Tree " charted on the Billboard Holiday / Seasonal Digital Songs chart in the US , peaking at position 23 . In December 2010 , it was also ranked at number 23 on the " Hot 100 Holiday Christmas Songs " by Billboard , based on sales and airplay over the winter period as calculated by Nielsen SoundScan and Nielson BDS . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Christmas Tree " ( featuring Space Cowboy ) – 2 : 22 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Ayane ( Dead or Alive ) = 
 Ayane ( Japanese : <unk> ) ( sometimes written <unk> ) is a video game character in the Dead or Alive and Ninja Gaiden series by Team Ninja and Koei Tecmo . She debuted as a hidden character in the PlayStation version of the fighting game Dead or Alive in 1998 , and has appeared in all of its sequels and spin @-@ offs so far , including an appearance as the protagonist of Dead or Alive 3 . In the games , Ayane is a teenage master of ninjutsu and is characterised by her complex relationship with her half @-@ sister Kasumi , the lead character of the Dead or Alive series . 
 Ayane is also prominently featured as a recurring supporting character in the Ninja Gaiden series since its revival in 2004 and has made multiple guest appearances in other games , in particular in the extended Dynasty Warriors franchise . She is one of the most popular Tecmo characters and is one of Koei Tecmo 's mascots , but has been a subject of controversies regarding her age and sexualization . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 In the Dead or Alive back story , Ayane was conceived and born as a result of the evil ninja Raidou 's rape of Ayame , Kasumi 's mother and wife of Shiden , leader of the Mugen Tenshin ( <unk> , Mugen Tenshin @-@ ryū , lit . " Mist Phantom Heavenly Deity Style " ) ninja clan . Ayane is overshadowed by her half @-@ sister Kasumi and bears jealousy and hatred towards her and her privileged upbringing . The Mugen Tenshin villagers allowed Ayane to stay , but disliked and looked down on her . Since they were children , Ayane has secretly admired her half @-@ brother Hayate as a way of increasing her self @-@ esteem . Hayate is portrayed as fond of her in return . Besides on Kasumi , Ayame 's ire focusses on Raidou who both created and ruined her life . Ayane 's envy towards Kasumi is similar to the hatred Raidou had towards Shiden , Kasumi 's father . 
 Depicted as quiet and reserved , Ayane has honed her skills in an attempt to make others see her as more than a " child of evil " . With the death of her former master Genra ( Omega ) at the end of <unk> , Ayane becomes the strongest ninja of the Hajin Mon ( <unk> , lit . " Divine Conqueror Sect " ) , the dark side of the Mugen Tenshin clan , and pledges her existence to assist in Hayate 's task of destroying the Dead or Alive Tournament Executive Committee ( DOATEC ) . Through most of the series , Ayane was a deadly rival to Kasumi . She has a tsundere type personality , is fiercely loyal to Hayate , and admires Ryu Hayabusa , the protagonist of the Ninja Gaiden series . Her deadly fighting style has given her the nickname " Female Tengu " . 
 = = = = Dead or Alive = = = = 
 Ayane was originally introduced as an unnamed training dummy in the Sega Saturn version of Dead or Alive , before she became a player character in the 1998 PlayStation port , in which she is an opponent character in the practice and tournament modes ( Ayane was later included in the Dead or Alive + + arcade edition ) as well as an unlockable secret character . In the original DOA , Ayane has had neither a written background nor in @-@ game plot @-@ line ( according to the later canon , Ayane was sent to secretly follow Kasumi ) . 
 In Dead or Alive 2 ( 1999 ) , Ayane joins in the Dead or Alive World Combat Championship as an assassin in pursuit of her half @-@ sister Kasumi , a runaway shinobi who has left the Mugen Tenshin behind and been branded a " traitor " to their clan . Ayane encounters and rescues an amnesiac Hayate , who goes by the name " Ein " . When confronting Helena , Ayane is accused of murdering Helena 's mother Maria , but the assassin is later revealed to be Christie . 
 In Dead or Alive 3 ( 2001 ) , the leader of the Mugen Tenshin 's Hajin Mon sect ( also written as <unk> ) and Ayane 's former teacher and beloved foster parent , Genra , has disappeared . Ayane , now the most powerful member and de facto leader of Hajin Mon , learns that Genra has been turned into a puppet by the DOATEC and its sinister Omega Project and realises that fate commands her to put Genra out of his misery . Achieving this , she emerges as official winner of the third DOA championship . Itagaki also described her as the game 's protagonist character . The introductory sequence to Dead or Alive Ultimate , accompanied by Aerosmith 's " Dream On " , was the first to hint at the origins of Ayane and Kasumi 's enmity . 
 In Dead or Alive 4 ( 2005 ) , Ayane has pledged her life to her half @-@ brother and Mugen Tenshin clan leader Hayate , in his cause to destroy the DOATEC for the suffering the company has caused the ninja clans . Ayane has a threefold stake in this plot : she wants revenge for Raidou being changed into a monster , for Hayate being brainwashed in their attempt to realize Project Epsilon , and for the manipulation and death of Genra . At the end of the game , Ayane uses her ninpo ( " ninja arts " ) spell to blow up the DOATEC Tri @-@ Tower . 
 She returns as a playable character in Dead or Alive 5 , set two years after the events of Dead or Alive 4 . Ayane follows Kasumi upon Hayate 's orders , and later discovers that she is in fact really an Alpha clone . Ayane and Hayate learn from Helena that Victor Donovan and his new organization , MIST , plan to sell his Alpha clones as super soldiers to various countries around the world . They infiltrate the oil rig platform where Helena believes MIST 's secret laboratory is hidden . After Ayane and Hayate kill Kasumi 's clone , they breach into the lab , but Hayate is captured by Rig and Ayane is forced to flee . After Ryu summons the real Kasumi to battle and Hayate is rescued , they destroy the laboratory and Alpha @-@ 152 . 
 Besides the main DOA series , Ayane appears as one of the player characters in the beach volleyball spin @-@ off games Dead or Alive Xtreme Beach Volleyball ( 2003 ) , Dead or Alive Xtreme 2 ( 2006 ) and Dead or Alive Paradise ( 2010 ) , pursuing Kasumi . Dead or Alive : Cronus , the series ' prequel project which was intended to tell the story of Kasumi 's and Ayane 's childhoods and explore " the innocence and cruelty of children , " was officially cancelled in 2010 after Itagaki left Team Ninja and Tecmo . Ayane is going to be one of the nine playable female characters in Dead or Alive Xtreme 3 . 
 = = = = Ninja Gaiden = = = = 
 In Ninja Gaiden ( 2004 ) , a younger Ayane ( aged 14 ; she is 16 @-@ year @-@ old in the DOA series ) plays a minor role as a non @-@ player character , serving Murai and the Shadow Clan as a stealthy infiltrator and courier assisting Ryu Hayabusa during his bloody vengeance . In the 2005 Ninja Gaiden Black edition , Ayane stars in the " Ninja Dog " easy mode , where she treats the disgraced Ryu as her pet and leaves him various items through the game . Ayane can be killed by the player when Ryu finds her wounded in <unk> 's shop , but this results in a game over . 
 In Ninja Gaiden II ( 2008 ) , Ayane appears only in a cutscene near the end of the game to give the Eye of the Dragon jewel to Ryu , turning his Dragon Sword into the more powerful True Dragon Sword . Ninja Gaiden Σ 2 , the enhanced port of <unk> for the PlayStation 3 , features Ayane as a single player mode 's playable character in one level , which shows how she obtained the Eye of the Dragon and defeated the remnants of the Black Spider Clan . She is also available as one of three new alternative player characters for the game in a cooperative multiplayer mode , and appears in the game 's prologue digital comic , The Vampire War . An unlockable costume for Ayane in Sigma 2 is her outfit from Ninja Gaiden Sigma . 
 In the original edition of Ninja Gaiden 3 ( 2012 ) , Ayane only appears in one cutscene , in which she loans Hayate 's sword to Ryu . Ninja Gaiden 3 : Razor 's Edge , an expanded version of the game , features Ayane as a playable character with her own new missions : a campaign involving the returning Black Spider Clan , as well as being available to fight alongside Ryu — like in Σ 2 — in an online cooperative multiplayer mode . A new Chapter Challenge mode also allows the player to attempt any part of the game using Ayane . 
 Ayane also makes a brief cameo appearance in the comic book tie @-@ in prequel of Ninja Gaiden : Dragon Sword ( 2008 ) . She is featured in Zen Pinball : Ninja Gaiden Sigma 2 , a 2009 pinball game for the PlayStation Network , and in the 2013 smart phone action card game <unk> @-@ nin no Ninja Gaiden ( " Ninja Gaiden 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 People " ) . 
 = = = = Other games = = = = 
 Ayane made her debut in Koei 's Dynasty Warriors franchise in 2009 with a non @-@ player character guest appearance in Dynasty Warriors : Strikeforce , where her Fuma Kodachi swords are also available as the player 's optional weapons . Ayane appears as a player character in the series ' 2011 spin @-@ off game Warriors Orochi 3 in her design and primary costume from Ninja Gaiden Sigma 2 . In this game , set after DOA4 , Ayane enters another world , named Orochi . Ayane stars in the Siege of <unk> @-@ themed stage and joins Yoshitsune Minamoto 's party to find a way back home , then follows Sima Zhao 's army and helps them to locate and rescue the prisoners at Xuchang . She returns — together with Ryu — as a playable character in the 2012 's Shin <unk> Musou VS ( which was abortively planned to be released in English as Dynasty Warriors Vs. or Dynasty Warriors 3DS ) , as a free downloadable content ( DLC ) character , once again wearing her Sigma 2 costume . 
 Ayane 's classic dress outfit is included in the Director 's Cut version of the survival horror game Fatal Frame II : Crimson Butterfly as an alternate costume for Mayu , one of this game 's two protagonist sisters ( the other one , Mio , may wear Kasumi 's costume ) . It is also an unlockable costume for the character <unk> in Super Swing Golf : Season 2 . Ayane herself is featured as a bonus playable character in her own side @-@ mission in Koei Tecmo 's survival horror game Fatal Frame : Maiden of Black Water , where she has been requested to find a missing girl named <unk> <unk> . In 2015 , a cartoonish version of Ayane was added to Marvelous Entertainment 's fighting game <unk> Kagura : <unk> Versus for the PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita as a playable paid DLC crossover character , along with bonus costumes for additional price . 
 = = = = Design = = = = 
 Ayane is the youngest female to appear as a playable character in the Dead or Alive series , having been introduced at the age of only 16 . She stands at 5 ' 2 " and weighs 104 lbs , with a bust size of 93 cm ( 37 " ) , and has one of the most distinctive appearances out of DOA girls due to her unusually colored purple hair and red eyes . Her face changed slightly between Ninja Gaiden II and Ninja Gaiden Sigma 2 . As in the case of other Dead or Alive 5 characters , her face and general aesthetics are noticeably different in this game , due to DOA5 's more realistic design style in comparison to a more cartoonish style of the previous DOA games . Team Ninja leader Yosuke Hayashi said " Ayane and Hitomi retain their signature spirits while complimented by a new look that reflects amazing beauty , grace , and a strong sense of presence . " Ayane 's Japanese voice actress has been consistently Wakana Yamazaki , dubbed into English by Gina <unk> , Janice <unk> , Janna Levenstein , Wendee Lee and Brittney Harvey . 
 IGN 's Hilary Goldstein wrote in 2004 that visually the character " is most notable for her anime purple hair and <unk> ' <unk> , " but her appearance of a " sweet girl " is misleading and hides her " devious nature " . Ayane wears a variety of mostly purple and black female ninja suits and other attires ( including a schoolgirl uniform and a Carnival of Venice @-@ style costume ) , often coming with a miniskirt or tunic and often featuring a butterfly motif ( later even on her weapons ) . Among about 20 Ayane 's outfits in the 2004 compilation game Dead or Alive Ultimate , one was inspired by the character Millennia from Kagero : Deception 2 . One of her alternative costumes in Ninja Gaiden Sigma 2 also pays homage to Sun <unk> ( Lady Sun ) from Koei 's Dynasty Warriors series . Her wardrobe in Last Round also includes a destructible green dress designed by <unk> <unk> and downloadable costumes of the Clockwork Princess Millennia from Tecmo Koei 's Deception IV : The Nightmare Princess , Fie <unk> from Nihon Falcom 's The Legend of Heroes : Trails of Cold Steel II , <unk> <unk> from Square Enix 's School Girl Strikers , and <unk> from Tatsunoko 's Nurse Witch Komugi . 
 Ayane 's fighting style is very different from Kasumi 's Tenjin Mon style . Her signature weapons are a pair of twin short swords named Fuma Kodachi ( <unk> , Wind Dancer Short Swords ) . According to Kung Fu Cult Masters by Leon Hunt , Ayane 's " <unk> slaps are harder to imagine in a film , but draw from a spinning / twisting dynamics of martial arts choreography . " Kasumi 's clone Phase 4 uses some of Ayane 's fighting style . Team Ninja founder Tomonobu Itagaki described Ayane 's character and personality as much " harder " than Kasumi 's , making her fit better in the " very hard @-@ edged " universe of the Ninja Gaiden series . His successor Yosuke Hayashi said the image of Ayane covered in her enemies ' blood can symbolise the intensity of Ninja Gaiden . Hayashi later requested a special appearance by Ayane in the Fatal Frame series , wherein the developers " spent a lot of time adjusting things like the wobble of her chest . Team Ninja gave them lots of advice . " The game 's director Toru Osawa said adding Ayane as a guest character was first suggested by Nintendo . 
 = = = = Gameplay = = = = 
 Ayane is often regarded as a top @-@ tier character in many of the games she is playable in , especially in the DOA fighting games where she was noted for being very unpredictable and confusing for the opponent as well as fast and hard to counter . Previewing the original Dead or Alive for the PlayStation , Computer & Video Games opined she " has an unusual floaty kind of fighting style , but has some great moves . Her quick punches make stringing combos together easy , and her throws are great for hitting people into the Danger Zone " ( an interactive feature within some arenas ) . In Prima Games ' official guide for Dead or Alive Ultimate ( a remake version of Dead or Alive and Dead or Alive 2 ) , Eric Mylonas declared Ayane the " tougher of the two siblings " as she " brings strings of blindingly fast combos into play and has devastating holds and throws . " Mylonas wrote Ayane has a major weakness in that she can not stop moving without becoming " an easy prey , " and she may not be favored by those who prefer " huge , over @-@ the @-@ top moves , " but for a " more patient sort , there 's probably no better character in the game . " According to GameSpy 's guide to Ultimate by Andrew Alfonso , Ayane 's key moves include her high kick — which is " a lot " better than Kasumi 's — with another move so powerful " it 's almost unfair to use it . " He also noted how she can be actually more effective with her back turned towards her opponent , despite the fact that the characters cannot block when facing away from an enemy . In his guide to Dead or Alive 3 , Alfonso wrote Ayane is a very unpredictable and quick attacker , even more than in the previous games in the series , and should be played primarily for her backwards position , hers being the best such stance of all the characters in the game . Ayane 's speed and deceiving attacks make her a " pretty good " partner for slower fighters for tag team battles , but her primary partners are other ninja characters . 
 In Prima Games ' official guide to Dead or Alive 4 , Bryan Dawson wrote that while in the previous games Ayane has been " one of the easiest characters to use and was very difficult to fight against , " in this game she " now requires much more skill in high @-@ level players , as her best attack as nowhere as dominant as they were in the past . " She was rated overall 7 / 10 . On the other hand , for Daniel Wilks from Hyper Ayane in DOA4 seemed " to have the edge in nearly every battle due to their staggering speed and ability to put together easy multi @-@ leveled combos . " According to GameSpot 's guide by Matthew Rorie , Ayane is " one of the more devious characters " of the game , " capable of devastating speed and some ingenious little fake @-@ out animations , " but she requires " a lot more practice than is apparent at first glance . " In GameSpy 's guide , David McCutcheon wrote that " widely regarded as the [ Street Fighter characters ] Ken / Ryu of the Dead or Alive series , Ayane can be both incredibly cheap and remarkably skilled , " as " rolling and spinning will work wonders " for the player 's countering effects and one " can juggle enemies to endless amounts of pain . " Ayane 's move set in an early version of Dead or Alive 5 seems almost identical to this in DOA4 , but she gained some new moves . In an official description of the character , Koei Tecmo wrote that " her mastery of ever @-@ changing moves means her opponents never know what is coming . " 
 Ayane 's gameplay abilities in other games were regarded more variably . In the DOA Xtreme and Paradise beach volleyball games , Ayane has excellent technique and jump abilities , at the cost of poor defence , power and speed . According to Official Xbox Magazine , Ayane is " not exactly who you want to spike at the net or try to blow past blocks , but she 's excellent at long spikes , digging , and soft dinks . " As such , Ayane is most effective as a support , but she should not be paired with Kasumi due to their rivalry ; to partner with each other , Ayane and Kasumi need convincing by gift @-@ giving . In Ninja Gaiden Σ 2 , Ayane 's attacks ( many of her Fuma Kodachi combos resemble her combos from Dead or Alive ) and finishing moves are far faster than these of Ryu , but the player has to learn to dodge much more as she has worse blocking abilities . The official guide to this game by Prima 's Bryan Dawson states that Ayane 's short range and limited attack power " make her the worst choice of the three new characters for almost every mission " and " her only saving graces " are a powerful ninpo spell and deadly Flash Kunai projectiles . In addition , if controlled by the console in the co @-@ op mode , the character " doesn 't seem to know what to do in any situation . " Mitch Dyer of IGN opined that a vastly improved Ayane from Ninja Gaiden 3 : Razor 's Edge is " a damn fine addition " to the game , where she is " just as capable as Ryu Hayabusa " with her " quick and vicious " melee attacks and explosive kunai projectiles , adding that she is " functionally similar to Hayabusa in terms of combos and skills , complete with a screen @-@ clearing special move . " Similarly , Retro Gamer described her simply as " a <unk> version of Ryu . " David Lynch of X360 wrote all the " girls " of Razor 's Edge ( Ayane , Kasumi and Momiji ) became " just as deadly " in it as Ryu Hayabusa has been through the Ninja Gaiden series . In Fatal Frame , unlike the protagonists of the game , Ayane can not permanently defeat ghosts and her strategy relies on evasion . 
 = = = In film = = = 
 In the live @-@ action film DOA : Dead or Alive , Ayane is a ninja assassin and Kasumi 's former servant who is dedicated to seeking out and killing her , as Kasumi is considered an outcast to the clan . Ayane first confronts Kasumi before she flees the temple , then several times on the island . She has romantic feelings towards Hayate ( she is not his half @-@ sister in the movie , and neither she is Kasumi 's ) , and initially believes him to be dead . Ayane fails to kill Kasumi but finds Hayate and aids him against DOATEC . During the film 's finale , she saves him from a potentially fatal fall . 
 Ayane was controversially portrayed by Natassia Malthe , a half @-@ Norwegian half @-@ Filipina actress who was also much older than Ayane is portrayed in the games . Malthe 's Ayane uses a Japanese long sword and also wields two longs swords in the various promotional images in and out of character . Malthe said she has undergone " weeks of martial arts training in China " for the film . Tomonobu Itagaki later said he " wanted to have Japanese actresses portray Kasumi and Ayane " but the film 's director Corey Yuen " believed strongly in his casting choices . " Itagaki said he would have chosen Aya <unk> to play Ayane . The film 's producer Mark A. Altman said that he " was such a fan " of Malthe being " threatening and enigmatic as Ayane " that he cast her in Dead and <unk> . 
 = = Merchandise and promotion = = 
 Licensed merchandise items featuring Ayane include a variety of statuettes and action figures for the Dead or Alive and Ninja Gaiden series , including the figures by Kotobukiya , Mr Big , Sega , <unk> Yamashita , and Volks . Other merchandise include " 3D " coffee mugs for Banpresto 's arcade redemption games , posters , swimwear for women , 3D mousepads and body towels , wall scrolls , arcade sticks by Hori decorated with a graphic of Ayane and Kasumi ( released in two versions , for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 ) , credit cards , and Dead or Alive talking clock that was bundled with another figure of either Ayane or Kasumi . More Ayane @-@ themed 3D mousepads were released as merchandise for DOA5 , along with dakimakura pillow cases , and for the <unk> Kagura collaboration . She was also featured in a special edition of Playboy magazine in 2004 . 
 A high @-@ quality statuette of Ayane came with the limited edition Japanese release of Ninja Gaiden . Dead or Alive 4 pre @-@ order bonuses in Japan included " the most beautiful slipcase in the world " and " the most beautiful poster in the world " , the slipcase having an almost @-@ naked Kasumi on one side and Ayane in her standard fighting outfit on the other . In 2011 , Ayane 's Ninja Gaiden Sigma 2 costume parts were made available as exclusive DLC for Dynasty Warriors Online during the game 's first anniversary promotion campaign . The first batch of the unreleased Dynasty Warriors Vs. was supposed to contain DLC codes for Ayane 's judo and volleyball outfit costumes . Free downloadable costumes for Ayane were offered as pre @-@ order bonuses for 2013 's Dead or Alive 5 Ultimate at Amazon . First @-@ print copies of Koei Tecmo 's Musou Orochi 2 Ultimate ( Japanese version of Warriors Orochi 3 Ultimate ) were bundled with DLC codes for blond haired Ayane 's special “ Orochi ” themed costume in DOA5 . Dead or Alive 5 Last Round pre @-@ order bonuses included Ayane 's special " Ninja 2015 " masked outfit at Amazon , Best Buy and GameStop , with an additional skimpy " Aloha " costume available at GameStop only . 
 A demo version of Dead or Alive 5 featuring Ayane and Hayate as playable characters was added as a downloadable bonus to the pre @-@ order version of Ninja Gaiden 3 for the PlayStation 3 , as well as the collector 's edition release for both the PS3 and Xbox 360 . A demo version of Ninja Gaiden 3 : Razor 's Edge available at the New York Comic Con 2012 featured Ayane fighting against an endless stream of enemies inside a closed room ; a different playable demo , also featuring Ayane , was shown at Tecmo Koei press event in Tokyo . She is one of the four playable characters available from the start in the free @-@ to @-@ play game Dead or Alive 5 Ultimate : Core Fighters . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Praise and popularity = = = 
 Since her introduction , Ayane has remained a popular face of the series alongside her older half @-@ sister . Ayane was described as a fan @-@ favourite by GMR in 2003 , and was called " everyone 's favorite purple haired ninja " by GameAxis in 2006 . In 2012 , Angelo M. D <unk> of Cheat Code Central , listing Ayane among the top ten hidden characters in fighting games , noted that she " is now one of the poster characters for both series , and it seems she becomes more popular by the day . " Regarding the preferences of Dead or Alive online multiplayer players , Official Xbox Magazine wrote in 2005 : " Of all the stats and figures , one of the most unusual is a rating for the most popular characters in America , Asia and the rest of the world . At the moment , Ayane is the most popular character to use by a long way . " In QMI Agency 's 2012 poll for the title of the Ultimate Fighting Game Champion , Ayane <unk> the only DOA character to make the second round , as she defeated Morrigan <unk> before losing to Scorpion , the winner of the title . She was voted the DOA series ' third most popular female character in Japan in the publisher Koei Tecmo 's own poll in 2014 , also placing fourth in another popular vote in 2015 . 
 Ayane become a popular character among audience of both genders for various reasons . Model and actress Jaime Bergman chose the " quick and bold " Ayane as a Dead or Alive 2 character she would partner with . While awarding the Annual GameSpy E3 Award to Dead or Alive Ultimate in 2004 , Raymond ' <unk> ' Padilla wrote , " Ayane should be my new girlfriend . " He later elaborated : " To be honest , I always thought Ayane was an uptight bitch with a massive chip on her shoulder . I always rooted for Kasumi in their feud . Then a funny thing happened when I saw the trailer for Dead or Alive Ultimate during E3 2004 -- I started to care about Ayane . Learning more about her story , her upbringing , and the root of her feud with Kasumi made me change sides . " Kotaku 's Mike Fahey also described himself as " more of an Ayane sort of guy . " In 2005 , she was described as his favourite Dead or Alive character by James Mielke from 1UP.com. Featuring Ayane as a " videogame babe of the day " in 2009 , IGN 's Chris Carle commented : " After that awkward goth stage in high school , not many people continue to rock the violet locks , but Ayane is different … she 's hot enough to get away with it . " " <unk> " , pseudonym of the professional gamer Marie @-@ Laure <unk> comes from a mix of " Kasumi " and " Ayane " . <unk> said : " She has a lot of charisma and is pretty . She ’ s full of anger but has a sweet heart in fact . I think she has the most interesting story and personality in the game . " 
 Ayane was ranked as the seventh top fictional ninja in a 2009 list by <unk> . In 2010 , Mikel Reparaz of GamesRadar ranked hers , Ryu 's and Momiji 's guest appearance in Strikeforce as the 49th " most awesome " character cameo in gaming history . In 2012 , Gelo Gonzales of FHM listed Ayane among the nine " sexiest ninja babes in games " , commenting that she is " like Kasumi , only moodier ... about as punk as ninjas get , and carries a get @-@ the @-@ fuck @-@ outta @-@ my @-@ way @-@ or @-@ I @-@ snap @-@ your @-@ arm @-@ in @-@ two @-@ places attitude , " comparing her to Ellen <unk> . In 2013 , Jon Ledford of Sushi Arcade included her among the ten best video game " ninjas " in all her roles , " whether she ’ s playing volleyball , fighting her sister or helping Ryu Hayabusa save the world . " In a 2015 article " The Truth About Ninjas " , Kotaku 's Matthew Burns included Kasumi , Ayane , and Mai Shiranui from The King of Fighters among " the ' fan favourite ' lady ninjas " . 
 Numerous publications commented noted Ayane 's sex appeal , often including her among the most attractive female characters in video games . Spanish magazine <unk> put Dead or Alive 2 among the five sexiest PlayStation games for any fight between Ayane and Kasumi . In 2000 , <unk> magazine Video Games featured Ayane in their " Console Pageant " article , rating her " VG Sexy Factor " at 85 % . In 2003 , Bryan ' Sir <unk> ' Johnson collectively placed her with the other Dead or Alive girls at second spot on GameSpy 's list of " top babes in games " . The Polish edition of GameStar included her as one of 20 candidates in a poll for the title of Miss of the Video Game World ( Miss <unk> Gier ) 2006 . In 2011 , Complex ranked her as the 14th best looking " sideline chick " of video games , stating , " Kasumi 's cool and all , but we definitely prefer Ayane 's cold and killer demeanor . " That same year , Jeremy Render of Cheat Code Central featured her among the top ten sexiest female video game characters , where Ayane shared number six spot with Hitomi . Together with Hitomi as well as Kasumi and <unk> , Ayane also placed tenth on the list " video game hotties " by the Spanish edition of IGN . In 2012 , Kristie Bertucci of Gadget Review ranked this " underage ninja that can kick ass while wearing skimpy clothing " as the 19th " hottest " female video game character . Also in 2012 , Ayane and the other DOA girls were collectively placed at number ten spot on the list of the " hottest women in video games " by Complex . That same year in Poland , Ayane was included among the 20 " sexiest girls in games " by Wirtualna Polska , as well as among the " sexiest game heroines " of the year by <unk> Austin Wood of Cheat Code Central declared this " one awesome female ninja with an unique fighting style " as number one sexiest game character of 2012 for her appearance in Razor 's Edge , noting her as a " remarkably interesting character given the somewhat shallow plot of the Ninja Gaiden games . " 
 In 2009 , Gelo Gonzales of FHM listed her among the nine " sexiest bad girls of videogame land " , commenting that " with her cute <unk> looks , this deadly ninja soon became a mainstay of the series . Dead or Alive is one of the pioneers of boob @-@ bouncing technology , and thankfully , Ayane has the curves to take full advantage of that . " Some also commented on her breasts specifically , such as when Gavin Mackenzie of PLAY joked them to be two of the top ten best things one could expect to see in Dead or Alive 5 . Ayane and Rachel shared the seventh place on the 2011 list of " most incredible chests " by Joystick Division . In 2012 , <unk> rated Ayane 's bosom in Ninja Gaiden Sigma 2 as number one in gaming . 
 = = = Criticism , controversies and fan content = = = 
 Official PlayStation Magazine ( Australia ) criticized Janice <unk> 's English voice acting in Ninja Gaiden Sigma , stating " she whimpers away like an eight @-@ year @-@ old brat at show and tell . " Az Elias of Cubed3 expressed disappointment regarding Ayane 's limited role in Warriors Orochi 3 . Ayane 's portrayal by Natassia Malthe in the film DOA : Dead or Alive was panned by many fans and critics alike ( even as , prior to the premiere , IGN stated that " DOA is HOT ... and <unk> Malthe proves it " ) . Mikel Reparaz of GamesRadar dubbed the motion picture version of Ayane as " White Girl Who is Somehow Also Japanese " , Roger Moore wrote in Orlando Sentinel that Malthe 's purple hair " makes her look even less Japanese than [ Kasumi 's actress ] Aoki " , and UGO.com wrote about Malthe 's role as Ayane : " Defining Moment : <unk> . " 
 Some criticised the visual allure of the character , up to allegations of sexual objectification . Mentioning " the subject of unlockable gym slips for Ayane " in 2002 , Edge magazine stated that while it " remains opposed to videogame censorship , the Dead or Alive franchise has certainly challenged the boundaries of taste in games . " In 2009 , Joe Newman of GamesRadar ranked the series of Team Ninja 's controversial Sigma 2 commercials , designed to draw attention to the fact that the " notoriously big @-@ breasted " Ayane was a playable character ( one of which was called by Destructoid " the best and worst thing to have ever been created " ) , as the fourth most blatantly sexist game advertisement ever , adding : " God forbid a moment goes by where any part of her body might be covered up . " Team Ninja 's post @-@ Itagaki head Yosuke Hayashi dismissed the criticism , stating in 2012 : " With the representation of female characters in the Dead or Alive franchise , we 've always wanted to make the girls look as attractive as possible , and that 's something that 's not going to change for us at all . " Hayashi explained : " We are a Japanese developer , and we 're making the female characters with our common sense and our creative sense . When you take that to countries outside of Japan , it tends to be very misinterpreted in some cases , people considering it sexist or derogatory , etc . " The issue was also dismissed in 2015 by Team Ninja creative director Tom Lee , who said they as well as most of their " fans around the world don ’ t share the same sentiments " as their critics . 
 As with Kasumi 's , Ayane 's age has not been listed in the Western versions of the games to avoid backlash regarding characters portrayed as underage ; according to Itagaki , Ayane 's age in Ninja Gaiden would " cause problems with the ESRB . " Nevertheless , some outlets raised this issue and questioned the extent of adolescent Ayane 's sexualization in the games ( in Ninja Gaiden Sigma 2 players were even given control over the movement of her breasts through use of the Sixaxis game controller ) . Destructoid 's Jim Sterling has voiced concern about how a supposedly 14 @-@ year @-@ old character ( Ayane 's Sigma 2 age ) has such " huge busters " , as well as joking he was " worried that this now means I 'm a pedophile . " In 2011 , Nintendo of Europe decided to not distribute Dead or Alive : Dimensions in Sweden ( this also meant the game would not be released in Norway and Denmark ) , apparently because of a local child pornography law encompassing drawn and animated characters ( and despite the age of consent in Sweden being only 15 ) . ABC News mistakenly used GamesRadar 's joke image of Ayane " with the newly attached pterodactyl head and wings of Metroid boss Ridley " as an illustration for their article while reporting on this story . Reacting to the Nordic ban , Sterling ( writing for GameFront ) called her a " big @-@ eyed lump of grade @-@ A jailbait " and added : " Would it murder the fantasy of the fanbase if the girl was canonically 21 , despite still looking like an eleven @-@ year @-@ old hormone pill addict ? Instead , 21 @-@ year @-@ olds are designated as ' old ' women in Japanese games , usually playing a villainous , antagonistic role compared to the sweet , innocent , sexually desirable teenager . " He further wrote that his proposed practice of " bumping up the age be part of the localization process , " besides helping to avoid " silly controversies like we ’ ve seen in Sweden , " would have " the added benefit of narratives that are far more sensible — having Ayane as an accomplished ninja at sixteen just doesn ’ t make much sense . " Ayane became canonically 18 @-@ year @-@ old in Dead or Alive 5 . Regarding the other changes in DOA5 , according to Kotaku , director Yohei <unk> received a lot of " fan backlash from Ayane 's breast reduction . " Previously , one of her new costumes for Dimensions also severely upset some fans when the game was announced in 2010 . 
 Despite a warning from Team Ninja that no more DOA games would be released for the PC if the modding community released DOA5 mods that are not designed for " good and moral " play , nude models of Ayane were quickly created by members of the forum <unk> Illumination . Ayane was featured through Monty Oum 's computer @-@ animated fan series Dead Fantasy from the start . A fan mod also brought Ayane to Ultra Street Fighter IV , mapping her over Ibuki , and another removes Ayane 's makeup in DOA5 to make her look more like she did in <unk> . 
 = Swim Good = 
 " Swim Good " is a song by American recording artist Frank Ocean , released as the second single from his mixtape Nostalgia , Ultra ( 2011 ) . The song was written by Nick <unk> & Ocean and produced by Midi Mafia . It features additional vocals by fellow Odd Future member Tyler , The Creator . The song explores the topic of romantic baggage , guilt and utilizes several metaphors . Lyrically , the song expresses a narrative about a man who , burdened with many failed relationships , ends his life by driving into the ocean . The track explores tropes of the tragic love story and suicide . The song received positive reviews from music critics , who praised Ocean 's vocals and the song 's dark subject matter . 
 When Nostalgia , Ultra was expected to be released as an EP by Def Jam , " Swim Good " was released as the second single , though the EP release was later cancelled . The song peaked at number 70 on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The song received a music video directed by Australian director Nabil Elderkin . The anime @-@ inspired music video features Ocean driving down remote roads in a Samurai costume and eventually setting his car on fire . Ocean performed the track during his seven show tour through North America and Europe in November 2011 and other notable concerts such as Coachella . On July 31 , 2012 , the music video was nominated for three MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Swim Good " was written by Frank Ocean , Waynne Nugent and Kevin Risto of the duo Midi Mafia , who also produced the track . The song appears on his debut mixtape Nostalgia , Ultra , which was released on February 18 , 2011 . When asked by The Quietus about his own interpretation of the character in the song it was noted that Ocean " politely withdrew , saying he 'd enjoy that discussion but he doesn 't want to spoil his audience 's experience of his songs " . He further commented " but you have fun with the imagery , and for me the whole concept that everything has to be ... Like , nobody gets upset with a director when a director 's film isn 't about his life . People think that with a recording artist that shit has to be like a fucking play by play of their whole life , but it 's not . It 's imagery , and a little bit of satire . " The track was released as the second single from Nostalgia , Ultra digitally on October 18 , 2011 by Def Jam Recordings . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Swim Good " tells the story of a murder suicide through extended metaphors and a first @-@ person debate about killing yourself " . The track has been called an " astonishing suicide song " and that " Ocean finds himself dressed in black ( ' Like I 'm ready for a funeral ' ) , tormented by heartbreak and on the verge of driving his car into the sea . " The song is a " grim escape fantasy " describing a murder suicide , which " has the singer driving his car to the shore , his trunk “ bleeding ” with “ broken hearts ” . The hook of the song ends with the refrain of " I feel like a ghost , no Swayze , ever since I lost my baby . " Pitchfork Media described the singing as " heart @-@ battered . " The Quietus states that the song " makes you realise the ocean means a lot more to this songwriter than the reference to Ocean 's Eleven that he 's cited in interviews , he is mysterious and tragic . " Yahoo ! Music stated that " in his calm , ultra controlled tone , Ocean sings about feeling like he 's on his way to a funeral as he drives around town in a black suit , and a body in the trunk . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Swim Good " received positive reviews from music critics and was widely considered to be one of the best tracks off Nostalgia Ultra . Sam Hockley @-@ Smith of The Fader commented that " Swim Good " was one of the " highs off of record " , as did Anthony Osei of Complex magazine . Pitchfork Media commented that the track was a " brooding highlight " off the record . In addition , Yahoo ! Music 's Billy <unk> described it as a " breakout " song " . AbsolutePunk stated the song was " hard @-@ hitting " and " proved that Ocean 's voice is as great as his knack for writing thoughtful pop songs . " NPR 's Andrew Noz commented that " in the standout " Swim Good , " he sings of putting broken hearts in the trunk of a Lincoln Town Car and driving to the ocean as they bleed through . " Several critics noted the song for its dark subject matter . On the week of September 10 , 2011 the song debuted at number eighty @-@ one on Billboard 's Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , and peaked at position number seventy . 
 On July 31 , 2012 , the music video was nominated for three MTV Video Music Awards : Best Direction and Best Male Video , with Ocean being nominated for Best New Artist for his work with the video . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Ocean released a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video promoting a music video for the track . It was filmed by his cousin , and released on Ocean 's tumblr on August 11 , 2011 . The video , directed by Nabil Elderkin , was officially released on September 16 , 2011 . The video was released on Frank Ocean 's Vevo on September 23 , 2011 and was available for purchase on iTunes September 24 , 2011 . The Fader commented that " Elderkin serves up a fairly literal interpretation of “ Swim Good , ” Nostalgia , Ultra ‘ s most heart @-@ wrenching metaphor . It does however feature an explosion , a panda mask and the second appearance of Ninja Frank Ocean . " The video features " Frank Ocean and his samurai sword star " and it " blends Asian and aquatic vibes with impressive cinematography . " Rap @-@ Up reported " <unk> turns traumatic in Frank Ocean ’ s suspenseful video . " 
 The clip opens with a dazed Ocean " going through the motions of eating popcorn though he 's wearing an Odd Future mask that does not have a mouth opening . " It features a " ' 70s orange and black Lincoln limousine " and Ocean in an orange samurai robe " mysteriously driving along the coastline and deep into the forest . " He then whips out his sword and " draws blood from his unsuspecting female victim . He sets fire to the vehicle and watches it burn on the cliff during the explosive conclusion . " In the closing moments , " viewers are lead [ sic ] to believe that the mystery woman was also the passenger of the rear compartment " and the video ends when the " camera zooms in on Ocean 's blood @-@ stained sword . " The video " adds color to the already chilling , and unusual storyline for alternative R & B song " according to Yahoo . 
 Ocean embarked on a solo tour through North America and Europe to promote both the mixtape and his other musical projects . The set lists to the various shows varied , though " Swim Good " was performed at all shows . The track was included during Ocean 's setlist at the April 2012 Coachella Musical Festival . Complex magazine stated the audience " sang every word of ULTRA ’ s suicidal serenade “ Swim Good , ” which closed with the same seagull chirps it does on the tape . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Music of the Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles series = 
 The Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles video game series consists of Crystal Chronicles , a spin @-@ off of the main Final Fantasy series , its sequels My Life as a King and My Life as a Darklord , and their spin @-@ offs , Ring of Fates , Echoes of Time and The Crystal Bearers . Crystal Chronicles , Ring of Fates , and Echoes of Time have had released soundtrack albums to date , and Crystal Chronicles and Ring of Fates each have an associated single . Kumi Tanioka is the main composer for the series , having composed the three released soundtracks as well as the music for My Life as a King and My Life as a Darklord . Hidenori Iwasaki is filling that role for The Crystal Bearers . Nobuo Uematsu , the main composer for the regular Final Fantasy series , contributed one track to the Ring of Fates soundtrack . Yae and Donna Burke sang the Japanese and English versions of the theme song for Crystal Chronicles , respectively , while Aiko sang the theme song for Ring of Fates . 
 Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles Original Soundtrack was released by Pony Canyon in 2003 , as was its single , " Kaze no Ne " , and a promotional album Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles - A Musical Journey . Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Ring of Fates Original Soundtrack and the double A @-@ side " Hoshi no Nai Sekai " / " Yokogao " were released by Pony Canyon in 2007 . The latest release is that of Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Echoes of Time Original Soundtrack by Square Enix in 2009 . All the albums and the singles received generally positive reviews , although the Crystal Chronicles album was the most universally appreciated of the three soundtracks . Unlike the soundtracks to the numbered Final Fantasy games , no compositions from the Crystal Chronicles soundtracks have appeared in any compilation albums produced by Square Enix or any official Final Fantasy concerts . " Morning Sky " , the opening theme for Crystal Chronicles , was played in the first Games in Concert performance in Utrecht , Netherlands on November 26 , 2006 . 
 = = Creation and influence = = 
 Kumi Tanioka has described the musical style for the soundtrack to Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles as being based on " ancient instruments " . She says that the idea came to her while looking at illustrations of the game world , which gave her the idea of making " world music " , where the tracks would " not [ be ] limited to a single country or culture " . She also credits Hidenori Iwasaki , the synthesizer operator for the game , with doing " fantastic technical work " that brought her vision to life . For the soundtrack to Ring of Fates , Tanioka purposefully did not focus on " world music " , instead focusing on " creating a new landscape containing the same atmosphere " . The piano performances in the Ring of Fates soundtrack were done by Kumi Tanioka . She did the performances herself rather than use an outside performer as most Final Fantasy soundtracks have done primarily because she " likes to play piano " , and were done without any sheet music , as she preferred instead to improvise . She took extensive piano lessons as a child , and lists piano and choral music as the biggest influences on her musical style . She also claims to have been influenced by music from a wide variety of cultures , such as Indonesian , Irish and Balinese music . She will not be composing the soundtrack for The Crystal Bearers ; this role will be performed by Hidenori Iwasaki . 
 Tanioka has said that in composing the soundtrack for Echoes of Time she tried to " paint the world in an ethnic manner once again " . She has said that she tried throughout the soundtracks of the first four Crystal Chronicles games to " maintain a common atmosphere between each installment , [ but ] always introduce a new concept " . With Echoes of Time Tanioka wanted to go back to the " tribal " concept of the original Crystal Chronicles . She has said in regards to the soundtrack that " instead of the traditional sound endemic to the specific areas , I wanted to use them as one flavor and blend many colors just like Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles " and that many of the tracks she created would be " actually impossible to perform " in real life . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack album of Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles , containing the majority of the musical tracks from the game , and was composed by Kumi Tanioka . It was released on the Pony Canyon label on August 20 , 2003 . The album did not include the English versions of the opening song , " Sound of the Wind " and the ending theme , " <unk> Starry Night " , all sung by Donna Burke . The style of the music on this album is not defined , but was described by Kumi Tanioka as being based on " ancient instruments " . The soundtrack has extensive use of many medieval and Renaissance musical instruments such as the recorder , the <unk> and the lute , creating a distinctively rustic feel , and also follows the practices and styles of medieval music . The soundtrack spans 52 tracks over 2 discs , covering a duration of 2 : 11 : 38 , and has the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : A Musical Journey was a European promotional album which was given alongside the game on March 11 , 2004 if the game had been pre @-@ ordered . It contains six tracks from the soundtrack , including " Kaze no Ne " in both Japanese and English , the only time the English version has been released . It was published by Nintendo of Europe , and covers a duration of 17 : 37 . 
 Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles Original Soundtrack was well received ; Daniel Space of RPGFan praised it , saying that " the music is fun , extremely well written and interesting to hear " . He enjoyed the alternative instruments used in the tunes , calling them " successful in providing imagery of renaissance times " , although he felt that much more of them would have begun to drag the soundtrack down . Chris of Square Enix Music Online also enjoyed the soundtrack , although he noted that it was " not for everyone " . He did , however , feel that the constant use of Renaissance @-@ themed music resulted in a " lack of diversity of styles " that made several of the tracks " bland and <unk> " . Jared of Square Enix Music Online was more enthusiastic about the soundtrack , terming it " a stunning soundtrack full of feeling and emotion " and praising its " unique " style . As a promotional album , Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles - A Musical Journey was not as noted by critics . Jared felt that it was " a decent look into the soundtrack of Crystal Chronicles " , but not as good of a sampler disc as it could have been due to the track selection . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Ring of Fates Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Ring of Fates Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack album of Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Ring of Fates , containing all of the musical tracks from the game , and was composed and produced by Kumi Tanioka . The ending theme song for the game , " A World Without Stars " ( 星のない世界 , Hoshi no Nai Sekai ) , was sung by Aiko , though it was not included in the album , and Nobuo Uematsu contributed one track to the soundtrack . The soundtrack continues the musical theme of " ancient instruments " prevalent in the Crystal Chronicles soundtrack , but additionally incorporates more modern orchestral instruments such as string and horn pieces . The tracks on the album cover a wide range of emotional themes , from " joyful and whimsical tracks " to " lugubrious emotional tracks " to " bombastic battle tracks " . In keeping with the lighthearted nature of the game , any darker @-@ themed tracks are exaggerated to make them less serious . The soundtrack spans 57 tracks , covering a duration of 1 : 16 : 06 . It was released on September 19 , 2007 in Japan by Square Enix bearing the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . 
 Ring of Fates was well received by reviewers ; Neal Chandran of RPGFan , although finding the original soundtrack to be " bland " , felt that the Crystal Chronicles soundtrack was " quite varied , exciting , and dare I say really freaking good " and praised the variety of styles and moods of the tracks . Chris was also enthusiastic about the soundtrack , praising it as " one of the finest accompaniments to a Final Fantasy game ever produced " . He noted , however , that the soundtrack works best as a " flowing " work or accompaniment to the game , with a lack of individual tracks that stood out as memorable . Don of Square Enix Music Online was much harsher towards the soundtrack , terming it an " extremely underwhelming album " . He disapproved of the change from the medieval instrumentation to a more orchestral score , and felt that the pieces had much less emotional intensity than the Crystal Chronicles soundtrack . 
 = = = Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Echoes of Time Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Echoes of Time Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack album of Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Echoes of Time , containing the majority of the musical tracks from the game , and was composed by Kumi Tanioka . It was released by Square Enix on February 18 , 2009 . Like previous Crystal Chronicles soundtracks , Echoes incorporates a variety of instruments , including oboes , xylophones , marimbas and Latin guitars . Unlike the previous Crystal Chronicles soundtracks , the Echoes does not include a theme song . The soundtrack spans 51 tracks over 2 discs , covering a duration of 2 : 07 : 30 , and has the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 8 . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Crystal Bearers Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Crystal Bearers Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack album of Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Crystal Bearers , containing the majority of the musical tracks from the game , composed by Hidenori Iwasaki and Ryo Yamazaki , with the vocal talent of Donna Burke . The soundtrack spans 70 tracks over 2 discs . 
 Track listing 
 = = Singles = = 
 = = = Kaze no Ne = = = 
 " Sound of the Wind " ( <unk> , Kaze no Ne ) is the opening song of Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles , composed by Kumi Tanioka and performed by Yae . It was released as a single by Pony Canyon , featuring the " Kaze No Ne " song , an arranged version , and two other songs by Yae from her album Blue Line , " Carol ( scat ) " and " Flower of Love " ( <unk> , <unk> no Hana ) . The single was released on July 30 , 2003 , has a length of 14 : 12 , and has a catalog number of <unk> @-@ <unk> . While " Kaze No Ne " follows the medieval theme of the rest of the Crystal Chronicles soundtrack , the arranged version is a more " produced " techno @-@ sounding track . The two unrelated tracks are vocal and instrumental pieces , with " Carol " as a scat song , and " Flower of Love " more of a slower " ethnic / world " piece . 
 Patrick Gann of RPGFan called " Kaze no Ne " one of the few singles he had purchased that was " worth holding onto " . He described all of the tracks as " beautiful " , and felt that the arranged version of " Sound of the Wind " was " charming and enigmatic " . Dave of Square Enix Music Online concurred , calling the single " a potentially excellent addition to anyone 's discography " . He described Yae 's voice as " angelic " " mature " and " fresh " and summed up the album as " a definitive Yae experience accessible to game music fans " . 
 = = = Hoshi no Nai Sekai / Yokogao = = = 
 " Hoshi no Nai Sekai " / " Yokogao " is double A @-@ side containing the theme song to Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Ring of Fates " A World Without Stars " ( 星のない世界 , Hoshi no Nai Sekai ) , as well as two original tracks , " Profile " ( <unk> , Yokogao ) and " Love " ( <unk> , <unk> ) , and instrumental versions of " A World Without Stars " and " Profile " . The single is performed by Aiko . All of the songs are primarily focused on the vocals along with piano and electric guitar accompaniments . " A World Without Stars " is a primarily piano @-@ based song with lyrics in Japanese , while " Profile " and " Love " are mid @-@ tempo pop songs . The album was released on August 22 , 2007 by Pony Canyon , covers a duration of 24 : 40 , and has the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Neal Chandran approved of " Hoshi no Nai Sekai " / " Yokogao " , finding it to be enjoyable despite its short length . He felt that " A World Without Stars " was a " terrific piece , and that the other two songs , while " not as strong " , were " still decent tracks that were easy on the ears " , and approved of the instrumental versions included in the single . Don also appreciated the soundtrack , calling it " a nice choice " and saying that it " complements a rather weak original soundtrack " . He felt that the balance in the songs between the piano and electric guitar was well done . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Unlike the soundtracks to the numbered Final Fantasy games , no songs from the Crystal Chronicles soundtracks have appeared in any compilation albums produced by Square Enix . Songs from the series have also not appeared in any of the official Final Fantasy music concerts , although " Morning Sky " from the Crystal Chronicles soundtrack was played in the first Games in Concert performance in Utrecht , Netherlands on November 26 , 2006 . It was performed by Floor Jansen of the band After Forever and the Metropole Orchestra . 
 = Battle of the Miljevci Plateau = 
 The Battle of the Miljevci Plateau was a clash of the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska - HV ) and forces of the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) , fought on 21 – 23 June 1992 , during the Croatian War of Independence . The battle represented the culmination of a series of skirmishes between the HV and the RSK forces in Northern Dalmatia , after the implementation of the Vance plan and deployment of the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) began . The skirmishes occurred in the pink zones — areas under control of the RSK , but outside the UN Protected Areas established by the Vance plan . 
 Elements of two HV brigades advanced several kilometres north of Šibenik and captured the Miljevci Plateau , encompassing 108 square kilometres ( 42 square miles ) of territory and seven villages . After the battle , the UNPROFOR requested the HV to pull back to its positions prior to 21 June , and the request was followed by the United Nations Security Council Resolution 762 urging Croatia to withdraw from the plateau , but the HV remained in place . In the immediate aftermath , Croatian authorities claimed the offensive was not ordered by the General Staff and that the advance was made in response to a series of provocations . After the battle , some bodies of the killed RSK soldiers were thrown into a karst pit and were not retrieved until August , when the released prisoners of war informed the UNPROFOR of the location of the bodies . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence Force 's ( Teritorijalna obrana – TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt by Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina regions and eastern Croatia . 
 Following the Pakrac clash between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March 1991 , the conflict had escalated into the Croatian War of Independence . The JNA stepped in , increasingly supporting the Croatian Serb insurgents . In early April , the leaders of the Croatian Serb revolt declared their intention to integrate the area under their control , known as SAO Krajina , with Serbia . In May , the Croatian government responded by forming the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor narodne garde – ZNG ) , but its development was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo introduced in September . 
 On 8 October , Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia , and a month later the ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) . Late 1991 saw the fiercest fighting of the war , as the 1991 Yugoslav campaign in Croatia culminated in the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . In November , Croatia , Serbia and the JNA agreed upon the Vance plan , contained in the Geneva Accord . The plan entailed a ceasefire , protection of civilians in specific areas designated as United Nations Protected Areas and UN peacekeepers in Croatia . The ceasefire came into effect on 3 January 1992 . In December 1991 , the European Community announced its decision to grant a diplomatic recognition to Croatia on 15 January 1992 . SAO Krajina renamed itself the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) on 19 December 1991 . 
 Despite the Geneva Accord requiring an immediate withdrawal of JNA personnel and equipment from Croatia , the JNA stayed behind for up to eight months in some areas . When its troops eventually pulled out , JNA left their equipment to the RSK . As a consequence of organisational problems and breaches of ceasefire , the UN peacekeepers , named the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) , did not start to deploy until 8 March . The UNPROFOR took two months to fully assemble in the UN Protected Areas ( UNPAs ) . Furthermore , the RSK forces remained in areas outside designated UNPAs which were under RSK control at the time of the signing of the Implementation Agreement ceasefire of 3 January 1992 . Those areas , later better known as the pink zones , were supposed to be restored to Croatian control from the outset of the plan implementation . Failure of this aspect of the implementation of the Vance plan made the pink zones a major source of contention for Croatia and the RSK . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Before the UNPROFOR fully deployed , the HV clashed with an armed force of the RSK in the village of Nos Kalik , located in a pink zone near Šibenik , and captured the village at 4 : 45 p.m. on 2 March 1992 . The JNA formed a battlegroup to counterattack the next day . The JNA battlegroup , augmented by elements of the 9th Military Police Battalion , deployed at 5 : 50 a.m. and clashed with the HV force in Nos Kalik . However , the JNA counterattack failed . The HV captured 21 RSK troops in Nos Kalik , intent on exchanging the prisoners for Croats held under arrest in Knin . Following negotiations , the HV agreed to pull back on 11 April , but later declined to do so , claiming deteriorating security at the battlefield in general prevented the withdrawal . Several Serb @-@ owned houses in Nos Kalik were torched after the HV captured the village . 
 The HV clashed with units subordinated to the 180th Motorised Brigade of the JNA in a pink zone near Zadar on 17 – 22 May . While the JNA repelled attacks in most areas around Zadar and <unk> , the HV managed to cut a JNA base at the Križ Hill away from the rest of the force on 17 May . The JNA outpost occupied high ground overlooking the surrounding area , including Zadar . It housed radar equipment and was used as an artillery observer post . The JNA attempted to relieve the besieged garrison in the next few days , however the attempts failed and the base surrendered to the HV on 22 May . The attack and capture of the Križ Hill , codenamed Operation Jaguar , was carried out by the 2nd Battalion of the 159th Infantry Brigade of the HV , supported by artillery of the 112th Infantry Brigade . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 On 21 June , the HV attacked RSK positions at the Miljevci Plateau , located in the pink zone north of Šibenik . The TO forces in the area were subordinated to the 1st Brigade of the TO , and Lieutenant Colonel General Milan <unk> . The HV deployed 250 troops , elements of the 113th and 142nd Infantry Brigades , commanded by Brigadier Kruno <unk> . The HV had infiltrated the pink zone along three routes — via Nos Kalik , across the <unk> river and by boat sailing upstream along the Krka River , during the night of 20 / 21 June . The fighting began at 5 a.m. as the HV force , deployed in 26 squads , captured six out of seven villages on the plateau by the end of the morning . At 8 : 00 p.m. , the HV captured the village of Ključ , and all of the plateau . The advance created a HV @-@ held salient south of Knin , several kilometres deep . It also led the RSK artillery to bombard Šibenik and HV bombardment of Knin in response , both on 22 June . 
 The artillery fire progressively intensified until 23 June , while the RSK mobilised and counterattacked against the HV positions at the Miljevci Plateau . However , the mobilisation yielded only 227 additional troops , and the counterattack failed . An UNPROFOR assessment concluded the situation might deteriorate further and engulf all of the pink zones . To address the situation , UNPROFOR military commander Lieutenant General Satish Nambiar met with Deputy Prime Minister of Croatia Milan <unk> and Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia General Anton Tus in Zagreb the same day , in order to discuss the developments on the Miljevci Plateau . Skirmishes continued on 24 June , accompanied by some artillery fire . Morale of the RSK troops plummeted though , causing a TO garrison based in nearby <unk> to abandon its barracks . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 According to Croatian sources , the HV lost seven or eight troops killed in the battle . Serb sources cite 40 killed RSK troops , in the battle or its immediate aftermath , while the HV took seventeen prisoners . The prisoners were taken to the Kuline barracks in Šibenik . On 23 June , a total of 29 RSK soldiers killed at the Miljevci Plateau on the first day of the battle were thrown into the <unk> Pit , contrary to orders given by Brigadier Ivan Bačić , commanding officer of the 113th Infantry Brigade . Bačić ordered burial of the killed RSK troops at a local Serbian Orthodox cemetery . The same day , one prisoner , Miroslav Subotić , was shot in Nos Kalik by HV personnel . He was one of a group of prisoners tasked with clearance of the area after the fighting . The HV also destroyed ten tanks and armoured personnel carriers , and captured six howitzers and a considerable stockpile of other weapons and ammunition in the battle . The offensive brought seven villages and 108 square kilometres ( 42 square miles ) to HV control . 
 During their meeting with Nambiar , <unk> and Tus claimed that the offensive was neither planned nor ordered by authorities in Zagreb . They stated that the advance was made in response to a series of provocations made by the RSK armed forces . Bačić claimed that while no specific order to attack was received , Tus did instruct him to respond aggressively and capture as much territory as possible in cases of grave breaches of ceasefire by the RSK forces . Nevertheless , Bačić was reprimanded by the President of Croatia Franjo Tuđman because of the offensive . In the RSK , <unk> was forced to resign his post and was replaced by Major General Mile Novaković . 
 UNPROFOR and the European Community Monitor Mission ( ECMM ) requested the HV to withdraw to positions held before the offensive , but the HV declined the request . However , Croatia agreed that UNPROFOR and ECMM monitors would continue to be present in the pink zones when Croatia assumed control over them . The move was planned as a way to reassure the Serb population that the pink zones could provide them safety . In the aftermath of the offensive , the United Nations Security Council ( UNSC ) adopted the UNSC Resolution 762 , urging cessation of hostilities in or near the UNPAs , and urging the HV to pull back to positions held before 21 June . The 113th Brigade of the HV remained at the plateau regardless . The resolution authorised the UNPROFOR to perform monitoring of the pink zones . It also recommended establishment of a joint commission chaired by an UNPROFOR representative , and including representatives of the Government of Croatia , local authorities and the ECMM to oversee restoration of Croatian control in the pink zones . 
 The prisoners taken by the HV were released in August , and they informed the UNPROFOR about the bodies in the <unk> Pit and the death of Subotić . The bodies were retrieved by Croatian authorities in the presence of UNPROFOR and other international organisations . Two Croatian military police members were charged with Subotić 's murder in 2011 . As of 2013 the trial is ongoing . 
 In 2012 , twenty years after the battle , President Ivo Josipović presented the Charter of the Republic of Croatia to the commanders and units involved in the battle , commending their military achievements . That was the first such move in twenty years , and a reversal of the official stance towards the offensive which had originally declared it as an unauthorised deployment of the HV . 
 = California State Route 177 = 
 State Route 177 ( SR 177 ) is a short state highway in the U.S. state of California in Riverside County . The route links Interstate 10 ( I @-@ 10 ) midway between the Coachella Valley and Blythe on the California – Arizona border , to SR 62 near Rice . SR 177 travels along the eastern portion of the Joshua Tree National Park ; like the eastern 100 miles ( 160 km ) of SR 62 , it passes through some of the most desolate areas of the Mojave Desert . The southernmost portion of SR 177 near I @-@ 10 runs concurrently with County Route R2 ( CR R2 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 177 begins at I @-@ 10 near Desert Center and briefly travels north , intersecting with CR R2 . At this intersection , SR 177 turns northeast and travels across the Mojave Desert , through the <unk> Valley . It passes near the Desert Center Airport and comes near <unk> Lake , a dry lake . The highway passes along the southeastern boundary of Joshua Tree National Park before turning due north and crossing the desert for several miles . SR 177 briefly turns northeast again before intersecting with SR 62 and defaulting onto SR 62 eastbound . 
 The route is two lanes wide for its entire length . SR 177 is not part of the National Highway System , a network of highways that are essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . In 2013 , SR 177 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 1 @,@ 200 at the northern terminus with SR 62 , and 3 @,@ 700 at the southern terminus with I @-@ 10 , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the highway . 
 = = History = = 
 The Metropolitan Water District built a road from Desert Center that ran north before turning east to Earp along with portions of the California Aqueduct from February 20 to August 4 in 1933 . This was part of a road system that was built in order to support the construction of the aqueduct by connecting the camps that construction workers resided in during the project . This road cost $ 389 @,@ 600 ( about $ 48 million in 2015 dollars ) to construct ; the roads in the system were paved . SR 177 was added to the state highway system in 1972 by the California State Legislature . As of 1998 , Caltrans had no plans to expand the highway , considering it to be " maintain only " through 2015 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was when the route was established , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in Riverside County . 
 = Monetary Policy Committee = 
 The Monetary Policy Committee ( MPC ) is a committee of the Bank of England , which meets for three and a half days twelve times a year to decide the official interest rate in the United Kingdom ( the Bank of England Base Rate ) . It is also responsible for directing other aspects of the government 's monetary policy framework , such as quantitative easing and forward guidance . The Committee comprises eight members , along with the Governor of the Bank of England ( from 2013 Mark Carney ) , and is responsible primarily for keeping the Consumer Price Index ( CPI ) measure of inflation close to a target set by the government ( 2 % as of 2016 ) . Its secondary aim – to support growth and employment – was reinforced in March 2013 . 
 Announced on 6 May 1997 , only five days after that year 's General Election , and officially given operational responsibility for setting interest rates in the Bank of England Act 1998 , the Committee was designed to be independent of political interference and thus to add credibility to interest rate decisions . Each member has one vote , for which they are held to account : full minutes of each meeting are published alongside the Committee 's monetary policy decisions , and members are regularly called before the Treasury Select Committee , as well as speaking to wider audiences at events during the year . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 The Committee is responsible for formulating the United Kingdom 's monetary policy , most commonly via the setting of the rate at it which it lends to banks ( officially the Bank of England Base Rate or <unk> for short ) . As laid out in law , decisions are made with a primary aim of price stability , defined by the government 's inflation target ( 2 % on the Consumer Price Index as of 2011 ) . The target takes the form of a " point " , rather than the " band " used by the Treasury prior to 1997 . The secondary aim of the Committee is to support the government 's economic policies , and help it meet its targets for growth and employment . That secondary aim was reinforced by then Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne in his March 2013 budget , with the MPC given more discretion to more openly " trade off " above @-@ rate inflation in the medium run to boost other economic indicators . The MPC is not responsible for fiscal policy , which is handled by the Treasury itself , but is briefed by the Treasury about fiscal policy developments at meetings . 
 Under the Bank of England Act 1998 the Bank 's Governor must write an open letter of explanation to the Chancellor of the Exchequer if inflation exceeds the target by more than one percentage point in either direction , and once every three months thereafter until prices are back within the allowed range . It should also set out what plans the Bank has for rectifying the problem , and how long it is expected to remain at those levels in the meantime . 
 In January 2009 the Chancellor announced an Asset Purchase Facility ( APF ) , to be administered by the MPC , aimed at ensuring greater liquidity in financial markets . The committee had already started to cut rates the previous autumn , but the effect of such changes can take up to two years and rates cannot go below zero . By March 2009 , faced with very low levels on inflation and interest rates already at 0 @.@ 5 % , the MPC voted to start the process of quantitative easing ( QE ) – the injection of money directly into the economy – via the APF . It had the Bank buy government bonds ( gilts ) , along with a smaller amount of high @-@ quality debt issued by private companies . Although non @-@ gilts initially made up a non @-@ negligible part of the APF portfolio , as of May 2015 the entirety of the APF was held as gilts . On 7 August 2013 , Governor Mark Carney issued the committee 's first forward guidance as a third tool for controlling future inflation . 
 Criticism of the MPC has centred on its predominant focus on inflation to the detriment of growth and employment , although that criticism may have been mitigated by the March 2013 revisions to the committee 's remit . There have also been complaints about the reluctance of lenders to pass on rate changes , and about the extent to which the introduction and management of QE have risked politicising the committee . 
 = = History = = 
 Traditionally , the Treasury set interest rates . After reforms in 1992 , officials held regular meetings and published minutes , but were not independent of government . The result was a feeling that political factors were clouding what should be purely economic judgements on monetary policy . 
 On 6 May 1997 , operational responsibility to set interest rates was granted to the independent Bank of England by the Chancellor of the Exchequer , Gordon Brown . Guidelines for the creation of a new " Monetary Policy Committee " were laid out in the Bank of England Act 1998 . The Act also set out the responsibilities of the MPC : it would meet monthly ; its membership comprise the Governor , two Deputy Governors , two of the Bank 's Executive Directors and four members appointed by the Chancellor . It should publish minutes of all meetings within six weeks ( in October 1998 the committee announced plans to publish far more quickly , after only one ) . The Act gave the government responsibility for specifying its price stability target and growth and employment objectives at least annually . The government reserved the right to instruct the Bank on what rate to set in times of emergency . 
 The years 1998 to 2006 witnessed an unprecedented period of price stability – during which inflation stayed within a percentage point of the target – despite earlier predictions that it could sit outside the range forty or more percent of the time . A 2007 report produced for the Treasury Committee noted that the MPC 's independence of government " has reduced the scope for short @-@ term political considerations to enter into the determination of interest rates " . The creation of the MPC , it said , brought with it " an immediate credibility gain " . 
 The original inflation target for the MPC was 2 @.@ 5 % on the RPI @-@ X measure of inflation , but in 2003 this was changed to 2 % on CPI . Under the Bank of England Act , on 16 April 2007 , the governor ( then Mervyn King ) , was obliged to write the first MPC open letter to the chancellor ( then Gordon Brown ) , explaining why the inflation had deviated from the target of 2 % and reached 3 @.@ 1 % . With prices more unstable since 2007 , by February 2013 , he had had to write 14 such letters to chancellors . Having taken over in August 2013 , Governor Mark Carney wrote his first open letter in February 2015 to explain why inflation had fallen below 1 % for the first time in the MPC 's history . This was followed by deflation of 0 @.@ 1 % in April 2015 , the first month of negative CPI growth since the 1960s , and triggering a second letter . As of February 2015 , Carney has written five such letters . 
 In its first ten years , the MPC kept interest rates relatively stable between 3 @.@ 5 % and 7 @.@ 5 % . Between October 2008 and March the following year , however , the base rate was cut six times to an all @-@ time low of 0 @.@ 5 % in order to avoid deflation and spur growth . In March 2009 , the MPC launched a programme of quantitative easing , initially injecting £ 75 billion into the economy . By March 2010 , it had also increased the amount of money set aside for quantitative easing to £ 200 billion , a figure later increased by a further £ 75 billion in the months following October 2011 . The MPC announced two further £ <unk> rounds of quantitative easing in February and July 2012 , bringing the total to £ 375 billion whilst simultaneously keeping the base rate at 0 @.@ 5 % . As of February 2016 , there have been no further changes to either policy instrument , with further gilt purchases keeping the stock of gilts at £ <unk> . In March 2013 , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , George Osborne , called on the MPC to follow its American counterpart ( the Federal Reserve Board ) in committing itself to keeping interest rates low for a prolonged period of time via appropriate forward guidance , which it did on 7 August . 
 In December 2014 , the Bank adopted the recommendations of a report prepared by Kevin <unk> aimed at improving the transparency of the Committee 's decision making processes . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Following a reshuffle in April 2014 , the Committee currently comprises : 
 The Governor of the Bank 
 The three Deputy Governors for Monetary Policy , Financial Stability and Markets and Banking 
 The Bank 's Chief Economist 
 Four external members , appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer for a renewable three @-@ year term 
 Each member has one vote of equal weight , for which they can be held publicly accountable . The Governor chairs the meeting and is the last to cast his vote , acting as a casting vote in event of a tie . Representatives from the Treasury may attend the meeting , but only as non @-@ voting observers . 
 = = Meetings = = 
 The MPC meets twelve times a year : eight meetings spread throughout the year , plus four joint meetings with the Financial Policy Committee . After a half @-@ day " pre @-@ MPC meeting " , usually the Wednesday before , meetings are held over three days , typically a Thursday , Monday and Wednesday . Prior to the implementation of the reforms recommended by Kevin <unk> , meetings were generally held monthly on the Wednesday and Thursday following the first Monday of the month , although this was sometimes deviated from . In 2010 , for example , the meeting was postponed from the 5 / 6 to the 7 / 10 May in order to avoid conflicting with the general election schedule for the 6th . The May 2015 meeting was similarly delayed . 
 On the first day of the three , the Committee studies data relating to the UK economy , as well as the worldwide economy , presented by the Bank 's economists and regional representatives , and topics for discussion are identified and addressed . The second day consists of a main policy discussion during which MPC members explain their personal views . The Governor chooses the policy most likely to command a majority and , on the third day of the meeting , a vote is taken ; each member gets one vote . Those in the minority are asked to give the action they would have preferred . The Committee 's decisions are announced at noon the day after the meeting has concluded . Following a procedural change in 2015 , minutes of each meeting ( including the policy preference of each member ) are published on the Bank 's website at the same time as any decision is announced , resulting in a " Super Thursday " effect . Prior to August 2015 , the Committee 's decisions were published at noon on the final day of the meeting , but there was a two @-@ week delay before any minutes were published . Starting with the March 2015 meeting , full transcripts of meetings will also be published , albeit after an eight @-@ year delay . 
 Outside of meetings , members of the MPC can be called upon by Parliament to answer questions regarding their decisions , via parliamentary committee meetings , often those of the Treasury Committee . MPC members also speak to audiences throughout the country , with the same aim . Their views and expectations for inflation are also republished in the Bank 's quarterly inflation report . 
 = = Membership = = 
 To date , 32 men and 6 women have served on the MPC . As of February 2016 , the current Committee comprises ( by status ) : 
 Other , former members of the Committee ( by date of appointment ) are : 
 The dates listed show when their current terms of appointment are due to , or did , end . 
 As of January 2008 , Mervyn King , the Bank of England 's then Governor , was the only MPC member to have taken part in every meeting since 1997 . As a result , after the MPC meeting in July 2013 , the first after King retired , no single member had attended every meeting . As of 2016 , Kate Barker is the only external member to date to have been appointed for three terms , each lasting three years . As of February 2016 , none of the current committee members were present when the base rate was last changed . 
 = Prick Up Your Ears ( Family Guy ) = 
 " Prick Up Your Ears " is the sixth episode of season five of Family Guy . The episode was originally broadcast on November 19 , 2006 . In this episode Lois discovers that Chris ’ school has removed the sex education program due to budget cuts and decides to bring the class back by becoming the teacher . Unfortunately , she gets fired a short time later for teaching the students about safe sex rather than abstinence . Meanwhile , Stewie attempts to find and kill the Tooth Fairy after being told horror stories by Brian . 
 The episode was written by Cherry Chevapravatdumrong and directed by James Purdum . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 9 @.@ 3 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Drew Barrymore , Mindy Cohn , Gary Cole , Taylor Cole , Lauren Conrad , David Cross , Margaret Easley , Lauren Hooser , Kim Parks , Kevin Michael Richardson , André Sogliuzzo and Crawford Wilson , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Lois finds Chris and his friends watching a pornographic film , she becomes convinced a proper sex @-@ ed class should be taught at his school . Since the sex @-@ ed class at her children 's school was removed , Lois decides to become the school 's newest sex @-@ ed teacher . In class , she attempts to teach students about safe sex , but her efforts are ruined by a botched attempt of Peter , who wishes to distribute his views on sex as well . Soon after the first sex @-@ ed class , parental protests arise as Lois taught kids about safe ways to perform premarital sex , rather than abstinence . Lois is subsequently fired . She is replaced by a reverend who promotes both premarital and marital abstinence , explaining fictional consequences of intercourse with various questionable examples . The idea appeals to most students , including Meg , who starts a relationship with a fellow student named Doug . In a subplot , Stewie loses a tooth and is told about the tooth fairy . Frightened by the fairy tale , Stewie develops a plan to capture the fairy , not knowing she does not exist . He borrows Herbert 's false teeth and provokes Brian 's girlfriend Jillian to throw up , as she has bulimia nervosa , in order to collect her teeth as well . Brian , overseeing Stewie 's increasing obsession with the fairy , reveals to Stewie that she does not exist , but another scene shows a man named T. Fairy , having an apparent tooth fetish , stealing teeth to roll around in them . 
 Peter , truly believing the anti @-@ sex propaganda Meg brings home , starts wearing a chastity belt and refuses to have sex with Lois . In her place , Lois grows tired of the whole ordeal , forcefully convinces Peter to change his mind by raping him . Meanwhile , Lois catches Meg and Doug engaging in " ear sex " ( which has become a fad at the school ) . Meg explains they did it so that it would not count as sex " in the eyes of the Lord . " This prompts Lois and Peter to collaborate into sneaking into the school after being banned . Lois tells the kids that while they should not have sex until they are ready , everyone has urges and it is okay to have premarital sex , but only as long as it is practiced safely and encourages them to use condoms . Following this revelation , Meg 's boyfriend breaks up with her after discovering Meg 's naked appearance . Humiliated , Meg blames Lois for ruining her relationship and runs away to her room , sobbing . As Peter , Brian , and Lois wrap things up , an announcer tells viewers to text which ending should end the episode : Lois retelling her speech ( <unk> ) , Meg talking about her day ( <unk> ) , or Cleveland giving his line ( <unk> 3 ) . In the end , the viewers choose <unk> 3 , and the episode ends with Cleveland poking out the window and saying the line " Hey Y 'all ! Sock it to me ! " . 
 = = Production and censorship = = 
 Many scenes from the original episode were seen as vulgar and were removed from the television broadcast . One of the scenes removed was from the beginning of the episode when Stewie , Chris , and his friends were watching Genital Hospital , a reference to the television show General Hospital . The original scene had included the doctor on the film undoing his zipper after discussing the patient ’ s health problems . The edited version cut away before the doctor could undo his zipper , but the sound can still be heard when it cuts back to Chris and his friends watching the porno . Another scene edited was a naked Peter shown crouched on top of Lois 's head ( attempting ear sex ) ( even though it was shown on Adult Swim every time the episode repeats ) . On the TV version , Peter is still naked , but it is implied ( through sound effects ) that Lois forcibly pushed him to the floor and she has a hand on her ear ( <unk> Peter attempted ear sex ) In this scene Peter refers to the <unk> as Ronald McDonald 's autistic friend , which was originally penned as " retarded friend " ( which is included in the uncut version ) . A scene in which Brian , wearing a robe , informs Lois of the weird tasting <unk> jelly in the fridge leads Peter to reveal that the <unk> was on his penis was edited on TV so that way he states that the jelly was on his crotch . In a scene added later to the episode , Mel Gibson apologizes to the Jewish community after being offensive while continuing to offend them . The scene was added after the episode had been made but prior to broadcasting . When Peter joins Meg in her quest to be abstinent , the TV version has a gag where Peter keeps mispronouncing the word , Meg corrects him , and Peter punishes her by sending her to her room . The Adult Swim and DVD version replaces that scene with one that was edited for being insensitive to Asian people in which Peter tells Meg that now that he is abstinent , he will be as untouched as the turn signal on an Asian woman 's car , followed by a cutaway of an Asian lady causing an accident on an eight @-@ lane highway . In the scene involving Stewie entering Herbert 's house , a picture of Chris with the body of a model was in the animatic , but not shown on TV . The original ending of this episode ( with the " choose your own ending " text message contest ) was supposed to have Lois and Peter throw Brian out the window instead of giving Cleveland his one and only appearance in the episode . This deleted scene is featured in the episode animatic on the season five DVD set . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actors Drew Barrymore , Mindy Cohn , Gary Cole , Taylor Cole , Lauren Conrad , David Cross , Margaret Easley , Lauren Hooser , Kim Parks , Kevin Michael Richardson , André Sogliuzzo and Crawford Wilson guest star in the episode . Recurring guest voices include Lori Alan , Alex Breckenridge , Steve Callaghan , Chris Cox , Ralph Garman , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , John Viener , and Adam West , who has a role of an exaggerated version of himself . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 As Lois is informed the sex education classes will be terminated , she exclaims " Oh , no ! " , a cut @-@ a @-@ way scene then begins of a sports car driving along the road with music playing in the background , this is a reference to Knight Rider . When Stewie is using his toys in order to capture and kill the tooth fairy , the toys are SpongeBob from SpongeBob SquarePants , Starscream ( from The Transformers ) and Man @-@ E @-@ Faces , all of which are fictional characters for television programs . When Peter is watching television , he is watching Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County ; the women shown on the episode are actually cartoon animations of the real actors for the show . When Lois catches Chris and his friends watching a pornographic film , she tells them that without sex education , they can easily become sexually confused . The scene cuts to Michael Jackson in his childhood form eating a bowl of Frosted Mini @-@ <unk> , saying that he likes the frosted side , while the grown @-@ up in him likes his younger self . When Lois teaches a sex education class , Peter uses a bust of William Shakespeare and a Rainbow Brite doll to demonstrate sexual intercourse . In the scene where Stewie loses a tooth , everybody comes in and tells him to calm down , then it shows a long line of characters , mimicking a scene from the movie Airplane ! . While doing a news story on ear sex , Diane tells Tom that CSI is on Thursdays . When Brian talks about Jillian 's bulimia , he mentions the death of singer Karen Carpenter , who died from anorexia in 1983 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight improvement over the previous week , the episode was viewed in 9 @.@ 3 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 3 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , tying with The Simpsons , while still winning over American Dad ! . 
 Although the episode received little positive reception , it was given a positive review by IGN 's Dan Iverson who noted that its plot had “ great satire of the issue of sex education vs. abstinence . ” He also stated that “ the random flashback jokes are often what are most memorable about each episode . ” He gave the episode a rating of 7 @.@ 8 out of 10 . In his review of Family Guy , volume 5 , Francis Rizzo III of DVD Talk called the episode " a smart jab at the conservative Christian approach to sex education , " and stated that " the effect it has on Meg , as well as Peter , is great " . 
 = Quietly Confident Quartet = 
 The Quietly Confident Quartet was the self @-@ given name of the Australian men 's 4 × 100 metres medley relay swimming team that won the gold medal at the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow . The United States boycotted the Moscow Olympics in protest against the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and , as of 2015 , the Australian victory remains the only occasion the United States has not won the event at Olympic level since its inception in 1960 . The quartet consisted of backstroker Mark Kerry , breaststroker Peter Evans , butterflyer Mark Tonelli and freestyler Neil Brooks . The team was nominally led by its oldest member Tonelli , who was 23 and was also a spokesperson for the Australian athletes ' campaign for their right to compete at the Olympics against the wishes of the Fraser Government . The team was seen as an unlikely prospect to win ; all four of the swimmers had clashed with swimming authorities over disciplinary issues and three experienced suspension or expulsion from the Australian team during their careers . 
 Australia had previously won medals in the event , but was not regarded as one of the favourites for the gold , as the Soviet Union , Great Britain , and Sweden all fielded more decorated swimmers over the component legs of the relay . After the backstroke leg , Australia was in fourth place and more than a second in arrears of the Soviet leaders . However , Evans was the fastest among the breaststrokers and moved the team into second position at the halfway point in the race ; and Tonelli , a makeshift butterflyer , completed his leg in a time much faster than his previous best , allowing Australia to keep the Soviet lead reasonable . Australia 's anchor swimmer Brooks overtook his more <unk> Soviet counterpart Sergey Kopliakov in the latter half of the final leg to secure a narrow victory . The quartet disbanded after the Olympics due to Tonelli 's retirement , although some of the members continued to be present in the relay team at various times alongside new swimmers . By 1986 , all four members of the 1980 team had retired from international competition . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Australian team for the event was a young and inexperienced foursome . Mark Tonelli was the oldest at the age of 23 , followed by Mark Kerry , who turned 21 a month after the Olympics . Both were attending their second Olympics , while Peter Evans and Neil Brooks were 18 and 17 respectively and had never represented Australia at the Commonwealth , World Championship or Olympic level . Evans and Brooks were from Western Australia , a state that had never been prominent in Australian swimming . The team members had some contact prior to their Olympic selection ; Brooks ' family had billeted Tonelli in 1976 when the Australian Olympic team held a training camp in Perth . Brooks cited his experience with Tonelli as a motivating factor in his career . 
 The quartet was also marked by rebellious and anti @-@ establishment tendencies . Tonelli and Kerry were expelled from the 1978 Commonwealth Games team by the Australian Swimming Union for violating a curfew during a training camp in Hawaii before the team 's trip to Edmonton , Canada for the competition ; Tonelli had been out drinking and admitted to smoking marijuana , which was not illegal in Hawaii , while Kerry had been courting a female . In 1980 , during the lead @-@ up to the selection of the Olympic team , Brooks walked out of a training camp , alleging that the coaches were neglecting him , while Evans once stopped during a training session and refused to do extra mileage , emphatically proclaiming that " work is a poor substitute for talent " . Later in their careers , Evans and Brooks continued to have their clashes with swimming officialdom ; Evans over his coaches ' demands for more training mileage and Brooks over swimmers ' human rights . Brooks was later suspended twice in his career for his clashes with swimming authorities , and expelled from the Australian Institute of Sport for indiscipline . 
 The rebel qualities of the group were on show in the lead up to the Olympics . An obstacle arose with the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , which resulted in a boycott of the Games by a large part of the Western world , led by the United States . The Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser was also the patron of the Australian Olympic Committee , and he and sections of the public put significant political pressure on the athletes to join the boycott . Tonelli realised that only the sportspeople would suffer from a boycott and that trade relations would continue unabated . He took a leadership role among the athletes , fighting for their right to compete and publicising their cause to the Australian community . Evans was fully supportive of Tonelli 's campaign , reflecting that " We were political tools , and the only ones to suffer would be us . " He rhetorically asked : " Do you really think that if we didn 't go someone would come up to us after the Games and pat us on the back for not going ? " 
 Kerry was equally adamant that he was going to compete , unlike some swimmers who decided to make personal boycotts . He received offers from Australian officials to not compete in return for financial payments . He said 
 I felt the biggest statement we could make was to go to Moscow and show the world . If there was a total boycott , fine , but trade was still going on . It was disgusting . Why should the athletes be made to suffer ? 
 According to women 's swimming captain Lisa Forrest , Tonelli adopted populist tactics in championing the athletes ' cause . He said that Fraser was sending " wheat to feed the Russian army , wool to clothe the army and Australian metal to make Russian guns " , claiming that this contradicted the proposed protest against the invasion and Russian military aggression . Tonelli 's anti @-@ authoritarian and individualistic style manifested itself during media appearances , including a news interview in which he debated with Reverend Lance Shilton , who had called the athletes traitors . Shilton expressed sympathy for the athletes , which Tonelli interpreted as condescension . He responded by rolling his eyes and twirling his finger , a gaffe that was shown on national television ; Tonelli mistakenly thought that only his voice was being broadcast at the time and that the images were showing something else . Forrest said that " the damage was done — one of our most prominent anti @-@ boycott lobbyists ... looked like a smart alec " . 
 = = Event history and expectations = = 
 The United States had always won the 4 × 100 m medley relay since the event 's inception at the Olympics in 1960 with comfortable margins . The closest winning buffer was 2 @.@ 6 seconds and in 1972 and 1976 they had won by 4 @.@ 10 and 3 @.@ 72 s respectively ; their boycott opened up the field in the event . In the five previous times the event had been contested , Australia 's best result had come in the inaugural race in Rome , where the team of David Theile , Terry Gathercole , Neville Hayes and Geoff Shipton out @-@ touched Japan to claim silver . The only other time that Australia had won a medal was in Tokyo in 1964 , when Peter Reynolds , Ian O 'Brien , Kevin Berry and David Dickson finished behind the United States and Germany . The following two Games saw a fourth placing and an elimination in the heats . The previous outing in 1976 in Montreal had seen Australia come sixth . Kerry was the only veteran of the 1976 relay team who returned to the Olympics in Moscow . 
 Australia was regarded by swimming analysts as a medal chance , but were not seen as the main threats — Sweden , Great Britain and the Soviet Union were the most heavily fancied teams . The hosts had the silver medallists in the 100 m backstroke and breaststroke , Viktor Kuznetsov and Arsens Miskarovs respectively , and their butterflyer Yevgeny Seredin had come fifth in his 100 m event . Their freestyler Sergey Kopliakov later came fourth in the corresponding 100 m event . The British boasted Duncan Goodhew , the 100 m breaststroke gold medallist , and Gary Abraham , who had placed fifth in the 100 m backstroke . Sweden 's butterflyer Pär Arvidsson and backstroker Bengt Baron had won their respective 100 m events and their freestyle swimmer Per <unk> would win silver in the 100 m a few days later . Their weakest swimmer was the breaststroker Peter Berggren , who came ninth in the 100 m . On paper , Australia 's team paled in comparison . Brooks later came seventh in his 100 m freestyle semifinal and 14th overall after having an asthma attack , and Evans was Australia 's only medallist in the corresponding individual event , winning bronze in the breaststroke . Kerry had been eliminated in the 100 m backstroke semifinals , while Tonelli was the Australian champion in the 100 m freestyle and backstroke but was swimming as a makeshift butterflyer ; the nation did not have an entrant in the 100 m butterfly . Adding to the pressure was Australia 's failure to win any gold medals in any sport at the 1976 Olympics . This meant that the public were still awaiting their first gold since the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich . Coming into the Olympics , Australia was ranked seventh out of the thirteen competing countries . 
 = = Race = = 
 The medley relay was scheduled for Thursday , 24 July , the fifth day of swimming competition , with heats in the morning and the final in the evening . Australia 's prospects improved when Sweden was disqualified in the first heat . Australia and the Soviet Union swam in the second heat . With their superior depth , the home team was able to rest their entire first @-@ choice quartet in the heats . On the other hand , Australia was only willing to rest Kerry — Glenn Patching swam the backstroke leg in his place . The hosts led the Australians from the start and extended their margin over each of the first three legs . Brooks reclaimed 1 @.@ 34 s on the freestyle leg , but the Australians fell 0 @.@ 13 s short to come second in their heat . Nevertheless , the Australians still qualified in second place overall , as they and the Soviets were more than 1 @.@ 5 s faster than the third @-@ placed Hungarians . In any case , despite resting all of their first @-@ choice quartet , the home team were still faster than the Australians , who had fielded all but one of their full @-@ strength team . 
 Evans brashly took the opportunity to attempt to regain the psychological ascendancy from Goodhew , confronting him privately and stating that " we will win it " , later reporting that the Briton was astounded by his posturing . The eldest swimmer in the quartet at the age of 23 , Tonelli convened the team as its de facto leader . He asked his compatriots to commit to swimming their legs in a certain time ; Kerry vowed to swim the backstroke in 57 s , Evans the breaststroke in 63 s flat , Tonelli the butterfly in 54 s and Brooks promised to anchor the team in 49 @.@ 8 s , even though he had never gone faster than 51 s . Tonelli named the foursome the " Quietly Confident Quartet " because they exhibited a reserved self @-@ belief as they lined up for the race . Whereas most of the other teams were " psyching up " in the marshalling area , the Australians were remaining light @-@ hearted and placid , confident that they could perform in the water . 
 Patching was one of several <unk> who had slipped on the starting area earlier in the meet , so Kerry decided to rub a sticky red substance onto the soles of his feet . The Soviet organisers had provided a carpet following the incidents , resulting in Kerry leaving red footprints in the stadium . Kerry led off in a time faster than his effort in the individual event , but it was still two seconds slower than his personal best . He finished his leg in 57 @.@ 87 s , leaving Australia in fourth place . Kuznetsov gave the Soviets the lead after posting a time of 56 @.@ 81 s , with Hungary and Great Britain in second and third place . France was the last to reach the 100 m mark , recording a time of 58 @.@ 84 s . Evans then swam a personal best of 63 @.@ 01 s , the fastest split among the breaststrokers by 0 @.@ 63 s . His leg moved Australia into second place at the halfway mark , just 0 @.@ 45 s behind the hosts and roughly half a second ahead of the British and the Hungarians . The four leading teams had broken away , leaving a two @-@ second gap back to the fifth @-@ placed East Germans . 
 Tonelli then swam his leg in 54 @.@ 94 s , almost two seconds faster than his previous best over the distance . He began to lose ground in the last 50 m and was a bodylength behind Seredin until a late surge brought him to within a metre by the time the swimmers touched the wall . If Tonelli had replicated his relay leg in the individual event , he would have claimed the silver medal . Although he lost 0 @.@ 36 s to Seredin , he had minimised his loss and Australia were within 0 @.@ 81 s going into the final leg . Furthermore , the Australians were now more than a second clear of the third placed Great Britain . 
 Brooks then executed a powerful , well @-@ timed dive and surfaced almost even with his Soviet counterpart Kopliakov . He had drawn level halfway through his leg and made a superior turn to take the lead as they headed home . The Soviet freestyler pulled level with 25 m to go before Brooks again pulled away to seal an Australian victory by 0 @.@ 22 s . He did not breathe in the last ten metres , and claimed to be laughing for the final five metres , confident that his opponent could not pass him . Brooks had finished his leg in 49 @.@ 86 s as he had vowed to his team mates . In doing so , he recorded the <unk> freestyle split in the relay , faster than that of the individual 100 m freestyle gold medallist , Jörg <unk> of East Germany . 
 The time of 3 m 45 @.@ 70 s sealed Australia 's first win in a medley relay at the Olympics , for men or women . It remains the only time that the United States has not won the men 's event . The team made a celebratory dive into the water and did a poolside interview . Tonelli remarked that " I was totally stunned . After all the hassle , and my being the athletes ' mouthpiece , we 'd come through and done it " . Forrest hailed the win as " a gold medal that should never have been " . 
 Sportscaster Norman May 's dramatic call of the race on the <unk> radio network , ending with " Gold , gold for Australia , gold ! " , became one of Australia 's best @-@ known and most iconic sports commentaries . 
 = = Government reaction = = 
 Relations between the Olympians and the Australian Government remained tense after months of political struggle regarding the boycott . A prime minister would customarily send a congratulatory message to Olympic medallists . However , the Australian Olympic chef de mission Phil Coles confirmed at the following day 's press conference that the quartet had not received a message from Fraser . Australian journalists soon bombarded Fraser 's office with phone calls asking why he had not applauded the athletes . Various members of the government recommended that Fraser congratulate the swimmers , but the prime minister baulked . When questioned in a radio interview , he said " I hope that circumstances do not arise over the next few years which will cause them to have very great regrets about the fact that they 've gone " . Fraser relented and late in the night , his office sent a telegram . However , he would not send his message directly to the Olympic village , so the telegram was sent to the Australian Embassy in Moscow . Fraser had ordered the Australian diplomatic mission to close its doors to the Olympians , so the embassy staff had to pass the envelopes containing the message through the fence to Australian Olympic officials . Fraser 's telegram said : 
 You know I did not and do not approve of Australia being represented at these Olympic Games . I do want to say however that your performance in the relay was a truly great sporting achievement . My personal congratulations . 
 Coles reported that the relay squad tore up the prime minister 's message . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The quartet never competed as a unit after the Moscow Olympics . Tonelli retired immediately after the Games , while Kerry took an extended break . The backstroker attempted a comeback in the leadup to the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane , but his abbreviated preparation before the selection trials was not enough and he was defeated by other swimmers . This left Evans and Brooks as the only members of the 1980 team to participate in Australia 's medley relay victory at the Commonwealth Games . In 1984 , Kerry secured a recall to the team as Australia 's preferred backstroker , while Brooks was surpassed by Mark Stockwell as the leading freestyler . Australia came third in the 1984 Summer Olympics in the medley relay as the Americans returned to the Olympic fold ; Evans and Kerry swam in the final , while Brooks did the freestyle leg in the heats . Evans and Kerry retired after the Olympics , and Brooks was not the first @-@ choice swimmer in 1986 , meaning that a totally different quartet competed in the medley relay at the 1986 Commonwealth Games in Edinburgh . Brooks was suspended for drunken behaviour on the flight back to Australia , and then retired , and all four members of the Quietly Confident Quartet had departed the Australian swimming scene . 
 = Long @-@ term potentiation = 
 In neuroscience , long @-@ term potentiation ( LTP ) is a persistent strengthening of synapses based on recent patterns of activity . These are patterns of synaptic activity that produce a long @-@ lasting increase in signal transmission between two neurons . The opposite of LTP is long @-@ term depression , which produces a long @-@ lasting decrease in synaptic strength . 
 It is one of several phenomena underlying synaptic plasticity , the ability of chemical synapses to change their strength . As memories are thought to be encoded by modification of synaptic strength , LTP is widely considered one of the major cellular mechanisms that underlies learning and memory . 
 LTP was discovered in the rabbit hippocampus by Terje Lømo in 1966 and has remained a popular subject of research since . Many modern LTP studies seek to better understand its basic biology , while others aim to draw a causal link between LTP and behavioral learning . Still others try to develop methods , pharmacologic or otherwise , of enhancing LTP to improve learning and memory . LTP is also a subject of clinical research , for example , in the areas of Alzheimer 's disease and addiction medicine . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early theories of learning = = = 
 At the end of the 19th century , scientists generally recognized that the number of neurons in the adult brain ( roughly 100 billion ) did not increase significantly with age , giving <unk> good reason to believe that memories were generally not the result of new neuron production . With this realization came the need to explain how memories could form in the absence of new neurons . 
 The Spanish <unk> Santiago Ramón y Cajal was among the first to suggest a mechanism of learning that did not require the formation of new neurons . In his 1894 Croonian Lecture , he proposed that memories might instead be formed by strengthening the connections between existing neurons to improve the effectiveness of their communication . Hebbian theory , introduced by Donald Hebb in 1949 , echoed Ramón y Cajal 's ideas , further proposing that cells may grow new connections or undergo metabolic changes that enhance their ability to communicate : 
 Let us assume that the persistence or repetition of a reverberatory activity ( or " trace " ) tends to induce lasting cellular changes that add to its stability .... When an axon of cell A is near enough to excite a cell B and repeatedly or persistently takes part in firing it , some growth process or metabolic change takes place in one or both cells such that A 's efficiency , as one of the cells firing B , is increased . 
 Though these theories of memory formation are now well established , they were farsighted for their time : late 19th and early 20th century neuroscientists and psychologists were not equipped with the neurophysiological techniques necessary for elucidating the biological underpinnings of learning in animals . These skills would not come until the later half of the 20th century , at about the same time as the discovery of long @-@ term potentiation . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 LTP was first observed by Terje Lømo in 1966 in the Oslo , Norway , laboratory of Per Andersen . There , Lømo conducted a series of neurophysiological experiments on anesthetized rabbits to explore the role of the hippocampus in short @-@ term memory . 
 Lømo 's experiments focused on connections , or synapses , from the perforant pathway to the dentate gyrus . These experiments were carried out by stimulating presynaptic fibers of the perforant pathway and recording responses from a collection of postsynaptic cells of the dentate gyrus . As expected , a single pulse of electrical stimulation to fibers of the perforant pathway caused excitatory postsynaptic potentials ( EPSPs ) in cells of the dentate gyrus . What Lømo unexpectedly observed was that the postsynaptic cells ' response to these single @-@ pulse stimuli could be enhanced for a long period of time if he first delivered a high @-@ frequency train of stimuli to the presynaptic fibers . When such a train of stimuli was applied , subsequent single @-@ pulse stimuli elicited stronger , prolonged EPSPs in the postsynaptic cell population . This phenomenon , whereby a high @-@ frequency stimulus could produce a long @-@ lived enhancement in the postsynaptic cells ' response to subsequent single @-@ pulse stimuli , was initially called " long @-@ lasting potentiation " . 
 Timothy Bliss , who joined the Andersen laboratory in 1968 , collaborated with Lømo and in 1973 the two published the first characterization of long @-@ lasting potentiation in the rabbit hippocampus . Bliss and Tony Gardner @-@ Medwin published a similar report of long @-@ lasting potentiation in the awake animal which appeared in the same issue as the Bliss and Lømo report . In 1975 , Douglas and Goddard proposed " long @-@ term potentiation " as a new name for the phenomenon of long @-@ lasting potentiation . Andersen suggested that the authors chose " long @-@ term potentiation " perhaps because of its easily pronounced acronym , " LTP " . 
 = = = Models and theory = = = 
 The physical and biological mechanism of LTP is still not understood , but some successful models have been developed . [ 1 ] Studies of dendritic spines , protruding structures on dendrites that physically grow and retract over the course of minutes or hours , have suggested a relationship between the electrical resistance of the spine and the effective synapse strength , due to their relationship with intracellular calcium transients . Mathematical models such as BCM Theory , which depends also on intracellular calcium in relation to NMDA receptor voltage gates , have been developed since the 1980s and modify the traditional a priori Hebbian learning model with both biological and experimental justification . Still others have proposed re @-@ arranging or synchronizing the relationship between receptor regulation , LTP , and synaptic strength . 
 = = Types = = 
 Since its original discovery in the rabbit hippocampus , LTP has been observed in a variety of other neural structures , including the cerebral cortex , cerebellum , amygdala , and many others . Robert <unk> , a prominent LTP researcher , has suggested that LTP may even occur at all excitatory synapses in the mammalian brain . 
 Different areas of the brain exhibit different forms of LTP . The specific type of LTP exhibited between neurons depends on a number of factors . One such factor is the age of the organism when LTP is observed . For example , the molecular mechanisms of LTP in the immature hippocampus differ from those mechanisms that underlie LTP of the adult hippocampus . The signalling pathways used by a particular cell also contribute to the specific type of LTP present . For example , some types of hippocampal LTP depend on the NMDA receptor , others may depend upon the metabotropic glutamate receptor ( <unk> ) , while still others depend upon another molecule altogether . The variety of signaling pathways that contribute to LTP and the wide distribution of these various pathways in the brain are reasons that the type of LTP exhibited between neurons depends in part upon the anatomic location in which LTP is observed . For example , LTP in the Schaffer collateral pathway of the hippocampus is NMDA receptor @-@ dependent , whereas LTP in the mossy fiber pathway is NMDA receptor @-@ independent . 
 The pre- and postsynaptic activity required to induce LTP are other criteria by which LTP is classified . Broadly , this allows classification of LTP into Hebbian , non @-@ Hebbian , and anti @-@ Hebbian mechanisms . Borrowing its name from Hebb 's postulate , summarized by the maxim that " cells that fire together wire together , " Hebbian LTP requires simultaneous pre- and postsynaptic depolarization for its induction . Non @-@ Hebbian LTP is a type of LTP that does not require such simultaneous depolarization of pre- and postsynaptic cells ; an example of this occurs in the mossy fiber hippocampal pathway . A special case of non @-@ Hebbian LTP , anti @-@ Hebbian LTP explicitly requires simultaneous presynaptic depolarization and relative postsynaptic hyperpolarization for its induction . 
 Owing to its predictable organization and readily inducible LTP , the CA1 hippocampus has become the prototypical site of mammalian LTP study . In particular , NMDA receptor @-@ dependent LTP in the adult CA1 hippocampus is the most widely studied type of LTP , and is therefore the focus of this article . 
 = = Properties = = 
 NMDA receptor @-@ dependent LTP exhibits several properties , including input specificity , associativity , cooperativity , and persistence . 
 Input specificity 
 Once induced , LTP at one synapse does not spread to other synapses ; rather LTP is input specific . Long @-@ term potentiation is only propagated to those synapses according to the rules of associativity and cooperativity . However , the input specificity of LTP may be incomplete at short distances . One model to explain the input specificity of LTP was presented by Frey and Morris in 1997 and is called the synaptic tagging and capture hypothesis . 
 Associativity 
 Associativity refers to the observation that when weak stimulation of a single pathway is insufficient for the induction of LTP , simultaneous strong stimulation of another pathway will induce LTP at both pathways . 
 Cooperativity 
 LTP can be induced either by strong <unk> stimulation of a single pathway to a synapse , or cooperatively via the weaker stimulation of many . When one pathway into a synapse is stimulated weakly , it produces insufficient postsynaptic depolarization to induce LTP . In contrast , when weak stimuli are applied to many pathways that converge on a single patch of postsynaptic membrane , the individual postsynaptic <unk> generated may collectively <unk> the postsynaptic cell enough to induce LTP cooperatively . Synaptic tagging , discussed later , may be a common mechanism underlying associativity and cooperativity . Bruce McNaughton argues that any difference between associativity and cooperativity is strictly semantic . 
 Persistence 
 LTP is persistent , lasting from several minutes to many months , and it is this persistence that separates LTP from other forms of synaptic plasticity . 
 = = = Early phase = = = 
 = = = = Maintenance = = = = 
 While induction entails the transient activation of CaMKII and PKC , maintenance of E @-@ LTP ( early @-@ form LTP ) is characterized by their persistent activation . During this stage , <unk> ( Protein kinase <unk> ) which does not have dependence on calcium , become autonomously active . Consequently , they are able to carry out the phosphorylation events that underlie E @-@ LTP expression . 
 = = = = Expression = = = = 
 Phosphorylation is a chemical reaction in which a small phosphate group is added to another molecule to change that molecule 's activity . <unk> active CaMKII and PKC use phosphorylation to carry out the two major mechanisms underlying the expression of E @-@ LTP . First , and most importantly , they phosphorylate existing AMPA receptors to increase their activity . Second , they mediate or modulate the insertion of additional AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic membrane . Importantly , the delivery of AMPA receptors to the synapse during E @-@ LTP is independent of protein synthesis . This is achieved by having a <unk> pool of AMPA receptors adjacent to the postsynaptic membrane . When the appropriate LTP @-@ inducing stimulus arrives , <unk> AMPA receptors are rapidly trafficked into the postsynaptic membrane under the influence of protein kinases . As mentioned previously , AMPA receptors are the brain 's most abundant glutamate receptors and mediate the majority of its excitatory activity . By increasing the efficiency and number of AMPA receptors at the synapse , future excitatory stimuli generate larger postsynaptic responses . 
 While the above model of E @-@ LTP describes entirely postsynaptic mechanisms for induction , maintenance , and expression , an additional component of expression may occur presynaptically . One hypothesis of this presynaptic facilitation is that persistent CaMKII activity in the postsynaptic cell during E @-@ LTP may lead to the synthesis of a " retrograde messenger " , discussed later . According to this hypothesis , the newly synthesized messenger travels across the synaptic cleft from the postsynaptic to the presynaptic cell , leading to a chain of events that facilitate the presynaptic response to subsequent stimuli . Such events may include an increase in neurotransmitter vesicle number , probability of vesicle release , or both . In addition to the retrograde messenger underlying presynaptic expression in early LTP , the retrograde messenger may also play a role in the expression of late LTP . 
 = = = Late phase = = = 
 Late LTP ( L @-@ LTP ) is the natural extension of E @-@ LTP . Unlike E @-@ LTP , which is independent of protein synthesis , L @-@ LTP requires gene transcription and protein synthesis in the postsynaptic cell . Two phases of L @-@ LTP exist : the first depends upon protein synthesis , while the second depends upon both gene transcription and protein synthesis . These phases are occasionally called <unk> and <unk> , respectively , with E @-@ LTP referred to as <unk> under this nomenclature . 
 = = = = Induction = = = = 
 Late LTP is induced by changes in gene expression and protein synthesis brought about by the persistent activation of protein kinases activated during E @-@ LTP , such as MAPK . In fact , MAPK — specifically the extracellular signal @-@ regulated kinase ( ERK ) subfamily of MAPKs — may be the molecular link between E @-@ LTP and L @-@ LTP , since many signaling cascades involved in E @-@ LTP , including CaMKII and PKC , can converge on ERK . Recent research has shown that the induction of L @-@ LTP can depend on coincident molecular events , namely PKA activation and calcium influx , that converge on <unk> ( <unk> ) , a potent transcriptional coactivator for cAMP response element binding protein ( CREB ) . This requirement for a molecular coincidence accounts perfectly for the associative nature of LTP , and , presumably , for that of learning . 
 = = = = Maintenance = = = = 
 Upon activation , ERK may phosphorylate a number of cytoplasmic and nuclear molecules that ultimately result in the protein synthesis and morphological changes observed in L @-@ LTP . These cytoplasmic and nuclear molecules may include transcription factors such as CREB . ERK @-@ mediated changes in transcription factor activity may trigger the synthesis of proteins that underlie the maintenance of L @-@ LTP . One such molecule may be protein kinase <unk> ( PKMζ ) , a persistently active kinase whose synthesis increases following LTP induction . PKMζ is an atypical isoform of PKC that lacks a regulatory subunit and thus remains constitutively active . Unlike other kinases that mediate LTP , PKMζ is active not just in the first 30 minutes following LTP induction ; rather , PKMζ becomes a requirement for LTP maintenance only during the late phase of LTP . PKMζ thus appears important for the persistence of memory and would be expected to be important in the maintenance of long @-@ term memory . Indeed , administration of a PKMζ inhibitor into the hippocampus of the rat results in retrograde amnesia with intact short @-@ term memory ; PKMζ does not play a role in the establishment of short @-@ term memory . PKMζ has recently been shown to underlie L @-@ LTP maintenance by directing the trafficking and reorganization of proteins in the synaptic scaffolding that underlie the expression of L @-@ LTP . Even more recently , transgenic mice lacking PKMζ demonstrate normal LTP , questioning the necessity of PKMζ 
 The long @-@ term stabilization of synaptic changes is also determined by a parallel increase of pre- and postsynaptic structures such as axonal bouton , dendritic spine and postsynaptic density . On the molecular level , an increase of the postsynaptic scaffolding proteins PSD @-@ 95 and <unk> has been shown to correlate with the stabilization of synaptic enlargement . 
 = = = = Expression = = = = 
 The identities of only a few proteins synthesized during L @-@ LTP are known . Regardless of their identities , it is thought that they contribute to the increase in dendritic spine number , surface area , and postsynaptic sensitivity to neurotransmitter associated with L @-@ LTP expression . The latter may be brought about in part by the enhanced synthesis of AMPA receptors during L @-@ LTP . Late LTP is also associated with the presynaptic synthesis of <unk> and an increase in synaptic vesicle number , suggesting that L @-@ LTP induces protein synthesis not only in postsynaptic cells , but in presynaptic cells as well . As mentioned previously , for postsynaptic LTP induction to result in presynaptic protein synthesis , there must be communication from the postsynaptic to the presynaptic cell . This may occur via the synthesis of a retrograde messenger , discussed later . 
 Even in studies restricted to postsynaptic events , investigators have not determined the location of the protein synthesis that underlies L @-@ LTP . Specifically , it is unclear whether protein synthesis takes place in the postsynaptic cell body or in its dendrites . Despite having observed ribosomes ( the major components of the protein synthesis machinery ) in dendrites as early as the 1960s , prevailing wisdom was that the cell body was the predominant site of protein synthesis in neurons . This reasoning was not seriously challenged until the 1980s , when investigators reported observing protein synthesis in dendrites whose connection to their cell body had been severed . More recently , investigators have demonstrated that this type of local protein synthesis is necessary for some types of LTP . 
 One reason for the popularity of the local protein synthesis hypothesis is that it provides a possible mechanism for the specificity associated with LTP . Specifically , if indeed local protein synthesis underlies L @-@ LTP , only dendritic spines receiving LTP @-@ inducing stimuli will undergo LTP ; the potentiation will not be propagated to adjacent synapses . By contrast , global protein synthesis that occurs in the cell body requires that proteins be shipped out to every area of the cell , including synapses that have not received LTP @-@ inducing stimuli . Whereas local protein synthesis provides a mechanism for specificity , global protein synthesis would seem to directly compromise it . However , as discussed later , the synaptic tagging hypothesis successfully reconciles global protein synthesis , synapse specificity , and associativity . 
 = = = Retrograde signaling = = = 
 Retrograde signaling is a hypothesis that attempts to explain that , while LTP is induced and expressed <unk> , some evidence suggests that it is expressed presynaptically as well . The hypothesis gets its name because normal synaptic transmission is directional and proceeds from the presynaptic to the postsynaptic cell . For induction to occur <unk> and be partially expressed presynaptically , a message must travel from the postsynaptic cell to the presynaptic cell in a retrograde ( reverse ) direction . Once there , the message presumably initiates a cascade of events that leads to a presynaptic component of expression , such as the increased probability of neurotransmitter vesicle release . 
 Retrograde signaling is currently a contentious subject as some investigators do not believe the presynaptic cell contributes at all to the expression of LTP . Even among proponents of the hypothesis there is controversy over the identity of the messenger . Early thoughts focused on nitric oxide , while most recent evidence points to cell adhesion proteins . 
 = = = Synaptic tagging = = = 
 Before the local protein synthesis hypothesis gained significant support , there was general agreement that the protein synthesis underlying L @-@ LTP occurred in the cell body . Further , there was thought that the products of this synthesis were shipped cell @-@ wide in a nonspecific manner . It thus became necessary to explain how protein synthesis could occur in the cell body without compromising LTP 's input specificity . The synaptic tagging hypothesis attempts to solve the cell 's difficult problem of synthesizing proteins in the cell body but ensuring they only reach synapses that have received LTP @-@ inducing stimuli . 
 The synaptic tagging hypothesis proposes that a " synaptic tag " is synthesized at synapses that have received LTP @-@ inducing stimuli , and that this synaptic tag may serve to capture plasticity @-@ related proteins shipped cell @-@ wide from the cell body . Studies of LTP in the marine snail Aplysia californica have implicated synaptic tagging as a mechanism for the input @-@ specificity of LTP . There is some evidence that given two widely separated synapses , an LTP @-@ inducing stimulus at one synapse drives several signaling cascades ( described previously ) that initiates gene expression in the cell nucleus . At the same synapse ( but not the unstimulated synapse ) , local protein synthesis creates a short @-@ lived ( less than three hours ) synaptic tag . The products of gene expression are shipped globally throughout the cell , but are only captured by synapses that express the synaptic tag . Thus only the synapse receiving LTP @-@ inducing stimuli is potentiated , demonstrating LTP 's input specificity . 
 The synaptic tag hypothesis may also account for LTP 's associativity and cooperativity . Associativity ( see Properties ) is observed when one synapse is excited with LTP @-@ inducing stimulation while a separate synapse is only weakly stimulated . Whereas one might expect only the strongly stimulated synapse to undergo LTP ( since weak stimulation alone is insufficient to induce LTP at either synapse ) , both synapses will in fact undergo LTP . While weak stimuli are unable to induce protein synthesis in the cell body , they may prompt the synthesis of a synaptic tag . Simultaneous strong stimulation of a separate pathway , capable of inducing cell body protein synthesis , then may prompt the production of plasticity @-@ related proteins , which are shipped cell @-@ wide . With both synapses expressing the synaptic tag , both would capture the protein products resulting in the expression of LTP in both the strongly stimulated and weakly stimulated pathways . 
 Cooperativity is observed when two synapses are activated by weak stimuli incapable of inducing LTP when stimulated individually . But upon simultaneous weak stimulation , both synapses undergo LTP in a cooperative fashion . Synaptic tagging does not explain how multiple weak stimuli can result in a collective stimulus sufficient to induce LTP ( this is explained by the postsynaptic summation of EPSPs described previously ) . Rather , synaptic tagging explains the ability of weakly stimulated synapses , none of which are capable of independently generating LTP , to receive the products of protein synthesis initiated collectively . As before , this may be accomplished through the synthesis of a local synaptic tag following weak synaptic stimulation . 
 = = = Modulation = = = 
 As described previously , the molecules that underlie LTP can be classified as mediators or modulators . A mediator of LTP is a molecule , such as the NMDA receptor or calcium , whose presence and activity is necessary for generating LTP under nearly all conditions . By contrast , a modulator is a molecule that can alter LTP but is not essential for its generation or expression . 
 In addition to the signaling pathways described above , hippocampal LTP may be altered by a variety of modulators . For example , the steroid hormone estradiol may enhance LTP by driving CREB phosphorylation and subsequent dendritic spine growth . Additionally , β @-@ adrenergic receptor agonists such as norepinephrine may alter the protein synthesis @-@ dependent late phase of LTP . Nitric oxide synthase activity may also result in the subsequent activation of <unk> cyclase and <unk> . Similarly , activation of dopamine receptors may enhance LTP through the cAMP / PKA signaling pathway . 
 = = Relationship to behavioral memory = = 
 While the long @-@ term potentiation of synapses in cell culture seems to provide an elegant substrate for learning and memory , the contribution of LTP to behavioral learning — that is , learning at the level of the whole organism — cannot simply be extrapolated from in vitro studies . For this reason , considerable effort has been dedicated to establishing whether LTP is a requirement for learning and memory in living animals . Because of this , LTP also plays a crucial role in fear processing . 
 = = = Spatial memory = = = 
 In 1986 , Richard Morris provided some of the first evidence that LTP was indeed required for the formation of memories in vivo . He tested the spatial memory of rats by pharmacologically modifying their hippocampus , a brain structure whose role in spatial learning is well established . Rats were trained on the Morris water maze , a spatial memory task in which rats swim in a pool of murky water until they locate the platform hidden beneath its surface . During this exercise , normal rats are expected to associate the location of the hidden platform with salient cues placed at specific positions around the circumference of the maze . After training , one group of rats had their hippocampi bathed in the NMDA receptor blocker APV , while the other group served as the control . Both groups were then subjected to the water maze spatial memory task . Rats in the control group were able to locate the platform and escape from the pool , while the performance of APV @-@ treated rats was significantly impaired . Moreover , when slices of the hippocampus were taken from both groups , LTP was easily induced in controls , but could not be induced in the brains of APV @-@ treated rats . This provided early evidence that the NMDA receptor — and by extension , LTP — was required for at least some types of learning and memory . 
 Similarly , Susumu Tonegawa demonstrated in 1996 that the CA1 area of the hippocampus is crucial to the formation of spatial memories in living mice . So @-@ called place cells located in this region become active only when the rat is in a particular location — called a place field — in the environment . Since these place fields are distributed throughout the environment , one interpretation is that groups of place cells form maps in the hippocampus . The accuracy of these maps determines how well a rat learns about its environment and thus how well it can navigate it . Tonegawa found that by impairing the NMDA receptor , specifically by genetically removing the <unk> subunit in the CA1 region , the place fields generated were substantially less specific than those of controls . That is , mice produced faulty spatial maps when their NMDA receptors were impaired . As expected , these mice performed very poorly on spatial tasks compared to controls , further supporting the role of LTP in spatial learning . 
 = = = Inhibitory avoidance = = = 
 In 2006 , Jonathan Whitlock and colleagues reported on a series of experiments that provided perhaps the strongest evidence of LTP 's role in behavioral memory , arguing that to conclude that LTP underlies behavioral learning , the two processes must both mimic and occlude one another . Employing an inhibitory avoidance learning paradigm , researchers trained rats in a two @-@ chambered apparatus with light and dark chambers , the latter being fitted with a device that delivered a foot shock to the rat upon entry . An analysis of CA1 hippocampal synapses revealed that inhibitory avoidance training induced in vivo AMPA receptor phosphorylation of the same type as that seen in LTP in vitro ; that is , inhibitory avoidance training mimicked LTP . In addition , synapses potentiated during training could not be further potentiated by experimental manipulations that would have otherwise induced LTP ; that is , inhibitory avoidance training occluded LTP . In a response to the article , Timothy Bliss and colleagues remarked that these and related experiments " substantially advance the case for LTP as a neural mechanism for memory . " 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 The role of LTP in disease is less clear than its role in basic mechanisms of synaptic plasticity . However , alterations in LTP may contribute to a number of neurological diseases , including depression , Parkinson 's disease , epilepsy , and neuropathic pain . Impaired LTP may also have a role in Alzheimer 's disease and drug addiction . 
 = = = Alzheimer 's disease = = = 
 LTP has received much attention among those who study Alzheimer 's disease ( AD ) , a neurodegenerative disease that causes marked cognitive decline and dementia . Much of this deterioration occurs in association with degenerative changes in the hippocampus and other medial temporal lobe structures . Because of the hippocampus ' well established role in LTP , some have suggested that the cognitive decline seen in individuals with AD may result from impaired LTP . 
 In a 2003 review of the literature , Rowan et al. proposed one model for how LTP might be affected in AD . AD appears to result , at least in part , from <unk> of amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) . The result of this abnormal processing is the accumulation of fragments of this protein , called amyloid β ( Aβ ) . Aβ exists in both soluble and fibrillar forms . <unk> of APP results in the accumulation of soluble Aβ that , according to Rowan 's hypothesis , impairs hippocampal LTP and may lead to the cognitive decline seen early in AD . 
 AD may also impair LTP through mechanisms distinct from Aβ . For example , one study demonstrated that the enzyme PKMζ accumulates in neurofibrillary tangles , which are a pathologic marker of AD . PKMζ is an enzyme with critical importance in the maintenance of late LTP . 
 = = = Drug addiction = = = 
