 Shelly <unk> – engineer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Parathyroid gland = 
 The parathyroid glands are small endocrine glands in the neck of humans and other tetrapods that produce parathyroid hormone . Humans usually have four parathyroid glands , variably located on the back of the thyroid gland , although considerable variation exists . Parathyroid hormone and calcitonin ( one of the hormones made by the thyroid gland ) have key roles in regulating the amount of calcium in the blood and within the bones . 
 The parathyroid glands share a similar blood supply , venous drainage , and lymphatic drainage to the thyroid glands . The parathyroid glands are derived from the epithelial lining of the third and fourth branchial pouches , with the superior glands arising from the fourth pouch , and the inferior glands arising from the higher third pouch . The relative position of the inferior and superior glands , which are named according to their final location , changes because of the migration of embryological tissues . 
 Hyperparathyroidism and hypoparathyroidism , characterised by alterations in the blood calcium levels and bone metabolism , are states of surplus or insufficient parathyroid function . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The parathyroid glands are two pairs of glands usually positioned behind the left and right lobes of the thyroid . Each gland is a yellowish @-@ brown flat ovoid that resembles a lentil seed , usually about 6 mm long and 3 to 4 mm wide , and 1 to 2 mm <unk> . There are typically four parathyroid glands . The two parathyroid glands on each side which are positioned higher are called the superior parathyroid glands , while the lower two are called the inferior parathyroid glands . Healthy parathyroid glands generally weigh about 30 mg in men and 35 mg in women . These glands are not visible or able to be felt during examination of the neck . 
 = = = Blood supply = = = 
 The blood supply , drainage , and lymphatic drainage of the parathyroid glands correspond to the thyroid overlying gland . 
 The superior parathyroid glands receive their blood from the inferior thyroid arteries . The inferior parathyroid glands receive a variable blood supply , from either the ascending branch of the inferior thyroid arteries or the thyroid ima artery . The inferior thyroid artery arises from the subclavian arteries . 
 Each parathyroid vein drains into the superior , middle and inferior thyroid veins . The superior and middle thyroid veins drain into the internal jugular vein , and the inferior thyroid vein drains into the brachiocephalic vein . 
 = = = <unk> drainage = = = 
 <unk> vessels from the parathyroid glands drain into deep cervical lymph nodes and <unk> lymph nodes . 
 = = = Variation = = = 
 The parathyroid glands are variable in number : three or more small glands , and can usually be located on the posterior surface of the thyroid gland . Occasionally , some individuals may have six , eight , or even more parathyroid glands . Rarely , the parathyroid glands may be within the thyroid gland itself , the chest , or even the thymus . 
 = = = Histology = = = 
 The parathyroid glands are named for their proximity to the thyroid but serve a completely different role than the thyroid gland . The parathyroid glands are quite easily recognizable from the thyroid as they have densely packed cells , in contrast with the follicular structure of the thyroid . Two unique types of cells are present in the parathyroid gland : 
 Chief cells , which synthesize and release parathyroid hormone . These cells are small , and appear dark when loaded with parathyroid hormone , and clear when the hormone has been secreted , or in their resting state . 
 <unk> cells , which are lighter in appearance and increase in number with age , have an unknown function . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In early human embryonic life , a series of six branchial pouches form that give rise to the human face , neck , and surrounding structures . The pouches are numbered such that the first pouch is the closest to the top of the embryo 's head and the sixth is the furthest from it . The parathyroid glands originate from the interaction of the endoderm of the third and fourth pouch and neural crest mesenchyme . The position of the glands reverses during embryological life . The pair of glands which is ultimately inferior develops from the third pouch with the thymus , whereas the pair of glands which is ultimately superior develops from the fourth pouch . During embryological development , the thymus migrates downwards , dragging the inferior glands with it . The superior pair are not dragged downwards by the fourth pouch to the same degree . The glands are named after their final , not embryological , positions . Since the thymus 's ultimate destination is in the mediastinum of the chest , it is occasionally possible to have ectopic <unk> derived from the third pouch within the chest cavity if they fail to detach in the neck . 
 Parathyroid development is regulated by a number of genes , including those coding for several transcription factors . 
 = = Function = = 
 The major function of the parathyroid glands is to maintain the body 's calcium and phosphate levels within a very narrow range , so that the nervous and muscular systems can function properly . The parathyroid glands do this by secreting parathyroid hormone . 
 Parathyroid hormone ( PTH , also known as <unk> ) is a small protein that takes part in the control of calcium and phosphate homeostasis , as well as bone physiology . Parathyroid hormone has effects antagonistic to those of calcitonin . 
 Calcium . PTH increases blood calcium levels by directly stimulating osteoblasts and thereby indirectly stimulating osteoclasts ( through <unk> / <unk> mechanism ) to break down bone and release calcium . PTH also increases gastrointestinal calcium absorption by activating vitamin D , and promotes calcium conservation ( reabsorption ) by the kidneys . 
 Phosphate . PTH is the major regulator of serum phosphate concentrations via actions on the kidney . It is an inhibitor of proximal tubular reabsorption of phosphorus . Through activation of vitamin D the absorption of Phosphate is increased . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 Parathyroid disease is conventionally divided into states where the parathyroid is overactive ( hyperparathyroidism ) , and states where the parathyroid is under- or hypoactive ( hypoparathyroidism ) . Both states are characterised by their symptoms , which relate to the excess or deficiency of parathyroid hormone in the blood . 
 = = = Hyperparathyroidism = = = 
 Hyperparathyroidism is the state in which there is excess parathyroid hormone circulating . This may cause bone pain and tenderness , due to increased bone resorption . Due to increased circulating calcium , there may be other symptoms associated with hypercalcemia , most commonly dehydration . Hyperparathyroidism is most commonly caused by a benign proliferation of chief cells in single gland , and rarely MEN syndrome . This is known as primary hyperparathyroidism , which is generally managed by surgical removal of the abnormal parathyroid gland . 
 Renal disease may also lead to hyperparathyroidism . When too much calcium is lost , there is a compensation by the parathyroid , and parathyroid hormone is released . The glands hypertrophy to synthesise more parathyroid hormone . This is also known as secondary hyperparathyroidism . If this situation exists for a prolonged period of time , the parathyroid tissue may become unresponsive to the blood calcium levels , and begin to autonomously release parathyroid hormone . This is known as tertiary hyperparathyroidism . 
 = = = Hypoparathyroidism = = = 
 The state of decreased parathyroid activity is known as hypoparathyroidism . This is most commonly associated with damage to the glands or their blood supply during thyroid surgery , although it may also be associated with rarer genetic syndromes such as <unk> syndrome , which is inherited as an autosomal dominant syndrome . Hypoparathyroidism will also occur after surgical removal of the parathyroid glands . 
 Occasionally , an individual 's tissues are resistant to the effects of parathyroid hormone . This is known as <unk> , as although the parathyroid glands are fully functional , the hormone itself is not able to function , resulting in a decrease in blood calcium levels . <unk> is often associated with the genetic condition Albright 's hereditary osteodystrophy . <unk> , one of the longest words in the English language , is used to describe an individual with Albright 's hereditary osteodystrophy but with normal parathyroid hormone and serum calcium levels . 
 Hypoparathyroidism may present with symptoms associated with decreased calcium , and is generally treated with Vitamin D analogues . 
 = = History = = 
 The parathyroid glands were first discovered in the Indian Rhinoceros by Richard Owen in 1852 . In his description of the neck anatomy , Owen referred to the glands as " a small compact yellow glandular body attached to the thyroid at the point where the veins emerged " . The glands were first discovered in humans by Ivar Viktor Sandström ( 1852 – 1889 ) , a Swedish medical student , in 1880 at Uppsala University . Unaware of Owen 's description , he described the glands in his monograph " On a New Gland in Man and Fellow Animals " as the " <unk> <unk> " , noting its existence in dogs , cats , rabbits , oxen , horses and humans . For several years , Sandström 's description received little attention . 
 Physiologist Eugene <unk> first documented the putative function of the glands in 1891 , noting the connection between their removal and the development of muscular tetani . William G. MacCallum in 1908 , investigating tumours of the parathyroid , proposed their role in calcium metabolism . He noted that " <unk> occurs spontaneously in many forms and may also be produced by the destruction of the parathyroid glands " . 
 The first successful removal of the parathyroid may have been carried out in 1928 by medical doctor Isaac Y <unk> , whose intern had noticed elevated calcium levels in an elderly patient with muscle weakness . Prior to this surgery , patients with removed parathyroid glands typically died from muscular tetani . 
 Parathyroid hormone was isolated in 1923 by Adolph M. Hanson and 1925 by James B. <unk> . Studies of parathyroid hormone levels by Roger Guillemin , Andrew <unk> and Rosalyn Sussman <unk> led to the development of immunoassays capable of measuring body substances and a Nobel Prize in 1977 . 
 = = In other animals = = 
 Parathyroid glands are found in all adult tetrapods , although they vary in their number and position . Mammals typically have four parathyroid glands , while other types of animals typically have six . The removal of parathyroid glands in animals produces a condition resembling acute poisoning with irregular muscle contractions . 
 Fish do not possess parathyroid glands , however several species have been found to express parathyroid hormone . Developmental genes and calcium @-@ sensing receptors in fish gills are similar to those within the parathyroid glands of birds and mammals . It has been suggested that the tetrapod glands may have been evolutionarily derived from these fish gills . 
 = = Additional images = = 
 = K @-@ 41 ( Kansas highway ) = 
 K @-@ 41 is a 4 @.@ 960 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 7 @.@ 982 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Kansas . Located entirely within Ottawa County , the highway runs from the eastern city limit of Delphos to U.S. Route 81 ( US 81 ) . A designation of K @-@ 41 existed in the early 1930s in southwestern Kansas . The current designation was established following the older designation 's removal . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The route begins at the eastern city limit of Delphos , near a junction with Strickler Avenue . The road continues west through Delphos as 5th Street . Heading east , the route passes by the Delphos Cemetery before an intersection with 100th Road . Following an intersection with 110th Road , K @-@ 41 dips slightly south before intersecting County Route 781 . The route ends at US 81 at an intersection . The road continues east as Volunteer Road toward Oak Hill . K @-@ 41 is a two @-@ lane highway along its entire route . 
 The route is maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation ( KDOT ) , who is responsible for constructing and maintaining highways in the state . As part of this role , KDOT regularly surveys traffic on their highways . These surveys are most often presented in the form of annual average daily traffic , which is the number of vehicles that use a highway during an average day of the year . In 2010 , KDOT calculated that around 705 vehicles used the road daily near Delphos , including 85 trucks , whereas only 410 vehicles used K @-@ 41 daily near US 81 . No part of the highway has been listed as part of the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the nation 's defence , mobility , and economy . 
 = = History = = 
 The first designation for K @-@ 41 was implemented by 1927 and ran from K @-@ 12 near Protection north to US 54 in Bucklin . At this time , the entire route was only a dirt road . By 1932 , K @-@ 12 was truncated , which left K @-@ 41 's southern terminus at US 160 in Protection . By 1936 , a section of the route north of Protection was surfaced with gravel . Another section from US 54 to US 154 which was added by that year was also improved . This route was renumbered to K @-@ 34 the next year . By January 1938 , the current designation for K @-@ 41 was established along a gravel road . By 1941 , the road had been paved in its entirety . Since then , the route has not undergone any designation changes . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Ottawa County . 
 = Bigger ( Justin Bieber song ) = 
 " Bigger " is a song by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber , included as a track on his debut release , My World , released on November 17 , 2009 . It was written by Bieber , Frank Ocean , Dapo Torimiro , Kevin Risto and Waynne Nugent of Midi Mafia , with the latter duo and Dapo producing the song . Musically , the song is a R & B number which infuses elements of teen pop and dance @-@ pop , while including influences of new jack swing . The song 's lyrics refer to one maturing in a relationship and working to reach goals . The song received generally positive reception from critics who reviewed the album , with a Billboard reviewer commenting that Bieber had " genuine swagger " on the song . Some reviews however questioned the lyrical content . After the release of My World , due to digital sales , the song charted in the lower regions of charts in the United States , Canada , the United Kingdom , and Japan . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Bigger " was co @-@ written by Bieber , Odd Future collective member Frank Ocean , Dapo Torimiro , Kevin Risto and Waynne Nugent of Midi Mafia . ( Midi Mafia also worked with Bieber on the ballad " Down To Earth " ) Midi Mafia and Dapo have production credits . It was recorded at Icon Studios in Atlanta , Georgia , and it was mixed at Larrabee Studios in North Hollywood , California . The track was one of three songs on the standard edition of the album that Bieber co @-@ wrote . 
 " Bigger " , described as moderately fast , is a R & B song with a length of three minutes and seventeen seconds , with inclinations toward teen pop and dance @-@ pop . According to a review of My World by Jon Caramanica of The New York Times , the song is influenced by new jack swing , as well as the music of Guy . The song is set in common time , and has a tempo of 104 beats per minute . It is written in the key of C minor , and Bieber 's vocals do not deviate far , only spanning from the low note of C4 to the high note of E5 . It features the chord patterns <unk> and <unk> . The song 's lyrics see the protagonist professing to their love interest how they have matured , in lines such as " I was a player when I was little , but I 'm bigger . " Lyrically , the song also speaks of rebuffing anyone that comes in between his reaching goals , in lines like " And all the haters I swear they look so small from up here ... " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In calling Bieber 's vocals " boyish as they are disarmingly mature " , Monica Herrerra of Billboard reviewed the song positively , commenting , " that Bieber has " genuine swagger on the nimble R & B track . " Jon Caramanica complimented the song as one of the carefree tracks on the album , as he was skeptical of the lyrical content in " First Dance " but on " Bigger " , the writer said , " earplugs back in , young ladies . " Although Ashante Infantry of Toronto Star said a turn @-@ off of the song was the " Mafia " tag by the production team , Midi Mafia , at the beginning of the song , she called " Bigger " one of the best tracks on the album . In a review of My Worlds Mike Diver of BBC Music Blog said that the phrase " I was a player when I was little , " was one of the several " awkward lyrical moments " on the album and said that it left " one to hope he ’ s talking about Little League rather than chasing skirt . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending December 5 , 2009 , due to digital sales after the release of My World , " Bigger " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 . The song debuted at number forty @-@ nine on the Hot Digital Songs chart in the US , and therefore consecutively appeared at number ninety @-@ four on the Hot 100 . In Canada , it debuted at number seventy @-@ eight . It dropped off both charts the following week . " Bigger " also appeared at number ninety @-@ six on the Japan Hot 100 . In both territories it was also the second highest non @-@ previously released song from My World to appear on the charts . In the United Kingdom , after the release of My World , " Bigger " appeared at number 162 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Justin Bieber , Dapo Torimiro , Kevin Risto , Waynne Nugent , Frank Ocean 
 Production - Dapo , Midi Mafia 
 Vocal recording - Chris Krauss 
 Vocal production - Kevin Risto 
 Mixing - Jaycen @-@ Joshua Fowler and Dave Pensado , assisted by Giancarlo Lino . 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Edwin McMillan = 
 Edwin Mattison McMillan ( September 18 , 1907 – September 7 , 1991 ) was an American physicist and Nobel laureate credited with being the first ever to produce a transuranium element , neptunium . For this , he shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Glenn Seaborg in 1951 . 
 A graduate of California Institute of Technology , he earned his doctorate from Princeton University in 1933 , and joined the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory , where he discovered oxygen @-@ 15 and beryllium @-@ 10 . During World War II , he worked on microwave radar at the MIT Radiation Laboratory , and on sonar at the Navy Radio and Sound Laboratory . In 1942 he joined the Manhattan Project , the wartime effort to create atomic bombs , and helped establish the project 's Los Alamos Laboratory where the bombs were designed . He led teams working on the gun @-@ type nuclear weapon design , and also participated in the development of the implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . 
 McMillan co @-@ invented the synchrotron with Vladimir Veksler . He returned to the Radiation Laboratory after the war , and built them . In 1954 he was appointed associate director of the Radiation Laboratory , being promoted to deputy director in 1958 . On the death of Lawrence that year , he became director , and he stayed in that position until his retirement in 1973 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McMillan was born in Redondo Beach , California , on September 18 , 1907 , the son of Edwin Harbaugh McMillan and his wife Anna Marie McMillan née Mattison . He had a younger sister , Catherine Helen . His father was a physician , as was his father 's twin brother , and three of his mother 's brothers . On October 18 , 1908 , the family moved to Pasadena , California , where he attended McKinley Elementary School from 1913 to 1918 , Grant School from 1918 to 1920 , and then Pasadena High School , from which he graduated in 1924 . 
 California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) was only a mile from his home , and he attended some of the public lectures there . He entered Caltech in 1924 . He did a research project with Linus Pauling as an undergraduate and received his Bachelor of Science degree in 1928 and his Master of Science degree in 1929 , writing an unpublished thesis on " An improved method for the determination of the radium content of rocks " . He then took his Doctor of Philosophy from Princeton University in 1933 , writing his thesis on the " <unk> of a Beam of HCI Molecules in a Non @-@ Homogeneous Electric Field " under the supervision of Edward Condon . 
 = = Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory = = 
 In 1932 , McMillan was awarded a National Research Council fellowship , allowing him to attend a university of his choice for postdoctoral study . With his PhD complete , although it was not formally accepted until January 12 , 1933 , he accepted an offer from Ernest Lawrence at the University of California , Berkeley , to join the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory , which Lawrence had founded the year before . McMillan 's initial work there involved attempting to measure the magnetic moment of the proton , but Otto Stern and Immanuel <unk> were able to carry out these measurements first . 
 The main focus of the Radiation laboratory at this time was the development of the cyclotron , and McMillan , who was appointed to the faculty at Berkeley as an instructor in 1935 , soon became involved in the effort . His skill with instrumentation came to the fore , and he contributed improvements to the cyclotron . In particular , he helped develop the process of " <unk> " , adjusting the cyclotron to produce a homogeneous magnetic field . Working with M. Stanley Livingston , he discovered oxygen @-@ 15 , an isotope of oxygen that emits positrons . To produce it , they bombarded nitrogen gas with deuterons . This was mixed with hydrogen and oxygen to produce water , which was then collected with hygroscopic calcium chloride . Radioactivity was found concentrated in it , proving that it was in the oxygen . This was followed by an investigation of the absorption of gamma rays produced by bombarding fluorine with protons . 
 In 1935 , McMillan , Lawrence and Robert Thornton carried out cyclotron experiments with deuteron beams that produced a series of unexpected results . <unk> fused with a target nuclei , transmuting the target to a heavier isotope while ejecting a proton . Their experiments indicated a nuclear interaction at lower energies than would be expected from a simple calculation of the Coulomb barrier between a deuteron and a target nucleus . Berkeley theoretical physicist Robert Oppenheimer and his graduate student Melba Phillips developed the Oppenheimer – Phillips process to explain the phenomenon . McMillan became an assistant Professor in 1936 , and an associate Professor in 1941 . With Samuel Ruben , he also discovered the isotope beryllium @-@ 10 in 1940 . This was both interesting and difficult to isolate due to its extraordinarily long half @-@ life , about 1 @.@ 39 million years . 
 = = Discovery of neptunium = = 
 Following the discovery of nuclear fission in uranium by Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1939 , McMillan began experimenting with uranium . He bombarded it with neutrons produced in the Radiation Laboratory 's 37 @-@ inch cyclotron through bombarding beryllium with deuterons . In addition to the nuclear fission products reported by Hahn and Strassmann , they detected two unusual radioactive isotopes , one with a half @-@ life of about 2 @.@ 3 days , and the other with one of around 23 minutes . McMillan identified the short @-@ lived isotope as uranium @-@ 239 , which had been reported by Hahn and Strassmann . McMillan suspected that the other was an isotope of a new , undiscovered element , with an atomic number of 93 . 
 At the time it was believed that element 93 would have similar chemistry to rhenium , so he began working with Emilio Segrè , an expert on that element from his discovery of its homolog technetium . Both scientists began their work using the prevailing theory , but Segrè rapidly determined that McMillan 's sample was not at all similar to rhenium . Instead , when he reacted it with hydrogen fluoride ( HF ) with a strong oxidizing agent present , it behaved like members of the rare earth elements . Since these comprise a large percentage of fission products , Segrè and McMillan decided that the half @-@ life must have been simply another fission product , titling the paper " An Unsuccessful Search for Transuranium Elements " . 
 McMillan realized that his 1939 work with Segrè had failed to test the chemical reactions of the radioactive source with sufficient rigor . In a new experiment , McMillan tried subjecting the unknown substance to HF in the presence of a reducing agent , something he had not done before . This reaction resulted in the sample precipitating with the HF , an action that definitively ruled out the possibility that the unknown substance was a rare earth . In May 1940 , Philip Abelson from the Carnegie Institute in Washington , DC , who had independently also attempted to separate the isotope with the 2 @.@ 3 day half @-@ life , visited Berkeley for a short vacation and they began to collaborate . Abelson observed that the isotope with the 2 @.@ 3 @-@ day half @-@ life did not have chemistry like any known element , but was more similar to uranium than a rare earth . This allowed the source to be isolated and later , in 1945 , led to the classification of the actinide series . As a final step , McMillan and Abelson prepared a much larger sample of bombarded uranium that had a prominent 23 @-@ minute half @-@ life from 239U and demonstrated conclusively that the unknown 2 @.@ 3 @-@ day half @-@ life increased in strength in concert with a decrease in the 23 @-@ minute activity through the following reaction : 
 <formula> 
 This proved that the unknown radioactive source originated from the decay of uranium and , coupled with the previous observation that the source was different chemically from all known elements , proved beyond all doubt that a new element had been discovered . McMillan and Abelson published their results in a paper entitled Radioactive Element 93 in the Physical Review on May 27 , 1940 . They did not propose a name for the element in the paper , but they soon decided on " neptunium " since uranium had been named after the planet Uranus , and Neptune is the next planet beyond in our solar system . McMillan suddenly departed at this point , leaving Glenn Seaborg to pursue this line of research , which led to the second transuranium element , plutonium . In 1951 , McMillan shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Seaborg " for their discoveries in the chemistry of the transuranium elements " . 
 = = World War II = = 
 McMillan 's abrupt departure was caused by the outbreak of World War II in Europe . In November 1940 , he began working at the MIT Radiation Laboratory in Cambridge , Massachusetts , where he participated in the development and testing of airborne microwave radar during World War II . He conducted tests in April 1941 with the radar operating from an old Douglas B @-@ 18 Bolo medium bomber . Flying over the Naval Submarine Base New London with Luis Walter Alvarez and Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding , they showed that the radar was able to detect the conning tower of a partly submerged submarine . MacMillan married Elsie Walford Blumer in New Haven , Connecticut , on June 7 , 1941 . Her father was George Blumer , Dean Emeritus of the Yale Medical School . Her sister Mary was Lawrence 's wife . The <unk> had three children : Ann Bradford , David Mattison and Stephen Walker . 
 McMillan joined the Navy Radio and Sound Laboratory near San Diego in August 1941 . There he worked on a device called a <unk> . The idea , which came from Lawrence , was to use sonar to build up a visual image of the surrounding water . This proved to be far more difficult that doing so with radar , because of objects in the water and variations in water temperature that caused variations in the speed of sound . The <unk> proved to be impractical , and was abandoned . He also , however , developed a sonar training device for submariners , for which he received a patent . 
 Oppenheimer recruited McMillan to join the Manhattan Project , the wartime effort to create atomic bombs , in September 1942 . Initially , he commuted back and forth between San Diego , where his family was , and Berkeley . In November he accompanied Oppenheimer on a trip to New Mexico on which the Los Alamos Ranch School was selected as the site of the project 's weapons research laboratory , which became the Los Alamos Laboratory . With Oppenheimer and John H. Manley , he drew up the specifications for the new laboratory 's technical buildings . He recruited personnel for the laboratory , including Richard Feynman and Robert R. Wilson , established the test area known as the Anchor Ranch , and scoured the country for technical equipment from machine tools to a cyclotron . 
 As the laboratory took shape , McMillan became deputy head of the gun @-@ type nuclear weapon effort under Navy Captain William S. Parsons , an ordnance expert . The plutonium gun , codenamed Thin Man , needed a muzzle velocity of at least 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) per second , which they hoped to achieve with a modified Navy 3 @-@ inch antiaircraft gun . The alternative was to build an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . McMillan took an early interest in this , watching tests of this concept conducted by Seth Neddermeyer . The results were not encouraging . Simple explosions resulted in distorted shapes . John von Neumann looked at the implosion program in September 1943 , and proposed a radical solution involving explosive lenses . This would require expertise in explosives , and McMillan urged Oppenheimer to bring in George Kistiakowsky . Kistiakowsky joined the laboratory on February 16 , 1944 , and Parsons 's E ( Explosives ) Division was divided in two , with McMillan as deputy for the gun and Kistiakowsky as deputy for implosion . 
 McMillan heard disturbing news in April 1944 , and drove out to Pajarito Canyon to confer with Segrè . Segrè 's group had tested samples of plutonium bred in the Manhattan Project 's nuclear reactors and found that it contained quantities of plutonium @-@ 240 , an isotope that caused spontaneous fission , making Thin Man impractical . In July 1944 , Oppenheimer reorganised the laboratory to make an all @-@ out effort on implosion . McMillan remained in charge of the gun @-@ type weapon , which would now be used only with uranium @-@ 235 . This being the case , Thin Man was replaced by a new , scaled @-@ back design called Little Boy . McMillan was also involved with the implosion as the head of the G @-@ 3 Group within the G ( Gadget ) Division , which was responsible for obtaining measurements and timings on implosion , and served as the laboratory 's liaison with Project Camel , the aerial test program being carried out by Caltech . On July 16 , 1945 , he was present at the Trinity nuclear test , when the first implosion bomb was successfully detonated . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In June 1945 , McMillan 's thoughts began to return to cyclotrons . Over time they had gotten larger and larger . A 184 @-@ inch cyclotron was under construction at the Radiation Laboratory , but he realised that a more efficient use could be made of the energy used to accelerate particles . By varying the magnetic field used , the particles could be made to move in stable orbits , and higher energies achieved with the same energy input . He dubbed this the " phase stability principle " , and the new design a " synchrotron " . Unknown to McMillan , the synchrotron principle had already been invented by Vladimir Veksler , who had published his proposal in 1944 . McMillan became aware of Veksler 's paper in October 1945 . The two began corresponding , and eventually became friends . In 1963 they shared the Atoms for Peace Award for the invention of the synchrotron . 
 The phase stability principle was tested with the old 37 @-@ inch cyclotron at Berkeley after McMillan returned to the Radiation Laboratory in September 1945 . When it was found to work , the 184 @-@ inch cyclotron was similarly modified . He became a full professor in 1946 . In 1954 he was appointed associate director of the Radiation Laboratory . He was promoted to deputy director in 1958 . On the death of Lawrence that year , he became director , and he stayed in that position until his retirement in 1973 . The laboratory was renamed the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory in 1958 . In 1970 , it split into the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory , and McMillan became director of the former . 
 McMillan was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1947 , serving as its chairman from 1968 to 1971 . He served on the influential General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1954 to 1958 , and the Commission on High Energy Physics of the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics from 1960 to 1967 . After his retirement from the faculty at Berkeley in 1974 , he spent 1974 – 75 at CERN , where he worked on the g minus 2 experiment to measure the magnetic moment of the muon . He was awarded the National Medal of Science in 1990 . 
 McMillan suffered the first of a series of strokes in 1984 . He died at his home in El Cerrito , California , from complications from diabetes on September 7 , 1991 . He was survived by his wife and three children . His gold Nobel Prize medal is in the National Museum of American History , a division of The Smithsonian , in Washington DC . 
 = = Publications = = 
 McMillan , E. M. " Focusing in Linear Accelerators " , University of California Radiation Laboratory , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( August 24 , 1950 ) . 
 McMillan , E. M. " A Thick Target for Synchrotrons and <unk> " , University of California Radiation Laboratory , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( September 19 , 1950 ) . 
 McMillan , E. M. " The Transuranium Elements : Early History ( Nobel Lecture ) " , University of California Radiation Laboratory , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( December 12 , 1951 ) . 
 McMillan , E. M. " Notes on <unk> Focusing " , University of California Radiation Laboratory , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( February 9 , 1956 ) . 
 McMillan , E. M. " Some Thoughts on Stability in Nonlinear Periodic Focusing Systems " , University of California Radiation Laboratory , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( September 5 , 1967 ) . 
 McMillan , E. M. " Some Thoughts on Stability in Nonlinear Periodic Focusing Systems [ <unk> ] " , University of California Radiation Laboratory , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( March 29 , 1968 ) . 
 = Józef Zajączek = 
 Prince Józef Zajączek ( 1 November 1752 , Kamieniec Podolski — 28 August 1826 , Warsaw ) was a Polish general and politician . 
 Zajączek started his career in the Army of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to hetman Franciszek Ksawery Branicki . He was Branicki 's supporter on the political scene , before joining the liberal opposition during the Great Sejm in 1790 . He became a radical supporter of the Constitution of 3 May 1791 . As a military commander , in the rank of a general , he participated in Polish – Russian War of 1792 and Kościuszko Uprising . After the partitions of Poland , he joined the Napoleonic Army , and was a general in Napoleon 's forces until his wounding and capture during Napoleon 's invasion of Russia in 1812 . From 1815 he became involved in the governance of the Congress Kingdom of Poland , becoming the first <unk> of Kingdom of Poland . 
 = = Youth = = 
 Józef Zajączek was born on 1 November 1752 in Kamieniec Podolski to Antoni Zajączek and Marianna <unk> , members of the Polish noble family of the Świnka . Young Zajączek probably attended a school in Zamość , and later a Jesuit school in Warsaw . 
 At the age of sixteen he joined the Bar Confederates , and served as a secretary to Michał Wielhorski , accompanying him on his diplomatic mission to Paris , France , in 1770 . Zajączek stayed in Paris for several years , and in 1773 he met one of the major leaders of the Confederacy , Casimir Pulaski . Falling under Pulaski 's influence , he left Wielhorski 's service , and accompanied Pulaski on his diplomatic mission to the Ottoman Empire in 1774 , where he witnessed the Ottoman defeat at the Battle of <unk> on 20 June . Returning to France later that year he wrote a hagiographic biography of Pulaski in French . In 1775 he got an officer ( junior lieutenant ) position in the hussar regiment of the French Army , although after several weeks he abandoned this position to return to Poland . Thanks to the support from the magnate Sapieha family he received a post of an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to hetman Franciszek Ksawery Branicki . 
 Zajączek participated as a deputy from the Podole Voivodeship in the Sejm ( parliament of the Commonwealth ) session of 1784 , and was a vocal member of the hetman Branicki 's faction ( known as the Hetmans ' Party ) . In a similar vein he participated in the Sejm of 1786 , this time as a deputy from the Kiev Voivodeship . During that time he emerged as a vocal critic of king Stanisław August Poniatowski . In late 1786 he married Aleksandra <unk> , née de Pernet . Meanwhile , he kept being promoted in ranks , reaching that of colonel in 1787 . He was also not a deputy to the first half of the Four @-@ year Sejm ( 1788 – 1792 ) , and spent the first two years of its deliberations with his unit ( 2nd Front Guard Regiment , Polish : 2 regiment <unk> <unk> ) on the Ukrainian border ; in 1790 , however , he was elected as a deputy once again and joined his patron Branicki in Warsaw . Soon , however , he left Branicki 's camp , joining the faction of Hugo Kołłątaj , the Patriotic Party . Zajączek became involved in the works of a commission tasked with reforming the Polish military , and contributed to a new project on military exercises and officer training . He became one of the supporters of the new Constitution of 3 May 1791 , and members of the Friends of the Constitution society . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = In the Commonwealth 's army = = = 
 Displeased with reforms in Poland that were threatening its influence there , Russia invaded Poland in May 1792 , starting the Polish – Russian War of 1792 . Two weeks before the war started , on May 4 Zajączek became the commander of the 3rd Front Guard Regiment ( 3 regiment <unk> <unk> ) . On May 26 he was given command over a reserve corps , and on 29 May he was promoted to the rank of major general . After gathering some troops near Lublin , he departed towards Dubno , which he reached on 7 June . He was one of the Polish commanders at the <unk> battle of Zieleńce , for which he received the highest decoration of the Polish military , Virtuti Militari , becoming the fifth person to receive this award , instituted just that year . He took part in some minor skirmishes , but did not participate in any significant battle before Stanisław August Poniatowski surrendered to the enemy , joining the Targowica Confederation . The war ended without any decisive battles , with the Polish army still in the fighting condition , not suffering from any major defeat nor from lack of supplies . Angered at the king 's betrayal , Zajączek was one of the main proponents of the plan to kidnap the king ; the plan , however , never came to fruition . Like many other dissatisfied officers , including Prince Poniatowski and Tadeusz Kościuszko , Zajączek requested a discharge from the army ; his resignation was accepted on 18 August . 
 Shortly afterward Zajączek left the country , heading to Vienna . In August 1793 he moved to Leipzig , joining a number of other Polish emigres , namely Kościuszko and <unk> , preparing for a new war . Soon he became one of the major planners of this approaching conflict , often tasked with delivering important messages to Poland , and collecting information there ; in particular he was active in Warsaw , and Kościuszko planned for him to become a commander of that region . Zajączek also went on missions to Dresden and Paris . During that time , he became known as a radical revolutionary , democrat and proponent of abolishing serfdom in Poland . In April he joined the " club of Polish Jacobins " . 
 Shortly after the Kościuszko Uprising began in March 1794 , Zajączek joined Kościuszko in <unk> on 2 April . Zajączek was given the command of the Lesser Poland Division , and on 4 April he took part in battle of Racławice , which concluded with a major Polish victory . On 6 April he was promoted to lieutenant general . Over the next few weeks Zajączek accompanied Kościuszko and his staff . On 8 June he was defeated at the battle of Chełm and retreated toward Lublin . He lost support among the troops , and faced a mutiny , eventually quelled by Kościuszko , on 10 June . In mid June Zajączek 's forces merged with those of Kościuszko . He commanded the forces in the inconclusive battle of <unk> on 9 – 10 July , and soon after he was one of the Polish commanders of the defense of Warsaw that lasted from mid July until early September . In the following few weeks Zajączek became one of the members of the Supreme National Council , and a president of its Criminal Court . He was a commander of the defense of Warsaw during the disastrous battle of Praga of 4 November . During the battle Zajączek was wounded and retreated from the battle even before the conflict was over . He has been criticised for his insufficient preparation for the defense of Warsaw against Russian invasion , and for poor leadership during the battle . Zajączek escaped to Polish Galicia where he was interned by Austrians . He was released one year later , moving to Paris . 
 = = = In Napoleon 's army = = = 
 In Paris , Zajączek quickly became involved with the active emigre groups there . Hoping to sway revolutionary France into supporting the Polish cause , many Poles , including him , volunteered to join the French Revolutionary Army , eventually leading to the creation of the Polish Legions in Italy led by Jan Henryk Dąbrowski , which became a part of Napoleon 's army . On 8 March 1797 Napoleon ordered that Zajączek should be recognized as an active brigade general of the French army . That year he published a brochure on his experiences of the 1794 war , Histoire de la révolution de Pologne en 1794 , in which he tried to justify his actions . Zajączek was , however , still unpopular among the Polish troops , many of whom blamed him for the fall of Praga ; due to frequent personal conflicts , Zajączek chose to remain with the French army , rather than joining the Legions themselves . Over the coming years , he took part in the French Revolutionary Wars . He took part in the 1798 Egyptian Expedition . There he also served as a governor of several provinces , first , from July that year , of the <unk> Governorate , later , from January 1799 , simultaneously of the Faiyum Governorate and Beni <unk> Governorate . On 25 January 1800 he defeated Murad Bey at the Battle of <unk> . In 1801 he was promoted to division general , and later took part in the failed defense of Alexandria . 
 In 1802 Zajączek became the commander of the French 2nd Division . In 1803 he received the Knight 's Cross of the Legion of Honour ; a year later , the Commander 's Cross . In 1805 during the War of the Third Coalition he was assigned to the French Army of the Rhine , where he worked at army 's High Command . Next year in September , during the War of the Fourth Coalition , he was assigned to command of the foreign ( mostly Polish ) North Legion ; in the following month he organized another similar unit , the Kalisz Legion . In 1808 those units were reorganized into parts of the Army of the Duchy of Warsaw , in which Zajączek became a general . During that time , dissatisfied with his transfer from the French army , and being made subject to Prince Józef Poniatowski whom he disliked , he refused to wear a Polish uniform and swear an oath to the Duchy , and was forced to do so only on direct orders of French marshal Louis @-@ Nicolas Davout . In 1809 he commanded several formations in the Polish – Austrian War , where he failed to distinguish himself , instead suffering the only significant defeat in this campaign at the battle of <unk> on 11 June . He remained in the Army after the war , commanding the 2nd Division , and organizing the troops for the expected conflict with Russia . 
 During Napoleon 's Invasion of Russia in 1812 , Zajączek commanded the 16th Infantry Division of the V Corps in la Grande Armée . His division performed well at the battle of Smolensk in August where he was wounded , recuperating till October . He rejoined his unit in the time to take part in the battle of <unk> . After Prince Poniatowski , commander of the V Corps , was wounded , from 1 November Zajączek took charge of that formation . He led it at the battle of Vyazma and battle of <unk> until a wound at Berezina claimed his leg , which was amputated by doctor Dominique Jean Larrey . While recuperating from the wound he was taken prisoner by the Imperial Russian Army in Wilno ( Vilnius ) . 
 Zajączek 's name is found on the Arc de Triomphe in Paris . 
 = = Prince and namestnik = = 
 Zajączek was imprisoned in Poltava fortress until January 1814 , first to Białystok , then – in July – he was returned to Warsaw . There he was assigned to the post of a deputy president of a Military Commission , reorganizing the former Napoleonic Army of the Duchy of Warsaw into a new , Russian @-@ controlled Army of the Congress Poland . 
 Russian tsar Alexander I , also newly crowned King of Poland , gave Zajączek on 3 December 1815 the position of the first <unk> of Kingdom of Poland ( tsar 's deputized ruler of the territory , a position similar to that of a viceroy ) . This nomination surprised many , including Zajączek himself , who is said to have at first refused this position , but in the end accepted it after Alexander phrased his request as a direct order . Zajączek 's years as a namestnik have garnered mixed reviews , both among his contemporaries , as well as among later historians . He was actively interested in economic development of Polish lands , and contributed to the industrialization and urbanization of the Kingdom 's lands ; he was also one of the founders of the University of Warsaw . He has been criticized , however , for being inexperienced for such a major civil leader position , too servile to the wishes of his patron , Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich and he often disregarded the Constitution of the Congress Poland , which contributed to a slow but steady erosion of the country 's freedoms and autonomy . <unk> towards the Russian authorities , he readily let Duke Constantine and Alexander 's commissar , Nikolay Nikolayevich Novosiltsev , neither of whose positions were envisioned in the Constitution , become the de facto rulers of the Kingdom . In recognition of Zajączek 's services , Aleksander I bestowed upon him the title of ' Prince of Poland ' on 27 April 1818 . 
 In the spring of 1826 Zajączek fell ill , steadily becoming weaker . On 25 July that year he lost consciousness , and died in the morning of 28 July . He died in Warsaw 's palace called Pałac <unk> ( Regent 's Palace ) , nowadays a seat of the President of Poland . His funeral lasted from 2 to 5 August . He was buried at the Church of the Holy Heart of Jesus in <unk> , where he had a manor on the lands received from Napoleon . His heart was placed in the Bernardine Church in Warsaw , and his insides were buried at the Powązki Cemetery , also in Warsaw . 
 Zajączek and his wife had no children ; Aleksandra outlived her husband by nineteen years . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 Commander 's Cross of the Virtuti Militari ( 1807 ) 
 Order of the White Eagle ( 1815 ) 
 Order of St. Andrew ( 1816 ) 
 Order of the Black Eagle ( Prussia , 1819 ) 
 Knight 's ( 1803 ) and Commander 's Cross of the Legion of Honour ( France , 1804 ) 
 = Molwyn Joseph = 
 Molwyn Joseph is an Antiguan politician and Chairman of the Antigua Labour Party ( ALP ) . First entering politics in 1984 when he was made a Minister without Portfolio in the government of Vere Bird , Joseph became Minister of Finance seven years later , renegotiating the Antiguan national debt and introducing fiscal reforms . After a 1996 scandal in which it was discovered he had used his position to import a 1930s Rolls Royce for a friend , bypassing normal import duties and taxes , he was dismissed from the Bird administration , returning 14 months later to serve as Minister for Planning , Implementation and the Environment . Following the 1999 general election he became Minister of Heath and Social Improvement before being made Minister of Tourism and the Environment a few months later . As Minister , Joseph attempted to improve the perception of Antigua as a tourist destination and invest in the industry , spending 2 million US dollars increasing the number of hotel rooms on the island and providing money for both Air Jamaica and Air Luxor to provide flights to the island . 
 Outside of his ministerial duties , he also met with Jiang Zhenghua , Vice @-@ Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People 's Congress , having led the official Antiguan delegation to Beijing . Following a power struggle in 2003 , Joseph was given the Economic Development and Investment Promotion portfolio , to hold at the same time as his Tourism and the Environment position . Despite a scandal surrounding donations he had received from Texan businessman Robert Stafford , Joseph was selected to contest the seat of St Mary 's North in the 2004 Antiguan general election , in which the ALP lost power , being replaced in government by the United Progressive Party ( UPP ) led by Baldwin Spencer . Joseph himself lost his seat , but was elected Chairman of the ALP a year later , and regained the seat in 2009 with a majority of 21 . The same year , he was arrested for participating in an unauthorised May Day rally protesting the UPP administration ; after a lengthy trial , he and several other ALP members were convicted and fined . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Joseph entered Cabinet @-@ level politics on 19 April 1984 when , following the ALP 's general election victory , he was made a Minister without Portfolio . In 1991 he became Minister of Finance and Trade , and along with Financial Secretary Keith Hurst and Minister of Economic Development Rodney Williams negotiated the rescheduling of Antigua 's national debt with European creditors . The government 's 1992 budget , announced and drafted by Joseph , included no new taxes but did involve a cut to government spending , in response to what he claimed was reduced spending by tourists and smaller amounts of international aid in 1990 and 1991 . The 1993 budget contained similar provisions , ruling out the possibility of an income tax , as suggested by one of Antigua 's major trade unions . This was accompanied by a programme of fiscal reforms , including " expenditure control , improved revenue collection , external debt management , proper evaluation of projects , improved public sector efficiency , price controls on basic foods and commodities , tax reform and good governance " . 
 Within Parliament , Joseph campaigned for the Business Licensing Bill , a statute which aimed to impose licensing fees , ranging from 40 to 20 @,@ 000 East Caribbean dollars , on those seeking to start businesses in certain fields . The Bill attracted large amounts of controversy , with critics such as Hugh Marshall asserting that it violated the <unk> Single Market and Economy agreement and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , and would lead to Antiguan traders finding it difficult to expand into external markets . Although other ministers such as Williams spoke in support of the bill , it was later shelved indefinitely , with Joseph saying that he " [ found ] myself a lonely man " . 
 = = Dismissal = = 
 In 1996 , Joseph left his position as Finance Minister after it was discovered that he had helped a friend import a 1930s Rolls Royce , using his position to bypass the normal import duties and taxes . Although the government 's immediate reaction was to deny that this had happened , the Solicitor @-@ General issued a report in which he found that " the landing of the Rolls Royce car ... was in violation of customs and port procedures " , facilitated by Joseph 's intervention . With the growing pressure , Joseph resigned on 22 September , . Now on the backbenches , Joseph became " senior parliamentarian in charge of refugees " , and as such was the government 's chief spokesperson when the eruption of a volcano in Montserrat led to 3 @,@ 000 refugees fleeing the country and coming to Antigua and Barbuda . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Joseph 's position on the backbenches did not last long ; on 3 December 1997 , less than two years after his resignation , he was recalled to take up the Planning , Implementation and the Environment portfolio , with Bird saying that " his managerial skills are required at this juncture of our economic history when several projects require implementation to get off the ground quickly " . Following the 1999 general election , he was again appointed to the cabinet , this time as Minister of Heath and Social Improvement , with the Planning portfolio going to <unk> Benjamin . A few months later he became Minister of Tourism and the Environment , with Bernard Percival taking over his Health portfolio . 
 As Minister , Joseph oversaw a " back @-@ to @-@ basics approach " to tourism , attempting to have the nation perceived as one known " for its cleanliness , tidiness , natural beauty and pristine environment " . As part of this , the Antiguan government invested 2 million US dollars in boosting the number of hotel rooms available , from 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 , and opened the Antigua Hotel Institute , seeking to train <unk> in how to more efficiently and effectively work in the tourism industry . Joseph also oversaw the government buying a third of the Jolly Beach Resort in an attempt to save it from bankruptcy , establishing a management company to oversee the property . In February 2000 he led the government delegation in an official visit to Beijing , where they met with Jiang Zhenghua , Vice @-@ Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People 's Congress , to discuss " bilateral relations and the issues of common concern " . He also led the Antiguan delegation to the World Travel Market in 2001 . Following Joseph 's promise of government investiture in the route , Air Jamaica resumed flights to Antigua in 2002 , having ceased flying there six years earlier . This was followed by the announcement that Air Luxor would similarly begin offering flights to the islands . 
 After a financial scandal in early 2003 , the ALP backbencher <unk> Bowen asked for a vote of no confidence in Bird 's government on 19 May , calling for him to step down and " accusing him of being involved corrupt practices and governing without accountability " . When Bowen was threatened with being thrown out of the Party , he claimed that several other MPs and government ministers were prepared to resign if he was dismissed , including Joseph . The dispute remained unresolved , with Bowen accusing the government of vesting too much power in Senator <unk> Michael ; Bowen , <unk> <unk> , Bernard Percival and Longford Jeremy eventually all resigned from the ALP administration , with further suggestions that Joseph , as well as trade minister Gaston Brown , could also leave . Joseph eventually announced on 19 June , that he would resign if Michael was not immediately removed ; within a few hours , Michael 's resignation had been formally tendered . Soon afterwards , Joseph was given the Economic Development and Investment Promotion portfolio , to hold at the same time as his Tourism and the Environment position . 
 = = Later career = = 
 In late 2003 , it was discovered that Texan businessman Allen Stanford had given both Joseph and fellow minister Gaston Browne cheques worth 100 @,@ 000 East Caribbean dollars . While Browne denied suggestions that this had constituted bribery , claiming that the money had gone towards community projects , Leader of the Opposition Baldwin Spencer demanded that both ministers resign . Both ministers were part of a team negotiating with Stanford over a land exchange in St. John 's , and the news led to protesters picketing their offices . Prime Minister Lester Bird affirmed his support in both ministers , and despite a motion of censure brought by the opposition and more protests , Stanford publicly made a second set of donations to Joseph and Browne . 
 Antigua had a general election in 2004 , following the dissolution of Parliament in late February ; with the ALP running a full slate , Joseph was nominated for the St Mary 's North seat . The ALP were conclusively defeated by the United Progressive Party ( UPP ) and forced out of government , Joseph lost his seat to Bertrand Joseph . Now in opposition , the ALP held a leadership contest in 2005 , in which Joseph was elected Party Chairman , defeating Vere Bird , Jr . 164 votes to 108 . In 2007 , he was appointed by Bird to act as Shadow Minister for Tourism and Education . In the 2009 general election he again ran for St Mary 's North , defeating Bertrand Joseph by 21 votes ; despite this , the UPP retained power . Following an unauthorised ALP march on May Day in 2009 to protest against the UPP government , Joseph and six other senior ALP figures , including the former Prime Minister , were arrested and charged with public order offences . They pleaded not guilty , but were convicted and fined . 
 = The Boat Race 1988 = 
 The 134th Boat Race took place on 2 April 1988 . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford won by five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 18 minutes 27 seconds , the equal @-@ fourth fastest time in the event 's history . The race was umpired by former Cambridge rowing Blue Mike Sweeney . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie won , while Oxford won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1987 race by four lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 69 victories to Oxford 's 64 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The event was sponsored by Beefeater Gin and was televised in the United Kingdom by the BBC on its Grandstand sports programme . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Oxford weighed in with the heaviest crew in Boat Race history – on average the rowers weighed 14 st 11 @.@ 5 lb ( 93 @.@ 9 kg ) , 11 lb more per man than Cambridge . Oxford 's Gavin Stewart , at 6 ft 8 @.@ 5 in ( 2 @.@ 04 m ) was the tallest rower in the history of the Boat Race . Cambridge 's crew included four former Blues while Oxford 's featured six . Oxford 's coaching team included Canadian international coach Mike Spracklen . 
 = = Race = = 
 The race took place on 2 April 1988 . Oxford started as pre @-@ race favourites , and having won the toss , elected to start from the Surrey station . Immediately from the start , the umpire was called into action , warning both coxes for steering too closely to one another . Cambridge took a slight lead but Oxford soon recovered to become level , and by the Mile Post were three seconds ahead . Shortly after , the Cambridge number 7 , Nick Grundy caught a crab , causing his boat to " shudder to a halt . " Oxford slowly extended their lead ; nine seconds ahead at Hammersmith Bridge , eleven seconds by the Chiswick Steps and fifteen by Barnes Bridge . Oxford passed the finishing post 16 seconds ahead of Cambridge , winning by five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 18 minutes 27 seconds , the equal @-@ fourth fastest time in the event 's history . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie won by five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 17 minutes and 55 seconds , their second consecutive victory . Oxford won the 43rd Women 's Boat Race with their third victory in four years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The Beefeater Gin Trophy was presented by Denis Thatcher . Grundy said of his crab : " I feathered my oar after a stroke and the tip caught the water , which plunged it back in . " Oxford Boat Club president Chris Penny said " It was not an easy race but it was enjoyable . We kept our heads , found our rhythm and moved back and through them . " 
 = Outrageous ( song ) = 
 " Outrageous " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . It was written and produced by R. Kelly , with vocal production provided by <unk> and Penelope Magnet . The song was released on July 20 , 2004 , by Jive Records , as the fourth and final single from In the Zone . " Outrageous " was the record label 's choice for first and second single , but Spears pushed for " Me Against the Music " and " Toxic " respectively , to be released instead . It was finally announced as a single after it was selected as the theme song for the 2004 film Catwoman . " Outrageous " is an R & B song with influences of hip hop and an exotic feel . Lyrically , it talks about materialism and entertainment . " Outrageous " received mixed reviews from critics . Some praised its funky sound , while others deemed it as " forgettable " . 
 " Outrageous " only charted in the United States , entering many of Billboard 's component charts and peaking at number 79 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Spears only performed the song once , on 2004 's The Onyx Hotel Tour . The music video was being shot in New York City in June 2004 , when Spears hurt her knee and had to undergo arthroscopic surgery . The video was canceled , as well as The Onyx Hotel Tour and the feature in the Catwoman soundtrack . A composite of different scenes was released in the DVD Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Outrageous " was written and produced by R. Kelly , and was recorded at The Chocolate Factory , in Chicago , Illinois . Penelope Magnet and Christopher " Tricky " Stewart of production team RedZone were enlisted to produce Spears 's vocals . She recorded them at Battery Studios in New York City . The song was later mixed by Serban Ghenea at MixStar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia . On September 11 , 2003 , " Outrageous " was confirmed as one of the tracks from In the Zone . Jive Records hoped the song would be released as the first single from the album , but Spears convinced them to release her collaboration with Madonna , " Me Against the Music " . The track was also one of the choices for second single along with " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " , but Spears selected " Toxic " instead . On June 1 , 2004 , it was announced that " Outrageous " would be released as the fourth single from the album and would be sent to radio stations on June 29 , 2004 . It was also announced that the track would be the theme song from the 2004 film Catwoman . " Outrageous " was sent to mainstream radio in the United States on July 20 , 2004 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Outrageous " is an R & B song with influences of hip hop . The beat was compared by Gavin Mueller of Stylus Magazine to R. Kelly 's 2003 single " Snake " . Jennifer Vineyard of MTV noted that " she whispers and moans [ ... ] with a snake charmer melody giving the song an exotic feel " . Nick Southall of Stylus Magazine compared the background vocals to those of Punjabi musician Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan . According to the sheetmusic published at Musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing Group , " Outrageous " is composed in the key of D major , with a tempo of 105 beats per minute . The song 's lyrics talk about materialism and amusement , with Spears referencing in the chorus a number of things that give her pleasure , such as " my world tour " and " my sex drive " . Vineyard noted , " the cumulative effect seems like it 's designed to put the listener in the lover 's shoes — taking full advantage of the aural male gaze " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said the track " includes a telling parallel that reveals a lot about one of music 's biggest — as Alanis Morissette would put it — treadmill capitalists : she sings " my sex drive " and " my shopping spree " with the same dripping gusto " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Outrageous " received mixed reviews from music critics . Mim Udovitch of Blender called the song an " R. Kelly club number , [ that ] has a hot , odd compulsion and lyrics that are practically big @-@ <unk> ' , Spears @-@ style " . William Shaw of Blender selected it as the ninth best Spears song , highlighting " the nonsense chants " at 1 : 10 . While reviewing Greatest Hits : My Prerogative , Ann Powers commented , " ' Outrageous ' is R. Kelly 's dirty little take on the ideal Janet Jackson song " . Spence D. of IGN said of the song that " it 's a somewhat derivative Egyptian lover groove number . Yet for all it 's [ sic ] repetitiveness , it 's still kind of funky and pervasive " . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times called it " [ a ] composition that cruises along on autopilot for two minutes and then suddenly switches gears with a delectable Michael Jackson @-@ inspired bridge " . Annabel Leathes of BBC Online stated that " R. Kelly transform [ s ] Britney into a grubby Beyoncé " . Caryn Ganz of Spin called " Outrageous " a " go @-@ nowhere homage to living fabulously " . Dave de Sylvia of Sputnikmusic called it " a forgettable but nonetheless catchy single " . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly said that along with " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " , " [ they ] are little more than wobbly , rhythm @-@ based contraptions intended to advance Spears ' sex @-@ princess @-@ on @-@ the @-@ loose image " . Jamie Gill of Yahoo ! Music Radio commented that , " with its cheap , tinny production — it would take a rather senile and unworldly old lady in Tonbridge Wells [ sic ] to find this even diverting , let alone shocking " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On August 14 , 2004 , " Outrageous " debuted at number 85 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . On August 28 , 2004 , it peaked at number 79 . The same week , the song peaked at number twenty @-@ three on Billboard ' s Pop Songs . It also reached number 27 on Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Songs on September 11 , 2004 . " Outrageous " also reached number 14 on the Hot Dance Singles Sales chart . In Japan , " Outrageous " charted on the Oricon Albums Chart for eight weeks and peaked at number 31 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The music video for " Outrageous " was directed by Dave Meyers , who previously worked in the music videos for " Lucky " and " Boys " , as well as the Curious commercials . It was shot in outdoors locations in Queens and Manhattan , New York City on June 8 , 2004 . The music video was set to premiere on MTV on June 28 , 2004 . After completion of the scenes with guest star Snoop Dogg , Spears was shooting dance scenes in Manhattan when around 11 : 30 p.m. , she fell and injured her left knee . She was taken immediately to a local hospital , where doctors performed an MRI scan and found floating cartilage . The following day , Spears underwent arthroscopic surgery . Spears was forced to remain six weeks with a thigh brace , followed by eight to twelve weeks of rehabilitation , which caused the rest of the shoot as well as the remainder of The Onyx Hotel Tour to be canceled . " Outrageous " was also scrapped as the theme song from Catwoman . A 45 second music video composed of the scenes that were shot was released in the 2004 DVD Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . The video begins with Snoop Dogg and a group of men playing basketball in an outdoors court , until Spears appears wearing blue baggy shorts . She starts to flirt with him , before jumping into his arms and licking his beard . In the next scene , she performs with her dancers on a street at night . 
 Spears has performed the song only once , on her 2004 The Onyx Hotel Tour . It was the last song of the fifth act of the show , titled " Security Cameras " . She performed " Breathe on Me " wearing pink lingerie while emulating different sexual practices with her dancers . After it ended , she put on a white trench coat while her dancers wore them in black and performed " Outrageous " . The act ended with a skit that segued into the finale performance of " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Business routes of Interstate 69 in Michigan = 
 There are currently four business routes of Interstate 69 ( I @-@ 69 ) in the US state of Michigan . Designated Business Loop Interstate 69 ( BL I @-@ 69 ) , they are all former routings of I @-@ 69 's predecessor highways , US Highway 27 ( US 27 ) , M @-@ 78 or M @-@ 21 , in whole or in part . The BL I @-@ 69 in Coldwater and the one in Charlotte were both parts of US 27 before the freeway bypassed those two cities in 1967 and the early 1970s , respectively . The BL I @-@ 69 through Lansing and East Lansing was previously part of M @-@ 78 and Temporary I @-@ 69 until it was redesignated in 1987 . Before 1984 , the loop in Port Huron was originally part of M @-@ 21 and was initially a business spur numbered Business Spur Interstate 69 ( BS I @-@ 69 ) . It was later redesignated when it was extended to run concurrently with that city 's BL I @-@ 94 which was originally part of I @-@ 94 's predecessor , US 25 . Each business loop follows streets through each city 's downtown areas and connects to I @-@ 69 on both ends , giving traffic a route through the downtown and back to the freeway . 
 = = Coldwater = = 
 Business Loop I @-@ 69 ( BL I @-@ 69 ) is a business loop formed from part of the old US 27 and part of US 12 near and through Coldwater . At the southern end , it begins at exit 10 on I @-@ 69 where Fenn Road crosses the freeway . The business loop follows the two @-@ lane Fenn Road west for about three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) , then curves north to merge with old US 27 ( Angola Road ) . The highway runs northward through farmland south of Coldwater , and after approximately two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , it enters the city limit at Garfield Road . Once in Coldwater , the business loop follows Clay Street through residential neighborhoods . After another half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) , the highway reaches a fork where Clay Street continues due north and Division Street branches to the northeast ; BL I @-@ 69 follows the four @-@ lane Division Street for about another mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the main intersection in the city known locally as " the Four Corners . " This intersection is where old US 27 intersects US 12 ( Chicago Street ) . BL I @-@ 69 turns eastward along the four @-@ lane US 12 and continues from the Four Corners back to I @-@ 69 at exit 13 . 
 In 1919 , the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) signposted the highway system for the first time , and the future US 27 corridor through Coldwater was part of the original M @-@ 29 . On November 11 , 1926 , the United States Numbered Highway System was approved by the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) , and the new US 27 replaced M @-@ 29 in the area . In September 1967 , the freeway bypassing Coldwater opened . At the same time , the old route through the city was redesignated as BL I @-@ 69 . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Branch County . 
 = = Charlotte = = 
 Business Loop I @-@ 69 ( BL I @-@ 69 ) is a business loop that took over the Business US 27 ( Bus . US 27 ) route inside Charlotte . It is a surface street for the nearly five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of the loop . The trunkline starts just outside the city of Charlotte at exit 57 and follows Cochran Road The loop travels due north through rural areas south of town along a two @-@ lane road . North of a crossing of the Battle Creek River , Cochrane Road widens to include a center turn lane . About 2 3 ⁄ 4 miles ( 4 @.@ 4 km ) north of the starting point , BL I @-@ 69 begins a 3 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) concurrency with M @-@ 50 at Shepherd Street . North of Warren Avenue , BL I @-@ 69 / M @-@ 50 widens to four lanes , two in each direction . The concurrency ends at Lawrence Avenue ; M @-@ 50 continues north , and the business loop heads east on Lawrence Avenue for a few blocks . That intersection also marks the eastern terminus of M @-@ 79 . From that point , BL I @-@ 69 follows Lawrence Avenue and then veers northeast onto Lansing Street to complete its loop at exit 61 . 
 In 1919 , the MSHD signposted the highway system for the first time , and the future US 27 corridor through Charlotte was part of the original M @-@ 29 . On November 11 , 1926 , the United States Numbered Highway System was approved by the AASHO and the new US 27 replaced M @-@ 29 through Coldwater . By the end of the next year , M @-@ 78 was extended from downtown Charlotte along US 27 to run northeasterly toward Lansing . The highway through downtown Charlotte was first designated Bus . US 27 after the 1961 completion of a non @-@ freeway bypass , a two @-@ lane , limited @-@ access highway east of the city . At that point I @-@ 69 only existed in the southern parts of Michigan . That freeway was not extended up to the city when the southernmost segment of I @-@ 69 was completed in 1967 . By 1971 , I @-@ 69 was completed to Charlotte and at the time US 27 was cosigned with I @-@ 69 , the bypass being incorporated into I @-@ 69 . For three years the business loop in Charlotte was not signed as BL I @-@ 69 , but it was so designated in 1974 and Bus . US 27 was decommissioned in and near Charlotte . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Eaton County . 
 = = Lansing = = 
 Business Loop I @-@ 69 , or BL I @-@ 69 , is a business loop in the Lansing area . It is the longest business route in the state of Michigan at a length of over 14 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 23 @.@ 3 km ) . Beginning at exit 93 on I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 69 in Eaton County west of the city , the business loop runs concurrently with M @-@ 43 east along Saginaw Highway . The roadway has five total lanes , two in each direction separated by a center turn lane , as it travels through commercial areas in Delta Township and past the Lansing Mall . BL I @-@ 69 / M @-@ 43 continues east on Saginaw Highway and crosses into Ingham County at Waverly Road . From the county line eastward , the highway is known as Saginaw Street , and it passes through residential neighborhoods . Within the city of Lansing , BL I @-@ 69 utilizes a one @-@ way pair of three @-@ to @-@ four @-@ lane streets : Saginaw Street eastbound and Oakland Street westbound . One block separates the two directions of BL I @-@ 69 / M @-@ 43 until the intersection with Martin Luther King Jr . Boulevard near the St. Lawrence Campus of the Sparrow Hospital ; east of this intersection two blocks separate the two directions of the highway . The business loop crosses the Grand River in downtown Lansing near the campus of Lansing Community College north of the Michigan State Capitol . 
 On the eastern side of the river just north of Cooley Law School Stadium , BL I @-@ 69 / M @-@ 43 intersects the one @-@ way pair of Cedar and Larch streets that carries the two directions of BL I @-@ 96 . BL I @-@ 69 / M @-@ 43 continues through residential areas east of the other business loop . Near Marshall Park between Maryland Avenue and Marshall Street , Oakland Avenue ends and Grand River Avenue takes over for the westbound direction of BL I @-@ 69 / M @-@ 43 . Further east near the interchange with US 127 , Grand River Avenue and Saginaw Street cross each other . M @-@ 43 departs to the southeast via Grand River Avenue while BL I @-@ 69 turns northeasterly via the four @-@ lane Saginaw Street . East of this intersection , BL I @-@ 69 crosses into East Lansing and runs through residential areas on the north side of the city . The roadway turns due east at Abbot Road . At an intersection with Haslett Road , Saginaw Street widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway with a grassy median . Along this section , it resumes the Saginaw Highway name and turns northeasterly again , crossing into Meridian Township . The major intersections along Saginaw Highway have Michigan left turns as well . Before the business loop ends , it crosses into Clinton County . The eastern end of BL I @-@ 69 is located at exit 94 on I @-@ 69 in Bath Township . 
 In 1919 , the MSHD signposted the highway system for the first time , and the east – west highways through Lansing were part of the original M @-@ 29 through downtown and the original M @-@ 39 north of downtown . The north – south highway in Lansing was the original M @-@ 14 . On November 11 , 1926 , the United States Numbered Highway System was approved by the AASHO , and the new US 27 replaced M @-@ 29 and M @-@ 14 in the area . By the end of the next year , M @-@ 78 was extended from Charlotte along US 27 to through downtown Lansing . M @-@ 78 separated from US 27 in downtown Lansing and continued northeasterly through the northern part of East Lansing . M @-@ 39 was replaced with an extended M @-@ 43 in 1938 . 
 As the freeways in the Lansing area were completed in the 1960s through the 1980s , the highways through downtown changed designations . The section of I @-@ 96 west of Lansing opened in December 1962 . In 1973 , M @-@ 78 was converted to a freeway near the Flint area , and from Olivet southwest of Lansing to the new freeway , the old highway was redesignated Temporary I @-@ 69 ( Temp . I @-@ 69 ) . Additional segments of I @-@ 69 north of Lansing were finished in 1984 and 1987 . I @-@ 69 was routed over I @-@ 96 and the new freeway north of Lansing , and the business loop was designated along M @-@ 43 and the former Temp . I @-@ 69 in 1987 after that second segment opened . 
 Major intersections 
 = = Port Huron = = 
 Business Loop I @-@ 69 ( BL I @-@ 69 ) is a business loop running through downtown Port Huron . The first mile or so ( 1 @.@ 7 km ) of BL I @-@ 69 runs southeasterly from I @-@ 69 at the interchange where it meets I @-@ 94 . The business loop follows a four @-@ lane freeway until the intersection with 32nd Street . A bit further east , it turns due east – west into a one @-@ way pair of three @-@ lane surface streets , eastbound along Oak Street and westbound along Griswold Street , that run through residential areas on the west and south sides of Port Huron . East of 23rd Street. the two halves of BL I @-@ 69 narrow to two lanes each . In downtown Port Huron , BL I @-@ 69 turns northerly running concurrently with BL I @-@ 94 on four @-@ lane Military Avenue parallel to the St. Clair River . North of the crossing of the Black River , BL I @-@ 69 / BL I @-@ 94 continues northward on Huron Avenue through downtown . At the intersection with Glenwood Avenue , the business loop turns northwesterly onto Pine Grove Avenue through residential areas on the north side of the city . The street is five lanes , two in each direction with a center turn lane , and passes under the I @-@ 94 / I @-@ 69 freeway at the toll and customs plazas for the Blue Water Bridge ; north of the freeway , there is a ramp to connect to the eastbound direction of the freeway and the bridge . The business loop continues along Pine Grove Avenue , intersecting the southern end of M @-@ 25 at Hancock Street . At that intersection , the business loop turns westward for a block . It then turns south along the connector to terminate at westbound I @-@ 94 / I @-@ 69 west of the Blue Water Bridge toll plaza . 
 In 1919 , the MSHD signposted the highway system for the first time , and the east – west highway through Port Huron was part of the original M @-@ 19 , and the north – south highway was part of the original M @-@ 27 . M @-@ 21 was extended over M @-@ 19 into Port Huron by 1924 . On November 11 , 1926 , the United States Numbered Highway System was approved by the AASHO , and the new US 25 replaced M @-@ 27 in the area . In 1964 , a section of I @-@ 94 in the Port Huron area was completed . The former route of US 25 through downtown was redesignated Bus . US 25 when the main highway was shifted out to the freeway . The first freeway segment of M @-@ 21 was built into the Port Huron area in 1966 ; the freeway directly tied into the western end of the old route into downtown . In 1973 , US 25 was decommissioned in the state , and the former Bus . US 25 was renumbered BL I @-@ 94 . The remaining segment of freeway along the M @-@ 21 corridor opened in 1984 as I @-@ 69 ; after this freeway opened , M @-@ 21 was shortened to Flint , and the former M @-@ 21 in Port Huron became Business Spur I @-@ 69 . To connect back to I @-@ 69 , the business route was extended northward along BL I @-@ 94 when that highway was designated through downtown in 1986 . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in St. Clair County . 
 = City of Death = 
 City of Death is the second serial of the seventeenth season of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , which depicts the adventures of a time @-@ travelling humanoid alien known as the Doctor . It was produced by the BBC and first broadcast in four weekly parts between 29 September 1979 and 20 October 1979 on BBC1 . The serial was written by " David Agnew " – a pseudonym for David Fisher , Douglas Adams , and Graham Williams – and directed by Michael Hayes . 
 City of Death features the Fourth Doctor ( Tom Baker ) and his companion Romana ( Lalla Ward ) . Set mainly in Paris in 1979 , the plot concerns a scheme by an alien , Scaroth , to steal the Mona Lisa to finance experiments in time travel in the hope of averting the accident that marooned him on Earth four hundred million years previously , which began the existence of life on the planet as well . 
 The serial 's original storyline was devised by Fisher but was heavily re @-@ written by script editor Adams , aided by producer Williams . It was the first Doctor Who serial to film on location outside of the United Kingdom ; the production team worked in Paris during April and May 1979 . The studio work was completed in June . 
 Broadcast during a strike that took ITV ( the BBC 's rival ) off the air , City of Death scored high ratings . The fourth episode was watched by over sixteen million viewers , the highest UK television audience ever attained by an episode of Doctor Who . Although , in retrospect , it has been regarded as one of the best serials from Doctor Who 's classic run , the initial reception was not as positive , with criticism of the humorous tone . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While leisurely enjoying the city of Paris with Romana , the Doctor feels the effects of time distortion . At the Louvre while admiring the Mona Lisa , he encounters the Countess Scarlioni wearing an alien bracelet used to scan security systems . The Doctor and Romana meet Inspector Duggan , who has been tailing Count Scarlioni for some time ; Scarlioni has placed a large number of lost art treasures on the market , and Duggan fears the <unk> are looking to steal the Mona Lisa . Though the three are briefly captured by the Countess , the Doctor helps them to escape and explore the Count 's mansion , where they discover equipment by Dr. Kerensky to experiment with time , the source of the Doctor 's time distortions . They also discover , behind a wall , six exact copies of the Mona Lisa , each painted by Leonardo da Vinci himself . 
 Leaving Romana and Duggan to continue to investigate in the present , the Doctor uses his TARDIS to visit Leonardo 's workshop . There he is captured by Captain Tancredi , whose appearance is the same as Count Scarlioni . Tancredi reveals he is Scaroth , the last of the Jagaroth race , stranded on Earth and fragmented through time due to an explosion of their spacecraft on Earth 400 million years ago . Seeking to restore himself and his race , Scaroth has aided human technological advancement , while remaining in contact with the other fragments of himself . Tancredi , in this era , has convinced Leonardo to paint 6 copies of the Mona Lisa , so that when Scarlioni steals the known painting in 1979 , he can then sell it seven times , substantially funding the completion of Dr. Kerensky 's work . When Tancredi leaves the Doctor under watch by a human guard , the Doctor knocks out the guard , uses a felt @-@ tip marker to write " This is a fake " on the six blank canvases and leaves instructions for Leonardo to paint over the text , as to allow them to track the copies in the future by X @-@ raying them . The Doctor escapes when Tancredi suffers a temporary collapse caused by his other selves . 
 The Doctor returns to the present and learns that Scaroth has succeeded in stealing the Mona Lisa . Furthermore , Scaroth has killed Dr. Kerensky and threatens to do the same to the entire city of Paris if Romana does not complete Kerensky 's work . The Doctor convinces the Countess that her husband is not human , and she sees his true face , but the Count kills her before she can react . With the time equipment fixed , Scaroth uses it to travel back 400 million years in hopes to stop the explosion of his ship . Though Romana reveals that the equipment will bring him back after two minutes , the Doctor asserts that it is enough time for Scaroth to stop the explosion of the Jagaroth ship , itself the source of the spark of energy that created the beginnings of life on Earth ; should Scaroth prevent the explosion , every native living being on the planet will never have existed . The Doctor , Romana , and Duggan race to the TARDIS and travel back to intercept Scaroth . Duggan punches Scaroth unconscious before he can stop the ship . Scaroth 's body returns to the present as the ship attempts to take off and explodes , assuring the development of life on Earth . 
 In the present , Scaroth is killed by his henchman Hermann , who does not recognise him without his human mask , and a failure in the time equipment sets the mansion ablaze . By the time the Doctor , Romana , and Duggan arrive , the original and five of the six copies of the Mona Lisa have been destroyed , but one of the copies remains untouched . The Doctor proposes that since a copy of a painting by the original artist is not a fake , the painting should be considered the real work of art , reminding Duggan that art is worthless if its monetary value is all that matters . The Doctor and Romana say goodbye to Duggan at the Eiffel Tower . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Writer David Fisher had contributed two scripts to Doctor Who 's sixteenth season – The Stones of Blood and The Androids of Tara – and was asked by producer Graham Williams for further story ideas . Fisher submitted two proposals ; the first of these became The Creature from the Pit while the other , The Gamble with Time , concerned a plot to rig the casinos in Las Vegas to finance time travel experiments . Williams asked Fisher to rework The Gamble With Time as a spoof of Bulldog Drummond , a fictional detective from the 1920s . Fisher 's draft script centered around Scarlioni , a member of the Sephiroth race , who had become fractured in time in an accident . The script was mainly set in the year 1928 with the Doctor and Romana , aided by Drummond @-@ esque detective " Pug " Farquharson , on the trail of the stolen Mona Lisa , pursuing Scarlioni from Paris to Monte Carlo where his partner , the Baroness Heidi , is using time travel technology to cheat at roulette at the casino to fund Scarlioni 's time travel experiments . Other settings included Paris in 1979 , Leonardo da Vinci 's studio in the year 1508 and prehistoric Earth . At this point , production unit manager John Nathan @-@ Turner had worked out that the production team could afford to film on location in Paris with a stripped @-@ down crew . This necessitated a rewrite to Fisher 's scripts to move the action to Paris and , for cost reasons , to drop the 1920s setting . The Doctor 's robotic dog companion K9 also had to be removed from the script as the cost of bringing the robot dog and his operators to Paris was prohibitive . 
 However , Fisher was going through a divorce , and his personal situation meant that he was unable to perform the rewrites . This meant that script editor Douglas Adams , aided by Graham Williams , had to perform a complete rewrite of the story over the course of a weekend . According to Adams , Graham Williams " took me back to his place , locked me in his study and hosed me down with whisky and black coffee for a few days , and there was the script " . The revised script , now titled The Curse of the Sephiroth , was credited to " David Agnew " , a standard pseudonym used by the BBC and which had been previously used on Doctor Who for the season fifteen serial The Invasion of Time . The serial was subsequently retitled City of Death on 8 May 1979 . Adams would later reuse elements of City of Death , along with the unfinished Doctor Who serial Shada ( 1979 ; 2003 ) , in his novel Dirk Gently 's Holistic Detective Agency ( 1987 ) . In Part One , Romana makes a throwaway reference to a great art gallery called the Braxiatel Collection ; the Virgin New Adventures novel series would later expand on this , introducing the character Irving Braxiatel , a Time Lord . Braxiatel also appears in the Bernice Summerfield series of novels and audio dramas and in the Gallifrey series of audio dramas . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Julian Glover was a well @-@ established character actor who had previously appeared in Doctor Who as Richard the Lionheart in The Crusade ( 1965 ) . Glover was reluctant to don the Jagaroth mask created for scenes where Scarlioni had shed his human disguise as he felt the mask would impede his performance . As a result , he is doubled by Richard Sheekey in many of these scenes . Tom Chadbon was cast as Duggan on account of his resemblance to the Franco @-@ Belgian comics hero Tintin . Peter Halliday had previously appeared in several Doctor Who serials including The Invasion and Doctor Who and the Silurians . 
 Douglas Adams knew John Cleese and Eleanor Bron through his connections with Monty Python and the Cambridge Footlights . On learning that both would be working in BBC Television Centre on the day the art gallery scenes were to be recorded , he persuaded them to make a cameo appearance in a short scene written for " two Englishmen " . Cleese and Bron agreed on the condition that there be no pre @-@ publicity regarding their appearance ; Cleese wanted them to be credited as " Helen <unk> " and " Kim Bread " but the BBC declined . Cleese liked the name " Kim Bread " and used it in later projects . During recording , Cleese and Baker also recorded two short comedy skits for the BBC Christmas tape . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 City of Death director Michael Hayes had previously directed the Doctor Who serials The Androids of Tara ( 1978 ) and The Armageddon Factor ( 1979 ) . He also had experience filming in Paris , having worked there on adaptations of Maigret ( 1960 – 63 ) and other Georges Simenon stories for the BBC . Location filming took place in Paris between 30 April 1979 and 3 May 1979 . It proved a difficult shoot as the dates coincided with the May Day holiday period , which meant that many of the locations chosen for filming were closed , necessitating considerable improvisation on the part of the cast and crew . Model filming was conducted at Bray Studios between 8 May 1979 and 10 May 1979 . These concentrated on the shots of the Jagaroth spacecraft taking off from the prehistoric Earth and were overseen by Ian Scoones , a veteran of Gerry Anderson 's Thunderbirds . Following rehearsals , production moved to BBC Television Centre where the remaining scenes were recorded in two blocks ; the first between 21 May 1979 and 22 May 1979 and second between 3 June 1979 and 5 June 1979 . 
 Tom Baker found filming in Paris to be a very different experience to what he was used to in the UK where crowds would gather to watch the filming and meet the stars . Doctor Who was not shown in France at the time and so the cast and crew were largely ignored . Lalla Ward found City of Death the most challenging Doctor Who serial she worked on but was pleased with the final outcome , saying , " We had to film loads of scenes in the rain and cold ... there was no glamour in it at all ... it was different from the ordinary stories too and I like the finished result " . Seeing her costumes as an important part in creating the role of Romana , Ward clashed with costume designer Doreen James , rejecting the silver catsuit James had designed for her for the story . Ward came up with the idea for the schoolgirl costume she wore in conjunction with Baker , recalling , " I thought it would be fun to wear something that little girls probably hated wearing because it might cheer them up ... I didn 't bank on the fact that I 'd also get loads of letters from their fathers saying ' Cool School uniform ! ' " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 City of Death was broadcast on BBC1 over four consecutive Saturdays beginning on 29 September 1979 . At this time , industrial action had blacked out rival broadcaster ITV and as a result , the serial scored very high ratings , averaging 14 @.@ 5 million viewers over the four episodes ; 16 @.@ 1 million watched the fourth episode , the largest audience ever recorded for an episode of Doctor Who . The story was repeated on BBC1 across four consecutive evenings from Tuesday to Friday , 12 - 15 August , 1980 , achieving viewing figures of 6 @.@ 3 , 5 @.@ 5 , 5 @.@ 6 and 5 @.@ 9 million viewers respectively . 
 Audience appreciation ratings were taken for the first two episodes of City of Death , and both episodes attained a respectable score of 64 % . Listings magazine Radio Times published two letters from viewers regarding City of Death . Les Rogers of Hastings praised the serial 's cast and the location filming ; less impressed , however , was Paul R. <unk> of Exeter who felt the show was being played for laughs . Responding to similar criticisms from viewers , Douglas Adams wrote , " If the programme didn 't move and take a few risks then it would have died of boredom years ago " . Several viewers wrote to point out the discrepancy between the start of life on Earth of 4 @,@ 000 million years ago and the date given in City of Death of 400 million years ago . Graham Williams replied , " The good Doctor makes the odd mistake or two but I think an error of 3 @,@ 600 million years is pushing it ! His next edition of the Encyclopedia Galactica will provide an erratum " . Another viewer wrote to point out that the atmosphere of the primordial Earth would have been poisonous to the Doctor and his companions ; Douglas Adams responded to this criticism , citing dramatic licence . 
 City of Death was voted into seventh place in a 1998 poll of the readers of Doctor Who Magazine to find the best Doctor Who story ; the magazine commented that it " represented the height of Doctor Who as popular light entertainment for all the family " . In 2009 , Doctor Who Magazine readers voted it in eighth place . In a more recent 2014 poll , the magazine 's readers voted it fifth best Doctor Who story of all time . A 2008 article in The Daily Telegraph named City of Death one of the ten greatest episodes of Doctor Who . John Condor , writing in the fanzine DWB in 1991 , hailed the story as " the best blend of kitsch , surrealism , fantasy and comedy @-@ drama seen in our favourite Time Lord 's annals " . Vanessa Bishop , reviewing the serial 's DVD release , described it as " imaginatively written , well @-@ performed and beautifully made , City of Death is a story where pretty much everything works " . Reacting to the serial , as part of Doctor Who Magazine 's ongoing " Time Team " feature , Jacqueline Rayner said " you 're suddenly , almost violently , made aware this is happening in our world ... with people just getting on with their business and two Time Lords walking through it . I don 't think I 've ever experienced that with Doctor Who up till now ... it 's the tiny touches of <unk> amid the fantastical that lift the story even higher " . Charlie Jane Anders and Javier Grillo @-@ Marxuach of io9 included it on their list of " 10 TV Episodes that Changed Television " , citing " the sharp dialogue and clever use of time travel [ that ] prefigure everything Steven Moffat has done with the series in recent years . " The A.V. Club reviewer Christopher Bahn described City of Death as the " gem " of the seventeenth season , finding Adams ' subtle comedy script " easily the funniest and most quotable the series ever achieved " . While he praised Scarlioni 's costume and the mask , he felt that more could have been done with using Paris as a filming location . 
 However , Doctor Who fandom 's initial response to the serial was not so positive ; John Peel , writing in the fanzine TARDIS in 1979 , decried it as " total farce ... I simply couldn 't believe this was Doctor Who ... the continual buffoonery is getting on my nerves " . A similar view was held by Gary Russell who , reviewing the VHS release in 1991 , said , " City of Death , like most Douglas Adams material , is overrated and misses the mark for me , falling between the stools of good pastiche and bad parody and making fairly unsatisfactory viewing " . This line was countered by Vanessa Bishop who called it " the Doctor Who story it 's alright to laugh at ... we must now accept that City of Death is funny — because if we didn 't the Crackerjack @-@ style sleuths , scientists and all ... would leave it knocking about near the bottom of all the Doctor Who story ranking polls " and , responding to the criticisms about the levels of comedy , that " it 's precisely these things that make it seem so special " . Reviewing the serial in 2011 , Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times stated he disliked the smug tone to the humour and Ward 's " snooty " portrayal of Romana . Despite this , he noted that the serial had good production values and direction , as well as a few jokes that he enjoyed . 
 = = Commercial releases = = 
 = = = In print = = = 
 City of Death is one of five Doctor Who serials from the series ' original run ( 1963 – 1989 ) not to have been novelised by Target Books ; the others are The Pirate Planet , Shada , Resurrection of the Daleks , and Revelation of the Daleks . Target approached Douglas Adams on a number of occasions with a view to commissioning a novelisation , offering their standard advance of £ 600 ; Adams replied saying , " I don 't want to be embarrassing but I do have a tendency to be a best @-@ selling author " . Target , concerned that their regular authors would seek better terms , refused to change their offer . Several years later , Target editor Nigel Robinson offered an advance of £ 4 @,@ 000 – double what was the standard advance at the time – but Adams again declined . Adams was unwilling to allow another author to write the novelisation . However , after Adams ' death his estate allowed Gareth Roberts to write an adaptation of the unfinished serial Shada , which was published by BBC Books in 2012 . In 2013 , Roberts announced that he was working on a novelisation of City of Death , to be published on 21 May 2015 . Roberts later announced that James Goss was working on the book instead . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 City of Death was released on VHS videotape in April 1991 with a cover by Andrew <unk> . It was re @-@ issued on VHS in 2001 . A DVD of the serial was released in 2005 , which incorporated numerous special features including a commentary by actors Julian Glover and Tom Chadbon , as well as director Michael Hays , and the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes documentary " Paris in the Springtime " . This serial was also released as part of the Doctor Who DVD Files in Issue 37 on 2 June 2010 . On 1 January 2013 , AudioGo released a two @-@ hour soundtrack of the serial , narrated by Lalla Ward . Ian Scoones ' storyboards for City of Death 's special effects sequences were published in Peter Haining 's book Doctor Who – 25 Glorious Years in 1988 , and a Scaroth figure was released by Harlequin Miniatures in 1999 . 
 = Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution = 
 The Fourth Amendment ( Amendment IV ) to the United States Constitution prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures and requires any warrant to be judicially sanctioned and supported by probable cause . It is part of the Bill of Rights and was adopted in response to the abuse of the writ of assistance , a type of general search warrant issued by the British government and a major source of tension in pre @-@ Revolutionary America . The Fourth Amendment was introduced in Congress in 1789 by James Madison , along with the other amendments in the Bill of Rights , in response to Anti @-@ Federalist objections to the new Constitution . Congress submitted the amendment to the states on September 28 , 1789 . By December 15 , 1791 , the necessary three @-@ quarters of the states had ratified it . On March 1 , 1792 , Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced the adoption of the amendment . 
 Because the Bill of Rights did not initially apply to the states , and federal criminal investigations were less common in the first century of the nation 's history , there is little significant case law for the Fourth Amendment before the 20th century . The amendment was held to apply to the states in Mapp v. Ohio ( 1961 ) . 
 Under the Fourth Amendment , search and seizure ( including arrest ) should be limited in scope according to specific information supplied to the issuing court , usually by a law enforcement officer who has sworn by it . Fourth Amendment case law deals with three central questions : what government activities constitute " search " and " seizure " ; what constitutes probable cause for these actions ; and how violations of Fourth Amendment rights should be addressed . Early court decisions limited the amendment 's scope to a law enforcement officer 's physical intrusion onto private property , but with Katz v. United States ( 1967 ) , the Supreme Court held that its protections , such as the warrant requirement , extend to the privacy of individuals as well as physical locations . Law enforcement officers need a warrant for most search and seizure activities , but the Court has defined a series of exceptions for consent searches , motor vehicle searches , evidence in plain view , exigent circumstances , border searches , and other situations . 
 The exclusionary rule is one way the amendment is enforced . Established in Weeks v. United States ( 1914 ) , this rule holds that evidence obtained through a Fourth Amendment violation is generally inadmissible at criminal trials . Evidence discovered as a later result of an illegal search may also be inadmissible as " fruit of the poisonous tree , " unless it inevitably would have been discovered by legal means . 
 = = Text = = 
 The amendment as proposed by Congress in 1789 reads as follows : 
 The right of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures , shall not be violated , and no Warrants shall issue , but upon probable cause , supported by Oath or affirmation , and particularly describing the place to be searched , and the persons or things to be seized . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = English law = = = 
 Like many other areas of American law , the Fourth Amendment finds its roots in English legal doctrine . Sir Edward Coke , in <unk> 's case ( 1604 ) , famously stated : " The house of every one is to him as his castle and fortress , as well for his defence against injury and violence as for his repose . " <unk> 's Case acknowledged that the King did not have unbridled authority to intrude on his subjects ' dwellings but recognized that government agents were permitted to conduct searches and seizures under certain conditions when their purpose was lawful and a warrant had been obtained . 
 The 1760s saw a growth in the intensity of litigation against state officers , who , using general warrants , conducted raids in search of materials relating to John Wilkes 's publications attacking both government policies and the King himself . The most famous of these cases involved John Entick , whose home was forcibly entered by the King 's Messenger Nathan Carrington , along with others , pursuant to a warrant issued by George Montagu @-@ Dunk , 2nd Earl of Halifax authorizing them " to make strict and diligent search for ... the author , or one concerned in the writing of several weekly very seditious papers entitled , ' The Monitor or British Freeholder , No 257 , 357 , 358 , 360 , 373 , 376 , 378 , and 380 , ' " and seized printed charts , pamphlets and other materials . Entick filed suit in Entick v Carrington , argued before the Court of King 's Bench in 1765 . Charles Pratt , 1st Earl Camden ruled that both the search and the seizure was unlawful , as the warrant authorized the seizure of all of Entick 's papers — not just the criminal ones — and as the warrant lacked probable cause to even justify the search . By holding that " [ O ] ur law holds the property of every man so sacred , that no man can set his foot upon his neighbour 's close without his leave " , Entick established the English precedent that the executive is limited in intruding on private property by common law . 
 = = = Colonial America = = = 
 Homes in Colonial America , on the other hand , did not enjoy the same sanctity as their British counterparts , because legislation had been explicitly written so as to enable enforcement of British revenue @-@ gathering policies on customs ; until 1750 , in fact , the only type of warrant defined in the handbooks for justices of the peace was the general warrant . During what scholar William Cuddihy called the " colonial epidemic of general searches " , the authorities possessed almost unlimited power to search for anything at any time , with very little oversight . 
 In 1756 , the colony of Massachusetts enacted legislation that barred the use of general warrants . This represented the first law in American history curtailing the use of seizure power . Its creation largely stemmed from the great public outcry over the Excise Act of 1754 , which gave tax collectors unlimited powers to interrogate colonists concerning their use of goods subject to customs . The act also permitted the use of a general warrant known as a writ of assistance , allowing tax collectors to search the homes of colonists and seize " prohibited and <unk> " goods . A crisis erupted over the writs of assistance on December 27 , 1760 when the news of King George II 's death on October 23 arrived in Boston . All writs automatically expired six months after the death of the King and would have had to be re @-@ issued by George III , the new king , to remain valid . 
 In mid @-@ January 1761 , a group of over 50 merchants represented by James Otis petitioned the court to have hearings on the issue . During the five @-@ hour hearing on February 23 , 1761 , Otis vehemently denounced British colonial policies , including their sanction of general warrants and writs of assistance . However , the court ruled against Otis . Future US President John Adams , who was present in the courtroom when Otis spoke , viewed these events as " the spark in which originated the American Revolution . " 
 Because of the name he had made for himself in attacking the writs , Otis was elected to the Massachusetts colonial legislature and helped pass legislation requiring that special writs of assistance be " granted by any judge or justice of the peace upon information under oath by any officer of the customs " and barring all other writs . The governor overturned the legislation , finding it contrary to English law and parliamentary sovereignty . 
 Seeing the danger general warrants presented , the Virginia Declaration of Rights ( 1776 ) explicitly forbade the use of general warrants . This prohibition became a precedent for the Fourth Amendment : 
 That general warrants , whereby any officer or messenger may be commanded to search suspected places without evidence of a fact committed , or to seize any person or persons not named , or whose offense is not particularly described and supported by evidence , are grievous and oppressive and ought not to be granted . 
 Article XIV of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights , written by John Adams and enacted in 1780 as part of the Massachusetts Constitution , added the requirement that all searches must be " reasonable " and served as another basis for the language of the Fourth Amendment : 
 Every subject has a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches , and seizures of his person , his houses , his papers , and all his possessions . All warrants , therefore , are contrary to this right , if the cause or foundation of them be not previously supported by oath or affirmation ; and if the order in the warrant to a civil officer , to make search in suspected places , or to arrest one or more suspected persons , or to seize their property , be not accompanied with a special designation of the persons or objects of search , arrest , or seizure : and no warrant ought to be issued but in cases , and with the formalities , prescribed by the laws . 
 By 1784 , eight state constitutions contained a provision against general warrants . 
 = = Proposal and ratification = = 
 After several years of comparatively weak government under the Articles of Confederation , a Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia proposed a new constitution on September 17 , 1787 , featuring a stronger chief executive and other changes . George Mason , a Constitutional Convention delegate and the drafter of Virginia 's Declaration of Rights , proposed that a bill of rights listing and guaranteeing civil liberties be included . Other delegates — including future Bill of Rights drafter James Madison — disagreed , arguing that existing state guarantees of civil liberties were sufficient and that any attempt to enumerate individual rights risked the implication that other , unnamed rights were unprotected . After a brief debate , Mason 's proposal was defeated by a unanimous vote of the state delegations . 
 For the constitution to be ratified , however , nine of the thirteen states were required to approve it in state conventions . Opposition to ratification ( " Anti @-@ Federalism " ) was partly based on the Constitution 's lack of adequate guarantees for civil liberties . Supporters of the Constitution in states where popular sentiment was against ratification ( including Virginia , Massachusetts , and New York ) successfully proposed that their state conventions both ratify the Constitution and call for the addition of a bill of rights . Four state conventions proposed some form of restriction on the authority of the new federal government to conduct searches . 
 In the 1st United States Congress , following the state legislatures ' request , James Madison proposed twenty constitutional amendments based on state bills of rights and English sources such as the Bill of Rights 1689 , including an amendment requiring probable cause for government searches . Congress reduced Madison 's proposed twenty amendments to twelve , and these were submitted to the states for ratification on September 25 , 1789 . 
 By the time the Bill of Rights was submitted to the states for ratification , opinions had shifted in both parties . Many Federalists , who had previously opposed a Bill of Rights , now supported the Bill as a means of silencing the Anti @-@ Federalists ' most effective criticism . Many Anti @-@ Federalists , in contrast , now opposed it , realizing that the Bill 's adoption would greatly lessen the chances of a second constitutional convention , which they desired . Anti @-@ Federalists such as Richard Henry Lee also argued that the Bill left the most objectionable portions of the Constitution , such as the federal judiciary and direct taxation , intact . 
 On November 20 , 1789 , New Jersey ratified eleven of the twelve amendments , including the Fourth . On December 19 , 1789 , December 22 , 1789 , and January 19 , 1790 , respectively , Maryland , North Carolina , and South Carolina ratified all twelve amendments . On January 25 and 28 , 1790 , respectively , New Hampshire and Delaware ratified eleven of the Bill 's twelve amendments , including the Fourth . This brought the total of ratifying states to six of the required ten , but the process stalled in other states : Connecticut and Georgia found a Bill of Rights unnecessary and so refused to ratify , while Massachusetts ratified most of the amendments , but failed to send official notice to the Secretary of State that it had done so . ( All three states would later ratify the Bill of Rights for sesquicentennial celebrations in 1939 . ) 
 In February through June of 1790 , New York , Pennsylvania , and Rhode Island each ratified eleven of the amendments , including the Fourth . Virginia initially postponed its debate , but after Vermont was admitted to the Union in 1791 , the total number of states needed for ratification rose to eleven . Vermont ratified on November 3 , 1791 , approving all twelve amendments , and Virginia finally followed on December 15 , 1791 . Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced the adoption of the ten successfully ratified amendments on March 1 , 1792 . 
 = = Applicability = = 
 The Bill of Rights originally only restricted the federal government , and went through a long initial phase of " judicial dormancy " ; in the words of historian Gordon S. Wood , " After ratification , most Americans promptly forgot about the first ten amendments to the Constitution . " Federal jurisdiction regarding criminal law was narrow until the late 19th century when the Interstate Commerce Act and Sherman Antitrust Act were passed . As federal criminal jurisdiction expanded to include other areas such as narcotics , more questions about the Fourth Amendment came to the Supreme Court . The U.S. Supreme Court responded to these questions by outlining the fundamental purpose of the amendment as guaranteeing " the privacy , dignity and security of persons against certain arbitrary and invasive acts by officers of the Government , without regard to whether the government actor is investigating crime or performing another function . " In Mapp v. Ohio ( 1961 ) , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Fourth Amendment applies to the states by way of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . 
 Fourth Amendment case law deals with three central issues : what government activities constitute " search " and " seizure " ; what constitutes probable cause for these actions ; how violations of Fourth Amendment rights should be addressed . 
 The Fourth Amendment typically requires " a neutral and detached authority interposed between the police and the public , " and it is offended by " general warrants " and laws that allows searches to be conducted " indiscriminately and without regard to their connection with [ a ] crime under investigation . " , for the " basic purpose of the Fourth Amendment , which is enforceable against the States through the Fourteenth , through its prohibition of " unreasonable " searches and seizures is to safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary invasions by governmental officials . " 
 The Fourth Amendment has been held to mean that a search or an arrest generally requires a judicially sanctioned warrant , because the basic rule under the Fourth Amendment is that arrests and " searches conducted outside the judicial process , without prior approval by judge or magistrate , are per se unreasonable . " In order for such a warrant to be considered reasonable , it must be supported by probable cause and be limited in scope according to specific information supplied by a person ( usually a law enforcement officer ) who has sworn by it and is therefore accountable to the issuing court . The Supreme Court further held in Chandler v. Miller ( 1997 ) : " To be reasonable under the Fourth Amendment , a search ordinarily must be based on individualized suspicion of wrongdoing . But particularized exceptions to the main rule are sometimes warranted based on ' special needs , beyond the normal need for law enforcement . ' ... When such ' special needs ' are alleged , courts must undertake a context @-@ specific inquiry , examining closely the competing private and public interests advanced by the parties . " The amendment applies to governmental searches and seizures , but not those done by private citizens or organizations who are not acting on behalf of a government . In Ontario v. Quon ( 2010 ) , the Court held the amendment to also apply to the government when acting as an employer , ruling that a government could search a police officer 's text messages that were sent over that government 's pager . 
 = = = Search = = = 
 One threshold question in the Fourth Amendment jurisprudence is whether a " search " has occurred . Initial Fourth Amendment case law hinged on a citizen 's property rights — that is , when the government physically intrudes on " persons , houses , papers , or effects " for the purpose of obtaining information , a " search " within the original meaning of the Fourth Amendment has occurred . Early 20th @-@ century Court decisions , such as Olmstead v. United States ( 1928 ) , held that Fourth Amendment rights applied in cases of physical intrusion , but not to other forms of police surveillance ( e.g. , wiretaps ) . In Silverman v. United States ( 1961 ) , the Court stated of the amendment that " at the very core stands the right of a man to retreat into his own home and there be free from unreasonable governmental intrusion . " 
 Fourth Amendment protections expanded significantly with Katz v. United States ( 1967 ) . In Katz , the Supreme Court expanded that focus to embrace an individual 's right to privacy , and ruled that a search had occurred when the government wiretapped a telephone booth using a microphone attached to the outside of the glass . While there was no physical intrusion into the booth , the Court reasoned that : 1 ) Katz , by entering the booth and shutting the door behind him , had exhibited his expectation that " the words he utters into the mouthpiece will not be broadcast to the world " ; and 2 ) society believes that his expectation was reasonable . Justice Potter Stewart wrote in the majority opinion that " the Fourth Amendment protects people , not places " . A " search " occurs for purposes of the Fourth Amendment when the government violates a person 's " reasonable expectation of privacy . " Katz 's reasonable expectation of privacy thus provided the basis to rule that the government 's intrusion , though electronic rather than physical , was a search covered by the Fourth Amendment , and thus necessitated a warrant . The Court said that it was not recognizing any general right to privacy in the Fourth Amendment , and that this wiretap could have been authorized if proper procedures had been followed . 
 This decision in Katz was later developed into the now commonly used two @-@ prong test , adopted in Smith v. Maryland ( 1979 ) , for determining whether the Fourth Amendment is applicable in a given circumstance : 
 a person " has exhibited an actual ( subjective ) expectation of privacy " ; and 
 society is prepared to recognize that this expectation is ( objectively ) reasonable . 
 The Supreme Court has held that the Fourth Amendment does not apply to information that is voluntarily given to third parties . In Smith , the Court held individuals have no " legitimate expectation of privacy " regarding the telephone numbers they dial because they knowingly give that information to telephone companies when they dial a number . 
 Following Katz , the vast majority of Fourth Amendment search cases have turned on the right to privacy , but in United States v. Jones ( 2012 ) , the Court ruled that the Katz standard did not replace earlier case law , but rather , has supplemented it . In Jones , law enforcement officers had attached a GPS device on a car 's exterior without Jones ' knowledge or consent . The Court concluded that Jones was a <unk> to the car , and so had a property interest in the car . Therefore , since the intrusion on the vehicle — a common law trespass — was for the purpose of obtaining information , the Court ruled that it was a search under the Fourth Amendment . The Court used similar " trespass " reasoning in Florida v. Jardines ( 2013 ) , to rule that bringing a drug detection dog to sniff at the front door of a home was a search . 
 In certain situations , law enforcement may perform a search when they have a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity , even if it falls short of probable cause necessary for an arrest . Under Terry v. Ohio ( 1968 ) , law enforcement officers are permitted to conduct a limited warrantless search on a level of suspicion less than probable cause under certain circumstances . In Terry , the Supreme Court ruled that when a police officer witnesses " unusual conduct " that leads that officer to reasonably believe " that criminal activity may be afoot " , that the suspicious person has a weapon and that the person is presently dangerous to the officer or others , the officer may conduct a " pat @-@ down search " ( or " frisk " ) to determine whether the person is carrying a weapon . This detention and search is known as a Terry stop . To conduct a frisk , officers must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which , taken together with rational inferences from those facts , reasonably warrant their actions . As established in Florida v. Royer ( 1983 ) , such a search must be temporary , and questioning must be limited to the purpose of the stop ( e.g. , officers who stop a person because they have reasonable suspicion to believe that the person was driving a stolen car , cannot , after confirming that it is not stolen , compel the person to answer questions about anything else , such as the possession of contraband ) . 
 = = = Seizure = = = 
 The Fourth Amendment proscribes unreasonable seizure of any person , person 's home ( including its curtilage ) or personal property without a warrant . A seizure of property occurs when there is " some meaningful interference with an individual 's possessory interests in that property " , such as when police officers take personal property away from an owner to use as evidence , or when they participate in an eviction . The amendment also protects against unreasonable seizure of persons , including a brief detention . 
 A seizure does not occur just because the government questions an individual in a public place . The exclusionary rule would not bar voluntary answers to such questions from being offered into evidence in a subsequent criminal prosecution . The person is not being seized if his freedom of movement is not restrained . The government may not detain an individual even momentarily without reasonable , objective grounds , with few exceptions . His refusal to listen or answer does not by itself furnish such grounds . 
 In United States v. Mendenhall ( 1980 ) , the Court held that a person is seized only when , by means of physical force or show of authority , his freedom of movement is restrained and , in the circumstances surrounding the incident , a reasonable person would believe that he was not free to leave . In Florida v. Bostick ( 1991 ) , the Court ruled that as long as the police do not convey a message that compliance with their requests is required , the police contact is a " citizen encounter " that falls outside the protections of the Fourth Amendment . If a person remains free to disregard questioning by the government , there has been no seizure and therefore no intrusion upon the person 's privacy under the Fourth Amendment . 
 When a person is arrested and taken into police custody , he has been seized ( i.e. , a reasonable person who is handcuffed and placed in the back of a police car would not think they were free to leave ) . A person subjected to a routine traffic stop on the other hand , has been seized , but is not " arrested " because traffic stops are a relatively brief encounter and are more analogous to a Terry stop than to a formal arrest . If a person is not under suspicion of illegal behavior , a law enforcement official is not allowed to place an individual under arrest simply because this person does not wish to state his identity , provided specific state regulations do not specify this to be the case . A search incidental to an arrest that is not permissible under state law does not violate the Fourth Amendment , so long as the arresting officer has probable cause . In Maryland v. King ( 2013 ) , the Court upheld the constitutionality of police <unk> for DNA upon arrests for serious crimes , along the same reasoning that allows police to take fingerprints or photographs of those they arrest and detain . 
 = = = = Exceptions = = = = 
 The government may not detain an individual even momentarily without reasonable and articulable suspicion , with a few exceptions . In Delaware v. Prouse ( 1979 ) , the Court ruled an officer has made an illegal seizure when he stops an automobile and detains the driver in order to check his driver 's license and the registration of the automobile , unless the officer has articulable and reasonable suspicion that a motorist is unlicensed or that an automobile is not registered , or either the vehicle or an occupant is otherwise subject to seizure for violation of law . 
 Where society 's need is great , no other effective means of meeting the need is available , and intrusion on people 's privacy is minimal , certain discretionless checkpoints toward that end may briefly detain motorists . In United States v. Martinez @-@ Fuerte ( 1976 ) , the Supreme Court allowed discretionless immigration checkpoints . In Michigan Dept. of State Police v. <unk> ( 1990 ) , the Supreme Court allowed discretionless sobriety checkpoints . In Illinois v. Lidster ( 2004 ) , the Supreme Court allowed focused informational checkpoints . However , in City of Indianapolis v. Edmond ( 2000 ) , the Supreme Court ruled that discretionary checkpoints or general crime @-@ fighting checkpoints are not allowed . 
 = = = Warrant = = = 
 Under the Fourth Amendment , law enforcement must receive written permission from a court of law , or otherwise qualified magistrate , to lawfully search and seize evidence while investigating criminal activity . A court grants permission by issuing a writ known as a warrant . A search or seizure is generally unreasonable and unconstitutional if conducted without a valid warrant and the police must obtain a warrant whenever practicable . Searches and seizures without a warrant are not considered unreasonable if one of the specifically established and well @-@ delineated exceptions to the warrant requirement applies . These exceptions apply " [ o ] nly in those exceptional circumstances in which special needs , beyond the normal need for law enforcement , make the warrant and probable cause requirement impracticable . " 
 In these situations where the warrant requirement doesn 't apply a search or seizure nonetheless must be justified by some individualized suspicion of wrongdoing . However , the U.S. Supreme Court carved out an exception to the requirement of individualized suspicion . It ruled that , " In limited circumstances , where the privacy interests implicated by the search are minimal and where an important governmental interest furthered by the intrusion would be placed in jeopardy by a requirement of individualized suspicion " a search [ or seizure ] would still be reasonable . 
 = = = Probable cause = = = 
 The standards of probable cause differ for an arrest and a search . The government has a probable cause to make an arrest when " the facts and circumstances within their knowledge and of which they had reasonably trustworthy information " would lead a prudent person to believe that the arrested person had committed or was committing a crime . Probable cause to arrest must exist before the arrest is made . Evidence obtained after the arrest may not apply retroactively to justify the arrest . 
 When police conduct a search , the amendment requires that the warrant establish probable cause to believe that the search will uncover criminal activity or contraband . They must have legally sufficient reasons to believe a search is necessary . In Carroll v. United States ( 1925 ) , the Supreme Court stated that probable cause to search is a flexible , common @-@ sense standard . To that end , the Court ruled in <unk> v. United States ( 1925 ) that the term probable cause means " less than evidence that would justify condemnation " , reiterating Carroll 's assertion that it merely requires that the facts available to the officer would " warrant a man of reasonable caution " in the belief that specific items may be contraband or stolen property or useful as evidence of a crime . It does not demand any showing that such a belief be correct or more likely true than false . A " practical , non @-@ technical " probability that incriminating evidence is involved is all that is required . In Illinois v. Gates ( 1983 ) , the Court ruled that the reliability of an informant is to be determined based on the " totality of the circumstances . " 
 = = Exceptions to the warrant requirement = = 
 = = = Consent = = = 
 If a party gives consent to a search , a warrant is not required . There are exceptions and complications to the rule , including the scope of the consent given , whether the consent is voluntarily given , and whether an individual has the right to consent to a search of another 's property . In <unk> v. Bustamonte ( 1973 ) , the Court ruled that a consent search is still valid even if the police do not inform a suspect of his right to refuse the search . This contrasts with Fifth Amendment rights , which cannot be relinquished without an explicit Miranda warning from police . 
 The Court stated in United States v. Matlock ( 1974 ) that a third party co @-@ occupant could give consent for a search without violating a suspect 's Fourth Amendment rights . Per the Court 's ruling in Illinois v. Rodriguez ( 1990 ) , a consent search is still considered valid if police accept in good faith the consent of an " apparent authority " , even if that party is later discovered to not have authority over the property in question . 
 = = = Plain view and open fields = = = 
 According to the plain view doctrine as defined in Coolidge v. New Hampshire ( 1971 ) , if an officer is lawfully present , he may seize objects that are in " plain view " . However , the officer must have had probable cause to believe that the objects are contraband . 
 Similarly , " open fields " such as pastures , open water , and woods may be searched without a warrant , on the ground that conduct occurring therein would have no reasonable expectation of privacy . The doctrine was first articulated by the Court in Hester v. United States ( 1924 ) , which stated that " the special protection accorded by the Fourth Amendment to the people in their ' persons , houses , papers , and effects , ' is not extended to the open fields . " 
 In Oliver v. United States ( 1984 ) , the police ignored a " no trespassing " sign and a fence , trespassed onto the suspect 's land without a warrant , followed a path for hundreds of feet , and discovered a field of marijuana . The Supreme Court ruled that no search had taken place , because there was no privacy expectation regarding an open field : 
 open fields do not provide the setting for those intimate activities that the Amendment is intended to shelter from government interference or surveillance . There is no societal interest in protecting the privacy of those activities , such as the cultivation of crops , that occur in open fields . 
 While open fields are not protected by the Fourth Amendment , the curtilage , or outdoor area immediately surrounding the home , is protected . Courts have treated this area as an extension of the house and as such subject to all the privacy protections afforded a person 's home ( unlike a person 's open fields ) under the Fourth Amendment . The curtilage is " intimately linked to the home , both physically and psychologically , " and is where " privacy expectations are most heightened . " However , courts have held aerial surveillance of curtilage not to be included in the protections from unwarranted search so long as the airspace above the curtilage is generally accessible by the public . An area is curtilage if it " harbors the intimate activity associated with the sanctity of a man 's home and the <unk> of life . " Courts make this determination by examining " whether the area is included within an enclosure surrounding the home , the nature of the uses to which the area is put , and the steps taken by the resident to protect the area from observation by people passing by . " The Court has acknowledged that a doorbell or knocker is typically treated as an invitation , or license , to the public to approach the front door of the home to deliver mail , sell goods , solicit for charities , etc . This license extends to the police , who have the right to try engaging a home 's occupant in a " knock and talk " for the purpose of gathering evidence without a warrant . However , they cannot bring a drug detection dog to sniff at the front door of a home without either a warrant or consent of the homeowner or resident . 
 = = = <unk> circumstance = = = 
 Law enforcement officers may also conduct warrantless searches in several types of exigent circumstances where obtaining a warrant is dangerous or impractical . One example is the Terry stop , which allows police to frisk suspects for weapons . The Court also allowed a search of arrested persons in Weeks v. United States ( 1914 ) to preserve evidence that might otherwise be destroyed and to ensure suspects were disarmed . In Carroll v. United States ( 1925 ) , the Court ruled that law enforcement officers could search a vehicle that they suspected of carrying contraband without a warrant . The Court allowed blood to be drawn without a warrant from drunk @-@ driving suspects in Schmerber v. California ( 1966 ) on the grounds that the time to obtain a warrant would allow a suspect 's blood alcohol content to reduce , although this was later modified by Missouri v. McNeely ( 2013 ) . Warden v. Hayden ( 1967 ) provided an exception to the warrant requirement if officers were in " hot pursuit " of a suspect . 
 = = = Motor vehicle = = = 
 The Supreme Court has held that individuals in automobiles have a reduced expectation of privacy , because vehicles generally do not serve as residences or repositories of personal effects . Vehicles may not be randomly stopped and searched ; there must be probable cause or reasonable suspicion of criminal activity . Items in plain view may be seized ; areas that could potentially hide weapons may also be searched . With probable cause to believe evidence is present , police officers may search any area in the vehicle . However , they may not extend the search to the vehicle 's passengers without probable cause to search those passengers or consent from the passengers . 
 In Arizona v. Gant ( 2009 ) , the Court ruled that a law enforcement officer needs a warrant before searching a motor vehicle after an arrest of an occupant of that vehicle , unless 1 ) at the time of the search the person being arrested is unsecured and within reaching distance of the passenger compartment of the vehicle or 2 ) police officers have reason to believe that evidence for the crime for which the person is being arrested will be found in the vehicle . 
 = = = Searches incident to a lawful arrest = = = 
 A common law rule from Great Britain permits searches incident to an arrest without a warrant . This rule has been applied in American law , and has a lengthy common law history . The justification for such a search is to prevent the arrested individual 1 . ) from destroying evidence or 2 . ) using a weapon against the arresting officer by disarming the suspect . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that " both justifications for the search @-@ incident @-@ to @-@ arrest exception are absent and the rule does not apply " , when " there is no possibility " that the suspect could gain access to a weapon or destroy evidence . In Trupiano v. United States ( 1948 ) , the Supreme Court held that " a search or seizure without a warrant as an incident to a lawful arrest has always been considered to be a strictly limited right . It grows out of the inherent necessities of the situation at the time of the arrest . But there must be something more in the way of necessity than merely a lawful arrest . " In United States v. Rabinowitz ( 1950 ) , the Court reversed Trupiano , holding instead that the officers ' opportunity to obtain a warrant was not germane to the reasonableness of a search incident to an arrest . Rabinowitz suggested that any area within the " immediate control " of the arrestee could be searched , but it did not define the term . In deciding Chimel v. California ( 1969 ) , the Supreme Court elucidated its previous decisions . It held that when an arrest is made , it is reasonable for the officer to search the arrestee for weapons and evidence . However , in Riley v. California ( 2014 ) , the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that police must obtain a warrant to search an arrestee 's cellular phone . The Court said that earlier Supreme Court decisions permitting searches incident to an arrest without a warrant do not apply to " modern cellphones , which are now such a pervasive and insistent part of daily life that the proverbial visitor from Mars might conclude they were an important feature of human anatomy , " and noted that US citizens ' cellphones today typically contain " a digital record of nearly every aspect of their lives — from the mundane to the intimate . " 
 = = = Border search exception = = = 
 Searches conducted at the United States border or the equivalent of the border ( such as an international airport ) may be conducted without a warrant or probable cause subject to the border search exception . Most border searches may be conducted entirely at random , without any level of suspicion , pursuant to U.S. Customs and Border Protection plenary search authority . However , searches that intrude upon a traveler 's personal dignity and privacy interests , such as strip and body cavity searches , must be supported by " reasonable suspicion . " The U.S. Courts of Appeals for the Fourth and Ninth circuits have ruled that information on a traveler 's electronic materials , including personal files on a laptop computer , may be searched at random , without suspicion . 
 = = = Foreign intelligence surveillance = = = 
 The Supreme Court decision in United States v. U.S. District Court ( 1972 ) left open the possibility for a foreign intelligence surveillance exception to the warrant clause . Three United States Courts of Appeals have recognized a foreign intelligence surveillance exception to the warrant clause , but tied it to certain requirements . The exception to the Fourth Amendment was formally recognized by the United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review in its 2008 In re Directives decision . The lower court held that , " a foreign intelligence exception to the Fourth Amendment 's warrant requirement exists when surveillance is conducted to obtain foreign intelligence for national security purposes and is directed against foreign powers or agents of foreign powers reasonably believed to be located outside the United States . " Despite the foregoing citation the Fourth Amendment prohibitions against unreasonable searches and seizures nonetheless apply to the contents of all communications , whatever the means , because , " a person 's private communications are akin to personal papers . " To protect the telecommunication carriers cooperating with the US government from legal action , the Congress passed a bill updating the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 to permit this type of surveillance . 
 = = = Other exceptions = = = 
 In New Jersey v. T. L. O. ( 1985 ) , the Supreme Court ruled that searches in public schools do not require warrants , as long as the searching officers have reasonable grounds for believing that the search will result in the finding of evidence of illegal activity . However , in Safford Unified School District v. Redding ( 2009 ) , the Court ruled that school officials violated the Fourth Amendment when they strip searched a 13 @-@ year @-@ old girl based only on a student claiming to have received drugs from that student . Similarly , in Samson v. California ( 2006 ) , the Court ruled that government offices may be searched for evidence of work @-@ related misconduct by government employees on similar grounds . Searches of prison cells are subject to no restraints relating to reasonableness or probable cause . 
 = = <unk> rule = = 
 One way courts enforce the Fourth Amendment is through the use of the exclusionary rule . The rule provides that evidence obtained through a violation of the Fourth Amendment is generally not admissible by the prosecution during the defendant 's criminal trial . The Court stated in Elkins v. United States ( 1960 ) that the rule 's function " is to deter — to compel respect for the constitutional guaranty in the only effectively available way — by removing the incentive to disregard it . " 
 The Court adopted the exclusionary rule in Weeks v. United States ( 1914 ) , prior to which all evidence , no matter how seized , could be admitted in court . In Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States ( 1920 ) and Nardone v. United States ( 1939 ) , the Court ruled that leads or other evidence resulting from illegally obtained evidence are also inadmissible in trials . Justice Felix Frankfurter described this secondary evidence in the Nardone decision as the " fruit of the poisonous tree " . The Supreme Court rejected incorporating the exclusionary rule by way of the Fourteenth Amendment in Wolf v. Colorado ( 1949 ) , but Wolf was explicitly overruled in Mapp v. Ohio ( 1961 ) , making the Fourth Amendment ( including the exclusionary rule ) applicable in state proceedings . 
 The exclusionary rule and its effectiveness have often been controversial , particularly since its 1961 application to state proceedings . Critics charge that the rule hampers police investigation and can result in freeing guilty parties convicted on reliable evidence ; other critics state that the rule has not been successful in deterring illegal police searches . Proponents argue that the number of criminal convictions overturned under the rule has been minimal and that no other effective mechanism exists to enforce the Fourth Amendment . In 1982 , California passed a " Victim 's Bill of Rights " containing a provision to repeal the exclusionary rule ; though the bill could not affect federally mandated rights under the Fourth Amendment , it blocked the state courts from expanding these protections further . 
 = = = Limitations = = = 
 Starting with United States v. Calandra ( 1974 ) , the Supreme Court has repeatedly limited the exclusionary rule . The Court in Calandra ruled that grand juries may use illegally obtained evidence when questioning witnesses , because " the damage to that institution from the unprecedented extension of the exclusionary rule outweighs the benefit of any possible incremental deterrent effect . " Explaining the purpose of the rule , the Court said that the rule " is a judicially created remedy designed to safeguard Fourth Amendment rights generally through its deterrent effect , rather than a personal constitutional right of the party aggrieved . " 
 Several cases in 1984 further restricted the exclusionary rule : 
 In United States v. Leon , the Court established the " good faith " exception to the rule , ruling that evidence seized by officers reasonably relying on a warrant was still admissible , even though the warrant was later found to be defective , unless an officer dishonestly or recklessly prepared an affidavit to seek a warrant , the issuing magistrate abandoned his neutrality , or the warrant lacked sufficient particularity . 
 The Court determined in Nix v. Williams that " fruit of the poisonous tree " evidence could still be introduced if a prosecutor could demonstrate that it would have been an " inevitable discovery " of legitimate investigation . 
 In Segura v. United States , the Court ruled that evidence illegally found without a search warrant is admissible if the evidence is later found and legally seized based on information independent of the illegal search . 
 In Arizona v. Evans ( 1995 ) and Herring v. United States ( 2009 ) , the Court ruled that the exclusionary rule does not apply to evidence found due to negligence regarding a government database , as long as the arresting police officer relied on that database in " good faith " and the negligence was not pervasive . In Davis v. United States ( 2011 ) , the Court ruled that the exclusionary rule does not apply to a Fourth Amendment violation resulting from a reasonable reliance on binding appellate precedent . In Utah v. <unk> ( 2016 ) , the Court ruled that evidence obtained from an unlawful police stop would not be excluded from court when the link between the stop and the evidence ’ s discovery was “ attenuated ” by the discovery of an outstanding warrant during the stop . 
 The Supreme Court has also held the exclusionary rule to not apply in the following circumstances : 
 evidence illegally seized by a " private actor " ( i.e. , not a governmental employee ) 
 tax hearings 
 evidence collected by U.S. Customs agents 
 deportation hearings 
 evidence seized by probation or parole officers 
 probation or parole revocation hearings 
 = Blyth , Northumberland = 
 Blyth ( / <unk> / blithe ) is a town and civil parish in southeast Northumberland , England . It lies on the coast , to the south of the River Blyth and is approximately 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) northeast of Newcastle upon Tyne . It has a population of about 37 @,@ 339 . 
 The port of Blyth dates from the 12th century , but the development of the modern town only began in the first quarter of the 18th century . The main industries which helped the town prosper were coal mining and shipbuilding , with the salt trade , fishing and the railways also playing an important role . These industries have largely vanished , but the port still thrives , shipping paper and pulp from Scandinavia for the newspaper industries of England and Scotland . 
 The town was seriously affected when its principal industries went into decline , and it has undergone much regeneration since the early 1990s . The Keel Row Shopping Centre , opened in 1991 , brought major high street retailers to Blyth , and helped to revitalise the town centre . The market place has recently been re @-@ developed , with the aim of attracting further investment to the town . 
 The Quayside has also seen much redevelopment and has been transformed into a peaceful open space , the centrepiece of which is a sculpture commemorating the industry which once thrived there . There were , on the opposite side of the river are the nine wind turbines of the Blyth Harbour Wind Farm , which were constructed along the East Pier in 1992 . They were joined in 2000 by Blyth Offshore Wind Farm , which is composed of two turbines situated 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) out to sea . Although the original 9 turbines have now been demolished , there is currently one bigger turbine on the North Blyth side with building work taking place on a second turbine . 
 Blyth is also home to the non @-@ League football club Blyth Spartans , famed for their 1978 " giant @-@ killing " feats in the FA Cup . 
 = = History = = 
 The place @-@ name ' Blyth ' is first attested in 1130 as ' <unk> ' , and takes its name from the river Blyth . The river @-@ name comes from the Old English adjective ' blithe ' meaning ' gentle ' or ' merry ' , and still used today . Interestingly , the town of Blyth is referred to as ' <unk> ' in 1236 and ' <unk> ' in 1250 . Had this name persisted , the town would today be referred to as ' <unk> ' , on the analogy of Tynemouth to the south . 
 Little is known of the early development of the Blyth area . The oldest archaeological find is an antler hammer dating from the late Neolithic or early Bronze Age period , which was found at Newsham in 1979 . Human skulls , a spearhead and a sword dating from the Bronze Age were found in the river in 1890 , as well as a bronze axe which was found at South Beach in 1993 , and a dagger found at Newsham . Although there is no conclusive evidence of a Roman presence in the area , an earthwork shown on early mapping of the area , at the location of present @-@ day Freehold Street , is said to have been a Roman camp , but it has also been argued that it may be of Norsemen origin or date from the Civil War . Debate also surrounds a mosaic which was found near Bath Terrace . The strongest evidence so far has been a single coin , dating from the reign of the Emperor Constans ( <unk> – 350 ) , which was found during excavations for a dry dock . 
 Between the 12th and 18th centuries , there were several small settlements and some industrial activity in the area . The principal industries during this period were coal mining , fishing and the salt trade . Shipbuilding in the area dates from 1748 . 
 The modern town of Blyth began to develop in the first quarter of the 18th century . Up until 1716 , the land around the Blyth area — the Newsham Estate — was owned by the Earls of Derwentwater , but when the third Earl , James Radclyffe , was executed for his part in the Jacobite rising of 1715 , the land was forfeited to the crown . On 11 July 1723 , the Lordship of Newsham was put up for sale by the Commissioners of Forfeited Estates at their office in the Inner Temple , London . The land was bought by Matthew White and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Richard Ridley . From the 12th century , most port activities were on the north side of the river , but under White and Ridley the first new quays and houses were built on the south side , and from here the port began to prosper . By 1730 , a coaling quay , a ballast quay , a pilots ' watch house and a lighthouse had all been built at Blyth harbour . In 1765 the first breakwater was constructed , and in 1788 the first <unk> with an elevated loading point was erected . Deep mines were sunk at Cowpen Colliery and Cowpen Square in 1796 and 1804 respectively , and by 1855 , a quarter of a million tons of coal was being shipped from Blyth , rising to three million tons by 1900 . The only industry not to survive during this prosperous time was the salt trade , which was heavily taxed during the 18th and early @-@ 19th centuries . During the Napoleonic Wars , the tax was increased to provide funds for the military and , even though the tax was abolished in 1825 , the industry went into terminal decline . Having had fourteen salt pans at the beginning of the 18th century , exporting over 1 @,@ 000 tons of salt annually , Blyth 's salt industry closed in 1876 , with the destruction of the last salt pan . 
 From the mid @-@ 19th century , several important events occurred which allowed the port of Blyth to rapidly expand . First , in 1847 , a railway line was constructed , connecting Blyth to collieries at Seghill . This line combined with the existing line between Seghill and North Tyneside to form the Blyth and Tyne Railway . In 1853 , the Blyth Harbour and Docks Board was formed , then in 1858 the Harbour Act was passed allowing dredging of the harbour to begin . In 1882 , the formation of the Blyth Harbour Commission led to the building of new coal loading staiths , as well as the construction of the South Harbour . 
 As trade in Blyth continued to grow , so did the population . Development of the Cowpen Quay and Waterloo areas began in about 1810 and 1815 respectively , and between the 1850s and 1890s major house building took place in these areas . Blyth railway station , first built in 1847 , was relocated in 1867 and rebuilt in 1896 , to cope with the increase in goods and passenger traffic . The 1890s saw the filling in of " the <unk> " ( also known as " the Flanker " or " the Gut " ) . The <unk> was a tidal inlet which stretched south from the river , across the site of today 's bus station , along the route of Beaconsfield Street , and on past Crofton Mill Pit . Before it was filled in , it almost entirely separated Blyth from Cowpen — Waterloo Bridge providing the only main link . Once it was removed , the two areas could combine and allow the town to begin to take its present form . The town continued to expand in the 20th century ; much large @-@ scale house building took place in the 1920s and 1930s , and from the 1950s to the 1970s . 
 Industry in Blyth reached its peak in the first half of the 20th century . At this time it boasted one of the largest shipbuilding yards on the North East coast , with five dry docks and four building slipways . During the First and Second World Wars , the Blyth shipyards built many ships for the Royal Navy including the first aircraft carrier , HMS Ark Royal in 1914 . Blyth also served as a submarine base during both wars . By 1930 , the port of Blyth was exporting 5 @.@ 5 million tons of coal , and by the early 1960s , reached its peak with over six million tons . Blyth A and Blyth B power stations , collectively known as Blyth Power Station , were opened in 1958 and 1962 . Blyth A was the first power station in Britain to have 120 megawatt sets installed , while Blyth B was the first to be fitted with 275 megawatt sets . 
 During the 1960s , Blyth entered a period of steep decline . Following the Beeching report , the railway into Blyth was closed ; and in 1966 , economic depression resulted in the closure of the shipyards . As the demand for coal fell , due to the increasing use of oil , natural gas and nuclear power as energy sources , the following years saw the closure of many collieries in the area . By the 1980s , the only one left in the town was Bates ' Pit , which closed in 1986 . In January 2002 , Blyth Power Station was closed and subsequently demolished in stages , until 7 December 2003 , when its four chimneys were demolished . 
 = = = Notable people = = = 
 Richard Stannard , recipient of the Victoria Cross 
 Mark Knopfler , singer of Dire Straits , grew up in Blyth 
 William Smith Discovered islands in the Antarctic region . 
 = = Governance = = 
 From around the first quarter of the 18th century , until November 1900 , the land to the south of the River Blyth was known as South Blyth . It was in the Parish of <unk> and was run by the Parish Council until 1863 , when the South Blyth Local Board was formed . Under the Local Government Act of 1894 , South Blyth Local Board became an Urban District Council , then in 1906 it was amalgamated with Cowpen Urban District Council to form Blyth Urban District Council . On 21 September 1922 , Blyth UDC became Blyth Municipal Borough Council , and in 1935 its southern boundary was moved south from Meggie 's Burn to Seaton Burn . Blyth MBC lasted until 1974 , when it was amalgamated with Seaton Valley and Cramlington Urban District Councils , as well as part of Whitley Bay Urban District Council , to form Blyth Valley Borough Council . 
 Blyth was the administrative centre for the borough of Blyth Valley , until the borough was abolished in structural changes to local government on 1 April 2009 . Blyth Valley — which also included Cramlington and several villages — was 70 square kilometres in size and , according to the Registrar General 's Population Estimate for mid @-@ 2005 , it had a population of 81 @,@ 600 ; this gives a population density of 1 @,@ 166 people per square kilometre . The two @-@ tier local government of Northumberland County Council and Blyth Valley Borough Council has been replaced by a unitary authority for the county of Northumberland . Blyth is situated in the parliament constituency of Blyth Valley , which shares its boundaries with the borough . It is divided up into twenty wards , nine of which — Cowpen , Croft , Isabella , Kitty Brewster , Newsham and New Delaval , Plessey , South Beach , South Newsham , and Wensleydale — make up the town of Blyth . The MP is Ronnie Campbell ( Labour ) . 
 As part of Blyth Valley , Blyth is twinned with : 
 Solingen , Germany 
 <unk> , Germany 
 Gelendzhik , Russia 
 = = Geography = = 
 Blyth is at 55 ° 07 ′ 34 ″ N 1 ° 30 ′ 50 ″ W ( 55 @.@ 1261 , − 1 @.@ <unk> ) , on the coast of North East England , to the south of the River Blyth and is approximately 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) northeast of Newcastle upon Tyne and 26 kilometres ( 16 mi ) north of Sunderland . It is 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) east of Bedlington , 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) northeast of Cramlington , 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Ashington and 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) south of Newbiggin @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea . On the north side of the river are the villages of East <unk> , Cambois and North Blyth and to the south of the town are the villages of New Hartley , Seaton Delaval and Seaton Sluice . Some of Blyth 's suburbs have origins which can be traced back much further than the town itself ; Newsham , <unk> and Cowpen are all believed to have had habitation sites dating from the Romano @-@ British , Saxon and Medieval periods , although most of the housing in these areas dates from the 19th and 20th centuries . Also occupying the suburbs are several large housing estates ; the Newsham Farm , South Beach and Solingen estates , and the Avenues were all developed during the 20th century . In January 2005 , the land in Blyth was made up of 61 @.@ 87 % green space , 11 @.@ 95 % domestic gardens , 8 @.@ 23 % road , 4 @.@ 85 % domestic buildings , 2 @.@ 03 % non @-@ domestic buildings and 11 @.@ 07 % other uses . 
 The geology of the area is made up of a carboniferous bedrock of sandstone , mudstone and coal , which is covered mainly by boulder clay and till . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate in Northumberland is generally cool and dry . Compared with the rest of the United Kingdom , the weather there is relatively stable , and extreme conditions , such as floods , droughts or heatwaves , are rare . Below are the average maximum and minimum temperatures , and average rainfall recorded between 1971 and 2000 at the Met Office weather station in Boulmer , which is around 33 kilometres ( 21 mi ) north of Blyth . 
 The average maximum temperatures between April and October are around 1 – 2 ½ ° C lower than the national average and the average minimum temperatures between May and August are around ½ ° C below the national average ; both the average maximum and minimum temperatures for the remainder of the year are about the same as the national average . The average rainfall in Northumberland is well below the national average ; 651 millimetres ( 26 in ) was recorded at Boulmer , compared to 838 millimetres ( 33 in ) for the whole of England . 
 = = = Transport links = = = 
 The main approach road to Blyth is the <unk> ' Spine Road ' which is accessible from the A1 via the A19 . The <unk> is the main road through Blyth and leads to Bedlington to the west and North Tyneside to the south . The other main route into Blyth is the <unk> . Blyth bus station is located in Post Office Square in the town centre . Buses in Blyth are operated by Arriva North East and there are regular services to Newcastle as well as the other main towns in the south of Northumberland and the surrounding areas of Blyth . A one service is operated by Go North East . 
 Blyth currently has no passenger rail links – the nearest station is Cramlington ( 5 mi or 8 km ) . Blyth railway station was closed on 2 November 1964 following the Beeching Report . There were also two small stations on the outskirts of the town , at <unk> and Newsham ; they were closed to passenger services in 1956 and 1964 respectively . 
 It is possible that the Tyne and Wear Metro may be extended from Northumberland Park and terminate at Blyth , but this will not be considered before 2019 . An alternative , proposed ( 2009 ) by the Association of Train Operating Companies , is reopening the existing freight line between Newcastle and Ashington , including reopening Newsham station to serve Blyth . 
 = = Port of Blyth = = 
 The Port of Blyth was first recorded from 1138 , when monks at Newminster Abbey exported salt , having created it from pans on the north side of the river and evaporated using the copious supplies of local coal . Coal exports started from the 14th century , with local mines recorded from the 16th century . In 1609 21 @,@ 571 tons of coal were shipped from Blyth . The first large quay - Bishop 's Quay , which still exists today - was developed by 1682 . But the port was not dredged at this time , necessitating the use of Northumbrian keel boats to transfer the loads to ships moored offshore . By 1730 specific coaling and ballast quays existed , and by 1765 the ports facilities included a pilot house and lighthouse , to facilitate the newly built first breakwater , North Dyke . The High Lighthouse came into operation soon afterwards , operating until July 1984 . 
 The port expanded greatly in the 19th century , with the purchase of a steam tug in 1819 , and the rebuilding of the breakwater in 1822 . By this point , three ship building yards had also been established . The construction of the Blyth and Tyne Railway from 1849 allowed coal shipments to quickly expand , reaching 200 @,@ 000 tons per annum . The Blyth Harbour and Dock Company was created in 1854 , but with need for further expansion , it was replaced by a bill of parliament given Royal Assent on 19 June 1882 , which constituted the current Blyth Harbour Commission . This allowed additional financing to be raised , for construction of the South Harbour . 
 By the 20th century , through connection via the London and North Eastern Railway which had leased large amounts of land throughout the port , Blyth had started the growth to become the Europe 's largest coal export port , exporting 5.5M tonnes per year by the late 1930s . This was also supplemented by ship building , including the opening of a facility by Hughes , Bolckow and Co of Middlesbrough . Large scale shipbuilding had begun in 1811 , and after passing through various hands , in 1880 the first two iron ships were built at Blyth for the Russian Government . This led to the foundation of the Blyth Shipbuilding Company on 2 March 1883 , building cargo liners , tramp steamers and colliers . With a cargo ship under construction , in 1914 she was purchased by the Admiralty and converted into the Navy 's first seaplane carrier Ark Royal . The company returned to commercial ship building , but collapsed in 1925 . It was then revived from 1926 , but after merger with other local yards and in light of the Wall Street Crash and resultant global recession , collapsed again in 1930 . Reopened under its original name in 1937 , it built various ships in preparation for and during WW2 , including the former German cargo ship Hannover which was converted into the escort carrier Audacity . Owned by <unk> ( Hong Kong ) Ltd post @-@ WW2 , it then built cargo @-@ liners for Moller 's subsidiary the Lancashire Shipping Company . The construction yard closed in 1967 , with only repair work and ship dismantling sustaining business until the yards were demolished in the late 1980s to make room for a paper and timber storage area . 
 After World War 2 , whilst most ports began to quickly contract , Blyth was still a major facility through the 1960s , when coal exports reached over 6 M tonnes per year . However , with the closure Blyth 's last ship builder in 1966 , the port began a significant period of contraction . The employment slack was in part taken up by the construction of the coal @-@ fired Blyth Power Station , located on the northern <unk> of the river . The A Station with 480 megawatts ( MW ) of capacity first generated electricity in 1958 , a year after the creation of the Central Electricity Generating Board , and the B Station with a capacity of 1 @,@ 250 MW four years later . The power stations ' four large chimneys were a landmark of the Northumberland skyline for over 40 years ; the A Station 's two chimneys each stood at 140 metres ( 460 ft ) ; the B Station 's two chimneys were taller , at 170 metres ( 560 ft ) each . They were operated by the successors of the CEGB , including National Power , following the privatisation of the UK 's power industry . After their closure in 2001 , the stations were demolished over the course of two years , ending with the demolition of the stations ' chimneys on 7 December 2003 . The establishment of an Alcan aluminium smelting facility in the 1970s 5 mi ( 8 km ) north along the river slowed this decline , as did the import of paper from Finland . 
 Today , the Port of Blyth handles up to 1 @.@ 5 million tonnes of cargo , mainly containers and RoRo , and some limited volumes of bulk cargos . Blyth Harbour Wind Farm , developed by AMEC Wind and owned by the port commissioners , was commissioned in January 1993 consists of nine <unk> <unk> turbines , giving a total capacity of 2 @.@ 7 MW . In January 2008 consent was granted to replace the existing nine turbines with seven new ones , six generating 2 @.@ 5 MW each , and a seventh at 163 m ( 535 ft ) would produce 7 @.@ 5 MW . 
 Seafarers ' charity Apostleship of the Sea has a chaplain at the port to support visiting seafarers welfare and faith needs . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Industry and commerce = = = 
 With the running down of the coal mining and shipbuilding industries , Blyth largely exists today as a dormitory town in the commuter belt serving Newcastle and North Tyneside . However , its port still remains a major industry in the area , handling over 1 @.@ 5 million tonnes of cargo annually . Its main trades are forest products , such as paper , pulp and timber , unitised cargo ( containers and RoRo ) and the import of materials used in the production of aluminium . It also handles the import of a variety of stones and metals . A twice weekly container service between the port and Moerdijk , near Rotterdam , provides connections with the Netherlands , Germany , Belgium and France as well as South America and the Far East . The port is operated by Port of Blyth , which is the operating division of Blyth Harbour Commission . Port of Blyth is a trust port , which means that it is governed by its own local legislation under the control of an independent board ; there are no shareholders and therefore no dividends to support , which allows any surplus to be reinvested in the port . 
 = = = Energy = = = 
 = = = = Renewables = = = = 
 Several renewable energy projects have been established in Blyth . In 1992 , Blyth Harbour Wind Farm was constructed along Blyth 's East Pier . Consisting of nine wind turbines and with a maximum capacity of 2 @.@ 7 megawatts , it can provide enough electricity for over 1 @,@ 500 homes . It was joined in December 2000 by Blyth Offshore Wind Farm , which is composed of two turbines situated 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) out to sea . At 2 megawatts each , they were , when installed , the largest in the world . 
 The National Renewable Energy Centre ( <unk> ) is one of five centres of excellence set up by the North East 's regional development agency , One NorthEast . It was established in 2002 and is based at Eddie Ferguson House , by the Quayside . Its purpose is to develop and test new energy technologies and equipment that will assist in the transition to a low @-@ carbon economy . 
 = = = = Proposed clean coal power station = = = = 
 On 11 May 2007 , proposals for a £ 2 billion clean coal power station were announced by energy supplier RWE npower . If the plans go ahead , it is estimated that 1 @,@ 500 jobs will be created for the construction , with another 200 full @-@ time staff required for the running of the plant , which would open in 2014 on the site of the old power station . The development would see the installation of three 800 megawatt coal @-@ fired units , which would generate enough energy to supply around 3 @.@ 5 million homes . These plans have , however , met some opposition ; many residents living in the area feel that the land should be redeveloped for other purposes , rather than continue to be used as an industrial site . The MP for Wansbeck , Denis Murphy , stated that , although the project would have benefits for the area , he still had concerns ; Ronnie Campbell , the MP for Blyth Valley , claimed he would welcome the development as long as it did not have an adverse effect on the overall regeneration of the area . 
 = = = Urban Regeneration = = = 
 Commercial developments in the town centre have also helped to revitalise Blyth . Opened in 1991 , the Keel Row Shopping Centre has brought many large high street retailers to the town . Several streets and many derelict buildings , including the old council offices , were cleared away to make way for the development . Adjacent , is the thrice weekly market which is held on Tuesdays , Fridays and Saturdays . On 14 March 2009 , the market was officially reopened following a £ 3 million refurbishment , which involved the installation of new paving , seating , lighting , and a water feature . The centrepiece is an artwork by Simon Watkinson , named <unk> ; the 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) stainless steel column incorporates lighting effects and represents the town 's coal mining heritage and history as a wartime submarine base . The aim of the refurbishment is to attract people to the market area when the market is closed , and to bring further investment to the town . However , the project has received criticism ; following approval of the proposals in June 2007 , concern was raised by Councillor <unk> Gibbs @-@ Barton , who said that the market place was beginning to resemble a park , and that more trade should be being encouraged . Following the reopening there were also claims that new stalls provided to market traders are unable to withstand adverse weather conditions , and that traders were being overcharged for stall space . 
 = = = Employment = = = 
 The closure of Blyth 's male @-@ dominated heavy industries during the latter half of the 20th century led to a shift towards more female dominated light industries , much of which were based on the new Blyth and Kitty Brewster trading estates . At the 2001 UK census , the industries of employment of residents of Blyth were 19 @.@ 44 % manufacturing , 16 @.@ 82 % retail , 11 @.@ 82 % health and social work , 8 @.@ 83 % construction , 8 @.@ 58 % public administration and defence , 8 @.@ 33 % real estate , 6 @.@ 69 % transport and communications , 5 @.@ 23 % education , 4 @.@ 53 % hotels and catering , 3 @.@ 13 % finance , 0 @.@ 92 % utilities , 0 @.@ 66 % agriculture and forestry , 0 @.@ 65 % mining and quarrying , 0 @.@ 07 % fishing , and 4 @.@ 29 % other industries . The census showed that the economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 was 39 @.@ 35 % in full @-@ time employment , 11 @.@ 82 % in part @-@ time employment , 4 @.@ 65 % self @-@ employed , 5 @.@ 37 % unemployed , 1 @.@ 57 % economically active students , 3 @.@ 02 % economically inactive students , 14 @.@ 42 % retired , 6 @.@ 89 % looking after home or family , 9 @.@ 69 % permanently sick or disabled , and 3 @.@ 23 % economically inactive for other reasons . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Blyth is the largest town in Northumberland ; at the 2001 UK census it had a population of 35 @,@ 818 . There were 15 @,@ 358 households and , for every 1000 females , there were 950 males . The age distribution was 6 @.@ 0 % 0 – 4 years , 14 @.@ 6 % 5 – 15 years , 5 @.@ 2 % 16 – 19 years , 33 @.@ 1 % 20 – 44 years , 25 @.@ 8 % 45 – 64 years and 15 @.@ 4 % 65 years and over . The average age of the population was 38 @.@ 64 years . The ethnicity of the town was 99 @.@ 0 % white , 0 @.@ 5 % Asian , 0 @.@ 3 % mixed race , 0 @.@ 1 % Chinese and < 0 @.@ 1 % black ; other ethnic groups made up the remaining 0 @.@ 1 % . The place of birth of residents was 98 @.@ 5 % United Kingdom , 0 @.@ 1 % Republic of Ireland , 0 @.@ 5 % other European countries , 0 @.@ 1 % Africa , 0 @.@ 5 % Asia , 0 @.@ 1 % the Americas and 0 @.@ 1 % Oceania . Religion was recorded as 79 @.@ 2 % Christian , 0 @.@ 3 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 2 % Sikh , 0 @.@ 07 % Buddhist , < 0 @.@ 1 % Hindu and < 0 @.@ 1 % Jewish . " Other religions " was stated by 0 @.@ 2 % , " no religion " was stated by 13 % , and 7 @.@ 0 % did not state a religion . 
 = = Education = = 
 Like the rest of Northumberland , Blyth has a three @-@ tier school system consisting of first , middle and high schools . The town currently has ten first schools , five middle schools and one high school . However , it has been decided that Blyth will switch to a two @-@ tier system of primary and secondary schools , as it is felt that transferring children twice between schools is having a negative effect on their progress in core subjects . Under the plans , all five middle schools and three first schools will close ; the remaining first schools will become primary schools in 2009 , and the high school — Blyth Community College ( now The Blyth Academy ) is now a secondary school and ranges from years 7 to 11 and 3 years of 6th form . 
 At present , The Blyth Academy is one of three high schools in Blyth Valley . Opened on 1 September 2000 as Blyth Community College following the amalgamation of Ridley ( formerly Newlands ) and Tynedale high schools and built on the site of the latter , it is designed to accommodate 1 @,@ 450 pupils and also serves as a centre for lifelong learning classes . In the town centre is Northumberland College 's Blyth centre , as well as the public library , which holds a large collection of local studies resources . 
 Bede Academy , a school for children aged three to 18 sponsored by Sir Peter Vardy through the Emmanuel Schools Foundation opened in September 2009 . Bede Academy is built on the former grounds of Ridley High School ( formerly Newlands ) . 
 = = Entertainment and leisure = = 
 = = = Events and venues = = = 
 Held every July , the annual Blyth Town Summer Fair takes place in and around the market place and hosts many attractions , such as music performances , arts and crafts exhibitions , fairground rides and children 's entertainment . The Blyth Town Christmas Fayre is also held in the market place and features a similar range of family entertainment . Close to the town centre is an intimate , 299 seat theatre called the Phoenix Theatre . It presents a regular programme of professional performing arts to the local community and has successfully brought amateur and professional practitioners alongside each other to develop work for the community . There were once four cinemas in Blyth , but with the closure of the <unk> in 2004 there are now none . The others — The Central , The <unk> and The Roxy — were all closed down in the 1960s and 1970s . 
 = = = Sport and recreation = = = 
 The town is home to the non @-@ League football club , Blyth Spartans . Founded in 1899 , they are currently in the Northern Premier League and play their home games at Croft Park . They are notable for their " giant @-@ killing " feats in the FA Cup , particularly those of the 1977 – 78 season , when they reached the fifth round . The town 's other non @-@ League football club is Blyth Town , who were established in 1995 and play in the Wade Associates Northern Alliance Premier Division . Also based in Blyth are Blyth RFC who hold host to the Blyth Cricket Club at the Blyth Rugby Football Club , which was formed in 1883 and competes in the Northumberland Cricket League , and the Blyth Renegades basketball club , which is run by local after school activity provider , Aspire 2 Achieve . 
 Blyth Sports Centre offers a wide range of facilities including two swimming pools , a sports hall , squash courts , fitness suite , saunas , outdoor skate park , and more . Blyth Golf Club is situated on the outskirts of the town at New Delaval , and has an 18 hole course with a par of 72 . Royal Northumberland Yacht Club has its headquarters in the South Harbour . <unk> offers crewing and sailing opportunities and is a Royal Yachting Association Training Centre for sail cruising and powerboating for its members . 
 = = = Parks and open spaces = = = 
 Ridley Park was created on land handed over by Viscount Matthew White Ridley and was opened on 27 July 1904 . In June 2005 , a £ 602 @,@ 000 regeneration project was completed , which saw the installation of a children 's water play area and upgrading of existing play facilities at the southern end of the park . The Quayside is a stretch of the riverfront that was once a centre of Blyth 's industry , where coal would be loaded from trains onto ships for export , but having undergone major redevelopment , it is now a clean and peaceful area . Notable features of the Quayside include the " Spirit of the Staithes " sculpture and eleven " solar sound posts " which , when approached , replay pre @-@ recorded stories relating to the port told by local people . Blyth 's largest and most natural open space is its beach and sand dunes , which stretch from the mouth of the river to Seaton Sluice . The dunes were declared a Local Nature Reserve by Blyth Valley Borough Council in December 2003 , and are also an area of Special Nature Conservation Interest . They are notable for their diverse range of plant life , butterflies , moths and birds , as well as being one of only two coastal locations in the country inhabited by both species of banded land snail — Cepaea nemoralis and Cepaea hortensis . 
 = = Landmarks and places of interest = = 
 The " Spirit of the Staithes " sculpture on Blyth 's Quayside was unveiled by Princess Anne on 28 May 2003 . As part of the overall regeneration of the Quayside , it was commissioned by Blyth Valley Council in conjunction with Northern Arts and created by the artist Simon Packard . Standing 15 metres ( 50 ft ) high and 7 metres ( 22 ft ) wide , it represents the heritage of coal distribution in Europe , an industry in which Blyth was the largest exporter . 
 The " High Light " lighthouse is one of Blyth 's oldest structures . It stands to the rear of Bath Terrace and is 18 @.@ 74 m ( 61 ft 6 in ) tall . Built in three stages , the first section was constructed in 1788 to a height of 10 @.@ 66 m ( 35 ft 0 in ) ; a further 4 @.@ 26 m ( 14 ft 0 in ) was added in 1888 , and the final 3 @.@ 82 m ( 12 ft 6 in ) was added in 1900 . The original oil @-@ fired lamp had a range of 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ) ; it was upgraded to gas in 1857 and electricity in 1932 . Prior to land reclamation in the late 19th century , the lighthouse had been much closer to the quayside . At some stage it became the rear of a pair of leading lights , and known as the ' High Light ' ; the corresponding ' low light ' has long since been demolished . Blyth High Light was deactivated in 1985 and listed Grade II on 15 July 1987 . 
 Before their demolition , the four chimneys of Blyth Power Station dominated the landscape along the coast . Two were 167 m ( 548 ft ) high , the other two were 137 m ( 449 ft ) high , and they were visible for many miles . 
 On the north side of the River Blyth are the remains of the railway coal staithes which featured in the chase scene at the end of the 1971 film Get Carter , starring Michael Caine . 
 = = = Printed sources and further reading = = = 
 Balmer , Bob ( 2002 ) [ 1997 ] . Images of England : Blyth ( 3rd ed . ) . Tempus Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Balmer , Bob ; Smith , Gordon ( 2004 ) . Images of England : Blyth volume II . Tempus Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = The Blackest Beautiful = 
 The Blackest Beautiful is the third studio album by American post @-@ hardcore band letlive . It was released by Epitaph Records on July 9 , 2013 . Recorded between June 2012 and January 2013 , the album used four different drum sessions , and went through ten recording engineers before settling on Stephen George . The drums were recorded with session musician Christopher Crandall , in the absence of the band having a permanent drummer at the time . The album incorporated a variety of music styles based on its members , including punk rock , funk , and soul ; it was mastered and mixed to have a " more human " and " organic " sound . 
 Although the album was not expected to sell well because it was streamed for free prior to release , it still debuted in the United States at number 74 on the Billboard 200 and number six on the Hard Rock Albums chart , with nearly five thousand copies sold . The band toured the United Kingdom and Ireland to support the album , and joined other bands on tours across the United States . Critics welcomed the album , praising its crisp production and forward @-@ thinking sound within post @-@ hardcore , with Metacritic giving an aggregate rating of " universal acclaim " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jason <unk> Butler , the band 's front @-@ man and remaining founding member , described the group 's first releases , extended play Exhaustion , Saltwater , And Everything In Between ( 2004 ) and debut album Speak Like You Talk ( 2005 ) , as " educational experiences " in writing whole songs rather than " cool bits " for songs . Music journalist Andrew Kelham wrote that the era these " raw hardcore punk " records were produced in was plagued by " potential [ that ] was never realised as an ever @-@ revolving door of musicians cause the band to limp through Jason 's late teens and early twenties . " With the second album , Fake History , the band felt they found their " signature sound " . In 2008 , when performing as a substitute opening support band for Bring Me the Horizon 's show in Los Angeles , they caught the attention of Brett Gurewitz , owner of Epitaph Records , who later signed the band and re @-@ released their second album in 2011 . 
 = = Recording , production = = 
 In 2010 , <unk> began writing on the third album . Butler said that their writing approach changed in comparison to their previous releases , as they were now doing most of it while on tour . During pre @-@ production , the band listened to styles and ideas that , according to Butler , changed the way they looked at the songs they had initially written . The styles were their most expansive to date , and came from the diversity of their members : Butler had involved himself in the punk rock skateboarding culture when he was eleven , but had also been influenced by his father , who was in a soul band . 
 When they began recording in studio in June 2012 , the band 's members felt little pressure to complete the album as they could deliver something similar to their previous album " if you 've delivered once already , why would it be a problem to do it again ? We are the band that made those records [ ... ] so there 's really no problem in that regard . " Guitarist Jeff Sahyoun said he did not even think back on Fake History when they were producing The Blackest Beautiful . However , as they progressed through it , there were elements that were not clicking , and the performances lacked the same bite in comparison to their Fake History demos . Butler said that this " almost sent the band crazy " . He said he required a specific environment when he sings as his performance puts him in a vulnerable state . 
 During a tour where they supported Underoath in October , they brought their studio equipment with them , which allowed them to record on the road . Butler said " It was like we 'd have a pop up studio in a bathroom in South Florida or in the woods off the highway in Wyoming . " In December , the band felt they were done with recordings ; Butler said " there was absolutely nothing left to try " , and walked away from the project . The band had recorded the drums on four different occasions . They finished recording at a static studio in January 2013 . 
 Although there was increasing demand from fans , the band took their time with mixing and producing . Butler said the pressure was more rooted in giving the fans an album they deserve rather than meeting the expectations of the band . He said it was " one of the hardest processes I 've endured as a human being , not just as an artist , but ever . " Because Fake History was perceived by fans as sounding overproduced , the band strove for an " organic and authentic " sound that was " very human " and that reflected the sound of their live performances . They took " an analogue route " , where they used the test mix of the album as it " spoke to them " in its raw energy . After going through ten different sound engineers , they went with Stephen George , whom Sahyoun said " just added little diamonds and made it pop " , so the album sonically reminded them of their influences . 
 During the recording sessions , drummer Anthony Rivera left the band . Butler said the departure was an " amicable split " : " sometimes you simply need more than what the artist lifestyle gives you , and that 's fine " . Chris Crandall replaced Rivera for the studio sessions , and <unk> Robinson , a drum tech from the band Of Mice and Men replaced Crandall following the album release . 
 = = Artwork , packaging = = 
 When the band was creating the album art , they intended to create something provocative and captivating and so they experimented with how " black and white American flags could represent " a much bigger idea of the sterilization that we are experiencing . " The title is a play on the saying " Black is beautiful " and how it acts as an opposition to everything that society is saying otherwise . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Blackest Beautiful was described as a post @-@ hardcore record , much like its predecessors , from " screaming rage to tight , sophisticated harmonies to frenzied funky riffing to emotively melodic parts " . Mike Diver of Clash considered it a pop record with clear , melodic structure , while others grouped it with punk rock , soul , and funk , as well as displaying ' glimpses ' of other music styles including Afrobeat , electronica and jazz . The incorporation of funk music has been noted by critics . Stephen Hill described the album as " find [ ing ] the space between DC Hardcore and Stax funk " . James McMahon described the album as being " dragged through the civil rights movement , through 80s New York block parties , through the birth of hip @-@ hop , funk , jazz and soul . " Terry Bezer in Front found that the album has ' as much in common with funk as punk ' and wrote in Metal Hammer that the album features ' the musical dexterity and reckless abandon of razor @-@ edged funk ' . <unk> 's ferocity and use of dynamics have led critics to draw comparisons to rock bands Glassjaw , At the Drive @-@ in , Refused , Black Flag and Deftones . Bezer cited three albums as primary influences on the The Blackest Beautiful : Raised Fist 's Veil of Ignorance and its " tempo changes , fury and non @-@ stop fire " ; Prince 's Love Symbol Album and funk style ; and Public Enemy 's It Takes A Nation Of Millions for its confrontational and " fight for what 's right " lyrics . Butler said that there was a poetic play in their combination of melody and chaos on the album : " I think the best way for us as musicians to get people to listen is to appeal to them . Appeal to the natural rhythm of the head bob , the beating of the heart , the tap of the foot ; just find that area and utilize it properly and say something . " 
 The album 's lead single , " Banshee ( Ghost Fame ) " , was described as an " unholy collision of Refused and Rage Against the Machine " . " White America ’ s Beautiful Black Market " was a " rock rap crossover affair " , a protest song about the relationship between the corporations and the United States government , as they are " sucking the dicks of corporations " . " Empty Elvis " was described as " condensing Glassjaw 's whole career into three mouth @-@ <unk> [ sic ] exciting minutes " . " That Fear Fever " fused rock , pop and metal . " Virgin Dirt " was described as a " post @-@ rock epic " . The tracks " Younger " and " The Dope Beat " were listed as examples of the band 's " staggering dynamics , brain @-@ burrowing melodies and intelligent production tricks " . " Pheromone Cvlt " showed the band 's " blend of deranged hardcore and aching soul " ; Bezer wrote that the track possesses ' Prince levels of funked up cool ' . " 27 Club " was a " blistering seven @-@ minute epic " about living life either selflessly or selfishly , with " rampages from Hendrix riffs to reggae " . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The album 's lyrics are described as ' politically , socially and personally conscious ' , incorporating themes such as corporate greed , racism and growing up in a broken home . Butler says it is " an ode to the disenfranchised and disaffected youth " and about accepting that we will never be perfect . Some of the lyrics reflect on his early life where he had to raise his sister and grow up at the same time . He added ambiguity to the lyrics to " facilitate " ideas for the listeners . Freeman said that the lyrics " reveal just how self @-@ aware he is , which is a good counterpoint to those who feel that his constant vocalizing equates to selfishness . " 
 " Banshee ( Ghost Fame ) " describes the differences between music as an art form and as an industry . " The Priest and Used Cars " talks about clockwork theory and how it put the fear of death into Butler when he was younger . " Pheromone Cvlt " was about how tired he was with women telling him how broken he is and how he needs to be fixed , and how he wants to find someone who wants to find someone who was not with him because he was a " fucking mess " . Butler commented how the lyrics of " 27 Club " focus on " when people assume I 'm pumped full of drugs or a Christian . I 'm misidentified all the time " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album was initially announced in Rock Sound for a summer 2013 release ; later specified to be July 9 , 2013 . A few weeks prior to its release , the album was streamed online for free . Although Butler acknowledged that the strategy would mean the album would not sell well , he said " It 's not about how many people it reaches but that it makes them feel something . " 
 The band toured the United Kingdom and Ireland in October , playing songs from both Fake History and The Blackest Beautiful . Many of the dates were sold out ; London 's date was met with such high demand that it was upgraded to a larger venue from the Camden Underworld to the Electric Ballroom . 
 In November and December , the band returned to the United States where they supported Every Time I Die with Code Orange Kids . 
 In February and March 2014 , the band supported Bring Me the Horizon for their Sempiternal album , joining groups Of Mice & Men and Issues on The American Dream Tour . From April to May , they co @-@ headlined a tour with Architects for their album Lost Forever / / Lost Together , with support from Glass Cloud and I The Mighty . On August 26 , they and Architects supported A Day To Remember at a postponed event at the Cardiff <unk> Arena . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The album received an aggregate score of 86 / 100 at Metacritic , based on 12 reviews , signifying " universal acclaim " . Kerrang ! editor James <unk> gave the album five out of five " K " s , classing The Blackest Beautiful as a " classic " , praising the inclusion of producers Kit Walters and Stephen George . He wrote : " What The Blackest Beautiful certainly is , though , is the sound of letlive. right here and right now . And right now , letlive. sound amazing . Get Down . " Metal Hammer writer Stephen Hill gave the album a nine out of ten , saying " it 's hard to pick out highlights when every track sounds so fresh , joyous and casually rule @-@ book torching " and that " this is the kind of album that changes people 's lives " . Chris Hidden of Rock Sound also gave a nine out of ten , calling it a " bold record " and highlighting its fusion of " staggering dynamics , brain @-@ burrowing melodies and intelligent production " . 
 Fred Thomas of Allmusic noted how the album is " technically dazzling and soulfully delivered aggression " . Tom Doyle of This Is Fake DIY wrote that the album is a " punch in the gut to whatever expectations you might have about letlive . " Channing Freeman of Sputnikmusic said while the songs lack the same immediacy in comparison to those on Fake History , they have more longevity . Although Mike Diver of Clash Music liked the album overall , he said that " Pheromone Cvlt " was " placid " and " Virgin Dirt " was " losing sting " . 
 However , Dave Simpson , writing for The Guardian , criticized the album 's " adolescent , cliched lyrics " , especially from the track ' The Priest and Used Cars ' . 
 = = = Media picks = = = 
 End of Year awards 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The album debuted in the United States at number 74 on the Billboard 200 and number six on Hard Rock Albums , selling nearly five thousand copies . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted at number 62 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by letlive . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 letlive . 
 Jason <unk> Butler – lead vocals 
 Ryan Jay Johnson – bass , backing vocals 
 Jean Francisco Nascimento – guitar , keyboard 
 Jeff Sahyoun – guitar , backing vocals 
 Additional personnel 
 Christopher Crandall – drums , percussion 
 Staff 
 Kit Walters – producer 
 Stephen George – mixing 
 Jonathan Weiner – Album artwork and layout 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Washington State Route 163 = 
 State Route 163 ( SR 163 ) is a 3 @.@ 37 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 5 @.@ 42 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington . The highway serves the city of Tacoma and the community of Ruston in Pierce County before traveling via a ferry route to the community of Tahlequah on Vashon Island in King County . SR 163 begins at an interchange with SR 16 in Tacoma and travels north as Pearl Street through Ruston to Point Defiance , where the designation continues onto the MV Chetzemoka ferry to Tahlequah . 
 SR 163 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering , extending from Sumner to Auburn . The highway was previously a part of the Pacific Highway during the early 20th century , but was designated as a branch of State Road 5 and Primary State Highway 5 ( PSH 5 ) until 1964 . SR 163 became SR 167 during the late 1960s and was moved to Pearl Street in 1991 , with the ferry route being added in 1994 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 163 begins as Pearl Street at a partial cloverleaf interchange with the SR 16 freeway in Tacoma north of Tacoma Community College . Pearl Street travels north , serving Woodrow Wilson High School and Truman Middle School , before leaving Tacoma and entering Ruston and serving Point Defiance Elementary School . The highway re @-@ enters Tacoma at Point Defiance Park and passes the Science and Math Institute before traveling onto the Point Defiance – Tahlequah Ferry . 
 The ferry , operated by Washington State Ferries ( WSF ) , is on a 1 @.@ 7 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) route and is served by the Kwa @-@ di <unk> class MV Chetzemoka traveling at a speed of 15 knots ( 17 mph ) for a 15 @-@ minute crossing . The ferries depart from Port Defiance and head north across the <unk> Passage to the community of Tahlequah on Vashon Island . WSF operates the ferry every day with 19 crossings , as a $ 5 toll for adult passengers is charged with prepaid Wave2Go cards being accepted . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that between 1 @,@ 000 and 26 @,@ 000 vehicles per day used the highway , mostly at the SR 16 interchange in Tacoma . The Point Defiance – Tahlequah ferry carried 650 @,@ 000 passengers and 383 @,@ 000 vehicles in 2012 , according to WSF statistics . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 163 was first designated during the 1964 highway renumbering as a road extending from U.S. Route 410 in Sumner to SR 18 in Auburn . The corridor was previously a part of the Pacific Highway from 1913 to 1923 , and later became a branch of State Road 5 in 1925 . State Road 5 became PSH 5 during the creation of the Primary and secondary state highways in 1937 , and the branch stayed designated . SR 163 was removed from the highway system in the late 1960s , and became part of SR 167 . 
 SR 163 was re @-@ designated in 1991 along Pearl Street from SR 16 in Tacoma to the Point Defiance ferry terminal . The route was extended onto the Point Defiance – Tahlequah Ferry serving Vashon Island in 1994 . No major revisions have occurred since 1994 to the highway 's route . 
 Regular ferry service on the <unk> Passage between Point Defiance in Tacoma and Tahlequah on Vashon Island started with the MV <unk> in June 1951 during the creation of the WSF , and served the route until the completion of the MV Hiyu in 1967 . The Hiyu operated for 26 years until it was replaced by the refurbished MV Rhododendron in 1993 . The Hiyu briefly returned to the route twice , in June 2008 and in September and October 2008 , while the Rhododendron was loaned out to Pierce County for the Steilacoom – Anderson Island ferry . The MV Chetzemoka , built in 2010 , began serving the route in January 2012 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Never Say Never Again = 
 Never Say Never Again is a 1983 British spy film directed by Irvin Kershner , produced by Jack Schwartzman , and written by Lorenzo Semple Jr. with uncredited additional co @-@ writers Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais , from a story by Kevin McClory , Jack Whittingham , and Ian Fleming . It is the second adaption of Fleming 's Thunderball , which was previously adapted as the 1965 film of the same name . Unlike the majority of Bond films , Never Say Never Again was not produced by Eon Productions , but by an independent production company , one of whose members was Kevin McClory . McClory , one of the original writers of the Thunderball storyline , retained the filming rights of the novel following a rights controversy . 
 Sean Connery played the role of James Bond for the seventh time , marking his return to the character 12 years after Diamonds Are Forever . The film 's title is a reference to Connery 's reported declaration in 1971 that he would " never again " play that role . As Connery was 52 at the time of filming , the storyline features an aging Bond , who is brought back into action to investigate the theft of two nuclear weapons by SPECTRE . Filming locations included France , Spain , the Bahamas and Elstree Studios in England . 
 Never Say Never Again was released by Warner Bros. in autumn 1983 , opening to positive reviews and was a commercial success , grossing $ 160 million at the box office , although less overall than the Eon @-@ produced Octopussy released in the same year . Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , to date , owns the distribution rights and distributes Eon 's Bond films , and the company has handled subsequent home video releases of the film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After MI6 agent James Bond , 007 , fails a routine training exercise , his superior , M , orders Bond to a health clinic outside London to get back into shape . While there , Bond witnesses a mysterious nurse named Fatima Blush giving a sadomasochistic beating to a patient in a nearby room . The man 's face is bandaged and after Blush finishes her beating , Bond sees the patient using a machine which scans his eye . Bond is seen by Blush and an attempt is subsequently made to kill him in the clinic gym , but Bond manages to defeat the assassin . 
 Blush and her charge , a United States Air Force pilot named Jack Petachi , are operatives of SPECTRE , a criminal organisation run by Ernst Stavro Blofeld . Petachi has undergone an operation on his right eye to make it match the retinal pattern of the US President , which he uses to circumvent iris recognition security at an American military base in England . While doing so , he replaces the dummy warheads of two cruise missiles with live nuclear warheads ; SPECTRE then steals the warheads , intending to extort billions of dollars from NATO governments . Blush murders Petachi to cover SPECTRE 's tracks . 
 Under orders from the Prime Minister , M reluctantly reactivates the double @-@ 0 section and Bond is assigned the task of tracking down the missing weapons . He meets Domino Petachi , the pilot 's sister , and her wealthy lover , Maximillian Largo , a SPECTRE agent . Bond follows Largo and his yacht to the Bahamas , where he spars with Blush and Largo . 
 Bond is informed by Nigel Small @-@ Fawcett of the British Consulate that Largo 's yacht is now heading for Nice , France . There , Bond joins forces with his CIA counterpart , Felix Leiter . Bond goes to a beauty salon where he poses as an employee and , whilst giving Domino a massage , is informed by her that Largo is hosting an event at a casino that evening . At the charity event , Largo and Bond play a 3 @-@ D video game called Domination ; the loser of each turn receives a series of electric shocks of increasing intensity or pays a corresponding cash bet . Bond ultimately wins . While dancing with Domino , Bond informs her that her brother had been killed on Largo 's orders . Bond returns to his villa to find that Nicole , his French contact , has been killed by Blush . After a vehicle chase on his motorbike , Blush captures Bond . She admits that she is impressed with him , and forces Bond to declare in writing that she is his " Number One " sexual partner . Bond distracts her with promises , then uses his Q @-@ branch @-@ issue fountain pen to shoot Blush with an explosive dart . 
 Bond and Leiter attempt to board Largo 's motor yacht , the Flying Saucer , in search of the missing nuclear warheads . Bond finds Domino . He attempts to make Largo jealous by kissing Domino in front of a two way mirror . Largo becomes enraged , traps Bond and takes him and Domino to Palmyra , Largo 's base of operations in North Africa . Largo coldly punishes Domino for her betrayal by selling her to some passing Arabs . Bond subsequently escapes and rescues her . 
 Domino and Bond reunite with Leiter on a United States Navy submarine and track Largo to a location known as the Tears of Allah , below a desert oasis on the Ethiopian Coast . Bond and Leiter infiltrate the underground facility and a gun battle erupts between Leiter 's team and Largo 's men in the temple . In the confusion Largo makes a getaway with one of the warheads . Bond catches and fights Largo underwater . Just as Largo tries to detonate the last bomb , he is killed by Domino , taking revenge for her brother 's death . Bond returns to the Bahamas with Domino . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sean Connery as James Bond , MI6 agent 007 . 
 Kim Basinger as Domino Petachi , sister of Jack Petachi and girlfriend / mistress of Maximillian Largo . 
 Klaus Maria Brandauer as Maximillian Largo ; based on the character Emilio Largo , a senior member of SPECTRE . 
 Barbara Carrera as Fatima Blush ; based on Fiona Volpe and a member of SPECTRE . 
 Rowan Atkinson as Nigel Small @-@ Fawcett , Foreign Office representative in the Bahamas . 
 Bernie Casey as Felix Leiter , Bond 's CIA contact and friend . 
 Max von Sydow as Ernst Stavro Blofeld , the head of SPECTRE . 
 Edward Fox as M , Bond 's superior at MI6 . 
 Gavan O 'Herlihy as Jack Petachi , a pilot used by SPECTRE to steal the nuclear missiles . He is Domino Petachi 's brother . 
 Alec McCowen as Q ( also known as Algy ) 
 Ronald Pickup as Elliott , a government agent working under M 
 Pamela Salem as Miss Moneypenny , M 's secretary 
 Saskia Cohen <unk> as Nicole , Bond 's MI6 contact in France 
 Prunella Gee as Patricia Fearing , a physiotherapist at the clinic 
 Valerie Leon as Lady in Bahamas 
 John Stephen Hill as Communications Officer 
 <unk> <unk> as Kovacs 
 Pat Roach as Lippe 
 Anthony Sharp as Lord Ambrose 
 = = Production = = 
 Never Say Never Again had its origins in the early 1960s , following the controversy over the 1961 Thunderball novel . Fleming had worked with independent producer Kevin McClory and scriptwriter Jack Whittingham on a script for a potential Bond film , to be called Longitude 78 West , which was subsequently abandoned because of the costs involved . Fleming , " always reluctant to let a good idea lie idle " , turned this into the novel Thunderball , for which he did not credit either McClory or Whittingham ; McClory then took Fleming to the High Court in London for breach of copyright and the matter was settled in 1963 . After Eon Productions started producing the Bond films , it subsequently made a deal with McClory , who would produce Thunderball , and then not make any further version of the novel for a period of ten years following the release of the Eon @-@ produced version in 1965 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s McClory again started working on a project to bring a Thunderball adaptation to production and , with the working title Warhead , he brought writer Len Deighton together with Sean Connery to work on a script . The script ran into difficulties after accusations from Eon Productions that the project had gone beyond copyright restrictions , which confined McClory to a film based on the Thunderball novel only , and once again the project was deferred . 
 Towards the end of the 1970s developments were reported on the project under the name James Bond of the Secret Service , but when producer Jack Schwartzman became involved and cleared a number of the legal issues that still surrounded the project he brought on board scriptwriter Lorenzo Semple , Jr. to work on the screenplay . Connery was unhappy with some aspects of the work and asked Tom Mankiewicz who had rewritten Diamonds Are Forever to work on the script ; however Mankiewicz declined as he felt he was under a moral obligation to Cubby Broccoli . Connery then hired British television writers Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais to undertake re @-@ writes , although they went uncredited for their efforts because of a restriction by the Writers Guild of America . 
 The film underwent one final change in title : after Connery had finished filming Diamonds Are Forever he had pledged that he would " never " play Bond again . Connery 's wife , Micheline , suggested the title Never Say Never Again , referring to her husband 's vow and the producers acknowledged her contribution by listing on the end credits " Title " Never Say Never Again " by : Micheline Connery " . A final attempt by Fleming 's trustees to block the film was made in the High Court in London in the spring of 1983 , but this was thrown out by the court and Never Say Never Again was permitted to proceed . 
 = = = Cast and crew = = = 
 When producer Kevin McClory had first planned the film in 1964 he held initial talks with Richard Burton for the part of Bond , although the project came to nothing because of the legal issues involved . When the Warhead project was launched in the late 1970s , a number of actors were mentioned in the trade press , including Orson Welles for the part of Blofeld , Trevor Howard to play M and Richard Attenborough as director . 
 In 1978 the working title James Bond of the Secret Service was being used and Connery was in the frame once again , potentially going head @-@ to @-@ head with the next Eon Bond film , Moonraker . By 1980 , with legal issues again causing the project to founder , Connery thought himself unlikely to play the role , as he stated in an interview in the Sunday Express : " when I first worked on the script with Len I had no thought of actually being in the film " . When producer Jack Schwartzman became involved , he asked Connery to play Bond ; Connery agreed , asking ( and getting ) a fee of $ 3 million , ( $ 7 million in 2016 dollars ) a percentage of the profits , as well as casting and script approval . Subsequent to Connery reprising the role , the script has several references to Bond 's advancing years – playing on Connery being 52 at the time of filming – and academic Jeremy Black has pointed out that there are other aspects of age and disillusionment in the film , such as the <unk> 's porter referring to Bond 's car ( " They don 't make them like that anymore . " ) , the new M having no use for the 00 section and Q with his reduced budgets . 
 For the main villain in the film , Maximillian Largo , Connery suggested Klaus Maria Brandauer , the lead of the 1981 Academy Award @-@ winning Hungarian film Mephisto . Through the same route came Max von Sydow as Ernst Stavro Blofeld , although he still retained his Eon @-@ originated white cat in the film . For the femme fatale , director Irvin Kershner selected former model and Playboy cover girl Barbara Carrera to play Fatima Blush – the name coming from one of the early scripts of Thunderball . Carrera 's performance as Fatima Blush earned her a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress , which she lost to Cher for her role in Silkwood . Micheline Connery , Sean 's wife , had met up @-@ and @-@ coming actress Kim Basinger at a hotel in London and suggested her to Connery , which he agreed upon . For the role of Felix Leiter , Connery spoke with Bernie Casey , saying that as the Leiter role was never remembered by audiences , using a black Leiter might make him more memorable . Others cast included comedian Rowan Atkinson , who would later parody Bond in his role of Johnny English . 
 Former Eon Productions ' editor and director of On Her Majesty 's Secret Service , Peter R. Hunt , was approached to direct the film but declined due to his previous work with Eon . Irvin Kershner , who had achieved success in 1980 with The Empire Strikes Back was then hired . A number of the crew from the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark were also appointed , including first assistant director David Tomblin , director of photography Douglas Slocombe and production designers Philip Harrison and Stephen Grimes . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming for Never Say Never Again began on 27 September 1982 on the French Riviera for two months before moving to Nassau , the Bahamas in mid @-@ November where filming took place at Clifton Pier , which was also one of the locations used in Thunderball . The Spanish city of Almería was also used as a location . Largo 's Palmyran fortress was actually historic Fort Carré in Antibes . For Largo 's ship , the Flying Saucer , the yacht <unk> , owned by Saudi billionaire , Adnan Khashoggi , was used . The boat , now owned by Prince Al @-@ Waleed bin Talal , has subsequently been renamed the Kingdom <unk> . Principal photography finished at Elstree Studios where interior shots were filmed . Elstree also housed the Tears of Allah underwater cavern , which took three months to construct . Most of the filming was completed in the spring of 1983 , although there was some additional shooting during the summer of 1983 . 
 Production on the film was troubled , with Connery taking on many of the production duties with assistant director David Tomblin . Director Irvin Kershner was critical of producer Jack Schwartzman , saying that whilst he was a good businessman , " he didn 't have the experience of a film producer " . After the production ran out of money , Schwartzman had to fund further production out of his own pocket and later admitted he had underestimated the amount the film would cost to make . 
 Steven Seagal , who was the fight choreographer for this film , broke Connery 's wrist while training . On an episode of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , Connery revealed he did not know his wrist was broken until over a decade later . 
 Many of the elements of the Eon @-@ produced Bond films were not present in Never Say Never Again for legal reasons . These included the gun barrel sequence , where a screen full of 007 symbols appeared instead , and similarly there was no " James Bond Theme " to use , although no effort was made to supply another tune . A pre @-@ credits sequence was filmed but not used ; instead the film opens with the credits run over the top of the opening sequence of Bond on a training mission . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Never Say Never Again was written by Michel Legrand , who composed a score similar to his work as a jazz pianist . The score has been criticised as " anachronistic and misjudged " , " bizarrely intermittent " and " the most disappointing feature of the film " . Legrand also wrote the main theme " Never Say Never Again " , which featured lyrics by Alan and Marilyn Bergman — who had also worked with Legrand in the Academy Award winning song , " The Windmills of Your Mind " — and was performed by Lani Hall after Bonnie Tyler , who disliked the song , had reluctantly declined . 
 Phyllis Hyman also recorded a potential theme song , written by Stephen Forsyth and Jim Ryan , but the song — an unsolicited submission — was passed over given Legrand 's contractual obligations with the music . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Never Say Never Again premiered in New York on 7 October 1983 , grossing $ 9 @.@ 72 million ( $ 23 million in 2016 dollars ) on its first weekend , which was reported to be " the best opening record of any James Bond film " up to that point and surpassing Octopussy 's $ 8 @.@ 9 million ( $ 21 million in 2016 dollars ) from June that year . The film went on general release in the US in 1 @,@ 500 cinemas on 14 October 1983 and had its UK premiere at the Warner West End cinema in Leicester Square on 14 December 1983 . Worldwide , Never Say Never Again grossed $ 160 million in box office returns , which was a solid return on the budget of $ 36 million . 
 Warner Bros. released Never Say Never Again on VHS and Betamax in 1984 , and on laserdisc in 1995 . After Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer purchased the distribution rights in 1997 ( see Legacy , below ) , the company has released the film on both VHS and DVD in 2001 , and on Blu @-@ ray in 2009 . 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 Never Say Never Again was broadly welcomed and praised by the critics : Ian Christie , writing in the Daily Express , said that Never Say Never Again was " one of the better Bonds " , finding the film " superbly witty and entertaining , ... the dialogue is crisp and the fight scenes imaginative . " Christie also thought that " Connery has lost none of his charm and , if anything , is more appealing than ever as the stylish resolute hero . " David Robinson , writing in The Times also concentrated on Connery , saying that : " Connery ... is back , looking hardly a day older or thicker , and still outclassing every other exponent of the role , in the <unk> throwaway with which he parries all the sex and violence on the way " . For Robinson , the presence of Connery and Klaus Maria Brandauer as Maximillian Largo " very nearly make it all worthwhile . " The reviewer for Time Out summed up Never Say Never Again saying " The action 's good , the photography excellent , the sets decent ; but the real clincher is the fact that Bond is once more played by a man with the right stuff . " 
 Derek Malcolm in The Guardian showed himself to be a fan of Connery 's Bond , saying the film contains " the best Bond in the business " , but nevertheless did not find Never Say Never Again any more enjoyable than the recently released Octopussy ( starring Roger Moore ) , or " that either of them came very near to matching Dr. No or From Russia with Love . " Malcolm 's main issue with the film was that he had a " feeling that a constant struggle was going on between a desire to make a huge box @-@ office success and the effort to make character as important as stunts . " Malcolm summed up that " the mix remains obstinately the same @-@ up to scratch but not surpassing it . " Writing in The Observer , Philip French noted that " this curiously muted film ends up making no contribution of its own and inviting damaging comparisons with the original , hyper @-@ confident Thunderball " . French concluded that " like an hour @-@ glass full of damp sand , the picture moves with increasing slowness as it approaches a confused climax in the Persian Gulf . " 
 Writing for Newsweek , critic Jack Kroll thought the early part of the film was handled " with wit and style " , although he went on to say that the director was " hamstrung by Lorenzo Semple 's script " . Richard Schickel , writing in Time magazine praised the film and its cast . He wrote that Klaus Maria Brandauer 's character was " played with silky , neurotic charm " , whilst Barbara Carrera , playing Fatima Blush , " deftly parodies all the fatal femmes who have slithered through Bond 's career " . Schickel 's highest praise was saved for the return of Connery , observing " it is good to see Connery 's grave stylishness in this role again . It makes Bond 's cynicism and opportunism seem the product of genuine worldliness ( and world weariness ) as opposed to Roger Moore 's mere <unk> . " 
 Janet Maslin , writing in The New York Times , was broadly praising of the film , saying she thought that Never Say Never Again " has noticeably more humor and character than the Bond films usually provide . It has a marvelous villain in Largo . " Maslin also thought highly of Connery in the role , observing that " in Never Say Never Again , the formula is broadened to accommodate an older , seasoned man of much greater stature , and Mr. Connery expertly fills the bill . " Writing in The Washington Post , Gary Arnold was fulsome in his praise , saying that Never Say Never Again is " one of the best James Bond adventure thrillers ever made " , going on to say that " this picture is likely to remain a cherished , savory example of commercial filmmaking at its most astute and accomplished . " Arnold went further , saying that " Never Say Never Again is the best acted Bond picture ever made , because it clearly surpasses any predecessors in the area of inventive and clever character delineation " . 
 The critic for The Globe and Mail , Jay Scott , also praised the film , saying that Never Say Never Again " may be the only instalment of the long @-@ running series that has been helmed by a first @-@ rate director " . According to Scott , the director , with high quality support cast , resulted in the " classiest of all the Bonds " . Roger Ebert gave the film 3 ½ out of 4 stars , and wrote that Never Say Never Again , while consisting of a basic " Bond plot " , was different from other Bond films : " For one thing , there 's more of a human element in the movie , and it comes from Klaus Maria Brandauer , as Largo . " Ebert went on to add , " there was never a Beatles reunion ... but here , by God , is Sean Connery as Sir James Bond . Good work , 007 . " 
 = = = Reflective reviews = = = 
 Because Never Say Never Again is not an Eon @-@ produced film , it has not been included in a number of subsequent reviews . Norman Wilner of MSN said that 1967 's Casino Royale and Never Say Never Again " exist outside the ' official ' continuity , [ and ] are excluded from this list , just as they 're absent from MGM 's <unk> . But take my word for it ; they 're both pretty awful " . Of the more recent reviews , opinion on Never Say Never Again is still mixed : film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes lists the film with a 63 % rating from 46 reviews . The score is still more positive than some of the Eon films , with Rotten Tomatoes ranking Never Say Never Again 16th among all Bond films in 2008 . Empire gives the film three of a possible five stars , observing that " Connery was perhaps wise to call it quits the first time round " . IGN gave Never Say Never Again a score of 5 out of 10 , claiming that the film " is more miss than hit " . The review also thought that the film was " marred with too many clunky exposition scenes and not enough moments of Bond being Bond " . 
 In 1995 Michael Sauter of Entertainment Weekly rated Never Say Never Again as the ninth best Bond film to that point , after 17 films had been released . Sauter thought the film " is successful only as a portrait of an over @-@ the @-@ hill superhero . " He did admit , however that " even past his prime , Connery proves that nobody does it better " . James Berardinelli , in his review of Never Say Never Again , thinks the re @-@ writing of the Thunderball story has led to a film which has " a hokey , jokey feel , [ it ] is possibly the worst @-@ written Bond script of all " . Berardinelli concludes that " it 's a major disappointment that , having lured back the original 007 , the film makers couldn 't offer him something better than this drawn @-@ out , hackneyed story . " Critic Danny Peary wrote that " it was great to see Sean Connery return as James Bond after a dozen years " . He also thought the supporting cast was good , saying that Klaus Maria Brandauer 's Largo was " neurotic , vulnerable ... one of the most complex of Bond 's foes " and that Barbara Carrera and Kim Basinger " make lasting impressions . " Peary also wrote that the " film is exotic , well acted , and stylishly directed ... It would be one of the best Bond films if the finale weren 't disappointing . When will filmmakers realize that underwater fight scenes don 't work because viewers usually can 't tell the hero and villain apart and they know doubles are being used ? " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the 1990s , McClory announced plans to make another adaptation of the Thunderball story starring Timothy Dalton entitled Warhead 2000 AD , but the film was eventually scrapped . In 1997 the Sony Corporation acquired some or all of McClory 's rights in an undisclosed deal , and subsequently announced that it intended to make a series of Bond films , as the company also held the rights to Casino Royale . This move prompted a round of litigation from MGM , which was settled out @-@ of @-@ court , forcing Sony to give up all claims on Bond ; McClory still claimed he would proceed with another Bond film , and continued his case against MGM and Danjaq ; on 27 August 2001 the court rejected McClory 's suit . McClory died in 2006 . 
 On 4 December 1997 , MGM announced that the company had purchased the rights to Never Say Never Again from Schwartzman 's company Taliafilm . The company has since handled the release of both the DVD and Blu @-@ ray editions of the film . 
 = New York State Route 65 = 
 New York State Route 65 ( NY 65 ) is a north – south state highway located in the western portion of New York in the United States . It extends for 18 @.@ 51 miles ( 29 @.@ 79 km ) from an intersection with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) and NY 5 in the Ontario County town of West Bloomfield to a junction with NY 96 in the Monroe County town of Brighton . In between , the route serves the village of Honeoye Falls and passes through the extreme northeastern corner of Livingston County . NY 65 intersects NY 251 in Mendon , NY 252 in Pittsford , and the regionally important NY 31 in Brighton . The southern half of NY 65 passes through mostly rural areas , while its northern section traverses densely populated portions of Monroe County . 
 NY 65 originally began at what is now US 20A in Honeoye when it was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; however , it was truncated to its current southern terminus in the late 1930s . No changes have been made to NY 65 's alignment since that time ; however , ownership and maintenance of the 1 @.@ 95 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 14 km ) portion of the route north of NY 31 was transferred to Monroe County at some point prior to 1990 . This section of NY 65 is co @-@ designated as the unsigned County Route 271 ( CR 271 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 65 begins at an intersection with US 20 and NY 5 in the West Bloomfield hamlet of the same name . It heads to the northwest as Ontario Street , passing through gradually less developed areas as it approaches the Ontario – Monroe county line . Just south of the line , however , the route enters the hamlet of North Bloomfield , a southeastern extension of Honeoye Falls located on the Livingston – Ontario county line . NY 65 passes into Livingston County in the town of Lima upon crossing over Honeoye Creek in the center of the community ; however , it remains in the county for just 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) before following Honeoye Creek into Monroe County and the village of Honeoye Falls in the town of Mendon situated on the county 's southern edge . 
 The Ontario Street name follows NY 65 northwestward through the southern half of the village , where it crosses back over Honeoye Creek before passing through the village 's residential center and entering its business district . Here , NY 65 turns west onto East Street and crosses Honeoye Creek again to reach an intersection with Main and Monroe Streets . Monroe Street , once designated NY 363 , is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . NY 65 turns north here , following North Main Street out of the village . Outside of Honeoye Falls , the route becomes Clover Street , a name it retains for the rest of its routing . 
 The highway heads onward through the town of Mendon , leaving the densely populated village and its lightly populated outskirts for the rolling , open areas that dominate much of southern Monroe County . Three miles ( 5 km ) to the north of Honeoye Falls , NY 65 intersects NY 251 by way of a roundabout northeast of the hamlet of Rochester Junction . The community , located on NY 251 , marks the point where the Lehigh Valley Railroad spur that went to the railroad 's station in downtown Rochester returned to the main line . The route continues onward , passing alongside the western edge of Mendon Ponds Park as it enters the town of Pittsford . At the northern edge of the park , NY 65 curves to the northeast and passes over the New York State Thruway ( Interstate 90 ) . 
 North of the Thruway , NY 65 intersects the eastern terminus of NY 253 and Calkins Road ( unsigned NY <unk> and a former extension of NY 253 ) at junctions roughly 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) apart . From this point northward , the route heads through much more developed areas , beginning with a series of housing tracts situated in the 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) between Calkins and Jefferson Roads , the latter carrying NY 252 . It continues on past NY 252 , taking on a more northerly routing as it crosses over the CSX Transportation @-@ owned West Shore Subdivision railroad line and the Erie Canal and passes through densely populated portions of Pittsford and Brighton . 
 Just inside the Brighton town line , NY 65 intersects NY 31 ( Monroe Avenue ) in a linear commercial district centered on NY 31 . At this point , maintenance of NY 65 shifts from NYSDOT to Monroe County , which maintains the route as the unsigned CR 271 . The route heads due northward for just under 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , paralleling I @-@ 590 and passing The Harley School before veering to the northeast ahead of an intersection with Elmwood Avenue . Both NY 65 and CR 271 end 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) later at a junction with East Avenue ( NY 96 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 All of what is now NY 65 , including the portion of the route north of modern NY 31 , was state @-@ maintained by 1926 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 65 was assigned to an alignment extending from NY 254 ( now US 20A ) in Honeoye northward to NY 15 ( now NY 96 ) in Brighton . The route followed the northernmost portion of what is now CR 37 from Honeoye to US 20 in West Bloomfield , from where it continued to Brighton on its current alignment . The section of NY 65 south of US 20 , which was not state @-@ owned in 1926 , was removed from the route c . 1938 . Farther north , ownership and maintenance of the portion of the route north of NY 31 was transferred to Monroe County by 1990 . 
 NY 65 originally had an overlap with NY 253 in the town of Pittsford . From the 1930 renumbering to the 1980s , NY 253 turned north onto NY 65 at its present eastern terminus and followed NY 65 north to Calkins Road , where NY 253 turned east and continued to the northeast toward Pittsford , East Rochester and Penfield . In the latter half of the 1980s , NY 253 was truncated to its present eastern terminus at NY 65 and the section of NY 253 from NY 96 north to NY 441 in East Rochester and Penfield was designated NY 153 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Dignity ( album ) = 
 Dignity is the fourth studio album by American recording artist Hilary Duff . It was released on March 21 , 2007 , by Hollywood Records . After launching her third record Hilary Duff ( 2004 ) , she experienced an eventful personal life , including a stalking incident , her parents ' separation , and breaking up with her boyfriend . Consequently , Duff assumed an integral position in its production , co @-@ writing almost every track with longtime collaborator Kara DioGuardi instead of her previously @-@ limited involvement . 
 Duff was musically inspired by indie rock band The Faint and pop singers Beyoncé and Gwen Stefani . In contrast to the pop rock themes of her prior releases , Dignity takes on more of a dance sound , which she said was not her intention while writing the album . The lyrics reference the events Duff experienced in the years leading to the album 's release , and the album 's songs contain influences of rock and roll and hip hop music . 
 Critical response was mostly positive ; the album was praised for its songwriting and her new musical direction . Upon release , Dignity debuted at number three in the US , a lower peak than Duff 's previous albums and with lower sales , which Billboard attributed to the loss of fans during her musical evolution . Despite this , it produced Duff 's highest @-@ peaking US single to date , " With Love " ( number 24 ) , and two US number one club hits . The album has reached the top ten in several countries and was certified Gold in the US by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Duff 's previous studio album , the self @-@ titled Hilary Duff ( 2004 ) , received generally negative reviews . Despite peaking at number two on the Billboard 200 , its commercial performance was modest : it exited the chart after 33 weeks and sold 1 @.@ 8 million copies in the United States . 
 Between the releases of Hilary Duff and Dignity , Duff 's personal life was eventful . In October 2006 , she and her boyfriend at the time , Joel Madden of punk rock band Good Charlotte , claimed that they were being stalked by Russian emigre Maksim Miakovsky and his roommate , paparazzo David Joseph Klein . According to a restraining order filed by Duff , Miakovsky came to the United States solely to pursue a relationship with her . He was later arrested after threatening to kill her . In November , she ended her two @-@ year relationship with Madden . Around the same time , her parents Robert and Susan separated after 22 years of marriage following an affair between Robert and another woman . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 Duff explained of the album 's title , " I 'm older and more mature now than I was when I made my last record , but I don 't think I know it all . Having dignity is something you work on your whole life , in how you treat people and how you treat yourself . I hope I always strive to have it . " She continued , " It 's not something that you can be given or that you can just get or that you 're born with . It 's something that you have to work on . " She stated that with Dignity , her increased songwriting output was a breakthrough for her . " That hadn 't really been part of my process on previous records , except here and there . It was important this time , " she said . She co @-@ wrote all of the album 's songs , with the exception of " Outside of You " , written by Pink , Chantal Kreviazuk and Raine Maida . In an interview , Maida stated that the song was written for a Pink album but did not make the final cut . When Duff expressed interest in the song , she recorded it . Duff explained of her writing process : 
 [ The album ] has all of me in it . I never did my records like that before . I got to choose the music , but this time around it was , like , I 'd sit down and think : ' What happened to me yesterday ? What happened to me today ? ' and just write . It was very therapeutic , in a way . And easy – I was shocked at how easy it was to be honest about yourself and things that affect you . It is a dance record , but I wanted it to be serious . I wanted to talk about serious things , but do it in a not @-@ so @-@ serious way , with music that makes you want to get up and dance . 
 Much of Dignity was written in Duff 's own home , as she felt " comfortable and free " there . She said that she knew from the beginning that she wanted to write the album with the assistance of songwriter and producer Kara DioGuardi , due to their previous work history on songs such as " Come Clean " and " Fly " . Another reason that Duff wished to work with her was that she found her lyrics were complemented by DioGuardi 's melodies . She added , " I helped with the melodies , but that 's not my strongest suit . Coming up with the lyrics was mainly [ what I did ] . I 'd tell her this is how I want it to go , and she would help with the lyrics , too , sometimes . She 'd say , ' This doesn 't really fit , ' and if I was adamant , we 'd make it work . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 As inspiration for the album , Duff cited indie rock band The Faint and pop singers such as Gwen Stefani and Beyoncé , while critics compared her musical style with Stefani , Janet Jackson , Depeche Mode , Madonna and Justin Timberlake . Duff felt that the album 's dance @-@ pop themes were a deviation from the pop rock of her previous albums . " I didn 't necessarily plan the album to sound like this , but it was so easy to write to , " she said . Critics have noted that Dignity 's musical style is dance @-@ pop and electropop , with influences of hip hop , rock and roll and Middle Eastern music . According to Duff , the album is a combination of dance , electro and rock music . 
 The lyrics of several songs relate to Duff 's experiences between the releases of Hilary Duff and Dignity . The songs " Stranger " and " Gypsy Woman " , despite speculation that they were written about Madden 's then @-@ new girlfriend Nicole Richie , were actually written about Duff 's father 's affair . She said that " Stranger " was written from her mother 's perspective . " Stranger is a song I wrote about how my mom must feel around my dad , " she said . " I made it seem like it was about a relationship I was in , because I didn 't want people to know about my parents . But I 've realized that so many people can relate to what I 've gone through . " The album 's title track has also been reported to be about Richie , though Duff did not deny rumors that it was . " Dignity is a song that is definitely about people in Hollywood " , she said . " I wouldn 't say that it is about her specifically but it is about people that kind of do what she does and act the way she acts . " The song " Danger " was written about one of Duff 's friends ' relationships with an older man . " I understand that feeling of wanting to be dangerous , " she said . " You may know morally something 's not right , but you can 't help yourself . " She has stated that the song " Dreamer " was written about a stalker in a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek fashion , and it has been speculated that it was written specifically about Miakovsky . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Three singles were released from the album . The lead single , " With Love " became her highest @-@ peaking single on the Hot 100 when it reached number 24 . The single reached number one on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . " Play with Fire " was released as the first digital @-@ only single on May 15 , 2007 in a remixed form of the original version , with production by Richard Vission . It was previously released on August 21 , 2006 which Duff considered to be a " tease " of Dignity 's musical sound . Although she felt it was different from the album 's other songs , she saw it as embodying the dance / electro / rock combination of the album , which influenced her decision to release it . Duff opted to release the song well in advance of the album " to give listeners a chance to get into my new sound " . Though it failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , it charted on the magazine 's Hot Dance Club Play chart , peaking at number 34 . The third and final single , " Stranger " , peaked at 97 on the Hot 100 and also reached the top of the dance charts . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the album 's release , Duff " worked tirelessly with the whole Hollywood Records staff to market [ the ] record . " On the day of the album 's release , April 3 , MTV began airing the two @-@ part documentary special , Hilary Duff : This Is Now . The documentary followed Duff as she prepared for the release of Dignity by attending photoshoots , interviews , wardrobe fittings , rehearsals and a trip to Europe . In addition , Duff hosted Total Request Live for the week of March 26 , made several appearances at retail outlets and on television , and was given massive online coverage on MySpace and Yahoo ! . 
 Accompanying Duff 's new musical style , the record label began promoting her with a more mature image . Duff dyed her hair dark and " sexed @-@ up " her image . According to Duff , she wanted to " try new things " , but the image change " just happened . It is not like a conscious change . People think it is so different because they have watched me grow up but that is just what happens in life . " Entertainment Weekly described Duff 's new look as comprising " dark mane , dental veneers , luxe and vampy fashions " . In mid @-@ 2007 , concurrent to the preparation of the radio release of " Stranger " , Duff was featured on the July covers of the magazines Us Weekly and Shape in a bikini , and on the August cover of Maxim accompanied by the declaration that she had gone " from the queen of teen to breakout sex symbol " . The Associated Press wrote that Duff 's more provocative image would help her singles to garner mainstream radio play . Guy <unk> , a radio consultant and former programmer for Top 40 radio , explained that " radio has a stigma about playing [ Disney ] acts , considering them teen and preteen in their appeal " , and that Duff 's provocative image would " definitely have a positive effect on the attitude of programmers , who are mostly male , as Disney tries to mature her image " . A bonus EP containing five bonus remixes was released exclusively to US <unk> stores as a package with the album . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The critical response to Dignity was generally positive . Metacritic gave the album a Metascore — a weighted average based on the impressions of a select 13 critical reviews — of 61 , signifying generally favorable reviews . Rolling Stone gave a positive review of the album , feeling that Duff 's attempt to make an adult @-@ oriented dance @-@ pop album was successful . About.com gave the album four out of five stars , called Duff " as likeable as ever " and praised the songwriting and production contributions of Richard Vission and will.i.am. Allmusic noted that the album was firmly based on " sturdy , hooky , and memorable " songwriting . The review claimed similarities between Dignity and Justin Timberlake 's FutureSex / LoveSounds ( 2006 ) , noting that Duff was musically fashionable but not a trendsetter . At the same time , the review criticized Duff 's thin vocals , calling them " not at all like a woman " . Billboard called Duff 's decision to make a dance @-@ pop album daring , considering the unpopularity of the genre at the time . The review continued , " It 's practically something straight out of the United Kingdom for all of its poppy goodness . " Entertainment Weekly noted that Duff 's break @-@ up with Madden brought out her personality , which the magazine felt was lacking in her previous work . " She 's never sounded less eager to please or more <unk> human , " the review claimed . 
 The Guardian praised Duff 's decision to opt for a more electronic dance sound as opposed to the teen pop of her previous work , despite the questionable marketability . They argued that some of the album 's strongest tracks rivaled some by Kylie Minogue . Sputnikmusic 's review noted various flaws of the album , such as what they felt were a lackluster guitar solo on the song " I Wish " and Duff 's childish , uncharacterized vocals throughout . However , they continued , " For all its inadequacies , Dignity is a solid , cleverly @-@ constructed pop album . Like all albums of the genre not written solely by the performer , it 's never quite clear which parts , if any , are Duff 's words and which represent the feelings of the under @-@ appreciated co @-@ writer , but in Dignity we at least have an album where it 's worthwhile listening to the lyrics . " They praised the songwriting of every track except " Play with Fire " , which they felt was a poor choice for a lead single . 
 IGN gave a more mixed review of Dignity , giving it 6 @.@ 9 out of 10 . They praised what they felt was Duff 's more mature image , but ultimately claimed , " Duff is still Duff and her music is still running the standard pop line . " PopMatters noted that the synthesizers used on the album 's tracks failed to disguise Duff 's speak @-@ singing . The website believed her vocals were not on the level of her pop music peers such as Kelly Clarkson and Mandy Moore . " Nevertheless , " they added , " thanks to the miracle of processing , reverb effects , and multi @-@ tracking tricks to beef up her vocals , Duff 's voice is still sweetly candy @-@ coated enough to make the medicine go down . " Slant Magazine said , " Duff is mostly just an anonymous voice for an assemblage of producers and songwriters . Which is perfectly acceptable for a self @-@ proclaimed dance album , but Duff 's voice is nondescript and her delivery is blank ; the impish , quirky , or coolly disaffected vocal characteristics and sex appeal that make other dance @-@ pop divas viable performers is nonexistent . " The website 's review claimed that the album was not very adventurous , and noted that the pop rock " Outside of You " , which they felt was the catchiest song on Dignity , was not a dance song like the others . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Dignity debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 , selling 140 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The debut was lower than those of Duff 's previous albums , each of which entered at either number one or two with opening week sales of around 200 @,@ 000 copies . Billboard wrote that Duff 's " continued evolution in sound and image ... may have resulted in her losing some of her much younger fans . " The album has sold a total of 412 @,@ 000 copies in the US by June , 2015 . The album debuted at number twenty @-@ five in the UK with first @-@ week sales of over 8 @,@ 000 copies . The album spent three weeks in the top seventy @-@ five of the UK Albums Chart . Dignity broke Duff 's streak of consecutive number @-@ one debuts in Canada , entering the albums chart at number three with 20 @,@ 000 copies sold . In response , Duff said she " couldn 't be happier " and felt lucky that Dignity sold the amount it did , noting the state of the marketplace and the moderate sales figures for other albums that week . The album debuted at number seventeen on the ARIA Albums Chart in Australia , selling roughly 2 @,@ 300 copies in its first week . The Herald Sun referred to it as " dead in the water " in its second week on the chart . In Italy , Dignity received a Gold certification from the FIMI for shipments to stores of more than 40 @,@ 000 copies . The album has sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional producer 
 ^ b signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ c signifies a remixer 
 " Dreamer " contains a sample of the song " Just Can 't Get Enough " By Depeche Mode 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for Dignity adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Raúl Alfonsín = 
 Raúl Ricardo Alfonsín Foulkes ( 12 March 1927 – 31 March 2009 ) was an Argentine lawyer , politician and statesman who served as the President of Argentina from 10 December 1983 , to 8 July 1989 . Born in Chascomús , Buenos Aires Province , he began his studies of law at the National University of La Plata and was a graduate of the University of Buenos Aires . He was affiliated with the Radical Civic Union ( UCR ) , joining the faction of Ricardo Balbín after the party split . 
 He was elected a deputy in the legislature of the Buenos Aires province in 1958 , during the presidency of Arturo Frondizi , and a national deputy during the presidency of Arturo Umberto Illia . He opposed both sides of the Dirty War , and several times filed a writ of Habeas corpus , requesting the freedom of victims of forced disappearances , during the National Reorganization Process . He denounced the crimes of the military dictatorship of other countries , and opposed the actions of both sides in the Falklands War as well . He became the leader of the UCR after Balbín 's death , and was the Radical candidate for the presidency in the 1983 elections , which he won . 
 When he became president , he sent a bill to the Congress to revoke the self @-@ amnesty law established by the military . He established the National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons to investigate the crimes committed by the military , which led to the Trial of the Juntas and resulted in the sentencing of the heads of the former regime . Discontent within the military led to the mutinies of the Carapintadas , leading Alfonsín to appease them with the full stop law and the law of Due Obedience . He also had conflicts with the unions , which were controlled by the opposing Justicialist Party . He resolved the Beagle conflict , increased trade with Brazil , and proposed the creation of the Contadora support group to mediate between the United States and the Nicaraguan Contras . He passed the first divorce law of Argentina . He initiated the Austral plan to improve the national economy , but that plan , as well as the Spring plan , failed . The resulting hyperinflation and riots led to his party 's defeat in the 1989 presidential elections , which was won by Peronist Carlos Menem . 
 He continued as the leader of the UCR , and opposed the presidency of Carlos Menem . He initiated the Pact of Olivos with Menem in order to negotiate the terms for the 1994 amendment of the Argentine Constitution . Fernando de la Rúa led a faction of the UCR that opposed the pact , and eventually became president in 1999 . De la Rúa resigned during the December 2001 riots , and Alfonsín 's faction provided the support needed for the Peronist Eduardo Duhalde to be appointed president by the Congress . Alfonsín died of lung cancer on 31 March 2009 , at the age of 82 , and was given a large state funeral . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Raúl Alfonsín was born on 12 March 1927 , in the city of Chascomús , 123 km ( 76 mi ) south of Buenos Aires . His parents were <unk> Raúl Alfonsín Ochoa and Ana María Foulkes . His father was of Galician and German descent , and his mother was the daughter of Welsh immigrant Ricardo Foulkes and Falkland Islander María Elena Ford . Following his elementary schooling , Raúl Alfonsín enrolled at the General San Martín Military Lyceum , graduating after five years as a second lieutenant . He did not pursue a military career , and began studying law instead . He began his studies at the National University of La Plata , and completed them at the University of Buenos Aires , graduating at the age of 23 . He married María Lorenza Barreneche , whom he met in the 1940s at a masquerade ball , in 1949 . They moved to Mendoza , La Plata , and returned to Chascomús . They had six sons , of whom only Ricardo Alfonsín would also follow a political career . 
 Alfonsín bought a local newspaper ( El Imparcial ) . He joined the Radical Civic Union ( UCR ) in 1946 , as a member of the Intransigent Renewal Movement , a faction of the party that opposed the incorporation of the UCR into the Democratic Union coalition . He was appointed president of the party committee in Chascomús in 1951 , and was elected to the city council in 1954 . He was detained for a brief time , during the reaction of the government of Juan Perón to the bombing of Plaza de Mayo . The Revolución Libertadora ousted Perón from the national government ; Alfonsín was again briefly detained and forced to leave his office in the city council . The UCR broke up into two parties : the Intransigent Radical Civic Union ( UCRI ) , led by Arturo Frondizi , and the People 's Radical Civic Union ( UCRP ) , led by Ricardo Balbín and <unk> Larralde . Alfonsín did not like the split , but opted to follow the UCRP . 
 Alfonsín was elected deputy for the legislature of the Buenos Aires province in 1958 , on the UCRP ticket , and was reelected in 1962 . He moved to La Plata , capital of the province , during his tenure . President Frondizi was ousted by a military coup on 29 March 1962 , which also closed the provincial legislature . Alfonsín returned to Chascomús . The UCRP prevailed over the UCRI the following year , leading to the presidency of Arturo Umberto Illia . Alfonsín was elected a national deputy , and then vice president of the UCRP bloc in the congress . In 1963 he was appointed president of the party committee for the province of Buenos Aires . 
 Illia was deposed by a new military coup in June 1966 , the Argentine Revolution . Alfonsín was detained while trying to hold a political rally in La Plata , and a second time when he tried to re @-@ open the UCRP committee . He was forced to resign as deputy in November 1966 . He was detained a third time in 1968 after a political rally in La Plata . He also wrote opinion articles in newspapers , under the pseudonyms Alfonso <unk> Lura and <unk> Feijó . The Dirty War began during this time , as many guerrilla groups rejected both the right @-@ wing military dictatorship and the civil governments , preferring instead a left @-@ wing dictatorship aligned with the Soviet Union , as in the Cuban Revolution . Alfonsín clarified in his articles that he rejected both the military dictatorship and the guerrillas , asking instead for free elections . The UCRP became the UCR once more ; and the UCRI was turned into the Intransigent Party . Alfonsín created the Movement for Renewal and Change within the UCR , to challenge Balbín 's leadership of the party . The military dictatorship finally called for free elections , allowing Peronism ( which had been banned since 1955 ) to take part in them . Balbín defeated Alfonsín in the primary elections , but lost in the main ones . Alfonsín was elected deputy once more . 
 Illia was invited in 1975 to a diplomatic mission to the Soviet Union ; he declined and proposed instead . Upon his return , Alfonsín became one of the founding members of the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights . He served as the defense lawyer for Mario Roberto <unk> , leader of the ERP guerrillas , but only to carry out due process of law , and not because of a genuine desire to support him . The 1976 Argentine coup d 'état against President Isabel Martínez de Perón started the National Reorganization Process . Alfonsín filed several Habeas corpus motions , requesting the freedom of victims of forced disappearances . He also visited other countries , denouncing those disappearances and violations of human rights . He established the magazine <unk> y control in 1976 , one of the few magazines that criticized the military dictatorship during its early stages . The magazine was published up to 1978 . His editorials were collected in 1980 in the book La <unk> argentina . He did not support the 1982 Falklands War , and criticized both the Argentine attack and the British counterattack . The Argentine defeat in the war marked the decline of the military dictatorship . The main political parties united in the <unk> , issuing a joint request to the dictatorship to call for elections . Alfonsín proposed the appointment of Arturo Illia as the head of state of a transition government , similar to the <unk> in Greece . The Movement for Renewal and Change took control of the UCR ; Balbín had died the previous year . 
 = = Presidential campaign = = 
 <unk> was appointed candidate of the UCR for the 1983 general elections , with Víctor Martínez as candidate for the vice @-@ presidency . Fernando de la Rúa , who would have run in the primary elections against him , declined his candidacy because of Alfonsín 's huge popularity . The publicity was managed by David <unk> , who created the slogan " Ahora Alfonsín " ( Spanish : " Now Alfonsín " ) , and the gesture of the shaking hands . His campaign used a non @-@ confrontational approach , in stark contrast with the Peronist candidate for the governorship of the Buenos Aires province , Herminio Iglesias . Iglesias burned a coffin with the seals of the UCR on live television , which generated a political scandal . Both Iglesias and Ítalo Luder , the Peronist candidate to the presidency , saw a decrease in their public image as a result . 
 During the campaign , both parties made similar proposals to reduce authoritarianism and the political influence of the military , and to maintain the Argentine claim in the Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute . <unk> denounced a pact between the military and the Peronist unions that sought an amnesty for the military . He maintained that the armed forced should be subject to the civilian government , and that unions should be regulated . He also proposed an investigation into the actions of the military during the Dirty War . He closed his campaign by reading the preamble of the constitution of Argentina . The last rally was at the Plaza de la República , and was attended by 400 @,@ 000 people . 
 The elections were held on 30 October . The Alfonsín – Martínez ticket won with 51 @.@ 7 % of the vote , followed by Luder – <unk> with 40 @.@ 1 % . It was the first time since the rise of Perón that the Peronist party was defeated in elections without electoral fraud or proscription . The UCR won 128 seats in the Assembly , forming a majority ; and 18 seats in the Senate , constituting a minority . 18 provinces elected radical governors , and 17 elected governors from either the Justicialist or local parties . Alfonsín took office on 10 December , and gave a speech from the Buenos Aires Cabildo . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 = = = First days = = = 
 The presidential inauguration of Alfonsín was attended by Isabel Perón . Despite internal recriminations for the defeat , the Peronist party agreed to support Alfonsín as president , to prevent a return of the military . By this time , the left @-@ wing terrorism had been neutralized and was no longer a menace . There were still factions in the military ambitious to keep an authoritarian government , and groups such as the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo seeking reparations for the actions of the military during the Dirty War . 
 Three days after taking office , Alfonsín sent a bill to the Congress to revoke the self @-@ amnesty law established by the military . This made it possible for the judiciary to investigate the crimes committed during the Dirty War . During the campaign , Alfonsín had promised that he would do this while Luder had been non @-@ committal . Alfonsín also ordered the initiation of judicial cases against guerrilla leaders Mario Firmenich , Fernando Vaca <unk> , Ricardo Obregón Cano , Rodolfo <unk> , Roberto <unk> , Héctor Pardo and Enrique Gorriarán Merlo ; and military leaders Jorge Videla , Emilio Massera , Orlando <unk> , Roberto Viola , Armando <unk> , Omar <unk> , Leopoldo <unk> , Jorge Anaya and Basilio Dami <unk> . He also requested the extradition of guerrilla leaders who were living abroad . 
 Most of the first cabinet , organised in Chascomús , was composed of trusted colleagues of Alfonsín . Alfonsín appointed as minister of labour Antonio Mucci , who belonged to a faction of the UCR that sought to reduce the influence of Peronism among labour unions , and promptly sent a bill to Congress designed to promote independent unions . Facing an economic crisis , he appointed Bernardo Grinspun as minister of the economy . He appointed Aldo Neri minister of health , Dante Caputo minister of foreign relations , Antonio <unk> minister of interior affairs , Roque Carranza minister of public works , Carlos <unk> Aramburu minister of education , and Raúl <unk> minister of defense . Juan Carlos Pugliese led the chamber of deputies , and Edison Otero was the provisional president of the senate . Many presidential negotiations took place at the Quinta de Olivos , the official residence of the president , rather than at the Casa Rosada . 
 = = = Aftermath of the Dirty War = = = 
 The first priority of Raúl Alfonsín was to consolidate democracy , incorporate the armed forces into their standard role in a civilian government , and prevent further military coups . Alfonsín first tried to reduce the political power of the military with budget cuts , reductions of military personnel and changing their political tasks . As for the crimes committed during the Dirty War , Alfonsín was willing to respect the command responsibility and accept the " superior orders " defense for the military of lower ranks , as long as the Junta leaders were sentenced under military justice . This project was resisted by human rights organisations such as Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo and public opinion , as it was expected that the defendants would be acquitted or receive low sentences . The military considered that the Dirty War was a legally sanctioned war , and considered the prosecutions to be unjustified . Alfonsín also established the National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons ( <unk> ) , composed of several well @-@ known personalities , to document cases of forced disappearances , human rights violations and abduction of children . Alfonsín sent a military code bill to the Congress , so that the military would use it . In its " Nunca más " report ( Spanish : Never again ) , the <unk> revealed the wide scope of the crimes committed during the Dirty War , and how the Supreme Council of the military had supported the military 's actions against the guerrillas . 
 As a result , Alfonsín sponsored the Trial of the Juntas , in which , for the first time , the leaders of a military coup in Argentina were on trial . The first hearings began at the Supreme Court in April 1985 and lasted for the remainder of the year . In December , the tribunal handed down life sentences for Jorge Videla and former Navy Chief Emilio Massera , as well as 17 @-@ year sentences for Roberto Eduardo Viola . President Leopoldo <unk> was acquitted of charges related to the repression , but he was court @-@ martialed in May 1986 for malfeasance during the Falklands War . Ramón Camps received a 25 @-@ year sentence . The trials did not focus only on the military : Mario Firmenich was captured in Brazil in 1984 and extradited to Argentina . José López Rega was extradited from Miami in 1986 , because of his links with the Argentine <unk> Alliance . 
 The military were supported by the families of the victims of subversion , a group created to counter the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo . This group placed the blame of the Dirty War on the guerrillas , but had few followers . The trials were followed by bomb attacks and rumors of military protests and even a possible coup . Alfonsín sought to appease the military by raising their budget . As that was not enough , he proposed the full stop law , to set a deadline for Dirty War @-@ related prosecutions . The Congress approved the law , despite strong opposition from the public . Prosecutors rushed to start cases before the deadline , filing 487 charges against 300 officers , with 100 of them still in active service . Major Ernesto Barreiro refused to appear in court , and started a mutiny in Córdoba . Lieutenant Colonel Aldo Rico started another mutiny at Campo de Mayo , supporting Barreiro . The rebels were called " Carapintadas " ( Spanish : " Painted faces " ) because of their use of military camouflage . The CGT called a general strike in support of Alfonsín , and large masses rallied in the Plaza de Mayo to support the government . Alfonsín negotiated directly with the rebels and secured their surrender . He announced the end of the crisis from the balcony of the Casa Rosada . The mutineers eventually surrendered , but the government proceeded with the Law of Due Obedience to regulate the trials . However , the timing of both events was exploited by the military , and the opposition parties described the outcome as a surrender by Alfonsín . 
 Aldo Rico escaped from prison in January 1988 and started a new mutiny in a distant regiment in the northeast . This time , both the military support for the mutiny and the public outcry against it were minimal . The army attacked him , and Rico surrendered after a brief combat . Colonel Mohamed Alí Seineldín launched a new mutiny in late 1988 . As in 1987 , the mutineers were defeated and jailed , but the military was reluctant to open fire against them . Alfonsín 's goal of reconciling the military with the civil population failed , as the latter rejected the military 's complaints , and the military was focused on internal issues . The Movimiento Todos por la Patria , a small guerrilla army led by Enrique Gorriarán Merlo , staged the attack on the Regiment of La <unk> in 1989 . The army killed many of their members , and quickly defeated the uprising . 
 = = = Relation with unions = = = 
 Peronism still controlled the labor unions , the most powerful ones in all of Latin America . The biggest one was the General Confederation of Labour ( CGT ) . Alfonsín sought to reduce the Peronist influence over the unions , fearing that they may become a destabilizing force for the fledgling democracy . He rejected their custom of holding single @-@ candidate internal elections , and deemed them totalitarian and not genuine representatives of the workforce . His proposal was to change the laws for those internal elections , remove the union leaders appointed during the dictatorship , and elect new ones under the new laws . The CGT rejected the proposal as interventionist , and prompted Peronist politicians to vote against it . The law was approved by the Chamber of Deputies but failed to pass in the Senate by one vote . A second bill proposed simply a call to elections , without supervision from the government , which was approved . As a result , the unions remained Peronist . 
 The CGT was splintered in internal factions at the time . Lorenzo Miguel had close ties to the Justicialist party , and led " the 62 organisations " faction . Saúl Ubaldini was more confrontational , distrusted the politicians of the PJ , and was eventually appointed secretary general of the CGT . His lack of political ties allowed him to work as a mediator between the union factions . Carlos Alderete led a faction closer to Alfonsín , named " the 15 " unions . The government sought to deepen the internal divisions between the unions by appointing Alderete as minister of labour and promoting legislation to benefit his faction . He was removed after the defeat in the 1987 midterm elections , but the government stayed on good terms with his faction . 
 Alfonsín kept a regulation from the dictatorship that allowed him to regulate the level of wages . He authorized wage increases every three months , to keep them up to the inflation rate . The CGT rejected this , and proposed instead that wages be determined by free negotiations . Alfonsín allowed strike actions , which were forbidden during the dictatorship , which gave the unions another way to expand their influence . There were thirteen general strikes and thousands of minor labor conflicts . However , unlike similar situations in the past , the CGT sided with Alfonsín during the military rebellions , and did not support the removal of a non @-@ Peronist president . The conflicts were caused by high inflation , and the unions requested higher wages in response to it . The unions got the support of the non @-@ unionized retirees , the church and left @-@ wing factions . Popular support for the government allowed it to endure in spite of opposition from the unions . 
 = = = Social policies = = = 
 With the end of the military dictatorship , Alfonsín pursued cultural and educational policies aimed at reducing the authoritarian customs of several institutions and groups . He also promoted freedom of the press . Several intellectuals and scientists who had left the country in the previous decade returned , which benefited the universities . The University of Buenos Aires returned to the quality levels that it had in the 1960s . Many intellectuals became involved in politics as well , providing a cultural perspective to the political discourse . Both Alfonsín and the Peronist Antonio Cafiero benefited . 
 Divorce was legalized by a law passed in 1987 . The church opposed it , but it had huge popular support that included even Catholic factions , who reasoned that marital separation already existed , and divorce simply made it explicit . The church opposed Alfonsín after that point . The church successfully exerted pressure to prevent the abolition of religious education . In line with the teachings of Pope John Paul II , the Church criticized what it perceived as an increase in drugs , terrorism , abortion and pornography . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Argentina had a tense relationship with the United Kingdom because of the recently ended Falklands War . The British government banned all foreign ships from the exclusion zone of the islands in 1986 . Argentina organised air and marine patrols , as well as military maneuvers in the Patagonia . However , this was not enough to placate the military hard @-@ liners in Argentina . Alfonsín proposed the postponement the sovereignty discussions , instead negotiating for a de jure cease of hostilities , with a reduction in the number of military forces and a normalization of Argentina – United Kingdom relations . The United Kingdom did not trust the proposal , suspecting that it was a cover @-@ up for sovereignty discussions . 
 The Beagle conflict was still an unresolved problem with Chile , despite the 1978 Papal mediation . The military , troubled by the trial of the juntas , called for rejection of the proposed agreement and a continuation of the country 's claim over the islands . Alfonsín called for a referendum to settle the dispute . Despite opposition from the military and the Justicialist party , who called for abstention , support for the resolution referendum reached 82 % . The bill passed in the Senate by a single vote majority , as the PJ maintained its resistance . The Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1984 between Chile and Argentina was signed the following year , ending the conflict . The human rights violations committed by the Chilean president Augusto Pinochet remained a contentious issue , as well as the revelation of Chilean help to British forces during the Falklands War . The Argentine church invited Pope John Paul II for a second visit to Argentina in 1987 , to celebrate his successful mediation . He celebrated World Youth Day next to the Obelisk of Buenos Aires , and gave a mass at the Basilica of Our Lady of Luján . 
 Argentina allied with Brazil , Uruguay and Peru , three countries that had also recently ended their local military dictatorships , to mediate in the conflict between the United States and the Nicaraguan Contras . They created the Contadora support group , to support the Contadora group from South America . Both groups negotiated together , but ultimately failed because of the reluctance of both Nicaragua and the United States to change their positions . The group changed its scope later to discuss foreign debt and diplomacy with the United Kingdom in relation to the Falklands conflict . 
 Initially , Alfonsín refused to foster diplomatic relations with the Brazilian military government , and only did so when the dictatorship ended and José <unk> became president . One of their initial concerns was to increase Argentine – Brazilian trade . Both presidents met in Foz do <unk> and issued a joint declaration about the peaceful use of nuclear power . A second meeting in Buenos Aires strengthened the trade agreements . Argentina and Brazil signed the Program of Integration and Economic Cooperation ( <unk> ) , and in 1988 both countries and Uruguay agreed to create a common market . This led to the 1991 Treaty of Asunción , that created the Mercosur . 
