 = = = Economic policy = = = 
 Alfonsín began his term with many economic problems . The foreign debt was nearly 43 billion dollars by the end of the year , and the country had narrowly prevented a sovereign default in 1982 . During that year , the gross domestic product fell by 5 @.@ 6 % , and the manufacturing profits by 55 % . Unemployment was at nearly 10 % , and inflation was nearly 209 % . It also appeared unlikely that the country would receive the needed foreign investment . The country had a deficit of $ 6 @.@ 7 billion . Possible solutions such as a devaluation of the currency , privatization of industry , or restrictions on imports , would probably have proven to be unpopular . 
 Bernardo Grinspun , the first minister of the economy , arranged an increase in wages , reaching the levels of 1975 . This caused inflation to reach 32 % . He also tried to negotiate more favourable terms on the country 's foreign debt , but the negotiations failed . <unk> a default , he negotiated with the IMF , which requested spending cuts . International credits prevented default at the end of 1984 , but he resigned in March 1985 when the debt reached $ 1 billion and the IMF denied further credits . Grinspun was succeeded by Juan Vital <unk> , who designed the Austral plan . This plan froze prices and wages , stopped the printing of money , arranged spending cuts , and established a new currency , the Austral . The plan was a success in the short term , and choked inflation . Inflation rose again by the end of the year , the CGT opposed the wage freeze , and business community opposed the price freeze . Alfonsín thought that the privatization of some state assets and a deregulation of the economy might work , but those proposals were opposed by both the PJ and his own party . 
 With the support of the World Bank , the government tried new measures in 1987 , including an increase in taxes , privatizations , and a decrease in government spending . Those measures could not be enforced ; the government had lost the 1987 midterm elections , " the 15 " unions that had earlier supported the government distanced themselves from it , and the business community was unable to suggest a clear course of action . The PJ , aiming for a victory in the 1989 presidential elections , opposed the measures that it believed would have a negative social impact . The " Spring plan " sought to keep the economy stable until the elections by freezing prices and wages and reducing the federal deficit . This plan had an even worse reception than the Austral plan , and none of the parties supported it . The World Bank and the IMF refused to extend credits to Argentina . Big exporters refused to sell dollars to the Central Bank , which depleted its reserves . The austral was <unk> in February 1989 , and the high inflation turned into hyperinflation . The 1989 presidential elections took place during this crisis , and the Justicialist Carlos Menem became the new president . 
 = = = Midterm elections = = = 
 The actions taken against the military contributed to a strong showing by the UCR in the November 1985 legislative elections . They gained one seat in the Lower House of Congress , which meant control of 130 of the 254 seats . The <unk> lost eight seats ( leaving 103 ) and smaller , provincial parties made up the difference . Alfonsín surprised observers in April 1986 by announcing the creation of a panel entrusted to plan a transfer of the nation 's capital to <unk> , a small coastal city 800 km ( 500 mi ) south of Buenos Aires . His proposals boldly called for constitutional amendments creating a Parliamentary system , including a Prime Minister , and were well received by the Lower House , though they encountered strong opposition in the Senate . 
 The government suffered a big setback in the 1987 legislative election . The UCR lost the majority in the chamber of deputies . All provinces elected Peronist governors , with the exception of Córdoba and Río Negro . Along with the city of Buenos Aires ( a federal district at the time ) , they were the only districts where the UCR prevailed . As a result , the government could not move forward with its legislative agenda , and the PJ only supported minor projects . The PJ was strengthened for the 1989 presidential elections , and the UCR sought to propose governor Eduardo Angeloz as candidate . Angeloz was a rival of Alfonsín within the party . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Amid rampant inflation , Angeloz was heavily defeated by PJ candidate Carlos Menem in the 1989 election . By the winter of 1989 , the inflation had grown so severe that Alfonsín transferred power to Menem on July 8 , five months earlier than scheduled . 
 Alfonsín stayed on as president of the UCR , leaving after the party 's defeat in the 1991 legislative elections . Suffering damage to its image because of the hyperinflation of 1989 , the UCR lost in several districts . Alfonsín became president of the party again in 1993 . He supported the creation of a special budget for the province of Buenos Aires , led by governor Eduardo Duhalde . The radical legislator Leopoldo Moreau supported the new budget even more vehemently than the Peronists . Both parties had an informal alliance in the province . Alfonsín also supported the amendment to the constitution of Buenos Aires that allowed Duhalde to run for re @-@ election . 
 President Carlos Menem sought a constitutional amendment to allow his re @-@ election , and Alfonsín opposed it . The victory in the 1993 midterm elections strengthened the PJ , which approved the bill in the Senate . Menem proposed a referendum on the amendment , to force the radical deputies to support it . He also proposed a bill for a law that would allow a constitutional amendment with a simple majority of the Congress . As a result , Alfonsín made the Pact of Olivos with him . With this agreement , the UCR would support Menem 's proposal , but with further amendments that would reduce presidential power . The Council of Magistrates of the Nation reduced the influence of the executive power over the judiciary , the city of Buenos Aires would become an autonomous territory allowed to elect its own mayor , and the presidential term of office would be reduced to four years . The presidential elections would include the two @-@ round system , and the electoral college would be abolished . Alfonsín was elected to the constituent assembly that worked for the 1994 amendment of the Argentine Constitution . A faction of the UCR , led by Fernando de la Rúa , opposed the pact , but the party as a whole supported Alfonsín . The UCR got only 19 % of the vote in the elections , attaining third position in the 1995 presidential elections behind the Frepaso , when Menem was re @-@ elected . Alfonsín resigned the presidency of the party in that year . 
 The UCR and the Frepaso united as a political coalition , the Alliance for Work , Justice and Education , led by Alfonsín , Fernando de la Rúa and Rodolfo Terragno from the UCR , and Carlos Álvarez and Graciela Fernández Meijide from the Frepaso . The coalition won the 1997 legislative elections . Alfonsín did not agree with de la Rúa about the fixed exchange rate used by then . He thought that it had been a good measure in the past but had become detrimental to the Argentine economy , while de la Rúa supported it . 
 Alfonsín suffered a car crash in the Río Negro province in 1999 , during the campaign of governor Pablo <unk> . They were on Route 6 , and he was ejected from the car because he was not wearing a seat belt . He was hospitalized for 39 days . De la Rúa became president in the 1999 elections , defeating the governor of Buenos Aires , Eduardo Duhalde . Alfonsín was elected Senator for Buenos Aires Province in October 2001 . De la Rúa resigned during the December 2001 riots , and the Congress appointed Adolfo Rodríguez Saá , who resigned as well . Alfonsín instructed the radical legislators to support Duhalde as the new president . He also gave him two ministers , Horacio <unk> for Defense and Jorge <unk> for Justice . The radical support helped Duhalde overcome the ambitions of Carlos Ruckauf and José Manuel de la Sota , who also had ambitions to be appointed president . Alfonsín 's health problems later in the year led him to step down , to be replaced by Diana Conti . 
 In 2006 , Alfonsín supported a faction of the UCR that favoured the idea of carrying an independent candidate for the 2007 presidential elections . The UCR , instead of fielding its own candidate , endorsed Roberto Lavagna , a center @-@ left economist who presided over the dramatic recovery in the Argentine economy from 2002 until he parted ways with President Néstor Kirchner in December 2005 . Unable to sway enough disaffected Kirchner supporters , Lavagna garnered third place . Alfonsín was honoured by President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner with a bust of his likeness at the Casa Rosada on October 1 , 2008 . This was his last public appearance . 
 = = Death = = 
 Alfonsín died at home on 31 March 2009 , at the age of 82 , after being diagnosed a year before with lung cancer . The streets around his house at the Santa Fe avenue were filled with hundreds of people , who started a candlelight vigil . The radical Julio Cobos , Fernández de Kirchner 's vice president , was the acting president at the moment and ordered three days of national mourning . There was a ceremony in the Congress , where his body was displayed in the Blue Hall , that was attended by almost a thousand people . His widow María Lorenza Barreneche could not attend the funeral , because of her own poor health . It was attended by former presidents Carlos Menem , Fernando de la Rúa , Eduardo Duhalde and Néstor Kirchner , all the members of the Supreme Court of Argentina , mayor Mauricio Macri , governor Daniel Scioli , the president of Uruguay Tabaré Vázquez and several other politicians . The coffin was moved to La Recoleta Cemetery . He was placed next to the graves of other important historical figures of the UCR , such as Leandro N. <unk> , Hipólito Yrigoyen and Arturo Illia . 
 At the international level , Perú set a day of national mourning , and Paraguay set three days . The governments of Brazil , Chile , Colombia , France , Mexico , Paraguay , Peru , Spain , Uruguay and the United States sent messages of condolence . In addition to Tabaré Vázquez , Julio María Sanguinetti of Uruguay , and Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil attended the ceremony . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Historians Félix Luna , Miguel Angel de Marco and Fernando Rocchi all praise the role of Raúl Alfonsín in the aftermath of the Dirty War and the restoration of democracy . Luna also considers that Alfonsín was an effective president , and that he set an example of not using the state for personal gain . De Marco points out that it was a delicate time period , and any mistake could have endangered the newly founded democracy and led to another coup . The aforementioned historians do not agree , though , on their view of the Pact of Olivos . Luna considers that it was a necessary evil to prevent the chaos that would have been generated if Menem managed to proceed with the constitutional amendment without negotiating with the UCR . De Marco and Rocchi instead believe that it was the biggest mistake of Alfonsín 's political career . 
 Alfonsín received the 1985 Princess of Asturias Award for international cooperation because of both his role in ending the Beagle dispute and his work to reestablish democracy in Argentina . Several months after his death , he was named " Illustrious Citizen of Buenos Aires Province " in 2008 , and " Illustrious Citizen of Buenos Aires " in 2009 . The latter award was granted posthumously and received by his son Ricardo Alfonsín . 
 = Live ! at the Star @-@ Club in Hamburg , Germany ; 1962 = 
 Live ! at the Star @-@ Club in Hamburg , Germany ; 1962 is a double album featuring live performances by the English rock group The Beatles , recorded in late December 1962 at the Star @-@ Club during their final Hamburg residency . The album was released in 1977 in two different versions , comprising a total of 30 songs by The Beatles . 
 The performances were recorded on a home tape machine using a single microphone , resulting in a low fidelity recording . Ted " Kingsize " Taylor began to investigate possible marketing of the tapes in 1973 . The tapes were eventually bought by Paul Murphy and subjected to extensive audio processing to improve the sound , leading to the 1977 album . 
 Although the poor sound quality limits its commercial appeal , the album provides historic insight into the group 's club act in the period after Ringo Starr joined but before the emergence of Beatlemania . The Beatles were unsuccessful in legally blocking the initial release of the album ; the recordings were reissued in many forms until 1998 , when The Beatles were awarded full rights to the performances . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Beatles ' five residencies in Hamburg during 1960 to 1962 allowed the Liverpool band to develop their performance skills and widen their reputation . Drummer Pete Best was added to the band in August 1960 to secure their first Hamburg booking , where they played for 48 nights at the Indra Club and then 58 nights at the Kaiserkeller . The Beatles returned to Hamburg in April 1961 to play at the Top Ten Club for three months . 
 A new Hamburg music venue , the Star @-@ Club , opened on 13 April 1962 , with The Beatles booked for the first seven weeks . The Beatles returned to Hamburg in November and December 1962 for their fourth and fifth engagements there , which had been booked for the Star @-@ Club many months in advance . Unlike their previous three trips to Hamburg , their drummer was Starr , having replaced Best in August . The Beatles were reluctant to return for their final two @-@ week booking , which started 18 December , as they were gaining popularity in Britain and had just achieved their first charted single with " Love Me Do " . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Portions of The Beatles ' final Star @-@ Club performances ( along with other acts ) were recorded by the club 's stage manager , Adrian Barber , for Ted " Kingsize " Taylor . Barber used a <unk> home reel @-@ to @-@ reel recorder at a tape speed of 3 ¾ inches per second , with a single microphone placed in front of the stage . Taylor , leader of The Dominoes ( who were also playing at the club ) , said that John Lennon verbally agreed to the group being recorded in exchange for Taylor providing the beer during their performances . 
 The tapes were originally described as having been recorded in the spring of 1962 , an attempt to pre @-@ date The Beatles ' June 1962 contract signing with Parlophone . However , song arrangements and dialogue from the tapes pointed to late December 1962 , and a recording date of 31 December 1962 ( the group 's last day in Hamburg ) was commonly cited . Later researchers have proposed that the tapes are from multiple days during the last week of December ; Allan Williams ( The Beatles ' booking agent at the time ) recalled that a total of about three hours was recorded over three or four sessions between Christmas and New Year 's Day . 
 The tapes captured The Beatles performing at least 33 different titles , plus some repeated songs . Of the 30 songs that were commercially released from the tapes , only two were Lennon – McCartney compositions . The others were an assortment of cover versions , seventeen of which would be re @-@ made by The Beatles and appear on their various studio albums or Live at the BBC . The arrangements played at the Star @-@ Club are similar to the versions recorded later , albeit less refined , although there are a few cases with distinct differences . For example , " Mr. Moonlight " has a much quicker tempo , a guitar @-@ based instrumental break , and an intentionally altered lyric with Lennon proclaiming he is on his " nose " instead of his " knees " ; " Roll Over Beethoven " was described as " never taken at a more breakneck pace " . 
 The recording equipment and method resulted in the tapes being unmistakably low fidelity . The vocals , even in the best cases , sound " somewhat muffled and distant " . The vocals on a few songs are so indistinct that labelling and liner notes on early releases gave incorrect information about who was singing and the exact song being performed . Much of The Beatles ' dialogue between songs is audible , which includes addressing the audience in both English and German , as well as repartee among themselves . The banter is irreverent and coarse at times , an aspect of their stage act that would soon cease under the influence of manager Brian Epstein . 
 = = = Marketing attempts = = = 
 Taylor said he had offered to sell the tapes to Epstein in the mid @-@ 1960s , but that Epstein did not consider them to be of commercial value and offered only £ 20 . Taylor said he kept the tapes at home , largely forgotten until 1973 when he decided to look into their marketability . Williams relates a different history than Taylor , stating that after Taylor returned to Liverpool , he left the tapes with a recording engineer for editing into a potential album . The project was never finished and the engineer later relocated , with the tapes being among many items left behind . In 1972 , Williams , Taylor , and the engineer gained access to the abandoned office and recovered the tapes " from beneath a pile of rubble on the floor . " 
 When the existence of the tapes was first publicly reported in July 1973 , Williams was planning to ask Apple for at least £ 100 @,@ 000 . Williams said he later met with George Harrison and Starr to offer the tapes for £ 5000 , but they declined , citing financial difficulties at the time . Williams and Taylor teamed up with Paul Murphy , head of Buk Records , to find an outlet for the tapes . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Murphy eventually bought the tapes himself and formed a new company , Lingasong , specifically for the project . He sold the worldwide distribution rights to Double H Licensing , which spent more than $ 100 @,@ 000 on elaborate audio processing and mixing of the songs under the direction of Larry <unk> . The sequence of songs was rearranged , and some of the individual songs were edited to bypass flawed tape sections or make up for an incomplete recording . 
 After an unsuccessful attempt by The Beatles to block it , the 26 @-@ song Live ! at the Star @-@ Club in Hamburg , Germany ; 1962 was released by Lingasong . The album first appeared in Germany in April 1977 in association with Bellaphon Records , and was released in the UK the following month . For the album 's June 1977 US release ( in association with Atlantic Records ) , four songs were removed and replaced with four different songs from the tapes . 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 Over the next two decades , the recordings were licensed to several record companies , resulting in numerous releases with varying track selections . In 1979 , Pickwick Records performed some additional audio filtering and equalisation of the songs on the Lingasong US version , and released it over two volumes as First Live Recordings ; the set included the song " Hully Gully " that was mistakenly credited to The Beatles , but was actually performed by Cliff Bennett and the Rebel Rousers , another act on the Star @-@ Club bill . In 1981 , Audio Fidelity Enterprises released Historic Sessions in the UK , the first single package with all 30 Beatles tracks from the original Star @-@ Club releases . Several additional songs from the Star @-@ Club tapes have appeared on Beatles bootleg records over the years . 
 In 1985 , a bootlegger known as " Richard " , who had already found infamy by issuing several titles with controversial covers and content , issued his own , bootleg , version of the Star Club tapes without any of the editing found on the official releases , entitled The Beatles vs. the Third Reich — directly parodying The Beatles vs. the Four Seasons in both name and cover . 
 The release of the recordings on two CDs by industry giant Sony Music in 1991 sparked renewed legal attention by The Beatles ( as represented by Paul McCartney , Harrison , Starr , and Yoko Ono ) . Sony also produced a version specifically for their Columbia House music club , but Sony withdrew the titles in 1992 as a lawsuit was progressing . Lingasong 's CD release of the original set prompted another lawsuit from The Beatles in 1996 ; the case was decided in 1998 in favour of The Beatles , who were granted ownership of the tapes and exclusive rights to their use . Harrison appeared in person to provide evidence in the case , and his testimony was cited as an important factor in the judge 's decision . Harrison characterised the claim that Lennon gave Taylor permission for the recording as " a load of rubbish " , and added : " One drunken person recording another bunch of drunks does not constitute business deals . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album had limited commercial success , reaching a peak position of No. 111 during a seven @-@ week run on the US Billboard 200 album chart . Assessments of the album often weigh the poor sound quality against the historic importance and insight provided into The Beatles ' early stage act . Rolling Stone reviewer John Swenson called the album " poorly recorded but fascinating " and commented that it showed The Beatles as " raw but extremely powerful . " Allmusic , commenting on a reissue , wrote : " The results were very low @-@ fidelity , and despite The Beatles ' enormous success , it took Taylor fifteen years to find someone greedy and shameless enough to release them as a record " . Q Magazine described the recordings as having " certain historical interest " and remarked : " The show seems like a riot but the sound itself is terrible – like one hell of a great party going on next door . " George Harrison gave the assessment : " The Star @-@ Club recording was the <unk> recording ever made in our name ! " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Germany / UK version = = = 
 ( Bellaphon <unk> / Lingasong <unk> ) 
 Side one 
 Introduction / " I Saw Her Standing There " ( John Lennon , Paul McCartney ) – 0 : 34 / 2 : 22 
 " Roll Over Beethoven " ( Chuck Berry ) – 2 : 15 
 " Hippy Hippy Shake " ( Chan Romero ) – 1 : 42 
 " Sweet Little Sixteen " ( Berry ) – 2 : 45 
 " Lend Me Your Comb " ( Kay Twomey , Fred Wise , Ben Weisman ) – 1 : 44 
 " Your Feet 's Too Big " ( Ada Benson , Fred Fisher ) – 2 : 18 
 Side two 
 " Twist and Shout " ( Phil Medley , Bert Russell ) – 2 : 03 
 " Mr. Moonlight " ( Roy Lee Johnson ) – 2 : 06 
 " A Taste of Honey " ( Bobby Scott , Ric Marlow ) – 1 : 45 
 " Bésame Mucho " ( Consuelo Velázquez , Sunny Skylar ) – 2 : 36 
 " Reminiscing " ( King Curtis ) – 1 : 41 
 " Kansas City / Hey , Hey , Hey , Hey " ( Jerry Leiber , Mike Stoller , Richard Penniman ) – 2 : 09 
 Side three 
 " Nothin ' Shakin ' ( But the Leaves on the Trees ) " ( Eddie Fontaine , <unk> <unk> , Diane Lampert , John Gluck ) – 1 : 15 
 " To Know Her Is to Love Her " ( Phil Spector ) – 3 : 02 
 " Little Queenie " ( Berry ) – 3 : 51 
 " Falling in Love Again ( Can 't Help It ) " ( Frederick Hollander , Sammy Lerner ) – 1 : 57 
 " Ask Me Why " ( Lennon , McCartney ) – 2 : 26 
 " Be @-@ Bop @-@ A @-@ Lula " ( Gene Vincent , Bill Davis ) – 2 : 29 
 Guest lead vocal by Fred Fascher , Star @-@ Club waiter 
 " Hallelujah I Love Her So " ( Ray Charles ) – 2 : 10 
 Guest lead vocal by Horst Fascher , Star @-@ Club manager 
 Side four 
 " Red Sails in the Sunset " ( Jimmy Kennedy , Hugh Williams ) – 2 : 00 
 " Everybody 's Trying to Be My Baby " ( Carl Perkins ) – 2 : 25 
 " Matchbox " ( Carl Perkins ) – 2 : 35 
 " I 'm Talking About You " ( Berry ) – 1 : 48 
 " Shimmy Like Kate " ( Armand Piron , Fred Smith , Cliff Goldsmith ) – 2 : 17 
 Based on The Olympics ' arrangement of " I Wish I Could Shimmy Like My Sister Kate " ; sometimes misidentified as " Shimmy Shimmy " or " Shimmy Shake " 
 " Long Tall Sally " ( <unk> Johnson , Robert Blackwell , Penniman ) – 1 : 45 
 " I Remember You " ( Johnny Mercer , Victor Schertzinger ) – 1 : 54 
 = = = US version = = = 
 ( Lingasong / Atlantic LS @-@ 2 @-@ <unk> ) 
 The US version includes the above except " I Saw Her Standing There " , " Twist and Shout " , " Reminiscing " , and " Ask Me Why " , and substitutes the following four songs : 
 Introduction / " I 'm Gonna Sit Right Down and Cry ( Over You ) " ( Joe Thomas , Howard Biggs ) – 3 : 04 
 " Where Have You Been ( All My Life ) " ( Barry Mann , Cynthia Weil ) – 1 : 55 
 " Till There Was You " ( Meredith Willson ) – 1 : 59 
 " Sheila " ( Tommy Roe ) – 1 : 56 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – lead guitar ; harmony and backing vocals ; lead vocal on tracks 2 , 11 , 13 , 21 , <unk> . 
 John Lennon – rhythm guitar ; harmony and backing vocals ; harmonica on track 26 ; lead vocal on tracks 4 , 5 ( shared ) , 7 , 8 , 14 , 17 , 22 , 23 , 24 , <unk> , <unk> . 
 Paul McCartney – bass guitar ; harmony and backing vocals ; lead vocal on tracks 1 , 3 , 5 ( shared ) , 6 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 15 , 16 , 20 , 25 , 26 , <unk> . 
 Ringo Starr – drums . 
 = Norwich Market = 
 Norwich Market ( also known as Norwich Provision Market ) is an outdoor market consisting of around 200 stalls in central Norwich , England . Founded in the latter part of the 11th century to supply Norman merchants and settlers moving to the area following the Norman conquest of England , it replaced an earlier market a short distance away . It has been in operation on the present site for over 900 years . 
 By the 14th century , Norwich was one of the largest and most prosperous cities in England , and Norwich Market was a major trading hub . Control of , and income from , the market was ceded by the monarchy to the city of Norwich in 1341 , from which time it provided a significant source of income for the local council . Freed from royal control , the market was reorganised to benefit the city as much as possible . Norwich and the surrounding region were devastated by plague and famine in the latter half of the 14th century , with the population falling by over 50 % . Following the plague years , Norwich came under the control of local merchants and the economy was rebuilt . In the early 15th century , a Guildhall was built next to the market to serve as a centre for local government and law enforcement . The largest surviving mediaeval civic building in Britain outside London , it remained the seat of local government until 1938 and in use as a law court until 1985 . 
 In the Georgian era , Norwich became an increasingly popular destination with travellers and developed into a fashionable shopping town . Buildings around the market were developed into luxury shops and coaching inns . The eastern side of the market was particularly fashionable and became known as Gentleman 's Walk . The area around the market had become very congested by the 19th century , but the council was unable to raise funds for improvement and few alterations were made . Because many of the market 's stalls were privately owned , the council was unable to rearrange the market into a more rational layout . 
 Following the First World War , the local authority began to systematically buy up all the stalls on the market , eventually bringing the entire market into public ownership . It was radically redesigned in the 1930s : stalls were arranged into parallel rows and a new City Hall was built along the entire western side of the marketplace to replace the by then inadequate Guildhall . This new arrangement survived with few significant changes for the rest of the 20th century . By the 1990s , the market was becoming decrepit and , in 2003 , proposals were made for another radical rebuilding of the area . These proposals were extremely controversial and were abandoned in 2004 in favour of a scheme which retained the parallel rows of stalls , but replaced the old stalls with steel units of four stalls each . The rebuilt market was completed in early 2006 and is one of the largest markets in Britain . 
 = = Foundation = = 
 The county town of Norfolk , Norwich is a city on the River Wensum in the East of England . Its origins are unclear , but by the reign of King Æthelstan ( 924 – 939 ) the city was a major trading centre and one of the most important boroughs in England . The Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement was centred around Tombland , a large open space at the point where the roads into Norwich converged . The plain of Tombland was the site of Norwich 's market . 
 Following the Norman conquest of England ( 1066 – 1071 ) , Norwich was radically redesigned . Norwich Cathedral was built immediately to the east of Tombland and much of the old town to the southwest of Tombland was cleared for the motte of Norwich Castle . A new Norman town was built west of the Castle , in an area known as Mancroft . The new town at Mancroft included a market of its own to provide for the Norman settlers and merchants moving into the area , and possibly also to supply the castle 's garrison . The exact date of the foundation of the market at Mancroft is not recorded , but it is known to have been operational by the time the Domesday Book was compiled in 1086 . Granting the right to trade in Norman England was a part of the Royal Prerogative and , as with most fairs and markets of the period , the market at Mancroft was operated under licence from the King . The King 's Clerk had jurisdiction over all trade conducted at the market , and tolls and rents were collected on behalf of the King . 
 Almost no records survive of the Norman market in the 11th to 13th centuries . It is known that shortly after the market 's establishment , a tollhouse was built nearby , which served as a collection point for taxes on trade . Although the precise location of the tollhouse is not recorded , it was immediately north of the market on part of the site now occupied by the Guildhall . At some point soon after its construction , the tollhouse also became the centre for the civil administration of the city . Although the Tombland market retained its charter to host an annual horse fair , over time the market at Mancroft supplanted that at Tombland as the principal market of the area . At the end of the 11th century , the Tombland market was removed during construction work on Norwich Cathedral . 
 = = Norwich Market in the Middle Ages = = 
 By the start of the 14th century , Norwich was one of Europe 's major cities . East Anglia was at this time one of the most densely populated areas in England , producing large amounts of grain , sheep , cattle and poultry . Much of this produce was traded in Norwich , an inland port roughly at the centre of the region . The City , meanwhile , had industrialized , its growth based on textiles , leather and metalworking , as well as being the administrative centre of the region . By 1300 , Norwich had a population of between 6 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 , with a total of around 20 @,@ 000 people living in the area . ( One 19th century historian estimated Norwich 's population pre @-@ 1349 at as high as 70 @,@ 000 . ) It was one of the largest and most prosperous cities in the country , and was considered the second city of England . Aside from occasional fairs , the majority of all goods produced in or imported to the region passed through the market at Mancroft . While there is some evidence that the market operated daily for a period around 1300 , it generally operated on Wednesdays and Saturdays . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 The market had by this time taken on roughly the layout it retains today . It was a long rectangular open space aligned north – south , with the tollhouse ( the Guildhall after 1413 ) marking the northern end and the very large church of St Peter Mancroft marking the southern end . ( St Peter Mancroft was built in 1430 – 55 incorporating an earlier church built in 1075 and was financed by the market 's merchants . It retains its association with the market ; all stallholders retain the right to hold their weddings in the church and to be buried in the churchyard . ) The marketplace sloped downwards from west to east . A long straight passageway called the Nethererowe or Nether Row ( later renamed Gentleman 's Walk ) marked the eastern boundary . Another passage called the <unk> , or Over Row ( later renamed St Peter 's Street , and since 1938 occupied by City Hall ) , marked the western boundary . 
 The mediaeval market was divided into sections , each dealing with a particular trade . The stalls of the market were arranged in rows . They varied in width from 2 feet ( 60 cm ) to 15 feet ( 460 cm ) . Highly valuable , in the early years of the market they were generally owned by major institutions such as trade guilds and religious bodies , and generated a high income from rents . They also provided a steady income for the King , and later the city , from perpetual rents . The marketplace was surrounded by retail buildings , construction of which began in about 1300 . These were fixed , permanent structures , some of which had multiple storeys and cellars . 
 The northern section of the main market place , immediately south of the tollhouse , housed fishmongers , butchers , <unk> and <unk> . This section of the market also housed the murage loft after 1294 , where tolls to fund the building of Norwich 's city walls were collected . The southern section of the main market place , north of St Peter Mancroft , housed a bread market and a number of stalls associated with Norwich 's significant cloth and leather industries . A broad space between the main marketplace and the Nethererowe was kept clear for the use of country smallholders , who would set up temporary booths and tents to sell their wares . 
 South of St Peter Mancroft was a second marketplace dealing in wheat , poultry , cattle and sheep . Pigs , horses , timber and dye were not traded in the main market , but had dedicated markets elsewhere in the city . ( The modern Norwich place names of <unk> , St John <unk> and Rampant Horse Street derive from their origins as the sites of the mediaeval timber , dye and horse markets respectively . ) 
 = = = Transfer to city control = = = 
 In 1341 , King Edward III visited Norwich for a jousting tournament , coinciding with the completion of the city 's defensive walls . Edward and his mother , Isabella of France , were very impressed by the city and , as a token of appreciation for bearing the costs of the defensive fortifications , Edward granted the franchise of the market to the city in perpetuity . The control by the King 's Clerk over trade at the market was ended and tolls and rents from the market from then on went directly to the city 's bailiffs ( the rulers of the city ) . 
 With the powers of the King 's Clerk abolished , the bailiffs of Norwich set about regulating the operation of the market for what they felt was the greatest benefit to the city . To encourage fair competition among the market 's traders , it was forbidden to sell foodstuffs before the Cathedral bell had tolled for Lady Mass ( 6 @.@ 00 am ) . The practice of forestalling ( meeting merchants on their way to the market either to buy their goods for resale , or to prevent them from attending the market and thus make goods of the type they were selling scarce and hence more expensive ) was forbidden . Trading anywhere other than in the market was strongly discouraged and the right to re @-@ sell goods at a profit was restricted to Freemen of the city . The prices of bread and beer were fixed , and a set of standardised weights and measures was introduced , against which measures used by merchants would regularly be checked . Shortly after the transfer of the market to the city a market cross was erected near the centre of the main market ( opposite the present day entrance to Davey Place ) , the design of which is not recorded . 
 In mid @-@ 1348 , the outbreak of bubonic plague known as the Great Mortality ( later referred to as the Black Death ) , which had swept across Europe during the past year , reached England for the first time with an outbreak in the south coast port of Melcombe . The plague spread gradually over the rest of the country with devastating effect , causing a mortality estimated at between 30 % – 45 % . In late March 1349 , the outbreak reached East Anglia and , for reasons which are not understood , increased drastically in intensity . In 1349 – 50 alone , more than half the population of East Anglia died . In 1369 , East Anglia , whose farming economy had collapsed in the wake of the plague , was struck by famine . 
 Although the market continued to operate , in the immediate aftermath of the plague it was at a much reduced level and many stalls were left empty for some years after . The famine of 1369 overwhelmed Norwich 's burial grounds , necessitating an expansion of St Peter Mancroft 's churchyard . The southernmost rows of stalls in the main marketplace , which had been occupied by drapers and linen merchants , were removed to clear space for an enlarged churchyard . By 1377 , the population of Norwich had fallen from at least 20 @,@ 000 before the outbreak to below 6 @,@ 000 . 
 Although social order was maintained throughout the plague years , the economy of the region was devastated . However , the surviving merchant community were very influential in the city and , in the wake of the catastrophe , set about increasing the council 's influence around the market , buying many of the surrounding shops . The council also bought a set of wharves along King Street near Dragon Hall in 1397 and decreed that all goods entering Norwich by water be unloaded there . This ensured almost complete control of Norwich trade by the merchants who now dominated the council . 
 The market soon began to recover from the plague years to become a major trading hub again . Records of 1565 show 37 butchers ' stalls alone in the market , and Norwich also became a major centre for the import of exotic foods . Sugar , figs and prunes were traded in the market in the 16th century , and it is recorded that 20 @,@ 000 oranges and 1 @,@ 000 lemons were provided for the 1581 St Bartholomew 's Day fair . 
 = = = Guildhall and new market cross = = = 
 In 1404 , Norwich secured a royal charter granting it autonomy as " The County of the City of Norwich " . The local council was restructured into a body headed by a Mayor and administered by Sheriffs and Aldermen ; the Mayor also formally became Clerk of the Markets , but in practice the running of the markets was always delegated to deputies . 
 By this time , the tollhouse was proving inadequate as the seat of local government and between 1407 – 13 it was demolished , along with an adjoining site which had housed a vegetable market , and was replaced by a new Guildhall . In keeping with Norwich 's status , it was one of the largest civic buildings in England outside London and housed all aspects of local government and justice for the new council . The Guildhall cost between £ 400 – £ 500 to build . ( As it was built primarily using pressed labour , modern equivalents of the building costs are virtually meaningless . The annual income of the city council at the time the Guildhall was built was around £ 120 . ) The eastern face of the Guildhall was built in a distinctive black and white checked design , representing the exchequer . The undercroft of the tollhouse was retained for use as a dungeon , while a new basement served as a lock @-@ up from the opening of the Guildhall until the 1980s . 
 The murage loft in the market , redundant since the completion of the city walls , took over the functions of the old tollhouse and became the offices of the market supervisor and the collection office for market tolls and taxes . 
 Between 1501 and 1503 , Mayor John <unk> had the original market cross demolished and replaced with an elaborate new cross . This was octagonal in shape , stood on a plinth 30 feet ( 9 m ) wide , and rose to a height of 60 to 70 feet ( 18 to 21 m ) . The central structure contained an oratory , occupied by a priest . 
 <unk> 's new market cross only survived in its original form for a short time . During the English Reformation of the 1530s , the rood on the pinnacle was pulled down and the oratory became a storeroom . The octagonal plinth became a shopping arcade of small stalls . In 1549 , a temporary gallows was erected at the cross for the mass execution of 60 of the participants in Kett 's Rebellion , who had congregated in the marketplace during their brief capture of Norwich . In 1574 , a local law was enacted demanding that all unemployed men were to assemble at the market cross each morning at 5 @.@ 00 am , along with the tools of their trade , and remain there for an hour in the hope that they would be offered work ; a bonesetter was hired to treat any men who claimed they were unfit for work through injury . The success of this scheme is not recorded . 
 By the 17th century , the building was known as the Market House , and was used for the sale of grain and other goods sold by the bushel ; a set of approved measures were chained to the pillars for public use . The archaic title of " Keeper of the Cross " was bestowed on the man appointed to sweep the marketplace weekly . 
 The market cross also served as the focal point of Norfolk 's parliamentary elections . Candidates would bring large crowds of voters in by cart from the surrounding countryside and ply them with large quantities of free alcohol to ensure their support . Candidates would pay for lodgings for the voters , but , in closely fought elections , more voters than usual would be shipped in and every inn in the city would fill , forcing voters to sleep in and around the cross . Sir Thomas Browne described the voters around the market cross as " like flocks of sheep " during the unusually close elections of 1678 , at the height of the Exclusion Crisis . Following the counting of the vote , the winning candidate would be carried three times around the market , followed by torch @-@ bearers and trumpeters . By this time , the crowds would generally be extremely drunk on the liquor provided by the candidates , and elections would often degenerate into drunken revelry or fighting . 
 Although it was popular with travelling vendors , particularly of small fancy goods , the maintenance of the market cross was costly and unpopular with Norwich 's citizens . In 1732 the cross was demolished , and the stone was sold for £ 125 . In 2005 the base of the cross was rediscovered in excavations during renovation of the market area , but has since been re @-@ covered . Its site is now outlined in red stones embedded in the market floor . 
 = = Other uses of the market square in Tudor and Stuart England = = 
 With few fixed structures in the main marketplace , the plain traditionally served as a public open space on days when the market was not operational . Before the Reformation in the 1530s , its main use was as a venue for religious festivals , particularly the annual procession of the Craft Guilds at Corpus Christi . Most public religious festivals were abandoned following the Reformation and the subsequent dissolution of many of the mediaeval guilds , and the leading event on Norwich 's civic calendar became the annual inauguration of the mayor , which took place each May . 
 The inauguration ceremony was conducted by the civic authorities and by the surviving , and still powerful , Guild of St George , and combined elements of a public festival and a religious carnival . Four <unk> ( city officials carrying swords ) marched ahead of the procession to clear a path . Behind the <unk> , the incoming and outgoing mayors rode side @-@ by @-@ side , preceded by trumpeters and standard @-@ bearers carrying the banners of England and St George , and followed by the city 's Sheriffs and Aldermen in ceremonial gowns of violet and red , respectively . The procession was flanked by the city 's waits ( musicians playing loud wind instruments , usually the shawm ) ( a mediaeval double reed wind instrument with conical wooden body ) , and accompanied by dick fools ( clowns carrying wands and wearing red and yellow gowns adorned with bells and cats ' tails ) and a man costumed as a dragon . 
 As well as the mayoral inaugurations , the marketplace was also the setting for other public events , particularly mourning processions on the deaths of monarchs , coronation celebrations , royal birthdays and celebrations of military victories . Firework displays and bonfires would be held on these occasions , accompanied by the local militia firing volleys and the ringing of the bells of the surrounding churches , while local residents and shopkeepers would illuminate their windows with lit candles . Often , particularly in the 18th century , temporary triumphal arches would be erected beside the Guildhall . Free beer would traditionally be distributed at these events , which would on occasion degenerate into drunken disorder . 
 The market was also the location for public punishment of wrongdoers , and stocks and a pillory were set at a prominent position at the eastern end of the Guildhall . The stocks were used for the punishment of relatively minor offences such as breaching the regulations on the price of bread , public brawling or <unk> to the Mayor ; wrongdoers would on occasion also be paraded around the market wearing paper hats bearing details of their offence . The pillory was used for more serious offences such as sedition . On at least two occasions in the late 16th century people convicted of sedition were nailed to the pillory by their ears ; on completion of their time on the pillory their ears were cut off . Public whippings of criminals were also conducted in the marketplace . Although not all executions in the period are recorded , it is known that public hangings also took place in the market square and around the market cross . 
 By the 17th century , the market had also become the venue for many travelling entertainments . Exotic animals were displayed , including lions , tigers , camels and jackals , and displays by conjurers , puppeteers , singers , acrobats and other entertainers also regularly took place . Displays of human deformities were also popular ; records exist from the 1670s and 1680s of the Mayor granting exhibition licences to , among others , " a monstrous man with 2 bodies brought from the Indies by Sir Thomas Grantham " , " a girl of sixteen with no bones " , " a monstrous <unk> child " , and " a monstrous man taken from amongst the hills of Corinthia , he feeds on the roots of trees etc " . Stages erected by charlatans selling medicines and demonstrating miracle cures were often erected near the Guildhall , prompting regular complaints from fishmongers that the crowds were blocking access to their stalls ; on at least one occasion one of these travelling doctors had his licence withdrawn ' because of possible damage to the city 's economy by the distraction of " idle minds " from their work ' . 
 = = Developments in the Georgian period = = 
 Improvements in Norfolk 's road infrastructure and the development of the stagecoach system made Norwich an increasingly popular destination with travellers . Norwich was recovering from the plague years and was a major city , with attractions and social events second only to London itself . The increasingly prosperous country landowners of Norfolk and Suffolk began visiting Norwich more frequently and staying for longer when they did so . 
 By the end of the 17th century many of the strict regulations regarding trade in Norwich were lifted or relaxed , and Norwich became a fashionable shopping town . Shops catering for the growing wealthy classes , such as booksellers , vintners and gunsmiths , grew around the market plain , especially in the large buildings along the eastern side of the market , the Nethererowe , which became so popular with the gentry it became known as Gentleman 's Walk . Gentleman 's Walk acquired a number of luxury shops , including John Toll 's drapers from which Elizabeth Gurney ( later Elizabeth Fry ) watched the election of 1796 , the wine and spirit dealership of Thomas <unk> who in company with other local shopkeepers founded a mutual association to provide fire insurance for the area 's shops which became Norwich Union , and Saunders Coffee House , patronised by the young Horatio and William Nelson . 
 By this time , a row of stalls bordering on St Peter Mancroft 's churchyard had developed into a row of three and four storey houses running east to west , and a second row of buildings running north to south ran through the main market square . This row of houses cut off the main market from the eastern strip housing the butchers and fishmongers , known as the Upper Market , leaving only two narrow passageways as direct links between the two halves of the market square . ( Although the buildings dividing the upper and lower markets were demolished in the 1930s , one of these connecting passages survives as Pudding Lane . The name " Pudding Lane " derives from " ped " , an archaic word for the large baskets from which itinerant traders sold goods in the market . ) 
 With increased numbers of people visiting Norwich , trade boomed in the inns around the marketplace . In addition to the existing taverns , at least four very large coaching inns opened along Gentleman 's Walk . By the latter half of the 18th century stagecoaches were leaving one or other of the inns almost daily to London , and the inns also served as the hub of a network of frequent services throughout East Anglia . 
 Built around long narrow yards , as well as serving food and drink and providing lodgings , these coaching inns also served as temporary warehouses , auction rooms and gambling halls for travellers doing business in the market . The best known was the Angel , parts of which dated to the 15th century . As well as providing the other functions of the Norwich inns , its yard also served as a popular theatre and venue for other performers . ( Despite its significance as a city , Norwich did not have a dedicated theatre until 1758 . ) However , in 1699 part of the building collapsed during a performance by Thomas Doggett 's troupe of players , killing a woman and injuring many of the audience . The reputation of the Angel was severely damaged , and although still used for small scale entertainments such as puppet shows , it was never again used for full scale theatrical performances . 
 Meanwhile , the livestock market south of St Peter Mancroft was becoming overwhelmingly crowded on market days . Eventually part of the eastern side of the castle mound was levelled , and in 1738 the livestock sales were moved to this new site . The old hay market remained on the old site for more than a century , until it was also moved to the new livestock market site in the early 19th century . The new livestock market was one of the last significant livestock markets in a British city centre , and developed a reputation as " the cruellest in the country " . 
 = = 19th century improvements = = 
 The relocation of the livestock market had done little to resolve the problems of congestion in and around the market . Many of the mediaeval access routes to the market were too narrow for wheeled transport , and the narrow alleys were also dark , dangerous and mostly unpaved . Although the market had been resurfaced during the 18th century , this had been with flint pebble cobblestones which were easily dislodged and trapped refuse . William Chase , editor of the first Norwich Directory , lobbied in the late 18th century for civic improvements and a rationalisation of the streets around the market . However , the economy of Norwich depended heavily on the textile industry , which had suffered badly from the loss of export markets during the French Wars , and funds for improvements were limited . By the beginning of the 19th century the only significant improvement had been the paving of Gentleman 's Walk . In 1805 a number of Improvement Commissions were established to propose solutions to the problems facing the area , but little action was taken . Local councils had no powers to levy rates to fund general civic improvements and as a consequence funds for improvement works had to be raised either through tolls and rents , via public appeals , or through long term borrowing , and the city was initially unable to raise sufficient funds . 
 In 1813 the yard of the King 's Head coaching inn was widened to create Davey Place , a new street between the market and Back of the Inns , at that time a narrow passageway which ran parallel to Gentleman 's Walk behind the coaching inns . ( Although the inns no longer remain , Back of the Inns survives as a street name . ) In 1820 the <unk> , Norwich 's first gas lamp , was installed in the market outside the entrance to Davey Place . Exchange Street , a new road running north from the northeast corner of the market , was completed in 1828 and a roadway was installed alongside the existing footpath . London Street , the main road connecting the market with the older areas of the city around Tombland and the Cathedral was widened in 1856 . In 1860 the decrepit fish market adjacent to the Guildhall , by now over 700 years old , was replaced with a new neoclassical building . In 1863 Gentleman 's Walk was paved properly with York stone , and in 1874 the cobbles of the marketplace were replaced by timber blocks . Although by this time the market operated on all working days , Sunday trading laws meant it was closed on Sundays . The market space on Sundays was used for public assemblies and gatherings . 
 Meanwhile , Norwich railway station had opened in 1844 . Although many Norwich residents were reluctant to use the railway , and goods carriers initially found it more convenient to continue to collect goods from the coaching inns , as railway usage gradually increased the number of coaches and carts calling at the inns slowly dwindled , reducing congestion . In 1899 the Angel inn — renamed the Royal Hotel in 1840 on the occasion of Queen Victoria 's wedding — finally closed , and was replaced with George Skipper 's Royal Arcade , a shopping centre in the Art Nouveau style . 
 Although the civic authorities initially resisted installing tramways in the city centre owing to concerns about nuisance and disruption , they eventually relented ; by the end of the 19th century Norwich had a total of 16 miles ( 26 km ) of tram routes , including a route along Gentleman 's Walk itself . While schemes to rationalise the layout of the market 's stalls had been proposed since the 18th century , they had foundered on the fact that so many of the stalls were privately owned . 
 = = 1930s redevelopment = = 
 In the wake of the First World War the council 's Markets Committee began a programme of gradually buying back all the privately owned stalls , with the intention of encouraging demobilised servicemen to work on the market . Within a few years the market was entirely publicly owned , and the council took responsibility for the upkeep of the market . The city also bought out and closed many of the 30 or more inns in the area , transferring their licences to the growing suburbs . 
 Meanwhile , the Guildhall , designed to serve the post @-@ plague city with a population of around 6 @,@ 000 , was hopelessly inadequate as the administrative centre of a major modern city . As an interim solution the row of buildings dividing the upper and main markets had mostly been taken into public ownership and converted into civic offices , and in January 1914 the 1860 fish market had also been enlarged and converted into offices . The Liberal welfare reforms of the early 20th century and the Local Government Act 1929 had greatly increased the role of local government in public health and welfare , and by the 1930s Norwich council was suffering from a severe lack of office space . 
 The council opted for a radical redevelopment of the area around the upper market . The row of buildings from St Peter Mancroft to the Guildhall , which divided the upper and lower markets , were demolished , opening up the marketplace , as were the buildings along the western side of the market . The mixture of stalls and booths which occupied the market itself were all removed , and replaced by 205 stalls in uniform parallel rows , topped with multi @-@ coloured sloping roofs ( known locally as " tilts " ) . During the rebuilding of the market square , the existing stalls were relocated to a number of temporary locations in the area to allow them to continue trading , including the courtyard and rear of the City Hall development and surrounding streets . In 1938 the coverings of the stalls were given the multi @-@ coloured stripes for which they became famous . 
 In 1932 , despite concerns from some local residents and businesses about the huge expense at a time of recession , a new building was envisaged to replace the demolished civic buildings , spanning the entire length of the western edge of the now unified marketplace . From over 140 entries a design by Charles Holloway James and Stephen Rowland Pierce was selected . Heavily influenced by Scandinavian architecture , the design attracted negative criticism at the time , with John Piper saying that " fog is its friend " . Opened by King George VI in 1938 as City Hall , the building proved extremely successful , and was described by Nikolaus Pevsner as " the foremost English public building between the Wars " . Norwich 's war memorial , designed by Edwin Lutyens and opened in 1927 outside the Guildhall , was moved to a long narrow memorial garden on a raised terrace between City Hall and the enlarged market shortly after the opening of City Hall . The Guildhall remained in use as a law court until 1985 , and its basement remained in use as cells until that time . 
 = = 1976 renovation = = 
 Although superficially the market remained little changed in the decades following the 1930s redevelopment , by the 1960s it was falling into disrepair , and it no longer met modern hygiene regulations . A lack of funds delayed improvement works , and renovation works did not begin until February 1976 . Hot and cold running water and refrigeration were provided to those stalls handling food , and many of the stalls were converted into lockable units . New electrical mains cables were installed throughout the market , the site was resurfaced , and the elegant but aging 19th century lavatories were demolished . Aside from the demolition of the Victorian toilets , the only significant visible alteration was the addition of corrugated plastic covers over the walkways between the stalls . Although competition from supermarkets was by this time affecting shopping patterns , and the decline of market gardening meant a virtual end to stall @-@ holders selling their own produce , the market survived competitive pressures . Many stalls diversified into specialist foods , clothing and other goods and the high number of stalls allowed the market to sell a range of goods as great as that provided by the supermarkets . 
 = = 2005 rebuilding = = 
 While the 1976 renovations prolonged the life of the 1930s market , by the 1990s the market was once more becoming decrepit . The covers erected in 1976 over the walkways blocked sunlight , leaving much of the market dingy and poorly lit . The walkways themselves , already narrow , were becoming even more restricted as stalls erected external displays and additional weatherproofing . Removable shutters used to secure the stalls overnight were stacked against the sides of the stalls during trading hours , causing further obstruction , while on those stalls fitted with doors the doors opened outwards to maximise the limited space inside the units . In addition , the floors of stalls followed the slope of the hill , a gradient of about 1 : 12 , causing health problems for those market workers who had to stand at this angle for prolonged periods during the day . Norwich City Council decided that these problems needed to be addressed , and in December 2003 invited the public to choose between three proposals for a rebuilt market . 
 These plans were extremely controversial . All three envisaged reducing the number of stalls from 205 to 140 – 160 in order to increase space , and all three involved splitting the market into isolated clusters of stalls , significantly altering its character and appearance . The Eastern Daily Press organised a campaign against the perceived unattractiveness of the designs , the proposed reduction in the number of stalls which would mean stallholders losing their jobs and the remaining stallholders facing rent increases to cover the difference , and the change to the character of central Norwich that such a radical redesign of the market would entail . A petition of over 12 @,@ 000 signatories rejecting all three proposed designs was gathered . 
 Following a public meeting on 26 January 2004 the council backed down , and Hereward Cooke , deputy leader of the council , said that " We are finding out what the stall @-@ holders and people of Norwich want and we will try our best to fulfill their wishes " . Architect Michael Innes proposed a new design , which was accepted by the council . The new design was put in place in 2005 . 
 Innes 's design retained the market 's layout of parallel rows of stalls with striped coloured roofs . The new stalls were built as steel and aluminium prefabricated units consisting of four stalls each , each stall having a level floor accessed by a step . These " pods " were arranged in rows , with 2 @-@ metre ( 6 ft 7 in ) wide walkways between the " pods " . Transparent retractable canopies were installed above the aisles , which could be opened and closed centrally . 
 To allow the market to continue trading while the rebuilding took place , a set of temporary stalls were built in Gentleman 's Walk and surrounding streets . A third of the market 's stalls at a time traded from these temporary stalls while their stalls in the main market were replaced , a process taking four months for each third of the market . The rebuilding was officially completed on 25 March 2006 . Although generally popular with traders and shoppers , the redesign was criticised by The Times , who described it as " an anaemic shopping mall for health and safety inspectors : straight lines , wipe @-@ clean boxy cubicles , all life and love drained out . " 
 Meanwhile , in November 2004 engineers identified cracks in the terrace supporting the Memorial Gardens , and they were closed to the public as a potential hazard . Eventually in 2009 work began on renovating the gardens . Lutyens 's memorial was dismantled and cleaned , and reassembled at a higher level to be visible from the street ; it was also rotated 180 ° to face City Hall , rather than the market . The terrace was strengthened , and the gardens were landscaped around a new sculpture by Paul de <unk> on the original site of the memorial . 
 Supermarkets continued to affect shopping patterns . In 1979 fruit and vegetable stalls occupied 70 of the market 's 205 stalls ; by 1988 <unk> occupied only 28 stalls , and by 2010 there were only seven remaining fruit and vegetable stalls on the market . A wide variety of other stalls have taken their place , and the market remains active . One of the largest markets in Britain , it is a tourist attraction as well as remaining heavily used by local residents , and is a focal point of the city . 
 = 1984 Pacific typhoon season = 
 The 1984 Pacific typhoon season has no official bounds , but most tropical cyclones tend to form in the northwestern Pacific Ocean between May and November . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northwestern Pacific Ocean . Tropical Storms formed in the entire west pacific basin were assigned a name by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . Tropical depressions that enter or form in the Philippine area of responsibility are assigned a name by the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration or PAGASA . This can often result in the same storm having two names . 
 A total of 30 tropical depressions formed in 1984 in the Western Pacific , of which 27 became tropical storms , 16 reached typhoon intensity , and two reached super typhoon strength . Eight tropical cyclones moved into mainland China , four struck Vietnam , four moved through the Philippines , and one cyclone moved into South Korea . The second consecutive typhoon season with a late start , all of the season activity was contained between June and December , with August and October the most active months , contributing to half of the seasonal tropical cyclone count . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Despite its late start , a total of 30 tropical depressions formed this year in the Western Pacific , of which 27 became tropical storms . A total of 16 storms reached typhoon intensity , of which 2 reached super typhoon strength . Three of the systems formed in June , four in July , seven in August , four in September , eight in October , three in November , and one in December . Eight tropical cyclones moved into mainland China , four struck Vietnam , four moved through the Philippines , and one cyclone moved into South Korea . The most damaging and deadly typhoon this season was Ike , which led to significant damage and two @-@ thirds of the overall seasonal death toll , mainly from the Philippines . The longest lived cyclone was Bill , which persisted for two weeks during mid November . Despite the eight tropical cyclones moving into China , Hong Kong received only 18 percent of its annual rainfall from tropical cyclones , which was 35 percent below the annual average . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Vernon = = = 
 Tropical Storm Vernon , the first of the year , developed in the South China Sea on June 7 . It moved northwest , and then westward in an environment of strong vertical wind shear , Vernon moved inland into Vietnam on June 10 . Flooding of rice , sweet potato , and sesame crops in Quang Nam @-@ Danang province was caused by Vernon . Combined with 1983 's late formation of Tropical Storm Sarah in June , this is only known time that two consecutive years had their first storm develop as late as June . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Wynne ( Asiang ) = = = 
 The monsoon trough established itself across the South China Sea eastward into the Philippine Sea on June 14 . A tropical disturbance formed within this trough on June 16 in the northern Philippine Sea . Moving westward for much of its existence to the south of a narrow subtropical ridge , an upper level high developed over the strengthening low level circulation early on June 19 , which became a tropical depression that day . By that evening , the cyclone had strengthened into a tropical storm . Strong upper level ridging over mainland China led to easterly vertical wind shear , which limited intensification . The cyclone passed by the southern coast of Taiwan , which caused slight weakening as it entered the South China Sea . Passing south of Hong Kong , a U. S. Naval ship and Hong Kong both reported winds of 60 knots ( 110 km / h ) , with gusts to 82 knots ( 152 km / h ) reported at Tate 's Cairn and 70 knots ( 130 km / h ) noted out at sea . Southwest flow to the south of Wynne led to flooding in Luzon , where 100 square kilometres ( 25 @,@ 000 acres ) of <unk> was destroyed . Three fisherman drowned north of Luzon . Late on June 25 , Wynne made landfall in China near the Luichow Peninsula , and then weakened rapidly inland . 
 = = = Typhoon Alex ( <unk> ) = = = 
 On June 28 , a surface circulation formed in the Philippine Sea . Development of the system began in earnest on June 30 , and a tropical depression had formed early on July 1 , with tropical storm status attained later in the day . A ridge to its north eroded , allowing Alex to move north @-@ northwest towards Taiwan . Alex became the first typhoon of the season shortly before moving across the mountainous island . On July 5 , extratropical transition of Alex had begun . By late in the day , it was an extratropical cyclone along a frontal zone in the Sea of Japan . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Betty ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Development of this system was slow within the eastern portion of the monsoon trough . By midday on July 2 , the disturbance was first noted about 1 @,@ 020 kilometres ( 630 mi ) southwest of Guam . The system moved northwest for much of its life cycle , initially following Alex and then the southwest side of the subtropical ridge . A broad tropical depression formed on the afternoon on July 5 within the disturbed weather area , weakening as it passed over Luzon . Late on July 7 , ship reports indicated the system had become a tropical storm . The cyclone moved within the radar fence of Hong Kong near its peak intensity before making landfall 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) to its west @-@ southwest during the early afternoon of July 9 . Winds gusted to 70 knots ( 130 km / h ) at Green Island . Weakening over the topography of China was rapid thereafter , and the system dissipated by early on July 10 . 
 = = = Typhoon Cary = = = 
 Initiated by the tropical tropospheric trough ( TUTT ) , an area of convection was first noted southeast of the upper trough in an area with favorable upper level divergence on July 2 near 18N <unk> . The disturbance moved west @-@ southwest and evolved into a tropical depression late on July 6 and a tropical storm soon after . The cyclone moved northwest towards a break in the subtropical ridge and reached typhoon status late on July 9 forming a large eye about 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) in diameter . Rapid development continued for another 12 hours as it slowly moved through the ridge axis . The cyclone turned northeast late on July 10 as it began to be sheared significantly from the northwest . Shearing relented on July 11 allowing the eye to reform , this time 75 kilometres ( 47 mi ) wide . As the typhoon progressed more poleward , increased vertical wind shear and the entrainment of cooler and drier air began its extratropical transition . By late on July 14 , Cary had become an extratropical cyclone . The nontropical system then moved westward , eventually dissipating south of Japan . 
 = = = Typhoon Dinah = = = 
 For two weeks after Betty and Cary , high pressure dominated the northwest Pacific , with no sign of a monsoon trough . A cold front dropped into the area from the north , and remained stationary across much of the central North Pacific just north of Wake Island for nearly a week . An area of convection along the tail of the old frontal boundary formed on July 21 , and closed off a wind circulation just northwest of Wake Island . Drifting westward , the system did not develop considerably until July 23 . By late on July 24 , it became a tropical depression . Intensifying while moving west @-@ southwest , the system became a typhoon late on July 25 with a 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) wide eye . 
 Meanwhile , Tropical Storm Ed was approaching from the northwest and the ridge north of Dinah moved east , which turned the typhoon northwest . For 48 hours between July 26 and July 28 , Dinah and Ed were between 1 @,@ 165 kilometres ( 724 mi ) and 1 @,@ 670 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 040 mi ) from one another , and <unk> interaction did impart a slight change onto Dinah 's track . On July 27 , while the cyclones were at their closest approach , Dinah weakened due to the more dominant outflow from Ed . The westerly shear led to a change in track to the east @-@ northeast for Dinah . On July 28 , once the cyclones moved farther apart , Dinah restrengthened rapidly and reached its maximum intensity by noon on July 29 . Moving north @-@ northeast around the western fringe of the subtropical ridge , Dinah 's motion accelerated , moving close to Marcus Island late that afternoon , causing extensive vegetation damage . The coast guard station on the island sustained US $ 30 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1984 dollars ) when sustained winds reached 63 knots ( 117 km / h ) , with gusts to 89 knots ( 165 km / h ) . Weakening as it continued to move north @-@ northeast , Dinah regained tropical storm status on July 31 . Veering more northeast and interacting with a nearby upper trough in the Westerlies , Dinah became an extratropical cyclone late on August 1 . The nontropical cyclone moved off the east , eventually crossing the International Dateline . 
 = = = Typhoon Ed = = = 
 Ed formed along the tail of a weakening cold front just south of Japan on July 23 . It took a day to become detached on satellite pictures , and become a tropical disturbance . On the morning of July 25 a surface circulation had formed and the cyclone became a tropical depression . By July 26 , it became a tropical storm . Initially it moved southeast during this period of strengthening as it approached Typhoon Dinah . As a shortwave trough in the Westerlies approached Ed , the cyclone turned north and moved away from Dinah . <unk> built in quickly behind the shortwave , and the cyclone turned west @-@ northwest ; a course it would maintain until landfall in mainland China . Strengthening continued , and Ed became an intense typhoon just south of Kyūshū . As it moved across the East China Sea , cooler waters and drier air led to weakening . Late on July 31 , Ed made landfall 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) north of Shang @-@ Hai as a strong tropical storm . Turning northwest after landfall , Ed moved along the Chinese coast and gradually weakened . By late on August 1 , it had dissipated as a tropical cyclone . The Korean ship <unk> Glory sank in the Korea Strait on July 29 , which led to one death and 11 others declared missing . The launch of the weather satellite GMS @-@ 3 was delayed by this typhoon 's passage nearby Japan . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Freda ( Ditang ) = = = 
 The tail end of a trough extending southwest of Dinah west of Guam led to the development of this system . A tropical disturbance formed there on August 2 and developed a surface cyclone in the Philippine Sea later that day . A broad surface cyclone , the system tracked northwest and slowly developed . By late on August 5 , it became a tropical depression . During the morning of August 6 , it strengthened into a tropical storm while maintaining its broad center and a pair of circulation centers . The new northern center became dominant overnight . The system jumped northwest and quickly moved through the Formosa Straits before striking mainland China very early on August 8 . Two died in Taiwan due to Freda . After two days inland , Freda finally dissipated as a tropical cyclone , but its cloud pattern remained identifiable for an additional day or two thereafter . 
 = = = Tropical Depression 09W ( <unk> — Gloring ) = = = 
 A broad surface low formed in the near equatorial trough on August 7 about 1 @,@ 225 kilometres ( 761 mi ) south of Guam . Moving northwest , the disturbance slowly organized as it moved into the southeast portion of the monsoon trough . On August 10 , the low jogged northward for a day towards an upper level low northwest of Taiwan . Late on August 11 , the low became a tropical depression , which was named <unk> by PAGASA and designated 09W by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . It then moved west @-@ northwest along the northern side of the monsoon trough as a sheared system due to moderate southerly flow aloft . A new circulation center developed , which led to PAGASA renaming the system Gloring as it neared the southern coast of Taiwan . The depression ultimately merged with a low pressure area over the South China Sea , which would develop into Tropical Storm Gerald . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Gerald ( Isang ) = = = 
 Gerald formed within the monsoon trough in the northern South China Sea , where it meandered for its existence . The initial surface low formed on August 12 near 18N <unk> . Slow development continued , and when the remains of Tropical Depression 09W / Gloring became absorbed by this cyclone , thunderstorm activity increased significantly . The system was a monsoon depression , with a central pressure of 997 hectopascals ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) and winds of up to 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) a bit to the south of the circulation center . The storm 's maximum sustained winds began to migrate closer to the center , and it became a tropical storm on the morning of August 16 . Drifting west , Gerald slowly intensified for the next couple days . As Holly developed east of Taiwan , its outflow sheared Gerald , keeping the system from becoming a typhoon . Holly 's proximity led to Gerald completing a small cyclonic loop on August 17 . As Holly turned northwest , Gerald drifted westward once again . By August 20 , Holly 's large circulation over the East China Sea lured Gerald northeast . Shearing again increased , weakening Gerald . The cyclone made landfall 95 kilometres ( 59 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Hong Kong as a tropical depression . Winds gusted to 62 knots ( 115 km / h ) at Tate 's Cairn . Once inland , it turned to the north and weakened rapidly . 
 = = = Typhoon Holly ( <unk> ) = = = 
 This system formed in the eastern end of the monsoon trough that spawned Gerald . A very large cyclone , it did not close off a wind circulation until it achieved tropical storm strength on the morning of August 16 . Like Freda and TD 09W , it had a broad center with light winds for much of its life cycle . Kadena Air Force Base , on Okinawa , measured 425 millimetres ( 16 @.@ 7 in ) of rainfall from this cyclone , and two periods of winds exceeding 50 knots ( 93 km / h ) on August 18 , and then again late August 19 and early August 20 . The cyclone moved westward under the base of the subtropical ridge and reached typhoon strength on the morning of August 18 . The system turned northwest and then north around the ridge 's periphery at a relatively slow rate of speed . As the system turned northeast and accelerated out of the East China Sea into the Korea Strait , it led to considerable damage in the Korean peninsula and across Kyūshū . One perished , eleven were injured , and nine went missing . <unk> , on Kyūshū , measured 381 millimetres ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) of rainfall in a 24 ‑ hour period during Holly 's passage . This rainfall led to flooding and landslides . Interaction with nearby landmasses began to weaken Holly , and interaction with a mid @-@ level trough led to its extratropical transition . Holly became an extratropical cyclone as it approached Hokkaidō early on August 23 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> ( Lusing ) = = = 
 Convection formed in the eastern end of the monsoon trough just north of Guam on August 20 , leading to the formation of a weak low pressure area by late morning August 21 . The system slowly consolidated as it moved northwest , and was separating from the monsoon trough on August 23 . Although convection increased in organization , the surface wind field did not respond . Nevertheless , it was deemed a tropical depression on the morning of August 24 . By the next morning , the surface circulation became exposed as upper level conditions worsened due to strong <unk> aloft . The cyclone was no longer deemed tropical at that time . The surface cyclone moved northwest , crossing the Ryūkyū Islands before it merged with a frontal zone in the northern East China Sea late on August 26 . 
 = = = Typhoon Ike ( <unk> ) = = = 
 This tropical cyclone formed on August 27 in the Philippine Sea , and strengthened as it moved westward into the southern Philippines , becoming a typhoon on August 31 . Typhoon Ike caused extreme wind and flooding damage when it crossed the Philippines , resulting in 1492 fatalities , one of the Philippines ' worst natural disaster in modern times , and its worst typhoon since Amy struck the archipelago in 1951 . A total of 200 @,@ 000 to 480 @,@ 000 were left homeless . Emerging from the Philippines as a strong tropical storm , Ike restrengthened as it tracked northwest through the South China Sea across northeast Hainan Island . Weakening back into a tropical storm , Ike moving inland into mainland China . In Hong Kong , winds gusted to 49 knots ( 91 km / h ) at Tate 's Cairn . Extensive crop damage was experienced in southern China , with Ike becoming the most significant tropical cyclone to strike Guangxi since 1954 . Total damage was reportedly US $ 111 million ( 1984 dollars ) . The name Ike was retired after this season . 
 = = = Typhoon June ( Maring ) = = = 
 A surface low formed within the monsoon trough on August 25 . The low drifted westward as convection tried to consolidate around the center . Strong upper level wind shear inhibited development for the next couple of days . It took until late on August 28 for a single circulation center to consolidate , and when it did , gale force winds around the center forced an upgrade from a monsoon depression to a tropical storm about 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) east of Luzon . Moving westward , it struck Luzon early on August 29 . By late morning , the system turned west @-@ northwest over the mountainous island , emerging into the South China Sea . A total of 121 lives were taken by June across the Philippines , and damage totaled US $ 5 million ( 1984 dollars . ) A weakness in the subtropical ridge to its north led to a turn to the northwest , and the system made landfall 240 kilometres ( 150 mi ) east of Hong Kong . Winds gusted to 38 knots ( 70 km / h ) at Tate 's Cairn , and total rainfall at Cheung Chau reached 187 @.@ 3 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 37 in ) . When Tropical Storm June hit southeast China on August 30 , 67 people were reported dead due to extensive flooding from June 's broad circulation . 
 = = = Typhoon Kelly = = = 
 Developing at the southern end of a shear line , a low level circulation formed on September 13 with increasing convective organization to the south of a cold core cyclone . Completing a cyclonic loop , the cyclone continued to develop despite cool air becoming entrained within its circulation . Approaching the upper level low , Kelly slowed down its northward motion and reached its maximum intensity . Soon afterwards , it rapidly accelerated northeast . Losing its tropical character late on September 17 , it became an extratropical cyclone on the morning of September 18 . This cyclone continued moving northeast for another few days , past the International Dateline and into the Gulf of Alaska . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Lynn ( <unk> ) = = = 
 First noted as an area of poorly organized thunderstorms near Guam on September 19 , the disturbance moved westward across the northern Philippine Sea . As an upper tropospheric cyclone weakened east of Luzon on September 22 , upper level conditions improved , but no reflection at the surface was yet witnessed . The thunderstorms entered the South China Sea on September 23 while a lee side surface low formed along the monsoon trough west of Luzon due to the strong easterly low @-@ level flow . The disturbance rapidly consolidated , and it became a tropical depression early on September 24 . Slowly intensifying as it moved west @-@ northwest , Lynn became a tropical storm on September 25 . At this point , the storm track became west @-@ southwesterly and upper level winds began to shear thunderstorms north of the center . Weakening ensued , and Lynn struggled to maintain tropical storm intensity as it made landfall about 95 kilometres ( 59 mi ) southeast of Da Nang , Vietnam . The depression then turned northwest and dissipated near the Vietnam / Laos border early on September 28 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> = = = 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Maury = = = 
 The system formed near the intersection of the northeast end of the monsoon trough with a frontal boundary near Marcus Island just as Nina was developing 1300 km to its west on September 27 . By early on September 28 , it had become a tropical depression with tropical storm strength reached by noon as Maury moved north around Nina . Instead of recurving quickly around the subtropical ridge to its east and southeast , Maury slowed as it entered Nina 's larger circulation . Nina absorbed Maury 's circulation on October 1 as it overtook the storm from the southwest . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nina = = = 
 Like Maury , Nina formed near the intersection of a frontal zone and the monsoon trough . On September 27 , a circulation formed about 925 kilometres ( 575 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Guam . An upper level high north of Guam allowed for further development . Moving north , the system detached from the monsoon trough , and it became a tropical depression on September 28 . Southerly shear across the system led to an initially subtropical appearance , as thunderstorms moved away from the center . This also prevented significant development . On September 29 , the main belt of the Westerlies captured the cyclone , displacing thunderstorms even farther east of the center . With the low level circulation exposed , Nina weakened into a tropical depression . By late on September 30 , the low level circulation moved back under the convection , which resulted in reintensification back to a tropical storm at the same time Maury was absorbed into its circulation . By late morning October 1 , Nina reached its maximum intensity , but extratropical transition was already underway . Central convection decreased , and Nina became an extratropical cyclone by October 2 . 
 = = = Typhoon Ogden = = = 
 A weak surface low formed west of Truk on October 3 , which contained little thunderstorm activity . Moving northwest , it joined the eastern section of the monsoon trough . Following the flow around the east side of the trough towards the north , poorly organized convection became associated with the persistent low . Once it neared the northeast fringe of the trough , convective organization improved . Although still a very broad system , it became a tropical depression on the morning of October 7 . Moving around the southwest part of a retreating subtropical ridge , Ogden sharply recurved . By early October 8 , it strengthened into a tropical storm and passed just east of Marcus Island . The cyclone attained typhoon intensity partially due to translational motion as it began to undergo extratropical transition on October 9 . Southwest shear began to significantly impact the system thereafter , which weakened the system into a tropical storm on October 10 . By noon , the system had fully evolved into an extratropical cyclone . The nontropical storm continued northeast towards the International Dateline . 
 = = = Typhoon Phyllis = = = 
 Phyllis formed within a surface trough left behind by Ogden . By late on October 7 , a surface low had formed east of Guam . The system drifted northeast . A compact system , the system became a tropical depression late on October 10 and a tropical storm on the morning of October 11 . Northward acceleration had begun , and Phyllis became a typhoon the morning of October 12 . A cut off low south of Honshū helped lead to strong southerly flow over Phyllis , which weakened the storm . The shear vector changed from southerly to easterly as the main belt of the Westerlies impacted the cyclone , which caused faster weakening . By the morning of October 14 , Phyllis became a wave along the cold front approaching the system from the west . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Roy = = = 
 Developing southwest of Guam as Phyllis was forming to its northeast , a weak circulation developed on October 9 . Upper level wind shear from Ogden slowed development into October 10 . Thereafter , convection became better organized with the system and it became a tropical depression by October 11 . A compact system , it became a tropical storm later that morning . Strong upper level easterlies halted development due to vertical wind shear . The low @-@ level monsoon flow became diverted from Roy to Phyllis , which removed a potential source of low @-@ level vorticity . Roy was an exposed circulation center on October 12 with decreasing convection when its lowest central pressure was reached . By the morning of October 13 , it lost its defined circulation center and had dissipated as a tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Susan = = = 
 On October 10 , a circulation had formed in the central South China Sea . Slow to consolidate , the low accelerated west along the axis of the monsoon trough as it became a tropical depression late on October 11 . Developing as it veered west @-@ northwest , Susan became a minimal tropical storm as it made landfall just north of Nha Trang , Vietnam . The system turned northwest up the Mekong river valley , maintaining its identity as a convective area for the next three days . Extreme flooding struck eastern and central Vietnam on October 12 and caused 33 casualties and moderate crop damage . 
 = = = Tropical Depression 23W = = = 
 Developing within the monsoon trough , convection increased near Truk on October 16 . A central convective feature formed , and the system became a tropical depression that afternoon . Moving northwest , the depression weakened as it became sheared from the north and a larger circulation formed to its southeast , which evolved into Thad . 
 = = = Typhoon Thad = = = 
 Developing southeast of Guam as Tropical Depression 23W was dissipating , this convective cluster moved north @-@ northwest . Forming a circulation center near Truk , Thad became a tropical storm as it approached Guam on October 19 . Moving east of the island , Thad became an intense typhoon very early on October 22 . Recurving into the Westerlies thereafter , the cyclone slowly weakened as it accelerated northeast and became an extratropical cyclone by October 24 . 
 = = = Super Typhoon Vanessa ( <unk> ) = = = 
 This system formed in the near equatorial trough southeast of Ponape a few days after Thad on October 20 . The system moved northwest to just north of Ponape as it slowly developed . The disturbance strengthened into a tropical depression by October 22 and a tropical storm October 23 despite some northwesterly shear from Thad . As a minimal typhoon , Vanessa moved about 165 kilometres ( 103 mi ) south of Guam , where winds gusted to 59 knots ( 109 km / h ) on Nimitz Hill . Damage on the island totaled US $ 1 @.@ 7 million ( 1984 dollars ) , mainly to the banana crop . 
 Moving west @-@ northwest , Vanessa continued to strengthen , becoming a super typhoon . Super Typhoon Vanessa was the strongest typhoon of the season , reaching maximum sustained wind speeds of 190 miles per hour ( 310 km / h ) over the open waters of the West Pacific . At its peak , it had a pressure of 880 mb , only 10 millibars higher than the record @-@ setting Typhoon Tip of 1979 . Its central pressure fell 100 mb in 48 hours . The intense cyclone recurved on October 27 and October 28 as a cold front approached from the northwest . Vanessa slowly merged with the frontal boundary , becoming a storm @-@ force extratropical cyclone late on October 30 . 
 Though the storm did not directly impact the Philippines , its outer bands triggered flooding that killed 63 people . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Warren ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The initial disturbance formed at the end of a shear line about 555 kilometres ( 345 mi ) northeast of <unk> . Embedded within the monsoon trough , it was a broad depression . It slowly weakened as it moved west @-@ southwest through the Philippines into the South China Sea on October 22 . Due to strengthening northeasterly low level flow , the circulation became better defined and conditions aloft favored strengthening . The system formed into a tropical depression late on October 23 despite easterly vertical wind shear . By early on October 24 , Warren became a tropical storm which then turned to the north . Between October 24 and October 26 , the cyclone performed a small cyclonic loop . On October 26 , Warren strengthened into a typhoon . 
 The steering flow weakened around Warren at that time as Vanessa was moving to its northeast . Warren became entrained into Vanessa 's southwestern circulation , and turned east @-@ northeast . As Vanessa moved away from Warren , the cyclone performed an anticyclonic loop and turned back to the west on October 28 . Clark Air Force Base recorded 222 millimetres ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) of rainfall on October 28 and October 29 due to Warren . The heavy rains over the Philippines led to landslides which killed 42 people . The passenger ferry MV Venus capsized on October 28 , which led to an additional 36 deaths . The 930 @-@ ton ship Lorenzo Container VIII sank that day , which led to eight missing crew members . 
 Another surge in the low @-@ level northeast flow to Warren 's north led to an expansion of its wind field . This cooler and drier air was also weakening the cyclone . On October 30 , the storm turned west @-@ southwest and continued weakening . By October 31 Warren had weakened to a tropical depression and it dissipated as a tropical cyclone over water . Its remaining convection moved into central Vietnam on November 1 . Its weakening center led to gales along the coast . By November 2 , Warren 's circulation center dissipated . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Seniang = = = 
 = = = Typhoon Agnes ( Undang ) = = = 
 This system began as an area of convection along the equator on October 28 . Moving northwest , the system developed . On November 1 , the system became a tropical depression and then strengthened into a tropical storm . The storm turned west @-@ northwest due to a broad ridge to its north . Intensifying into a typhoon , Agnes became an intense typhoon as it approached the Philippines . Two months after Typhoon Ike hit the central Philippines , 140 miles per hour ( 230 km / h ) Typhoon Agnes struck just south of <unk> on November 4 . It crossed the islands and briefly weakened . Strengthening began as it moved through the South China Sea . It hit <unk> , Vietnam as a 115 miles per hour ( 185 km / h ) typhoon on November 7 . Once onshore , Anges weakened rapidly before dissipating on November 8 . 
 Across the Philippines , Agnes wrought catastrophic damage . A total of 201 @,@ 014 homes were destroyed and another 163 @,@ 506 were damaged , with loses amounting to 1 @.@ 9 billion pesos ( US $ 96 @.@ 6 million ) . At least 895 people perished in the storm while 275 others were reported missing . Another 2 @,@ 526 people were injured by the storm . Altogether , approximately 1 @.@ 9 million people were affected by the typhoon . Extensive damage also took place in Vietnam where at least 134 people were killed . At least 30 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and another 120 @,@ 000 were flooded or damaged . 
 = = = Super Typhoon Bill ( <unk> ) = = = 
 An area of convection organized into a tropical depression on November 8 while east of Guam . It executed a small loop , reached tropical storm strength later on the 8th , and reached typhoon intensity on the 11th . Bill continued to strengthen as it tracked westward , reaching maximum sustained winds of 150 miles per hour ( 240 km / h ) on the 14th . Strong upper level winds weakened the storm , and as a break in the subtropical ridge brought the storm northward , upper level winds from Typhoon Clara weakened Bill to a tropical storm on the 18th . It looped southeastward while just east of Luzon , and looped again to the southwest on the 20th . Bill dissipated as a tropical cyclone on the November 22 , after causing minor damage on its path . 
 = = = Typhoon Clara ( <unk> ) = = = 
 A large , low @-@ latitude disturbance formed in the eastern Caroline islands on November 11 . By November 13 , the surface low was gaining significant amounts of convection . Its circulation was aided by a tropical disturbance to its south in the Solomon islands which enhanced westerly flow between the two systems , increasing the low level vorticity within the northern hemisphere system . Consolidation of the system began , and the system became a tropical depression on November 14 . Further development of this system into a tropical storm and typhoon was accompanied by an expansion in the size of its circulation . As Clara recurved east of <unk> , it passed within 930 kilometres ( 580 mi ) of Bill , which radically changed Bill 's course and weakened both cyclones . Once Bill moved farther away , Clara reintensified into a strong typhoon by November 20 . <unk> of Clara continued , and it became an extratropical cyclone along an approaching frontal zone , and was able to be followed through November 22 . Iwo @-@ Jima reported 40 knots ( 74 km / h ) winds with gusts to 63 knots ( 117 km / h ) as Clara passed by to the north . 
 = = = Typhoon Doyle ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Its initial tropical disturbance was first noted near 5N <unk> on December 1 . The system moved west @-@ northwest , slowly developing . A low @-@ level circulation in the Coral Sea helped enhance westerly flow to its south , which developed into a tropical depression late on December 4 and a tropical storm early on December 5 . Intensification continued , and typhoon strength was reached late on December 6 . Turning more northwest , the typhoon became intense early on December 8 . As it recurved northward , the cyclone weakened quickly late on December 9 and early on December 10 . The cyclone became an exposed circulation , and dissipated as a tropical cyclone over water late on December 11 . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 During the season 27 named tropical cyclones developed in the Western Pacific and were named by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , when it was determined that they had become tropical storms . These names were contributed to a revised list which started on 1979 . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration uses its own naming scheme for tropical cyclones in their area of responsibility . PAGASA assigns names to tropical depressions that form within their area of responsibility and any tropical cyclone that might move into their area of responsibility . Should the list of names for a given year prove to be insufficient , names are taken from an auxiliary list , the first 6 of which are published each year before the season starts . Names not retired from this list will be used again in the 1988 season . This is the same list used for the 1980 season . PAGASA uses its own naming scheme that starts in the Filipino alphabet , with names of Filipino female names ending with " ng " ( A , B , K , D , etc . ) . Names that were not assigned / going to use are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Due to a high death toll caused by Typhoon Ike , the name Ike was later retired and was replaced by Ian and was first used in the 1987 season . PAGASA did the same and retired the name <unk> and was replaced by <unk> for the 1988 season . 
 = HMS Calliope ( 1884 ) = 
 HMS Calliope was a Calypso @-@ class corvette ( later classified as a third @-@ class cruiser ) of the Royal Navy which served from 1887 until 1951 . Exemplifying the transitional nature of the late Victorian navy , Calliope was a sailing corvette – last such ship built for the Royal Navy – but supplemented the full sail rig with a powerful engine . Steel was used for the hull , and like the earlier iron @-@ hulled corvettes , Calliope was cased with timber and coppered below the waterline , in the same manner as wooden ships . 
 Calliope was known for " one of the most famous episodes of seamanship in the 19th century " , when the vessel was the only one present to avoid being sunk or stranded in the tropical cyclone that struck Apia , Samoa in 1889 . After retirement from active service , Calliope served as a training ship until 1951 , when the old corvette was sold for breaking . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Calliope and sister ship Calypso comprised the Calypso class of corvettes designed by Nathaniel Barnaby . Part of a long line of cruiser classes built for protecting trade routes and colonial police work , they were the last two sailing corvettes built for the Royal Navy . Corvettes had been built of iron since the Volage class of 1867 , but the <unk> and the preceding Comus class were instead built of steel . Corvettes were designed to operate across the vast distances of Britain 's maritime empire , and could not rely on dry docks for maintenance . Since iron ( and steel ) hulls were subject to biofouling , and they could not easily be cleaned , the established practice of copper sheathing was extended to protect them ; the metal plating of the hull was timber @-@ cased and coppered below the waterline . The only armour was a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 @-@ mm ) armoured deck covering the machinery spaces , but coal bunkers along the sides gave some protection to the machinery spaces . 
 Calypso and Calliope differed from their nine predecessors of the Comus class in armament ; they were also slightly longer , had a deeper draught , and displaced 390 tons more . Originally planned as a ten @-@ gun corvette , Calliope was completed with four 6 @-@ inch ( 152 @.@ 4 mm ) breechloaders in sponsons fore and aft on each side , twelve 5 @-@ inch ( 127 @.@ 0 mm ) breechloaders in broadside between the 6 @-@ inch guns , and six quick @-@ firing <unk> . 
 The compound @-@ expansion steam engine was supplied with steam by 6 boilers and developed 4 @,@ 023 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 000 kW ) . This was 50 % more powerful than the predecessor class , which gave the corvette one more knot of speed , a difference that would be crucial in the disaster that made Calliope famous . Driving a single feathering screw , the engine could achieve a speed of 13 ¾ knots , or 14 ¾ knots with forced draught . The vessel nevertheless was a fully rigged sailing ship , allowing sustained service in areas where coaling stations were far apart . Calliope was well @-@ suited to distant cruising service for the British Empire at its Victorian peak . 
 Although laid down in 1881 , Calliope was not launched until 1884 , and was placed in reserve at Portsmouth before completion . The ship was not activated until 25 January 1887 , when the vessel was placed in commission for the China Station , the sort of distant service for which the class had been designed . The same year , all corvettes and frigates were re @-@ classified as " cruisers " , with Calliope and Calypso falling into the " third @-@ class cruiser " category . 
 = = Service with the fleet = = 
 The British Empire was the largest on Earth , and Britain protected that empire and its trade routes with the world 's largest navy . Great Britain assumed the role of peacekeeper on the world 's oceans , and the Royal Navy was the instrument by which the Pax Britannica was kept . The global reach of the Royal Navy included the western Pacific Ocean , patrolled by the Australia Station . In 1887 Captain Henry Coey Kane took Calliope to the Pacific . At first assigned to the China Station , the vessel was reassigned to the Australia Station later in 1887 . The cruiser was in New Zealand at the end of that year , and was the first vessel to enter the new Calliope Dock . In early 1888 Calliope was sent north to watch over a looming diplomatic crisis and potential military confrontation in Samoa . 
 This crisis had its roots in the Great Powers ' competition for colonies in the last decades of the 19th century . The German Empire , invigorated by its victory over France in the Franco @-@ Prussian War and by its unification under the Prussian monarchy , had newfound imperial ambitions that stretched beyond Europe . It had shared in the division of Africa , and in the 1880s looked to the Pacific as well . Ships of its Imperial Navy were sent to Apia in Samoa , where German agents had fomented rebellion against the indigenous government . They were countered there by the Asiatic Squadron of the United States Navy . The United States had nearly completed establishing control over its territories on the North American continent , leading American ambitions to stretch beyond its shores . The squadron was at Samoa to assert US interests in the Pacific and to watch the Germans . 
 In March 1889 , the new corvette Calliope — sent to keep the peace and protect Britain 's interests in Samoa — joined the competing squadrons of the Imperial German and United States navies at Apia . The harbour there was primitive , small and nearly surrounded by reefs . Perhaps fit for four ships , the anchorage held seven warships and six merchant vessels on 14 March . 
 The barometer began to fall that day and a tropical cyclone began to form . The 1889 Apia cyclone increased in ferocity over the next two days . Rain fell in sheets , cutting visibility . Winds of 70 to 100 knots ( 130 – 185 km / h ) blew directly into the anchorage , trapping the ships in the V @-@ shaped harbour . The harbour bottom was scoured by currents and anchors lost their purchase . Operating their engines at full speed to resist the wind and waves , ships nevertheless dragged their anchors and were inexorably driven landward . Vessels collided and were thrown on the reefs or ashore , and some sank . By 09 : 00 on the 16th , Calliope , although still riding at anchor , had been hit by one ship and narrowly missed by another , and Captain Kane decided to attempt to escape . To relieve the strain on the five anchor cables , Calliope 's boilers were producing maximum pressure ; the engines were being worked " red hot " , and the propeller was making 74 revolutions per minute , sufficient for 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) in calmer waters . In spite of this titanic effort , the ship was barely able to make headway against the winds and the seas in the harbour , and anchor cables began to part . 
 To port and only 20 feet ( 6 m ) away was the coral reef . Ahead were the US ships USS Vandalia and USS Trenton ; to starboard were other warships . There was only a narrow opening between the vessels to one side and the ground to the other . <unk> in by these obstacles and with the rudder at times within 6 feet ( 2 m ) of the reef , Calliope manoeuvred while still attached to the anchor cables , which began to give way . When Captain Kane saw an opening , he slipped the anchors and drove forward . Avoiding the helpless Vandalia , he approached the sinking Trenton , coming so close that Calliope 's fore yard @-@ arm passed over the American 's deck . As Calliope rolled to port , the yard lifted over Trenton . The crew of the helpless and doomed American ship cheered Calliope as the corvette slipped past . The British ship 's drive for the open sea was called by the American commander on the scene " one of the grandest sights a seaman or anyone else ever saw ; the lives of 250 souls depended on the hazardous adventure . " 
 Making for the harbour mouth , the British ship 's bow and stern alternately rose and plunged into the incoming waves ; the propeller at times was spinning in air , requiring a careful hand on the throttle to keep the shaft from running away to destruction . Green seas were boarding the vessel and running the length of the deck . There were ten men on the wheel and more below handling relieving tackle on the tiller to assist in maintaining control of the rudder . Taking two hours to travel four cables , the cruiser finally escaped the anchorage into the open sea , an achievement not known to Calliope 's crew for some time , as sea spray and <unk> had reduced visibility to nothing . 
 The storm kept Calliope at sea the next two days . Re @-@ entering the harbour on 19 March to search for the missing anchors , the crew discovered that all of the other ships — twelve in all — had been wrecked or sunk , and nearly every crew had been diminished by the loss of men killed by the storm . Unable to find the anchor amidst the wreckage , and his ship having sustained significant damage , Captain Kane decided to return to Australia . He turned over Calliope 's diving outfit to the US Navy to assist it in salvage , and received in return boats from the wrecked American ships to replace the boats which had been stripped from Calliope by the storm . 
 Captain Kane then took his ship to Sydney , where they received a hero 's welcome . The narrowness of Calliope 's escape ; the excellence of the engines and the dedication of the crew , who kept the power plant in operation for many hours during the ordeal ; the seamanship of Captain Kane and officers ; their bravery in letting go of their anchor and facing the storm , trusting only in their ship and themselves ; and the respect and encouragement given to them by the crew of Trenton ; made Calliope famous . 
 The engineer of Calliope , Henry George Bourke , was specially promoted from staff engineer to fleet engineer on 28 May 1889 , " for his services in Her Majesty 's ship ' Calliope , ' during the recent hurricane at Samoa . " He attributed his success to the superior properties of West Coast coal from New Zealand used to fire the ship 's boilers ; this statement attracted the custom of the British Admiralty when fuelling its ships in those waters . 
 Captain Kane was made Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) in the 1891 Queen 's Birthday Honours . He was cited by the Admiralty for his " nerve and decisions " , given the command of HMS Victory in 1892 , and in 1897 was promoted to rear @-@ admiral . 
 Calliope returned to service on the Australian station after repairs were complete . At the end of 1889 the cruiser was recalled to the United Kingdom . 
 = = In reserve = = 
 Arriving back home in early 1890 , Calliope was placed in reserve and remained there for the next seven years . In June 1897 the cruiser was present at Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee Review of the Fleet at Spithead . That same year Calliope became a tender to HMS Northampton , an older and larger armoured cruiser used as seagoing training ship for boys . Calliope also was occasionally used as a training cruiser herself , and toured the Mediterranean from February to April in 1900 , and again in March 1901 , and in March 1902 . During the summer 1902 she undertook a training cruise in home waters May – June 1902 under the command of Captain E. D. St. A. Ommanney , visiting Campbeltown , Belfast Lough , Portishead , Dartmouth , Lyme Regis and Guernsey ; before she took part in the Coronation Naval Review . 
 Relieved of tender duty in 1905 , Calliope was returned to reserve and promptly stricken from the effective list . The cruiser laid up at Portsmouth , and in 1906 was listed for sale for a time . The next year Calliope was moved to North East England for a new career . 
 = = Training ship = = 
 On 29 October 1907 Calliope became a drill ship at Newcastle upon Tyne for the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve , Tyne Division , and served there for over four decades . The cruiser surrendered the name " Calliope " to a C @-@ class cruiser between 1915 and 1931 , and became Helicon . After the newer Calliope was paid off in the 1930s , Helicon reverted to Calliope and retained that name until sold in 1951 . When finally scrapped in 1953 , the steering wheel was presented to the government of Western Samoa . The mahogany panelling from the officers ' wardroom was reclaimed in 1953 and now forms the wings to the 18th century organ in the west gallery of Christ Church , North Shields , Tyne and Wear . 
 The name " Calliope " also lives on in the Royal Navy . In 1951 the ship 's successor as training ship on the Tyne took that name , and now the shore establishment itself bears the title and honours the memory of HMS Calliope . 
 = Ununseptium = 
 Ununseptium is a superheavy artificial chemical element with an atomic number of 117 and a temporary symbol of Uus . Also known as eka @-@ astatine or element 117 , it is the second @-@ heaviest known element and penultimate element of the 7th period of the periodic table . As of 2016 , fifteen ununseptium atoms have been observed : six when it was first synthesized in 2010 , seven in 2012 , and two in 2014 . 
 The discovery of ununseptium was announced in Dubna , Russia , by a Russian – American collaboration in 2010 , which makes it the most recently discovered element as of 2016 . One of its daughter isotopes was created directly in 2011 , partially confirming the results of the experiment . The experiment itself was repeated successfully by the same collaboration in 2012 and by a joint German – American team in 2014 . In 2015 , the Joint Working Party of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry and the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics , which evaluates claims of discovery of new elements , has recognized the element and assigned the priority to the Russian – American team . In June 2016 , the IUPAC published a declaration stating that the discoverers suggested a name of tennessine ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) , symbol Ts , named after Tennessee , United States . The name is set to be formally accepted in or after November 2016 . " Ununseptium " is a temporary systematic element name formed from Latin roots " one " , " one " , and " seven " ; it is intended to be used until a permanent one is assigned . The working name " element 117 " is commonly used by researchers and in the literature . 
 Ununseptium may be located in the " island of stability " , a concept that explains why some superheavy elements are more stable compared to an overall trend of decreasing stability for elements beyond lead on the periodic table . The synthesized ununseptium atoms have lasted tens and hundreds of milliseconds . In the periodic table , ununseptium is expected to be a member of group 17 , all other members of which are halogens . Some of its properties are likely to be significantly different from those of the halogens due to relativistic effects . Unlike the halogens , ununseptium is likely to neither commonly form anions nor achieve high oxidation states . A few key properties , such as its melting and boiling points and its first ionization energy , are nevertheless expected to follow the periodic trends of the halogens . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ discovery = = = 
 In December 2004 , the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research ( JINR ) team in Dubna , Moscow Oblast , Russia , proposed a joint experiment with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory ( ORNL ) in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , United States , to synthesize element 117 — so @-@ called for the 117 protons in its nucleus . Their proposal involved fusing a berkelium ( element 97 ) target and a calcium ( element 20 ) beam , conducted via bombardment of the berkelium target with calcium nuclei . The ORNL — then world 's only producer of berkelium — could not then provide the element , as they had temporarily ceased production , and re @-@ initiating it again would be too costly . Plans to synthesize element 117 were suspended in favor of the synthesis of element 118 , which was produced earlier by bombarding a californium target with calcium . The required berkelium @-@ 249 is a by @-@ product in californium @-@ 252 production , and obtaining the required amount of berkelium was an even more difficult task than obtaining that of californium , as well as costly : it would cost around 3 @.@ 5 million dollars , and the parties agreed to wait for a commercial order of californium production , from which berkelium could be extracted . 
 The JINR team sought to use berkelium because calcium @-@ 48 , the isotope of calcium used in the beam , has 20 protons and 28 neutrons , making a neutron – proton ratio of 1 @.@ 4 ; and it is the lightest stable or near @-@ stable nucleus with such a large neutron excess . The second @-@ lightest such nucleus , palladium @-@ 110 ( 46 protons , 64 neutrons , neutron – proton ratio of 1 @.@ 391 ) , is much heavier . Thanks to the neutron excess , the resulting nuclei were expected to be heavier and closer to the sought @-@ after island of stability . Since ununseptium has 117 protons in its nucleus and calcium has 20 , they needed to use berkelium , which has 97 protons in its nucleus . 
 In February 2005 , the leader of the JINR team — Yuri Oganessian — held a colloquium at ORNL and attended a symposium at Vanderbilt University ( Nashville , Tennessee , U.S. ) celebrating the career of a long @-@ standing collaborator of Oganessian , Joseph Hamilton , where Oganessian , Hamilton , and James Roberto ( then the deputy director for science and technology at Oak Ridge ) established a collaboration between JINR , ORNL , and Vanderbilt ; the team at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory ( LLNL ) in Livermore , California , U.S. , was soon invited to join . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 In the spring of 2008 , the ORNL started production of californium for a commercial order by an oil company ; Hamilton learned that in the summer , making a deal on subsequent extraction of berkelium . In September 2008 , Oganessian , Hamilton , and Roberto assembled to coordinate planning on the experiment . In November 2008 , the U.S. Department of Energy , the state department oversight over the reactor in Oak Ridge , allowed the scientific use of the extracted berkelium . The production lasted 250 days and ended in late December 2008 , resulting in 22 milligrams of berkelium , enough to perform the experiment . In January 2009 , the berkelium was removed from the reactor ; it was subsequently cooled for 90 days and then chemically purified for another 90 days . Its half @-@ life is only 330 days : after that time , half the berkelium produced would have decayed away . Because of this , the berkelium target had to be quickly transported to Russia ; for the experiment to be viable , it had to begin within six months of its departure from the United States . The target was packed into five lead containers to be sent on a commercial flight from New York to Moscow . 
 Russian customs officials twice refused to let the target enter the country because of missing or incomplete paperwork . Over the span of a few days , the target traveled over the Atlantic Ocean five times . On its arrival in Russia in early June 2009 , the berkelium was transferred to Research Institute of Atomic Reactors ( <unk> ) in Dimitrovgrad , Ulyanovsk Oblast , where it was deposited as a 300 @-@ nanometer @-@ thin layer on a titanium film . In July 2009 , it was then transported to Dubna , where it was installed in the particle accelerator at JINR . The calcium @-@ 48 beam was generated by chemically extracting the small quantities of calcium @-@ 48 present in naturally occurring calcium , enriching it 500 times in the closed town of <unk> , Sverdlovsk Oblast , Russia . 
 The experiment began on July 28 , 2009 . In January 2010 , scientists at the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions announced internally that they had detected the decay of a new element with atomic number 117 via two decay chains : one of an odd @-@ odd isotope undergoing 6 alpha decays before spontaneous fission , and one of an odd @-@ even isotope undergoing 3 alpha decays before fission . The obtained data from the experiment was sent to the LLNL for further analysis . On April 9 , 2010 , an official report was released in the journal Physical Review Letters identifying the isotopes as 294Uus and 293Uus , which were shown to have half @-@ lives on the order of tens or hundreds of milliseconds . The work was signed by all parties involved in the experiment to some extent : JINR , ORNL , LLNL , <unk> , Vanderbilt , and the University of Nevada ( Las Vegas , Nevada , U.S. ) , which provided data analysis support . The isotopes were formed as follows : 
 249 
 97Bk + 48 
 20Ca → 297 
 117Uus * → 294 
 117Uus + 3 1 
 0n ( 1 event ) 
 249 
 97Bk + 48 
 20Ca → 297 
 117Uus * → 293 
 117Uus + 4 1 
 0n ( 5 events ) 
 = = = Confirmation = = = 
 All of ununseptium 's daughter isotopes ( decay products ) were previously unknown ; therefore , their properties could not be used to confirm the claim of discovery . In 2011 , when one of the decay products ( ununpentium @-@ 289 ) was synthesized directly , its properties matched those measured in the claimed indirect synthesis from the decay of ununseptium . The discoverers did not submit a claim for their findings in 2007 – 2011 when the Joint Working Party was reviewing claims of discoveries of new elements . 
 The Dubna team repeated the experiment in 2012 , creating seven atoms of ununseptium and confirming their earlier synthesis of ununoctium ( produced after some time when a significant quantity of the berkelium @-@ 249 target had beta decayed to californium @-@ 249 ) . The results of the experiment matched the previous outcome ; the scientists have since filed an application to register the element . In 2014 , a joint German – American collaboration of scientists from the ORNL and the GSI Helmholtz Center for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt , Germany , claimed to have confirmed discovery of the element . The team repeated the Dubna experiment using the Darmstadt accelerator , creating two atoms of ununseptium @-@ 294 . 
 In December 2015 , the JWP officially recognized the discovery , and thus the listed discoverers — JINR , LLNL , and ORNL — were given the right to suggest an official name for the element . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 Using Mendeleev 's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements , ununseptium should be known as eka @-@ astatine . Using the 1979 IUPAC recommendations , the element should be temporarily called ununseptium ( symbol Uus ) until the discovery is confirmed and a permanent name chosen ; the temporary name is formed from Latin roots " one " , " one " , and " seven " , a reference to the element 's atomic number of 117 . Many scientists in the field call it " element 117 " , with the symbol ( 117 ) or 117 . According to guidelines of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) valid at the moment of the discovery approval , the permanent names of new elements should have ended in " -ium " ; this included ununseptium , even if the element was a halogen , which traditionally have names ending in " -ine " ; however , the new recommendations published in 2016 recommended using the " -ine " ending for new group 17 elements . 
 After the original synthesis in 2010 , scientists declared naming was a sensitive question , and it was avoided as far as possible . However , Hamilton declared that year , " I was crucial in getting the group together and in getting the 249Bk target essential for the discovery . As a result of that , I ’ m going to get to name the element . I can ’ t tell you the name , but it will bring distinction to the region " . 
 In June 2016 , IUPAC published a declaration stating the discoverers submitted their suggestions for naming the new elements to the IUPAC ; the suggestion for the element 117 was tennessine , with a symbol of Ts , after " the region of Tennessee " . The names are recommended for acceptance by the IUPAC Inorganic Chemistry Division ; formal acceptance should occur after a five @-@ months term expires after the declaration has been published . 
 = = Predicted properties = = 
 = = = Nuclear stability and isotopes = = = 
 The stability of nuclei quickly decreases with the increase in atomic number after curium , element 96 , whose half @-@ life is four orders of magnitude longer than that of any subsequent element . All isotopes with an atomic number above 101 undergo radioactive decay with half @-@ lives of less than 30 hours . No elements with atomic numbers above 82 ( after lead ) have stable isotopes . Nevertheless , because of reasons not yet well understood , there is a slight increase of nuclear stability around atomic numbers 110 – 114 , which leads to the appearance of what is known in nuclear physics as the " island of stability " . This concept , proposed by University of California professor Glenn Seaborg , explains why superheavy elements last longer than predicted . Ununseptium is the second @-@ heaviest element created so far , and has a half @-@ life of less than one second ; this is longer than the predicted value used in the discovery report . The Dubna team believes that the synthesis of the element is direct experimental proof of the existence of the island of stability . 
 It has been calculated that the isotope 295Uus would have a half @-@ life of 18 ± 7 milliseconds and that it may be possible to produce this isotope via the same berkelium – calcium reaction used in the discoveries of the known isotopes , 293Uus and 294Uus . The chance of this reaction producing 295Uus is estimated to be , at most , one @-@ seventh the chance of producing 294Uus . Calculations using a quantum tunneling model predict the existence of several isotopes of ununseptium up to <unk> . The most stable of these is expected to be <unk> with an alpha @-@ decay half @-@ life of 40 milliseconds . A liquid drop model study on the element 's isotopes shows similar results ; it suggests a general trend of increasing stability for isotopes heavier than <unk> , with partial half @-@ lives exceeding the age of the universe for the heaviest isotopes like <unk> when beta decay is not considered . 
 = = = Atomic and physical = = = 
 Ununseptium is expected to be a member of group 17 in the periodic table , below the five halogens ; fluorine , chlorine , bromine , iodine , and astatine , each of which has seven valence electrons with a configuration of <unk> . For ununseptium , being in the seventh period ( row ) of the periodic table , continuing the trend would predict a valence electron configuration of <unk> , and it would therefore be expected to behave similarly to the halogens in many respects that relate to this electronic state . 
 Significant differences are likely to arise , largely due to spin – orbit interaction — the mutual interaction between the motion and spin of electrons . The spin – orbit interaction is especially strong for the superheavy elements because their electrons move faster — at velocities comparable to the speed of light — than those in lighter atoms . In ununseptium atoms , this lowers the 7s and the 7p electron energy levels , stabilizing the corresponding electrons , although two of the 7p electron energy levels are more stabilized than the other four . The stabilization of the 7s electrons is called the inert pair effect ; the effect that separates the 7p subshell into the more @-@ stabilized and the less @-@ stabilized parts is called subshell splitting . Computational chemists understand the split as a change of the second ( azimuthal ) quantum number l from 1 to 1 / 2 and 3 / 2 for the more @-@ stabilized and less @-@ stabilized parts of the 7p subshell , respectively . For many theoretical purposes , the valence electron configuration may be represented to reflect the 7p subshell split as 7s27p2 
 1 / <unk> 
 3 / 2 . 
 Differences for other electron levels also exist . For example , the 6d electron levels ( also split in two , with four being <unk> / 2 and six being 6d5 / 2 ) are both raised , so they are close in energy to the 7s ones , although no 6d electron chemistry has been predicted for ununseptium . The difference between the 7p1 / 2 and 7p3 / 2 levels is abnormally high ; 9 @.@ 8 eV . Astatine 's 6p subshell split is only 3 @.@ 8 eV , and its <unk> / 2 chemistry has already been called " limited " . These effects cause ununseptium 's chemistry to differ from those of its upper neighbors ( see below ) . 
 Ununseptium 's first ionization energy — the energy required to remove an electron from a neutral atom — is predicted to be 7 @.@ 7 eV , lower than those of the halogens , again following the trend . Like its neighbors in the periodic table , ununseptium is expected to have the lowest electron affinity — energy released when an electron is added to the atom — in its group ; 2 @.@ 6 or 1 @.@ 8 eV . The electron of the hypothetical hydrogen @-@ like ununseptium atom — oxidized so it has only one electron , <unk> + — is predicted to move so quickly that its mass is 1 @.@ 9 times that of a non @-@ moving electron , a feature attributable to relativistic effects . For comparison , the figure for hydrogen @-@ like astatine is 1 @.@ 27 and the figure for hydrogen @-@ like iodine is 1 @.@ 08 . Simple extrapolations of relativity laws indicate a contraction of atomic radius . Advanced calculations show that the radius of an ununseptium atom that has formed one covalent bond would be 165 pm , while that of astatine would be 147 pm . With the seven outermost electrons removed , ununseptium is finally smaller ; 57 pm for ununseptium and 61 pm for astatine . 
 The melting and boiling points of ununseptium are not known ; earlier papers predicted about 350 – 500 ° C and 550 ° C respectively , or 350 – 550 ° C and 610 ° C respectively . These values exceed those of astatine and the lighter halogens , following periodic trends . A later paper predicts the boiling point of ununseptium to be 345 ° C ( that of astatine is estimated as 309 ° C , 337 ° C , or 370 ° C , although experimental values of 230 ° C and 411 ° C have been reported ) . The density of ununseptium is expected to be between 7 @.@ 1 and 7 @.@ 3 g · cm − 3 , continuing the trend of increasing density among the halogens ; that of astatine is estimated to be between 6 @.@ 2 and 6 @.@ 5 g · cm − 3 . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Unlike the previous group 17 elements , ununseptium may not exhibit chemical behavior common to the halogens . For example , extant members of the group routinely accept an electron to achieve the more stable electronic configuration of a noble gas , one having eight electrons ( octet ) in its valence shell This ability weakens as atomic weight increases going down the group ; ununseptium would be the least willing to accept an electron . Of the oxidation states it is predicted to form , − 1 is expected to be the least common . 
 There is another opportunity for ununseptium to complete its octet — by forming a covalent bond . Like the halogens , when two ununseptium atoms meet they are expected to form a Uus – Uus bond to give a diatomic molecule . Such molecules are commonly bound via single sigma bonds between the atoms ; these are different from pi bonds , which are divided into two parts , each shifted in a direction perpendicular to the line between the atoms , and opposite one another rather than being located directly between the atoms they bind . Sigma bonding has been calculated to show a great antibonding character in the <unk> molecule and is not as favorable energetically . Ununseptium is predicted to continue the trend ; a strong pi character should be seen in the bonding of <unk> . The molecule <unk> is predicted to go further , being bonded with a single pi bond . 
 Aside from the unstable − 1 state , three more oxidation states are predicted ; + 5 , + 3 , and + 1 . The + 1 state should be especially stable because of the destabilization of the three outermost 7p3 / 2 electrons , forming a stable , half @-@ filled subshell configuration ; astatine shows similar effects . The + 3 state should be important , again due to the destabilized 7p3 / 2 electrons . The + 5 state is predicted to be uncommon because the 7p1 / 2 electrons are oppositely stabilized . The + 7 state has not been shown — even computationally — to be achievable . Because the 7s electrons are greatly stabilized , it has been hypothesized that ununseptium effectively has only five valence electrons . 
 The simplest possible ununseptium compound would be the monohydride , <unk> . The bonding is expected to be provided by a 7p3 / 2 electron of ununseptium and the 1s electron of hydrogen . The non @-@ bonding nature of the 7p1 / 2 spinor is because ununseptium is expected not to form purely sigma or pi bonds . Therefore , the destabilized ( thus expanded ) 7p3 / 2 spinor is responsible for bonding . This effect lengthens the <unk> molecule by 17 picometers compared with the overall length of 195 pm . Since the ununseptium p electron bonds are two @-@ thirds sigma , the bond is only two @-@ thirds as strong as it would be if ununseptium featured no spin – orbit interactions . The molecule thus follows the trend for halogen hydrides , showing an increase in bond length and a decrease in dissociation energy compared to <unk> . The molecules <unk> and UutUus may be viewed analogously , taking into account an opposite effect shown by the fact that the element 's p1 / 2 electrons are stabilized . These two characteristics result in a relatively small dipole moment ( product of difference between electric charges of atoms and displacement of the atoms ) for <unk> ; only 1 @.@ 67 D , the positive value implying that the negative charge is on the ununseptium atom . For UutUus , the strength of the effects are predicted to cause a transfer of the electron from the ununseptium atom to the ununtrium atom , with the dipole moment value being − 1 @.@ 80 D. The spin – orbit interaction increases the dissociation energy of the <unk> molecule because it lowers the electronegativity of ununseptium , causing the bond with the extremely electronegative fluorine atom to have a more ionic character . Ununseptium monofluoride should feature the strongest bonding of all group 17 element monofluorides . 
 <unk> theory predicts a bent @-@ T @-@ shaped molecular geometry for the group 17 trifluorides . All known halogen trifluorides have this molecular geometry and have a structure of <unk> — a central atom , denoted A , surrounded by three ligands , X , and two unshared electron pairs , E. If relativistic effects are ignored , UusF3 should follow its lighter congeners in having a bent @-@ T @-@ shaped molecular geometry . More sophisticated predictions show that this molecular geometry would not be energetically favored for UusF3 , predicting instead a trigonal planar molecular geometry ( <unk> ) . This shows that <unk> theory may not be consistent for the superheavy elements . The UusF3 molecule is predicted to be significantly stabilized by spin – orbit interactions ; a possible rationale may be the large difference in electronegativity between ununseptium and fluorine , giving the bond a partially ionic character . 
 = 1958 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1958 Atlantic hurricane season included every tropical cyclone either affecting or threatening land . There were ten named storms as well as one pre @-@ season tropical depression . Seven of the storms became hurricanes , including five that were major hurricanes , or the equivalent of a Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . The strongest storm was Hurricane Helene , which became a strong Category 4 hurricane with 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) winds and an barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) while just offshore the southeastern United States . 
 In May , a subtropical depression formed in the Caribbean and dropped heavy rainfall near Miami , Florida . The first named storm of the season was Alma , which killed three people and caused flooding in Texas . Hurricane Daisy in August was a major hurricane that paralleled the eastern coast of the United States , although due to its small size it did not cause much damage . Hurricane Ella affected much of the northern Caribbean and Texas , most significantly the Dominican Republic where 30 people died . Ella also killed six people in Cuba , where it made landfall as a major hurricane . A few weeks later , Tropical Storm Gerda also struck the Dominican Republic and killed three people . The costliest storm of the season was Helene , which caused $ 11 @.@ 2 million in damage ( 1958 USD ) , mostly in North Carolina . Although it passed within 10 mi ( 16 km ) of the state , its effects were mostly limited to the coast , and the hurricane killed one person . The last storm of the season , Janice , killed eight people in Jamaica when its precursor dropped 20 in ( 510 mm ) of rainfall , and one person was killed in the Bahamas . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The ten tropical storms during the season is comparable to the 20 year average of ten . In contrast to the previous season when most storms were in the Gulf of Mexico , most storms in 1958 occurred over the western Atlantic Ocean . The first storm , Alma , formed in the middle of June . Subsequently , a trough persisted along the eastern United States , which suppressed tropical cyclone formation . Conditions remained unfavorable in July due to a large ridge suppressing the westerlies . In August , a persistent trough caused three storms – Becky , Cleo , and Daisy – to recurve and remain over the ocean . Most storms formed from the middle of August through the middle of October , when polar air reached as far south as Florida due to a shift in the ridge . 
 Before the season started , the United States Weather Bureau office in Miami began setting up a teleprinter to distribute hourly advisories to newspapers and the American Red Cross . The hurricane season officially began on June 15 , and lasted until November 15 . When the season started , the Lakeland Frost Warning Service sent four employees to assist the Miami Weather Bureau . The Hurricane Hunters flew daily to investigate potential storms in the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico . In addition , there was a set of radars from Texas to Maine to track storms . Beginning in 1958 , the Weather Bureau predicted the change in tide due to a storm with the assistance of a tide specialist . During the season , a reporter – daughter of Weather Bureau director Gordon Dunn – flew into Hurricane Daisy , becoming the first woman to fly into a hurricane . Utilizing radars along the East Coast of the United States , the Weather Bureau tracked both Hurricanes Daisy and Helene for 575 mi ( 925 km ) , which was the first such occurrence of that feat . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 121 . ACE , broadly speaking , is a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high values . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 A small circulation crossed Panama from the Pacific Ocean on May 17 , and by the following day it was a developing depression near San Andrés in the western Caribbean . The system gradually organized over warm waters while moving to the northwest , developing a well @-@ defined low pressure area by May 23 as it approached western Cuba . Later that day , the depression crossed the western portion of the island before turning to the northeast . On May 24 , the system passed southeast of Florida , dropping heavy rainfall that peaked at 12 @.@ 07 in ( 307 mm ) in Homestead . May 1958 was the second wettest May since 1911 , of which half of the precipitation fell during the depression . Several other locations in the Miami area reported record or near @-@ record rainfall for the month . The high rainfall disrupted planting of vegetables , and there was some crop damage . Flooding entered homes and businesses , forcing some evacuations . About 2 @,@ 900 people lost telephone service , and there was a brief water outage on Key Biscayne . There were also hundreds of vehicle accidents related to the storm . 
 After affecting Florida , the depression continued to the northeast , and although it had a warm core , it was not able to develop significantly due to lack of temperature instability , as well as another low developing southwest of the circulation . The depression was briefly forecast to strike North Carolina , but instead an eastward moving ridge kept it offshore . In Hatteras , North Carolina , the depression dropped 3 in ( 76 mm ) of rainfall . The influx of cold air transitioned the depression to an extratropical cyclone on May 28 . An approaching cold front absorbed the depression and produced heavy rainfall in eastern Canada . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Alma = = = 
 A tropical wave was first observed in the central Caribbean Sea on June 9 . By the following day , there was evidence of a weak closed circulation off the south coast of Jamaica . Moving generally westward , on June 12 it crossed the Yucatán Peninsula , and the system emerged into the Bay of Campeche the next day . On June 14 , a tropical depression formed about halfway between the Yucatán Peninsula and Tamaulipas . Within six hours , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Alma about 150 mi ( 240 km ) east of Tampico . Later that day , a ship reported a pressure of 997 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) and high seas , and early on June 15 a United States Coast Guard plane measured winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) near the northeast Mexican coast . That day , Alma made landfall about 70 mi ( 110 km ) south of Brownsville , Texas in northeastern Mexico . The storm moved ashore in northeastern Tamaulipas early on June 15 before crossing into southern Texas . After weakening to a tropical depression , Alma straddled the Rio Grande before dissipating in western Texas late on June 16 . 
 The United States Coast Guard recommended people to evacuate in beach areas near Brownsville , Texas . As it moved ashore , Alma produced a high tide of 2 @.@ 9 ft ( 0 @.@ 88 m ) along Padre Island , and one person drowned near Galveston due to heavy surf . The highest wind gust was 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) at Port Isabel , causing minor damage . However , Alma dropped heavy rainfall further inland , reaching about 20 in ( 510 mm ) near Medina . The rains caused floods that resulted in heavy damage to property and crops . Some rivers and streams rose above their banks due to floods , creating torrents of up to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) in some arroyos . The floods covered highways and forced about 100 people to evacuate near Sabinal . The rains also knocked out telephone lines in Uvalde County , and temporarily trapped hundreds of scouts . One person drowned along the Concho River , and three people overall died due to the system . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Becky = = = 
 Based on reports from the Cape Verde islands offshore Africa , it is estimated a tropical depression developed on August 8 . It moved westward due to the subtropical ridge to its north , a motion the depression would continue for much of its duration . Nearby ship reports indicated gradual strengthening , and the depression became a tropical storm on August 11 . At 0400 UTC on August 12 , the San Juan Weather Bureau office initiated advisories on Tropical Storm Becky about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . That day , the Hurricane Hunters flew into the storm , reporting a pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) and flight level winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) ; its peak surface winds were estimated at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Also on August 12 , a storm warning was issued for the northern Leeward Islands , and a storm watch was issued for the United States Virgin Islands and northern Puerto Rico . 
 After peaking in intensity , Becky continued quickly to the west @-@ northwest , and its fast motion may have prevented further strengthening . On August 14 , a flight reported hurricane @-@ force wind gusts in rainbands 210 mi ( 340 km ) east @-@ northeast of the center . The next day , the circulation became poorly defined , and by August 16 , Becky had become extratropical after it merged with an approaching cold front . The storm turned to the north and northeast , dissipating later on August 17 . As Becky was transitioning into an extratropical storm , it produced high waves along the southeastern coast of the United States . 
 = = = Hurricane Cleo = = = 
 A well @-@ developed tropical wave spawned a tropical storm on August 11 to the south of Cape Verde . It moved westward , and ships in the area indicated that it had a large circulation . The Hurricane Hunters flew into the system and observed a well @-@ developed hurricane with winds of 146 mph ( 235 km / h ) , which were the highest measured winds . As a result , the San Juan Weather Bureau Office initiated advisories on Hurricane Cleo and issued a hurricane watch for the Lesser Antilles . Subsequent analysis determined that Cleo became a hurricane on August 13 . A weak trough near 50 ° W allowed the hurricane to turn to the north , and Cleo continued to intensify , based on improved definition of the eye on radar imagery . A flight into the storm late on August 16 indicated a pressure of 947 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) with winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) early on August 16 . 
 After maintaining peak winds for about six hours , Cleo began weakening . It turned more to the northwest due to a strengthening ridge to the northeast and the hurricane 's outflow weakening the trough . An approaching cold front turned Cleo to the northeast on August 18 and caused it to accelerate . That day , it passed about 450 mi ( 720 km ) east of Bermuda . On August 20 , the hurricane became extratropical to the southeast of Newfoundland . In St. John 's , the storm dropped about 2 in ( 51 mm ) of rainfall . The remnants of Cleo turned to the east and east @-@ southeast , dissipating on August 22 between the Azores and Portugal . 
 = = = Hurricane Daisy = = = 
 A tropical wave moved through the Lesser Antilles on August 20 and gradually spread north . On August 24 , a nearby ship reported a low pressure area and strong winds , indicating the formation of a small tropical cyclone near the Bahamas . After a Hurricane Hunters flight indicated winds of 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) , the Weather Bureau initiated advisories on Tropical Storm Daisy early on August 25 to the north of the Bahamas . That day it became a hurricane , and initially it moved slowly to the northwest due to a ridge to the northeast . On August 26 , a trough turned Daisy to the northeast , and the hurricane continued to intensify due to an anticyclone aloft . By early August 28 , the hurricane reached peak winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) , and a minimum pressure of 948 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) while offshore South Carolina . Daisy accelerated to the north , passing about 75 mi ( 121 km ) east of Hatteras , North Carolina ; there , gusts peaked at 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) due to the storm 's small size . 
 For much of its duration , Hurricane Daisy was visible from radar along the eastern United States , which assisted in tracking the storm . Passing east of Hatteras , Daisy dropped moderate rainfall , peaking at 5 @.@ 92 in ( 150 mm ) near Morehead City , North Carolina , before turning to the northeast on August 29 . The Weather Bureau issued a hurricane warning from Block Island to Provincetown , Massachusetts due to the projected path near New England . Later on August 29 , Daisy passed about 70 mi ( 110 km ) southeast of Nantucket . Nearby Block Island reported peak gusts of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , and a Texas Tower 120 mi ( 190 km ) east of Cape Cod reported gusts to 87 mph ( 140 km / h ) . The storm also produced high tides and light rainfall , and forced 600 people to evacuate Nantucket . Due to its small size , there was no major damage in the United States . After affecting Nantucket , Daisy weakened and became extratropical by early on August 30 . The remnants turned to the east , passing south of Nova Scotia before dissipating on August 31 . In Canada , the storm damaged a boat in the Bay of Fundy that drifted for two days until reaching Saint John , New Brunswick . 
 = = = Hurricane Ella = = = 
 A tropical wave spawned a tropical depression near the Lesser Antilles on August 30 , which quickly became Tropical Storm Ella . It quickly intensified in the eastern Caribbean into a hurricane by August 31 while passing south of Puerto Rico ; there , the outer rainbands caused some flooding that caused minor damage . On September 1 , Ella strengthened to winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) , as measured by the Hurricane Hunters . At that intensity , the hurricane passed just south of the Dominican Republic before making landfall in southwestern Haiti . In the Dominican Republic , heavy rainfall and floods caused $ 100 @,@ 000 in damage , mostly in the country 's southwestern portion . Heavy rainfall caused widespread flooding in southwestern Haiti , and thousands of people became homeless after their houses were damaged . Near Les Cayes , 30 people were killed due to flash flooding . 
 After affecting Haiti , Ella weakened to a Category 1 hurricane before moving ashore in southeastern Cuba early on September 2 . While traversing the island , Ella weakened to a tropical storm and was unable to restrengthen . Near Santiago de Cuba , the Bayamo River washed away 25 houses and killed five people . One other person died in the country due to the hurricane . After Ella reached the Gulf of Mexico on September 3 , its structure was disrupted , and it remained a tropical storm as it continued to the west @-@ northwest . Its outer rainbands produced gusts of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) in Grand Isle , Louisiana . Ella struck Texas on September 6 and dissipated soon thereafter . At its final landfall , the storm produced 13 @.@ 6 in ( 350 mm ) of rainfall in Galveston , Texas , and in the city , one person died after falling overboard a boat . 
 = = = Hurricane Fifi = = = 
 A ship on September 4 indicated a tropical depression developed from a tropical wave to the east of the Lesser Antilles . The system initially had two circulations that consolidated into one by September 5 . That day , Hurricane Hunters observed 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) winds , which prompted the Weather Bureau to upgrade it to Tropical Storm Fifi . Due to the storm 's fast track to the northwest , a gale warning and hurricane watch were issued for the Leeward and northern Windward Islands . On September 6 , Fifi intensified into a hurricane and reached peak winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) , around the same time that it passed about 150 mi ( 240 km ) northeast of the Leeward Islands . Later , Fifi began weakening , and by September 8 it was downgraded to tropical storm status . The westerlies turned Fifi to the northeast on September 10 . After passing southeast of Bermuda , the storm dissipated on September 11 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gerda = = = 
 A tropical wave was first observed on September 11 about 400 mi ( 640 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . It moved westward , and based on surface reports from the island chain , a tropical depression developed west of Martinique on September 13 . The system moved quickly to the west @-@ northwest , becoming a tropical storm by late on September 13 . The Hurricane Hunters encountered winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on September 14 just offshore the Dominican Republic ; on that basis the system was designated Tropical Storm Gerda . Shortly thereafter , the storm struck the Barahona peninsula . The high terrain of Hispaniola quickly weakened Gerda , and on September 15 the Hurricane Hunters could not detect a closed circulation . It is estimated that Gerda dissipated offshore southeastern Cuba . The wave continued west , later reaching the Gulf of Mexico . Aided by an approaching trough , a small low pressure area redeveloped on September 19 , which struck southern Texas and moved to the northeast . This low eventually dissipated over Louisiana on September 22 , having produced gusts of 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) along the Texas coast . 
 When the precursor to Gerda passed through the Lesser Antilles , it dropped 15 in ( 380 mm ) of rain . Stations in the United States Virgin Islands reported winds up to 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) . The storm 's threat prompted gale warnings along the southern coast of Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic . In the former island , Gerda killed three people . Two people drowned after falling off a boat on Vieques island , and the other died after his house collapsed while he was inside . The storm damaged coffee , banana , and plantain crops in Puerto Rico . Winds reached 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) in the Dominican Republic . 
 = = = Hurricane Helene = = = 
 A tropical wave was first observed near Cape Verde on September 16 . On September 21 , the Hurricane Hunters observed a circulation , which indicated a tropical depression had formed east of the northern Leeward Islands . It moved to the west @-@ northwest , becoming Tropical Storm Helene on September 23 . The next day Helene became a hurricane , aided by an anticyclone aloft . It moved around a large ridge , bringing its center toward the southeastern United States . As the hurricane approached the Carolinas , the hurricane rapidly intensified as the eye became visible on radar , and Helene reached peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) on the morning of September 27 . An approaching trough turned the hurricane to the northeast , and Helene came within 10 mi ( 15 km ) of the coast of North Carolina . It slowly weakened , and at the same time its size expanded . On September 29 , Helene became extratropical as it was moving over Newfoundland . The remnants continued to the northeast , later turning to the southeast and dissipating on October 4 just west of Great Britain . 
 While paralleling the southeastern United States , Helene produced a peak storm surge of 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) near Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point in North Carolina . A station in Wilmington reported sustained winds of 88 mph ( 142 km / h ) and a peak gust of 135 mph ( 220 km / h ) , exceeding the previous record for measured wind speed there by a wide margin . At Cape Fear , winds were estimated at 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) , with gusts as high as 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . Rainfall from Helene peaked at 8 @.@ 29 in ( 211 mm ) in Wilmington International Airport , although rainfall spread as far north as New England . Damage in the United States totaled $ 11 @.@ 2 million , and there was one indirect fatality . In Atlantic Canada , Helene produced high winds and heavy rainfall , causing power outages in Prince Edward Island and Cape Breton Island . A wharf in Caribou , Nova Scotia was destroyed by rough seas generated by Helene , and at least 1 @,@ 000 lobster traps were carried out to sea as a result . 
 = = = Hurricane Ilsa = = = 
 On September 24 , ship reports near an area of disturbed weather east of the Lesser Antilles prompted a Hurricane Hunters flight . By the time the aircraft investigated the system , they discovered a tropical storm with winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) , which was named Ilsa by the Weather Bureau . Subsequent analysis estimated that the storm became a tropical depression earlier that day . Ilsa quickly intensified into a hurricane on September 25 , by which time it was located about 1 @,@ 100 mi ( 1 @,@ 800 km ) southeast of Hurricane Helene . Over the subsequent few days , the two hurricanes underwent the Fujiwhara effect , in which Ilsa turned to the north and Helene turned to the northeast . Ilsa quickly intensified on September 26 , developing a well @-@ defined eye and spiral rainbands . Early on September 27 , it reached peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) , and subsequently it weakened . On September 29 the hurricane turned to the northeast and accelerated , becoming extratropical and dissipating by the next day . 
 Early in the duration of Ilsa , the Weather Bureau issued a gale warning and hurricane watch for the Leeward Islands , Virgin Islands , and northern Puerto Rico . However , no damage was reported . The storm caused extensive beach erosion and squally conditions in Bermuda . 
 = = = Hurricane Janice = = = 
 A tropical wave moved through the Lesser Antilles on September 30 . It moved westward through the Caribbean , developing a broad circulation by October 3 as it approached Jamaica . The weak circulation gradually became better organized , developing into a tropical depression near the Cayman Islands on October 4 . The system quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Janice as it moved toward the coast of Cuba . An eastward @-@ moving cold front turned the storm to the north and northeast , and Janice crossed central Cuba early on October 6 . The storm intensified while moving through the Bahamas , becoming a hurricane on October 7 . Janice slowed that day and reached peak winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . On October 9 , the hurricane turned to the east @-@ northeast , and by that time had weakened slightly ; however , the next day it re @-@ attained its previous peak intensity while passing northwest of Bermuda , reaching a minimum pressure of 968 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . On October 12 , Janice became extratropical in the northern Atlantic Ocean , and the next day merged with a stronger non @-@ tropical low offshore Atlantic Canada . 
 The precursor to Janice dropped heavy rainfall in Jamaica , reaching over 20 in ( 510 mm ) in some locations . Rain @-@ induced flooding destroyed homes , wrecked crops , and damaged coastal wharves and roads . Eight people were killed , and the floods were considered the worst in 25 years . When Janice was still over Cuba , the Weather Bureau issued gale warnings from Vero Beach , Florida to Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . In the Bahamas , Janice produced peak winds of 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) on San Salvador Island . In Nassau , one person was killed while trying to move a boat . A dredger was lost and a yacht was seriously damaged in the Bahamas , and damage in the country reached $ 200 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Twelve = = = 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms ( tropical storms and hurricanes ) that formed in the North Atlantic in 1958 . 
 = Deinosuchus = 
 Deinosuchus ( / <unk> / DY @-@ nə @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is an extinct genus related to the alligator that lived 80 to 73 million years ago ( Ma ) , during the late Cretaceous period . The name translates as " terrible crocodile " and is derived from the Greek deinos ( δεινός ) , " terrible " , and <unk> ( <unk> ) , " crocodile " . The first remains were discovered in North Carolina ( United States ) in the 1850s ; the genus was named and described in 1909 . Additional fragments were discovered in the 1940s and were later incorporated into an influential , though inaccurate , skull reconstruction at the American Museum of Natural History . Knowledge of Deinosuchus remains incomplete , but better cranial material found in recent years has expanded scientific understanding of this massive predator . 
 Although Deinosuchus was far larger than any modern crocodile or alligator , with the largest adults measuring 10 @.@ 6 m ( 35 ft ) in total length , its overall appearance was fairly similar to its smaller relatives . It had large , robust teeth built for crushing , and its back was covered with thick hemispherical osteoderms . One study indicated Deinosuchus may have lived for up to 50 years , growing at a rate similar to that of modern crocodilians , but maintaining this growth over a much longer time . 
 Deinosuchus fossils have been found in 10 US states , including Texas , Montana , and many along the East Coast . Fossils have also been found in northern Mexico . It lived on both sides of the Western Interior Seaway , and was an opportunistic apex predator in the coastal regions of eastern North America . Deinosuchus reached its largest size in its western habitat , but the eastern populations were far more abundant . Opinion remains divided as to whether these two populations represent separate species . Deinosuchus was probably capable of killing and eating large dinosaurs . It may have also fed upon sea turtles , fish , and other aquatic and terrestrial prey . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Morphology = = = 
 Despite its large size , the overall appearance of Deinosuchus was not considerably different from that of modern crocodilians . Deinosuchus had an alligator @-@ like , broad snout , with a slightly bulbous tip . Each premaxilla contained four teeth , with the pair nearest to the tip of the snout being significantly smaller than the other two . Each maxilla ( the main tooth @-@ bearing bone in the upper jaw ) contained 21 or 22 teeth . The tooth count for each dentary ( tooth @-@ bearing bone in the lower jaw ) was at least 22 . All the teeth were very thick and robust ; those close to the rear of the jaws were short , rounded , and blunt . They appear to have been adapted for crushing , rather than piercing . When the mouth was closed , only the fourth tooth of the lower jaw would have been visible . 
 Modern saltwater crocodiles ( Crocodylus porosus ) have the strongest recorded bite of any living animal , with a maximum force of 16 @,@ 414 N ( 3 @,@ 690 lbf ) . The bite force of Deinosuchus has been estimated to be 18 @,@ 000 N ( 4 @,@ 000 lbf ) to 100 @,@ 000 N ( 22 @,@ 000 lbf ) . It has been argued that even the largest and strongest theropod dinosaurs , such as Tyrannosaurus , probably had bite forces inferior to that of Deinosuchus . 
 Deinosuchus had a secondary bony palate , which would have permitted it to breathe through its nostrils while the rest of the head remained submerged underwater . The vertebrae were articulated in a procoelous manner , meaning they had a concave hollow on the front end and a convex bulge on the rear ; these would have fit together to produce a ball and socket joint . The secondary palate and procoelous vertebrae are advanced features also found in modern eusuchian crocodilians . 
 The osteoderms ( scutes ) covering the back of Deinosuchus were unusually large , heavy , and deeply pitted ; some were of a roughly hemispherical shape . Deep pits and grooves on these osteoderms served as attachment points for connective tissue . Together , the osteoderms and connective tissue would have served as load @-@ bearing reinforcement to support the massive body of Deinosuchus out of water . These deeply pitted osteoderms have been used to suggest that , despite its bulk , Deinosuchus could probably have walked on land much like modern @-@ day crocodiles . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 The large size of Deinosuchus has generally been recognized despite the fragmentary nature of the fossils assigned to it . However , estimates of how large it really was have varied considerably over the years . The original estimate from 1954 for the type specimen of the then @-@ named " Phobosuchus riograndensis " were based on a skull of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) and a lower jaw of 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) long , reconstructed with similar proportions to the Cuban crocodile giving a total estimated length of 15 m ( 49 ft ) . However , this reconstruction is currently considered to be inaccurate . Using more complete remains , it was estimated in 1999 that the size attained by specimens of Deinosuchus varied from 8 to 10 m ( 26 to 33 ft ) with weights from 2 @.@ 5 to 5 t ( 2 @.@ 8 to 5 @.@ 5 short tons ) . This was later corroborated when it was noted that most known specimens of D. rugosus usually had skulls of about 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) with estimated total lengths of 8 m ( 26 ft ) and weights of 2 @.@ 3 t ( 2 @.@ 5 short tons ) . A reasonably well @-@ preserved skull specimen discovered in Texas indicated the animal 's head measured about 1 @.@ 31 m ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) , and its body length was estimated at 9 @.@ 8 m ( 32 ft ) . However , the largest fragmentary remains of D. riograndensis were 1 @.@ 5 times the size of those of the average D. rugosus and it was determined that the largest individuals of this species may have been up to 12 m ( 39 ft ) in length and perhaps weighed as much as 8 @.@ 5 t ( 9 @.@ 4 short tons ) . 
 A particularly large mandibular fragment from a D. riograndensis specimen was estimated to have come from an individual with a skull length of about 147 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 84 ft ) . This length was used in conjunction with a regression equation relating skull length to total length in the American alligator to estimate a total length of 10 @.@ 6 metres ( 35 ft ) for this particularly specimen . This is only slightly lower than previous estimates for the species . Deinosuchus has often been described as the largest crocodyliform of all time . However other <unk> such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> may have equaled or exceeded it in size . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 Deinosuchus was present on both sides of the Western Interior Seaway . Specimens have been found in 10 U.S. states : Utah , Montana , Wyoming , New Mexico , New Jersey , Georgia , Alabama , Mississippi , Texas , and North Carolina . A Deinosuchus osteoderm from the San Carlos Formation was also reported in 2006 , so the giant crocodilian 's range may have included parts of northern Mexico . Deinosuchus fossils are most abundant in the Gulf Coastal Plain region of Georgia , near the Alabama border . All known specimens of Deinosuchus were found in rocks dated to the Campanian stage of the Late Cretaceous period . The oldest examples of this genus lived approximately 80 Ma , and the youngest lived around 73 Ma . 
 The distribution of Deinosuchus specimens indicates these giant crocodilians may have preferred estuarine environments . In the Aguja Formation of Texas , where some of the largest specimens of Deinosuchus have been found , these massive predators probably inhabited brackish @-@ water bays . Although some specimens have also been found in marine deposits , it is not clear whether Deinosuchus ventured out into the ocean ( like modern @-@ day saltwater crocodiles ) ; these remains might have been displaced after the animals died . Deinosuchus has been described as a " conspicuous " component of a purportedly distinct biome occupying the southern half of Late Cretaceous North America . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 In 1954 , Edwin H. Colbert and Roland T. Bird speculated that Deinosuchus " may very well have hunted and devoured some of the dinosaurs with which it was contemporaneous " . Colbert restated this hypothesis more confidently in 1961 : " Certainly this crocodile must have been a predator of dinosaurs ; otherwise why would it have been so overwhelmingly gigantic ? It hunted in the water where the giant theropods could not go . " David R. Schwimmer proposed in 2002 that several hadrosaurid tail vertebrae found near Big Bend National Park show evidence of Deinosuchus tooth marks , strengthening the hypothesis that Deinosuchus fed on dinosaurs in at least some instances . In 2003 , Christopher A. Brochu agreed that Deinosuchus " probably dined on ornithopods from time to time . " Deinosuchus is generally thought to have employed hunting tactics similar to those of modern crocodilians , ambushing dinosaurs and other terrestrial animals at the water 's edge and then submerging them until they drowned . A 2014 study suggested that it would have been able to perform a " death roll " , like modern crocodiles . 
 Schwimmer and G. Dent Williams proposed in 1996 that Deinosuchus may have preyed on marine turtles . Deinosuchus would probably have used the robust , flat teeth near the back of its jaws to crush the turtle shells . The " side @-@ necked " sea turtle <unk> was especially common in the eastern habitat of Deinosuchus , and several of its shells have been found with bite marks that were most likely inflicted by the giant crocodilian . 
 Schwimmer concluded in 2002 that the feeding patterns of Deinosuchus most likely varied by geographic location ; the smaller Deinosuchus specimens of eastern North America would have been opportunistic feeders in an ecological niche similar to that of the modern American alligator . They would have consumed marine turtles , large fish , and smaller dinosaurs . The bigger , but less common , Deinosuchus that lived in Texas and Montana might have been more specialized hunters , capturing and eating large dinosaurs . Schwimmer noted no theropod dinosaurs in Deinosuchus 's eastern range approached its size , indicating the massive crocodilian could have been the region 's apex predator . 
 In 2016 , Mark Witton took a rigorous look at Deinosuchus ' diet . His results show that , although Deinosuchus did eat dinosaurs , its diet was mostly made up of sea turtles . 
 = = = Growth rates = = = 
 A 1999 study by Gregory M. Erickson and Christopher A. Brochu suggested the growth rate of Deinosuchus was comparable to that of modern crocodilians , but was maintained over a far longer time . Their estimates , based on growth rings in the dorsal osteoderms of various specimens , indicated each Deinosuchus might have taken over 35 years to reach full adult size , and the oldest individuals may have lived for more than 50 years . This was a completely different growth strategy than that of large dinosaurs , which reached adult size much more quickly and had shorter lifespans . According to Erickson , a full @-@ grown Deinosuchus " must have seen several generations of dinosaurs come and go " . 
 Schwimmer noted in 2002 that Erickson and Brochu 's assumptions about growth rates are only valid if the <unk> rings reflect annual periods , as they do in modern crocodilians . According to Schwimmer , the growth ring patterns observed could have been affected by a variety of factors , including " migrations of their prey , wet @-@ dry seasonal climate variations , or oceanic circulation and nutrient cycles " . If the ring cycle were biannual rather than annual , this might indicate Deinosuchus grew faster than modern crocodilians , and had a similar maximum lifespan . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 In 1858 , geologist Ebenezer Emmons described two large fossil teeth found in Bladen County , North Carolina . Emmons assigned these teeth to <unk> , which he then believed to be " a genus of crocodilian reptiles " . Later discoveries showed that <unk> was actually a pliosaur , a type of marine reptile . The teeth described by Emmons were thick , slightly curved , and covered with vertically grooved enamel ; he assigned them a new species name , P. rugosus . Although not initially recognized as such , these teeth were probably the first Deinosuchus remains to be scientifically described . Another large tooth that likely came from Deinosuchus , discovered in neighboring Sampson County , was named Polydectes <unk> by Edward Drinker Cope in 1869 . 
 In 1903 , at Willow Creek , Montana , several fossil osteoderms were discovered " lying upon the surface of the soil " by John Bell Hatcher and T.W. Stanton . These osteoderms were initially attributed to the ankylosaurid dinosaur Euoplocephalus . Excavation at the site , carried out by W.H. Utterback , yielded further fossils , including additional osteoderms , as well as vertebrae , ribs , and a pubis . When these specimens were examined , it became clear that they belonged to a large crocodilian and not a dinosaur ; upon learning this , Hatcher " immediately lost interest " in the material . After Hatcher died in 1904 , his colleague W.J. Holland studied and described the fossils . Holland assigned these specimens to a new genus and species , Deinosuchus hatcheri , in 1909 . Deinosuchus comes from the Greek δεινός / deinos , meaning " terrible " , and <unk> / <unk> , meaning " crocodile " . 
 A 1940 expedition by the American Museum of Natural History yielded more fossils of giant crocodilians , this time from Big Bend National Park in Texas . These specimens were described by Edwin H. Colbert and Roland T. Bird in 1954 , under the name Phobosuchus riograndensis . Donald Baird and Jack Horner later assigned the Big Bend remains to Deinosuchus , which has been accepted by most modern authorities . The genus name Phobosuchus , which was initially created by Baron Franz Nopcsa in 1924 , has since been discarded because it contained a variety of different crocodilian species that turned out to not be closely related to each other . 
 The American Museum of Natural History incorporated the skull and jaw fragments into a plaster restoration , modeled after the present @-@ day Cuban crocodile . Colbert and Bird stated this was a " conservative " reconstruction , since an even greater length could have been obtained if a long @-@ skulled modern species , such as the saltwater crocodile had been used as the template . Because it was not then known that Deinosuchus had a broad snout , Colbert and Bird miscalculated the proportions of the skull , and the reconstruction greatly exaggerated its overall width and length . Despite its inaccuracies , the reconstructed skull became the best @-@ known specimen of Deinosuchus , and brought public attention to this giant crocodilian for the first time . 
 Numerous additional specimens of Deinosuchus were discovered over the next several decades . Most were quite fragmentary , but they expanded knowledge of the giant predator 's geographic range . As noted by Chris Brochu , the osteoderms are distinctive enough that even " bone granola " can adequately confirm the presence of Deinosuchus . Better cranial material was also found ; by 2002 , David R. Schwimmer was able to create a composite computer reconstruction of 90 % of the skull . 
 = = Classification and species = = 
 Since the discovery of the earliest fragmentary remains that will come to be known as Deinosuchus , it was found that it was a relative of crocodiles , going as far as placing it in the same family ( <unk> ) in 1954 , this assignment was mostly supported by dental features but was overturned in 1999 when the finding of new specimens from Texas and Georgia helped place Deinosuchus in a phylogenetic analysis , finding it in a basal position within the clade <unk> along with Leidyosuchus . This classification was bolstered in 2005 by the discovery of a well @-@ preserved Deinosuchus brain case from the <unk> Formation of Alabama , which shows some features reminiscent of those in the modern American alligator , Deinosuchus however , was not a direct ancestor of modern alligators . 
 The species pertaining to Deinosuchus since the resurrection of the generic name in 1979 have been traditionally recognized as D. rugosus from the eastern side of the Western Interior Seaway and the larger D. riograndensis from the western side , characterized by differences of the shape of their osteoderms and teeth , this view was not always favored by all researchers and in 2002 it was proposed that there was only one species , Deinosuchus rugosus , with the differences found between the two species explained as the result of the larger size of the western morph . This proposal faced support and criticism and was dropped in 2010 when new fossils of specimens from both sides of the interior seaway showed that the differences between the two morphs were not just size related , teeth from large eastern specimens retained the common characteristics of other specimens of the region and osteoderms from small specimens of the western morph were no different from those of large ones , supporting the specific separation of the two morphs , now formalized as D. rugosus and D. riograndensis . 
 = 2001 North Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 2001 North Indian Ocean cyclone season was fairly quiet , although activity was evenly spread between the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal . There were six depressions tracked by the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) , which is the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the northern Indian Ocean . The agency also tracked four cyclonic storms , which have maximum winds of at least 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) sustained over 3 minutes . The American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center tracked an additional storm – Tropical Storm Vamei – which crossed from the South China Sea at a record @-@ low latitude . 
 The first storm originated on May 21 , and became the strongest recorded storm in the Arabian Sea at the time . The IMD estimated peak 3 minute winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) while the storm was off the west coast of India . The storm weakened greatly before making landfall in Gujarat , and although impact on land was minor , it left up to 950 fishermen missing . A few weeks later , the first Bay of Bengal system originated – a short @-@ lived depression that dropped heavy rainfall upon striking Odisha . After a period of inactivity during the monsoon season , there were cyclonic storms in September and October in the northern Arabian Sea . Both lasted only a few days and dissipated due to unfavorable wind shear . Another cyclonic storm formed in the Bay of Bengal and struck Andhra Pradesh , which dropped heavy rainfall that was equivalent to 300 % of the average October precipitation total . The rains caused flooding , particularly in Cuddapah , where a dam was deliberately opened and inundated the town overnight . There were 153 deaths due to the storm and RS5 billion ( Indian rupees , $ 104 million USD ) in damage . The final storm of the season tracked by the IMD was a short @-@ lived depression in November in the Bay of Bengal . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) in New Delhi – the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the northern Indian Ocean as recognized by the World Meteorological Organization – issued warnings for tropical cyclones developing in the region . The basin 's activity is sub @-@ divided between the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal on opposite coasts of India , and is generally split before and after the monsoon season . The IMD utilized satellite imagery to track storms , and used the Dvorak technique to estimate intensity . 
 Toward the end of the year , convection was generally lower than normal in the Bay of Bengal , despite being a typical hotspot for activity . There were no deaths or damage throughout the year outside of India , and damage there was lower than what occurred in the previous few seasons . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storm ARB 01 = = = 
 The first storm of the season originated from a tropical disturbance that formed east of Somalia on May 18 . Over the following few days , the system gradually organized , becoming a depression on May 21 . It moved eastward toward the coastline of southwestern India and rapidly intensified on May 22 , strengthening from a deep depression to a very severe cyclonic storm within 24 hours . After approaching the coastline , the storm turned to the north and northwest away from land due to a ridge . Based on the well @-@ defined eye and the storm 's satellite presentation , the IMD estimated peak winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) on May 24 , and the JTWC estimated 1 minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) . It became the strongest storm on record in the Arabian Sea , only to be surpassed by Cyclone Gonu in 2007 . Soon after reaching peak intensity , the cyclone rapidly weakened as it turned northward . By May 28 , it had deteriorated into a deep depression , and the IMD downgraded the storm to a remnant low before the circulation reached the Gujarat coast . 
 Ahead of the storm , all ports in Gujarat , including Kandla , one of the largest in the country , were closed as a precautionary measure . Over 10 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from coastal areas in the threatened region . Offshore , between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 fishing vessels lost contact with the mainland immediately after the storm . However , because the storm remained offshore , the coast only experienced minor damage , although rainfall was widespread . About 200 houses were washed away in <unk> , and one person died in Jamnagar . About 950 fishermen were missing after the storm , which prompted a helicopter search . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm ARB 02 = = = 
 An upper @-@ level disturbance spawned a low pressure area in the eastern Arabian Sea on September 24 . It initially consisted of a well @-@ defined circulation on the eastern edge of an area of convection about 370 km ( 230 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Mumbai . With low wind shear beneath the subtropical ridge , the system gradually organized and developed curved banding features while moving west @-@ northwestward . At 0900 UTC on September 24 , the IMD classified the system as a depression , and nine hours later upgraded it further to a deep depression . On the same day , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert , although they did not begin advisories due to the center being on the east side of the convection . At 0900 UTC on September 25 , the IMD upgraded the system to a cyclonic storm , estimating peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . 
 Early on September 26 , the circulation moved beneath the convection , prompting the JTWC to begin advisories on Tropical Cyclone 02A . Around that time , the storm 's outskirts dropped light rainfall in western India . Forecasters initially anticipated that the storm would strengthen to winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) and strike the southern Arabian Peninsula . However , persistent wind shear dislocated the circulation from the convection and imparted weakening . The IMD downgraded the storm to a deep depression and later depression on September 27 , by which time the thunderstorms were rapidly dwindling . The JTWC issued their last advisory on September 28 after the circulation had no nearby convection . At that time , the storm was located 185 km ( 115 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Masirah Island off Oman . The IMD also downgraded the depression to a low pressure area on September 28 and noted that the remnant system became poorly defined the following day . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm ARB 03 = = = 
 Similar to the previous storm , an area of convection formed in the Arabian Sea about 185 km ( 115 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Mumbai on October 7 . It was associated with a circulation that moved westward from the Indian Coast , which formed as a well @-@ defined low pressure area over western India . The convection organized and increased , aided by low wind shear and good outflow . Late on October 8 , the IMD classified the system as a depression , and early the next day upgraded it to a deep depression . A low @-@ level circulation formed beneath a well @-@ defined mid @-@ level storm , with intense convection and strong winds north of the center . At 06 : 00 UTC on October 9 , the JTWC began classifying the system as Tropical Cyclone 03A . 
 With increasing banding features , the storm strengthened while moving west @-@ northwestward , steered by a ridge to the north . At 09 : 00 UTC that day , the IMD upgraded the system to a cyclonic storm , estimating peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Soon thereafter , the storm began weakening due to increased dry air and the upper @-@ level environment becoming unfavorable . The thunderstorms diminished and disappeared over the circulation by October 10 . That day , the JTWC discontinued advisories , and the IMD downgraded it to a remnant low pressure area south of Pakistan . The storm brushed the Indian coast with rainfall , reaching 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) in Gujarat state , although there was no major damage . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm BOB 01 = = = 
 Early on October 14 , a low pressure area formed off the eastern coast of India . While moving generally westward , the system quickly organized into a depression that day . On October 15 , the IMD estimated peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , based on satellite imagery appearance warranting a Dvorak rating of 2 @.@ 5 ; this made it a cyclonic storm . However , the circulation remained removed from the deep convection . Early on November 16 , the storm made landfall near Nellore , Andhra Pradesh . It quickly weakened over land , degenerating into a remnant low pressure area over Rayalaseema on October 17 . 
 While moving ashore , the storm dropped heavy rainfall in Andhra Pradesh and extending into Tamil Nadu , causing flooding in some areas for the first time in 40 years . In a 24 ‑ hour period , <unk> recorded 261 mm ( 10 @.@ 3 in ) of precipitation , and 13 stations recorded daily totals of over 100 mm ( 4 in ) ; the highest two @-@ day rainfall total was 676 @.@ 5 mm ( 26 @.@ 63 in ) , and some areas received 300 % of the average October rainfall within 36 hours . Damage was heaviest in Andhra Pradesh , particularly in Nellore , Chittoor , and Kadapa , although floods also extended into Bihar . Several regional roads and rail lines were damaged , including portions of National Highway 5 , which stranded hundreds of trucks ; the routes were reopened within two weeks . The rains breached 1 @,@ 635 water tanks , while 125 @,@ 000 ha ( 310 @,@ 000 acres ) of crop fields , mostly rice and groundnuts , were impaired . About 1 @,@ 000 head of cattle were killed as well . In Cuddapah , excess water was released from irrigation dams along the <unk> River ; water levels rose 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in the middle of the night , catching residents off guard , and damaging 18 @,@ 244 houses . The dam was also breached in Nellore , and many towns in the region were inundated or isolated for two days . Across the state , the storm damaged 55 @,@ 747 houses , accounting for RS5 billion ( Indian rupees , $ 104 million USD ) in losses . There were 153 deaths related to the floods and the storm , mostly in Cuddapah . 
 Following the storm , the Indian Red Cross Society used funds related to previous floods and an earthquake to help 2 @,@ 000 families . After the floods , the Indian government provided food and housing to 61 @,@ 681 residents in 130 shelters , and distributed 20 kg of rice to each household . The army flew helicopters to drop off food , candles , and kerosene to stranded families in Cuddapah . Stagnant waters were disinfected after the floods , and deceased cattle were burned to reduce infection . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 For several days , the JTWC monitored a disturbance in the northern Bay of Bengal for potential development , associated with the southwest monsoon . On June 9 , a low pressure area formed , and it became well @-@ defined by June 11 . By that time , there was convection located west of an exposed circulation . Early the following day , the IMD classified it as a depression , estimating peak winds of 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) . Strong wind shear prevented much development . Shortly after forming , the system moved northwestward and made landfall near Paradip , Odisha . It quickly weakened below depression intensity on June 13 while progressing inland , degenerating into a remnant low near Madhya Pradesh on June 15 . The system dropped heavy rainfall along its path , with a daily peak of 350 mm ( 14 in ) in Vidarbha . 
 On November 7 , a cycling area of convection was persistent off the east coast of India , associated with a broad circulation embedded within a trough . The thunderstorms expanded and gradually organized , aided by good outflow and low wind shear . On November 11 , the IMD upgraded the system to a depression off Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh . On the same day , the JTWC began classifying the depression as Tropical Cyclone 04B . Located within a weakness of the ridge , the depression moved slowly to the north and northeast , and was initially expected to move ashore . However , increasing shear removed the convection from the center , and the storm remained offshore while weakening . On November 12 , the IMD downgraded the system back to a low pressure area . The storm brought rainfall to coastal portions of eastern India , peaking at 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in Paradip . 
 The near @-@ equator Tropical Storm Vamei crossed Sumatra from the South China Sea at the end of December . According to the Japan Meteorological Agency – the official agency covering the western Pacific Ocean – the storm dissipated on December 28 along the east coast of Sumatra . On the next day , the remnants entered the Bay of Bengal , and thunderstorms soon reformed over the circulation due to weak to moderate wind shear . After the remnants of Vamei organized further , the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 05B on December 30 , although the agency later treated it as a continuation of the original storm . Moving west @-@ northwest , the storm re @-@ intensified to a secondary peak of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . However , an increase in shear left the circulation exposed from the convection . Vamei quickly weakened , dissipating early on January 1 , 2002 . The IMD never tracked the storm . 
 = External cardinal = 
 In the category of the members of the College of Cardinals in the central Middle Ages ( 11th to 13th century ) , an external cardinal ( as opposed to a " curial cardinal " ) was a Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church who did not reside in the Roman Curia , because of simultaneously being a bishop of the episcopal see other than suburbicarian , or abbot of an abbey situated outside Rome . In the wider sense , it may also concern cardinals who were appointed to the external episcopal sees and resigned their memberships in the College of Cardinals with this appointment . As well , it can concern cardinals who were generally curial cardinals , but for some time exercised the posts of administrators or prelates of the external churches . 
 Today , the great majority of the cardinals are archbishops of the main metropolitan dioceses of the world and reside in their countries . Apart from the exclusive right of the election of the new pope , their dignity is purely honorific . However , originally the College of Cardinals was simply a college of the clergy of the City of Rome , constituted of the bishops of the seven dioceses ( called suburbicarian sees ) bordering the diocese of Rome ( cardinal @-@ bishops ) , priests of the parochial churches of Rome ( cardinal @-@ priests ) and deacons heading the ecclesiastical regions of the city of Rome ( cardinal @-@ deacons ) . Unlike today , the cardinals had real jurisdiction over the dioceses , parochial churches ( called tituli ) or <unk> to which they were attached . The phenomenon of the external cardinalate in the late Middle Ages constituted the first exception to the rule , that cardinals – members of the clergy of the diocese of Rome – cannot serve simultaneously in another , external church , which is now common practice . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and development = = = 
 The College of Cardinals originated from the college of the main clergy of the city of Rome . The title of cardinal initially concerned only the priests of the 28 parochial churches of the Eternal City ( tituli ) , who were required to assist the pope in the liturgical service in the four <unk> of Rome ( Vatican Basilica , Liberian Basilica , Basilica of St. Paul Outside the Walls and San Lorenzo fuori le Mura ) . Later ( probably in the 8th century ) the term was extended to the bishops of the seven dioceses bordering the diocese of Rome : Ostia , Porto , Albano , Palestrina , Silva Candida ( 1079 replaced by <unk> ) , <unk> @-@ <unk> ( whose name later changed to Tusculum , and later to Frascati ) and Velletri ( after 1060 replaced by Sabina ) . These bishops ( cardinal @-@ bishops ) performed the liturgical service in the Lateran Basilica . Finally , the deacons serving in the papal household or heading the ecclesiastical regions of the city ( and later attached to the churches called <unk> ) , also became the cardinals ( cardinal @-@ deacons ) . 
 The cardinals of the Holy Roman Church up to the 11th century had strictly liturgical duties and generally took no part in the government of the Church . Cardinal bishops were equal to the other bishops , even if celebrating the rite of consecration of the new pope gave them considerable prestige , while the dignity of the cardinal priest or deacon was considered lower than that of a bishop . The liturgical service in the five patriarchal basilicas of Rome , as well as day pastoral duties in constant presence of the cardinals at Rome . 
 This situation started to gradually change with the ascension of Pope Leo IX ( 1049 – 1054 ) and the beginning of the Reform Papacy . This pope , in order to reform the corrupted Roman clergy , appointed several new cardinals from the monastic centers outside Rome , such as Monte Cassino , <unk> and Cluny . These new cardinals became his close advisors . Leo ’ s successors continued this trend and Nicholas II in 1059 gave the cardinals the exclusive right to elect a new pope . At the end of the 11th century the boca formed a single College of Cardinals , which became the main body of the papal government — they served as experts or judges in the legal causes ( auditors ) , countersigned the solemn papal privileges , acted as governors of the cities or provinces of the Papal States or were sent by the popes on important diplomatic missions . The cardinals became the most important members of the Roman Curia , and as such were still required to reside in the papal court , unless they were dispatched for a legatine mission in the name of the pope . 
 Almost simultaneously to the development of the College of Cardinals as a body of papal advisors , the popes started to elevate to the cardinalate some " external " abbots . After such appointments , they continued to reside in their abbeys and did not become members of the Papal curia . On the other hands , the elections of the cardinals to the posts of abbots of external monasteries were also ratified by the popes . The main goal of such appointments was probably to strengthen the ties between some important monastic centers with the Roman Church . The first known instances of such appointments concerned the abbey of Montecassino , one of the main centers supporting reform of the Church . In 1057 cardinal @-@ deacon Frederick de Lorraine ( the future pope Stephen X ) was elected abbot of Montecassino ; Pope Victor II confirmed his election and simultaneously named him cardinal @-@ priest of S. Crisogono . His successor as abbot of Montecassino , Desiderio , was also quickly promoted to the cardinalate , but continued to act also as abbot . From 1057 until 1259 / 62 at least eight abbots of Montecassino were simultaneously members of the College of Cardinals . Also some other Italian ( e.g. Subiaco , Farfa , Vallombrosa , S. Sophia in Benevento ) and French abbeys ( St. Victor at Marseille ) were for some time ruled by the cardinal @-@ abbots . 
 During the Investiture Controversy , both the legitimate Popes as well as Antipope Clement III developed another , not entirely new , practice . They appointed their cardinals to the important Episcopal sees in Italy in order to assure their government by their own trusted collaborators . Antipope Clement III named cardinals Hugo Candidus and Roberto of S. Marco bishops of Fermo and Faenza respectively . Popes Victor III and Urban II appointed their cardinals to the episcopal sees of Brescia ( <unk> ) and Reggio @-@ Emilia ( <unk> ) . The practice was continued by successive popes , who named their cardinals particularly to the recently reestablished Latin archiepiscopal sees in southern Italy ( <unk> , Brindisi , Salerno , Benevento ) . Also , three successive archbishops of Pisa : Uberto Rossi <unk> ( 1133 – 1137 / 38 ) , <unk> ( 1138 – 1145 ) and Villano Caetani ( 1146 – 1175 ) were initially the cardinals . 
 Up to the pontificate of Pope Alexander III ( 1159 – 1181 ) , all the cardinals who were appointed to the external episcopal sees , resigned their membership in the College of Cardinals after receiving episcopal consecration , which clearly shows that the episcopate was considered a higher dignity than that of cardinal @-@ priest or deacon . On the other hand , the bishops were never appointed cardinals . Certainly , the episcopate and cardinalate were considered incompatible dignities . However , during Alexander ’ s pontificate a change is apparent ; although there were still the cases of the cardinals leaving the College of Cardinals after assuming episcopal office ( Lombardo of Benevento , Rainaldo of Gaeta ) , there also appeared members of the College who were simultaneously cardinals and bishops . Perhaps Alexander III followed here an example of his rival , Antipope Victor IV , who in 1162 appointed <unk> <unk> bishop of Parma and cardinal @-@ priest . The first such instance in the legitimate obedience was Conrad of Wittelsbach , who was appointed cardinal @-@ priest of S. Marcello in December 1165 and subsequently promoted to the suburbicarian see of Sabina , but continued to act also as archbishop of Mainz . Archbishop of Reims Guillaume aux <unk> Mains was named cardinal priest of S. Sabina in 1179 , but retained archdiocese of Reims ; similarly bishops Giovanni of Toscanella , Ruffino of Rimini and Gerardo of Novara , elevated to the cardinalate in 1189 , 1190 and 1211 respectively . On the other hand , when cardinal @-@ priest Uberto Crivelli was elected and consecrated archbishop of Milan in 1185 , he retained his cardinalate and his Roman <unk> ( S. Lorenzo in <unk> ) . The posts of cardinal and bishop were no longer considered incompatible with each other . Moreover , the rank of cardinal @-@ priest or cardinal @-@ deacon became equal to that of bishop . However , it seems that the elected , but not yet consecrated , bishops who were appointed cardinals were generally obliged to resign their sees . 
 Further development occurred in the pontificate of Clement III ( 1187 – 1191 ) . Cardinals elected to the external sees renounced their titular churches but without resigning their membership in the College of Cardinals . They used the title cardinalis Sanctae <unk> Ecclesiae in addition to the episcopal title , without indicating their cardinalitial order or titular church . The first such case was that of Adelardo Cattaneo , cardinal @-@ priest of S. Marcello from 1185 and bishop of Verona 1188 – 1214 . That he resigned the church of San Marcello appears not only from his titulature in the documents , but also from the fact that during his lifetime a new cardinal @-@ priest of this title ( <unk> ) was appointed . The case of Adelardo was followed by the cardinal @-@ archbishops Guy Paré of Reims ( 1204 ) , Uberto <unk> of Milan ( 1207 ) and Stephen Langton of Canterbury ( 1207 ) under Pope Innocent III . At the end of 12th century ca . 15 % of the members of the College of Cardinals were " external " cardinals . 
 = = = End of the medieval " external " cardinalate = = = 
 Despite the cases mentioned above , the pontificate of Innocent III marks also the beginning of the end of the " external " cardinalate . Stephen Langton was the last cardinal allowed by the Pope to become a diocesan bishop of the external see . From that time the popes constantly rejected all such <unk> made by the cathedral chapters , indicating that the presence of the cardinals in the papal curia is indispensable . On the other hand , bishops appointed to the College of Cardinals were obliged to resign their sees ( although it must be remarked that until the end of the 13th century they were appointed always to the rank of cardinal @-@ bishop ) . It is still possible to find a few cases of the cardinals who exercised the posts of administrators of the episcopal sees , but only for a short time , often as part of their legatine duties . The last instance of external cardinal sensu stricto was abbot Riccardo of Montecassino ( 1252 – 1259 / 62 ) . Generally already in the pontificate of Gregory IX ( 1227 – 1241 ) , the College of Cardinals became an exclusively curial body , without any " external " element , and remained such until the Great Western Schism ( 1378 – 1417 ) . However , during this time the rank of cardinal became also the highest in the Catholic Church , inferior only to the Pope . 
 The phenomenon of the " external " cardinalate was revived during the Great Western Schism , but in another form and for other reasons . Popes from the rival obediences gave the cardinalitial dignities to the churchmen serving European monarchs ( Crown @-@ cardinals ) without calling them to the Roman Curia , in order to assure the support of the monarchs . These cardinals continued to reside in their countries . Additionally , the curial cardinals in 13th century started to cumulate a great number of the benefices , from the time of the Schism including also the episcopal sees . After the Council of Trent ( 1545 – 1563 ) , the cardinals occupying external bishoprics were generally obliged to reside in them . Today , the majority of the cardinals are simultaneously diocesan archbishops or bishops , and they have no real jurisdiction over their titular churches at Rome . 
 = = <unk> and engagement in the papal government = = 
 There was no consistency to the titulature used by the " external " cardinals in the official documents issued by the popes , secular rulers or by themselves . Cardinal @-@ abbots subscribed or were called sometimes only as cardinals , sometimes only as abbots , and sometimes using both titles . Abbot Mainardo of Pomposa subscribed papal bulls only as cardinal @-@ bishop of Silva Candida . Desiderius of Montecassino subscribed papal bulls as abbot and cardinal or only as cardinal , while the papal privileges for the abbey Montecassino call him either cardinal and abbot or only abbot . Abbot Richard of St.-Victor used the forms “ cardinal and abbot ” or only abbot . Leonato of S. Clemente in <unk> in the private documents subscribed as cardinal and abbot but the papal privileges issued for him call him only abbot without indicating his cardinalate . 
 Cardinals who simultaneously were also bishops usually appear in the documents with both titles : cardinalitial and episcopal . The only exceptions are archbishop Uberto Crivelli of Milan , who subscribed papal bulls only as cardinal , and Ruggiero of Benevento , who generally was styled only as archbishop , while his cardinalate was mentioned very infrequently . 
 Even more differentiated was the engagement of the " external " cardinals in the Church government and the papal policy , even if limited evidence does not fully highlight this question . Certainly some of them spent some time working in the papal curia , which is attested by their subscriptions on the papal bulls . Among the signatories of the papal privileges appear abbots Desiderius of Montecassino , Mainardo of Pomposa , Giovanni of Subiaco , Richard of St.-Victor , Oderisio de Marsi of Montecassino , Bernardo degli Uberti of Vallombrosa , Amico of S. Vincenzo , <unk> of Farfa , Benedetto of Torre Maggiore and Giovanni of S. Sophia , as well as the bishops Hugo Candidus , Konrad von Wittelsbach , Guillaume of Reims , Uberto Crivelli of Milan , Giovanni of Toscanella and Ruffino of Rimini . The last three seem to have been de facto curial cardinals , having spent at the papal court most of their time . On the other hand , cardinals like Pietro of S. Benedetto in Salerno , Rainaldo of Montecassino , Simone of Subiaco , Leonato of S. Clemente in <unk> , Ruggiero of Benevento , <unk> of Montecassino or Riccardo of Montecassino seem to have never participated in the curial business . Also cardinals Adelardo Cattaneo of Verona , Guy Paré of Reims , Uberto <unk> of Milan and Stephen Langton of Canterbury after their episcopal appointments are no longer attested in the papal curia . 
 Several " external " cardinals acted as papal legates or vicars , often in the region of their episcopal seat or abbey . Among them were : 
 Peter <unk> of S. Salvatore – legate in Germany ( 1079 ) and France ( 1080 ) , 
 Mainardo of Pomposa – legate before Emperor Henry IV ( 1065 ) and in Milan ( 1067 ) 
 Richard of St.-Victor – legate in Spain for many years 
 Konrad von Wittelsbach – legate in Germany from 1177 
 Guillaume of Reims – legate in France from 1179 
 Ruffino of Rimini – legate in Imola ( <unk> ) 
 Gerardo de <unk> – legate in Lombardy ( 1210 – 11 ) 
 Besides , some " external " cardinals participated in the papal elections : Desiderius of Montecassino and Richard of St.-Victor in 1086 , Oderisio de Marsi in 1088 , Enrico of Mazara and Amico of S. Vincenzo in 1118 , Simone Borelli in 1159 , Uberto Crivelli in 1185 , probably also Konrad von Wittelsbach in 1185 , Giovanni of Toscanella in 1191 and 1198 , and Ruffino of Rimini in 1191 . 
 Three " external " cardinals became popes : Frederick of Montecassino became Pope Stephen IX in 1057 , Desiderius of Montecassino became Pope Victor III in 1086 and Uberto Crivelli of Milan became Pope Urban III in 1185 . 
 = = Lists of the " external " cardinals = = 
 Note : The " external " cardinals have been divided into four subcategories , of whom only the first two concern the " external " cardinals sensu stricto . Some cardinals belonged to more than one subcategory . The disputed cases are listed separately at the end of the each subsection . Cardinals created by antipopes ( " <unk> " ) are also included . 
 = = = Cardinal @-@ abbots = = = 
 The list is arranged chronologically by the date of appointment of the abbot to the cardinalate or of the cardinal to the abbacy . 
 = = = = Disputed cases = = = = 
 = = = Cardinals – diocesan bishops ( 11 – 13th century ) = = = 
 The list is arranged chronologically by the date of appointment of the bishop to the cardinalate or of the cardinal to the episcopate . 
 = = = = Disputed case = = = = 
 = = = Cardinals who renounced their cardinalate after appointments to the external bishoprics = = = 
 The list is arranged chronologically by the date of appointment of the cardinal to the external episcopal see and his renouncement of the cardinalate . 
 = = = = Disputed cases = = = = 
 = = = Cardinals who served as administrators or prelates of the external churches ( until 13th century ) = = = 
 = = Rejected episcopal elections of the cardinals in 13th century = = 
 = Manchester Mark 1 = 
 The Manchester Mark 1 was one of the earliest stored @-@ program computers , developed at the Victoria University of Manchester from the Small @-@ Scale Experimental Machine ( SSEM ) or " Baby " ( operational in June 1948 ) . It was also called the Manchester Automatic Digital Machine , or <unk> . Work began in August 1948 , and the first version was operational by April 1949 ; a program written to search for Mersenne primes ran error @-@ free for nine hours on the night of 16 / 17 June 1949 . 
 The machine 's successful operation was widely reported in the British press , which used the phrase " electronic brain " in describing it to their readers . That description provoked a reaction from the head of the University of Manchester 's Department of Neurosurgery , the start of a long @-@ running debate as to whether an electronic computer could ever be truly creative . 
 The Mark 1 was to provide a computing resource within the university , to allow researchers to gain experience in the practical use of computers , but it very quickly also became a prototype on which the design of Ferranti 's commercial version could be based . Development ceased at the end of 1949 , and the machine was scrapped towards the end of 1950 , replaced in February 1951 by a Ferranti Mark 1 , the world 's first commercially available general @-@ purpose electronic computer . 
 The computer is especially historically significant because of its pioneering inclusion of index registers , an innovation which made it easier for a program to read sequentially through an array of words in memory . Thirty @-@ four patents resulted from the machine 's development , and many of the ideas behind its design were incorporated in subsequent commercial products such as the IBM 701 and 702 as well as the Ferranti Mark 1 . The chief designers , Frederic C. Williams and Tom Kilburn , concluded from their experiences with the Mark 1 that computers would be used more in scientific roles than in pure mathematics . In 1951 , they started development work on Meg , the Mark 1 's successor , which would include a floating point unit . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1936 , mathematician Alan Turing published a definition of a theoretical " universal computing machine " , a computer which held its program on tape , along with the data being worked on . Turing proved that such a machine was capable of solving any conceivable mathematical problem for which an algorithm could be written . During the 1940s , Turing and others such as Konrad Zuse developed the idea of using the computer 's own memory to hold both the program and data , instead of tape , but it was mathematician John von Neumann who became widely credited with defining that stored @-@ program computer architecture , on which the Manchester Mark 1 was based . 
 The practical construction of a von Neumann computer depended on the availability of a suitable memory device . The University of Manchester 's Small @-@ Scale Experimental Machine ( SSEM ) , the world 's first stored @-@ program computer , had successfully demonstrated the practicality of the stored @-@ program approach and of the Williams tube , an early form of computer memory based on a standard cathode ray tube ( CRT ) , by running its first program in June 1948 . Early electronic computers were generally programmed by being rewired , or via plugs and patch panels ; there was no separate program stored in memory , as in a modern computer . It could take several days to reprogram ENIAC , for instance . Stored @-@ program computers were also being developed by other researchers , notably the National Physical Laboratory 's Pilot ACE , Cambridge University 's EDSAC , and the US Army 's EDVAC . The SSEM and the Mark 1 differed primarily in their use of Williams tubes as memory devices , instead of mercury delay lines . 
 From about August 1948 , the SSEM was intensively developed as a prototype for the Manchester Mark 1 , initially with the aim of providing the university with a more realistic computing facility . In October 1948 , UK Government Chief Scientist Ben Lockspeiser was given a demonstration of the prototype Mark 1 while on a visit to the University of Manchester . Lockspeiser was so impressed by what he saw that he immediately initiated a government contract with the local firm of Ferranti to make a commercial version of the machine , the Ferranti Mark 1 . In his letter to the company , dated 26 October 1948 , Lockspeiser authorised the company to " proceed on the lines we discussed , namely , to construct an electronic calculating machine to the instructions of Professor F. C. Williams " . From that point on , development of the Mark 1 had the additional purpose of supplying Ferranti with a design on which to base their commercial machine . The government 's contract with Ferranti ran for five years from November 1948 , and involved an estimated £ 35 @,@ 000 per year . 
 = = Development and design = = 
 The SSEM had been designed by the team of Frederic C. Williams , Tom Kilburn and Geoff Tootill . To develop the Mark 1 they were joined by two research students , D. B. G. Edwards and G. E. Thomas ; work began in earnest in August 1948 . The project soon had the dual purpose of supplying Ferranti with a working design on which they could base a commercial machine , the Ferranti Mark 1 , and of building a computer that would allow researchers to gain experience of how such a machine could be used in practice . The first of the two versions of the Manchester Mark 1 – known as the Intermediary Version – was operational by April 1949 . However , this first version lacked features such as the instructions necessary to programmatically transfer data between the main store and its newly developed magnetic backing store , which had to be done by halting the machine and manually initiating the transfer . These missing features were incorporated in the Final Specification version , which was fully working by October 1949 . The machine contained 4 @,@ 050 valves and had a power consumption of 25 kilowatts . To increase reliability , purpose @-@ built CRTs made by GEC were used in the machine instead of the standard devices used in the SSEM . 
 The SSEM 's 32 @-@ bit word length was increased to 40 bits . Each word could hold either one 40 @-@ bit number or two 20 @-@ bit program instructions . The main store initially consisted of two double @-@ density Williams tubes , each holding two arrays of 32 x 40 @-@ bit words – known as pages – backed up by a magnetic drum capable of storing an additional 32 pages . The capacity was increased in the Final Specification version to eight pages of main store on four Williams tubes and 128 magnetic drum pages of backing store . The 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) diameter drum , initially known as a magnetic wheel , contained a series of parallel magnetic tracks around its surface , each with its own read / write head . Each track held 2 @,@ 560 bits , corresponding to two pages ( 2 × 32 × 40 bits ) . One revolution of the drum took 30 milliseconds , during which time both pages could be transferred to the CRT main memory , although the actual data transfer time depended on the latency , the time it took for a page to arrive under the read / write head . Writing pages to the drum took about twice as long as reading . The drum 's rotational speed was synchronised to the main central processor clock , which allowed for additional drums to be added . Data was recorded onto the drum using a phase modulation technique still known today as Manchester coding . 
 The machine 's instruction set was increased from the 7 of the SSEM to 26 initially , including multiplication done in hardware . This increased to 30 instructions in the Final Specification version . Ten bits of each word were allocated to hold the instruction code . The standard instruction time was 1 @.@ 8 milliseconds , but multiplication was much slower , depending on the size of the operand . 
 The machine 's most significant innovation is generally considered to be its incorporation of index registers , commonplace on modern computers . The SSEM had included two registers , implemented as Williams tubes : the accumulator ( A ) and the program counter ( C ) . As A and C had already been assigned , the tube holding the two index registers , originally known as B @-@ lines , was given the name B. The contents of the registers could be used to modify program instructions , allowing convenient iteration through an array of numbers stored in memory . The Mark 1 also had a fourth tube , ( M ) , to hold the <unk> and multiplier for a multiplication operation . 
 = = Programming = = 
 Of the 20 bits allocated for each program instruction , 10 were used to hold the instruction code , which allowed for 1 @,@ 024 ( 210 ) different instructions . The machine had 26 initially , increasing to 30 when the function codes to programmatically control the data transfer between the magnetic drum and the cathode ray tube ( CRT ) main store were added . On the Intermediary Version programs were input by key switches , and the output was displayed as a series of dots and dashes on a cathode ray tube known as the output device , just as on the SSEM from which the Mark 1 had been developed . However , the Final Specification machine , completed in October 1949 , benefitted from the addition of a teleprinter with a 5 @-@ hole paper @-@ tape reader and punch . 
 Mathematician Alan Turing , who had been appointed to the nominal post of Deputy Director of the Computing Machine Laboratory at the University of Manchester in September 1948 , devised a base 32 encoding scheme based on the standard ITA2 5 @-@ bit teleprinter code , which allowed programs and data to be written to and read from paper tape . The ITA2 system maps each of the possible 32 binary values that can be represented in 5 bits ( 25 ) to a single character . Thus " 10010 " represents " D " , " 10001 " represents " Z " , and so forth . Turing changed only a few of the standard <unk> ; for instance , <unk> and <unk> , which mean " no effect " and " <unk> " in the teleprinter code , were represented by the characters " / " and " @ " respectively . Binary zero , represented by the forward slash , was the most common character in programs and data , leading to sequences written as " / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / " . One early user suggested that Turing 's choice of a forward slash was a subconscious choice on his part , a representation of rain seen through a dirty window , reflecting Manchester 's " famously dismal " weather . 
 Because the Mark 1 had a 40 @-@ bit word length , eight 5 @-@ bit teleprinter characters were required to encode each word . Thus for example the binary word : 
 10001 10010 10100 <unk> 10001 <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 would be represented on paper tape as <unk> . The contents of any word in store could also be set via the teleprinter 's keyboard , and output onto its printer . The machine worked internally in binary , but it was able to carry out the necessary decimal to binary and binary to decimal conversions for its input and output respectively . 
 There was no assembly language defined for the Mark 1 . Programs had to be written and submitted in binary form , encoded as eight 5 @-@ bit characters for each 40 @-@ bit word ; programmers were encouraged to memorize the modified ITA2 coding scheme to make their job easier . Data was read and written from the <unk> punch under program control . The Mark 1 had no system of hardware interrupts ; the program continued after a read or write operation had been initiated until another input / output instruction was encountered , at which point the machine waited for the first to complete . 
 The Mark 1 had no operating system ; its only system software was a few basic routines for input and output . As in the SSEM from which it was developed , and in contrast to the established mathematical convention , the machine 's storage was arranged with the least significant digits to the left ; thus a one was represented in five bits as " 10000 " , rather than the more conventional " <unk> " . Negative numbers were represented using two 's complement , as most computers still do today . In that representation , the value of the most significant bit denotes the sign of a number ; positive numbers have a zero in that position and negative numbers a one . Thus the range of numbers that could be held in each 40 @-@ bit word was − 239 to + 239 − 1 ( decimal : <unk> to + 549 @,@ 755 @,@ 813 @,@ 887 ) . 
 = = First programs = = 
 The first realistic program to be run on the Mark 1 was a search for Mersenne primes , in early April 1949 , which ran error free for nine hours on the night of 16 / 17 June 1949 . The algorithm was specified by Max Newman , head of the Mathematics Department at the University of Manchester , and the program was written by Kilburn and Tootill . Turing later wrote an optimised version of the program , dubbed the Mersenne Express . 
 The Manchester Mark 1 continued to do useful mathematical work until 1950 , including an investigation of the Riemann hypothesis and calculations in optics . 
 = = Later developments = = 
 Tootill was temporarily transferred from the University of Manchester to Ferranti in August 1949 , to continue work on the Ferranti Mark 1 's design , and spent four months working with the company . The Manchester Mark 1 was dismantled and scrapped towards the end of 1950 , replaced a few months later by the first Ferranti Mark 1 , the world 's first commercially available general @-@ purpose computer . 
 Between 1946 and 1949 , the average size of the design team working on the Mark 1 and its predecessor , the SSEM , had been about four people . During that time 34 patents were taken out based on the team 's work , either by the Ministry of Supply or by its successor , the National Research Development Corporation . In July 1949 , IBM invited Williams to the United States on an all @-@ expenses @-@ paid trip to discuss the Mark 1 's design . The company subsequently licensed several of the patented ideas developed for the machine , including the Williams tube , in the design of its own 701 and 702 computers . The most significant design legacy of the Manchester Mark 1 was perhaps its incorporation of index registers , the patent for which was taken out in the names of Williams , Kilburn , Tootill , and Newman . 
 Kilburn and Williams concluded that computers would be used more in scientific roles than pure maths , and decided to develop a new machine that would include a floating point unit . Work began in 1951 , and the resulting machine , which ran its first program in May 1954 , was known as Meg , or the <unk> machine . It was smaller and simpler than the Mark 1 , and much faster for maths problems . Ferranti produced a version of Meg with the Williams tubes replaced by the more reliable core memory , marketed as the Ferranti Mercury . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The successful operation of the Manchester Mark 1 and its predecessor , the SSEM , was widely reported in the British press , which used the phrase " electronic brain " to describe the machines . Lord Louis Mountbatten had earlier introduced that term in a speech delivered to the British Institution of Radio Engineers on 31 October 1946 , in which he speculated about how the primitive computers then available might evolve . The excitement surrounding the reporting in 1949 of what was the first recognisably modern computer provoked a reaction unexpected by its developers ; Sir Geoffrey Jefferson , professor of neurosurgery at the University of Manchester , on being asked to deliver the Lister Oration on 9 June 1949 chose " The Mind of Mechanical Man " as his subject . His purpose was to " debunk " the Manchester project . In his address he said : 
 Not until a machine can write a sonnet or compose a concerto because of thoughts and emotions felt , and not by the chance fall of symbols , could we agree that machine equals brain – that is , not only write it but know that it had written it . No machine could feel pleasure at its success , grief when its valves fuse , be warmed by flattery , be made miserable by its mistakes , be charmed by sex , be angry or miserable when it cannot get what it wants . 
 The Times reported on Jefferson 's speech the following day , adding that Jefferson forecast that " the day would never dawn when the gracious rooms of the Royal Society would be converted into garages to house these new fellows " . This was interpreted as a deliberate slight to Newman , who had secured a grant from the society to continue the work of the Manchester team . In response Newman wrote a follow @-@ up article for The Times , in which he claimed that there was a close analogy between the structure of the Mark 1 and the human brain . His article included an interview with Turing , who added : 
 This is only a foretaste of what is to come , and only the shadow of what is going to be . We have to have some experience with the machine before we really know its capabilities . It may take years before we settle down to the new possibilities , but I do not see why it should not enter any of the fields normally covered by the human intellect and eventually compete on equal terms . 
 = Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid = 
 Abū <unk> Khālid ibn al @-@ <unk> ibn al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( Arabic : أبو سليمان خالد بن <unk> بن <unk> <unk> ; 585 – 642 ) also known as Sayf Allāh al @-@ <unk> ( Arabic : سيف الله <unk> ; Drawn Sword of God ) , was a companion of the Prophet Muhammad . He is noted for his military tactics and prowess , commanding the forces of Medina under Muhammad and the forces of his immediate successors of the Rashidun Caliphate , Abu Bakr and Umar ibn Khattab . It was under his military leadership that Arabia , for the first time in history , was united under a single political entity , the Caliphate . Commanding the forces of the nascent Islamic State , Khalid was victorious in over a hundred battles , against the forces of the Byzantine @-@ Roman Empire , Sassanid @-@ Persian Empire , and their allies , in addition to other Arab tribes . His strategic achievements include the conquest of Arabia during the Ridda Wars , Persian Mesopotamia and Roman Syria within several years from 632 to 636 . He is also remembered for his decisive victories at Yamamah , <unk> , and Firaz , and his tactical successes at Walaja and Yarmouk . 
 Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid ( Khalid son of al @-@ Walid ) was from the Meccan tribe of Quraysh , from a clan that initially opposed Muhammad . He played a vital role in the Meccan victory at the Battle of Uhud against the Muslims . He converted to Islam , and joined Muhammad after the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah and participated in various expeditions for him , such as the Battle of Mu 'tah . It was the first battle between the Romans and the Muslims . Khalid ibn Al @-@ Walid reported that the fighting was so intense , that he used nine swords , which broke in the battle . Khalid took over after Zayd ibn <unk> , then Jafar ibn Abi Talib , then Abdullah ibn <unk> were killed . After Muhammad 's death , he played a key role in commanding Medinan forces for Abu Bakr in the Ridda wars , conquering central Arabia and subduing Arab tribes . He captured the Sassanid Arab client Kingdom of Al @-@ Hirah , and defeated the Sassanid Persian forces during his conquest of Iraq ( Mesopotamia ) . He was later transferred to the western front to capture Roman Syria and the Byzantine Arab client state of the Ghassanids . 
 Although Umar later relieved him of high command , he nevertheless remained the effective leader of the forces arrayed against the Byzantines during the early stages of the Byzantine – Arab Wars . Under his command , Damascus was captured in 634 and the key Arab victory against the Byzantine forces was achieved at the Battle of Yarmouk ( 636 ) , which led to the conquest of the Bilad al @-@ Sham ( Levant ) . In 638 , at the zenith of his career , he was dismissed from military services . 
 Khalid is said to have fought around a hundred battles , both major battles and minor skirmishes as well as single duels , during his military career . Having remained undefeated , he is claimed by some to be one of the finest military generals in history . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Khalid was born c . 592 in Mecca . His father was Walid ibn al @-@ <unk> , Sheikh of the Banu Makhzum , a clan of the Arab tribe of Quraysh . Walid was known in Mecca by the title of al @-@ Waheed - " the One " . Khalid 's mother was <unk> al @-@ <unk> bint al @-@ Harith , a paternal sister of <unk> bint al @-@ Harith . 
 Soon after his birth , in accordance with the traditions of the Quraysh , Khalid was sent to a Bedouin tribe in the desert , where a foster mother nursed him and brought him up in the clear , dry and unpolluted air of the desert . At the age of five or six , he returned to his parents in Mecca . During his childhood Khalid suffered a mild attack of smallpox , which he survived , but it left some pockmarks on his left cheek . 
 The three leading clans of Quraysh at that time were Banu Hashim , Banu Abd ad @-@ Dar and Banu Makhzum , the latter clan being responsible for the matters of warfare . As a member of the Makhzum clan , who were amongst the best horsemen in Arabia , Khalid learned to ride and use such weapons as the spear , the lance , the bow and the sword . The lance was said to be his favorite among the weapons . In youth he was admired as a renowned warrior and wrestler among the Quraysh . Khalid was a cousin of Umar , the future second Caliph , and they looked very similar . 
 = = Muhammad 's era ( 610 – 632 ) = = 
 Not much is known about Khalid during the early days of the preaching of Muhammad . His father was known for his hostility against Muhammad . Following the migration of Muhammad from Mecca to Medina , many battles were fought between the new Muslim community at Medina and the confederacy of the Quraysh . Khalid did not participate in the Battle of Badr — the first battle fought between Muslims and <unk> — but his brother Walid ibn Walid was caught and made a prisoner . Khalid and his elder brother <unk> ibn Walid went to Medina to ransom Walid , but soon after he was ransomed , Walid , amidst the journey back to Mecca , escaped and went back to Muhammad and converted to Islam . Khalid 's leadership was instrumental in turning the tables and ensuring a Meccan victory during the Battle of Uhud ( 625 ) . In 627 AD he was a part of Quraysh 's campaign against the Muslims , resulting in the Battle of the Trench , Khalid 's last battle against Muslims . 
 = = = Conversion to Islam = = = 
 A peace agreement of ten years was concluded between the Muslims and Quraysh of Mecca at the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah in 628 . It has been recorded that Muhammad told Khalid 's brother , Walid bin Walid , that : " A man like Khalid , can 't keep himself away from Islam for long " . Walid wrote letters to Khalid persuading him to convert . Khalid , who was not unduly drawn towards the idols of the Kaaba , decided to convert to Islam and is said to have shared this matter with his childhood friend Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl who opposed him . Khalid was threatened by Abu Sufyan ibn Harb with dire consequences , but was restrained by Ikrimah who is reported to have said : " Steady , O Abu Sufyan ! Your anger may well lead me also to join Muhammad . Khalid is free to follow whatever religion he chooses " . In May 629 , Khalid set out for Medina . On the way he met ' Amr ibn al- ' As and Uthman ibn Talhah , who were also going to Medina to convert to Islam . They arrived at Medina on 31 May 629 and went to the house of Muhammad . Khalid was received by his elder brother Walid bin al @-@ Walid and was first among the three men to enter Islam . 
 = = = Military Campaigns during Muhammad 's era = = = 
 An expedition was immediately prepared to take punitive action against the Ghassanids . Muhammad appointed Zayd ibn <unk> as the commander of the force . In the event of Zayd 's death , the command was to be taken over by <unk> ibn Abī <unk> , and if Jafar were to be killed , the command would be in the hands of <unk> Allah ibn <unk> . In the event that all three were killed , the men of the expedition were to select a commander from amongst themselves . 
 All three named commanders were slain during the battle , and Khalid was selected as the commander . He was able to maintain his heavily outnumbered army of 3 @,@ 000 men against an army of 10 @,@ 000 of the Byzantine Empire and Ghassanid Arabs in what would be known as the Battle of Mu 'tah . Khalid assumed command of the Muslim army at the crucial moment , and turned what would have been a bloody slaughter into a strategic retreat and saved the Muslim army from total annihilation . 
 During nightfall , Khalid sent some columns behind the main army , and the next morning prior to the battle they were instructed to join the Muslim army in small bands , one after the other , giving an impression of a fresh reinforcement , thus lowering the opponent 's morale . Khalid somehow stabilized the battle lines for that day , and during the night his men retreated back to Arabia . Believing a trap was waiting for them , the Byzantine troops did not pursue . Khalid is said to have fought valiantly at the Battle of Mu 'tah and to have broken nine swords during the battle . After the Battle of Mu 'tah , Khalid was given the title Sword of God for bringing back his army to fight another day . 
 = = = = Later military campaigns = = = = 
 A year later , in 630 , the Muslims advanced from Medina to conquer Mecca . In the Conquest of Mecca Khalid commanded one of the four Muslims armies that entered Mecca from four different routes , and routed the <unk> cavalry . Later that year , he participated in the Battle of Hunayn and the Siege of Ta 'if . 
 He was part of the Tabuk campaign under the command of Muhammad , and from there he was sent to Daumat @-@ ul @-@ Jandal where he fought and captured the Arab Prince of Daumat @-@ ul @-@ Jandal , forcing Daumat @-@ ul @-@ Jandal to submit . 
 In 631 he participated in the farewell hajj of Muhammad . During which he is said to have collected a few hairs of Muhammad as a holy relic , believing that they would help him win his battles . 
 = = = = Military campaigns as commander = = = = 
 On January 630 AD , <unk> , 9th month , of the Islamic Calendar . Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid was sent to destroy the Idol Goddess al @-@ <unk> , worshipped by <unk> . He did this , killing one Ethiopian woman . 
 Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid was also sent to invite the Banu <unk> tribe to Islam . They started saying ' Saba 'na , Saba 'na ' ( we became Sabians ) , so Khalid took them prisoners and started executing some of them , due to past enmity , before being stopped by Abdur Rahman bin Awf . Some men from Banu <unk> had previously killed Al @-@ Fakih Ibn Al @-@ <unk> Al @-@ <unk> , the uncle of Khalid , and Awf Ibn Abd @-@ Awf , father of Abdur Rahman bin Awf . Muhammad got very angry when he heard of Khalid 's behavior ; then paid money to the relatives of the dead and compensated for the property destroyed and he kept repeating aloud : " O God , I am innocent of what Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid has done ! " 
 Muhammad also sent Khalid on an expedition to <unk> Jandal , to attack the Christian Prince <unk> who lived in a castle there . This took place in March 631 AD , <unk> , 11th month of the Islamic Calendar . In this campaign , Khaled took the Prince hostage and threatened to kill him until the door of the castle was opened . Muhammad then later ransomed him in exchange for 2000 camels , 800 sheep , 400 sets of armour , 400 lances , and a pledge to pay <unk> . 
 In April 631 AD , Muhammad again sent Khalid on an 2nd expedition to <unk> Jandal to destroy the pagan Idol , <unk> . Khalid destroyed the statue as well as the shrine and killed those who resisted . 
 = = Abu Bakr 's era ( 632 – 634 ) = = 
 = = = Conquest of Arabia = = = 
 After the death of Muhammad , many powerful Arab tribes broke away in open revolt against the rule of Medina . Caliph Abu Bakr sent his armies to counter the rebels and apostates . Khalid was one of Abu Bakr ’ s main advisers and an architect of the strategic planning of the <unk> wars . He was given the command over the strongest Muslim army and was sent towards central Arabia , the most strategically sensitive area where the most powerful rebel tribes resided . The region was closest to the Muslim stronghold of Medina and was the greatest threat to the city . Khalid first set out for the rebel tribes of Tayy and <unk> , where Adi ibn Hatim — a prominent companion of Muhammad , and a chieftain of the Tayy tribe — arbitrated , and the tribes submitted to the Caliphate . 
 In mid @-@ September 632 AD , Khalid defeated <unk> , a main rebel leader who claimed prophethood as a means to draw support for himself . <unk> 's power was crushed after his remaining followers were defeated at the Battle of <unk> . Khalid next marched to <unk> and defeated the rebel tribe of Banu Saleem at the Battle of <unk> . The region was secured after the Battle of Zafar in October 632 with the defeat of a tribal mistress , Salma . 
 Once the region around Medina , the Islamic capital , was recaptured , Khalid entered Nejd , a stronghold of the Banu Tamim tribes . Many of the clans hastened to visit Khalid and submit to the rule of the Caliphate . But the Banu <unk> ' tribe , under Sheikh Malik ibn <unk> , hung back . Malik avoided direct contact with Khalid 's army and ordered his followers to scatter , and he and his family apparently moved away across the desert . He also collected taxes and sent his men to Medina to deliver them . Nevertheless , Malik was accused of rebelling against the state of Medina and charged for entering into an anti @-@ Caliphate alliance with <unk> , a self @-@ proclaimed prophetess . Malik was arrested along with his clansmen , and asked by Khalid about his crimes . Upon hearing Malik 's response : " your master said this , your master said that " referring to Abu Bakr , Khalid declared Malik a rebel apostate and ordered his execution . 
 Abu Qatada Ansari , a companion of Muhammad , who accompanied Khalid from Medina was so shocked at Malik 's murder by Khalid that he immediately returned to Medina , and told Abu Bakr that he refused to serve under a commander who had killed a Muslim . The death of Malik and Khalid 's taking of his wife Layla created controversy . Some officers of his army — including Abu <unk> — believed that Khalid killed Malik to take his wife . After the pressure exerted by Umar — Khalid 's cousin and one of Caliph Abu Bakr 's main advisors — Abu Bakr called Khalid back to Medina to explain himself . Although Khalid had declared Malik an apostate , in Medina , ‘ Umar told <unk> : “ You enemy of Allâh ! You killed a Muslim man and then leap upon his wife . By Allâh , I will stone you " . Some have argued that Umar later dismissed him from army service over this . 
 Khalid then crushed the most powerful threat to the nascent Islamic state of Medina : Musaylimah , a claimant to prophethood , who had already defeated two Muslim armies . In the third week of December 632 , Khalid won a decisive victory against Musaylimah at the Battle of <unk> . Musaylimah died in the battle , and nearly all resistance from rebelling tribes collapsed . 
 = = = Invasion of Persian Empire = = = 
 With the collapse of the rebellion , and Arabia united under the central authority of the caliph at Medina , Abu Bakr decided to expand his empire . It is unclear what his intentions were , whether it was a full scale expansion plan or pre @-@ emptive attacks to secure more territory to create a buffer zone between the Islamic state and the powerful Sassanid and Byzantine empires . Khalid was sent to the Persian Empire with an army consisting of 18 @,@ 000 volunteers to conquer the richest province of the Persian empire , Euphrates region of lower Mesopotamia , ( present day Iraq ) . Khalid entered lower Mesopotamia with this force . It is recorded that before engaging the Sassanid forces Khalid wrote a letter to taunt his opponents to surrender : 
 Submit to Islam and be safe . Or agree to the payment of the Jizya ( tax ) , and you and your people will be under our protection , else you will have only yourself to blame for the consequences , for I bring the men who desire death as ardently as you desire life . 
 He won quick victories in four consecutive battles : the Battle of Chains , fought in April 633 ; the Battle of River , fought in the third week of April 633 ; the Battle of Walaja , fought in May 633 ( where he successfully used a double envelopment manoeuvre ) , and Battle of <unk> , fought in the mid @-@ May 633 . In the last week of May 633 , al @-@ Hira , the regional capital city of lower Mesopotamia , fell to Khalid . The inhabitants were given peace on the terms of annual payment of jizya ( tribute ) and agreed to provide intelligence for Muslims . After resting his armies , in June 633 , Khalid laid siege to Anbar which despite fierce resistance fell in July 633 as a result of the siege imposed on the town . Khalid then moved towards the south , and captured Ein ul <unk> in the last week of July , 633 . 
 By then , nearly all of lower Mesopotamia , ( the northern Euphrates region ) , was under Khalid 's control . Meanwhile , Khalid received a call for relief from northern Arabia at Daumat @-@ ul @-@ Jandal , where another Muslim Arab general , Ayaz bin <unk> , was being surrounded by rebel tribes . August 633 , Khalid went to Daumat @-@ ul @-@ <unk> and defeated the rebels in the Battle of Daumat @-@ ul @-@ <unk> , capturing the city fortress . On his journey back to Mesopotamia , Khalid is said to have made a secret trip to Mecca to participate in Hajj . 
 On his return from Arabia , Khalid received intelligence entailing a concentration of a large Persian army and Christian Arab auxiliaries . These forces were based in four different camps in the Euphrates region at <unk> , Zumail , Saniyy and the largest being at Muzayyah . Khalid avoided a pitched battle with a large united Persian force and decided to attack and destroy each of the camps in a separate night attacks from three sides . He divided his army in three units , and attacked the Persian forces in coordinated assaults from three different directions during the night , starting from the Battle of Muzayyah , then the Battle of Saniyy , and finally the Battle of Zumail in November 633 AD . 
 This string of Muslim victories curtailed Persian efforts to recapture lower Mesopotamia and left the Persian capital Ctesiphon unguarded and vulnerable to Muslim attack . Before assaulting the Persian capital , Khalid decided to eliminate all Persian forces from the south and west , and thus marched against the border city of Firaz , where he defeated a combined force of Sassanid Persians , Byzantine Romans and Christian Arabs and captured the city 's fortress during the Battle of Firaz in December 633 . This was the last battle in his conquest of lower Mesopotamia . While Khalid was on his way to attack <unk> , a key fort on the way to Ctesiphon , he received a letter from Abu Bakr and was sent to the Byzantine front in Syria to assume the command of Muslim armies with the intent of conquering Roman Syria . During his stay in Iraq , Khalid was also installed as military governor of the conquered territory . 
 = = = Invasion of the Byzantine Empire = = = 
 After the successful invasion of the Sassanid Persian province of Iraq , Caliph Abu Bakr sent an expedition to invade the Levant ( Roman Syria ) . The invasion was to be carried out by four corps , each with its own assigned targets . The Byzantines responded to this threat by concentrating their units at <unk> ( a place in Palestine , probably al @-@ Lajjun ) from different garrisons . This move tied down the Muslim troops at border regions , as with this large force at their rear , Muslim armies were no longer free to march to central or northern Syria . Muslim forces apparently were too small in numbers to counter the Byzantine threat , and Abu Ubaidah ibn al @-@ Jarrah , the chief Muslim commander of the Syrian front , requested reinforcements from Abu Bakr . The latter responded by sending reinforcements led by Khalid . 
 There were two routes towards Syria from Iraq , one was via Daumat @-@ ul @-@ Jandal ( Now known as <unk> ) and the other was through Mesopotamia passing though Ar @-@ Raqqah . Since the Muslim forces in Syria were in need of urgent reinforcement , Khalid avoided the conventional route to Syria via Daumat @-@ ul @-@ Jandal because it was a long and would take weeks to reach Syria . He also avoided the Mesopotamian route because of the presence of Roman garrisons in northern Syria and Mesopotamia . Engaging them at the time when Muslim armies were being outflanked in Syria , was also ruled out since it would mean fighting on two fronts . Khalid selected a rather shorter route to Syria which unconventionally passed though the Syrian Desert . He marched his army though the desert , where traditions tells that his soldiers marched for two days without a single drop of water , before reaching a pre @-@ decided water source at an oasis . Khalid is said to have solved the water shortage issue using a Bedouin method . Camels were made to drink water after intentionally denying them water for a lengthy time period , encouraging the camels to drink a lot of water at one time . Camels have the ability to store water in their stomach which in turn could be obtained by slaughtering them when necessary . Muslim troops rode entirely on camels and this method became an effective one for the Muslim army . 
 Khalid entered Syria in June 634 and quickly captured the border forts of Sawa , Arak , Palmyra , al @-@ <unk> , al @-@ Qaryatayn and <unk> . The latter two were captured after the Battle of Qaryatayn and the Battle of <unk> . After subduing these desert forts , Khalid 's army moved towards Bosra , a town near the Syria @-@ Arabia border and the capital of the Arab Christian Ghassanid kingdom , a vassal of the eastern Byzantine Empire . He bypassed Damascus while crossing a mountain pass which is now known as " <unk> @-@ al @-@ Uqab " ( " the Uqab pass " ) after the name of Khalid 's army standard . On his way at Maraj @-@ al @-@ Rahat , Khalid routed a Ghassanid army in the brief Battle of Marj @-@ al @-@ Rahat . 
 With the news of Khalid 's arrival , Abu Ubaidah ordered Shurhabil ibn Hasana , one of the four corps commanders , to attack the city of Bosra . The latter laid siege to Bosra with his army of 4 @,@ 000 men . The Byzantine and Christian Arab garrison which outnumbered Shurhabil 's forces , made a sally and were likely to annihilate them when Khalid 's cavalry arrived from the desert and attacked the rear of the Byzantine forces , relieving Shurhabil . The garrison retreated to the city 's fortress . Abu Ubaidah joined Khalid at Bosra and Khalid , as per the caliph 's instructions , took over the supreme command . The fortress of Bosra surrendered in mid @-@ July 634 , effectively ending the Ghassanid dynasty . After capturing Bosra , Khalid instructed all the corps to join him at Ajnadayn where they fought a decisive battle against the Byzantines on 30 July 634 . Modern historians consider this battle to have been the key in breaking Byzantine power in Syria . 
 Defeat at the Battle of Ajnadayn left Syria vulnerable to the Muslim army . Khalid decided to capture Damascus , the Byzantine stronghold . At Damascus , Thomas , son @-@ in @-@ law of Byzantine Emperor Heraclius , was in charge of the city 's defense . Receiving intelligence of Khalid ’ s march towards Damascus he prepared the city 's defences . He wrote to Emperor Heraclius , who was at Emesa that time , for reinforcement . Moreover , Thomas , in order to delay or halt Khalid 's advance and to attain time to prepare for a siege , sent his armies to move forward . Two of his armies were routed first at <unk> in mid @-@ August and the other at Maraj as @-@ Saffar on 19 August . Meanwhile , Heraclius ' reinforcements reached Damascus before the other column of Heraclius reached the city which Khalid laid siege to on 20 August . To isolate Damascus from the rest of the region , Khalid placed the detachments south on the road to Palestine and in north at the Damascus @-@ Emesa route , and several other smaller detachments on routes towards Damascus . Heraclius ' reinforcements were intercepted and routed by Khalid at the Battle of <unk> @-@ al @-@ Uqab 30 km from Damascus . 
 Khalid led an assault and conquered Damascus on 18 September 634 after a 30 @-@ day siege . According to some sources , the siege is purported to have lasted some four or six months . Emperor Heraclius having received the news of the fall of Damascus , left for Antioch from Emesa . Khalid 's cavalry attacked the Byzantine garrison of Damascus , which was also heading towards Antioch , catching up to them using an unknown shortcut , at the Battle of Maraj @-@ al @-@ Debaj , 150 km north of Damascus . Abu Bakr died during the siege of Damascus and Umar became the new Caliph . He dismissed his cousin Khalid from his command and appointed Abu Ubaidah ibn al @-@ Jarrah the new commander in chief of Islamic forces in Syria . Abu Ubaidah got the letter of his appointment and Khalid 's dismissal during the siege , but he delayed the announcement until the city was conquered . 
 = = Caliph Umar 's era ( 634 – 642 ) = = 
 = = = Dismissal of Khalid from command = = = 
 On 22 August 634 , Abu Bakr died , having made Umar , Khalid 's cousin , his successor . Umar 's first move was to relieve Khalid from supreme command of Muslim Forces and appoint Abu Ubaidah ibn al @-@ Jarrah as the new commander in chief of the Islamic army . The relationship between Khalid and Umar had been tense since the incident of Malik ibn <unk> . Khalid had become a trial of disbelief ( because of his undefeated wars ) for the Muslims as they had attributed the wins of battles to the personality and figure of Khalid ; Umar was reported as saying : " I did not fire Khalid ibn al Waleed because I am angry with him or because of betrayal of trust or responsibility but the reason was just that I wanted people to know that it is Allah who gives victory " . This resulted in the dismissal of Khalid from supreme command and later in 638 , from military services . Khalid , gave a pledge of loyalty to the new caliph and continued service as an ordinary commander under Abu Ubaidah . He is reported to have said : " If Abu Bakr is dead and Umar is Caliph , then we hear and obey " . There was inevitably a slowdown in the pace of military operations , as Abu Ubaidah ibn al @-@ Jarrah would move slowly and steadily and was a more cautious commander . The conquest of Syria continued under his Generalship and , Abu Ubaidah being an admirer of Khalid , gave him command of the cavalry and used him as a military advisor . 
 = = = Conquest of Central Levant = = = 
 Soon after the appointment of Abu @-@ Ubaidah as commander in chief , he sent a small detachment to the annual fair held at Abu @-@ al @-@ Quds , modern day Abla , near <unk> 50 km east of Beirut . There was a Byzantine and Christian Arab garrison guarding that fair , however the size of the garrison was miscalculated by the Muslim informants . The garrison quickly encircled the small Muslim force . Before it would have been completely destroyed , Abu Ubaidah , having received new intelligence , sent Khalid to rescue the Muslim army . Khalid engaged and defeated them in the Battle of Abu @-@ al @-@ Quds on 15 October 634 and returned with tons of looted booty from the fair and hundreds of Roman prisoners . 
 With Central Syria captured , the Muslims had dealt a decisive blow to the Byzantines . The communication between Northern Syria and Palestine was now cut off . Abu Ubaidah decided to march to Fahl ( Pella ) , which is about 500 ft ( 150 m ) below sea level , and where a strong Byzantine garrison and survivors of Battle of Ajnadayn were present . The region was crucial because from here the Byzantine army could strike eastwards and cut the supply lines and communications to Arabia . Moreover , with this large garrison at the rear , Palestine could not be invaded . The Muslim army moved to Fahl with Khalid leading the advance guard , only to find the plain being flooded by Byzantines engineers blocking the Jordan River . The Byzantine army was eventually defeated at the Battle of Fahl on the night 23 January 635 . 
 = = = Battle for Emesa and 2nd Battle of Damascus = = = 
 With the victory at Fahl , the Muslim army split , Amr ibn al @-@ Aas and Shurhabil ibn Hasana moved south to capture Palestine , while Abu Ubaidah and Khalid moved north to capture Northern Syria . While the Muslims were occupied at Fahl , Heraclius , sensing the opportunity , quickly sent an army under General Theodras to recapture Damascus . Shortly after Heraclius dispatched this new army , the Muslims having finished the business at Fahl , were on their way to Emesa . The Byzantine army met the Muslims half way to Emesa , at Maraj @-@ al @-@ Rome . During the night Theodras sent half of his army towards Damascus to launch a surprise attack on the Muslim garrison . Khalid 's spy informed him about the move , Khalid having received permission from Abu Ubaidah , quickly moved towards Damascus with his mobile guard . While Abu Ubaidah fought and defeated the Roman army in the Battle of Maraj @-@ al @-@ Rome , Khalid moved to Damascus with his Mobile guard attacking and routing General Theodras in the 2nd battle of Damascus . A week later , Abu Ubaida capture Baalbek ( Heliopolis ) , where the great Temple of Jupiter stood , and sent Khalid straight towards Emesa . 
 Emesa and Chalcis asked for peace for a year . Abu Ubaidah , accepted the offer and rather than invading the districts of Emesa and Chalcis , he consolidated his rule in conquered land and captured Hama , Ma ’ <unk> an Nu ’ man . However , the peace treaties were on Heraclius ' instructions to lull the Muslims and to secure time for preparation of defenses of Northern Syria . Having mustered sizable armies at Antioch , Heraclius sent them to reinforce strategically important areas of Northern Syria , most importantly the strong fortress of Chalcis . With the arrival of Byzantine army in the city , the peace treaty was violated . Abu <unk> and Khalid then marched to Emesa , and a Byzantine army that halted Khalid ’ s advance guard was routed and the Muslims besieged Emesa which was finally completed in March 636 after two months of siege . 
 = = = Battle of Yarmouk = = = 
 After capturing Emesa , the Muslims moved north to capture the whole of the Northern Syria . Meanwhile , Heraclius had concentrated a large army at Antioch to roll back Syria . Khalid got the news from Roman prisoners in Northern Syria . After his past experiences Heraclius had been avoiding pitched battles with the Muslims . He planned to isolate the Muslim corps from each other , and separately encircle and destroy the Muslim armies . Five massive armies were launched in Syria from different routes in June 636 to recapture it . Khalid , sensing Heraclius ' plan , feared that the Muslim armies would indeed be isolated and destroyed . In a council of war he suggested that Abu Ubaidah draw all the Muslim armies to one place so as to fight a decisive battle with the Byzantines . As per Khalid 's suggestion , Abu Ubaidah ordered all the Muslim armies in Syria to evacuate the conquered land and concentrate at Jabiya . This maneuver gave a decisive blow to Heraclius ' plan , as he did not wish to engage his troops in an open battle with the Muslims , where the Muslim light cavalry could be effectively used against the heavy and less mobile Byzantine cavalry . From Jabiya , on Khalid ’ s suggestion , Abu Ubaidah ordered the Muslim army to withdraw to the plain of the Yarmouk River , which had a good supply of pasture and water and where cavalry could be used more effectively . Abu Ubaidah , in a council of war , transferred the supreme command of the Muslim forces to Khalid , who acted as a field commander in the battle and was the mastermind of the annihilation of the Byzantine army . 
 On 15 August , the Battle of Yarmouk was fought , it lasted for 6 days and ended in a devastating defeat for the Byzantines . The Battle of Yarmouk is considered to be one of the most decisive battles of history . It was a historic defeat that sealed the fate of Byzantium in the Levant , the magnitude of the defeat was so intense that Byzantine forces were unable to recover from it for some time . It left the whole of the Byzantine Empire vulnerable to the Muslim Arab armies . The battle was the greatest battle ever fought on Syrian soil up to that point , and is believed to be the tactical marvel of Khalid . 
 = = = Capturing Jerusalem = = = 
 With the Byzantine army shattered and routed , the Muslims quickly recaptured the territory that they conquered prior to Yarmouk . The Muslim forces moved south to a last Byzantine stronghold , Jerusalem , where many of the Byzantine survivors of the disaster at Yarmouk took shelter . The Siege of Jerusalem lasted four months after which the city agreed to surrender , but only to the caliph in person . Amr ibn al @-@ Aas , one of the four corps commander , suggested that Khalid should be sent as caliph , because of his very strong resemblance with Caliph Umar . Khalid was recognized and eventually , Umar came and Jerusalem surrendered in April 637 . After Jerusalem , the Muslim armies broke up once again . Yazid ’ s corps came to Damascus and captured Beirut . Amr and Shurhabil ’ s corps went on to conquer the rest of Palestine , while Abu Ubaidah and Khalid , at the head of a 17 @,@ 000 strong army moved north to conquer whole of the Northern Syria . 
 = = = Conquest of Northern Syria = = = 
 With Emesa already in hand , Abu Ubaidah and Khalid moved towards Chalcis , which was strategically the most significant fort of Byzantines . Through Chalcis , the Byzantines would guard Anatolia , Heraclius ' homeland Armenia and the Asian zone 's capital Antioch . Abu Ubaidah sent Khalid with his elite mobile guard towards Chalcis . The fort was guarded by the Greek troops under their commander , <unk> , who was reported to be of high prestige , second only to the emperor himself . <unk> , diverting from conventional Byzantine tactics , decided to face Khalid and destroy the leading elements of the Muslim army before the main body could join them at <unk> , 5 km east of Chalcis . The Roman army was totally annihilated at the Battle of <unk> , which even forced Umar to praise Khalid 's military genius . Umar is reported to have said : " Khalid is truly the commander , May Allah have mercy upon Abu Bakr . He was a better judge of men than I have been " . 
 Abu Ubaidah soon joined Khalid at the virtually impregnable fort of Chalcis , which surrendered in June 637 . With this strategic victory , the territory north of Chalcis lay open to the Muslims . Khalid and Abu Ubaidah next captured Aleppo from desperate Byzantine troops in October 637 . The next objective was the splendid city of Antioch , the capital of the Asian zone of the Byzantine Empire . Before marching towards Antioch , Khalid and Abu Ubaidah decided to isolate the city from Anatolia ; this was done by capturing all the fortresses that were providing strategic defense to Antioch , most importantly A <unk> at north east of Antioch . In order to save the empire from annihilation , a desperate battle was fought between the Muslim army and that of the defenders of Antioch outside the city near Orontes river , popularly known as Battle of Iron bridge . The Byzantine army was composed of the survivors of Yarmouk and other Syrian campaigns . After being defeated , the Byzantines retreated to Antioch and the Muslims besieged the city . Having little hope of help from emperor , Antioch surrendered on 30 October 637 , with the terms that all Byzantine troops would be given safe passage to Constantinople . 
 Abu Ubaidah sent Khalid northwards , while he marched south and captured <unk> , <unk> , Tartus and the coastal areas west of Anti @-@ Lebanon mountains . Khalid moved north and raided territory up to the Kızıl River ( <unk> ) in Anatolia . Emperor Heraclius had already left Antioch for Edessa before the arrival of the Muslims . He arranged for the necessary defenses in Jazira and Armenia and left for his capital Constantinople . On his way to Constantinople he had a narrow escape when Khalid , after the capturing Marash , was heading south towards <unk> . Heraclius hastily took the mountainous path and , passing though the Cilician Gates , is reported to have said : 
 Farewell , a long farewell to Syria , my fair province . Thou art an infidel 's ( enemy 's ) now . Peace be with you , O ' Syria – what a beautiful land you will be for the enemy hands . 
 With the devastating defeat at Yarmouk his empire was extremely vulnerable to Muslim invasion . With few military resources left he was no longer in a position to attempt a military come back in Syria . To gain time for the preparations of the defense of the rest of his empire , Heraclius needed the Muslims occupied in Syria . He sought help of the Christian Arabs of Jazira who mustered up a large army and marched against Emesa , Abu Ubaidah ’ s headquarters . Abu Ubaidah withdrew all his forces from Northern Syria to Emesa , and Christian Arabs laid siege to Emesa . Khalid was in favor of an open battle outside fort , but Abu Ubaidah rather sent the matter to Umar , who brilliantly handled it . Umar sent detachment of Muslim armies from Iraq to invade Jazira , homeland of the invading Christian Arabs , from three different routes . Moreover , another detachment was sent to Emesa from Iraq under Qa ’ <unk> ibn Amr , a veteran of Yarmouk who was sent to Iraq for the Battle of al @-@ <unk> . Umar himself marched from Medina ahead of 1 @,@ 000 men . The Christian Arabs , under this overwhelming response , abandoned the siege and hastily withdrew to Jazira . At this point Khalid and his mobile guard came out of Emesa and devastated their army , attacking them from rear . This was Heraclius ' last attempt to achieve a comeback on the Syrian front . 
 = = = Campaigns in Armenia and Anatolia = = = 
 After the battle , Umar ordered the conquest of Jazira which was completed by late summer 638 . After the conquest of Jazira Abu Ubaidah sent Khalid and <unk> bin Ghanim ( conqueror of Jazira ) to invade the Byzantine territory north of Jazira . They marched independently and captured Edessa , Amida ( Diyarbakır ) , Malatya and raided Byzantine Armenia up to Ararat region and also reportedly raided central Anatolia . Heraclius had already abandoned all the forts between Antioch and Tartus to create a buffer zone or no man 's land between Muslim controlled areas and main land Anatolia . Umar for the time stopped his armies from advancing further into Anatolia , and instead ordered Abu Ubaidah , now governor of Syria , to consolidate his rule in conquered land of the Levant . At this point Umar is reported to have said : " I wish there was a wall of fire between us and Romans , so that they could not enter our territory nor we could enter theirs " . Due to the dismissal of Khalid from the army and a famine and plague the next year , the Muslim armies were kept from invading Anatolia . The expedition to Anatolia and Armenia marked the end of the military career of Khalid . 
 = = = Dismissal from army = = = 
 Khalid , by now , was at the height of his career , he was famous and loved by his men , for the Muslim community he was a national hero , and was publicly known as Sayf @-@ <unk> ( " Sword of Allah " ) . An event happened shortly after Khalid 's capture of Marash ( Kahramanmaraş ) , in the autumn of 638 , he came to know of Ash 'as , a famous poet and warrior on Persian front , reciting a poem in praise of Khalid and receiving a gift of 10 @,@ 000 dirhams from him , apparently from the state treasury . 
 Umar and his senate identified this act as misuse of state treasure , though not as punishing as to lose one 's office , Khalid was already warned not act as alone , he should seek permission from his commander or Caliph for such actions . He immediately wrote a letter to Abu Ubaidah asking him to bring Khalid in front of the congregation , his turban , and take off his cap . Umar wanted Abu Ubaida to ask Khalid from what funds he gave to Ash 'as : from his own pocket or from the state treasury ? If he confessed to having used the spoils , he was guilty of misappropriation . If he claimed that he gave from his own pocket , he was guilty of extravagance . In either case he would be dismissed , and Abu Ubaida would take charge of his duties . Abu Ubaida was himself an admirer of Khalid and loved him as his younger brother , and so said that he was not capable of doing it . Instead , Bilal ibn <unk> was appointed for this task and called back Khalid from Chalcis to <unk> , where he was charged publicly . Khalid stated that he gave money from his own pocket and thus was declared innocent in that charge . However , when he went to Abu Ubaida , he told him that he had been dismissed on the order of Umar and is required to go back to Medina . Khalid went to Chalcis and said farewell to his mobile guard . He then went to Medina to meet Umar . He protested about what he considered to be injustice . Umar is said to have praised him in these words : " You have done ; And no man has done as you have done . But it is not people who do ; It is Allah who does ... " 
 Later Umar explained his dismissal of Khalid : 
 I have not dismissed Khalid because of my anger or because of any dishonesty on his part , but because people glorified him and were misled . I feared that people would rely on him . I want them to know that it is Allah who give us victory ; and there should be no mischief in the land . 
 It was in this way that Khalid 's successful military career came to an end . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Although it is believed that relations between Umar and Khalid , cousins , were always something short of cordial , both of them apparently harboured no ill @-@ will towards each other . Upon his death , he bequeathed his property to Umar and made him the executor of his will and estate . 
 Within less than four years of his dismissal , Khalid died and was buried in 642 in Emesa , where he lived since his dismissal from military services . His tomb is now part of a mosque called Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid Mosque . Khalid 's tombstone depicts a list of over 50 victorious battles that he commanded without defeat ( not including small battles ) . It is said that he had wanted to die as a martyr in the field of battle , and was apparently disappointed when he knew that he would die in bed . Khalid expressed the pain of this sadness through one last , anguished sentence : 
 I 've fought in so many battles seeking martyrdom that there is no spot in my body left without a scar or a wound made by a spear or sword . And yet here I am , dying on my bed like an old camel . May the eyes of the cowards never rest . 
 The wife of Khalid , upon feeling such a pain of her husband told Khalid : " You were given the title of ' Saif @-@ <unk> ' meaning , ' The Sword of Allah ' and , the sword of Allah is not meant to be broken and hence , it is not your destiny to be a ' martyr ' but to die like a conqueror . " 
 = = List of battles = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Military = = = 
 Khalid is said to have fought around a hundred battles , both major battles and minor skirmishes as well as single duels , during his military career . Having remained undefeated , he is claimed by some to be one of the finest military generals in history . 
 Khalid was the architect of most of the early Muslim military doctrines , he was pioneer of almost every major tactic that Muslims used during Early Islamic conquest . One of Khalid 's major achievements in this context was utilizing the individual skills of Arab Bedouin warriors to a larger scale . He is believed to have developed them into an almost regular unit called <unk> ( " champions " ) , who would issue personal challenges to the enemy officers . These were highly trained and skilled swordsmen , whom Khalid utilized effectively to slay as many enemy officers as possible , giving a psychological blow to enemy morale . The Battle of Ajnadayn is perhaps the best example of this form of psychological warfare . Moreover , his biggest achievement was the conversion of Arab tactical doctrine into a strategic system . Until Khalid , the Arabs were basically raiders and skirmishers . Khalid turned those skirmishing tactics into something that could be used anywhere . Thus he would skirmish the enemy to death : he would bring his army in front of his enemies and wait until the whole battle degenerated into a skirmishing affair between small units . Then , after exhausting the enemy units , he would launch his cavalry at their flanks employing Hammer and Anvil tactics . 
 Much of Khalid 's strategic and tactical genius lies in his use of extreme methods . He apparently put more emphasis on annihilating enemy troops , rather than achieving victory by simply defeating them . For instance his employment of the double envelopment maneuver against the numerically superior Persian army at the Battle of Walaja , and his maneuver at the Battle of Yarmouk where he virtually trapped the Byzantine army between three steep ravines by stealthily capturing their only escape route , a bridge , at their rear . 
 Khalid utilized his better understanding of terrain in every possible way to gain strategic superiority over his enemies . During his Persian campaigns , he initially never entered deep into Persian territory and always kept the Arabian desert at his rear , allowing his forces to retreat there in case of a defeat . It was only after all the strong Persian and Persian @-@ allied forces were routed that he penetrated deep into Euphrates region and captured the regional capital of Iraq , Al @-@ Hira . Again , at Yarmouk , the terrain would help him in executing his grand strategy of annihilating the Byzantines . 
 In their mobility , Khalid 's troops had no match until the Mongol hordes of the 13th century . In fact the tactics of the desert Arabs and steppe Mongols were somewhat identical . Entire troops of Khalid would ride on camels while on march , whereas the Mongols used horses , with the difference that the Arabs did not make use of mounted archers . His most commonly used maneuver was surprise attack , such as his night attacks from three different sides on Persian camps at Zumail , Muzayyah and Saniyy , his highly mobile army successfully maneuvering in a 100 km area , quickly destroying encampments of the Persians and their Arab allies . The Battle of Maraj @-@ al @-@ Debaj being no exception , where once again his highly mobile army maneuvered around a Byzantine army , appearing from four directions and opening several fronts at a time , a maneuver which later in 13th century became one of the Mongol armies ' principal maneuvers . 
 The historian Waqidi writes that after the battle of Battle of Maraj @-@ al @-@ Debaj , Emperor Heraclius sent an ambassador to ask Khalid to return his daughter . The ambassador gave Khalid the letter from the Emperor which read as follows : 
 Khalid said to the ambassador : 
 The ambassador took the daughter of Heraclius , and returned to Antioch . 
 An example of Khalid 's strategic maneuverability was his advance into Roman Syria . Emperor Heraclius had sent all his available garrisoned troops into Syria , towards Ajnadayn , to hold the Muslim troops at the Syria @-@ Arabia border region . The possible route of any Muslim reinforcement was expected to be the conventional Syria @-@ Arabia road in the south , but Khalid , who was then in Iraq , took the most unexpected route : marching through the waterless Syrian desert , to the surprise of the Byzantines , he appeared in northern Syria . Catching the Byzantines off guard , he quickly captured several towns , virtually cutting off the communications of the Byzantine army at Ajnadayn with its high command at Emesa , where emperor Heraclius himself resided . 
 Khalid 's elite light cavalry , the Mobile guard , acted as the core of the Muslim cavalry during the invasion of Syria . It was composed of highly trained and seasoned soldiers , the majority of whom had been under Khalid 's standard during his Arabian and Persian campaigns . Muslim cavalry was a light cavalry force armed with 5 meter long lances . They could charge at an incredible speed and would usually employ a common tactic of Kar wa far literary meaning " engage @-@ disengage " , or in modern term : “ hit @-@ and @-@ run . ” They would charge on enemy flanks and rear , their maneuverability making them very effective against heavily armored Byzantine and Sassanid cataphracts . Khalid 's famous flanking charge on the final day of the Battle of Yarmouk stands as testimony to just how well he understood the potentials and strengths of his mounted troops . 
 The Arabs soldiers were far more lightly armored then their Roman and Persian contemporaries , which made them vulnerable in close combat at set @-@ piece battles and to missile fire of enemy archers . Khalid therefore never blundered in the battle and would rely on intelligence reports from spies that he would hire from local population on liberal rewards . Persian Historian Al @-@ Tabari said : 
 He ( Khalid ) neither slept himself , nor did he let others sleep ; nothing could be kept hidden from him . 
 = = = Political = = = 
 Khalid also remained military Governor of Iraq from 632 – 633 and Governor of Chalcis , the most strategic cantonment in Northern Syria . Though he was never active politically , it was rumored that his fame alarmed Umar , who then recalled him from the army . However , to Umar 's recall of Khalid , was largely related to the Muslim population 's belief in Khalid being irreplaceable . To relieve them of this belief , Umar recalled Khalid , to which Khalid agreed . 
 Umar is said to have later regretted this decision . It is said that after the Hajj of 642 , Umar had decided to re @-@ appoint Khalid to the military services , apparently to command the Muslim conquest of Persia that was to begin shortly . But fate had decided otherwise , as when he reached Medina , news of Khalid 's death reached him . The news of Khalid 's death broke like a storm over Medina . The women took to the streets , led by the women of the Banu Makhzum ( Khalid 's tribe ) , wailing and beating their chests . Though Umar , from the very first day had given orders that there would be no wailing for departed Muslims , as forbidden in Islam , in this one case he made an exception . Umar said : 
 Let the women of the Banu Makhzum say what they will about Abu Sulaiman ( Khalid ) , for they do not lie , over the likes of Abu Sulaiman weep those who weep . 
 It is also recorded that once Umar was sitting with his companions , someone recalled Khalid , Umar reportedly said : " By God , he was Islam 's shield against the enemies , his heart was pure from every animosity " . According to some narrations , on Umar ’ s death bed , he named people who he would have appointed as successors to the Caliphate if they had been alive , and amongst those he named was Khalid . 
 = = = Religious standing = = = 
 Khalid ibn Walid was a <unk> ( a companion of Muhammad ) , a fact which makes him a very respectable figure among Sunni Muslims . According to authentic Sunni <unk> he was first referred to as " a Sword amongst the Swords of Allah " by Muhammad while the Prophet was describing the Battle of Mu 'tah . 
 Shia Muslims , however , do not esteem him because they believe that he helped Abu Bakr in suppressing the supporters of their Imam Ali , who , according to them , was appointed by Muhammad as his political successor . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 In the series Omar , a TV show about the first years of Islam , the character of Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid was portrayed by the Syrian actor <unk> <unk> . The character of Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid was one of the main characters in the show . 
 Khalid 's reputation as a formidable general led to his inclusion as a " Great General " in Civilization V and the Warlords expansion to the Civilization IV video game , which attempts to include real historical people in its gameplay . 
 The Pakistan Army 's main battle tank ( MBT ) , Al @-@ Khalid is named after Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid . 
 The Pakistan Navy 's <unk> <unk> class submarine , PNS / M Khalid ( <unk> ) 
 The Bangladesh Navy 's frigate BNS Khalid Ibni Walid is named after him . 
 Kazi Nazrul Islam wrote a popular poem named " Khaled " while he was suffering from malaria , showing his respect to Khaled and grief for his colonized countrymen . 
 The troops sent by the Pakistan Army in the Gulf War in Operation Desert Storm was named " Khalid Bin Walid Independent Armoured Brigade Group . " It has been in active service in Saudi Arabia since . 
 = = Family = = 
 Walid reportedly had many wives and many children from them . Only the names of his following children are recorded in history . 
 Walid 's sons were : ( Khalid 's brothers ) 
 Hisham ibn Walid 
 Walid ibn Walid 
 <unk> ibn Walid 
 Abdul Shams ibn Walid . 
 Walid 's daughters were : ( Khalid 's sisters ) 
 <unk> bint Walid 
 Fatimah bint Walid . 
 <unk> bint al @-@ Walid ( Disputed ) . 
 It is unknown how many children Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid had , but names of his three sons and one known daughter are mentioned in history which are as follows : 
 Sulaiman bin Khalid 
 <unk> ibn Khalid 
 Muhajir bin Khalid . 
 Sulaiman , Khalid 's eldest son , was killed during the Muslim conquest of Egypt , although other sources claim he was slain during the Muslim siege of Diyarbakir in 639 . Muhajir bin Khalid died in the Battle of Siffin while fighting from Caliph Ali 's side and Abdulreman ibn Khalid remained Governor of Emesa during the time of third Caliph Uthman ibn Affan and participated in the Battle of Siffin as one of the generals of Muawiyah I , he was also the part of Umayyad army that besieged Constantinople in 664 . Abdulreman ibn Khalid was later to be appointed the successor of Caliph Muawiyah but according to some narrations , he was poisoned by Muawiyah , because Muawiyah wanted to make his son Yazid I to be his successor . The male line of descent from Khalid is believed to have ended with his grandson , Khalid bin Abdur @-@ Rahman bin Khalid . 
 = Eye ( cyclone ) = 
 The eye is a region of mostly calm weather at the center of strong tropical cyclones . The eye of a storm is a roughly circular area , typically 30 – 65 km ( 20 – 40 miles ) in diameter . It is surrounded by the eyewall , a ring of towering thunderstorms where the most severe weather occurs . The cyclone 's lowest barometric pressure occurs in the eye and can be as much as 15 percent lower than the pressure outside the storm . 
 In strong tropical cyclones , the eye is characterized by light winds and clear skies , surrounded on all sides by a towering , symmetric eyewall . In weaker tropical cyclones , the eye is less well defined and can be covered by the central dense overcast , an area of high , thick clouds that show up brightly on satellite imagery . Weaker or disorganized storms may also feature an eyewall that does not completely encircle the eye or have an eye that features heavy rain . In all storms , however , the eye is the location of the storm 's minimum barometric pressure - the area where the atmospheric pressure at sea level is the lowest . 
 = = Structure = = 
 A typical tropical cyclone will have an eye of approximately 30 – 65 km ( 20 – 40 mi ) across , usually situated at the geometric center of the storm . The eye may be clear or have spotty low clouds ( a clear eye ) , it may be filled with low- and mid @-@ level clouds ( a filled eye ) , or it may be obscured by the central dense overcast . There is , however , very little wind and rain , especially near the center . This is in stark contrast to conditions in the eyewall , which contains the storm 's strongest winds . Due to the mechanics of a tropical cyclone , the eye and the air directly above it are warmer than their surroundings . 
 While normally quite symmetric , eyes can be oblong and irregular , especially in weakening storms . A large ragged eye is a non @-@ circular eye which appears fragmented , and is an indicator of a weak or weakening tropical cyclone . An open eye is an eye which can be circular , but the eyewall does not completely encircle the eye , also indicating a weakening , moisture @-@ deprived cyclone . Both of these observations are used to estimate the intensity of tropical cyclones via Dvorak analysis . <unk> are typically circular ; however , distinctly polygonal shapes ranging from triangles to hexagons occasionally occur . 
 While typical mature storms have eyes that are a few dozen miles across , rapidly intensifying storms can develop an extremely small , clear , and circular eye , sometimes referred to as a pinhole eye . Storms with pinhole eyes are prone to large fluctuations in intensity , and provide difficulties and frustrations for forecasters . 
 Small / minuscule eyes — those less than 10 nmi ( 19 km , 12 mi ) across — often trigger eyewall replacement cycles , where a new eyewall begins to form outside the original eyewall . This can take place anywhere from fifteen to hundreds of kilometers ( ten to a few hundred miles ) outside the inner eye . The storm then develops two concentric eyewalls , or an " eye within an eye " . In most cases , the outer eyewall begins to contract soon after its formation , which chokes off the inner eye and leaves a much larger but more stable eye . While the replacement cycle tends to weaken storms as it occurs , the new eyewall can contract fairly quickly after the old eyewall dissipates , allowing the storm to re @-@ strengthen . This may trigger another cycle of eyewall replacement . 
 Eyes can range in size from 320 km ( 200 mi ) ( Typhoon Carmen ) to a mere 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) ( Hurricane Wilma ) across . While it is uncommon for storms with large eyes to become very intense , it does occur , especially in annular hurricanes . Hurricane Isabel was the eleventh most powerful North Atlantic hurricane in recorded history , and sustained a large , 65 – 80 km ( 40 – 50 mi ) -wide eye for a period of several days . 
 = = Formation and detection = = 
 Tropical cyclones typically form from large , disorganized areas of disturbed weather in tropical regions . As more thunderstorms form and gather , the storm develops rainbands which start rotating around a common center . As the storm gains strength , a ring of stronger convection forms at a certain distance from the rotational center of the developing storm . Since stronger thunderstorms and heavier rain mark areas of stronger updrafts , the barometric pressure at the surface begins to drop , and air begins to build up in the upper levels of the cyclone . This results in the formation of an upper level anticyclone , or an area of high atmospheric pressure above the central dense overcast . Consequently , most of this built up air flows outward anticyclonically above the tropical cyclone . Outside the forming eye , the anticyclone at the upper levels of the atmosphere enhances the flow towards the center of the cyclone , pushing air towards the eyewall and causing a positive feedback loop . 
 However , a small portion of the built @-@ up air , instead of flowing outward , flows inward towards the center of the storm . This causes air pressure to build even further , to the point where the weight of the air counteracts the strength of the updrafts in the center of the storm . Air begins to descend in the center of the storm , creating a mostly rain @-@ free area — a newly formed eye . 
 There are many aspects of this process which remain a mystery . Scientists do not know why a ring of convection forms around the center of circulation instead of on top of it , or why the upper @-@ level anticyclone only ejects a portion of the excess air above the storm . Many theories exist as to the exact process by which the eye forms : all that is known for sure is that the eye is necessary for tropical cyclones to achieve high wind speeds . 
 The formation of an eye is almost always an indicator of increasing tropical cyclone organisation and strength . Because of this , forecasters watch developing storms closely for signs of eye formation . 
 For storms with a clear eye , detection of the eye is as simple as looking at pictures from a weather satellite . However , for storms with a filled eye , or an eye completely covered by the central dense overcast , other detection methods must be used . Observations from ships and Hurricane Hunters can pinpoint an eye visually , by looking for a drop in wind speed or lack of rainfall in the storm 's center . In the United States , South Korea , and a few other countries , a network of NEXRAD Doppler weather radar stations can detect eyes near the coast . Weather satellites also carry equipment for measuring atmospheric water vapor and cloud temperatures , which can be used to spot a forming eye . In addition , scientists have recently discovered that the amount of ozone in the eye is much higher than the amount in the eyewall , due to air sinking from the ozone @-@ rich stratosphere . Instruments sensitive to ozone perform measurements , which are used to observe rising and sinking columns of air , and provide indication of the formation of an eye , even before satellite imagery can determine its formation . 
 = = Associated phenomena = = 
 = = = Eyewall replacement cycles = = = 
 Eyewall replacement cycles , also called concentric eyewall cycles , naturally occur in intense tropical cyclones , generally with winds greater than 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , or major hurricanes ( Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale ) . When tropical cyclones reach this intensity , and the eyewall contracts or is already sufficiently small ( see above ) , some of the outer rainbands may strengthen and organize into a ring of thunderstorms — an outer eyewall — that slowly moves inward and robs the inner eyewall of its needed moisture and angular momentum . Since the strongest winds are located in a cyclone 's eyewall , the tropical cyclone usually weakens during this phase , as the inner wall is " choked " by the outer wall . Eventually the outer eyewall replaces the inner one completely , and the storm can re @-@ intensify . 
 The discovery of this process was partially responsible for the end of the U.S. government 's hurricane modification experiment Project Stormfury . This project set out to seed clouds outside the eyewall , causing a new eyewall to form and weakening the storm . When it was discovered that this was a natural process due to hurricane dynamics , the project was quickly abandoned . 
 Almost every intense hurricane undergoes at least one of these cycles during its existence . Hurricane Allen in 1980 went through repeated eyewall replacement cycles , fluctuating between Category 5 and Category 3 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale several times . Hurricane Juliette was a rare documented case of triple eyewalls . 
 = = = Moats = = = 
 A moat in a tropical cyclone is a clear ring outside the eyewall , or between concentric eyewalls , characterized by subsidence — slowly sinking air — and little or no precipitation . The air flow in the moat is dominated by the cumulative effects of stretching and shearing . The moat between eyewalls is an area in the storm where the rotational speed of the air changes greatly in proportion to the distance from the storm 's center ; these areas are also known as rapid <unk> zones . Such areas can potentially be found near any vortex of sufficient strength , but are most pronounced in strong tropical cyclones . 
 = = = Eyewall mesovortices = = = 
 Eyewall mesovortices are small scale rotational features found in the eyewalls of intense tropical cyclones . They are similar , in principle , to small " suction vortices " often observed in multiple @-@ vortex tornadoes . In these vortices , wind speeds may be greater than anywhere else in the eyewall . Eyewall mesovortices are most common during periods of intensification in tropical cyclones . 
 Eyewall mesovortices often exhibit unusual behavior in tropical cyclones . They usually rotate around the low pressure center , but sometimes they remain stationary . Eyewall mesovortices have even been documented to cross the eye of a storm . These phenomena have been documented observationally , experimentally , and theoretically . 
