 Eyewall mesovortices are a significant factor in the formation of tornadoes after tropical cyclone landfall . <unk> can spawn rotation in individual thunderstorms ( a mesocyclone ) , which leads to tornadic activity . At landfall , friction is generated between the circulation of the tropical cyclone and land . This can allow the mesovortices to descend to the surface , causing tornadoes . 
 = = = Stadium effect = = = 
 The stadium effect is a phenomenon observed in strong tropical cyclones . It is a fairly common event , where the clouds of the eyewall curve outward from the surface with height . This gives the eye an appearance resembling an open dome from the air , akin to a sports stadium . An eye is always larger at the top of the storm , and smallest at the bottom of the storm because the rising air in the eyewall follows <unk> of equal angular momentum , which also slope outward with height . In tropical cyclones with very small eyes , the sloping phenomenon is much more pronounced . 
 = = = Eye @-@ like features = = = 
 An eye @-@ like structure is often found in intensifying tropical cyclones . Similar to the eye seen in hurricanes or typhoons , it is a circular area at the circulation center of the storm in which convection is absent . These eye @-@ like features are most normally found in intensifying tropical storms and hurricanes of Category 1 strength on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . For example , an eye @-@ like feature was found in Hurricane Beta when the storm had maximum wind speeds of only 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) , well below hurricane force . The features are typically not visible on visible wavelengths or infrared wavelengths from space , although they are easily seen on microwave satellite imagery . Their development at the middle levels of the atmosphere is similar to the formation of a complete eye , but the features might be horizontally displaced due to vertical wind shear . 
 = = Hazards = = 
 Though the eye is by far the calmest part of the storm , with no wind at the center and typically clear skies , over the ocean it is possibly the most hazardous area . In the eyewall , wind @-@ driven waves all travel in the same direction . In the center of the eye , however , the waves converge from all directions , creating erratic crests that can build on each other to become rogue waves . The maximum height of hurricane waves is unknown , but measurements during Hurricane Ivan when it was a Category 4 hurricane estimated that waves near the eyewall exceeded 40 m ( 130 ft ) from peak to trough . 
 A common mistake , especially in areas where hurricanes are uncommon , is for residents to exit their homes to inspect the damage while the calm eye passes over , only to be caught off guard by the violent winds in the opposite eyewall . 
 = = Other cyclones = = 
 Though only tropical cyclones have structures officially termed " eyes " , there are other weather systems that can exhibit eye @-@ like features . 
 = = = Polar lows = = = 
 Polar lows are mesoscale weather systems , typically smaller than 1 @,@ 000 km ( 600 mi ) across , found near the poles . Like tropical cyclones , they form over relatively warm water and can feature deep convection and winds of gale force or greater . Unlike storms of tropical nature , however , they thrive in much colder temperatures and at much higher latitudes . They are also smaller and last for shorter durations , with few lasting longer than a day or so . Despite these differences , they can be very similar in structure to tropical cyclones , featuring a clear eye surrounded by an eyewall and bands of rain and snow . 
 = = = Extratropical cyclones = = = 
 Extratropical cyclones are areas of low pressure which exist at the boundary of different air masses . Almost all storms found at mid @-@ latitudes are extratropical in nature , including classic North American nor 'easters and European windstorms . The most severe of these can have a clear " eye " at the site of lowest barometric pressure , though it is usually surrounded by lower , non @-@ convective clouds and is found near the back end of the storm . 
 = = = Subtropical cyclones = = = 
 Subtropical cyclones are low @-@ pressure systems with some extratropical characteristics and some tropical characteristics . As such , they may have an eye while not being truly tropical in nature . Subtropical cyclones can be very hazardous , generating high winds and seas , and often evolve into fully tropical cyclones . For this reason , the National Hurricane Center began including subtropical storms in its naming scheme in 2002 . 
 = = = Tornadoes = = = 
 Tornadoes are destructive , small @-@ scale storms , which produce the fastest winds on earth . There are two main types — single @-@ vortex tornadoes , which consist of a single spinning column of air , and multiple @-@ vortex tornadoes , which consist of small " suction vortices , " resembling mini @-@ tornadoes themselves , all rotating around a common center . Both of these types of tornadoes are theorized to have calm centers , referred to by some meteorologists as " eyes . " These theories are supported by doppler velocity observations by weather radar and eyewitness accounts . 
 = = Extraterrestrial vortices = = 
 NASA reported in November 2006 that the Cassini spacecraft observed a " hurricane @-@ like " storm locked to the south pole of Saturn with a clearly defined eyewall . The observation was particularly notable as eyewall clouds had not previously been seen on any planet other than Earth ( including a failure to observe an eyewall in the Great Red Spot of Jupiter by the Galileo spacecraft ) . In 2007 , very large vortices on both poles of Venus were observed by the Venus Express mission of the European Space Agency to have a dipole eye structure . 
 = 11001001 = 
 " 11001001 " is the 15th episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . It was first broadcast on February 1 , 1988 , in the United States in broadcast syndication . It was written by Maurice Hurley and Robert Lewin , and directed by Paul Lynch . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , members of an alien race called the Bynars hijack a nearly evacuated Enterprise while retrofitting the computer in space dock . 
 Make @-@ up supervisor Michael Westmore created the look of the Bynars , who were four women in extensive make @-@ up . The musical score was scored by Ron Jones . Reviewers praised the Bynars themselves , and the response to the episode was generally positive , with one critic calling it the best of the season . It was awarded an Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Federation starship Enterprise arrives at Starbase 74 for a routine maintenance check . Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) and Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) greet Starbase Commander Quinteros ( Gene <unk> ) and a pair of small humanoid aliens known as Bynars ; the Bynars heavily rely on their computer technology and work in pairs for best efficiency . Much of the crew take shore leave while Picard , Riker and a skeleton crew remain aboard . Riker is intrigued by the Bynars ' claimed upgrades to the holodeck and starts a program in a jazz bar . The program includes a woman named Minuet ( Carolyn McCormick ) , by whom Riker is fascinated , both as a beautiful and charming woman , but also by the level of sophistication in her responses . Riker shortly returns , and Picard walks in on him kissing Minuet , and he too is amazed by the simulation . 
 Meanwhile , the Bynars discreetly create a catastrophic failure in the ship 's warp core . Lt. Cmdr. Data ( Brent Spiner ) and Geordi La Forge ( LeVar Burton ) are unable to locate Picard or Riker and , assuming them to already be on the Starbase , order an emergency evacuation . They set the ship to leave the Starbase and warp to a safe location before it would explode . However , once they are clear of the dock , the failure disappears and the ship sets course for the Bynar system , the planet <unk> orbiting Beta Magellan . Data , La Forge , and Quinteros realize that the Bynars are still aboard the ship , but there are currently no other working vessels to follow them . Back on the Enterprise , Riker and Picard leave the simulation to find the ship empty and at warp to the Bynar system , with the ship 's controls locked to the bridge . Fearing that the Bynars have taken over the ship for nefarious purposes , they set the ship to self @-@ destruct in 5 minutes and then take the bridge by inter @-@ ship transporter beam and find the Bynars there unconscious . 
 After cancelling the self @-@ destruct , they find the Bynars have uploaded massive amounts of information to the Enterprise computers , but they are unable to decode it . Realizing that Minuet was purposely created by the Bynars as a distraction , Picard and Riker ask the simulation about what is going on as the ship nears the orbit of Bynar . Minuet explains that a star near the Bynar homeworld had gone supernova , and the EMP it emitted would knock out their computer systems , effectively killing the Bynars . They had used the Enterprise to upload their computer information for safekeeping and then planned to download it back to the Bynar computers after the threat of the EMP had passed . With Data 's help , Picard and Riker successfully download the data , and the Bynars recover . They apologize for their actions , having feared that Starfleet would refuse to help , though Picard notes they only had to ask . As the Enterprise returns to Starbase , Riker returns to the holodeck to thank Minuet but finds that without the Bynar data , the simulation has regressed to the expected norm for the holodeck , and while Minuet still exists , she is not the same as before . Riker reports to Picard that Minuet is gone . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode at one point was called " <unk> " . It was originally intended that this episode would take place prior to " The Big Goodbye " , with the Bynars modifications causing the problems with the holodeck seen in that episode . Instead it was changed to the Bynars aiming to fix the holodeck to prevent those problems re @-@ occurring . The Bynars themselves were played by young women . Children were considered for the parts , but the production team thought that it would be too problematic because of the limited time they could work each day and the need to hire teachers . Each actress was required to wear extensive make @-@ up , which was created by make @-@ up supervisor Michael Westmore . A large single @-@ piece bald cap was made from the same mold for each actress , which required some customised trimming to get it to fit properly . To cover up problems with the seams of the cap , some fake hair was added on the Bynars ' necks . Each actress also controlled the flashing light inside the apparatus on the side of the headpiece through a battery pack attached to the waistband of their costumes . To disguise their voices , the pitch was lowered in post production . It was originally planned to add subtitles over the Bynars ' conversations between themselves . 
 The image of the Starbase orbiting a planet was re @-@ used from Star Trek III : The Search for Spock . The score was created by Ron Jones , who incorporated jazz themes composed by John Beasley . The episode was written by Maurice Hurley and Robert Lewin . Hurley was pleased with the outcome of the episode , praising the work of Westmore on the Bynars ' makeup and the performance of Jonathan Frakes . Frakes enjoyed the episode too , saying , " A fabulous show . Those were the kind of chances we took first season that when they worked , they worked great . It was a very chancy show and I loved it . " Director Paul Lynch also thought that the Bynars were " great " . Carolyn McCormick appeared as Minuet and subsequently became a regular cast member in Law and Order . She returned to the role of Minuet in the season four episode " Future Imperfect " . Gene <unk> had previously appeared as Ben Childress in Star Trek : The Original Series episode " Mudd 's Women " and <unk> in " The Mark of Gideon " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " 11001001 " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing February 7 , 1988 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 7 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . These ratings were lower than both the episodes broadcast both before and afterwards . For their work in this episode , Bill Wistrom , Wilson Dyer , Mace <unk> , James <unk> , Gerry <unk> and Keith <unk> were awarded an Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . James Hunt reviewed the episode for the website " Den of Geek " in January 2013 . He was surprised by the episode as he " went in expecting something that was typically season one awful , and got something that was actually a lot of fun " . He thought that the theme of symbiosis between man and machine , and thought it was the best episode until that point in season one and one of the best of the season overall . Zack Handlen watched the episode for The A.V. Club in May 2010 . He too was surprised by what he found . Handlen said that " last time I saw it , I thought Riker and Minuet 's interactions were cheesy as hell . They didn 't bother me so much now , because they don 't go on very long , and there 's something hilarious about a man trying to seduce a computer simulation designed to respond to his seductions " . But he said , " I had fun with this , which I wasn 't expecting " , and " thought this was solid " . He gave the episode a B grade . 
 Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com in June 2011 . He described it as " one of the strongest first @-@ season episodes " , and the Bynars as " one of the finest alien species Trek has provided " . He also thought that turning off the auto @-@ destruct with two minutes to go instead of mere seconds neatly avoided a cliché , and gave it a score of seven out of ten . Michelle Erica Green for TrekNation watched the episode in June 2007 . She thought that it came " very close to being a really good episode " . She also thought that Picard and Riker 's actions were the " most boneheaded joint behavior by the top two officers " , in that they got distracted by a female character on the holodeck and didn 't notice the ship being evacuated . Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website " Jammer 's Reviews " described " 11001001 " as " easily season one 's best and most memorable episode " . He thought that it was the " season 's most solid sci @-@ fi concept " and that the series was " firing on all cylinders , with everything coming together , from plot to character , to sensible use of technology and action " . He gave it a score of four out of four . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " 11001001 " was on VHS cassette , appearing on August 26 , 1992 , in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and then released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = SMS Scharnhorst = 
 SMS Scharnhorst ( " His Majesty 's Ship Scharnhorst " ) was an armored cruiser of the Imperial German Navy , built at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg , Germany . She was the lead ship of her class , which also included her sister SMS Gneisenau . Scharnhorst and her sister were enlarged versions of the preceding Roon class ; they were equipped with a greater number of main guns and were capable of a higher top speed . The ship was named after the Prussian military reformer General Gerhard von Scharnhorst and commissioned into service on 24 October 1907 . 
 Scharnhorst served briefly with the High Seas Fleet in Germany in 1908 , though most of this time was spent conducting sea trials . She was assigned to the German East Asia Squadron based in Tsingtao , China , in 1909 . After arriving , she replaced the cruiser Fürst Bismarck as the squadron flagship , a position she would hold for the rest of her career . Over the next five years , she went on several tours of various Asian ports to show the flag for Germany . She frequently carried the squadron commanders to meet with Asian heads of state and was present in Japan for the coronation of the Taishō Emperor in 1912 . 
 After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , accompanied by three light cruisers and several colliers , sailed across the Pacific Ocean — in the process evading the various Allied naval forces sent to intercept them — before arriving off the southern coast of South America . On 1 November 1914 , Scharnhorst and the rest of the East Asia Squadron encountered and overpowered a British squadron at the Battle of Coronel . The stinging defeat prompted the British Admiralty to dispatch two battlecruisers to hunt down and destroy von Spee 's flotilla , which they accomplished at the Battle of the Falkland Islands on 8 December 1914 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Scharnhorst was 144 @.@ 6 meters ( 474 ft 5 in ) long overall and had a beam of 21 @.@ 6 m ( 70 ft 10 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 37 m ( 27 ft 6 in ) . The ship displaced 11 @,@ 616 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 433 long tons ) as designed and 12 @,@ 985 t ( 12 @,@ 780 long tons ) at deep load . She was powered by three triple @-@ expansion steam engines with eighteen coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers . Her engines were rated at 25 @,@ 644 indicated horsepower ( 19 @,@ 123 kW ) , for a top speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots ( 41 @.@ 7 km / h ; 25 @.@ 9 mph ) . Scharnhorst 's crew consisted of 52 officers and 788 enlisted men ; of these , 14 officers and 62 enlisted men were assigned to the squadron commander 's staff and were additional to the standard complement . 
 Scharnhorst 's primary armament consisted of eight 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 2 inch ) SK L / 40 guns , four in twin gun turrets , one fore and one aft of the main superstructure , and the remaining four were mounted in single wing turrets . Secondary armament included six 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 inch ) SK L / 40 guns in casemates and eighteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 inch ) guns mounted in casemates . She was also equipped with four 45 cm ( 18 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow , one on each broadside , and the fourth was placed in the stern . The ship 's armored belt was 15 cm thick and the gun turrets had 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) thick faces . Her deck was 3 @.@ 5 to 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick , with the heavier armor protecting the ship 's engine and boiler rooms and ammunition magazines . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Named for Generalleutnant ( Lieutenant General ) Gerhard von Scharnhorst , a Prussian military reformer during the Napoleonic Wars , Scharnhorst was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg , Germany on 22 March 1905 , under construction number 175 . She was launched on 23 March 1906 , and Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) Gottlieb Graf von <unk> gave the speech and christened the ship at her launching ceremony . The new armored cruiser was commissioned into the fleet a year and a half later on 24 October 1907 . She thereafter began sea trials and while conducting speed tests , she exceeded her design speed by one knot , reaching 23 @.@ 5 knots ( 43 @.@ 5 km / h ; 27 @.@ 0 mph ) . 
 From 6 to 11 November , her trials were interrupted by a voyage to Vlissingen in the Netherlands and Portsmouth in Britain in company with Kaiser Wilhelm II 's yacht Hohenzollern and the light cruiser Königsberg . On 14 January 1908 , Scharnhorst ran aground off the <unk> Lighthouse and suffered serious underwater damage . Repairs were effected at Blohm & Voss and lasted until 22 February . Shortly thereafter , the cruiser resumed her trials , which continued until the end of April . On 1 May , she replaced Yorck as the flagship of the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) August von Heeringen . Over the course of the rest of the year , she participated in the normal peacetime routine of training exercises and fleet maneuvers . 
 = = = East Asia Squadron = = = 
 On 11 March 1909 , Scharnhorst was assigned to the Ostasiengeschwader ( East Asia Squadron ) ; Yorck replaced her as the reconnaissance squadron flagship . After completing preparations for the voyage , Scharnhorst departed Kiel on 1 April ; aboard was Konteradmiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , who was to take command of the East Asia Squadron upon his arrival . On 29 April , Scharnhorst rendezvoused with Fürst Bismarck , the flagship of the East Asia Squadron , in Colombo . There , Scharnhorst took over the role of squadron flagship . At the time , the squadron also included the light cruisers Leipzig and Arcona and several gunboats and torpedo boats . In July and August , Scharnhorst went on a cruise in the Yellow Sea and in August surveyed ports in the area . She spent December and early January 1910 in Hong Kong for the Christmas and New Year 's festivities in company with Leipzig and the gunboat Luchs . 
 In January , Scharnhorst , Leipzig , and Luchs went on a tour of East Asian ports , including Bangkok , Manila , and stops in Sumatra and North Borneo . By 22 March , Scharnhorst and Leipzig had returned to the German port at Tsingtao . In the meantime , Arcona had left the East Asia Squadron in February ; her replacement , Nürnberg , arrived on 9 April . Ingenohl , by now promoted to Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) , departed on 6 June and was replaced by Konteradmiral Erich Gühler . The new squadron commander took Scharnhorst and Nürnberg on a tour of Germany 's Pacific colonies , starting on 20 June . Stops included the Mariana Islands , Truk , and Apia in German Samoa . In the last port , the cruisers met the unprotected cruisers Cormoran and Condor , the station ships for the South Seas Station . While there , the new light cruiser Emden arrived on 22 July to further strengthen the East Asia Squadron . 
 In 1910 , Scharnhorst won the Kaiser 's Schießpreis ( Shooting Prize ) for excellent gunnery in the East Asia Squadron . On 25 November , Scharnhorst and the rest of the squadron went on a trip to Hong Kong and Nanjing ; while in Hong Kong , an outbreak of typhus struck . Among those who were infected was Gühler , who succumbed to the disease on 21 January 1911 . In the meantime , unrest had broken out in Ponape , which required the presence of Emden and Nürnberg . Scharnhorst instead went on a tour of Southeast Asian ports , including Saigon , Singapore , and Batavia . She then returned to Tsingtao by way of Hong Kong and Amoy , arriving on 1 March . There , Konteradmiral Günther von Krosigk was waiting to take command of the squadron . Two weeks later , the squadron was reinforced by the arrival of Scharnhorst 's sister ship Gneisenau on 14 March . From 30 March to 12 May , Scharnhorst went on a cruise in Japanese waters with Krosigk aboard . She thereafter steamed to the northern area of the German protectorate in early July ; at the time tensions were high in Europe due to the Agadir Crisis . Krosigk attempted to keep the situation calm in East Asia and he took his flagship on a tour of harbors in the Yellow Sea . By 15 September , the cruiser was back in Tsingtao . 
 After arriving in Tsingtao , Scharnhorst went into dock for her annual repair ; Krosigk accordingly shifted his flag to Gneisenau temporarily . On 10 October , the Xinhai Revolution against the Qing Dynasty broke out , which caused a great deal of tension amongst the Europeans , who recalled the attacks on foreigners during the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 – 01 . The rest of the East Asia Squadron was placed on alert to protect German interests and additional troops were sent to protect the German consulate . But the feared attacks on Europeans did not materialize and so the East Asia Squadron was not needed . By late November , Scharnhorst was back in service and Krosigk returned to the ship . She cruised to Shanghai by way of Tientsin and Yantai , arriving on 12 December . From 14 to 24 January 1912 , Scharnhorst toured the ports of the central China coast and returned to Tsingtao on 9 March , where the rest of the squadron had assembled . On 13 April , the ships went on a month @-@ long cruise to Japanese waters , returning to Tsingtao on 13 May . From 17 July to 4 September , Scharnhorst went on another tour of Japanese ports and during this period she also visited Vladivostok in Russia and several ports in the Yellow Sea . 
 On 30 July , the Meiji Emperor died ; Scharnhorst escorted Leipzig , which carried Prince Heinrich , Wilhelm II 's brother , to the Meiji Emperor 's funeral and the coronation ceremony for the Taishō Emperor . The ships remained in Japan from 5 to 26 September . After returning to Tsingtao , Prince Heinrich conducted an inspection of the entire East Asia Squadron . On 4 December , Krosigk handed over command of the squadron to Konteradmiral Maximilian von Spee . On 27 December , Spee took Scharnhorst and Gneisenau on a tour of the southwest Pacific , including stops in Amoy , Singapore , and Batavia . The two cruisers reached Tsingtao on 2 March 1913 . From 1 April to 7 May , Scharnhorst took Spee to Japan to meet the Taishō Emperor . Starting on 22 June , Spee began a tour of Germany 's Pacific colonies aboard his flagship . The ship stopped in the Marianas , the Admiralty Islands , the Hermit Islands , Rabaul in <unk> , and Friedrich @-@ Wilhelmshafen in German New Guinea . 
 While in Rabaul on 21 July , Spee received word of further unrest in China , which prompted his return to the Wusong roadstead outside Shanghai by 30 July . After the situation calmed , Spee was able to take his ships on a short cruise to Japan , which began on 11 November . Scharnhorst and the rest of the squadron returned to Shanghai on 29 November , before she departed for another trip to Southwest Asia . Spee met with Chulalongkorn , the King of Siam , and also visited Sumatra , North Borneo , and Manila . Scharnhorst returned to Tsingtao on 19 March 1914 . In early May , Spee , by now promoted to Vizeadmiral , took Scharnhorst and the torpedo boat SMS <unk> on a visit to Port Arthur and then to Tianjin ; Spee continued on to Beijing , where he met with Yuan Shikai , the first President of the Republic of China . He came back aboard Scharnhorst on 11 May and the ship returned to Tsingtao . Spee thereafter began preparations for a cruise to German New Guinea ; Scharnhorst departed on 20 June , leaving only Emden behind in Tsingtao . 
 Gneisenau rendezvoused with Scharnhorst in Nagasaki , Japan , where they received a full supply of coal . They then sailed south , arriving in Truk in early July where they would restock their coal supplies . While en route , they received news of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand , heir to the throne of Austria @-@ Hungary . On 17 July , the East Asia Squadron arrived in Ponape in the Caroline Islands . Spee now had access to the German radio network and he learned of the Austro @-@ Hungarian declaration of war on Serbia and the Russian mobilization against Austria @-@ Hungary and possibly Germany . On 31 July , word came that the German ultimatum that Russia demobilize its armies was set to expire . Spee ordered his ships be stripped for war . On 2 August , Wilhelm II ordered German mobilization against Russia and its ally , France . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 When the First World War broke out , the East Asia Squadron consisted of Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , Emden , Nürnberg , and Leipzig . At the time , Nürnberg was returning from the west coast of the United States , where Leipzig had just replaced her , and Emden was still in Tsingtao . On 6 August 1914 , Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , the supply ship Titania , and the Japanese collier <unk> Maru were still in Ponape . Von Spee had issued orders to recall the light cruisers , which had been dispersed on cruises around the Pacific . Nürnberg joined von Spee that day , after which Spee moved his ships to Pagan Island in the Northern Mariana Islands , a German possession in the central Pacific . 
 All available colliers , supply ships , and passenger liners were ordered to meet the East Asia Squadron in Pagan and Emden joined the squadron there on 12 August . The auxiliary cruiser Prinz Eitel Friedrich joined Spee 's ships there as well . The four cruisers , accompanied by Prinz Eitel Friedrich and several colliers , then departed the central Pacific , bound for Chile . On 13 August , Commodore Karl von Müller , captain of the Emden , persuaded Spee to detach his ship as a commerce raider . On 14 August , the East Asia Squadron departed Pagan for Enewetak Atoll in the Marshall Islands , with Scharnhorst in the lead . The ships again coaled after their arrival on 20 August . 
 To keep the German high command informed , on 8 September von Spee detached Nürnberg to Honolulu to send word through neutral countries . Nürnberg returned with news of the Allied capture of German Samoa , which had taken place on 29 August . Scharnhorst and Gneisenau sailed to Apia to investigate the situation . Spee had hoped to catch a British or Australian warship by surprise , but upon his arrival on 14 September , he found no warships in the harbor . On 22 September , Scharnhorst and the rest of the East Asia Squadron arrived at the French colony of Papeete . The Germans attacked the colony , and in the ensuing Battle of Papeete , they sank the French gunboat Zélée . The ships came under fire from French shore batteries but were undamaged . Fear of mines in the harbor prevented von Spee from seizing the coal in the harbor . 
 By 12 October , Scharnhorst and the rest of the squadron had reached Easter Island . There they were joined by Dresden and Leipzig , which had sailed from American waters , on 12 and 14 October , respectively . Leipzig also brought three more colliers with her . After a week in the area , the ships departed for Chile . On the evening of 26 October , Scharnhorst and the rest of the squadron steamed out of Mas a Fuera , Chile and headed eastward , arriving in Valparaíso on 30 October . On 1 November , Spee learned from Prinz Eitel Friedrich that the British light cruiser HMS Glasgow had been anchored in Coronel the previous day , so he turned towards the port to try to catch her alone . 
 = = = = Battle of Coronel = = = = 
 The British had scant resources to oppose the German squadron off the coast of South America . Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock commanded the armored cruisers HMS Good Hope and Monmouth , Glasgow , and the converted armed merchant cruiser Otranto . The flotilla was reinforced by the elderly pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Canopus and the armored cruiser Defence . The latter , however , did not arrive until after the Battle of Coronel . Canopus was left behind by Cradock , who probably felt her slow speed would prevent him from bringing the German ships to battle . 
 The East Asia Squadron arrived off Coronel on the afternoon of 1 November ; to Spee 's surprise , he encountered Good Hope , Monmouth , and Otranto in addition to Glasgow . Canopus was still some 300 miles ( 480 km ) behind , with the British colliers . At 16 : 17 , Glasgow spotted the German ships . Cradock formed a line of battle with Good Hope in the lead , followed by Monmouth , Glasgow , and Otranto in the rear . Spee decided to hold off engaging until the sun had set more , at which point the British ships would be silhouetted by the sun , while his own ships would be obscured against the coast behind them . Cradock realized the uselessness of Otranto in the line of battle and detached her . 
 By 18 : 07 , the distance between the two squadrons had fallen to 13 @,@ 500 m ( 44 @,@ 300 ft ) and Spee ordered his ships to open fire thirty minutes later ; each ship engaged their opposite in the British line . Scharnhorst engaged Good Hope and hit her on the third salvo , striking between her forward gun turret and her conning tower and starting a major fire . Once the German gunners found the range , they began firing rapidly , with one salvo of high @-@ explosive shells every fifteen seconds . Oberleutnant zur See ( Lieutenant at Sea ) Knoop , the spotting officer aboard Scharnhorst , reported that " Continual hits could be observed ... in the midships Good Hope was hit repeatedly , with much fire resulting ... the interior of this part of the ship was on fire , which could be seen through the portholes , shining brightly . " 
 In the meantime , Glasgow began to shoot at both Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , since she could no longer engage the German light cruisers . One of her 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) shells struck Scharnhorst in the forecastle but failed to explode . By 18 : 50 , Monmouth had been badly damaged by Gneisenau and she fell out of line ; Gneisenau therefore joined Scharnhorst in battling Good Hope . At the same time , Nürnberg closed to point @-@ blank range of Monmouth and poured shells into her . At 19 : 23 , Good Hope 's guns fell silent following two large explosions ; the German gunners ceased fire shortly thereafter . Good Hope disappeared into the darkness . Spee ordered his light cruisers to close with his battered opponents and finish them off with torpedoes , while he took Scharnhorst and Gneisenau further south to get out of the way . 
 Glasgow was forced to abandon Monmouth after 19 : 20 when the German light cruisers approached , before fleeing south and meeting with Canopus . A squall prevented the Germans from discovering Monmouth , but she eventually capsized and sank at 20 : 18 . More than 1 @,@ 600 men were killed in the sinking of the two armored cruisers , including Cradock . German losses were negligible . However , the German ships had expended over 40 % of their ammunition supply . Scharnhorst was hit twice during the engagement , but both shells failed to explode . The second hit passed through her third funnel and did not explode ; she was struck by shell splinters that damaged her wireless antenna array . She suffered no casualties and the only German injuries were two slightly wounded men aboard Gneisenau . 
 After the battle , Spee took his ships north to Valparaiso . Since Chile was neutral , only three ships could enter the port at a time ; Spee took Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Nürnberg in first on the morning of 3 November , leaving Dresden and Leipzig with the colliers at Mas a Fuera . There , Spee 's ships could take on coal while he conferred with the Admiralty Staff in Germany to determine the strength of remaining British forces in the region . The ships remained in the port for only 24 hours , in accordance with the neutrality restrictions , and arrived at Mas a Fuera on 6 November , where they took on more coal from captured British and French steamers . On 10 November , Dresden and Leipzig were detached for a stop in Valparaiso , and five days later , Spee took the rest of the squadron south to St. Quentin Bay in the Gulf of Penas . On 18 November , Dresden and Leipzig met Spee while en route and the squadron reached St. Quentin Bay three days later . There , they took on more coal , since the voyage around Cape Horn would be a long one and it was unclear when they would have another opportunity to coal . 
 = = = = Battle of the Falkland Islands = = = = 
 Once word of the defeat reached London , the Royal Navy set to organizing a force to hunt down and destroy the East Asia Squadron . To this end , the powerful new battlecruisers Invincible and Inflexible were detached from the Grand Fleet and placed under the command of Vice Admiral Doveton Sturdee . The two ships left Devonport on 10 November and while en route to the Falkland Islands , they were joined by the armored cruisers Carnarvon , Kent , and Cornwall , the light cruisers Bristol and Glasgow , and Otranto . The force of eight ships reached the Falklands by 7 December , where they immediately coaled . 
 In the meantime , Spee 's ships departed St. Quentin Bay on 26 November and rounded Cape Horn on 2 December . They captured the Canadian barque Drummuir , which had a cargo of 2 @,@ 500 t ( 2 @,@ 500 long tons ; 2 @,@ 800 short tons ) of good @-@ quality Cardiff coal . Leipzig took the ship under tow and the following day the ships stopped off Picton Island . The crews transferred the coal from Drummuir to the squadron 's colliers . On the morning of 6 December , Spee held a conference with the ship commanders aboard Scharnhorst to determine their next course of action . The Germans had received numerous fragmentary and contradictory reports of British reinforcements in the region ; Spee and two other captains favored an attack on the Falklands , while three other commanders argued that it would be better to bypass the islands and attack British shipping off Argentina . Spee 's opinion carried the day and the squadron departed for the Falklands at 12 : 00 on 6 December . 
 Gneisenau and Nürnberg were delegated for the attack ; they approached the Falklands the following morning , with the intention of destroying the wireless transmitter there . Observers aboard Gneisenau spotted smoke rising from Port Stanley , but assumed it was the British burning their coal stocks to prevent the Germans from seizing them . As they closed on the harbor , 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) shells from Canopus , which had been beached as a guard ship , began to fall around the German ships , which prompted Spee to break off the attack . The Germans took a south @-@ easterly course at 22 kn ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) after having reformed by 10 : 45 . Scharnhorst was the center ship , with Gneisenau and Nürnberg ahead and Dresden and Leipzig astern . The fast battlecruisers quickly got up steam and sailed out of the harbor to pursue the slower East Asia Squadron . 
 By 13 : 20 , the British ships had caught up with Scharnhorst and the other cruisers and began firing at a range of 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) . Spee realized his armored cruisers could not escape the much faster battlecruisers and ordered the three light cruisers to attempt to break away while he turned about and allowed the British battlecruisers to engage the outgunned Scharnhorst and Gneisenau . Meanwhile , Sturdee detached his cruisers to pursue the German light cruisers . Invincible opened fire at Scharnhorst while Inflexible attacked Gneisenau and Spee ordered his two armored cruisers to similarly engage their opposites . Spee had taken the lee position ; the wind kept his ships swept of smoke , which improved visibility for his gunners . This forced Sturdee into the windward position and its corresponding worse visibility . Scharnhorst straddled Invincible with her third salvo and quickly scored two hits on the British battlecruiser . The German flagship was herself not hit during this phase of the battle . 
 Sturdee attempted to widen the distance by turning two points to the north to prevent Spee from closing to within the range of his numerous secondary guns . Spee counteracted this maneuver by turning rapidly to the south , which forced Sturdee to turn south as well to keep within range . This allowed Scharnhorst and Gneisenau to turn back north and get close enough to engage with their secondary 15 cm guns . Their shooting was so accurate that it forced the British to haul away a second time . After resuming the battle , the British gunfire became more accurate ; Scharnhorst was hit several times and fires broke out . The pace of her gunfire started to slacken , though she continued to score hits on Invincible . Sturdee then turned to port in an attempt to take the leeward position , but Spee countered the turn to retain his favorable position ; the maneuvering did , however , reverse the order of the ships , so Scharnhorst now engaged Inflexible . 
 By this stage of the battle , Scharnhorst had a slight list to port and was about a meter lower in the water . Her third funnel had been shot away . Gneisenau was briefly obscured by smoke , which led both battlecruisers to target Scharnhorst . By 16 : 00 , Spee ordered Gneisenau to attempt to escape while he reversed course and attempted to launch torpedoes at his pursuers . The port list had increased significantly by this point and she was well down by the bow , with only 2 meters ( 6 ft 7 in ) of freeboard . At 16 : 17 , the ship finally capsized to port and sank ; the British , their attention now focused on Gneisenau , made no attempt to rescue the crew . All 860 officers and men on board , including Spee , went down with the ship . Gneisenau , Leipzig , and Nürnberg were also sunk . Only Dresden managed to escape , but she was eventually tracked to the Juan Fernandez Islands and sunk . The complete destruction of the squadron killed about 2 @,@ 200 German sailors and officers , including two of Spee 's sons . 
 In mid @-@ 1915 , a coastal steamer found the body of a German sailor off the coast of Brazil . The sailor had a watertight cartridge case from a 21 cm shell attached ; inside was one of the <unk> ( Imperial war flags ) flown aboard Scharnhorst . The sailor was buried in Brazil and the flag was eventually returned to Germany , where it was placed on display at the Museum für <unk> ( Marine Science ) in Berlin , though it was lost during World War II . In the mid @-@ 1930s , the new German navy , the Kriegsmarine , built a battleship named for Scharnhorst . At the launching of the new Scharnhorst in October 1936 , the widow of the earlier ship 's captain was present . 
 = Vitamin = 
 A vitamin is an organic compound and a vital nutrient that an organism requires in limited amounts . An organic chemical compound ( or related set of compounds ) is called a vitamin when the organism cannot synthesize the compound in sufficient quantities , and it must be obtained through the diet ; thus , the term " vitamin " is conditional upon the circumstances and the particular organism . For example , ascorbic acid ( one form of vitamin C ) is a vitamin for humans , but not for most other animal organisms . Supplementation is important for the treatment of certain health problems , but there is little evidence of nutritional benefit when used by otherwise healthy people . 
 By convention the term vitamin includes neither other essential nutrients , such as dietary minerals , essential fatty acids , or essential amino acids ( which are needed in greater amounts than vitamins ) nor the great number of other nutrients that promote health , and are required less often to maintain the health of the organism . Thirteen vitamins are universally recognized at present . Vitamins are classified by their biological and chemical activity , not their structure . Thus , each " vitamin " refers to a number of <unk> compounds that all show the biological activity associated with a particular vitamin . Such a set of chemicals is grouped under an alphabetized vitamin " generic descriptor " title , such as " vitamin A " , which includes the compounds retinal , retinol , and four known carotenoids . <unk> by definition are convertible to the active form of the vitamin in the body , and are sometimes inter @-@ convertible to one another , as well . 
 Vitamins have diverse biochemical functions . Some , such as vitamin D , have hormone @-@ like functions as regulators of mineral metabolism , or regulators of cell and tissue growth and differentiation ( such as some forms of vitamin A ) . Others function as antioxidants ( e.g. , vitamin E and sometimes vitamin C ) . The largest number of vitamins , the B complex vitamins , function as enzyme cofactors ( coenzymes ) or the precursors for them ; coenzymes help enzymes in their work as catalysts in metabolism . In this role , vitamins may be tightly bound to enzymes as part of prosthetic groups : For example , biotin is part of enzymes involved in making fatty acids . They may also be less tightly bound to enzyme catalysts as coenzymes , detachable molecules that function to carry chemical groups or electrons between molecules . For example , folic acid may carry methyl , formyl , and methylene groups in the cell . Although these roles in assisting enzyme @-@ substrate reactions are vitamins ' best @-@ known function , the other vitamin functions are equally important . 
 Until the mid @-@ 1930s , when the first commercial yeast @-@ extract vitamin B complex and semi @-@ synthetic vitamin C supplement tablets were sold , vitamins were obtained solely through food intake , and changes in diet ( which , for example , could occur during a particular growing season ) usually greatly altered the types and amounts of vitamins ingested . However , vitamins have been produced as commodity chemicals and made widely available as inexpensive semisynthetic and synthetic @-@ source multivitamin dietary and food supplements and additives , since the middle of the 20th century . Study of structural activity , function and their role in maintaining health is called <unk> . 
 = = List of vitamins = = 
 Each vitamin is typically used in multiple reactions , and therefore most have multiple functions . 
 = = Health effects = = 
 Vitamins are essential for the normal growth and development of a multicellular organism . Using the genetic blueprint inherited from its parents , a fetus begins to develop , at the moment of conception , from the nutrients it absorbs . It requires certain vitamins and minerals to be present at certain times . These nutrients facilitate the chemical reactions that produce among other things , skin , bone , and muscle . If there is serious deficiency in one or more of these nutrients , a child may develop a deficiency disease . Even minor deficiencies may cause permanent damage . 
 For the most part , vitamins are obtained with food , but a few are obtained by other means . For example , microorganisms in the intestine — commonly known as " gut flora " — produce vitamin K and biotin , while one form of vitamin D is synthesized in the skin with the help of the natural ultraviolet wavelength of sunlight . Humans can produce some vitamins from precursors they consume . Examples include vitamin A , produced from beta carotene , and niacin , from the amino acid tryptophan . 
 Once growth and development are completed , vitamins remain essential nutrients for the healthy maintenance of the cells , tissues , and organs that make up a multicellular organism ; they also enable a multicellular life form to efficiently use chemical energy provided by food it eats , and to help process the proteins , carbohydrates , and fats required for respiration . 
 = = = Supplements = = = 
 In those who are otherwise healthy , there is little evidence that supplements have any benefits with respect to cancer or heart disease . Vitamin A and E supplements not only provide no health benefits for generally healthy individuals , but they may increase mortality , though the two large studies that support this conclusion included smokers for whom it was already known that beta @-@ carotene supplements can be harmful . While other findings suggest that vitamin E toxicity is limited to only a specific form when taken in excess . 
 The European Union and other countries of Europe have regulations that define limits of vitamin ( and mineral ) dosages for their safe use as food supplements . Most vitamins that are sold as food supplements cannot exceed a maximum daily dosage . Vitamin products above these legal limits are not considered food supplements and must be registered as prescription or non @-@ prescription ( over @-@ the @-@ counter drugs ) due to their potential side effects . As a result , most of the fat @-@ soluble vitamins ( such as the vitamins A , D , E , and K ) that contain amounts above the daily allowance are drug products . The daily dosage of a vitamin supplement for example cannot exceed 300 % of the recommended daily allowance , and for vitamin A , this limit is even lower ( 200 % ) . Such regulations are applicable in most European countries . 
 Dietary supplements often contain vitamins , but may also include other ingredients , such as minerals , herbs , and botanicals . Scientific evidence supports the benefits of dietary supplements for persons with certain health conditions . In some cases , vitamin supplements may have unwanted effects , especially if taken before surgery , with other dietary supplements or medicines , or if the person taking them has certain health conditions . They may also contain levels of vitamins many times higher , and in different forms , than one may ingest through food . 
 = = = Effect of cooking = = = 
 Shown below is percentage loss of vitamins after cooking averaged for common foods such as vegetables , meat or fish . 
 It should be noted however that some vitamins may become more " bio @-@ available " – that is , usable by the body – when steamed or cooked . 
 The table below shows whether various vitamins are susceptible to loss from heat — such as heat from boiling , steaming , cooking etc . — and other agents . The effect of cutting vegetables can be seen from exposure to air and light . Water @-@ soluble vitamins such as B and C seep into the water when a vegetable is boiled . 
 = = = Deficiencies = = = 
 Humans must consume vitamins periodically but with differing schedules , to avoid deficiency . The body 's stores for different vitamins vary widely ; vitamins A , D , and B12 are stored in significant amounts , mainly in the liver , and an adult 's diet may be deficient in vitamins A and D for many months and B12 in some cases for years , before developing a deficiency condition . However , vitamin B3 ( niacin and <unk> ) is not stored in significant amounts , so stores may last only a couple of weeks . For vitamin C , the first symptoms of scurvy in experimental studies of complete vitamin C deprivation in humans have varied widely , from a month to more than six months , depending on previous dietary history that determined body stores . 
 Deficiencies of vitamins are classified as either primary or secondary . A primary deficiency occurs when an organism does not get enough of the vitamin in its food . A secondary deficiency may be due to an underlying disorder that prevents or limits the absorption or use of the vitamin , due to a " lifestyle factor " , such as smoking , excessive alcohol consumption , or the use of medications that interfere with the absorption or use of the vitamin . People who eat a varied diet are unlikely to develop a severe primary vitamin deficiency . In contrast , restrictive diets have the potential to cause prolonged vitamin deficits , which may result in often painful and potentially deadly diseases . 
 Well @-@ known human vitamin deficiencies involve thiamine ( beriberi ) , niacin ( pellagra ) , vitamin C ( scurvy ) , and vitamin D ( rickets ) . In much of the developed world , such deficiencies are rare ; this is due to ( 1 ) an adequate supply of food and ( 2 ) the addition of vitamins and minerals to common foods ( fortification ) . In addition to these classical vitamin deficiency diseases , some evidence has also suggested links between vitamin deficiency and a number of different disorders . 
 = = = Side @-@ effects = = = 
 In large doses , some vitamins have documented side @-@ effects that tend to be more severe with a larger dosage . The likelihood of consuming too much of any vitamin from food is remote , but overdosing ( vitamin poisoning ) from vitamin supplementation does occur . At high enough dosages , some vitamins cause side @-@ effects such as nausea , diarrhea , and vomiting . When side @-@ effects emerge , recovery is often accomplished by reducing the dosage . The doses of vitamins differ because individual tolerances can vary widely and appear to be related to age and state of health . 
 In 2008 , overdose exposure to all formulations of vitamins and multivitamin @-@ mineral formulations was reported by 68 @,@ 911 individuals to the American Association of Poison Control Centers ( nearly 80 % of these exposures were in children under the age of 6 ) , leading to 8 " major " life @-@ threatening outcomes , but no deaths . 
 = = Pharmacology = = 
 Vitamins are classified as either water @-@ soluble or fat @-@ soluble . In humans there are 13 vitamins : 4 fat @-@ soluble ( A , D , E , and K ) and 9 water @-@ soluble ( 8 B vitamins and vitamin C ) . Water @-@ soluble vitamins dissolve easily in water and , in general , are readily excreted from the body , to the degree that urinary output is a strong predictor of vitamin consumption . Because they are not as readily stored , more consistent intake is important . Many types of water @-@ soluble vitamins are synthesized by bacteria . Fat @-@ soluble vitamins are absorbed through the intestinal tract with the help of lipids ( fats ) . Because they are more likely to accumulate in the body , they are more likely to lead to hypervitaminosis than are water @-@ soluble vitamins . Fat @-@ soluble vitamin regulation is of particular significance in cystic fibrosis . 
 = = History = = 
 The value of eating a certain food to maintain health was recognized long before vitamins were identified . The ancient Egyptians knew that feeding liver to a person would help cure night blindness , an illness now known to be caused by a vitamin A deficiency . The advancement of ocean voyages during the Renaissance resulted in prolonged periods without access to fresh fruits and vegetables , and made illnesses from vitamin deficiency common among ships ' crews . 
 In 1747 , the Scottish surgeon James Lind discovered that citrus foods helped prevent scurvy , a particularly deadly disease in which collagen is not properly formed , causing poor wound healing , bleeding of the gums , severe pain , and death . In 1753 , Lind published his Treatise on the Scurvy , which recommended using lemons and limes to avoid scurvy , which was adopted by the British Royal Navy . This led to the nickname limey for British sailors . Lind 's discovery , however , was not widely accepted by individuals in the Royal Navy 's Arctic expeditions in the 19th century , where it was widely believed that scurvy could be prevented by practicing good hygiene , regular exercise , and maintaining the morale of the crew while on board , rather than by a diet of fresh food . As a result , Arctic expeditions continued to be plagued by scurvy and other deficiency diseases . In the early 20th century , when Robert Falcon Scott made his two expeditions to the Antarctic , the prevailing medical theory at the time was that scurvy was caused by " tainted " canned food . 
 During the late 18th and early 19th centuries , the use of deprivation studies allowed scientists to isolate and identify a number of vitamins . Lipid from fish oil was used to cure rickets in rats , and the fat @-@ soluble nutrient was called " <unk> A " . Thus , the first " vitamin " bioactivity ever isolated , which cured rickets , was initially called " vitamin A " ; however , the bioactivity of this compound is now called vitamin D. In 1881 , Russian surgeon Nikolai <unk> studied the effects of scurvy at the University of Tartu in present @-@ day Estonia . He fed mice an artificial mixture of all the separate constituents of milk known at that time , namely the proteins , fats , carbohydrates , and salts . The mice that received only the individual constituents died , while the mice fed by milk itself developed normally . He made a conclusion that " a natural food such as milk must therefore contain , besides these known principal ingredients , small quantities of unknown substances essential to life . " However , his conclusions were rejected by his advisor , Gustav von Bunge , even after other students reproduced his results . A similar result by Cornelius <unk> appeared in a Dutch medical journal in 1905 , but it was not widely reported . 
 In East Asia , where polished white rice was the common staple food of the middle class , beriberi resulting from lack of vitamin B1 was endemic . In 1884 , Takaki <unk> , a British trained medical doctor of the Imperial Japanese Navy , observed that beriberi was endemic among low @-@ ranking crew who often ate nothing but rice , but not among officers who consumed a Western @-@ style diet . With the support of the Japanese navy , he experimented using crews of two battleships ; one crew was fed only white rice , while the other was fed a diet of meat , fish , barley , rice , and beans . The group that ate only white rice documented 161 crew members with beriberi and 25 deaths , while the latter group had only 14 cases of beriberi and no deaths . This convinced Takaki and the Japanese Navy that diet was the cause of beriberi , but they mistakenly believed that sufficient amounts of protein prevented it . That diseases could result from some dietary deficiencies was further investigated by Christiaan Eijkman , who in 1897 discovered that feeding unpolished rice instead of the polished variety to chickens helped to prevent beriberi in the chickens . The following year , Frederick Hopkins postulated that some foods contained " accessory factors " — in addition to proteins , carbohydrates , fats etc . — that are necessary for the functions of the human body . Hopkins and Eijkman were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1929 for their discoveries . 
 In 1910 , the first vitamin complex was isolated by Japanese scientist <unk> Suzuki , who succeeded in extracting a water @-@ soluble complex of micronutrients from rice bran and named it <unk> acid ( later <unk> ) . He published this discovery in a Japanese scientific journal . When the article was translated into German , the translation failed to state that it was a newly discovered nutrient , a claim made in the original Japanese article , and hence his discovery failed to gain publicity . In 1912 Polish @-@ born biochemist Casimir Funk , working in London , isolated the same complex of micronutrients and proposed the complex be named " vitamine " . It was later to be known as vitamin B3 ( niacin ) , though he described it as " anti @-@ beri @-@ beri @-@ factor " ( which would today be called thiamine or vitamin B1 ) . Funk proposed the hypothesis that other diseases , such as rickets , pellagra , coeliac disease , and scurvy could also be cured by vitamins . Max <unk> a friend and reader of Biochemistry at Bristol University reportedly suggested the " vitamine " name ( from " vital amine " ) . ) . The name soon became synonymous with Hopkins ' " accessory factors " , and , by the time it was shown that not all vitamins are amines , the word was already ubiquitous . In 1920 , Jack Cecil Drummond proposed that the final " e " be dropped to deemphasize the " amine " reference , after researchers began to suspect that not all " <unk> " ( in particular , vitamin A ) have an amine component . 
 In 1930 , Paul Karrer elucidated the correct structure for beta @-@ carotene , the main precursor of vitamin A , and identified other carotenoids . Karrer and Norman Haworth confirmed Albert Szent @-@ Györgyi 's discovery of ascorbic acid and made significant contributions to the chemistry of flavins , which led to the identification of <unk> . For their investigations on carotenoids , flavins and vitamins A and B2 , they both received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1937 . 
 In 1931 , Albert Szent @-@ Györgyi and a fellow researcher Joseph <unk> suspected that " <unk> acid " was actually vitamin C , and gave a sample to Charles Glen King , who proved its anti @-@ scorbutic activity in his long @-@ established guinea pig scorbutic assay . In 1937 , Szent @-@ Györgyi was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discovery . In 1943 , Edward Adelbert <unk> and Henrik Dam were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their discovery of vitamin K and its chemical structure . In 1967 , George Wald was awarded the Nobel Prize ( along with Ragnar Granit and Haldan Keffer Hartline ) for his discovery that vitamin A could participate directly in a physiological process . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The term vitamin was derived from " vitamine " , a compound word coined in 1912 by the Polish biochemist Kazimierz Funk when working at the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine . The name is from vital and amine , meaning amine of life , because it was suggested in 1912 that the organic micronutrient food factors that prevent beriberi and perhaps other similar dietary @-@ deficiency diseases might be chemical amines . This was true of thiamine , but after it was found that other such micronutrients were not amines the word was shortened to vitamin in English . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 Once discovered , vitamins were actively promoted in articles and advertisements in McCall 's , Good Housekeeping , and other media outlets . Marketers enthusiastically promoted cod @-@ liver oil , a source of Vitamin D , as " bottled sunshine " , and bananas as a “ natural vitality food " . They promoted foods such as yeast cakes , a source of B vitamins , on the basis of scientifically @-@ determined nutritional value , rather than taste or appearance . World War II researchers focused on the need to ensure adequate nutrition , especially in processed foods . Robert W. Yoder is credited with first using the term <unk> , in 1942 , to describe the appeal of relying on nutritional supplements rather than on obtaining vitamins from a varied diet of foods . The continuing preoccupation with a healthy lifestyle has led to an obsessive consumption of additives the beneficial effects of which are questionable . 
 = = = Governmental regulation = = = 
 Most countries place dietary supplements in a special category under the general umbrella of foods , not drugs . As a result , the manufacturer , and not the government , has the responsibility of ensuring that its dietary supplement products are safe before they are marketed . Regulation of supplements varies widely by country . In the United States , a dietary supplement is defined under the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 . There is no FDA approval process for dietary supplements , and no requirement that manufacturers prove the safety or efficacy of supplements introduced before 1994 . The Food and Drug Administration must rely on its Adverse Event Reporting System to monitor adverse events that occur with supplements . In 2007 , the US Code of Federal Regulations ( CFR ) Title 21 , part III took effect , regulating GMP practices in the manufacturing , packaging , labeling , or holding operations for dietary supplements . Even though product registration is not required , these regulations mandate production and quality control standards ( including testing for identity , purity and adulterations ) for dietary supplements . In the European Union , the Food Supplements Directive requires that only those supplements that have been proven safe can be sold without a prescription . For most vitamins , <unk> standards have been established . In the United States , the United States Pharmacopeia ( USP ) sets standards for the most commonly used vitamins and preparations thereof . Likewise , monographs of the European Pharmacopoeia ( <unk> ) regulate aspects of identity and purity for vitamins on the European market . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 The reason that the set of vitamins skips directly from E to K is that the vitamins corresponding to letters F – J were either reclassified over time , discarded as false leads , or renamed because of their relationship to vitamin B , which became a complex of vitamins . 
 The German @-@ speaking scientists who isolated and described vitamin K ( in addition to naming it as such ) did so because the vitamin is intimately involved in the coagulation of blood following wounding ( from the German word <unk> ) . At the time , most ( but not all ) of the letters from F through to J were already designated , so the use of the letter K was considered quite reasonable . The table nomenclature of reclassified vitamins lists chemicals that had previously been classified as vitamins , as well as the earlier names of vitamins that later became part of the B @-@ complex . 
 There are other missing B vitamins which were reclassified or determined not to be vitamins . For example , B9 is folic acid and five of the <unk> are in the range B11 through <unk> , forms of other vitamins already discovered , not required as a nutrient by the entire population ( like B10 , PABA for internal use ) , biologically inactive , toxic , or with unclassifiable effects in humans , or not generally recognised as vitamins by science , such as the highest @-@ numbered , which some naturopath practitioners call <unk> and <unk> . There are also nine lettered B complex vitamins ( e.g. Bm ) . There are other D vitamins now recognised as other substances , which some sources of the same type number up to D7 . The controversial cancer treatment <unk> was at one point lettered as vitamin B17 . There appears to be no consensus on any vitamins Q , R , T , V , W , X , Y or Z , nor are there substances officially designated as Vitamins N or I , although the latter may have been another form of one of the other vitamins or a known and named nutrient of another type . 
 = = Anti @-@ vitamins = = 
 Anti @-@ vitamins are chemical compounds that inhibit the absorption or actions of vitamins . For example , avidin is a protein in egg whites that inhibits the absorption of biotin . <unk> is similar to thiamine , vitamin B1 , and inhibits the enzymes that use thiamine . 
 = Kelvin Scottish = 
 Kelvin Scottish <unk> Ltd was a bus operating subsidiary of the Scottish Transport Group based in <unk> , Strathclyde , Scotland . It was formed in March 1985 from parts of Walter Alexander & Sons ( Midland ) Ltd and Central SMT , initially with six depots and a varied fleet of 381 vehicles . 
 The company expanded its operations in Glasgow prior to bus deregulation in 1986 . New services were introduced in competition with Strathclyde Buses , many using Routemaster double @-@ deckers operated by conductors . Kelvin suffered from vehicle maintenance problems , and on two occasions was forced to hire vehicles from other companies to ensure operation of all its routes . After Kelvin lost money in 1987 , the depot at Milngavie was closed and many routes withdrawn . 
 In July 1989 Kelvin was merged with Central Scottish to form Kelvin Central Buses . This company was sold to its employees on privatisation , before being taken over by Strathclyde Buses . It is now part of First Glasgow . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Operating from its head office in <unk> and depots in Old Kilpatrick , Milngavie , Kirkintilloch , Kilsyth , <unk> and Cumbernauld , Kelvin Scottish had an operating area bounded by Loch Lomond to the west , Cumbernauld to the east , the Campsie Fells to the north and the River Clyde to the south . Kelvin was the largest operator in Dunbartonshire and north east Glasgow , and was responsible for urban , rural and interurban services . Its operating area had previously been served by Central SMT and Walter Alexander & Sons ( Midland ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Kelvin was created by the Scottish Bus Group ( SBG ) as a limited company wholly owned by the group in March 1985 in preparation for bus deregulation the following year , and began operation three months later . It was the largest of the four new companies created by the SBG in 1985 , with an initial fleet of 381 vehicles , of which almost 300 were sourced from the former Alexander ( Midland ) fleet . 
 In early 1986 , maintenance problems saw a number of vehicles banned from use by vehicle examiners from the Ministry of Transport . The company was forced to hire eight vehicles from other companies to keep services running ; they remained in the fleet for four weeks while the regular vehicles were repaired . Similar issues resurfaced in February 1987 , when twelve vehicles were hired for three weeks . 
 Although deregulation itself took place in October 1986 , Kelvin received permission to introduce its new routes from 31 August . A number of new services were started in competition with Strathclyde Buses , running from Glasgow to Clydebank , Drumchapel , <unk> and Springburn . Strathclyde responded by extending its services into Clydebank , Cumbernauld , Dumbarton , Kirkintilloch and Milngavie . 
 In 1987 Kelvin made a reported loss of £ 3 million , leading to the closure of the depot at Milngavie . Many of the competing routes introduced in 1986 were withdrawn in July 1987 , and 70 vehicles were taken out of service . Two years later both Kelvin and neighbouring Central were severely affected by a strike by 700 of the companies ' drivers , caused by the dismissal of four shop stewards . 
 In July 1989 , it was announced that SBG was to be privatised . In an effort to make Kelvin Scottish more attractive on the approach to privatisation , Kelvin was merged with Central Scottish to form Kelvin Central Buses Ltd . Upon the merger , Kelvin Scottish ceased trading as a stand @-@ alone subsidiary . 
 = = Subsequent history = = 
 Following the privatisation of Scottish Bus Group in 1991 , Kelvin Central was sold to its employees . In 1994 it was taken over by Strathclyde Buses , which was itself bought out by FirstGroup two years later . 
 Kelvin Central was renamed to First Glasgow ( No.2 ) Ltd. in May 1998 , with a red livery adopted . Its operations are now part of First Glasgow . 
 = = Branding and promotions = = 
 The company initially adopted a simple two @-@ tone blue livery with a logo incorporating the Flag of Scotland and the words " Scottish " and " Kelvin " ; a more striking livery consisting of two lighter shades of blue and yellow applied diagonally was introduced in September 1985 . This was revised in early 1988 to yellow and light blue with a dark blue diagonal stripe . 
 As a result of increased competition in Dunbartonshire following deregulation , Kelvin decided to introduce additional <unk> to its vehicles to establish local identities . From April 1987 onwards Dumbarton BUS appeared on vehicles operating in Dumbarton and Loch <unk> . In October <unk> BUS was introduced onto Kirkintilloch @-@ based vehicles and Cumbernauld 's Buses onto vehicles stationed in that town . 
 In 1988 a new fares scheme , the Glasgow Gold Card , was introduced , offering weekly travel on all SBG routes in the city . A Kelvin Routemaster bus was painted in a gold livery to advertise the ticket , and remained in the livery until withdrawal by Kelvin Central in 1991 . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 The fleet acquired by Kelvin at its formation was very mixed . Of the 381 vehicles initially used , 135 were double @-@ deck . Nine types of vehicles were operated . The largest constituent was 153 Leyland Leopard single @-@ deckers ; the first new buses were six Leyland Tigers ordered by Central Scottish prior to the creation of Kelvin . 
 A fleet of 40 Routemaster buses were purchased from London Transport in 1986 to launch the new services in competition with Strathclyde Buses . Kelvin had not previously employed conductors , but introduced them for these services . This meant the vehicles did not have to spend as long loading at bus stops as one @-@ person operated buses and were able to offer quicker journeys through Glasgow . The Routemasters proved popular with both passengers and staff and continued to operate into the 1990s under successor company Kelvin Central , which was one of the last operators of the type in regular service in Scotland . 
 Although the original fleet did not include any minibuses , a large number of Mercedes @-@ Benz vehicles were introduced from September 1986 on a high @-@ frequency route in central and northern Glasgow ; it did not prove profitable and was converted to full @-@ size operation a year later , with many of the minibuses transferred to other SBG subsidiaries . Another unusual vehicle in the Kelvin fleet was the only Leyland Lynx bought by Scottish Bus Group , which was delivered new in 1989 . Six rare Leyland Lion double @-@ deckers were ordered in 1988 , but owing to a large cut in Kelvin 's peak vehicle requirement they did not enter service with the company and were instead sent to Clydeside Scottish . 
 = Ragnall mac Somairle = 
 Ragnall mac Somairle ( also known in Gaelic as Raghnall , <unk> , <unk> ; in English as Ranald , Reginald ; in Latin as Reginaldus ; and in Old Norse as Rögnvaldr , <unk> , Rǫgnvaldr ; died 1191 / 1192 – c . 1210 / 1227 ) was a significant late twelfth century magnate , seated on the western seaboard of Scotland . He was probably a younger son of Somairle mac Gilla Brigte , Lord of Argyll and his wife , Ragnhildr , daughter of Óláfr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles . The twelfth @-@ century Kingdom of the Isles , ruled by Ragnall 's father and maternal @-@ grandfather , existed within a hybrid Norse @-@ Gaelic milieu , which bordered an ever strengthening and consolidating Kingdom of Scots . 
 In the mid twelfth century , Somairle rose in power and won the Kingdom of the Isles from his brother @-@ in @-@ law . After Somairle perished in battle against the Scots in 1164 , much of his kingdom was probably partitioned between his surviving sons . Ragnall 's allotment appears to have been in the southern Hebrides and Kintyre . In time , Ragnall appears to have risen in power and became the leading member of Somairle 's descendants , the meic Somairle ( or Clann Somairle ) . Ragnall is known to have styled himself " King of the Isles , Lord of Argyll and Kintyre " and " Lord of the Isles " . His claim to the title of king , like other members of the meic Somairle , is derived through Ragnhildr , a member of the Crovan dynasty . 
 Ragnall disappears from record after he and his sons were defeated by his brother Áengus . Ragnall 's death @-@ date is unknown , although certain dates between 1191 and 1227 are all possibilities . Surviving contemporary sources reveal that Ragnall was a significant patron of the Church . Although his father appears to have aligned himself with traditional forms of Christianity , Ragnall himself is associated with newer reformed religious orders from the continent . Ragnall 's now non @-@ existent seal , which pictured a knight on horseback , also indicates that he attempted to present himself as an up @-@ to @-@ date ruler , not unlike his Anglo @-@ French contemporaries of the bordering Kingdom of Scots . 
 Ragnall is known to have left two sons , Ruaidrí and Domnall , who went on to found powerful Hebridean families . Either Ragnall or Ruaidrí had daughters who married Ragnall 's first cousins Rögnvaldr and Óláfr , two thirteenth @-@ century kings of the Crovan dynasty . 
 = = Origins of the meic Somairle = = 
 Ragnall was a son of Somairle mac Gilla Brigte , Lord of Argyll ( died 1164 ) and his wife , Ragnhildr , daughter of Óláfr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles . Somairle and Ragnhildr had at least three sons : Dubgall ( died after 1175 ) , Ragnall , Áengus ( died 1210 ) , and probably also a fourth , Amlaíb . Dubgall appears to have been the couple 's eldest son . Little is certain of the origins of Ragnall 's father , although his marriage suggests that he belonged to a family of some substance . In the first half of the twelfth century , the Hebrides and the Isle of Man ( Mann ) were encompassed within the Kingdom of the Isles , which was ruled by Somairle 's father @-@ in @-@ law , a member of the Crovan dynasty . Somairle 's rise to power may well have begun at about this time , as the few surviving sources from the era suggest that Argyll may have begun to slip from the control of David I , King of Scots ( died 1153 ) . 
 Somairle first appears on record in 1153 , when he rose in rebellion with his nephews , the sons of the royal pretender Máel Coluim mac Alaxandair ( fl . 1134 ) , against the recently enthroned Máel Coluim IV , King of Scots ( died 1165 ) . In the same year , Somairle 's father @-@ in @-@ law was murdered after ruling the Kingdom of the Isles about forty years . Óláfr was succeeded by his son , Guðrøðr ; and sometime afterwards , Somairle participated in a coup within the kingdom by presenting Dubgall as a potential king . In consequence , Somairle and his brother @-@ in @-@ law fought a naval battle in 1156 , after which much of the Hebrides appear to have fallen under Somairle 's control . Two years later , he defeated <unk> outright and took control of the entire island @-@ kingdom . In 1164 , Somairle again rose against the King of Scots , and is recorded in various early sources to have commanded a massive invasion force of men from throughout the Isles , Argyll , Kintyre , and Scandinavian Dublin . Somairle 's host sailed up the Clyde , and made landfall near what is today Renfrew , where they were crushed by the Scots , and he himself was slain . Following Somairle 's demise , Guðrøðr returned to the Isles and seated himself on Mann , although the Hebridean @-@ territories won by Somairle in 1156 were retained by his descendants , the meic Somairle . 
 Although contemporary sources are silent on the matter , it is more than likely that on Somairle 's demise , his territory was divided amongst his surviving sons . The precise allotment of lands is unknown ; even though the division of lands amongst later generations of meic Somairle can be readily discerned , such boundaries are unlikely to have existed during the chaotic twelfth century . It is possible that the territory of the first generation of meic Somairle may have stretched from Glenelg in the north , to the Mull of Kintyre in the south ; with Áengus ruling in the north , Dubgall centred in Lorne ( with possibly the bulk of the inheritance ) , and Ragnall in Kintyre and the southern islands . 
 = = Internal conflict = = 
 Little is known of Somairle 's descendants in the decades following his demise . Dubgall does not appear on record until 1175 , when he is attested far from the Isles in Durham , by the Durham Cathedral 's Liber Vitae . Nothing is certain of Dubgall 's later activities , and it is possible that , by the 1180s , Ragnall had begun to encroach upon Dubgall 's territories and his position as head of the meic Somairle . The fact that Dubgall is not accorded any title by the Liber Vitae could be evidence that Ragnall had displaced him upon Somairle 's demise , or that the chronicle 's account of Dubgall 's connection with the kingship is merely the work of thirteenth @-@ century bias favouring the powerful meic Dubgaill , Dubgaill 's descendants . 
 In 1192 , the Chronicle of Mann records that Ragnall and his sons were defeated in a particularly bloody battle against Áengus . The chronicle does not identify the location of the battle , or elaborate under what circumstances it was fought . However , it is possible that the conflict took place in the northern part of the meic Somairle domain , where some of Áengus ' lands may have lain . Although the hostile contact between Ragnall and Áengus could have been result of Ragnall 's rise in power at Dubgall 's expense , the clash of 1192 may also mark Ragnall 's downfall . 
 One of several ecclesiastical sources that deal specifically with Ragnall is an undated grant to the Cluniac priory at Paisley . Since this grant probably dates to the period after Ragnall 's defeat to Áengus , it may be evidence of an attempt made by Ragnall to secure an alliance with Alan fitz Walter , Steward of Scotland ( died 1204 ) . The patrons of this priory were members of Alan 's own family , a powerful kindred that had recently begun to expand its influence westwards from Renfrew , to the frontier of the Scottish realm and the fringes of Argyll . Since Bute seems to have fallen into the hands of this kindred at about the time of Ragnall 's grant , it is possible that Alan took advantage of the internal conflict between the meic Somairle , and seized the island before 1200 . Alternately , Alan may have received the island from Ragnall as payment for military support against Áengus , who appears to have gained the upper hand over Ragnall by 1192 . Alan 's expansion and influence in territories outwith the bounds of the Scottish kingdom may have been perceived as a threat by William I , King of Scots ( died 1214 ) , and may partly explain the king 's construction of a royal castle at Ayr in 1195 . This fortress extended Scottish royal authority into the outer Firth of Clyde region , and was probably intended to dominate not only William 's peripheral barons , but also independent rulers just beyond the borders of the Scottish realm . In fact , Alan 's westward expansion appears to have suddenly ceased at about 1200 , and may have been a consequence of royal anxiety concerning an alliance with Ragnall . 
 = = Titles and seal = = 
 A royal inspection of Saddell Abbey , dated to 1508 , reveals that Ragnall styled himself in a Latin charter to the abbey rex insularum , dominus de <unk> et <unk> ( " King of the Isles , Lord of Argyll and Kintyre " ) , a title which may indicate that Ragnall claimed all the possessions of his father . In what is probably a later charter , Ragnall is styled in Latin dominus de Inchegal ( " Lord of the Isles " ) in his grant to the priory of Paisley . Although Ragnall 's abandonment of the title " king " in favour of " lord " may not be significant , it could be connected with his defeat to Áengus , or to the expansion and rise in power of Ragnall 's namesake and first cousin Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles ( died 1229 ) . The style dominus de Inchegal is not unlike dominus Insularum ( " Lord of the Isles " ) , a title first adopted in 1336 by Ragnall 's great @-@ great @-@ grandson , Eoin Mac Domhnaill , Lord of the Isles ( died c . 1387 ) , the first of four successive Lords of the Isles . 
 Ragnall 's grant to the priory of Paisley is preserved in two documents : one dates to the late twelfth- or early thirteenth century , and a later copy is contained in an instrument which dates to 1426 . <unk> to the latter document is a description of a seal impressed in white wax , which the fifteenth @-@ century notary alleged to have belonged to Ragnall . On one side , the seal is described to have depicted a ship , filled with men @-@ at @-@ arms . On the reverse side , the seal was said to have depicted a man on horseback , armed with a sword in his hand . 
 Ragnall is the only member of the meic Somairle known to have styled himself in documents rex insularum . His use of both the title and seal are probably derived from those of the leading members of the Crovan dynasty , such as his namesake Rögnvaldr , who not only bore the same title but was said to have borne a similar two @-@ sided seal . The descriptions of the cousins ' seals shows that these devices combined the imagery of a Norse @-@ Gaelic galley and an Anglo @-@ French knight . The maritime imagery probably symbolised the power of a ruler of an island @-@ kingdom , and the equestrian imagery appears to have symbolised feudal society , in which the cult of knighthood had reached its peak in the twelfth- and early thirteenth centuries . The use of such seals by leading Norse @-@ Gaelic lords , seated on the periphery of the kingdoms of Scotland and England , probably illustrates their desire to present themselves as up @-@ to @-@ date and modern to their contemporaries in Anglo @-@ French society . 
 = = Norse @-@ Gaelic namesake = = 
 The Gaelic Ragnall corresponds to the Old Norse Rögnvaldr . Both names were Latinised to Reginaldus . The fact that two closely related Hebridean rulers , Ragnall and Rögnvaldr , shared the same personal names , the same grandfather , and ( at times ) the same title , has perplexed modern historians and possibly mediaeval chroniclers as well . 
 = = = Conquest in Caithness = = = 
 A particular thorn in the side of the Scottish Crown at the turn of the thirteenth century was Haraldr Maddaðarson , Earl of Orkney and Caithness ( died 1206 ) . At some point in the last half of the twelfth century , Haraldr put aside his first wife , a daughter of an Earl of Fife , and married Hvarflöð , a daughter of an Earl of Ross . The latter woman was a member of the powerful meic <unk> , a northern kindred who had been in open conflict with the Scottish Crown throughout the twelfth century . Previous Orcadian earls had extended influence into Ross , and it may well have been through Hvarflöð , and the claims to the earldom that she passed to their children , that drew Haraldr into conflict with the Scots . 
 Howden 's account of events reveals that Haraldr and his family gained control of Moray early in 1196 , and charter evidence suggests that William and royal forces were in the north that summer . Although the Chronicle of Melrose appears to indicate that Hvarflöð and Haraldr 's eldest son was defeated in 1197 , it is possible that this event dates to 1196 instead and relates to William 's aforesaid northern campaign . Fordun 's account records that William successfully asserted royal power in the northern regions ; and Howden 's account species that the king stripped Haraldr of his lordship in Caithness , and handed it over to Haraldr Eiríksson , a claimant to the Orcadian earldom . At some point after this , Howden 's account reveals that Haraldr overcame and killed Haraldr Eiríksson , and the Icelandic Annals specifically date the latter 's fall to 1198 . 
 It may have been at this point where Rögnvaldr entered into the fray . Orkneyinga saga states that , once William learned that Haraldr had taken control of Caithness , Rögnvaldr was tasked by the king to intervene on the Scots ' behalf . Having received the king 's message , the saga records that Rögnvaldr duly gathered an armed host from the Isles , Kintyre , and Ireland , and went forth into Caithness and subdued the region . Howden 's account appears to confirm Rögnvaldr 's participation in the region , albeit under slightly different circumstances , as it states that Haraldr approached the king and attempted to purchase the earldom . William , however , refused the offer , after which Howden 's version of events relates that " Reginaldus " , the son of a Manx king , succeeded in purchasing the earldom . 
 Although Rögnvaldr was likely the sea @-@ king who assisted the Scots against Haraldr , there is evidence suggesting that it may have been Ragnall instead . For example , the saga makes the erroneous statement that Rögnvaldr was descended from Ingibjörg <unk> , a woman who was much more likely to have been Ragnall 's grandmother than Rögnvaldr 's . The saga also notes that Rögnvaldr 's military force was partly gathered from Kintyre , which may be more likely of Ragnall than Rögnvaldr , since Ragnall is known to have specifically styled himself dominus <unk> et <unk> . Also , transcriptions and translations of Howden 's account of the episode have generally stated that " Reginaldus " was a son of Somairle . A recent reanalysis of the main extant version of Howden 's chronicle has shown , however , that this particular part of the text originally read in Latin Reginaldus filius rex de Man , and was later altered to include Somairle 's name above the last three words . Since the source of the original manuscript probably read in Latin Reginaldus filius <unk> , the sea @-@ king in question appears to have been Rögnvaldr rather than Ragnall . 
 Whether Ragnall or Rögnvaldr , William 's act of using a grandson of Óláfr in Caithness may have been an example of the king playing one member of the jarlsaetten against another . The jarlsaetten were people who possessed a claim to an earldom , in accordance with Norse custom , by right of their descent from previous earls . There are earlier instances of such claimants requesting Scottish kings for what they considered their birthright , and William certainly did this when he granted Caithness to Haraldr Eiríksson , a grandson of Rögnvaldr Kali Kolsson , Earl of Orkney . If Ragnall was indeed a descendant of Ingibjörg , a daughter of Páll Hákonarson , Earl of Orkney ( died 1137 ) , he was directly descended from previous Scandinavian earls . Whereas Óláfr 's marriage to Ingibjörg may have meant that Rögnvaldr was regarded as a member of the jarlsaetten as well , and a cousin to Haraldr himself . 
 = = = Scandinavian sojourn = = = 
 There is another instance where an historical source mentions a man who could refer to either Ragnall or Rögnvaldr . The early thirteenth @-@ century Böglunga sögur indicates at one point that men of two Norwegian factions decided to launch a raiding expedition into the Isles . One particular version of the sagas in this source states that Rögnvaldr ( styled " King of Mann and the Isles " ) and Guðrøðr ( styled " King on Mann " ) had not paid their taxes due to the Norwegian kings . In consequence , the saga records that the Isles were ravaged until the two travelled to Norway and reconciled themselves with Ingi <unk> , King of Norway ( died 1217 ) , whereupon the two took their lands from Ingi as a <unk> or fief . 
 The aforesaid kings of Böglunga sögur most likely refer to Rögnvaldr and his son , Guðrøðr ( died 1231 ) , although it is not impossible that the king ' Rögnvaldr ' in this source may instead refer to Ragnall , and that the king ' Guðrøðr ' in it may actually refer to Rögnvaldr himself , since the latter 's father was named Guðrøðr . Whatever the case , the events depicted in Böglunga sögur appear to show that , in the wake of destructive Norwegian activity in the Isles , which may have been some sort of officially sanctioned punishment from Scandinavia , Rögnvaldr and his son ( or instead perhaps Ragnall and Rögnvaldr ) travelled to Norway where they rendered homage to the Norwegian king , and made compensation for unpaid taxes . 
 = = = Muchdanach and Murcardus = = = 
 According to the seventeenth @-@ century History of the MacDonalds , at one point during Ragnall 's tenure his followers fought and slew a certain " Muchdanach " , ruler of <unk> and Ardnamurchan , and thereby acquired the latter 's lands . Muchdanach may be identical to a certain " Murcardus " , a man described by the Chronicle of Mann as one whose " power and energy " were felt throughout the Kingdom of the Isles , and whose slaying is recorded in 1188 , the year of Rögnvaldr 's assumption of the kingship . The chronicle 's brief account of Murcardus appears to reveal that he was a member of the kingdom 's elite , but whether his killing was connected to Rögnvaldr 's accession is unknown . If Muchdanach and Murcardus were indeed the same individual , the History of the MacDonalds would appear to preserve the memory of meic Somairle intrusion into Garmoran , and the episode itself may be an example of feuding between the meic Somairle and Crovan dynasty . 
 = = Ecclesiastical activities = = 
 = = = The Diocese of Argyll = = = 
 The ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the kingdom of Somairle 's predecessors was the far @-@ flung Diocese of the Isles . Little is known of its early history , although its origins may well lie with the Uí Ímair imperium . In the mid twelfth century , during the reign of Ragnall 's maternal uncle Guðrøðr Óláfsson , King of the Isles ( died 1187 ) , the diocese came to be incorporated into the newly established Norwegian Archdiocese of Nidaros . In effect , the political reality of the Diocese of the Isles — its territorial borders and nominal subjection to Norway — appears to have mirrored that of the Kingdom of the Isles . Before the close of the twelfth century , however , evidence of a new ecclesiastical jurisdiction — the Diocese of Argyll — begins to emerge during ongoing contentions between the meic Somairle and the Crovan dynasty . 
 In the early 1190s , the Chronicle of Mann reveals that Cristinus , Bishop of the Isles , an <unk> who was probably a meic Somairle candidate , was deposed and replaced by Michael ( died 1203 ) , a <unk> who appears to have been backed by Rögnvaldr . Cristinus ' tenure appears to have spanned at least two decades , during a sustained period of meic Somairle power in the Isles . His downfall , however , came about at about time of the Crovan dynasty 's resurgence under Rögnvaldr . The latter succeeded his father only years before , in 1187 , and appears to have capitalised upon the infighting amongst the meic Somairle , and possibly even the downfall of Ragnall himself . Although the first known Bishop of Argyll , Haraldr , is accorded a tenure during the first quarter of the thirteenth century , it is likely that there were earlier bishops unknown to surviving sources . In fact , the diocese first appears on record in Liber <unk> , a Papal document dating to the last decade of the twelfth century ; and it is possible that Cristinus , or an unknown successor , or perhaps even Haraldr himself , was the first <unk> bishop . Whatever the case , Cristinus ' tenure in the Isles may have witnessed an ecclesiastical reorientation , or shift of sorts , towards Argyll . 
 Although the early diocesan succession of Argyll is uncertain , the jurisdiction itself appears to have lain outwith the domain of Rögnvaldr 's direct control , allowing the meic Somairle to readily act as religious patrons without his interference . Like the Kingdom of the Isles itself , the great geographic size of the Diocese of the Isles appears to have contributed to the alienation of outlying areas , and to its eventual disintegration . In fact , there is reason to suspect that portions of the new diocese were likewise detached from the Scottish dioceses of Dunblane , Dunkeld , and Moray . Although the Scottish Crown may have welcomed the formation of the new diocese , as it may have formed part of a plan to project Scottish royal authority into the region , the meic Somairle rulers of the region were in fact hostile to the Scots , and the diocese 's seat on Lismore — albeit first recorded in the early fourteenth century — lay far outwith the Scottish king 's sphere of influence . Whatever the case , the foundation of the Diocese of Argyll appears to have been a drawn @-@ out and gradual process that was unlikely to have been the work of one particular man — such as Somerled , Dubgall , or Ragnall himself . Although the early diocese suffered from prolonged vacancies , as only two bishops are recorded to have occupied the see before the turn of the mid thirteenth century , over time it became firmly established in the region , allowing the meic Somairle to retain local control of ecclesiastical power and prestige . 
 = = = Iona Abbey , Iona Nunnery , and St Oran 's Chapel = = = 
 In the sixth century , exiled @-@ Irishman Colum Cille ( died 597 ) seated himself on Iona , from where he oversaw the foundation of numerous daughter @-@ houses in the surrounding islands and mainland . Men of his own choosing , many from his own extended family , were appointed to administrate these dependent houses . In time , a lasting monastic network — an ecclesiastical familia — was centred on the island , and led by his successors . During the ongoing Viking onslaught in the ninth century , the leadership of the familia relocated to Kells . In the twelfth century , Flaithbertach Ua <unk> , Abbot of Derry ( died 1175 ) , the <unk> ( " successor " ) of Colum Cille , relocated from Kells to Derry . In 1164 , at a time when Somairle ruled the entire Kingdom of the Isles , the Annals of Ulster indicates that he attempted to reinstate the monastic familia on Iona under Flaithbertach 's leadership . Unfortunately for Somairle , the proposal was met with significant opposition , and with his death in the same year , his intentions of controlling the kingdom , diocese , as well as the leadership of the familia came to nothing . 
 About forty years after Somairle 's death , a Benedictine monastery was established on Iona . The monastery 's foundation charter dates to December 1203 , which suggests that Ragnall may have been responsible for its erection , as claimed by early modern tradition preserved in the eighteenth @-@ century Book of Clanranald . Be that as it may , there is no hard evidence linking Ragnall to the house 's foundation . Since the charter reveals that the monastery received substantial endowments from throughout the meic Somairle domain , the foundation appears to have been supported by other leading members the kindred , such as Dubgall himself ( if he was still alive ) or his son , Donnchad . The charter placed the monastery under the protection of Pope Innocent III ( died 1216 ) , which secured its episcopal independence from the Diocese of the Isles . However , the price for the privilege of Iona 's papal protection appears to have been the adoption of the Benedictine Rule , and the supersession of the centuries @-@ old institution of Colum Cille . 
 The decision of the meic Somairle to establish the Benedictines on Iona completely contrasted the ecclesiastical actions of Somairle himself , and provoked a prompt and violent response from Colum Cille 's familia . According to the Annals of Ulster , after Cellach , Abbot of Iona built the new monastery in 1204 , a large force of Irishmen , led by the Bishops of Tyrone and <unk> and the Abbots of Derry and Inishowen , made landfall on Iona and burnt the new buildings to the ground . The sentiments of the familia may well be preserved in a contemporary poem which portrays Colum Cille lamenting the violation of his rights , and cursing the meic Somairle . Unfortunately for the familia , the Benedictine presence on Iona was there to stay , and the old monastery of Colum Cille was nearly obliterated by the new monastery . Somairle 's attempt to revive Iona brought him into conflict with secular and ecclesiastical power in northern Ireland . If Ragnall was indeed responsible for the foundation of the Benedictine monastery about four decades afterwards , it may indicate that he was following in his father 's footsteps , and asserting himself as a king in the Isles . 
 Sometime before the end of the twelfth century , or else early in the thirteenth century after the foundation of the Benedictine monastery , an Augustinian nunnery was established just south of the site . The Book of Clanranald reveals that Ragnall was traditionally regarded as its founder , and states his sister , Bethóc , was remembered as a prioress there . Although this source 's claim that the nunnery was originally a Benedictine foundation is erroneous , its statement that Bethóc was a " religious woman " is corroborated by the seventeenth @-@ century record of an inscribed stone on the island , said to have read in Gaelic " <unk> <unk> <unk> vic <unk> <unk> " . Ragnall , therefore , may well have founded the nunnery , and his sister could well have been its first prioress . Like the abbey itself , the remains of the nunnery reveal Irish influences , indicating that the Augustinian nunnery likely had Irish affiliations . In fact , apparent similarities between the layout of the abbey and that of the original church of the cathedral priory at Downpatrick suggests that the Benedictine foundation on Iona was related to the earlier introduction of the same order at Downpatrick by John de Courcy ( died 1219 ? ) . The latter was an English adventurer who had conquered Ulster about twenty years previous , and had married <unk> ( died in or after 1219 ) , Rögnvaldr 's sister . The possible ecclesiastical connections between the Downpatrick and Iona , therefore , may partly exemplify the complex interrelationships within the Irish Sea region . 
 Iona is popularly said to have been the traditional burial place of Scottish kings from the advent of the <unk> dynasty . Contemporary evidence for such claims , however , date only to about the twelfth- or thirteenth centuries . The so @-@ called traditions , therefore , appear to have been constructed to advance Iona 's prestige as a royal burial site , and may well have been instigated and encouraged by the meic Somairle . Iona was certainly the burial place of Ragnall 's later descendants , and leading members of West Highland nobility . The oldest intact building on the island is St Oran 's Chapel . Judging from certain Irish influences in its architecture , the chapel is thought to date to about the mid twelfth century . The building is known to have been used as a mortuary house by Ragnall 's later descendants , and it is possible that either he or his father were responsible for its erection . On the other hand , it is also possible that the chapel was constructed by the kings of the Crovan dynasty : either Guðrøðr , who was buried on the island in 1188 , or else Guðrøðr 's father ( Ragnall 's maternal @-@ grandfather ) Óláfr . 
 = = = Saddell Abbey = = = 
 A member of the meic Somairle , possibly Ragnall himself , or else his father , could have founded Saddell Abbey , a rather small Cistercian house , situated in the traditional heartland of the meic Somairle . This , now ruinous monastery , apparently a daughter house of <unk> Abbey , is the only Cistercian house known to have been founded in the West Highlands . Surviving evidence from the monastery itself suggests that Ragnall was probably the founder . For example , when the monastery 's charters were confirmed in 1393 by Pope Clement VII ( died 1394 ) , and in 1498 and 1508 by James IV , King of Scots ( died 1513 ) , the earliest grant produced by the house was that of Ragnall . Furthermore , the confirmations of 1393 and 1508 specifically state that Ragnall was indeed the founder , as does clan tradition preserved in the Book of Clanranald . However , evidence that Somairle was the founder may be preserved in a thirteenth @-@ century French list of Cistercian houses which names a certain " <unk> " under the year 1160 . 
 One possibility is that , whilst Somairle may well have begun the planning of a Cistercian house at Saddell , it was actually Ragnall who provided it with its first endowments . Somairle 's attempt to relocate Colum Cille 's familia to Iona , however , was undertaken during an era when Cistercians were already established in Ireland and the Isles , which may be evidence that Somairle was something of an " ecclesiastical traditionalist " who found newer reformed orders of continental Christianity unpalatable . Whatever the case , the ecclesiastical activities of his immediate descendants , especially the foundations and endowments of Ragnall himself , reveal that the meic Somairle were not averse to such continental orders . During his career , Somairle waged war upon the Scots and perished in an invasion of Scotland proper , which could suggest that Ragnall 's ecclesiastical activities were partly undertaken to improve relations with the King of Scots . Additionally , in an age when monasteries were often built by rulers as status symbols of their wealth and power , the foundations and endowments of Ragnall may have been undertaken as a means to portray himself as an up @-@ to @-@ date ruler . 
 = = Death = = 
 The year and circumstances of Ragnall 's death are uncertain , as surviving contemporary sources failed to mark his demise . According to clan tradition preserved in the Book of Clanranald , Ragnall may have died in 1207 . However , no corroborating evidence supports this date , and there is reason to believe that dates in this source are unreliable . In fact , this source <unk> Somairle 's death by sixteen years , which may indicate that Ragnall himself died some sixteen years earlier ( in 1191 ) . If this date is correct then Ragnall 's death may be related to his defeat suffered at the hands of his brother . However , the Chronicle of Mann , which records the 1192 conflict between Ragnall and Áengus , gives no hint of Ragnall 's demise in its account . Another possibility is that Ragnall may have been slain sometime around 1209 and 1210 , during yet more internal conflict amongst the meic Somairle . 
 A reanalysis of the Book of Clanranald has shown that , instead of 1207 , this source may actually date Ragnall 's demise to 1227 . However , this date may well be too late for man who was an adult by 1164 . Ragnall 's grant to Paisley may leave clues to his fate . The similarity between this charter and another granted to the priory by his son , Domnall , may be evidence that the documents were drawn up at about the same time . If so , Ragnall 's charter may be evidence that he survived his defeat at the hands of Áengus , and the two charters may indicate that Ragnall was nearing the end of his life . Ragnall 's grant may also indicate that he entered into a confraternity with the monks at Paisley . If the charter was indeed granted near the end of his life , it is also possible that Ragnall ended his days there . Since the priory was one of the religious houses founded by the meic Somairle , his possible retirement there may partly explain why Ragnall disappears from record after 1192 . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 The name of Ragnall 's wife , " <unk> " , as recorded in their grant to the priory of Paisley , may be an attempt to represent the Gaelic name <unk> in Latin . According to late Hebridean tradition , preserved in the garbled History of the MacDonalds , Ragnall was married to " <unk> 's daughter , or , as some say , to a sister of Thomas Randel , Earl of Murray " . This tradition cannot be correct due to its chronology , since Thomas Randolph , the first Earl of Moray , and his like @-@ named son and successor , both died in 1332 . One possibility , however , is that the tradition may instead refer to an earlier earl — Uilleam mac Donnchada ( died 1151 – 1154 ) . If so , Ragnall 's son , Domnall , may have been named after Uilleam 's son , Domnall ( died 1187 ) . The latter was a leading member of the meic Uilleim , a kindred who were in open conflict against the Scottish kings from the late twelfth- to early thirteenth centuries . 
 Ragnall is known to have left two sons : Ruaidrí ( died 1247 ) and Domnall . Domnall 's line , the meic Domnaill ( or Clann Domnaill ) , went on to produce the powerful Lords of the Isles who dominated the entire Hebrides and expansive mainland @-@ territories from the first half of the <unk> to the late fifteenth centuries . Ruaidrí founded the meic Ruaidrí ( or Clann Ruaidrí ) , a more obscure kindred who were seated in Garmoran . Ruaidrí seems to have been the senior of Ragnall 's sons , and is first recorded by name in 1214 . Four years previous , Áengus and his sons are recorded by the Chronicle of Mann to have been slain by Ragnall 's sons . This particular record could be evidence that Áengus had succeeded Ragnall , after which the latter 's sons extinguished Áengus 's line , and Ruaidrí assumed control of the meic Somairle succession . 
 It is very likely that either Ragnall or Ruaidrí had daughters who married Rögnvaldr and his younger half @-@ brother , Óláfr Guðrøðarson ( died 1237 ) . The chronicle states that Rögnvaldr had Óláfr marry " Lauon " , the daughter of a certain nobleman from Kintyre , who was also the sister of his own ( unnamed ) wife . The precise identification of this father @-@ in @-@ law is uncertain , although historical sources concerning the contemporary meic Somairle link this kindred with Kintyre more than any other region , and both Ragnall and Ruaidrí were contemporaneously styled " Lord of Kintyre " . It is possible that the first marriage took place sometime before 1210 , perhaps not long after 1200 , considering the age of Rögnvaldr 's son , Guðrøðr . These unions appear to have been orchestrated to patch up relations between the meic Somairle and the Crovan dynasty , rival kindreds who had bitterly contested the kingship of the Isles for about sixty years . In fact , it is possible that Rögnvaldr 's kingship was formally recognised by Ruaidrí , the leading meic Somairle dynast , who thereby established himself as a leading magnate within a reunified Kingdom of the Isles . 
 Ragnall is chiefly remembered in early modern Hebridean tradition as the genealogical link between Somairle and Domnall later 's descendants . Unsupported claims made by the Book of Clanranald present Ragnall as " the most distinguished of the Gall or Gaedhil for prosperity , sway of generosity , and feats of arms " , and report that he " received a cross from Jerusalem " . The latter statement may imply that Ragnall undertook ( or planned to undertake ) a pilgrimage or crusade . Although Ragnall 's involvement in such an enterprise is not impossible , the claim is uncorroborated by contemporary sources . The mid sixteenth @-@ century description of the Hebrides and the Islands of the Clyde authored by Donald Monro ( died in or after 1575 ) reveals that Ragnall 's reign was still remembered in the Isles during the sixteenth century . In this account , Monro credited Ragnall with establishing the law code administered by leading Hebrideans hundreds of years after his floruit . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Hurricane Connie = 
 Hurricane Connie in August 1955 contributed to significant flooding across the eastern United States , just days before Hurricane Diane affected the same general area . Connie formed on August 3 from a tropical wave in the eastern Atlantic Ocean . It moved quickly west @-@ northwestward , strengthening into a well @-@ developed hurricane by August 5 . Initially , it posed a threat to the Lesser Antilles , although it passed about 50 mi ( 80 km ) north of the region . The outer rainbands produced hurricane @-@ force wind gusts and intense precipitation , reaching 8 @.@ 65 in ( 220 mm ) in Puerto Rico . In the United States Virgin Islands , three people died due to the hurricane , and a few homes were destroyed . In Puerto Rico , Connie destroyed 60 homes and caused crop damage . After affecting Puerto Rico , Connie turned to the northwest , reaching peak winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . The hurricane weakened while slowing and turning to the north , and struck North Carolina on August 12 at Category 2 intensity , the first of three damaging tropical cyclones in the 1955 Atlantic hurricane season to hit the state . 
 Ahead of the storm , the United States Weather Bureau issued widespread hurricane warnings , resulting in 14 @,@ 000 people evacuating southeastern North Carolina . Connie produced strong winds , high tides , and heavy rainfall as it moved ashore , causing heavy crop damage and 27 deaths in the state . Connie tracked roughly along the eastern coast of Virginia before turning northwest , and it progressed inland until dissipating on August 15 near Sault Ste . Marie , Michigan . Four people were killed in Washington , D.C. due to a traffic accident . In Chesapeake Bay , Connie capsized a boat , killing 14 people and prompting a change in Coast Guard regulation . There were six deaths each in Pennsylvania and New Jersey , and eleven deaths in New York , where record rainfall flooded homes and subways . At least 225 @,@ 000 people lost power during the storm . Damage in the United States totaled around $ 86 million , although the rains from Connie contributed to flooding from Hurricane Diane that caused $ 700 million in damage . The remnants of Connie destroyed a few houses and boats in Ontario and killed three people in Ontario . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical cyclone on August 3 to the west of the Cape Verde islands , based on reports from two ships . It moved rapidly to the west @-@ northwest , quickly intensifying into Tropical Storm Connie . A Hurricane Hunters flight on August 4 reported a developing eye feature , and the next day Connie rapidly strengthened into a 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) major hurricane . On August 6 , it passed about 60 mi ( 97 km ) north of the Lesser Antilles and Puerto Rico . By that time , Connie had attained peak winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) , making it a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson scale . 
 For four days , Connie maintained its peak intensity as its track shifted from the west @-@ northwest toward the northwest , passing to the northeast of the Bahamas as it rounded a large ridge . On August 7 , its eye had decreased to a diameter of 7 mi ( 11 km ) . By August 10 , the eye had lost its definition as Connie slowed its northwest track . It began a west @-@ northwest drift due to slight Fujiwhara interaction with developing Hurricane Diane to its southeast , as well as a building ridge to its northeast . The hurricane turned to the north on August 11 and was steadily weakening , due to the combination of upwelling and entrainment of cool air . Connie turned toward the north @-@ northeast on August 12 , by which time it had weakened to a minimal hurricane . 
 Late on August 12 , Hurricane Connie made landfall near Fort Macon State Park in North Carolina . According to the Atlantic hurricane database , Connie moved ashore as a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , although the Hurricane Research Division initially suggested that the hurricane hit North Carolina with winds of at least 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) but those reports were found to be too high in reanalysis . Connie briefly moved offshore before striking land again near Cape Charles along the Eastern Shore of Virginia . It progressed inland , weakening to a tropical storm over Virginia and moving northward through the Chesapeake Bay . Connie turned to the northwest , passing through much of Pennsylvania before weakening to a tropical depression near the Pennsylvania / New York border . After crossing Lake Ontario and southwestern Ontario , the system moved through Lake Huron , dissipating on August 15 near Sault Ste . Marie , Michigan . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On August 5 , Hurricane Connie began to become an apparent threat to the northeastern Caribbean Islands , with maximum winds in the storm reaching 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . The National Weather Bureau issued hurricane warnings for Barbuda , Saba and Antigua . The Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico were placed on hurricane alert as warnings were possible later that day . After Connie affected Puerto Rico , a storm warning was issued for the northern coast of the Dominican Republic , and a hurricane warning was issued for the eastern Bahamas . 
 While Connie was meandering in the western Atlantic Ocean , its potential track posed problems for forecasters . On August 7 , a hurricane warning was issued from North Carolina to Norfolk , Virginia , with a hurricane alert further north to New York City . The Weather Bureau later extended the hurricane warnings to Delaware Breakwater , with storm warnings further northeast to Provincetown , Massachusetts . The alert for North Carolina was up for about three days until Connie moved inland . 
 Ahead of the storm , the United States military flew planes away from the coast to safer shelters further inland . Two people were killed when they crashed the Navy plane they were evacuating . Naval ships rode out the storm at sea , while small boats were secured at port . The American Red Cross opened shelters and mobilized 41 officials with experience in hurricanes . The Coast Guard ordered four towns along beaches to evacuate , and overall about 14 @,@ 000 people evacuated the coastline , some to the 79 Red Cross shelters opened up . About 2 @,@ 000 people evacuated from flood @-@ prone areas in New Bern , North Carolina . In Philadelphia , the Boy Scouts evacuated 800 scouts from Camp <unk> due to the threat of the hurricane . The threat of Connie also canceled a flight by President Dwight Eisenhower from Gettysburg to Washington , D.C. , prompting him to travel instead by car . Residents were also evacuated in coastal portions of New Jersey . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 As the hurricane passed about 50 mi ( 80 km ) north of the Lesser Antilles , the outer rainbands of Connie produced wind gusts as high as 104 mph ( 166 km / h ) on Tortola in the British Virgin Islands . Wind gusts reached 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) in Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands , although there were estimates of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) wind gusts on Saint Thomas . The outer rainbands of Connie also produced heavy rainfall in the northeastern Caribbean . The highest precipitation total in Puerto Rico was 8 @.@ 65 in ( 220 mm ) along the lower Río Blanco , of which 7 @.@ 50 in ( 191 mm ) fell in one day . Rainfall reached 7 @.@ 04 in ( 179 mm ) in Charlotte Amalie on Saint Thomas . Two people drowned on the island , and one person was electrocuted due to Connie 's passage . The hurricane also destroyed a few shacks and boats on Saint Thomas . Along the northern coast of Puerto Rico , the threat of Connie forced 40 @,@ 000 people to evacuate their homes . High waves and other impact from the storm destroyed 60 poorly @-@ built houses . Connie also damaged crops and utilities in Puerto Rico . 
 = = = United States and Canada = = = 
 As Connie struck North Carolina , it produced sustained winds of 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) in Morehead City , with gusts to 83 mph ( 134 km / h ) . Wind gusts near where the hurricane moved ashore reached 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , although it was not confirmed whether the gust was estimated or measured . Frying Pan Shoals offshore the state reported a gust of 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) . Along Connie 's western periphery , the rainbands spawned at least six tornadoes , of which five in South Carolina and one in North Carolina . The hurricane produced tides that were up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal while moving slowly ashore , which resulted in significant beach erosion . Tides were higher at <unk> , North Carolina than during Hurricane Hazel the previous October , and many piers that were rebuilt after Hazel were damaged or destroyed by Connie . The storm surge flooded low @-@ lying portions of Wilmington and destroyed 40 buildings in Myrtle Beach , South Carolina . High waves in advance of the storm flooded coastal roads along the Outer Banks . Rainfall amounts of over 10 in ( 250 mm ) in the area west of where Connie made landfall . Stream flooding occurred as far inland as Raleigh , but was most significant near the coast . Along the Pamlico River in Washington National Guardsmen were ordered to help about 1 @,@ 000 people evacuate during the storm . Outer rainbands knocked out power lines in coastal North Carolina , and flooding @-@ induced rainfall closed U.S. Route 17 near New Bern . Throughout North Carolina , the hurricane caused about $ 40 million in damage , of which about 75 % was from crop damage . There were 27 deaths in the state related to Connie , including traffic deaths , drownings , people in damaged buildings , and electrocutions . Damage was minimal in Myrtle Beach , South Carolina . 
 Hurricane @-@ force winds extended into Virginia . In the state , severe river flooding was reported from the coast , inland to Richmond , which caused localized damage . Ten stations in the state , and sixteen in neighboring Maryland , reached the highest stage on record . As Connie progressed northward , it continued to drop significant amounts of precipitation . Totals of over 10 in ( 250 mm ) were reported on both sides of the Chesapeake Bay , in Pennsylvania , and in southeastern New York . Rainfall in Richmond , Virginia totaled 8 @.@ 79 in ( 223 mm ) on August 12 , breaking the day 's precipitation record . Record rainfall also occurred in Philadelphia and New York City . The highest precipitation related to Connie was 13 @.@ 24 in ( 336 mm ) at Fort Schuyler in New York . Rainfall also extended as far west as Michigan and as far east as Maine . Across the northeastern United States , high rainfall from the hurricane resulted in disastrous flooding , along with Diane which moved ashore four days after Connie ; this was due to unusually moist air across the region , which resulted from above average water and air temperatures . Many areas were in drought conditions before the flooding . The combination of strong winds and high waves quickly wrecked a 125 ft ( 38 m ) schooner in the Chesapeake Bay . <unk> near Fairhaven , Maryland , the boat , named the Levin J. Marvel , was 64 years old , and was described as " unseaworthy " when it left from Annapolis , Maryland . Of the 23 passengers and four crew members , 14 people drowned , making it " one of the worst maritime calamities in the history of Tidewater Maryland " , as described by The Baltimore Sun . The other passengers were later rescued , some of whom after holding onto wreckage . 
 In Virginia , flooding washed out a portion of the Richmond , Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad near Lankford , and covered portions of U.S. 1 and U.S. 301 . The storm downed trees and caused scattered power outages for at least 5 @,@ 000 people in the state . In Washington D.C. , a car accident caused by slick roads resulted in the death of four people after a car was sideswiped and knocked into a swollen creek where the occupants drowned . In Delaware , the rains caused flooding that was described as " inconsequential " by the United States Geological Survey , due to preceding drought conditions . Rainfall reached 9 in ( 230 mm ) in southeastern Pennsylvania , causing flooding that entered basements in low @-@ lying areas and covered roads . Two people drowned after floods swept away their cars . There were six deaths in the state , and also six deaths in neighboring New Jersey . Hurricane Connie brought the heaviest rain seen in New York in over 50 years during its passage , dropping 5 @.@ 32 in ( 135 mm ) in New York City within a 20 @-@ hour span . Large areas of the city , including subways and thousands of houses , were flooded , and about 100 @,@ 000 people were left without power . Between New York and New Jersey , about 225 @,@ 000 people lost power . High winds and tides from the storm caused the cancellation of ferry service , and forced LaGuardia Airport to temporarily shut down after it was flooded 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) deep . The rains caused heavy damage across southeastern New York , and 11 people were killed across the state . In coastal Connecticut , the rainfall from Connie increased levels along streams , but there was little damage . Overall damage in the United States was estimated at about $ 86 @,@ 065 @,@ 000 , mostly in North Carolina , Virginia , and Maryland . 
 Further inland , gusts from Connie reached 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) along Lake Huron in Michigan , which caused high waves that damaged or sank many small boats . Damage in the state was estimated at $ 150 @,@ 000 . Before Connie affected Canada , residents in Humber valley prepared for potential evacuations , after Hurricane Hazel in the previous October produced deadly flooding . When the remnants of Connie entered Ontario as a tropical depression on August 23 , it continued to produce winds of up to 46 mph ( 75 km / h ) , and the storm dropped 2 @.@ 56 in ( 65 mm ) of rainfall near the Great Lakes . In Burlington , 27 boats were destroyed , and one person drowned in Lake Erie after his boat sank . Two other people drowned in the province . Connie destroyed six houses and damaged several others due to high waves . The storm also caused power outages and damage to the tobacco crop . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Flooding caused by Connie generally did not attract much media attention ; however , the floods were important in setting the conditions for later significant flooding across the northeastern United States . Just five days after Connie struck North Carolina , Hurricane Diane affected the same area , but instead of continuing to the northwest it turned to the northeast . Diane produced further rainfall in already wet areas from Connie . Damage from Diane totaled at least $ 700 million , and six states were declared federal disaster areas from the combined hurricanes ' impact ; this allowed federal assistance for the affected areas . 
 The loss of the Levin J. Marvel during the hurricane prompted the United States Congress to pass a law in 1956 , which allowed the Coast Guard to inspect all vessels with more than six passengers ; the previous law only allowed inspections for boats of more than 700 tons , greatly higher than the 183 tons that the Marvel weighed . A federal courthouse charged the inexperienced captain with negligence , giving him a one @-@ year probation . 
 Due to its destructive impacts , the name Connie was retired , and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . 
 = Axis naval activity in Australian waters = 
 Although Australia was remote from the main battlefronts , there was considerable Axis naval activity in Australian waters during the Second World War . A total of 54 German and Japanese warships and submarines entered Australian waters between 1940 and 1945 and attacked ships , ports and other targets . Among the best @-@ known attacks are the sinking of HMAS Sydney by a German raider in November 1941 , the bombing of Darwin by Japanese naval aircraft in February 1942 , and the Japanese midget submarine attack on Sydney Harbour in May 1942 . In addition , many Allied merchant ships were damaged or sunk off the Australian coast by submarines and mines . Japanese submarines also shelled several Australian ports and submarine @-@ based aircraft flew over several Australian capital cities . 
 The Axis threat to Australia developed gradually and until 1942 was limited to sporadic attacks by German armed merchantmen . The level of Axis naval activity peaked in the first half of 1942 when Japanese submarines conducted anti @-@ shipping patrols off Australia 's coast , and Japanese naval aviation attacked several towns in northern Australia . The Japanese submarine offensive against Australia was renewed in the first half of 1943 but was broken off as the Allies pushed the Japanese onto the defensive . Few Axis naval vessels operated in Australian waters in 1944 and 1945 , and those that did had only a limited impact . 
 Due to the episodic nature of the Axis attacks and the relatively small number of ships and submarines committed , Germany and Japan were not successful in disrupting Australian shipping . While the Allies were forced to deploy substantial assets to defend shipping in Australian waters , this did not have a significant impact on the Australian war effort or American @-@ led operations in the South West Pacific Area . 
 = = Australia Station and Australian defences = = 
 The definition of " Australian waters " used throughout this article is , broadly speaking , the area which was designated the Australia Station prior to the outbreak of war . This vast area consisted of the waters around Australia and eastern New Guinea , and stretching south to Antarctica . From east to west , it stretched from 170 ° east in the Pacific Ocean to 80 ° east in the Indian Ocean , and from north to south it stretched from the Equator to the Antarctic . While the eastern half of New Guinea was an Australian colonial possession during the Second World War and fell within the Australia Station , the Japanese operations in these waters formed part of the New Guinea and Solomon Islands Campaigns and were not directed at Australia . 
 The defence of the Australia Station was the Royal Australian Navy 's main concern throughout the war . While RAN ships frequently served outside Australian waters , escort vessels and minesweepers were available to protect shipping in the Australia Station at all times . These escorts were supported by a small number of larger warships , such as cruisers and armed merchant cruisers , for protection against surface raiders . While important military shipping movements were escorted from the start of the war , convoys were not instituted in Australian waters until June 1942 . The Australian naval authorities did , however , close ports to shipping at various times following real or suspected sightings of enemy warships or mines prior to June 1942 . 
 The Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) was also responsible for the protection of shipping within the Australia Station . Throughout the war , RAAF aircraft escorted convoys and conducted reconnaissance and anti @-@ submarine patrols from bases around Australia . The main types of aircraft used for maritime patrol were Avro Ansons , Bristol Beauforts , Consolidated PBY Catalinas and Lockheed Hudsons . Following the outbreak of the Pacific War , RAAF fighter squadrons were also stationed to protect key Australian ports and escorted shipping in areas where air attack was feared . 
 The Allied naval forces assigned to the Australia Station were considerably increased following Japan 's entry into the war and the beginning of the United States military build @-@ up in Australia . These naval forces were supported by a large increase in the RAAF 's maritime patrol force and the arrival of United States Navy patrol aircraft . Following the initial Japanese submarine attacks , a convoy system was instituted between Australian ports , and by the end of the war the RAAF and RAN had escorted over 1 @,@ 100 convoys along the Australian coastline . As the battlefront moved to the north and attacks in Australian waters became less frequent , the number of ships and aircraft assigned to shipping protection duties within the Australia Station was considerably reduced . 
 In addition to the air and naval forces assigned to protect shipping in Australian waters , fixed defences were constructed to protect the major Australian ports . The Australian Army was responsible for developing and manning coastal defences to protect ports from attacks by enemy surface raiders . These defences commonly consisted of a number of fixed guns defended by anti @-@ aircraft guns and infantry . The Army 's coastal defences were considerably expanded as the threat to Australia increased between 1940 and 1942 , and reached their peak strength in 1944 . The Royal Australian Navy was responsible for developing and manning harbour defences in Australia 's main ports . These defences consisted of fixed anti @-@ submarine booms and mines supported by small patrol craft , and were also greatly expanded as the threat to Australia increased . The RAN also laid defensive minefields in Australian waters from August 1941 . 
 While the naval and air forces available for the protection of shipping in Australian waters were never adequate to defeat a heavy or coordinated attack , they proved sufficient to mount defensive patrols against the sporadic and generally cautious attacks mounted by the Axis navies during the war . 
 = = 1939 – 1941 = = 
 = = = German surface raiders in 1940 = = = 
 While German surface raiders operated in the western Indian Ocean in 1939 and early 1940 , they did not enter Australian waters until the second half of 1940 . The first Axis ships in Australian waters were the unarmed Italian ocean liners Remo and Romolo , which were in Australian waters when Fascist Italy entered the war on 11 June 1940 , Eastern Australian Time . While Remo was docked at Fremantle and was easily captured , Romolo proved harder to catch , as she had left Brisbane on 5 June bound for Italy . Following an air and sea search , Romolo was intercepted by HMAS Manoora near Nauru on 12 June and was scuttled by her captain to avoid capture . 
 The German surface raider Orion was the first Axis warship to operate in Australian waters during World War II . After operating off the northern tip of New Zealand and the South Pacific , Orion entered Australian waters in the Coral Sea in August 1940 and closed to within 120 nmi ( 140 mi ; 220 km ) north @-@ east of Brisbane on 11 August . Following this , Orion headed east and operated off New Caledonia before proceeding south into the Tasman Sea , sinking the merchant ship <unk> south @-@ west of Noumea on 16 August and the British merchant ship Turakina in the Tasman Sea four days later . Orion sailed south @-@ west after sinking Turakina , passing south of Tasmania , and operated without success in the Great Australian Bight in early September . While Orion laid four dummy mines off Albany , Western Australia on 2 September , she departed to the south @-@ west after being spotted by an Australian aircraft the next day . After unsuccessfully patrolling in the Southern Ocean , Orion sailed for the Marshall Islands to refuel , arriving there on 10 October . 
 Pinguin was the next raider to enter Australian waters . Pinguin entered the Indian Ocean from the South Atlantic in August 1940 and arrived off Western Australia in October . Pinguin captured the 8 @,@ 998 long tons ( 9 @,@ 142 t ) Norwegian tanker Storstad off North West Cape on 7 October and proceeded east with the captured ship . Pinguin laid mines between Sydney and Newcastle on 28 October , and Storstad laid mines off the Victorian coast on the nights of 29 – 31 October . Pinguin also laid further mines off Adelaide in early November . The two ships then sailed west for the Indian Ocean . Pinguin and Storstad were not detected during their operations off Australia 's eastern and southern coasts , and succeeded in sinking three ships . Mines laid by Storstad sank two ships off Wilsons Promontory in early November , and the mines laid off Sydney by Pinguin sank one ship and a further merchant ship was damaged after striking a mine off Adelaide . Pinguin added to her tally of successes in Australian waters by sinking three merchant ships in the Indian Ocean during November . 
 On 7 December 1940 , the German raiders Orion and Komet arrived off the Australian protectorate of Nauru . During the next 48 hours , the two ships sank four merchant ships off the undefended island . Heavily loaded with survivors from their victims , the raiders departed for Emirau Island where they unloaded their prisoners . After an unsuccessful attempt to lay mines off Rabaul on 24 December , Komet made a second attack on Nauru on 27 December and shelled the island 's phosphate plant and dock facilities . This attack was the last Axis naval attack in Australian waters until November 1941 . 
 Consequences of the raid on Nauru led to serious concern about the supply of phosphates from there and nearby Ocean Island , though the general situation with naval forces allowed only limited response to threats to the isolated islands . There was some redeployment of warships and a proposal to deploy six inch naval guns to the islands despite provisions of the mandate prohibiting fortification but a shortage of such guns resulted in a change to a proposed two field guns for each island . The most serious effect of the raid was the fall in phosphate output in 1941 though decisions as early as 1938 to increase stockpiles of raw rock in Australia mitigated that decline . Another consequence was the institution of the first Trans @-@ Tasman commercial convoys with Convoy <unk> composed of Empire Star , Port Chalmers , Empress of Russia , and Maunganui leaving Sydney 30 December 1940 for Auckland escorted by HMNZS Achilles . 
 = = = German surface raiders in 1941 = = = 
 Following the raids on Nauru , Komet and Orion sailed for the Indian Ocean , passing through the Southern Ocean well to the south of Australia in February and March 1941 respectively . Komet re @-@ entered the Australia station in April en route to New Zealand , and Atlantis sailed east through the southern extreme of the Australia Station in August . Until November , the only casualties from Axis ships on the Australia Station were caused by mines laid by Pinguin in 1940 . The small trawler <unk> was sunk with the loss of seven lives after striking a mine off the New South Wales coast on 26 March 1941 , and two ratings from a Rendering Mines Safe party were killed while attempting to defuse a mine which had washed ashore in South Australia on 14 July . 
 On 19 November 1941 , the Australian light cruiser HMAS Sydney — which had been highly successful in the Battle of the Mediterranean — encountered the disguised German raider Kormoran , approximately 150 mi ( 130 nmi ; 240 km ) south west of Carnarvon , Western Australia . Sydney intercepted Kormoran and demanded that she prove her assumed identity as the Dutch freighter Straat Malakka . During the interception , Sydney 's captain brought his ship dangerously close to Kormoran . As a result , when Kormoran was unable to prove her identity and avoid a battle she had little hope of surviving , the raider was able to use all her weaponry against Sydney . In the resulting battle , Kormoran and Sydney were both crippled , with Sydney sinking with the loss of all her 645 crew and 78 of Kormoran 's crew being either killed in the battle or dying before they could be rescued by passing ships . 
 Kormoran was the only Axis ship to conduct attacks in Australian waters during 1941 and the last Axis surface raider to enter Australian waters until 1943 . There is no evidence to support claims that a Japanese submarine participated in the sinking of HMAS Sydney . The only German ship to enter the Australia Station during 1942 was the blockade runner and supply ship Ramses , which was sunk by HMAS Adelaide and HNLMS Jacob van <unk> on 26 November , shortly after Ramses left Batavia bound for France . All of Ramses ' crew survived the sinking and were taken prisoner . 
 = = 1942 = = 
 The naval threat to Australia increased dramatically following the outbreak of war in the Pacific . During the first half of 1942 , the Japanese mounted a sustained campaign in Australian waters , with Japanese submarines attacking shipping and aircraft carriers conducting a devastating attack on the strategic port of Darwin . In response to these attacks the Allies increased the resources allocated to protecting shipping in Australian waters . 
 = = = Early Japanese submarine patrols ( January – March 1942 ) = = = 
 The first Japanese submarines to enter Australian waters were I @-@ 121 , I @-@ 122 , I @-@ 123 and I @-@ 124 , from the Imperial Japanese Navy 's ( IJN 's ) Submarine Squadron 6 . Acting in support of the Japanese offensive in the Netherlands East Indies these boats laid minefields in the approaches to Darwin and the Torres Strait between 12 and 18 January 1942 . These mines did not sink or damage any Allied ships . 
 After completing their mine laying missions the four Japanese boats took station off Darwin to provide the Japanese fleet with warning of Allied naval movements . On 20 January 1942 the Australian Bathurst @-@ class corvettes HMAS Deloraine , Katoomba and Lithgow sank I @-@ 124 near Darwin . This was the only full @-@ sized submarine sunk by the Royal Australian Navy in Australian waters during World War II . Being the first accessible ocean @-@ going IJN submarine lost after Pearl Harbor , USN divers attempted to enter I @-@ 124 in order to obtain its code books , but were unsuccessful . 
 Following the conquest of the western Pacific the Japanese mounted a number of reconnaissance patrols into Australian waters . Three submarines ( I @-@ 1 , I @-@ 2 and I @-@ 3 ) operated off Western Australia in March 1942 , sinking the merchant ships Parigi and <unk> on 1 and 3 March respectively . In addition , I @-@ 25 conducted a reconnaissance patrol down the Australian east coast in February and March . During this patrol Nobuo Fujita from the I @-@ 25 flew a Yokosuka <unk> floatplane over Sydney ( 17 February ) , Melbourne ( 26 February ) and Hobart ( 1 March ) . Following these reconnaissances , I @-@ 25 sailed for New Zealand and conducted overflights of Wellington and Auckland on 8 March and 13 March respectively . 
 = = = Japanese naval aviation attacks ( February 1942 – November 1943 ) = = = 
 The bombing of Darwin on 19 February 1942 , was the heaviest single attack mounted by the Imperial Japanese Navy against mainland Australia . On 19 February , four Japanese aircraft carriers ( Akagi , Kaga , Hiryū and Sōryū ) launched a total of 188 aircraft from a position in the Timor Sea . The four carriers were escorted by four cruisers and nine destroyers . These 188 naval aircraft inflicted heavy damage on Darwin and sank nine ships . A raid conducted by 54 land @-@ based bombers later the same day resulted in further damage to the town and RAAF Base Darwin and the destruction of 20 Allied military aircraft . Allied casualties were 236 killed and between 300 and 400 wounded , the majority of whom were non @-@ Australian Allied sailors . Only four Japanese aircraft were confirmed to have been destroyed by Darwin 's defenders . 
 The bombing of Darwin was the first of many Japanese naval aviation attacks against targets in Australia . The carriers Shōhō , Shōkaku and Zuikaku — which escorted the invasion force dispatched against Port Moresby in May 1942 — had the secondary role of attacking Allied bases in northern Queensland once Port Moresby was secured . These attacks did not occur , however , as the landings at Port Moresby were cancelled when the Japanese carrier force was mauled in the Battle of the Coral Sea . 
 Japanese aircraft made almost 100 raids , most of them small , against northern Australia during 1942 and 1943 . Land @-@ based IJN aircraft took part in many of the 63 raids on Darwin which took place after the initial attack . The town of Broome , Western Australia experienced a devastating attack by IJN fighter planes on 3 March 1942 , in which at least 88 people were killed . Long @-@ range seaplanes operating from bases in the Solomon Islands made a number of small attacks on towns in Queensland . 
 Japanese naval aircraft operating from land bases also harassed coastal shipping in Australia 's northern waters during 1942 and 1943 . On 15 December 1942 , four sailors were killed when the merchant ship Period was attacked off Cape Wessel . The small general purpose vessel HMAS Patricia Cam was sunk by a Japanese floatplane near the Wessel Islands on 22 January 1943 with the loss of nine sailors and civilians . Another civilian sailor was killed when the merchant ship Islander was attacked by a floatplane during May 1943 . 
 = = = Attacks on Sydney and Newcastle ( May – June 1942 ) = = = 
 In March 1942 , the Japanese military adopted a strategy of isolating Australia from the United States by capturing Port Moresby in New Guinea , the Solomon Islands , Fiji , Samoa and New Caledonia . This plan was frustrated by the Japanese defeat in the Battle of the Coral Sea and was postponed indefinitely after the Battle of Midway . Following the defeat of the Japanese surface fleet , the IJN submarines were deployed to disrupt Allied supply lines by attacking shipping off the Australian east coast . 
 On 27 April 1942 , the submarines I @-@ 21 and I @-@ 29 left the major Japanese naval base at Truk Lagoon in the Japanese territory of the Caroline Islands to conduct reconnaissance patrols of Allied ports in the South Pacific . The goal of these patrols was to find a suitable target for the force of midget submarines , designated the Eastern Detachment of the Second Special Attack Flotilla , which was available in the Pacific . I @-@ 29 entered Australian waters in May and made an unsuccessful attack on the neutral Soviet freighter Wellen off Newcastle on 16 May . I @-@ 29 's floatplane overflew Sydney on 23 May 1942 , finding a large number of major Allied warships in Sydney Harbour . I @-@ 21 reconnoitred Suva , Fiji and Auckland , New Zealand in late May but did not find worthwhile concentrations of shipping in either port . 
 On 18 May , the Eastern Detachment of the Second Special Attack Flotilla left Truk Lagoon under the command of Captain Hankyu Sasaki . Sasaki 's force comprised I @-@ 22 , I @-@ 24 and I @-@ 27 . Each submarine was carrying a midget submarine . After the intelligence gathered by I @-@ 21 and I @-@ 29 was assessed , the three submarines were ordered on 24 May to attack Sydney . The three submarines of the Eastern Detachment rendezvoused with I @-@ 21 and I @-@ 29 35 mi ( 30 nmi ; 56 km ) off Sydney on 29 May . In the early hours of 30 May , I @-@ 21 's floatplane conducted a reconnaissance flight over Sydney Harbour that confirmed the concentration of Allied shipping sighted by I @-@ 29 's floatplane was still present and was a worthwhile target for a midget submarine raid . 
 On the night of 31 May , three midget submarines were launched from the Japanese force outside the Sydney Heads . Although two of the submarines ( Midget No. 22 and Midget A , also known as Midget 24 ) successfully penetrated the incomplete Sydney Harbour defences , only Midget A actually attacked Allied shipping in the harbour , firing two torpedoes at the American heavy cruiser USS Chicago . These torpedoes missed Chicago but sank the depot ship HMAS Kuttabul , killing 21 seamen on board , and seriously damaged the Dutch submarine K IX . All of the Japanese midget submarines were lost during this operation ( Midget No. 22 and Midget No. 27 were destroyed by the Australian defenders and Midget A was scuttled by her crew after leaving the Harbour ) . 
 Following this raid , the Japanese submarine force operated off Sydney and Newcastle , sinking the coaster Iron Chieftain off Sydney on 3 June . On the night of 8 June , I @-@ 24 conducted a bombardment of the eastern suburbs of Sydney and I @-@ 21 bombarded Newcastle . Fort Scratchley at Newcastle returned fire , but did not hit I @-@ 21 . While these bombardments did not cause any casualties or serious damage , the bombardments generated concern over further attacks against the east coast . Following the attacks on shipping in the Sydney region , the Royal Australian Navy instituted convoys between Brisbane and Adelaide . All ships of over 1 @,@ 200 long tons ( 1 @,@ 200 t ) and with speeds of less than 12 kn ( 14 mph ; 22 km / h ) were required to sail in convoy when travelling between cities on the east coast . The Japanese submarine force left Australian waters in late June 1942 having sunk a further two merchant ships . The small number of sinkings achieved by the five Japanese submarines sent against the Australian east coast in May and June did not justify the commitment of so many submarines . 
 = = = Further Japanese submarine patrols ( July – August 1942 ) = = = 
 The Australian authorities enjoyed only a brief break in the submarine threat . In July 1942 , a division of three submarines ( I @-@ 11 , I @-@ 174 and I @-@ 175 ) from Japanese Submarine Squadron 3 commenced operations off the East Coast . These three submarines sank five ships ( including a small fishing trawler ) and damaged several others during July and August . In addition , I @-@ 32 conducted a patrol off the southern coast of Australia while en route from New Caledonia to Penang , though the submarine was not successful in sinking any ships in this area . Following the withdrawal of this force in August , no further submarine attacks were mounted against Australia until January 1943 . 
 While Japanese submarines sank 17 ships in Australian waters in 1942 ( 14 of which were near the Australian coast ) the submarine offensive did not have a serious impact on the Allied war effort in the South West Pacific or the Australian economy . Nevertheless , by forcing ships sailing along the east coast to travel in convoy the Japanese submarines were successful in reducing the efficiency of Australian coastal shipping . This lower efficiency translated into between 7 @.@ 5 % and 22 % less tonnage being transported between Australian ports each month ( no accurate figures are available and the estimated figure varied between months ) . These convoys were effective , however , with no ship travelling as part of a convoy being sunk in Australian waters during 1942 . 
 = = 1943 = = 
 Japanese submarines returned to Australian waters in January 1943 and conducted a campaign against Australian shipping during the first half of the year . The IJN also conducted a diversionary bombardment of Port Gregory , a small West Australian town . 
 = = = East coast submarine patrols ( January – June 1943 ) = = = 
 Japanese submarine operations against Australia in 1943 began when I @-@ 10 and I @-@ 21 sailed from Rabaul on 7 January to reconnoitre Allied forces around Nouméa and Sydney respectively . I @-@ 21 arrived off the coast of New South Wales just over a week later . I @-@ 21 operated off the east coast until late February and sank six ships during this period , making it the most successful submarine patrol conducted in Australian waters during the Second World War . In addition to these sinkings , I @-@ 21 's floatplane conducted a successful reconnaissance of Sydney Harbour on 19 February 1943 . 
 In March , I @-@ 6 and I @-@ 26 entered Australian waters . While I @-@ 6 laid nine German @-@ supplied acoustic mines in the approaches to Brisbane this minefield was discovered by HMAS Swan and neutralised before any ships were sunk . Although I @-@ 6 returned to Rabaul after laying her mines , the Japanese submarine force in Australian waters was expanded in April when the four submarines of Submarine Squadron 3 ( I @-@ 11 , I @-@ 177 , I @-@ 178 and I @-@ 180 ) arrived off the east coast and joined I @-@ 26 . This force had the goal of attacking reinforcement and supply convoys travelling between Australia and New Guinea . 
 As the Japanese force was too small to cut off all traffic between Australia and New Guinea , the Squadron commander widely dispersed his submarines between the Torres Strait and Wilson 's Promontory with the goal of tying down as many Allied ships and aircraft as possible . This offensive continued until June and the five Japanese submarines sank nine ships and damaged several others . In contrast to 1942 , five of the ships sunk off the Australian east coast were travelling in escorted convoys at the time they were attacked . The convoy escorts were not successful in detecting any submarines before they launched their attacks or counter @-@ attacking these submarines . The last attack by a Japanese submarine off the east coast of Australia was made by I @-@ 174 on 16 June 1943 when she sank the merchant ship Portmar and damaged U.S. Landing Ship Tank LST @-@ 469 as they were travelling in Convoy GP55 off the New South Wales north coast . Some historians believe that RAAF aircraft searching for I @-@ 174 may have sunk I @-@ 178 during the early hours of 18 June , but the cause of this submarine 's loss during a patrol off eastern Australia has not been confirmed . 
 The single greatest loss of life resulting from a submarine attack in Australian waters occurred in the early hours of 14 May 1943 when I @-@ 177 torpedoed and sank the Australian hospital ship Centaur off Point Lookout , Queensland . After being hit by a single torpedo , Centaur sank in less than three minutes with the loss of 268 lives . While hospital ships — such as Centaur — were legally protected against attack under the terms of the Geneva Conventions , it is unclear whether Commander Hajime Nakagawa of I @-@ 177 was aware that Centaur was a hospital ship . While she was clearly marked with a red cross and was fully illuminated , the light conditions at the time may have resulted in Nakagawa not being aware of Centaur 's status , making her sinking a tragic accident . However , as Nakagawa had a poor record as a submarine captain and was later convicted of machine gunning the survivors of a British merchant ship in the Indian Ocean , it is probable that the sinking of Centaur was due to either Nakagawa 's incompetence or indifference to the laws of warfare . The attack on Centaur sparked widespread public outrage in Australia . 
 The Japanese submarine offensive against Australia was broken off in July 1943 when the submarines were redeployed to counter Allied offensives elsewhere in the Pacific . The last two Japanese submarines to be dispatched against the Australian east coast , I @-@ 177 and I @-@ 180 , were redirected to the central Solomon Islands shortly before they would have arrived off Australia in July . The Australian Naval authorities were concerned about a resumption of attacks , however , and maintained the coastal convoy system until late 1943 when it was clear that the threat had passed . Coastal convoys in waters south of Newcastle ceased on 7 December and convoys off the north @-@ east coast and between Australia and New Guinea were abolished in February and March 1944 respectively . 
 = = = Bombardment of Port Gregory ( January 1943 ) = = = 
 In contrast to the large number of submarines which operated off the east coast , only a single Japanese submarine was dispatched against the Australian west coast . On 21 January 1943 , I @-@ 165 left her base at Surabaya , East Java , destined for Western Australia . The submarine — under Lt. Cdr . <unk> Torisu — was tasked with creating a diversion to assist the evacuation of Japanese forces from Guadalcanal following their defeat there . Another submarine — I @-@ 166 — had undertaken a diversionary bombardment of the Cocos ( Keeling ) Islands on 25 December 1942 . It appears that Torisu 's original objective was to bombard the port of Geraldton , Western Australia . 
 After a six @-@ day voyage southward , I @-@ 165 reached Geraldton on 27 January . However , Torisu believed that he had sighted lights of aircraft or a destroyer near the town and broke off his attack . I @-@ 165 instead headed north for Port Gregory a former whaling , lead and salt port . At around midnight on 28 January , the submarine 's crew fired 10 rounds from her 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) deck gun at the town . The shells appear to have completely missed Port Gregory and did not result in any damage or casualties for the town was not occupied and the raid initially went unnoticed . While gunfire was sighted by nearby coastwatchers , Allied naval authorities only learned of the attack when Lt. Cdr . Torisu 's battle report radio signal was intercepted and decoded a week later . As a result , the attack was not successful in diverting attention away from Guadalcanal . 
 I @-@ 165 returned twice to Australian waters . In September 1943 , she made an uneventful reconnaissance of the north west coast . I @-@ 165 conducted another reconnaissance patrol off north western Australian between 31 May and 5 July 1944 . This was the last time a Japanese submarine entered Australian waters . 
 = = = German raider Michel ( June 1943 ) = = = 
 Michel was the final German surface raider to enter Australian waters and the Pacific . Michel departed from Yokohama , Japan on her second raiding cruise on 21 May 1943 and entered the Indian Ocean in June . On 14 June she sank the 7 @,@ 715 long tons ( 7 @,@ 839 t ) Norwegian tanker <unk> <unk> about 1 @,@ 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 nmi ; 2 @,@ 900 km ) north @-@ west of Fremantle . Michel followed up this success two days later by sinking a second Norwegian tanker , the 9 @,@ 940 long tons ( 10 @,@ 100 t ) <unk> , in the same area . Both tankers were sailing from Western Australia to the Middle East and 47 Allied sailors and passengers were killed as a result of the attacks . Following these sinkings Michel sailed well to the south of Australia and New Zealand and operated in the eastern Pacific . On 3 September , she sank the 9 @,@ 977 long tons ( 10 @,@ 137 t ) Norwegian tanker India west of Easter Island with all hands , while the tanker was sailing from Peru to Australia . 
 = = 1944 – 1945 = = 
 The Axis naval threat to Australia declined in line with the Allied successes in the Pacific Theatre in 1944 , and only three ships were sunk by Axis naval vessels on the Australia Station during 1944 and 1945 . While the Japanese conducted their only landing on the Australian mainland during 1944 , this was a small reconnaissance operation . As the threat from Axis attacks declined the Allies further reduced the forces assigned to protecting shipping in Australian waters . These forces were not completely disbanded until the end of the war , however . 
 = = = The Japanese landing in Australia ( January 1944 ) = = = 
 While the Japanese government never adopted proposals to invade Australia , a single reconnaissance landing was made on the Australian mainland . Between 17 and 20 January 1944 , members of a Japanese intelligence unit named Matsu Kikan ( " Pine Tree " ) made a reconnaissance mission to a sparsely populated part of the Kimberley region of Western Australia . The unit , operating from Kupang , West Timor , used a converted 25 long tons ( 25 t ) civilian vessel called Hiyoshi Maru and posed as a fishing crew . The mission was led by Lt. <unk> Mizuno of the Japanese Army and included another three Japanese army personnel , six Japanese naval personnel and 15 West Timorese sailors . Their orders , from the 19th Army headquarters at Ambon , were to verify reports that the U.S. Navy was building a base in the area . In addition , the Matsu Kikan personnel were ordered to collect information which would assist any covert reconnaissance or raiding missions on the Australian mainland . 
 Hiyoshi Maru left Kupang on 16 January and was given air cover for the outward leg by an Aichi D3A2 " Val " dive bomber which reportedly attacked an Allied submarine en route . On 17 January , Hiyoshi Maru visited the Ashmore Reef area . The following day the crew landed on the tiny and uninhabited Browse Island , about 100 mi ( 87 nmi ; 160 km ) north west of the mainland . On the morning of 19 January , Hiyoshi Maru entered York Sound on the mainland . Although the crew saw smoke emanating from hills to the east of their location , they nevertheless anchored and camouflaged the vessel with tree branches . Local historians state that Matsu Kikan landing parties went ashore near the mouth of the Roe River ( 15 ° 08 ′ 16 ″ S 125 ° 23 ′ 11 ″ E ) . They reportedly explored onshore for about two hours , and some members of the mission filmed the area using an 8 mm camera . The Matsu Kikan personnel spent the night on the boat and reconnoitred the area again the following day , before returning to Kupang . The Japanese did not sight any people or signs of recent human activity and little of military significance was learnt from the mission . 
 = = = Japanese operations in the Indian Ocean ( March 1944 ) = = = 
 In February 1944 , the Japanese Combined Fleet withdrew from its base at Truk and was divided between Palau and Singapore . The appearance of a powerful Japanese squadron at Singapore concerned the Allies , as it was feared that this force could potentially conduct raids in the Indian Ocean and against Western Australia . 
 On 1 March , a Japanese squadron consisting of the heavy cruisers Aoba ( flagship ) , Tone and Chikuma — under Vice Admiral Naomasa Sakonju — sortied from Sunda Strait to attack Allied shipping sailing on the main route between Aden and Fremantle . The only Allied ship this squadron encountered was the British steamer Behar , which was sunk midway between Ceylon and Fremantle on 9 March . Following this attack the squadron broke off its mission and returned to Batavia as it was feared that Allied ships responding to Behar 's distress signal posed an unacceptable risk . While 102 survivors from Behar were rescued by Tone , 82 of these prisoners were murdered after the cruiser arrived in Batavia on 16 March . Following the war Vice Adm. Sakonju was executed for war crimes which included the killing of these prisoners , while the former commander of Tone , Capt. Haruo <unk> , was sentenced to seven years imprisonment . The sortie mounted by Aoba , Tone and Chikuma was the last raid mounted by Axis surface ships against the Allied lines of communication in the Indian Ocean , or elsewhere , during World War II . 
 While the Japanese raid into the Indian Ocean was not successful , associated Japanese shipping movements provoked a major Allied response . In early March 1944 , Allied intelligence reported that two battleships escorted by destroyers had left Singapore in the direction of Surabaya and a U.S. submarine made radar contact with two large Japanese ships in the Lombok Strait . The Australian Chiefs of Staff Committee reported to the Government on 8 March that there was a possibility that these ships could have entered the Indian Ocean to attack Fremantle . In response to this report , all ground and naval defences at Fremantle were fully manned , all shipping was ordered to leave Fremantle and several RAAF squadrons were redeployed to bases in Western Australia . 
 This alert proved to be a false alarm , however . The Japanese ships detected in the Lombok Strait were actually the light cruisers Kinu and Ōi which were covering the return of the surface raiding force from the central Indian Ocean . The alert was lifted at Fremantle on 13 March and the RAAF squadrons began returning to their bases in eastern and northern Australia on 20 March . 
 = = = The German submarine offensive ( September 1944 – January 1945 ) = = = 
 On 14 September 1944 , the commander of the Kriegsmarine — Großadmiral ( Grand Admiral ) Karl Dönitz — approved a proposal to send two Type IXD U @-@ Boats into Australian waters with the objective of tying down Allied anti @-@ submarine assets in a secondary theatre . The U @-@ Boats involved was drawn from the <unk> Gruppe ( " Monsoon Group " ) , and the two selected for this operation were German submarine U @-@ 168 and German submarine U @-@ 862 . An additional submarine — U @-@ 537 — was added to this force at the end of September . 
 Due to the difficulty of maintaining German submarines in Japanese bases , the German force was not ready to depart from its bases in Penang and Batavia ( Jakarta ) until early October . By this time , the Allies had intercepted and decoded German and Japanese messages describing the operation and were able to vector Allied submarines onto the German boats . The Dutch submarine <unk> sank U @-@ 168 on 6 October near Surabaya and the American submarine USS Flounder sank U @-@ 537 on 10 November near the northern end of the Lombok Strait . Due to the priority accorded to the Australian operation , U @-@ 196 was ordered to replace U @-@ 168 . However , U @-@ 196 disappeared in the Sunda Strait some time after departing from Penang on 30 November . The cause of U @-@ 196 's loss is unknown , though it was probably due to an accident or mechanical fault . 
 The only surviving submarine of the force assigned to attack Australia — U @-@ 862 , under Korvettenkapitän Heinrich Timm — departed Batavia on 18 November 1944 , and arrived off the south west tip of Western Australia on 26 November . The submarine had great difficulty finding targets as the Australian naval authorities , warned of U @-@ 862 's approach , had directed shipping away from the routes normally used . U @-@ 862 unsuccessfully attacked the Greek freighter Ilissos off the South Australian coast on 9 December , with bad weather spoiling both the attack and subsequent Australian efforts to locate the submarine . 
 Following her attack on Ilissos , U @-@ 862 continued east along the Australian coastline , becoming the only German submarine to operate in the Pacific Ocean during the Second World War . After entering the Pacific U @-@ 862 scored her first success on this patrol when she attacked the <unk> liberty ship Robert J. Walker off the South Coast of New South Wales on 24 December 1944 . The ship sank the following day . Following this attack , U @-@ 862 evaded an intensive search by Australian aircraft and warships and departed for New Zealand . 
 As U @-@ 862 did not find any worthwhile targets off New Zealand , the submarine 's commander planned to return to Australian waters in January 1945 and operate to the north of Sydney . U @-@ 862 was ordered to break off her mission in mid @-@ January , however , and return to Jakarta . On her return voyage , the submarine sank another U.S. liberty ship — Peter Silvester — approximately 820 nmi ( 940 mi ; 1 @,@ 520 km ) southwest of Fremantle on 6 February 1945 . Peter Silvester was the last Allied ship to be sunk by the Axis in the Indian Ocean during the war . U @-@ 862 arrived in Jakarta in mid February 1945 and is the only Axis ship known to have operated in Australian waters during 1945 . Following Germany 's surrender , U @-@ 862 became the Japanese submarine I @-@ 502 but was not used operationally . 
 While Allied naval authorities were aware of the approach of the German strike force and were successful in sinking two of the four submarines dispatched , efforts to locate and sink U @-@ 862 once she reached Australian waters were continually hampered by a lack of suitable ships and aircraft and a lack of personnel trained and experienced in anti @-@ submarine warfare . As the southern coast of Australia was thousands of kilometres behind the active combat front in South @-@ East Asia and had not been raided for several years , it should not be considered surprising that few anti @-@ submarine assets were available in this area in late 1944 and early 1945 . 
 = = Conclusions = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 A total of six German surface raiders , four Japanese aircraft carriers , seven Japanese cruisers , nine Japanese destroyers and twenty eight Japanese and German submarines operated in Australian waters between 1940 and 1945 . These 54 warships sank 53 merchant ships and three warships within the Australia Station , resulting in the deaths of over 1 @,@ 751 Allied military personnel , sailors and civilians . Over 88 people were also killed by IJN air attacks on towns in northern Australia . In exchange , the Allies sank one German surface raider , one full @-@ sized Japanese submarine and two midget submarines within Australian waters , resulting in the deaths of 157 Axis sailors . A further two German submarines were sunk while en route to Australian waters with the loss of 81 sailors . 
 The six German and three Japanese surface raiders that operated within Australian waters sank 18 ships and killed over 826 sailors ( including the 82 prisoners murdered on board Tone in 1944 ) . Kormoran was the only Axis surface ship to be sunk within the Australia Station , and 78 of her crew were killed . 
 The 17 ships in the Japanese carrier force that raided Darwin in 1942 sank nine ships and killed 251 people for the loss of four aircraft . A further 14 sailors and civilians were killed in the sinking of HMAS Patricia Cam and the attacks on Period and Islander in 1943 and 88 people were killed during the raid on Broome in 1942 . 
 The 28 Japanese and German submarines that operated in Australian waters between 1942 and 1945 sank a total of 30 ships with a combined tonnage of 151 @,@ 000 long tons ( 153 @,@ 000 t ) ; 654 people , including 200 Australian merchant seamen , were killed on board the ships attacked by submarines . It has also been estimated that the RAAF lost at least 23 aircraft and 104 airmen to flying accidents during anti @-@ submarine patrols off the Australian coast . In exchange , the Allies sank only a single full @-@ sized Japanese submarine in Australian waters ( I @-@ 124 ) and two of the three midgets that entered Sydney Harbour . A total of 79 Japanese sailors died in these sinkings , and a further two sailors died on board the third midget , which was scuttled after leaving Sydney Harbour . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 While the scale of the Axis naval offensive directed against Australia was small compared to other naval campaigns of the war such as the Battle of the Atlantic , they were still " the most comprehensive and widespread series of offensive operations ever conducted by an enemy against Australia " . Due to the limited size of the Australian shipping industry and the importance of sea transport to the Australian economy and Allied military in the South West Pacific , even modest shipping losses had the potential to seriously damage the Allied war effort in the South West Pacific . 
 Despite the vulnerability of the Australian shipping industry , the Axis attacks did not seriously affect the Australian or Allied war effort . While the German surface raiders which operated against Australia caused considerable disruption to merchant shipping and tied down Allied naval vessels , they did not sink many ships and only operated in Australian waters for a few short periods . The effectiveness of the Japanese submarine campaign against Australia was limited by the inadequate numbers of submarines committed and flaws in Japan 's submarine doctrine . The submarines were , however , successful in forcing the Allies to devote considerable resources to protecting shipping in Australian waters between 1942 and late 1943 . The institution of coastal convoys between 1942 and 1943 may have also significantly reduced the efficiency of the Australian shipping industry during this period . 
 The performance of the Australian and Allied forces committed to the defence of shipping on the Australia station was mixed . While the threat to Australia from Axis raiders was " anticipated and addressed " , only a small proportion of the Axis ships and submarines which attacked Australia were successfully located or engaged . Several German raiders operated undetected within Australian waters in 1940 as the number of Allied warships and aircraft available were not sufficient to patrol these waters and the loss of HMAS Sydney was a high price to pay for sinking Kormoran in 1941 . While the Australian authorities were quick to implement convoys in 1942 and no convoyed ship was sunk during that year , the escorts of the convoys that were attacked in 1943 were not successful in either detecting any submarines before they launched their attack or successfully counter @-@ attacking these submarines . Factors explaining the relatively poor performance of Australian anti @-@ submarine forces include their typically low levels of experience and training , shortages of ASW assets , problems with co @-@ ordinating searches and the poor sonar conditions in the waters surrounding Australia . Nevertheless , " success in anti @-@ submarine warfare cannot be measured simply by the total of sinkings achieved " and the Australian defenders may have successfully reduced the threat to shipping in Australian waters by making it harder for Japanese submarines to carry out attacks . 
 = = = Books and printed material = = = 
 Australia in the War of 1939 – 1945 
 G. Herman Gill ( 1957 ) , Australia in the War of 1939 – 1945 . Series 2 – Navy . Volume I 1939 – 1942 . Australian War Memorial , Canberra . 
 G. Herman Gill ( 1968 ) , Australia in the War of 1939 – 1945 . Series 2 – Navy . Volume II – Royal Australian Navy , 1942 – 1945 . Australian War Memorial , Canberra . 
 Douglas Gillison ( 1962 ) , Australia in the War of 1939 – 1945 . Series 3 - Air . Volume I – Royal Australian Air Force , 1939 – 1942 . Australian War Memorial , Canberra . 
 George Odgers ( 1968 ) , Australia in the War of 1939 – 1945 . Series 3 - Air . Volume II – Air War Against Japan , 1943 – 1945 . Australian War Memorial , Canberra . 
 Gavin Long ( 1973 ) , The Six Years War . A Concise History of Australia in the 1939 – 45 War . Australian War Memorial and Australian Government Publishing Service , Canberra . ISBN 0 @-@ 642 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Steven L Carruthers ( 1982 ) , Australia Under Siege : Japanese Submarine Raiders , 1942 . Solus Books . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 5 
 John Coates ( 2001 ) , An Atlas of Australia 's Wars . Oxford University Press , Melbourne . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Crowhurst , Geoff ( 2012 ) . " Who Sank I @-@ 178 ? " . The Navy 75 ( 1 ) : 27 – 30 . ISSN 1322 @-@ 6231 . 
 Tom Frame ( 1993 ) , HMAS Sydney . Loss and Controversy . Hodder & Stoughton , Sydney . ISBN 0 @-@ 340 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Tom Frame ( 2004 ) , No Pleasure Cruise : The Story of the Royal Australian Navy . Allen & Unwin , Sydney . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 233 @-@ 4 
 Henry P. Frei ( 1991 ) , Japan 's Southward Advance and Australia . From the Sixteenth Century to World War II . Melbourne University Press , Melbourne . ISBN 0 @-@ 522 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 David Horner ( 1993 ) . ' Defending Australia in 1942 ' in War and Society , Volume 11 , Number 1 , May 1993 . 
 David Jenkins ( 1992 ) , Battle Surface ! Japan 's Submarine War Against Australia 1942 – 44 . Random House Australia , Sydney . ISBN 0 @-@ 09 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Paul Kemp ( 1997 ) , U @-@ Boats Destroyed . German Submarine Losses in the World Wars . Arms and Armour , London . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 321 @-@ 5 
 Tom Lewis ( 2003 ) . A War at Home . A Comprehensive guide to the first Japanese attacks on Darwin . Tall Stories , Darwin . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 3 
 Samuel Eliot Morison ( 1949 ( 2001 reprint ) ) . Coral Sea , Midway and Submarine Actions , May 1942 – August 1942 , Volume 4 of History of United States Naval Operations in World War II . University of Illinois Press , Champaign . ISBN 0 @-@ 252 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Robert Nichols ' The Night the War Came to Sydney ' in Wartime Issue 33 , 2006 . 
 Albert Palazzo ( 2001 ) . The Australian Army : A History of its Organisation 1901 – 2001 . Oxford University Press , Melbourne , 2001 . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Seapower Centre - Australia ( 2005 ) . The Navy Contribution to Australian Maritime Operations . Defence Publishing Service , Canberra . ISBN 0 @-@ 642 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 David Stevens , ' The War Cruise of I @-@ 6 , March 1943 ' in Australian Defence Force Journal No. 102 September / October 1993 . Pages 39 – 46 . 
 David Stevens ( 1997 ) , U @-@ Boat Far from Home . Allen & Unwin , Sydney . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 267 @-@ 2 
 David Stevens , ' Forgotten assault ' in Wartime Issue 18 , 2002 . 
 David Stevens ( 2005 ) , RAN Papers in Australian Maritime Affairs No. 15 A Critical Vulnerability : The impact of the submarine threat on Australia 's maritime defence 1915 – 1954 . Seapower Centre - Australia , Canberra . ISBN 0 @-@ 642 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Sydney David Waters ( 1956 ) , The Royal New Zealand Navy . Historical Publications Branch , Wellington . 
 = SMS Königsberg ( 1915 ) = 
 SMS Königsberg was the lead ship of the Königsberg class of light cruisers , built for the German Imperial Navy during World War I. She took the name of the earlier Königsberg , which had been destroyed during the Battle of Rufiji Delta in 1915 . The new ship was laid down in 1914 at the AG Weser shipyard , launched in December 1915 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in August 1916 . Armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns , the ship had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Königsberg saw action with the II Scouting Group ; in September 1917 she participated in Operation Albion , a large amphibious operation against the Baltic islands in the Gulf of Riga . Two months later , she was attacked by British battlecruisers in the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight . She was hit by the battlecruiser HMS Repulse , which caused a large fire and reduced her speed significantly . She escaped behind the cover of two German battleships , however . She was to have taken part in a sortie by the entire High Seas Fleet to attack the British Grand Fleet in the final days of the war , but unrest broke out that forced the cancellation of the plan . The ship carried Rear Admiral Hugo Meurer to Scapa Flow to negotiate the plan for interning the High Seas Fleet . Königsberg was not interned , however , so she escaped the scuttling of the German fleet and was instead ceded to France as a war prize . She was renamed Metz and served with the French Navy until 1933 , before being scrapped in 1936 . 
 = = Construction and specifications = = 
 Königsberg was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Gazelle " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1914 . She was launched on 18 December 1915 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 12 August 1916 . The ship was 151 @.@ 4 meters ( 497 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 14 @.@ 2 m ( 47 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 96 m ( 19 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . She displaced 7 @,@ 125 t ( 7 @,@ 012 long tons ; 7 @,@ 854 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of steam turbines powered by ten coal @-@ fired and two oil @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers . These provided a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) and a range of 4 @,@ 850 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 980 km ; 5 @,@ 580 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , four were located amidships , two on either side , and two were arranged in a super firing pair aft . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 040 rounds of ammunition , for 130 shells per gun . Königsberg also carried two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the centerline astern of the funnels . She was also equipped with a pair of 60 cm ( 24 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes in deck @-@ mounted swivel launchers amidships . She also carried 200 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Königsberg and the rest of the II Scouting Group provided the cruiser screen for the task force . 
 The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while the IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on Saaremaa . Königsberg , still Reuter 's flagship , steamed in Tagga Bay , with the commander of the ground troops General Ludwig von <unk> and his staff aboard . <unk> coordinated the operations of the German infantry , who quickly subdued Russian opposition . On 18 – 19 October , Königsberg and the rest of the II Scouting Group covered minesweepers operating off the island of Dagö , but due to insufficient minesweepers and bad weather , the operation was postponed . On the 19th , Königsberg , her sister ship Nürnberg , and the cruiser Danzig were sent to intercept two Russian torpedo boats reported to be in the area . Reuter could not locate the vessels , and broke off the operation . By 20 October , the islands were under German control and the Russian naval forces had either been destroyed or forced to withdraw . The Admiralstab ordered the naval component to return to the North Sea . 
 = = = Actions in the North Sea = = = 
 On 17 November 1917 , Königsberg saw action at the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight . At the time , she was assigned to the II Scouting Group as the flagship of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter . Along with three other cruisers from the II Scouting Group , Königsberg escorted minesweepers clearing paths in minefields laid by the British . The dreadnought battleships Kaiser and Kaiserin stood by in distant support . Six British battlecruisers supported a force of light cruisers that attacked the German minesweepers . Königsberg and the other three cruisers covered the fleeing minesweepers before retreating under a smoke screen . During the engagement , the battlecruiser HMS Repulse scored a hit on Königsberg , which did minor damage but started a serious fire . The shell hit reduced her speed to 17 kn ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) , though by then the German battleships had intervened . The British broke off the attack when the German battleships arrived on the scene , after which the Germans also withdrew . 
 On 23 – 24 April 1918 , the ship participated in an abortive fleet operation to attack British convoys to Norway . The I Scouting Group and II Scouting Group , along with the Second Torpedo @-@ Boat Flotilla were to attack a heavily guarded British convoy to Norway , with the rest of the High Seas Fleet steaming in support . The Germans failed to locate the convoy , which had in fact sailed the day before the fleet left port . As a result , Admiral Reinhard Scheer broke off the operation and returned to port . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 In October 1918 , Königsberg and the rest of the II Scouting Group were to lead a final attack on the British navy . Königsberg , Cöln , Dresden , and Pillau were to attack merchant shipping in the Thames estuary while Karlsruhe , Nürnberg , and Graudenz were to bombard targets in Flanders , to draw out the British Grand Fleet . Scheer , promoted to Großadmiral and give the position of the commander in chief of the fleet , and the new fleet commander Admiral Franz von Hipper intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to secure a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . When informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated , " I no longer have a navy . " 
 While disorder consumed the bulk of the fleet , Kommodore Andreas Michelsen organized a group to attack any British attempt to take advantage of the fleet 's disarray . He pieced together a group of around sixty ships , including Königsberg and several other light cruisers . On 9 November , reports of British activity in the German Bight prompted Königsberg and several destroyers to make a sweep . After the reports proved false , the flotilla returned to Borkum , where they learned of the Kaiser 's abdication . Following the Armistice that ended the fighting , Königsberg took Rear Admiral Hugo Meurer to Scapa Flow to negotiate with Admiral David Beatty , the commander of the Grand Fleet , for the place of internment of the German fleet . The ship arrived in Scapa Flow on 15 November , flying a white flag . The accepted arrangement was for the High Seas Fleet to meet the combined Allied fleet in the North Sea and proceed to the Firth of Forth before transferring to Scapa Flow , where they would be interned . 
 Most of the High Seas Fleet 's ships , including Königsberg 's sister ships Karlsruhe , Emden , and Nürnberg , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow , under the command of Reuter . Königsberg instead remained in Germany , returning Meurer from the negotiations with Beatty by the time the fleet left for internment . On 21 June 1919 , Reuter ordered the scuttling of the fleet . Königsberg was meanwhile stricken from the naval register on 31 May 1920 and ceded to France as " A " . The ship was taken to Cherbourg on 20 July . She was renamed Metz and served with the French Navy until 1933 . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1936 . 
 = Ralph Neville = 
 Ralph Neville ( or Ralf Nevill ; died 1244 ) was a medieval clergyman and politician who served as Bishop of Chichester and Lord Chancellor of England . Neville first appears in the historical record in 1207 in the service of King John of England , and remained in royal service throughout the rest of his life . By 1213 Neville had custody of the Great Seal of England , although he was not named chancellor , the office responsible for the seal , until 1226 . He was rewarded with the bishopric of Chichester in 1222 . Although he was also briefly Archbishop @-@ elect of Canterbury and Bishop @-@ elect of Winchester , both elections were set aside , or quashed , and he held neither office . 
 As keeper of the seal , and subsequently as chancellor , Neville was noted for his impartiality , and he oversaw a number of changes in the way the chancery operated . Neville was deprived of the Great Seal in 1238 after quarrelling with the king , but continued to hold the title of chancellor until his death . He died in his London palace , built on a street later renamed Chancery Lane owing to his connection with the chancery . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Neville , who was illegitimate , had at least three brothers : Nicholas de Neville , a canon at Chichester Cathedral ; William de Neville , treasurer of the see of Chichester ; and Robert de Neville , holder of a prebend at Chichester . The identity of their father is unknown , but another likely sibling was Roger , who held land in Lincolnshire . Robert became Chancellor of the Exchequer , and Nicholas a baron of the Exchequer . Ralph Neville was also related to Hugh de Neville , King John of England 's chief forester . 
 Neville was a royal clerk to King John in the spring of 1207 , and in December of that year was at Marlborough Castle on royal business . Earlier references to a Ralph Neville who in 1207 delivered items to Hugh de Neville , or the Ralph Neville who was the same Hugh de Neville 's chaplain , may be to the future bishop , but the evidence is inconclusive . Hugh de Neville and Neville subsequently worked together , and corresponded on both business and personal affairs . Both men claimed the other as a kinsman . 
 Neville 's activities during the years immediately after 1207 are unknown , owing to the lack of royal records , but in December 1213 he was given custody of the Great Seal of the kingdom . He was Dean of Lichfield by 11 April 1214 , at which time he held a prebend in the diocese of London . Neville was appointed to the royal chancery in about 1214 , largely through the patronage of Peter des Roches , the Bishop of Winchester and one of the king 's favourites . From March to October 1214 , Neville was in France with the king . After the king returned to England after 1214 , Neville remained in royal service until at least May 1216 , although without custody of the Great Seal . His activities during the final period of John 's reign prior to the king 's sudden death in October 1216 are unknown . 
 = = Royal service and Bishop of Chichester = = 
 Neville was keeper of the royal seal under the new king , Henry III ( r . 1216 – 1272 ) from about 6 November 1218 . He had been at the royal court since May 1218 , and was given custody of the seal as soon as it was made up . One of the first documents subsequently sealed was a declaration that no charters or other rights would be granted in perpetuity until Henry attained his majority . Neville was also vice @-@ chancellor of England under the chancellorship of Richard Marsh , who had been elected as Bishop of Durham in 1217 and spent most of his time attending to ecclesiastical affairs in his northern diocese . In fact , if not in name , Neville was responsible for all the duties of the chancellorship , and he exercised most of the power of that office , although Marsh continued to hold the title of chancellor until his death in 1226 . When instability threatened the royal government in May and June 1219 Neville was ordered by Pandulf , the papal legate , to remain in London with the Great Seal while a royal council was held at Gloucester . The council resulted in royal government coming under the control of Hubert de Burgh the Justiciar , Pandulf , and Peter des Roches , the Bishop of Winchester . 
 Neville received a papal dispensation for his illegitimacy on 25 January 1220 , on the recommendation of the king , Stephen Langton the Archbishop of Canterbury , other bishops , and the papal legate Cardinal Guala Bicchieri , all of whom testified to his good reputation and character . In late October he was named chancellor of the see of Chichester , but was then elected Bishop of Chichester on about 1 November 1222 . He was given control of the temporalities of the bishopric on 3 November 1222 , and was consecrated on 21 April 1224 . In April 1223 Neville was ordered by Pope Honorius III to cease using the Great Seal on the command of the justiciar or other members of the minority council , but instead to do so only at the king 's command , essentially ending the royal minority . But it did not finally end until December 1223 , and even then , as the king had not yet been officially declared of age , the ban on grants without a fixed time limit remained in force . 
 = = Lord Chancellor = = 
 Neville was named Lord Chancellor of England on 17 May 1226 . The appointment was made by the great council during the minority of King Henry III , and Neville obtained a grant of the office for life . Unlike Hubert de Burgh , who lost his offices when Henry III attained his majority and took control of the government , Neville remained chancellor with only slight disagreements until 1238 , although a confirmation of the lifetime nature of his tenure was made in 1232 . Under Neville , the first signs that the chancery was becoming a department of the government , rather than just a royal department that was part of the royal household , began to emerge . The contemporary writer Matthew Paris praised Neville for his actions as chancellor , claiming that he treated all equally and was transparent in discharging his duties , which was important , as the chancellor 's office controlled access to the king . Neville oversaw a number of changes in chancery procedures , splitting off the liberate rolls from the letters close in 1226 and reviving the keeping of the charter rolls in 1227 . He also issued writs on his own authority , the so @-@ called writs de <unk> . Neville received a number of gifts and privileges from the king while chancellor , including the right of exemption from the seizure of his possessions by any royal or other secular official . The king also agreed not to interfere with the execution of Neville 's last will and testament . 
 Surviving letters from the precentor of Chichester Cathedral beg the bishop to come to Chichester over Easter to celebrate the Easter Mass and to deal with pressing issues in the diocese . Neville 's duties as chancellor kept him from attending to much of the business of his diocese , but he employed clerics to administer the ecclesiastical offices of his diocese and in general his relationship with his cathedral chapter appears to have been good . He employed a teacher of theology for his cathedral , and supported students at schools in Lincoln , Oxford , and Douai . He worked to protect the rights , lands , and privileges of his diocese and cathedral chapter from encroachment by others , both secular and clerical . On one occasion he threatened to excommunicate the Earl of Arundel or the earl 's men for hunting on land the bishop considered to be his own . 
 Neville was elected Archbishop of Canterbury on about 24 September 1231 by the monks of Canterbury , but his election was quashed in early 1232 by Pope Gregory IX , on the grounds that Neville was an <unk> or illiterate , even though he had been found to be literatus in 1214 when appointed dean ; literatus in this sense meant " learned " rather than " literate " . Other concerns were that Simon Langton , the Archdeacon of Canterbury , described Neville as a courtier instead of a true priest , and claimed that Neville 's goal was to free England from its feudal ties to the papacy . 
 As well as his chancery duties , Neville occasionally sat with the barons of the exchequer or with royal justices , and he had a role in the appointment of royal justices . In 1230 he was regent of England while Henry was absent in France , during which time he met with Llywelyn the Great in an unsuccessful attempt to negotiate an agreement that would resolve the disputes between the English and the Welsh . In 1232 , during the events surrounding the de Burgh 's downfall Neville , along with Ranulf , the Earl of Chester , urged that de Burgh should not be dragged from sanctuary to face the royal accusations against him . Neville 's pleas prevailed for a time , but eventually de Burgh was removed from sanctuary . 
 The king attempted to deprive Neville of the chancellorship in 1236 , which the bishop countered by claiming that as he had been appointed during the royal minority with the consent of the great council , only the council could dismiss him . In 1238 the cathedral chapter of the see of Winchester elected as Bishop of Winchester first William de Raley in opposition to the king 's choice of William the Bishop of Valence , and when that election was quashed , they elected Neville . His election to Winchester was quashed in 1239 , leading to a quarrel with Henry III . Valence was the uncle of Eleanor of Provence , whom Henry had married in 1236 . Valence had gained much influence with the king quite quickly , and worked to eliminate the older royal officials and institute reforms in the royal administration . This , along with the disputed election to Winchester , was the cause of Neville 's fall from favour . Although Henry deprived Neville of the custody of the Great Seal from 1238 until 1242 , Neville retained the title of chancellor until his death , thus entitling him to the revenues he would normally have received from the office . The Great Seal itself was held by a number of minor officials , probably to allow Henry greater control over its use by preventing the establishment of another powerful official who might interfere with his plans . But they lacked the power base that Neville had possessed , which enabled him to oppose the king . 
 In 1239 Neville may have been offered the custody of the Great Seal , which he refused . In May 1242 Neville was once again responsible for the seal while Henry was in France , a responsibility apparently shared with the regent . After the king 's return in September 1243 Neville did seal a few documents with the Great Seal until his death a few months later . 
 = = Death and writings = = 
 Neville died between 1 and 4 February 1244 at the palace he had built in London in what was then New Street , subsequently renamed Chancery Lane because of his being Lord Chancellor . He was buried in Chichester Cathedral , behind the high altar . After Neville 's death Matthew Paris described him as " a man laudable in all things , and a pillar of fidelity in the business of the kingdom and the king " . Some of the provisions of his will are known : he left some jewellery and gems to the king , some of his lands were given to his successors as bishop , and other lands and items were bequeathed to his cathedral chapter at Chichester . He also endowed a distribution of bread to the poor residents of Chichester , a gift that continued into the 20th century . Neville also endowed a chapel near Chichester with two clergy to pray for the soul of King John . 
 Many of Neville 's letters survive , as they were collected by him during his lifetime . They are currently in the National Archives of the United Kingdom , having previously formed part of the Public Record Office . The letters were published in Sussex Archaeological Collections volume 3 in 1850 and were edited by William Henry <unk> . Neville was instrumental in promoting the career of his brother William , but non @-@ relatives also benefited from his patronage : one of Neville 's clerks , Silvester de <unk> , was a member of the chancery until 1246 , when he was selected as Bishop of Carlisle . 
 = Kraken ( roller coaster ) = 
 Kraken ( named for the fictional sea monster of the same name ) is a steel floorless roller coaster located at SeaWorld Orlando in the United States . Manufactured by Bolliger & Mabillard , the ride features a total of seven inversions including two vertical loops , a dive loop , a spiraling camelback ( zero @-@ g roll ) , a cobra roll and a flat spin Kraken opened on June 1 , 2000 . It is also the world 's second longest floorless coaster at 4 @,@ 177 feet ( 1 @,@ 273 m ) . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1999 , Six Flags Great Adventure spent $ 42 million on new attractions including a prototype Floorless Coaster by Bolliger & Mabillard , Medusa ( later Bizarro ) . The immediate popularity of the ride , led to SeaWorld Orlando and three other amusement parks to announce plans to install Floorless Coasters in 2000 ; aside from the announcement of Kraken on May 6 , 1999 , Six Flags Discovery Kingdom announced Medusa , Geauga Lake announced Dominator , and Six Flags Fiesta Texas announced Superman : Krypton Coaster . Kraken was announced as costing approximately $ 18 – 20 million . Kraken 's announcement more than one year out from its opening was an attempt by the park to drive international attendance . 
 Construction for the ride was well underway in January 2000 . During construction , Superior Rigging & Erection was responsible for erecting the supports and track of the roller coaster . 
 On June 1 , 2000 , Kraken officially opened to the public . At the time of opening Kraken held the record for the tallest and longest roller coaster in the state of Florida . It held this record until 2006 when Disney 's Animal Kingdom opened the 4 @,@ 424 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 348 m ) Expedition Everest . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 The 4 @,@ 177 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 273 m ) Kraken stands 153 feet ( 47 m ) tall . With a top speed of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) , the ride was the fastest roller coaster at SeaWorld Orlando until the opening of Mako in Summer of 2016 . The ride features seven inversions including two vertical loops , a dive loop , a spiraling camelback ( zero @-@ g roll ) , a cobra roll and a flat spin ( corkscrew ) . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Kraken operates with three floorless trains . Each train seats 32 riders in eight rows of four . This gives the ride a theoretical hourly capacity of 1500 riders per hour . The open @-@ air trains feature seats which leave riders ' legs dangling above the track . Riders are restrainted with over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints ( <unk> ) . As the trains are floorless , the station has a retractable floor for safe boarding . 
 = = = Theme = = = 
 Kraken is themed after the mythological sea monster of the same name , kept caged by Poseidon . Much of the ride is located above water , with three sections featuring subterranean dives . The ride 's station and surrounding area are themed as Kraken 's lair . Eels are said to be Kraken 's young and therefore feature throughout the ride 's queue . A SeaWorld Orlando spokesman stated " although it 's a roller coaster , the theme of the ride brings it back to the sea , and to our ( SeaWorld Orlando 's ) core " . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After riders have boarded the station floor is retracted and the front gates open , Kraken departs with a right U @-@ turn out of the station . This leads directly to the 153 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 47 m ) chain lift hill . At the top , the train crests the lift hill and follows a fairly level turn to the right before dropping 144 feet ( 44 m ) towards the ground . The ride then enters the first vertical loop followed by the dive loop . A spiraling camelback ( zero @-@ g roll ) , where riders experience a feeling of weightlessness , is followed by a cobra roll . A banked turn to the left leads into the mid @-@ course brake run . The exit from the mid @-@ course brake run drops down directly into the second vertical loop . A subterranean dive into Kraken 's lair is followed by a flat spin The ride concludes with a final brake run and a short path back to the station . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Orlando Sentinel commended the ride for " perfect timing and keeping folks guessing " , giving the ride ratings of 4 out of 5 for both thrill and theming . Sentinel reporter Dewayne Bevil , ranks the ride at number 7 in his Top 50 Orlando Theme Park Attractions list . Although it was reported that the ride would be more exciting than The Incredible Hulk at the nearby Islands of Adventure theme park , Mike Thomas of the Sentinel concluded that " Hulk <unk> the competition " , with Kraken taking the number two spot . In an interview for the Los Angeles Times Jerry Dane of the Florida Coaster Club described the floorless experience like " you are hung out there open and free " . Dane also commended the ride 's ability to provide different , yet equally good experiences in a variety of seats . In 2012 , Kraken was featured on the Travel Channel TV series Insane Coaster Wars , and received first place in the public @-@ voted " Wrong Way Up " category . Theme Park Review 's Robb Alvey shared the view the Kraken was better than the competition which included Dollywood 's Wild Eagle and Dorney Park 's Hydra the Revenge . 
 In Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards , Kraken was ranked in the top 50 steel roller coasters numerous times since its opening . It debuted on the poll at position 48 in 2003 , peaked at position 26 in 2005 , before it off the poll in 2009 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Kraken entered at position 12 in 2001 , before peaking at 10 the following year . The ride 's ranking in subsequent polls is shown in the table below . 
 = Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) = 
 " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " is a song performed by British girl group Spice Girls for their greatest hits album Greatest Hits . It was written by the Spice Girls , Richard Stannard and Matt Rowe , whilst produced by the latter two . It was released as the only single from the album on 5 November 2007 , by Virgin Records . The song was the first commercial single release to feature the group 's original lineup since Geri Halliwell left in 1998 . It was also the official Children in Need single of 2007 . As of 2016 , it is the final release from the group . 
 " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " is a midtempo ballad song , which lyrically talks about the group reuniting , and about their friendship throughout two decades together . The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics , with some calling it a " classic " from the group , while others felt it was not good enough . " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " was a moderate success worldwide , peaking at number eleven on the UK singles chart , becoming the group 's first single not to peak inside the top ten , or indeed the top two . However , it reached the top @-@ ten in Italy , Scotland and Spain . 
 An accompanying music video for " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " was directed by Anthony Mandler at Pinewood Studios and premiered in early November 2007 . The video depicts the girls in a stately room , with plum colored walls and antique furniture , wearing gowns designed by Roberto Cavalli . " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " was performed by the group at the 2007 Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show , Children in Need 2007 marathon , as well as on their reunion tour , The Return of the Spice Girls , which occurred in 2007 and 2008 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The plan of a Spice Girls ' reunion was first confirmed by Mel B in June 2005 . She stated , " We 'll get back together because we all want to . I know everyone is up for it . There is going to be a greatest hits album and we 've got loads of new songs that nobody has heard yet . " On 28 June 2007 , the group held a press conference at The O2 Arena revealing their intention to reunite . During the conference , the group confirmed their intention to embark upon a worldwide concert tour , starting in Vancouver on 2 December 2007 . " I want to be a Spice Girl again . We are like sisters and we have our arguments , but by the end of the day we get back together " , said Emma Bunton , while Melanie Chisholm commented that the tour " will be a proper good farewell to our fans " . The group 's comeback single , " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " , was announced as the official Children in Need charity single for 2007 , and released on radio on 23 October , whilst released digitally on 5 November and commercially on 19 November 2007 . 
 Geri Halliwell described the single as a " big love song " and " a Spice Girl classic " . Chisholm , in her 2008 appearance on Never Mind The Buzzcocks , commented that she thought the song was not good at all , and that at least she was against the release of any new material when the record company was trying to market the Greatest Hits release . She would later say " Headlines grew on me , it really came in to its own when we toured it , and it really felt lovely on stage " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " was written by the Spice Girls , along with Richard Stannard and Matt Rowe , who also produced the song . Musically , " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " is a midtempo ballad . It is written in the key of C ♯ minor , and moves at a slow tempo of 76 beats per minute . Lyrically , it talks about the group reuniting , mainly talking about their friendship throughout two decades together . They sing : " Let 's make the headlines / loud and true / I wanna tell the world I 'm giving it all to you / Let 's make the headlines / loud and clear / the best things only happen when you are near " . The song is built around acoustic guitar , syncopated rhythms , and lilting croon @-@ styled vocals . 
 According to Spence D. from IGN , the song " pretty much fits the mold of the Girls previous outings of this down tempo variety " , like " 2 Become 1 " and " Viva Forever " . He commented , " if it hadn 't been singled out as a new track you 'd easily swear that it was a " lost " B @-@ side from one of their previous albums " . For Nick Levine from Digital Spy , " The Spice Girls ' comeback single is as hip and modern as Jeremy Clarkson 's dress sense : the simple drum loop could have been laid down while they were recording their debut album ; the flamenco guitar riffs are pure ' Viva Forever ' ; and , nine years down the line , Mel C is still taking on all the money notes , adding some real oomph to the middle 8 " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " has received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Talia Kraines , writing for BBC Music was positive in her review , and called the song a " classic Spice ballad " . According to a writer from The Daily Collegian , " for the naysayers , who say the Spice Girls time has passed , two new tunes , " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " and " Voodoo " may grab your attention " . Nick Levine from Digital Spy commented in his positive review , " ' Headlines ' won 't be the first tune you skip to on the Spice Girls ' Greatest Hits album – or , in all honesty , the tenth – but , as its pretty , gently melodic chorus surges gracefully , the feeling that comes over you is unmistakable . Nostalgia 's a funny old thing , isn 't it ? " 
 NME gave it a mixed review , and said " new ballad " Headlines " is functional but lacks a certain , ahem , zig @-@ a @-@ zig <unk> . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic gave it a mixed review , as he commented that , along with " Voodoo " , it was " <unk> " and a " sleepy " song . The reviewer also said that the song " isn 't as self @-@ referential or clever as its title suggests " . However , Rosie Swash from The Guardian provided a negative review , stating , " the Spice Girls have never been the most sincere bunch of women and between an entirely forgettable melody and lyrics that go round in circles of crap about reaching into your soul and the time being now or never " , completing that the biggest sound the song made was " the echo of total hollowness " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " was first released in the United Kingdom . The song debuted at number twenty on 17 November 2007 on the UK Singles Chart , based on digital downloads . After two weeks , the song climbed and peaked at number eleven on the chart , becoming the group 's first single not to peak inside the top ten , or indeed the top two . However , the single managed to go to number three on the UK Physical Singles Chart . The song debuted at its peak of number 90 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , staying on the charts only for the week of 24 November 2007 . " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " debuted at number 42 on the Canadian Hot 100 , only staying for one week in the chart . 
 The song debuted at number 67 on the Austrian Singles Chart , the group 's lowest charting single in that country . The song debuted at number 52 on the Dutch Single Top 100 on the issue date 17 November 2007 . It later slipped to number 93 after one week , thus becoming the group 's third single to miss the top ten in that country . On the issue dated 15 November 2007 , " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " debuted at number three on the Swedish Singles Chart , the Spice Girls ' highest single since 1998 's " Goodbye " . The song stayed on the charts for five weeks . The song peaked at number two in Italy , becoming a success in that country , staying in the charts for seven weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On the 15 October 2007 episode of Dancing With the Stars , it was confirmed by Mel B that the Spice Girls would be filming a music video for " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " the following week . The filming took place at Pinewood Studios , on 19 October 2007 , and was directed by Anthony Mandler . The video was reportedly filmed in midst of conflict between the girls , however , these claims were denied by Mel B , who commented " We had such a laugh . It was great to be together again " , and Beckham , who noted " What 's really wonderful is just being able to hang out with the girls again like this " . A world exclusive screening of the video , which launched the run up to Children in Need night , aired on BBC One on 2 November 2007 . 
 The video opens on a stately room , with plum colored walls and antique furniture . Bunton opens a large , black door and is followed by Halliwell , Beckham , Mel B and Chisholm . The girls are dressed in beautiful gowns throughout the video , presumably designed by Roberto Cavalli , who designed the costumes for their then @-@ upcoming tour . Vignettes of the girls singing together and separately are sewn together to create a collage . Fading in and out , the music video ends with the girls combined together although they are at different places . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In November 2007 , the group performed together for the first time in nearly a decade at the 2007 Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show , held in Los Angeles , California . The group dressed in military @-@ themed outfits performed their old hit single " Stop " miming to a backing track , in front of giant glittering lights that spelled out " Spice " in the background . Then they performed " Headlines " , wearing beautiful gowns from Roberto Cavalli , but the performance was excluded from the TV broadcast for unknown reasons . A taped performance of the group <unk> @-@ synching the song , while dressed in black outfits , aired on 17 November 2007 for the Children in Need 2007 marathon . " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " was also performed on their reunion tour , Return of the Spice Girls in 2007 and 2008 . Kitty Empire from The Guardian reviewed the performance negatively , saying the song " was so unworthy of headlines that not even their fans have bought it " . 
 = = Format and track listing = = 
 This is the format and track listing of the major single release of " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " . 
 CD single 
 " Headlines ( Friendship Never Ends ) " - 3 : 28 
 " Wannabe " [ Soul Seekerz 2007 Mix ] - 6 : 56 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Spice Girls – lyrics , vocals 
 Richard Stannard - lyrics , production 
 Matt Rowe - lyrics , production 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – audio mixing 
 Published by Kobalt Music / Sony / ATV Music Publishing / Copyright Control / Peer Music ( UK ) Ltd . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Josiah Willard Gibbs = 
 Josiah Willard Gibbs ( February 11 , 1839 – April 28 , 1903 ) was an American scientist who made important theoretical contributions to physics , chemistry , and mathematics . His work on the applications of thermodynamics was instrumental in transforming physical chemistry into a rigorous deductive science . Together with James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann , he created statistical mechanics ( a term that he coined ) , explaining the laws of thermodynamics as consequences of the statistical properties of ensembles of the possible states of a physical system composed of many particles . Gibbs also worked on the application of Maxwell 's equations to problems in physical optics . As a mathematician , he invented modern vector calculus ( independently of the British scientist Oliver Heaviside , who carried out similar work during the same period ) . 
 In 1863 , Yale awarded Gibbs the first American doctorate in engineering . After a three @-@ year sojourn in Europe , Gibbs spent the rest of his career at Yale , where he was professor of mathematical physics from 1871 until his death . Working in relative isolation , he became the earliest theoretical scientist in the United States to earn an international reputation and was praised by Albert Einstein as " the greatest mind in American history " . In 1901 , Gibbs received what was then considered the highest honor awarded by the international scientific community , the Copley Medal of the Royal Society of London , " for his contributions to mathematical physics " . 
 Commentators and biographers have remarked on the contrast between Gibbs 's quiet , solitary life in turn of the century New England and the great international impact of his ideas . Though his work was almost entirely theoretical , the practical value of Gibbs 's contributions became evident with the development of industrial chemistry during the first half of the 20th century . According to Robert A. Millikan , in pure science Gibbs " did for statistical mechanics and for thermodynamics what Laplace did for celestial mechanics and Maxwell did for electrodynamics , namely , made his field a well @-@ nigh finished theoretical structure . " 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family background = = = 
 Gibbs was born in New Haven , Connecticut . He belonged to an old Yankee family that had produced distinguished American clergymen and academics since the 17th century . He was the fourth of five children and the only son of Josiah Willard Gibbs and his wife Mary Anna , née Van Cleve . On his father 's side , he was descended from Samuel Willard , who served as acting President of Harvard College from 1701 to 1707 . On his mother 's side , one of his ancestors was the Rev. Jonathan Dickinson , the first president of the College of New Jersey ( later Princeton University ) . Gibbs 's given name , which he shared with his father and several other members of his extended family , derived from his ancestor Josiah Willard , who had been Secretary of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in the 18th century . 
 The elder Gibbs was generally known to his family and colleagues as " Josiah " , while the son was called " Willard " . Josiah Gibbs was a linguist and theologian who served as professor of sacred literature at Yale Divinity School from 1824 until his death in 1861 . He is chiefly remembered today as the abolitionist who found an interpreter for the African passengers of the ship Amistad , allowing them to testify during the trial that followed their rebellion against being sold as slaves . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Willard Gibbs was educated at the Hopkins School and entered Yale College in 1854 , aged 15 . At Yale , Gibbs received prizes for excellence in mathematics and Latin , and he graduated in 1858 , near the top of his class . He remained at Yale as a graduate student at the Sheffield Scientific School . At age 19 , soon after his graduation from college , Gibbs was inducted into the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences , a scholarly institution composed primarily of members of the Yale faculty . 
 Relatively few documents from the period survive and it is difficult to reconstruct the details of Gibbs 's early career with precision . In the opinion of biographers , Gibbs 's principal mentor and champion , both at Yale and in the Connecticut Academy , was probably the astronomer and mathematician Hubert Anson Newton , a leading authority on meteors , who remained Gibbs 's lifelong friend and confidant . After the death of his father in 1861 , Gibbs inherited enough money to make him financially independent . 
 Recurrent pulmonary trouble <unk> the young Gibbs and his physicians were concerned that he might be susceptible to tuberculosis , which had killed his mother . He also suffered from astigmatism , whose treatment was then still largely unfamiliar to <unk> , so that Gibbs had to diagnose himself and grind his own lenses . Though in later years he used glasses only for reading or other close work , Gibbs 's delicate health and imperfect eyesight probably explain why he did not volunteer to fight in the Civil War of 1861 – 65 . He was not conscripted and he remained at Yale for the duration of the war . 
 In 1863 , Gibbs received the first Doctorate of Philosophy ( Ph.D. ) in engineering granted in the US , for a thesis entitled " On the Form of the Teeth of Wheels in Spur Gearing " , in which he used geometrical techniques to investigate the optimum design for gears . In 1861 , Yale had become the first US university to offer a Ph.D. degree and Gibbs 's was only the fifth Ph.D. granted in the US in any subject . After graduation , Gibbs was appointed as tutor at the College for a term of three years . During the first two years he taught Latin and during the third " natural philosophy " ( i.e. , physics ) . In 1866 , he patented a design for a railway brake and read a paper before the Connecticut Academy , entitled " The Proper Magnitude of the Units of Length " , in which he proposed a scheme for rationalizing the system of units of measurement used in mechanics . 
 After his term as tutor ended , Gibbs traveled to Europe with his sisters . They spent the winter of 1866 – 67 in Paris , where Gibbs attended lectures at the Sorbonne and the Collège de France , given by such distinguished mathematical scientists as Joseph Liouville and Michel <unk> . Having undertaken a punishing regime of study , Gibbs caught a serious cold and a doctor , fearing tuberculosis , advised him to rest on the Riviera , where he and his sisters spent several months and where he made a full recovery . 
 Moving to Berlin , Gibbs attended the lectures taught by mathematicians Karl Weierstrass and Leopold Kronecker , as well as by chemist Heinrich Gustav Magnus . In August 1867 , Gibbs 's sister Julia was married in Berlin to Addison Van Name , who had been Gibbs 's classmate at Yale . The newly married couple returned to New Haven , leaving Gibbs and his sister Anna in Germany . In Heidelberg , Gibbs was exposed to the work of physicists Gustav Kirchhoff and Hermann von Helmholtz , and chemist Robert Bunsen . At the time , German academics were the leading authorities in the natural sciences , especially chemistry and thermodynamics . 
 Gibbs returned to Yale in June 1869 and briefly taught French to engineering students . It was probably also around this time that he worked on a new design for a steam @-@ engine governor , his last significant investigation in mechanical engineering . In 1871 , he was appointed Professor of Mathematical Physics at Yale , the first such professorship in the United States . Gibbs , who had independent means and had yet to publish anything , was assigned to teach graduate students exclusively and was hired without salary . 
 = = = Middle years = = = 
 Gibbs published his first work in 1873 , at the unusually advanced age of 34 . His papers on the geometric representation of thermodynamic quantities appeared in the Transactions of the Connecticut Academy . These papers introduced the use of different type phase diagrams , which were his favorite aids to the imagination process when doing research , rather than the mechanical models , such as the ones that Maxwell used in constructing his electromagnetic theory , which might not completely represent their corresponding phenomena . Although the journal had few readers capable of understanding Gibbs 's work , he shared reprints with correspondents in Europe and received an enthusiastic response from James Clerk Maxwell at Cambridge . Maxwell even made , with his own hands , a clay model illustrating Gibbs 's construct . He then produced two plaster casts of his model and mailed one to Gibbs . That cast is on display at the Yale physics department . 
 Maxwell included a chapter on Gibbs 's work in the next edition of his Theory of Heat , published in 1875 . He explained the usefulness of Gibbs 's graphical methods in a lecture to the Chemical Society of London and even referred to it in the article on " Diagrams " that he wrote for the Encyclopædia Britannica . Prospects of collaboration between him and Gibbs were cut short by Maxwell 's early death in 1879 , aged 48 . The joke later circulated in New Haven that " only one man lived who could understand Gibbs 's papers . That was Maxwell , and now he is dead . " 
 Gibbs then extended his thermodynamic analysis to multi @-@ phase chemical systems ( i.e. , to systems composed of more than one form of matter ) and considered a variety of concrete applications . He described that research in a monograph titled " On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances " , published by the Connecticut Academy in two parts that appeared respectively in 1875 and 1878 . That work , which covers about three hundred pages and contains exactly seven hundred numbered mathematical equations , begins with a quotation from Rudolf Clausius that expresses what would later be called the first and second laws of thermodynamics : " The energy of the world is constant . The entropy of the world tends towards a maximum . " 
 Gibbs 's monograph rigorously and ingeniously applied his thermodynamic techniques to the interpretation of physico @-@ chemical phenomena , explaining and relating what had previously been a mass of isolated facts and observations . The work has been described as " the Principia of thermodynamics " and as a work of " practically unlimited scope " . It solidly laid the foundation for physical Chemistry . Wilhelm Ostwald , who translated Gibbs 's monograph into German , referred to Gibbs as the " founder of chemical energetics " . According to modern commentators , 
 It is universally recognised that its publication was an event of the first importance in the history of chemistry ... Nevertheless it was a number of years before its value was generally known , this delay was due largely to the fact that its mathematical form and rigorous deductive processes make it difficult reading for anyone , and especially so for students of experimental chemistry whom it most concerns . 
 Gibbs continued to work without pay until 1880 , when the new Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore , Maryland offered him a position paying $ 3 @,@ 000 per year . In response , Yale offered him an annual salary of $ 2 @,@ 000 , which he was content to accept . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 From 1880 to 1884 , Gibbs worked on developing the exterior algebra of Hermann Grassmann into a vector calculus well @-@ suited to the needs of physicists . With this object in mind , Gibbs distinguished between the dot and cross products of two vectors and introduced the concept of <unk> . Similar work was carried out independently , and at around the same time , by the British mathematical physicist and engineer Oliver Heaviside . Gibbs sought to convince other physicists of the convenience of the vectorial approach over the <unk> calculus of William Rowan Hamilton , which was then widely used by British scientists . This led him , in the early 1890s , to a controversy with Peter Guthrie Tait and others in the pages of Nature . 
 Gibbs 's lecture notes on vector calculus were privately printed in 1881 and 1884 for the use of his students , and were later adapted by Edwin Bidwell Wilson into a textbook , Vector Analysis , published in 1901 . That book helped to popularize the " del " notation that is widely used today in electrodynamics and fluid mechanics . In other mathematical work , he re @-@ discovered the " Gibbs phenomenon " in the theory of Fourier series ( which , unbeknownst to him and to later scholars , had been described fifty years before by an obscure English mathematician , Henry Wilbraham ) . 
 From 1882 to 1889 , Gibbs wrote five papers on physical optics , in which he investigated birefringence and other optical phenomena and defended Maxwell 's electromagnetic theory of light against the mechanical theories of Lord Kelvin and others . In his work on optics just as much as in his work on thermodynamics , Gibbs deliberately avoided speculating about the microscopic structure of matter and purposefully confined his research problems to those can be solved from broad general principles and experimentally confirmed <unk> methods that he used were highly original and the obtained results showed decisively the correctness of Maxwell ’ s electromagnetic theory . 
 Gibbs coined the term statistical mechanics and introduced key concepts in the corresponding mathematical description of physical systems , including the notions of chemical potential ( 1876 ) , statistical ensemble ( 1902 ) . Gibbs 's derivation of the phenomenological laws of thermodynamics from the statistical properties of systems with many particles was presented in his highly influential textbook Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics , published in 1902 , a year before his death . 
 Gibbs 's retiring personality and intense focus on his work limited his accessibility to students . His principal protégé was Edwin Bidwell Wilson , who nonetheless explained that " except in the classroom I saw very little of Gibbs . He had a way , toward the end of the afternoon , of taking a stroll about the streets between his study in the old Sloane Laboratory and his home — a little exercise between work and dinner — and one might occasionally come across him at that time . " Gibbs did supervise the doctoral thesis on mathematical economics written by Irving Fisher in 1891 . After Gibbs 's death , Fisher financed the publication of his Collected Works . Another distinguished student was Lee De Forest , later a pioneer of radio technology . 
 Gibbs died in New Haven on April 28 , 1903 , at the age of 64 , victim of an acute intestinal obstruction . A funeral was conducted two days later at his home on 121 High Street , and his body was buried in the nearby Grove Street Cemetery . In May , Yale organized a memorial meeting at the Sloane Laboratory . The eminent British physicist J. J. Thomson was in attendance and delivered a brief address . 
 = = = Personal life and character = = = 
 Gibbs never married , living all his life in his childhood home with his sister Julia and her husband Addison Van Name , who was the Yale librarian . Except for his customary summer vacations in the Adirondacks ( at Keene Valley , New York ) and later at the White Mountains ( in Intervale , New Hampshire ) , his sojourn in Europe in 1866 – 69 was almost the only time that Gibbs spent outside New Haven . He joined Yale 's College Church ( a Congregational church ) at the end of his freshman year and remained a regular attendant for the rest of his life . Gibbs generally voted for the Republican candidate in presidential elections but , like other " Mugwumps " , his concern over the growing corruption associated with machine politics led him to support Grover Cleveland , a conservative Democrat , in the election of 1884 . Little else is known of his religious or political views , which he mostly kept to himself . 
 Gibbs did not produce a substantial personal correspondence and many of his letters were later lost or destroyed . Beyond the technical writings concerning his research , he published only two other pieces : a brief obituary for Rudolf Clausius , one of the founders of the mathematical theory of thermodynamics , and a longer biographical memoir of his mentor at Yale , H. A. Newton . In Edward Bidwell Wilson 's view , 
 Gibbs was not an advertiser for personal renown nor a propagandist for science ; he was a scholar , scion of an old scholarly family , living before the days when research had become <unk> ... Gibbs was not a freak , he had no striking ways , he was a kindly dignified gentleman . 
 According to Lynde Wheeler , who had been Gibbs 's student at Yale , in his later years Gibbs 
 was always neatly dressed , usually wore a felt hat on the street , and never exhibited any of the physical mannerisms or eccentricities sometimes thought to be inseparable from genius ... His manner was cordial without being effusive and conveyed clearly the innate simplicity and sincerity of his nature . 
 He was a careful investor and financial manager , and at his death in 1903 his estate was valued at $ 100 @,@ 000 ( roughly $ 2 @.@ 63 million today ) . For many years he served as trustee , secretary , and treasurer of his alma mater , the Hopkins School . US President Chester A. Arthur appointed him as one of the commissioners to the National Conference of Electricians , which convened in Philadelphia in September 1884 , and Gibbs presided over one of its sessions . A keen and skilled horseman , Gibbs was seen habitually in New Haven driving his sister 's carriage . In an obituary published in the American Journal of Science , Gibbs 's former student Henry A. Bumstead referred to Gibbs 's personal character : 
 Unassuming in manner , genial and kindly in his intercourse with his fellow @-@ men , never showing impatience or irritation , devoid of personal ambition of the baser sort or of the slightest desire to exalt himself , he went far toward realizing the ideal of the unselfish , Christian gentleman . In the minds of those who knew him , the greatness of his intellectual achievements will never overshadow the beauty and dignity of his life . 
 = = Major scientific contributions = = 
 = = = Chemical thermodynamics = = = 
 Gibbs 's papers from the 1870s introduced the idea of expressing the internal energy U of a system in terms of the entropy S , in addition to the usual state @-@ variables of volume V , pressure p , and temperature T. He also introduced the concept of the chemical potential <formula> of a given chemical species , defined to be the rate of the increase in U associated with the increase in the number N of molecules of that species ( at constant entropy and volume ) . Thus , it was Gibbs who first combined the first and second laws of thermodynamics by expressing the infinitesimal change in the internal energy , <unk> , of a closed system in the form : 
 <formula> 
 where T is the absolute temperature , p is the pressure , dS is an infinitesimal change in entropy and dV is an infinitesimal change of volume . The last term is the sum , over all the chemical species in a chemical reaction , of the chemical potential , <unk> , of the ith species , multiplied by the infinitesimal change in the number of moles , <unk> of that species . By taking the Legendre transform of this expression , he defined the concepts of enthalpy , H and Gibbs free energy , G. 
 <formula> 
 This compares to the expression for Helmholtz free energy , A. 
 <formula> 
 When the Gibbs free energy for a chemical reaction is negative the reaction will proceed spontaneously . When a chemical system is at equilibrium the change in Gibbs free <unk> is zero . An equilibrium constant is simply related to the free energy change when the reactants are in their standard states . 
 <formula> 
 Chemical potential is usually defined as partial molar Gibbs free energy . 
 <formula> 
 Gibbs also obtained what later came to be known as the " Gibbs – Duhem equation " . 
 The publication of the paper " On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances " ( 1874 – 78 ) is now regarded as a landmark in the development of chemistry . In it , Gibbs developed a rigorous mathematical theory for various transport phenomena , including adsorption , electrochemistry , and the Marangoni effect in fluid mixtures . He also formulated the phase rule 
 <formula> 
 for the number F of variables that may be independently controlled in an equilibrium mixture of C components existing in P phases . Phase rule is very useful in diverse areas , such as metallurgy , mineralogy , and petrology . It can also be applied to various research problems in physical chemistry . 
 = = = Statistical mechanics = = = 
 Together with James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann , Gibbs founded " statistical mechanics " , a term that he coined to identify the branch of theoretical physics that accounts for the observed thermodynamic properties of systems in terms of the statistics of ensembles of all possible physical states of a system composed of many particles . He introduced the concept of " phase of a mechanical system " . He used the concept to define the <unk> , canonical , and grand canonical ensembles , thus obtaining a more general formulation of the statistical properties of many @-@ particle systems than Maxwell and Boltzmann had achieved before him . 
 According to Henri Poincaré , writing in 1904 , even though Maxwell and Boltzmann had previously explained the irreversibility of macroscopic physical processes in probabilistic terms , " the one who has seen it most clearly , in a book too little read because it is a little difficult to read , is Gibbs , in his Elementary Principles of Statistical Mechanics . " Gibbs 's analysis of irreversibility , and his formulation of Boltzmann 's H @-@ theorem and of the ergodic hypothesis , were major influences on the mathematical physics of the 20th century . 
 Gibbs was well aware that the application of the <unk> theorem to large systems of classical particles failed to explain the measurements of the specific heats of both solids and gases , and he argued that this was evidence of the danger of basing thermodynamics on " hypotheses about the constitution of matter " . Gibbs 's own framework for statistical mechanics , based on ensembles of macroscopically indistinguishable microstates , could be carried over almost intact after the discovery that the microscopic laws of nature obey quantum rules , rather than the classical laws known to Gibbs and to his contemporaries . His resolution of the so @-@ called " Gibbs paradox " , about the entropy of the mixing of gases , is now often cited as a prefiguration of the <unk> of particles required by quantum physics . 
 = = = Vector analysis = = = 
 British scientists , including Maxwell , had relied on Hamilton 's quaternions in order to express the dynamics of physical quantities , like the electric and magnetic fields , having both a magnitude and a direction in three @-@ dimensional space . Gibbs , however , noted that the product of quaternions always had to be separated into two parts : a one @-@ dimensional ( scalar ) quantity and a three @-@ dimensional vector , so that the use of quaternions introduced mathematical complications and redundancies that could be avoided in the interest of simplicity and to facilitate teaching . He therefore proposed defining distinct dot and cross products for pairs of vectors and introduced the now common notation for them . He was also largely responsible for the development of the vector calculus techniques still used today in electrodynamics and fluid mechanics . 
 While he was working on vector analysis in the late 1870s , Gibbs discovered that his approach was similar to the one that Grassmann had taken in his " multiple algebra " . Gibbs then sought to publicize Grassmann 's work , stressing that it was both more general and historically prior to Hamilton 's <unk> algebra . To establish priority of Grassmann ’ s ideas , Gibbs convinced Grassmann 's heirs to seek the publication in Germany of the essay " Theorie der Ebbe und <unk> " on tides that Grassmann had submitted in 1840 to the faculty at the University of Berlin , in which he had first introduced the notion of what would later be called a vector space ( linear space ) . 
 As Gibbs had advocated in the 1880s and 1890s , quaternions were eventually all but abandoned by physicists in favor of the vectorial approach developed by him and , independently , by Oliver Heaviside . Gibbs applied his vector methods to the determination of planetary and comet orbits . He also developed the concept of mutually reciprocal triads of vectors that later proved to be of importance in crystallography . 
 = = = Physical optics = = = 
 Though Gibbs 's research on physical optics is less well known today than his other work , it made a significant contribution to classical electromagnetism by applying Maxwell 's equations to the theory of optical processes such as birefringence , dispersion , and optical activity . In that work , Gibbs showed that those processes could be accounted for by Maxwell 's equations without any special assumptions about the microscopic structure of matter or about the nature of the medium in which electromagnetic waves were supposed to propagate ( the so @-@ called luminiferous ether ) . Gibbs also stressed that the absence of a longitudinal electromagnetic wave , which is needed to account for the observed properties of light , is automatically guaranteed by Maxwell 's equations ( by virtue of what is now called their " gauge invariance " ) , whereas in mechanical theories of light , such as Lord Kelvin 's , it must be imposed as an ad hoc condition on the properties of the aether . 
 In his last paper on physical optics , Gibbs concluded that 
 it may be said for the electrical theory [ of light ] that it is not obliged to invent hypotheses , but only to apply the laws furnished by the science of electricity , and that it is difficult to account for the coincidences between the electrical and optical properties of media unless we regard the motions of light as electrical . 
 Shortly afterwards , the electromagnetic nature of light was demonstrated by the experiments of Heinrich Hertz in Germany . 
 = = Scientific recognition = = 
 Gibbs worked at a time when there was little tradition of rigorous theoretical science in the United States . His research was not easily understandable to his students or his colleagues and he made no effort to popularize his ideas or to simplify their exposition to make them more accessible . His seminal work on thermodynamics was published mostly in the Transactions of the Connecticut Academy , a journal edited by his librarian brother @-@ in @-@ law , which was little read in the USA and even less so in Europe . When Gibbs submitted his long paper on the equilibrium of heterogeneous substances to the Academy , both Elias Loomis and H. A. Newton protested that they did not understand Gibbs 's work at all , but they helped to raise the money needed to pay for the typesetting of the many mathematical symbols in the paper . Several Yale faculty members , as well as business and professional men in New Haven , contributed funds for that purpose . 
 Even though it had been immediately embraced by Maxwell , Gibbs 's graphical formulation of the laws of thermodynamics only came into widespread use in the mid 20th century , with the work of László Tisza and Herbert Callen . According to James Gerald Crowther , 
 in his later years [ Gibbs ] was a tall , dignified gentleman , with a healthy stride and ruddy complexion , performing his share of household chores , approachable and kind ( if unintelligible ) to students . Gibbs was highly esteemed by his friends , but American science was too preoccupied with practical questions to make much use of his profound theoretical work during his lifetime . He lived out his quiet life at Yale , deeply admired by a few able students but making no immediate impress on American science commensurate with his genius . 
 On the other hand , Gibbs did receive the major honors then possible for an academic scientist in the US . He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1879 and received the 1880 Rumford Prize from the American Academy of Arts and Sciences for his work on chemical thermodynamics . He was also awarded honorary doctorates by Princeton University and Williams College . 
 In Europe , Gibbs was inducted as honorary member of the London Mathematical Society in 1892 and elected Foreign Member of the Royal Society in 1897 . He was elected as corresponding member of the Prussian and French Academies of Science and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Dublin , Erlangen , and Christiania ( now Oslo ) . The Royal Society further honored Gibbs in 1901 with the Copley Medal , then regarded as the highest international award in the natural sciences , noting that he had been " the first to apply the second law of thermodynamics to the exhaustive discussion of the relation between chemical , electrical and thermal energy and capacity for external work . " Gibbs , who remained in New Haven , was represented at the award ceremony by Commander Richardson Clover , the US naval attaché in London . 
 In his autobiography , mathematician Gian @-@ Carlo Rota tells of casually browsing the mathematical stacks of Sterling Library and stumbling on a handwritten mailing list , attached to some of Gibbs 's course notes , which listed over two hundred notable scientists of his day , including Poincaré , Boltzmann , David Hilbert , and Ernst Mach . From this , Rota concluded that Gibbs 's work was better known among the scientific elite of his day than the published material suggests . Lynde Wheeler reproduces that mailing list in an appendix to his biography of Gibbs . That Gibbs succeeded in interesting his European correspondents in his work is demonstrated by the fact that his monograph " On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances " was translated into German ( then the leading language for chemistry ) by Wilhelm Ostwald in 1892 and into French by Henri Louis Le <unk> in 1899 . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Gibbs 's most immediate and obvious influence was on physical chemistry and statistical mechanics , two disciplines which he greatly helped to found . During Gibbs 's lifetime , his phase rule was experimentally validated by Dutch chemist H. W. <unk> <unk> , who showed how to apply it in a variety of situations , thereby assuring it of widespread use . In industrial chemistry , Gibbs 's thermodynamics found many applications during the early 20th century , from electrochemistry to the development of the Haber process for the synthesis of ammonia . 
 When Dutch physicist J. D. van der Waals received the 1910 Nobel Prize " for his work on the equation of state for gases and liquids " he acknowledged the great influence of Gibbs 's work on that subject . Max Planck received the 1918 Nobel Prize for his work on quantum mechanics , particularly his 1900 paper on Planck 's law for quantized black @-@ body radiation . That work was based largely on the thermodynamics of Kirchhoff , Boltzmann , and Gibbs . Planck declared that Gibbs 's name " not only in America but in the whole world will ever be reckoned among the most renowned theoretical physicists of all times . " 
 The first half of the 20th century saw the publication of two influential textbooks that soon came to be regarded as founding documents of chemical thermodynamics , both of which used and extended Gibbs 's work in that field : these were Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical Processes ( 1923 ) , by Gilbert N. Lewis and Merle Randall , and Modern Thermodynamics by the Methods of Willard Gibbs ( 1933 ) , by Edward A. Guggenheim . 
 Gibbs 's work on statistical ensembles , as presented in his 1902 textbook , has had a great impact in both theoretical physics and in pure mathematics . According to mathematical physicist Arthur Wightman , 
 It is one of the striking features of the work of Gibbs , noticed by every student of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics , that his formulations of physical concepts were so felicitously chosen that they have survived 100 years of turbulent development in theoretical physics and mathematics . 
 Initially unaware of Gibbs 's contributions in that field , Albert Einstein wrote three papers on statistical mechanics , published between 1902 and 1904 . After reading Gibbs 's textbook ( which was translated into German by Ernst Zermelo in 1905 ) , Einstein declared that Gibbs 's treatment was superior to his own and explained that he would not have written those papers if he had known Gibbs 's work . 
 Gibbs 's early papers on the use of graphical methods in thermodynamics reflect a powerfully original understanding of what mathematicians would later call " convex analysis " , including ideas that , according to Barry Simon , " lay dormant for about seventy @-@ five years " . Important mathematical concepts based on Gibbs 's work on thermodynamics and statistical mechanics include the Gibbs lemma in game theory , the Gibbs inequality in information theory , as well as Gibbs sampling in computational statistics . 
 The development of vector calculus was Gibbs 's other great contribution to mathematics . The publication in 1901 of E. B. Wilson 's textbook Vector Analysis , based on Gibbs 's lectures at Yale , did much to propagate the use of vectorial methods and notation in both mathematics and theoretical physics , definitively displacing the quaternions that had until then been dominant in the scientific literature . 
 At Yale , Gibbs was also mentor to Lee De Forest , who went on to invent the triode amplifier and has been called the " father of radio " . De Forest credited Gibbs 's influence for the realization " that the leaders in electrical development would be those who pursued the higher theory of waves and oscillations and the transmission by these means of intelligence and power . " Another student of Gibbs who played a significant role in the development of radio technology was Lynde Wheeler . 
 Gibbs also had an indirect influence on mathematical economics . He supervised the thesis of Irving Fisher , who received the first Ph.D. in economics from Yale in 1891 . In that work , published in 1892 as Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of Value and Prices , Fisher drew a direct analogy between <unk> equilibrium in physical and chemical systems , and the general equilibrium of markets , and he used Gibbs 's vectorial notation . Gibbs 's protegé Edwin Bidwell Wilson became , in turn , a mentor to leading American economist and Nobel Laureate Paul Samuelson . In 1947 , Samuelson published Foundations of Economic Analysis , based on his doctoral dissertation , in which he used as epigraph a remark attributed to Gibbs : " Mathematics is a language . " Samuelson later explained that in his understanding of prices his " debts were not primarily to Pareto or <unk> , but to the great <unk> , Willard Gibbs of Yale . " 
 Mathematician Norbert Wiener cited Gibbs 's use of probability in the formulation of statistical mechanics as " the first great revolution of twentieth century physics " and as a major influence on his conception of cybernetics . Wiener explained in the preface to his book The Human Use of Human Beings that it was " devoted to the impact of the <unk> point of view on modern life , both through the substantive changes it has made to working science , and through the changes it has made indirectly in our attitude to life in general . " 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 When the German physical chemist Walther Nernst visited Yale in 1906 to give the Silliman lecture , he was surprised to find no tangible memorial for Gibbs . He therefore donated his $ 500 lecture fee to the university to help pay for a suitable monument . This was finally unveiled in 1912 , in the form of a bronze bas @-@ relief by sculptor Lee Lawrie , installed in the Sloane Physics Laboratory . In 1910 , the American Chemical Society established the Willard Gibbs Award for eminent work in pure or applied chemistry . In 1923 , the American Mathematical Society endowed the Josiah Willard Gibbs Lectureship , " to show the public some idea of the aspects of mathematics and its applications " . 
 In 1945 , Yale University created the J. Willard Gibbs Professorship in Theoretical Chemistry , held until 1973 by Lars Onsager . Onsager , who much like Gibbs focused on applying new mathematical ideas to problems in physical chemistry , won the 1968 Nobel Prize in chemistry . In addition to establishing the Josiah Willard Gibbs Laboratories and the J. Willard Gibbs Assistant Professorship in Mathematics , Yale has hosted two symposia dedicated to Gibbs 's life and work , one in 1989 and another on the centenary of his death , in 2003 . Rutgers University endowed a J. Willard Gibbs Professorship of <unk> , held as of 2014 by Bernard Coleman . 
 Gibbs was elected in 1950 to the Hall of Fame for Great Americans . The oceanographic research ship USNS Josiah Willard Gibbs ( T @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 ) was in service with the United States Navy from 1958 to 1971 . Gibbs crater , near the eastern limb of the Moon , was named in the scientist 's honor in 1964 . 
 Edward Guggenheim introduced the symbol G for the Gibbs free energy in 1933 , and this was used also by Dirk ter Haar in 1966 . This notation is now universal and is recommended by the IUPAC . In 1960 , William <unk> and others suggested the name " <unk> " ( abbreviated <unk> . ) for the unit of entropy , calorie / Kelvin , but this usage did not become common and the corresponding SI unit , Joule / Kelvin , carries no special name . 
 In 1954 , a year before his death , Albert Einstein was asked by an interviewer who were the greatest thinkers that he had known . Einstein replied : " Lorentz " , adding " I never met Willard Gibbs ; perhaps , had I done so , I might have placed him beside Lorentz . " 
 = = = In literature = = = 
 In 1909 , the American historian and novelist Henry Adams finished an essay entitled " The Rule of Phase Applied to History " , in which he sought to apply Gibbs 's phase rule and other thermodynamic concepts to a general theory of human history . William James , Henry Bumstead , and others criticized both Adams 's tenuous grasp of the scientific concepts that he invoked , as well as the arbitrariness of his application of those concepts as metaphors for the evolution of human thought and society . The essay remained unpublished until it appeared posthumously in 1919 , in The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma , edited by Henry Adams 's younger brother Brooks . 
 In the 1930s , feminist poet Muriel Rukeyser became fascinated by Willard Gibbs and wrote a long poem about his life and work ( " Gibbs " , included in the collection A Turning Wind , published in 1939 ) , as well as a book @-@ length biography ( Willard Gibbs , 1942 ) . According to Rukeyser : 
 Willard Gibbs is the type of the imagination at work in the world . His story is that of an opening up which has had its effect on our lives and our thinking ; and , it seems to me , it is the emblem of the naked imagination — which is called abstract and impractical , but whose discoveries can be used by anyone who is interested , in whatever " field " — an imagination which for me , more than that of any other figure in American thought , any poet , or political , or religious figure , stands for imagination at its essential points . 
 In 1946 , Fortune magazine illustrated a cover story on " Fundamental Science " with a representation of the thermodynamic surface that Maxwell had built based on Gibbs 's proposal . Rukeyser had called this surface a " statue of water " and the magazine saw in it " the abstract creation of a great American scientist that lends itself to the symbolism of contemporary art forms . " The artwork by Arthur <unk> also included Gibbs 's mathematical expression of the phase rule for heterogeneous mixtures , as well as a radar screen , an oscilloscope waveform , Newton 's apple , and a small rendition of a three @-@ dimensional phase diagram . 
 Gibbs 's nephew , Ralph Gibbs Van Name , a professor of physical chemistry at Yale , was unhappy with Rukeyser 's biography , in part because of her lack of scientific training . Van Name had withheld the family papers from her and , after her book was published in 1942 to positive literary but mixed scientific reviews , he tried to encourage Gibbs 's former students to produce a more technically oriented biography . Rukeyser 's approach to Gibbs was also sharply criticized by Gibbs 's former student and protégé Edwin Wilson . With Van Name 's and Wilson 's encouragement , physicist Lynde Wheeler published a new biography of Gibbs in 1951 . 
 Both Gibbs and Rukeyser 's biography of him figure prominently in the poetry collection True North ( 1997 ) by Stephanie Strickland . In fiction , Gibbs appears as the mentor to character Kit Traverse in Thomas Pynchon 's novel Against the Day ( 2006 ) . That novel also prominently discusses the birefringence of Iceland spar , an optical phenomenon that Gibbs investigated . 
 = = = Gibbs stamp ( 2005 ) = = = 
 In 2005 , the United States Postal Service issued the American Scientists commemorative postage stamp series designed by artist Victor <unk> , depicting Gibbs , John von Neumann , Barbara McClintock , and Richard Feynman . The first day of issue ceremony for the series was held on May 4 at Yale University 's Luce Hall and was attended by John Marburger , scientific advisor to the President of the United States , Rick Levin , president of Yale , and family members of the scientists honored , including physician John W. Gibbs , a distant cousin of Willard Gibbs . 
 Kenneth R. <unk> , a professor of chemical engineering at Iowa State University and an expert on graphical methods in thermodynamics , consulted on the design of the stamp honoring Gibbs . The stamp identifies Gibbs as a " <unk> " and features a diagram from the 4th edition of Maxwell 's Theory of Heat , published in 1875 , which illustrates Gibbs 's thermodynamic surface for water . Microprinting on the collar of Gibbs 's portrait depicts his original mathematical equation for the change in the energy of a substance in terms of its entropy and the other state variables . 
 = = Outline of principal work = = 
 Physical chemistry : free energy , phase diagram , phase rule , transport phenomena 
 Statistical mechanics : statistical ensemble , phase space , chemical potential , Gibbs entropy , Gibbs paradox 
 Mathematics : Vector Analysis , convex analysis , Gibbs phenomenon 
 Electromagnetism : Maxwell 's equations , birefringence 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 L. P. Wheeler , E. O. Waters and S. W. Dudley ( eds . ) , The Early Work of Willard Gibbs in Applied Mechanics , ( New York : Henry Schuman , 1947 ) . ISBN 1 @-@ 881987 @-@ 17 @-@ 5 . This contains previously unpublished work by Gibbs , from the period between 1863 and 1871 . 
 J. W. Gibbs , " On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances " , Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences , 3 , 108 – 248 , 343 – 524 , ( 1874 – 1878 ) . Reproduced in both The Scientific Papers ( 1906 ) , pp. 55 – 353 and The Collected Works of J. Willard Gibbs ( 1928 ) , pp. 55 – 353 . 
 E. B. Wilson , Vector Analysis , a text @-@ book for the use of students of Mathematics and Physics , founded upon the Lectures of J. Willard Gibbs , ( New Haven : Yale University Press , 1929 [ 1901 ] ) . 
 J. W. Gibbs , Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics , developed with especial reference to the rational foundation of thermodynamics , ( New York : Dover Publications , 1960 [ 1902 ] ) . 
 Gibbs 's other papers are included in both : 
 The Scientific Papers of J. Willard Gibbs , in two volumes , eds . H. A. Bumstead and R. G. Van Name , ( Woodbridge , CT : Ox Bow Press , 1993 [ 1906 ] ) . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 77 @-@ 3 , ISBN 1 @-@ 881987 @-@ 06 @-@ X. For scans of the 1906 printing , see vol . I and vol . II . 
 The Collected Works of J. Willard Gibbs , in two volumes , eds . W. R. Longley and R. G. Van Name , ( New Haven : Yale University Press , 1957 [ 1928 ] ) . For scans of the 1928 printing , see vol . I and vol . II . 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 H. A. Bumstead , " Josiah Willard Gibbs " , American Journal of Science ( ser . 4 ) 16 , 187 – 202 ( 1903 ) doi : 10 @.@ <unk> / <unk> @-@ 16 @.@ 93 @.@ 187 . Reprinted with some additions in both The Scientific Papers , vol . I , pp. xiii – <unk> ( 1906 ) and The Collected Works of J. Willard Gibbs , vol . I , pp. xiii – <unk> ( 1928 ) . Also available here [ 1 ] . 
 D. G. <unk> and G. D. Mostow ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the Gibbs Symposium , Yale University , May 15 – 17 , 1989 , ( American Mathematical Society and American Institute of Physics , 1990 ) . 
 W. H. Cropper , " The Greatest Simplicity : Willard Gibbs " , in Great Physicists , ( Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2001 ) , pp. 106 – 123 . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 M. J. Crowe , A History of Vector Analysis : The Evolution of the Idea of a <unk> System , ( New York : Dover , 1994 [ 1967 ] ) . ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 J. G. Crowther , Famous American Men of Science , ( Freeport , NY : Books for Libraries Press , 1969 [ 1937 ] ) . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0040 @-@ 5 
 F. G. Donnan and A. E. Hass ( eds . ) , A Commentary on the Scientific Writings of J. Willard Gibbs , in two volumes , ( New York : Arno , 1980 [ 1936 ] ) . ISBN 0 @-@ 405 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . Only vol I. is currently available online . 
 P. Duhem , Josiah @-@ Willard Gibbs à <unk> de la publication de ses Mémoires <unk> , ( Paris : A. Herman , 1908 ) . 
 C. S. Hastings , " Josiah Willard Gibbs " , Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences , 6 , 373 – 393 ( 1909 ) . 
 M. J. Klein , " Gibbs , Josiah Willard " , in Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol . 5 , ( Detroit : Charles <unk> 's Sons , 2008 ) , pp. 386 – 393 . 
 M. Rukeyser , Willard Gibbs : American Genius , ( Woodbridge , CT : Ox Bow Press , 1988 [ 1942 ] ) . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 57 @-@ 9 
 R. J. Seeger , J. Willard Gibbs , American mathematical physicist par excellence , ( Oxford and New York : Pergamon Press , 1974 ) . ISBN 0 @-@ 08 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 L. P. Wheeler , Josiah Willard Gibbs , The History of a Great Mind , ( Woodbridge , CT : Ox Bow Press , 1998 [ 1951 ] ) . ISBN 1 @-@ 881987 @-@ 11 @-@ 6 
 A. S. Wightman , " Convexity and the notion of equilibrium state in thermodynamics and statistical mechanics " . Published as an introduction to R. B. Israel , Convexity in the Theory of Lattice Gases , ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1979 ) , pp. ix – <unk> . ISBN 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ X 
 E. B. Wilson , " Reminiscences of Gibbs by a student and colleague " , Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society , 37 , 401 – 416 ( 1931 ) . 
 = Saurolophus = 
 Saurolophus ( / <unk> / ; meaning " lizard crest " ) is a genus of large saurolophine hadrosaurid dinosaurs that lived about 70 @.@ 0 – 68 @.@ 5 million years ago , in the Late Cretaceous of North America and Asia ; it is one of the few genera of dinosaurs known from multiple continents . It is distinguished by a spike @-@ like crest which projects up and back from the skull . Saurolophus was a herbivorous dinosaur which could move about either bipedally or quadrupedally . 
 The type species , S. osborni , was described by Barnum Brown in 1912 from Canadian fossils . A second valid species , S. angustirostris , is represented by numerous specimens from Mongolia , and was described by Anatoly Konstantinovich Rozhdestvensky . 
 = = Description = = 
 Saurolophus is known from material including nearly complete skeletons , giving researchers a clear picture of its bony anatomy . S. osborni , the rarer Albertan species , was around 9 @.@ 8 m ( 32 ft ) long , with its skull 1 @.@ 0 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long . Its weight is estimated at 1 @.@ 9 tonnes ( 2 @.@ 1 tons ) . S. angustirostris , the Mongolian species , was larger ; the type skeleton is roughly 12 m ( 39 ft ) long , and larger remains are reported . Aside from size , the two species are virtually identical , with differentiation hindered by lack of study . 
 The most distinctive feature of Saurolophus is its cranial crest , which is present in young individuals , but is smaller . It is long and spike @-@ like and projects upward and backward at about a 45 ° angle , starting from over the eyes . This crest is often described as solid , but appears to be solid only at the point , with internal chambers that may have had a respiratory and / or heat @-@ regulation function . 
 The holotype of S. angustirostris is a skull and postcrania , so the cranium of the species is well @-@ described . Bell et al. re @-@ evaluated the entire species in a 2011 publication with Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . Their description found the skull to be generalized among hadrosaurines , and are much larger than any skulls of S. osborni . The most unusual feature for a hadrosaurine is the long , protruding , solid crest that extends upwards diagonally from the back of the skull roof . Unlike lambeosaurines , the crests are made up completely of the nasal bone . The premaxilla bones make up almost 50 % of the entire skull length , and both sides are filled with small holes . Only in adult individuals has the front of the premaxillary contact been fused . Longer than the premaxilla , the nasal bones are the longest in the skull . They make up the entire length of the crest , and are never preserved as fused . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Barnum Brown , who described the first specimens , put it in its own subfamily in " Trachodontidae " ( = Hadrosauridae ) , the Saurolophinae . At the time , this also included Corythosaurus and Hypacrosaurus , the only well @-@ known examples of what would become the Lambeosaurinae . Brown thought that Saurolophus had an expanded tip to the ischium bone in the hip , as dinosaurs now recognized as lambeosaurines had , but this appears to have been based on a mistakenly associated lambeosaurine ischium . Additionally , he misinterpreted the crests of Saurolophus and lambeosaurines as being made of the same bones . 
 Most publications before 2010 classified Saurolophus as a member of Hadrosaurinae , often known colloquially as the " flat @-@ headed hadrosaurs " . In 2010 , the subfamily Saurolophinae was brought back into use because Hadrosaurus appears to have branched off prior to the " hadrosaurine " – lambeosaurine split . As a result , Hadrosaurinae by definition cannot include the traditional " hadrosaurines " . Saurolophinae is the oldest available name for the former " hadrosaurine " clade . Saurolophus , as the name suggests , is a saurolophine , as it has a saurolophine pelvis and a ( largely ) solid crest . 
 The following cladogram of hadrosaurid relationships was published in 2013 by Alberto Prieto @-@ Márquez et al. in Acta Palaeontologica Polonica : 
 = = Discovery and history = = 
 Barnum Brown recovered the first described remains of Saurolophus in 1911 , including a nearly complete skeleton ( AMNH <unk> ) . Now on display in the American Museum of Natural History , this skeleton was the first nearly complete dinosaur skeleton from Canada . It was found in rocks of early Maastrichtian age , in the Upper Cretaceous Horseshoe Canyon Formation ( then known as the Edmonton Formation ) near Tolman Ferry on the Red Deer River in Alberta . Brown wasted little time in describing his material , giving it its own subfamily . Saurolophus was an important early reference for other hadrosaurs , as seen in the names of Prosaurolophus ( " before Saurolophus " ) and Parasaurolophus ( " near Saurolophus " ) . However , little additional material has been recovered and described . 
 Instead , more abundant remains from Asia have provided more data . Initial remains were not promising ; a partial fragmentary ischium from Heilongjiang , China , that Riabinin named S. <unk> . Much better remains were soon recovered , though , but from Mongolia 's early Maastrichtian @-@ age Nemegt Formation . The 1946 – 1949 Russian @-@ Mongolian paleontological expeditions recovered the large skeleton that became S. angustirostris as described by Anatoly Rozhdestvensky . Other skeletons from a variety of growth stages have also been discovered , and S. angustirostris is now the most abundant Asian hadrosaurid . 
 In 1939 – 40 , two partial skeletons were found in the late Maastrichtian age Moreno Formation of California . These specimens were referred to cf . Saurolophus sp . In 2010 , one of the skulls was instead assigned to Edmontosaurus . A 2013 placed the two specimens in a new species , S. <unk> . In 2014 , the species was reassigned to a new genus , <unk> . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 Two species are regarded as valid today : the type species S. osborni , and S. angustirostris . S. osborni ( Brown , 1912 ) is known from a skull and skeleton , two other complete skulls , and skull fragments . S. angustirostris ( Rozhdestvensky , 1952 ) is known from at least 15 specimens . It differs from S. osborni by some details of the skull , as well as in the pattern of scales found in skin impressions . The Mongolian species had a longer skull ( by 20 % ) and the front of the snout ( the premaxillary bones ) were more upwardly directed . S. angustirostris also had a distinctive row of square scales along the back and tail , which was smooth in S. osborni . In S. angustirostris , the scales on the tail flank were arranged in vertical patterns , which may have corresponded to striped coloration in life . This area was covered in radial scale patterns in S. osborni , possibly indicating a more mottled or spotted coloration . S. <unk> ( Riabinin , 1930 ) is not considered valid ; either it is regarded as a dubious name , or as a synonym of S. angustirostris ( although the name <unk> S. angustirostris ) . 
 Until a 2011 reevaluation of the species by Phil R. Bell , S. <unk> was not well @-@ described . No autapomorphies , unique derived traits , had been established distinguishing it from S. osborni . Bell found in a publication earlier in the year that the two previous studies of S. angustirostris , by Rozhdestvensky in 1952 , and <unk> and <unk> in 1981 , do not provide a comprehensive enough description to compare the species with S. osborni . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 S. osborni is known only from the upper part ( unit 4 ) of the Horseshoe Canyon Formation . It lived alongside other dinosaur species including the ornithopods Hypacrosaurus altispinus and Parksosaurus warreni , ankylosaurid Anodontosaurus lambei , pachycephalosaurid Sphaerotholus <unk> , ornithomimids Ornithomimus <unk> and an unnamed species of Struthiomimus , small theropods including <unk> <unk> and <unk> borealis , and the tyrannosauroid Albertosaurus sarcophagus . The dinosaurs from this formation form part of the Edmontonian land vertebrate age . The Horseshoe Canyon Formation is interpreted as having a significant marine influence , due to an encroaching Western Interior Seaway , the shallow sea that covered the midsection of North America through much of the Cretaceous . S. osborni may have preferred to stay inland . A 2001 study suggested that Saurolophus osborni was part of a distinct inland fauna characterized by an association between Anchiceratops ornatus and it , while the contemporary coastal fauna was characterized by the association of Pachyrhinosaurus canadensis and Edmontosaurus regalis . However , the association between S. osborni and Anchiceratops was later noted to be in error , Anchiceratops only occurs lower in the Horseshoe Canyon Formation , before the major transgression of the Western Interior Seaway represented by the Drumheller Marine Tongue . 
 S. angustirostris was one of the largest herbivores of the Nemegt Formation , which lacked large horned dinosaurs , but had sauropods and a more diverse theropod fauna . It coexisted with the rare hadrosaurid Barsboldia , flat @-@ headed pachycephalosaurian Homalocephale and domed Prenocephale , the large ankylosaurid <unk> , rare <unk> sauropods Nemegtosaurus and Opisthocoelicaudia , the <unk> Mononykus , three types of troodontids including <unk> , several oviraptorosaurians including Rinchenia and <unk> , the ostrich @-@ mimics Gallimimus and Deinocheirus , <unk> Therizinosaurus , tyrannosaurid relative Bagaraatan , and the tyrannosaurid Tarbosaurus . Unlike other Mongolian formations like the well @-@ known Djadochta Formation that includes Velociraptor and Protoceratops , the Nemegt is interpreted as being well @-@ watered , like the Dinosaur Park Formation in Alberta . When examined , the rock facies of the Nemegt formation suggest the presence of stream and river channels , mudflats , and shallow lakes . Sediments also indicate that a rich habitat existed , offering diverse food in abundant amounts that could sustain Cretaceous dinosaurs . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 As a hadrosaurid , Saurolophus would have been a bipedal / quadrupedal herbivore , eating a variety of plants . Its skull permitted a grinding motion analogous to chewing , and its teeth were continually replacing and packed into dental batteries that contained hundreds of teeth , only a relative handful of which were in use at any time . Plant material would have been cropped by its broad beak , and held in the jaws by a cheek @-@ like organ . Its feeding range would have extended from the ground to about 4 m ( 13 ft ) above . Common S. angustirostris would have been an important large herbivore in the Nemegt Formation , but S. osborni was rare in the Horseshoe Canyon Formation and faced competition from other duckbills ( genus Hypacrosaurus ) . Comparisons between the scleral rings of Saurolophus and modern birds and reptiles suggest that it may have been cathemeral , active throughout the day at short intervals . 
 = = = Crest = = = 
 The distinctive spike @-@ like crest of Saurolophus has been interpreted in multiple ways , and could have had multiple functions . Brown compared it to the crest of a chameleon , and suggested it could provide an area for muscle attachment and a connection point for a <unk> back frill like that seen in the basilisk lizard . Peter Dodson interpreted similar features in other duckbills as having use in sexual identification . Maryańska and Osmólska , noting the hollow base , suggested that the crest increased the surface area of the respiratory cavity , and helped in thermoregulation . James Hopson supported a function as a visual signal , and further mentioned the possibility that the inflatable skin flaps over the nostrils could have acted as resonators and additional visual signals . This idea has been picked up by authors of popular dinosaur works , such as David B. Norman , who discussed hadrosaurid display at length and included a life restoration of such an adaptation in action . 
 The unique crest of Saurolophus is made up almost completely by the nasal bones , and in S. angustirostris it is solid . In adult specimens the crests are a rounded triangular shape in cross section . The crest protrudes past the edge of the skull backwards . Thin processes from the frontals and prefrontals extend along the underside of the crest , probably to strengthen it . At the end of the crest is a swelling of the nasal , which is often termed differently . 
 = = = Ontogeny = = = 
 Though the growth rates of Saurolophus are poorly understood , a group of perinatal Saurolophus was recently discovered in an area of the Gobi Desert known as " The Dragon 's Tomb " . The animals uncovered had skull lengths less than five percent of the length of the skulls of the adults , indicating they were in the earliest developmental stage at the time of their deaths The discovery of Saurolophus neonates also indicates the distinct crest found in adults was poorly developed in infancy . It remains unknown if the animals were still within their eggs or if they had hatched before they died . The specimens were described in the journal PLOS ONE on October 14 , 2015 by Leonard <unk> et al . 
 = Hearts and Minds ( Lost ) = 
 " Hearts and Minds " is the thirteenth episode of the first season of the American television series Lost . The episode sees Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) experience a vision quest , believing his stepsister Shannon ( Maggie Grace ) to be dead . Through a series of flashbacks , it is revealed that Boone is in love with Shannon , and that they slept together prior to crashing on the island . The episode was directed by Rod Holcomb and written by Carlton Cuse and Javier Grillo @-@ Marxuach . 
 The writers sought to reveal the backstory of Boone and Shannon by surprising viewers with the nature of their relationship . At the same time , they wanted to use the relationship to bring Boone and Locke closer together , and decided on a vision quest to make this happen . " Hearts and Minds " first aired on January 12 , 2005 , on ABC . The episode was watched by an estimated 20 @.@ 81 million viewers and received mixed to negative critical reception . Critics tended to view Shannon and Boone 's story as uninteresting , but expressed appreciation for John Locke 's ( Terry O 'Quinn ) " darkly mysterious " actions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Shannon calls Boone and , after he overhears sounds of violence , asks him to come to Sydney . When he gets there , he sees that her boyfriend , Bryan ( Charles Mesure ) , has been beating her . Boone reports this to the police , and reveals that Shannon is his stepsister . While Boone is speaking to the officer , James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) is brought to the station handcuffed shouting in anger . The detective ignores Boone . 
 Boone offers Bryan $ 25 @,@ 000 to break up with Shannon but Bryan asks for $ 50 @,@ 000 and Boone agrees . Boone also reveals that Bryan is not the first man he has paid off to leave Shannon alone . Shannon refuses to leave with Boone . He realizes that Shannon lied to him to get the money , and she has done this all the other times he had to pay off her boyfriends . Bryan says that Boone 's mother stole money away from her , and she is getting what is rightfully hers . After a brief fight with Bryan in which he is beaten , Boone leaves . That night , a drunk Shannon comes to Boone 's hotel room and tells him that Bryan stole the money . She tells Boone that she knows he loves her and , although he first tries to refuse her advances , they sleep together . Later , Shannon persuades Boone not to tell their parents . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 On Day 24 , October 15 , 2004 , Boone sees that Shannon Rutherford 's ( Maggie Grace ) relationship with Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) is getting more personal . Boone tries to tell Sayid that he would be better off staying away from Shannon , but he is ignored . 
 Boone and Locke have been trying to open the mysterious hatch , but tell the other survivors they are hunting for boar . Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) scolds Boone for not bringing back any boar , but John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) tells Boone that what he and Boone are doing with the hatch is far more important than hunting . At the hatch , Locke makes a paste and tells Boone it is for later . Locke suggests that staring at the hatch will tell them how to open it . 
 Boone informs Locke he is tired of lying , and wants to tell Shannon about the hatch . Locke knocks him unconscious with the handle of his knife , and Boone awakes to find himself tied up . Locke applies a strange paste on Boone 's head wound and leaves a knife embedded in the ground in front of Boone so he 'll be able to free himself . Locke explains that he will be able to reach it once he is properly motivated . After several unsuccessful attempts to do so , Boone hears Shannon 's screams and the sounds of the ' monster ' approaching . This is the impetus he needs , and after a short struggle , and in excruciating pain , he is finally able to reach the weapon . He then frees himself and searches for his sister . 
 Boone runs through the jungle , and locates Shannon tied to a tree . Boone frees her and they run away from the pursuing monster . The monster takes Shannon , and a distraught Boone later finds her mutilated body by a creek , watching her die . That night Boone returns to the camp and tries to kill Locke , screaming that he had killed his sister , but Locke reveals that Shannon is alive . The paste caused Boone to have a vision that , according to Locke , is crucial to his experience on the island . Boone says seeing Shannon dead made him feel relieved . Locke says to come with him , and the two disappear into the jungle . 
 Meanwhile , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) shows Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) to a garden that Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) has started . Kate discovers that Sun speaks English when the two are working in the garden , and Sun asks her not to tell anyone . Locke finds Sayid trying to make sense of Danielle Rousseau 's maps , and gives him a compass . Sayid tells Jack that according to Locke 's compass , north is not where it should be , causing him to believe that the instrument is defective . Hurley and Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) spend the day fishing . After Hurley fails to catch anything and accidentally steps on a sea urchin after giving up , Jin treats the wound and later gives Hurley a fish . 
 = = Production = = 
 Boone was the focus of " Hearts and Minds " , a character who had not yet had his backstory told . Ian Somerhalder was the first actor cast in the series ; while the role required him to find life living in the wild foreign and difficult , the actor was raised on a Louisianan ranch and was thus used to " learn [ ing ] how to survive . " He said , " [ Boone ] was very fragile in [ the Island 's ] environment , where I wouldn 't have been . " The episode 's guest stars included Charles Mesure as Bryan , Adam Leadbeater as Malcolm , and Kelly Rice as Nicole . 
 Executive producer Carlton Cuse and supervising producer Javier Grillo @-@ Marxuach , who wrote the episode , decided that its plot would be centered on cementing Boone and Locke 's relationship , by making the former go through a test of character . The episode 's plot evolved gradually , with the vision quest being one of the first ideas to include . This led to the depiction of the Shannon @-@ Boone relationship – which had not yet been explored – and making it the " axis " on which to tie Locke and Boone together . Cuse said that the series had hit a point narratively where Boone had become Locke 's " acolyte , " and he needed to " sort of shed his obsession with Shannon in order to move forward in terms of his relationship with Locke . " 
 The producers also thought it would be interesting for there to be more to Shannon and Boone 's relationship than just Boone 's possessive brotherly interest . According to Cuse , the plot twist had become a Lost characteristic so they wanted to surprise the audience by having the Shannon @-@ Boone relationship be sexual in nature . The idea for the two came from an observation that their bickering resembled an older married couple ; to support this , they made the characters step @-@ siblings as it had not yet been established what their sibling bond exactly was . 
 This was Cuse 's first writing credit for Lost , having joined the series during the seventh episode . He desired to cement Boone 's relationship with Locke , but was unsure how to connect the two characters in a meaningful way . The writers chose a vision quest but decided to make this " closed to the audience " and not let them know it was even occurring . Initially , it was conceived that Boone would be convinced into eating Locke 's drug , but director Rod Holcomb and the writers thought it would have made the hallucination easier to guess , and changed it into spreading the concoction into a head injury . 
 Locke knocking Boone out " marked a huge turning point " in the development of his character . According to the writers , there was huge debate over whether Locke was good or bad ; his decision was meant to be a shocking moment for viewers , since they thought people would view it as a sign that Locke was turning bad . This was characteristic of the series – the writers liked to depict a character in a certain way so that one 's opinion would be made up , then they would reveal something else that would change one 's mind . Locke 's scene with Sayid was introduced late into production , because the episode was running short and Locke did not have scenes without Boone ; Sayid 's scene with Jack was also added later . Many future plot points are introduced into the episode , such as Sayid observing a <unk> anomaly , main characters crossing paths ( Sawyer is being arrested in the police station where Boone is filing a complaint ) and Michael 's box of drawings , which sets up the following episode , " Special " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Hearts and Minds " first aired on January 12 , 2005 in the United States . The episode 's broadcast gained an estimated 20 @.@ 81 million viewers , making it ABC 's sixth most watched episode for the week . It earned a ratings share of 7 @.@ 9 / 21 among adults aged 18 to 49 and a 4 @.@ 1 / 13 share among teenagers , both measures attaining series highs . With this , Lost and Alias helped ABC win the night . It was down 780 @,@ 000 viewers on the previous episode , " Whatever the Case May Be " , but was up 5 @.@ 12 million on the season average of 15 @.@ 69 million viewers . 
 Critical reception of the episode was mixed to negative . Chris Carabott of IGN criticized the decision to focus the episode around Shannon and Boone , characters he felt " [ brought ] very little to the table " , at the expense of other " more intriguing " storylines and characters . He called the episode " awkward and uninspired " , though commented that it was saved by the character development of Locke . Carabott rated the episode 6 @.@ 6 out of 10 , signifying a " passable " episode . Entertainment Weekly writer Adam B. Vary graded the episode with a B + and praised Somerhalder for bringing " some real pathos to his conflicted feelings for Shannon ; he also found Locke to be " at his best when his motivations are darkly mysterious . " 
 Writing for Zap2it , Ryan McGee characterized the episode as having a " weak backstory with a <unk> ending , " although he enjoyed Locke for being " incredibly sage and incredibly terrifying all at once . " In her 2006 work Finding Lost : The Unofficial Guide , Nikki Stafford critiqued the writers for having some of the characters act inconsistently with the events of previous episodes , citing Jack and Kate 's " jokey and sweet " interactions as an example . Robert Dougherty , author of the 2008 book Lost Episode Guide for Others : An Unofficial Anthology , compared Shannon and Boone 's relationship to that of a soap opera . Other than the revelations surrounding their relationship and Locke 's actions however , Dougherty did not think the episode would have much of an impact on the series ' overall story . 
 Therese Odell of the Houston Chronicle reviewed the episode twice , once in September 2007 , then again following a repeat viewing in July 2009 . She called it " profoundly weird " , and described it as a " transition episode " , noting that on her original viewing she found it irritating , eager for the story to advance , but upon re @-@ watching it enjoyed it more , praising the " lovely exploration of Boone 's character " . Following the series ' conclusion , IGN ranked " Hearts and Minds " 109th out of all episodes , commenting that as few viewers were interested in Shannon and Boone , it was difficult to be interested in an episode centered on them , particularly as it had little long @-@ term impact . A similar ranking of episodes by Todd VanDerWerff for the Los Angeles Times placed " Hearts and Minds " 104th . 
 = Rodrigo ( musician ) = 
 Rodrigo Alejandro Bueno ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; May 24 , 1973 – June 24 , 2000 ) , known by his stage name Rodrigo or his nickname " El Potro " ( " the Colt " ) , was an Argentine singer of cuarteto music . Bueno 's style was marked by his on @-@ stage energy and charisma . His short , dyed hair and casual clothes differed from typical cuarteto singers with strident colors and long curly hair . During his career , Bueno expanded cuarteto music to the Argentine national scene , remaining one of the main figures of the genre . 
 The son of Eduardo Alberto Bueno , a record shop owner and music producer , and Beatriz Olave , a songwriter and newsstand owner , Rodrigo Bueno was born into the cuarteto musical scene in Córdoba , Argentina . He first appeared on television was at the age of two , on the show Fiesta de Cuarteto , along with family friend Juan Carlos " La Mona " Jiménez . With the help of his father , he recorded an album of children 's songs , Disco Baby , at the age of five . During his preteen years he informally joined the local band <unk> during live performances . He dropped out of school at the age of twelve and successfully auditioned for the band Manto Negro . After five years without success in Córdoba , Bueno 's father decided to try to launch his son 's career as a soloist in Buenos Aires , Argentina . In 1990 Bueno released his first record , La Foto de tu Cuerpo , on Polygram Records . Bueno introduced his next album , <unk> a Vivir , with a live performance at the nightclub Fantástico Bailable . The performance brought him his first recognition in the tropical music scene . 
 In 1995 , Bueno signed a contract with Sony Music that lasted only for the release of the album Sabroso ; the next year he signed a contract with Magenta Records that granted him one percent of his record sales . He discarded salsa and merengue from his repertoire , recording and performing exclusively cuarteto . His first release with the label , Lo Mejor del Amor , became an instant radio hit , earning him national fame and an ACE Award for Best Musical Act . The success was followed by La Leyenda <unk> ( certified gold by CAPIF ) and Cuarteteando . His 1999 release A 2000 became the theme of a series of concerts begun in the Astral Theater and held the following year in the Luna Park Arena under the name of Cuarteto Característico Rodrigo A 2000 ( " Characteristic Cuarteto , Rodrigo to 2000 " ) . The show sold out the stadium thirteen times , while the album A 2000 was certified quadruple platinum . 
 Bueno 's schedule at the time included twenty @-@ five to thirty shows weekly . Due to his demanding tours , Bueno began consuming beer to excess , which began to interfere with his performing . His stress level was further increased from receiving multiple death threats . Following a concert at the nightclub Escándalo in La Plata , Bueno was returning to the city of Buenos Aires on the evening of June 24 , 2000 . After his path was blocked by another driver who had passed him on the turnpike , Bueno tried to chase the vehicle to move in front of it again . In the process , he lost control of his SUV and crashed against a barrier . He was ejected from the SUV and he died instantly . His death caused an immediate sensation in the Argentine media , with speculation about a possible murder conspiracy . After a short trial , the driver of the other vehicle was found not guilty ; the judge considered Bueno to have been responsible for driving imprudently . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early life and beginnings in music = = = 
 Rodrigo Alejandro Bueno was born on May 24 , 1973 , in Córdoba , Argentina as the first of three brothers . His father , Eduardo Alberto Bueno , was a record store owner and music producer for Columbia Records as well as BMG , a subsidiary of Sony Music Entertainment . His mother , Beatriz Olave , was a newsstand owner and songwriter . Growing up , Bueno was influenced by the cuarteto scene . He made his first television appearance at the age of two on the show Fiesta del Cuarteto ; he appeared with an acquaintance of the family , Juan Carlos " La Mona " Jiménez . Jiménez would later become his main musical influence , along with the bands Cuarteto de Oro , <unk> and La Leo . During family meetings , Bueno would sing their songs for his relatives into a wooden microphone , a gift from his carpenter uncle . 
 At the age of five , with the help of his father , he recorded his first album , Disco Baby . One of the songs from the set , a cover of a María Elena Walsh song , was used as the opening theme of the children 's show <unk> y <unk> , broadcast on El Trece ( Channel 13 ) in Argentina . 
 Growing up , Bueno worked as a paperboy at the newsstand of his grandmother , Hortensia . In 1984 , he attended concerts of the local band <unk> and was occasionally invited to join them on stage . The next year , he dropped out of school and started working at his father 's record shop , where he sometimes sang for the costumers . A friend of his father belonged to the local band Manto Negro and offered Rodrigo a spot in the band . This is where he formally started his career in music , signing his first contract and earning his first salary as a musician at age thirteen . Bueno had written songs since the age of ten , but he would not show them to his colleagues because of his grammar mistakes . 
 = = = Becoming a soloist and rise to fame = = = 
 As Rodrigo failed to achieve success in Córdoba after five years with Manto Negro , his father and manager Eduardo decided to launch Rodrigo 's career as a soloist in Buenos Aires . In 1990 , he published his debut album , La Foto de tu Cuerpo , through Polygram Records . Although he described himself as a " cuarteto fan " , his first album had a rock style . In 1991 , he published his next album , <unk> a Vivir , which he promoted with his first appearance in Buenos Aires at the nightclub Fantástico Bailable . The success of his performance propelled the sales of the record and gained Bueno the acknowledgement of the tropical music scene . It was followed by <unk> <unk> , Muy Bueno and Made in Argentina , which met with moderate success . In 1993 , his father died of a heart attack in Bueno 's arms prior to a concert where he would promote his new release La Joya . Bueno was forced to perform and later considered retiring . 
 After six months of mourning , he returned with Made in Córdoba . As his popularity in Buenos Aires was rising , he left Polygram Records and signed a contract with Sony Music . During his short stint with the company , he recorded Sabroso , composed of salsa and merengue songs . Despite Bueno 's rising popularity , the recording executives still did not believe he could become a major success . After experimenting with salsa and merengue , then performing as a ballad crooner , he shifted his style and repertoire entirely to cuarteto . In 1996 , he signed a contract with Magenta Records that gave him 1 % of his total record sales . The songs from his first album release , Lo Mejor del Amor , became major radio hits that propelled him to national fame and earned him an ACE Award for Best Musical Act from the Argentine Association of Entertainment Journalists . The next year he published La Leyenda <unk> , recorded live at Fantástico Bailable . The record was later certified gold by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers . The success of those albums was followed by Cuarteteando , which included the hit songs " Ocho Cuarenta " , and " Y <unk> , <unk> " . La Leyenda <unk> and Cuarteteando sold 60 @,@ 000 copies each . 
 = = = Cuarteto Característico Rodrigo A 2000 live performances = = = 
 In December 1999 , Bueno published the album A 2000 , which he promoted with a series of four sold @-@ out concerts at the Astral Theater on Corrientes Avenue , the city 's entertainment and cultural center . Bueno began 2000 with a major tour of Argentina 's main summer spots on its Atlantic Coast . He performed 49 concerts in nine days , including one in front of more than 100 @,@ 000 people in the tourist hotspot of Mar del Plata . Following the success of the show at the Astral Theater , Bueno presented a series of concerts called Cuarteto Característico Rodrigo A 2000 ( Characteristic Cuarteto , Rodrigo to 2000 ) in the Luna Park Arena starting on April 5 , 2000 . 
 The only rehearsal was performed with the band Cuarteto Leo , held in the club Mundo Bailable , owned by his manager Jose Luis Gozalo . Gozalo invested <unk> ( equivalent to US $ 109 @,@ 900 in 2016 ) in publicity , while he requested Tito <unk> , the owner of the arena , to advance him <unk> ( equivalent to US $ 68 @,@ 700 in 2016 ) from the ticket sales to pay previous debts . The show was also financed by the <unk> manufacturer <unk> and the bus company Flecha Bus , while the wardrobe was provided by Ona Sáez . Due to the venue 's fame for hosting boxing matches , the concerts were conceptualized with boxing elements . Bueno performed dressed in boxing trunks and made his entrance to the stage wearing a robe and walking through a hall in the crowd to the ring @-@ themed stage , emulating a boxing match . With an estimated length of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours , the show included original songs , as well as classics of the cuarteto genre as a tribute to his early influence Cuarteto Leo . 
 Gozalo negotiated the broadcast of the first concert with Azul Televisión . The filming of subsequent performances was halted by the <unk> brothers , owners of Magenta Records . The brothers sent a cease and desist order to the channel , claiming that Magenta owned Bueno 's personality rights . The sold @-@ out event , originally scheduled for eight performances , was extended to a total of thirteen sold @-@ out concerts grossing a total of <unk> million . ( equivalent to US $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . Meanwhile , the album A 2000 was certified quadruple platinum by CAPIF , selling 750 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In addition to the show , Bueno was also performing an estimated of twenty @-@ five to thirty concerts per week , including nightclubs , television and other concerts . On April 8 , he received the keys to the city of Formosa after having offered a concert in spite of the celebrations of its 121st anniversary . Due to the effort that the appearances required , Bueno starting drinking beer to excess . His stress was also increased by multiple death threats , including a gang shooting near his house in Córdoba . He also received a bullet with his name engraved on it , according to recollections by Joaquín <unk> , lead singer of the band Turf . 
 His personal profits at the time came from receiving 1 % royalties on an estimated <unk> million ( equivalent to US $ 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in record sales , as well as an additional <unk> ( equivalent to US $ 824 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) for album re @-@ editions and <unk> ( equivalent to US $ 687 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) for a merchandise deal with <unk> y <unk> . Affected by his lifestyle and by disputes with Magenta Records , Bueno announced his impending retirement on April 11 , 2000 . He detailed that he would finish his scheduled concerts , including a Christmas tour throughout the United States . His last live performance , scheduled to take place at the Estadio Monumental Antonio Vespucio <unk> , was to be released as his final album entitled Adiós Rodrigo . Bueno added that he would become a record producer and move to the United States . 
 = = Death = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 On June 23 , 2000 , at 20 : 00 , Bueno attended a taping of La Biblia y el <unk> hosted by Jorge Guinzburg on Canal 13 . When the show ended at 22 : 45 , Bueno went to the restaurant El <unk> in Buenos Aires ' Palermo neighborhood , where he dined with his family , Fernando Olmedo ( son of the comedian Alberto Olmedo ) and comedian Pepe Parada . Olmedo remarked that he had never seen one of Bueno 's shows , and Bueno invited him to a show that same night at the club Escándalo in La Plata . Bueno gave a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hour performance in front of an audience of 2 @,@ 000 . When the concert was over , he was asked to stay at the club to rest , but Bueno refused , expressing his desire to drive . 
 = = = The accident = = = 
 In the early hours of June 24 , after the show in La Plata , Bueno was driving back to Buenos Aires in a Ford Explorer SUV with his ex @-@ wife , Patricia Pacheco ; his son , Ramiro ; Fernando Olmedo ; musician Jorge Moreno ; and radio host Alberto Pereyra . According to eyewitness accounts , after stopping at a toll booth in the Hudson area of the Buenos Aires - La Plata Highway at between 0330 and <unk> , Bueno 's path was blocked by a white Chevrolet K5 Blazer four @-@ wheel drive with tinted windows . In anger , Bueno started chasing the Blazer . He tried to pass it by closing onto it with the front of his SUV . After brushing the side of the Blazer , he lost control of his Explorer and crashed against a highway barrier . The SUV tumbled 400 meters ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) and the driver 's door and left back door opened . Bueno and Olmedo , who were not wearing seat belts , were thrown from the car around kilometer 24 @.@ 5 – 25 of the highway . Bueno died instantaneously , and Olmedo died forty minutes later at Evita Pueblo Hospital . The other passengers survived with minor injuries . 
 Bueno 's remains were taken to <unk> , where he was scheduled to perform that Saturday night , and where he was later declared an " <unk> Citizen " by mayor Manuel <unk> . His funeral took place there . An estimated 20 @,@ 000 mourners passed his body and police presence was granted after minor incidents took place . A helicopter and 400 police officers were deployed , while six medical units were dispatched to assist a number of fans that fainted . Along with other famous singers who died at the same age , he became part of the 27 Club . 
 = = = Controversy , investigation of the accident and initial reaction = = = 
 Bueno was booked to appear on Saturday on the show Siempre Sábado . Instead , his band played in the show as a tribute without anybody singing . Conspiracy theories surfaced claiming that Bueno 's death was linked to a " <unk> Mafia " and that he received death threats in the days prior the accident . Bueno 's mother did not attend his funeral , but she appeared on the show and said that the questions of accident versus murder would soon be clarified . 
 The forensic report stated that he died of " <unk> trauma " . Luis <unk> , the correctional prosecutor of Quilmes called the case a <unk> <unk> con <unk> ( negligent homicide with injuries ) . The 1st Police Precinct of <unk> identified the driver of the Chevrolet Blazer as Alfredo Pesquera , a local businessman . The next year , Pesquera was taken to trial . The prosecutor alleged that his maneuver eventually led to the death of Bueno and requested a thirteen @-@ year sentence . In December 2001 , Ariel González Eli Abe and Margarita <unk> de <unk> , members of the 2nd Criminal Tribunal of Quilmes , concluded that the death of Bueno was caused by his own unsafe driving . Pesquera was declared innocent and released . Following Bueno 's death , four teen fans committed suicide . The sales of his records and merchandise skyrocketed . Bueno sold 500 @,@ 000 records during his lifetime , and the sales quintupled a month after his death , with his last album selling more than a million copies . The records grossed a total of <unk> million ( equivalent to US $ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , three times the total amount that he made during his career . Reruns of his concerts garnered large audiences when they were broadcast on television stations such as Azul Televisión , América 2 and Crónica TV . 
 A series of tribute albums was released in the subsequent months by the companies owning his catalogs . His band divided into La Banda del Potro , represented by Leader Music , and <unk> Banda de Rodrigo , represented by Magenta Records . Both bands released 11 albums , grossing a total of <unk> million ( equivalent to US $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . In 2000 , while Bueno 's popularity was soaring in Buenos Aires , consulting agency <unk> found that among people in Córdoba , 72 % preferred the music of " La Mona " Jiménez while 15 % preferred Bueno . The following year , Jiménez was listed at 46 % , while the numbers for Bueno increased to 40 % . 
 In 2011 , a new theory surfaced after the newspaper Crónica spoke to the police about the cause of the accident . The police source mentioned the possibility that Rodrigo 's intensive routine might have increased the production of adrenaline in his body . The investigators explained that , if Rodrigo did not release the excess adrenaline through urination after his last concert , he could have lost his sense of distance in relation to Pesquera 's Blazer . This could have caused Rodrigo to apply the brake and turn the wheel violently . 
 = = = Lawsuits over the estate and burial = = = 
 Initially Bueno 's mother claimed to be the absolute owner of his recorded material as well as profits . Judge Ricardo <unk> of the 76th Civil Court froze all of the assets held in bank accounts and copyrighted material hosted by <unk> and the Argentine Musician 's Union , as requested by the legal group <unk> <unk> @-@ Ballester , the representatives of Patricia Pacheco and her son Ramiro . Pacheco claimed that Ramiro Pacheco was the legitimate son of Bueno and requested a DNA test to verify it . The lawyers sent legal notices to Olave , her lawyer Miguel Angel <unk> and Gozalo stating that none of the assets of Bueno 's estate could be used or spent until it was decided which one of the parties would inherit them . 
 The DNA tests confirmed that Ramiro Pacheco was the son of Bueno and his surname was changed . Rodrigo 's account at <unk> Bank contained US $ 300 @,@ 000 , but it was emptied by his brother Ulises before it was blocked by Judge <unk> . The copyright holdings could not be transferred to Ramiro Bueno , since the original compositions of his father as well as other assets were registered on his behalf under the name of Ulises . Beatriz Olave negotiated deals over the image of Bueno for use on the jersey of the soccer team Club Atlético Belgrano . 
 The disposition of Rodrigo 's body became a subject of dispute . A possible cremation and transport of the ashes to the Córdoba province was denied by judicial authorities in case a future autopsy was needed . The idea of a burial at the <unk> Municipal Cemetery was rejected by his mother due to concerns about vandalism . Instead , she decided to place the body in Las <unk> Cemetery in Monte Grande . Since the investigation into Bueno 's death was still open and further tests might be performed , his body was placed in a container by the Justice Ministry . In 2005 , five years after his death , the case was closed and the burial was authorized . The body was placed in a marble mausoleum . His mother , manager and friends attended a memorial service where they placed a trophy over the marble grave , symbolizing the appreciation of his relatives , fans and friends . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bueno spread cuarteto , originally a typical genre from the Córdoba Province , to a national level . Shortly after his death on the 27th kilometer of the Buenos Aires @-@ La Plata Highway , fans built a " sanctuary " memorial including a statue as a tribute . An estimated crowd of 15 @,@ 000 fans gathered there on the first anniversary of his death in 2001 . The memorial suffered several attacks through the years for unclear reasons . One year after his death , Sony Records released the album Todos <unk> con Rodrigo , which includes the original songs from Sabroso with added vocals from Argentine and international singers such as Celia Cruz and Luciano Pereyra . It soon went gold in Argentina with sales of 30 @,@ 000 records . The same year , he posthumously received two Carlos Gardel Awards . He received Best Male Tropical Performer for the album A 2000 and Song of the Year for his original " Soy <unk> " . 
 In 1999 , Bueno introduced cuarteto singer Walter Olmos to the public scene with performances in several of his concerts in the Buenos Aires province . After Bueno 's death , Olmos was popularly regarded as his musical heir , but he only enjoyed brief success before his death while playing Russian roulette in 2002 . 
 Rodrigo , La Película ( Rodrigo , The Movie ) opened on April 12 , 2001 at a record 136 Argentine theaters . The movie depicts a love story involving a teenage girl who idolized the singer with a montage of real concerts and songs as background . The film was not as successful as anticipated , however , and was regarded by some as an attempt to make a profit out of the memory of the singer . The entertainment magazine Sin Cortes described it as a " failed film " that " took advantage of the Rodrigo phenomena " . 
 Bueno , a Club Atlético Belgrano fan , is still regarded as an important figure within the club 's fan base . A group of fans visited his mausoleum in 2011 on the 11th anniversary of his death . The team 's jersey depicted his face as a tribute during the 2002 – 03 season of Argentina 's Football First Division . In 2012 , the club 's administration decided to raise funds to build a bronze statue of the singer to be placed in Gigante de Alberdi Stadium . 
 In 2010 , on the tenth anniversary of his death , the Buenos Aires Chamber of Deputies declared him as a salient personality of popular culture in the province . Bueno was the subject of tributes on Argentine television , including one from the show Gracias por Venir , which was attended by some of his relatives and close friends . 
 A tribute concert was performed on January 16 , 2013 during the opening of the first Cuarteto Carnival , based on the Bahian Carnival . During the Newsstand Day ( Día del <unk> ) celebrations , Governor of Córdoba José Manuel de la Sota announced his plans to commission a statue of Bueno . It was placed on the Buen Pastor esplanade , and unveiled prior to the Cuarteto Carnival tribute concert . In 2014 , another statue was erected to commemorate the fourteenth anniversary of Bueno 's death . The <unk> @-@ made sculpture was financed by the City of Buenos Aires , and placed in front of the disco <unk> Bailable , in the Once neighborhood . The ceremony was conducted by Bueno 's friend and television host Daniel " Tota " <unk> . The attendance included Deputy Mayor María Eugenia Vidal and Cabinet Chief Horacio Rodríguez <unk> ; Bueno 's family , business associates and his fans . 
 A villa <unk> in Buenos Aires ' <unk> Sur Ecological Reserve was named after him . In January 2015 a new Rodrigo statue was unveiled . Located at the entrance of El <unk> restaurant , the figure featured the singer dressed with the boxer outfit he wore during his Luna Park performances . 
 = = Music style and image = = 
 Bueno 's band was a typical cuarteto band , composed of fourteen musicians . Percussion predominated , with a main drummer and additional timbales , complemented by an accordion and an electric organ . The vocal part of the band featured a male quartet as a chorus . 
 Characterized by his " raspy and strong " voice and charismatic on @-@ stage performances , Bueno became an instant success on the Argentine musical scene . His image differed from that of other tropical music bands that wore bright colors and had long , curly hair . Bueno 's hair was short , dyed usually in blue , turquoise , red or violet . He wore fitted shirts with jeans and cowboy boots . He was known for his mixture of facial gestures and poses that accompanied his bravado image . Bueno was heavily involved with the creative process of his act . He produced his own records , wrote his own songs and designed the visuals for his shows , including the looks of the stage and graphic campaigns , such as flyers and posters . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bueno was married two times and had two children . In 1992 , he married Mariana <unk> of Uruguay ; they had a daughter the next year . The marriage lasted only a couple of months after the birth . His son Ramiro was born in 1997 during his brief second marriage to Patricia Pacheco . Bueno 's cousin , Juan Carlos Olave , is a professional footballer . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Music videos = = 
 = Make the World Move = 
