 " Make the World Move " is a song recorded by American singer Christina Aguilera for her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . It features guest vocals from Cee Lo Green . The song was written by Alexander Grant , Mike Del Rio , Candice Pillay , Jayson DeZuzio , Dwayne Abernathy and Armando Trovajoli . Musically , the track is an up – tempo inspirational song , which combines dance , R & B and soul genres . Lyrically , it is a positive attitude song which features horns and synthesizers as part of its instrumentation . 
 " Make the World Move " received a mixed response from music critics ; some were complimentary of Aguilera and Green 's performance , although others felt that the track is weak compared to other songs on Lotus . Upon the release of the album , the song debuted at number 123 on the South Korean international singles chart . Aguilera and Green performed " Make the World Move " on the third season of The Voice , a singing competition show on which they are both a coach . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , and its low sales figures , Aguilera filed for divorce from husband Jordan Bratman , starred in her first feature film entitled Burlesque and recorded its accompanying soundtrack . She then became a coach on NBC 's singing competition show The Voice and was featured on Maroon 5 's single " Moves like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which spent a total of four consecutive weeks at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . After these events , Aguilera announced her plans to record her seventh album , stating that she wanted good quality songs and that she wanted to find " personal " songs to record . She revealed that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( ' The Voice ' ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She continued to say that " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " Aguilera continued to say that the album would be about " self – expression and freedom " because of the obstacles she had to overcome during the last couple of years and wanting to go back to her roots . Speaking about her new material on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera revealed that the album was taking a while to record because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . 
 = = Development = = 
 In April 2011 , it was announced that Aguilera and Green were collaborating on a song . A demo track , entitled " Nasty " , leaked online and was later confirmed to be an unused song from Aguilera 's soundtrack album Burlesque . In May , Green revealed that they had recorded " Nasty " prior to becoming judges on The Voice . The same month , Green was asked about the song in an interview with Billboard ; he explained : " It 's a song for her album . I won 't disclose the title , because it could possibly be a working title ... You know , but we 've talked about it amongst ourselves and I 'm gonna go in on it and work it out . It 'll be the second song we 've done . " Despite not revealing the title of the song , he confirmed that Aguilera 's vocals on the track were finished . 
 In April 2012 , Aguilera confirmed that she and Green had worked on a new track entitled " Make the World Move " and described it as " positive " and " full of life . " Regarding the collaboration , she said : " I 'm just excited to share the stage with Cee Lo because we both get off on production and dancers and having all of those fun elements about being on stage and being a performer ... So the two of us together joining forces is going to be huge ! " When asked if " Make the World Move " would be released as a single , Aguilera replied saying that she was not sure about what would be done with the song . In an interview with MTV News in November , Aguilera explained how she felt the song would be suited to Green as she felt a male vocal contribution was needed , saying : " I got to collaborate with my good buddy Cee Lo ... There was a part for a potential male vocal on the chorus , and I just heard immediately Cee Lo 's voice on it , his signature Cee Lo , and it was fun collaborating with him and having him on my record and us joining forces together . " 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Make the World Move " was written by Alexander Grant , Mike Del Rio , Candice Pillay , Jayson DeZuzio , Dwayne Abernathy and Armando Trovajoli , with production done by Grant credited with his professional name , Alex da Kid , Del Rio and DeZuzio Aguilera was involved with the song 's vocal production , along with Pillay . Lucas Secon , co @-@ writer and producer of another Lotus track " Red Hot Kinda Love " , served as the programmer and arranger . The song was recorded by Josh Mosser while Aguilera and Green 's vocals were recorded by Oscar Ramirez and edited by Del Rio . The song contains a portion of the composition " Let 's Find Out " , written by Armando Trovajoli . " Make the World Move " , an up – tempo and " old school " inspirational song which consists of dance , R & B and soul genres , and lasts for a duration of 2 : 59 ( two minutes and 59 seconds ) . Demonstrating a sense of " sassiness " and " power " in her vocal performance , Aguilera sings the positive attitude lyrics , " The time is now / No time to wait / Turn up the love / Turn down the hate " over what Robert Copsey of Digital Spy called a " bonkers arrangement " which consists of " horn blasts " and " plinky synths . " Instrumentation also consists of a " brassy , big @-@ band arrangement . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Make the World Move " received a mixed response from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic described the collaboration between Aguilera and Green as a " pulsating party , " while Andrew Hampp for Billboard described the song as " a barn @-@ storming party anthem " . Hampp was complimentary of the song 's arrangement , writing that it is something that would have worked well on Aguilera 's fifth studio album , Back to Basics ( 2006 ) , which features prominent 1940 's music influences . He praised da Kid 's production , writing that he has bought a 1940s inspired song into the " 2010s " . Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club wrote that the " Make the World Move " is " a dizzying duet " and is " downright inspiring . " Sarah Rodman for The Boston Globe demonstrated admiration for the song , writing that it is " impossible @-@ to @-@ resist . " Newsday 's Glenn Gamboa was brief in her review of the track , writing that the song is " playful . " 
 In comparison to the previous track on Lotus , " Red Hot Kinda Love " , Chris Younie for 4Music wrote that " Make the World Move " is " not the same " , but " by no means hugely different . " Younie continued to say that the song is " a bit retro and a bit modern " and " a bit underground but a bit mainstream . " While he praised the chorus and its memorability , Younie labelled the track as being " lack – lustre following ' Red Hot Kinda Love ' " . Sarah Godfrey of The Washington Post described the song as a " strange " dance version of Buffalo Springfield 's " For What It 's Worth " . Robert Copsey wrote that the song did not fulfill his expectations . Michael Gallucci for Popcrush noted that as the fourth song on the album , it " keeps the party going " , but is forgettable . The Huffington Post 's Mesfin Fekadu criticized " Make the World Move " , along with album tracks " Around the World " and " Red Hot Kinda Love " , for failing to capture the " fun " in which they are supposed to embody . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Aguilera and Green performed " Make the World Move " for the first time together on the third season of The Voice on November 13 , 2012 . Opening the show , the set consisting of two red chairs on which each singer sat on , as well as a balcony for Green . Green wore a striped polo shirt , while Aguilera sported a " purple Afro wig and plastic tiara . " As described by Cassie Carpenter for the Daily Mail , Aguilera 's outfit consisted of 2a bridal – style grey strapless gown with visible panties and thigh – high sparkly Stuart Weitzman boots . " Aguilera 's make @-@ up artist Kristofer Buckle gave her a " drag – level appearance " , with false eyelashes , purple eye shadow , garish blush , and Barbie pink lipstick . The " spirited " performance ended with red balloons being dropped over the audience . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Westlake Studios , Los Angeles . 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , California 
 Sample 
 Contains a portion of the composition " Let 's Find Out " written by Armando Trovajoli 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Lotus , " Make the World Move " debuted on the South Korean singles chart at number 88 during the week of November 11 to 17 , 2012 , due to digital download sales of 2 @,@ 999 . 
 = Vladimir Lenin = 
 Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov , alias Lenin ( / <unk> / ; 22 April [ O.S. 10 April ] 1870 – 21 January 1924 ) , was a Russian communist revolutionary , politician , and political theorist . He served as head of government of the Russian Republic from 1917 to 1918 , of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic from 1918 to 1924 , and of the Soviet Union from 1922 to 1924 . Under his administration , Russia and then the wider Soviet Union became a one @-@ party communist state governed by the Russian Communist Party . Ideologically a Marxist , his political theories are known as Leninism . 
 Born to a wealthy middle @-@ class family in Simbirsk , Lenin became interested in revolutionary socialist politics following his brother 's execution in 1887 . Expelled from Kazan Imperial University for participating in protests against the Russian Empire 's Tsarist regime , he devoted the following years to a law degree . In 1893 , he moved to Saint Petersburg and became a senior figure in the Marxist Russian Social Democratic Labour Party ( RSDLP ) . Arrested for sedition and exiled to Shushenskoye for three years , there he married Nadezhda Krupskaya . After his exile , he moved to Western Europe , where he became a prominent party theorist through his publications . In 1903 , he took a key role in a RSDLP ideological split , leading the Bolshevik faction against Julius Martov 's Mensheviks . Encouraging insurrection during Russia 's failed Revolution of 1905 , he later campaigned for the First World War to be transformed into a Europe @-@ wide proletarian revolution , which as a Marxist he believed would cause the overthrow of capitalism and its replacement with socialism . After the 1917 February Revolution ousted the Tsar and established a Provisional Government , he returned to Russia to campaign for the new regime 's replacement by a Bolshevik @-@ led government of the soviets . 
 Lenin played a leading role in the October Revolution of 1917 , which overthrew the Provisional Government and established a one @-@ party state under the new Communist Party . His government abolished Russia 's elected Constituent Assembly , withdrew from the First World War by signing a treaty with the Central Powers , and granted temporary independence to non @-@ Russian nations under Russian control . Ruling by decree , it redistributed land among the peasantry and nationalized banks and large @-@ scale industry . Opponents were suppressed in the Red Terror , a violent campaign orchestrated by the state security services ; tens of thousands were killed and many others interned in concentration camps . Lenin 's government defeated anti @-@ Bolshevik armies in the Russian Civil War from 1917 to 1922 . Responding to famine and popular uprisings , in 1921 Lenin introduced a mixed economic system with the New Economic Policy . Creating the Communist International and waging the Polish – Soviet War to promote world revolution , Lenin 's government also united Russia with neighbouring territories to form the Soviet Union in 1922 . In increasingly poor health , Lenin expressed opposition to the growing power of his successor , Joseph Stalin , before dying at his dacha in Gorki . 
 Widely considered one of the most significant and influential figures of the 20th century , Lenin was the posthumous subject of a pervasive personality cult within the Soviet Union until its dissolution in 1991 . He became an ideological figurehead behind Marxism @-@ Leninism and thus a prominent influence over the international communist movement . A controversial and highly divisive individual , Lenin is viewed by Marxist @-@ Leninists as a champion of socialism and the working classes , while critics on both the left and right see him as the founder of a totalitarian dictatorship responsible for civil war and mass human rights abuses . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood : 1870 – 87 = = = 
 Lenin 's father , Ilya Nikolayevich Ulyanov , was from a family of serfs , although his ethnic origins remain unclear ; there have been suggestions that he was Russian , Chuvash , <unk> , or Kalmyk . Despite this lower @-@ class background he had risen to middle @-@ class status , studying physics and mathematics at Kazan Imperial University before teaching at the Penza Institute for the Nobility . Ilya married Maria Alexandrovna Blank in the summer of 1863 . Well educated and hailing from a relatively prosperous background , she was the daughter of a German – Swedish woman and a Russian Jewish physician who had converted to Christianity . Soon after their wedding , Ilya obtained a job in Nizhny Novgorod , rising to become Director of Primary Schools in the Simbirsk district six years later . Five years after that , he was promoted to Director of Public Schools for the province , overseeing the foundation of over 450 schools as a part of the government 's plans for modernisation . His dedication to education earned him the Order of St. Vladimir , which bestowed on him the status of hereditary nobleman . 
 The couple had two children , Anna ( born 1864 ) and Alexander ( born 1868 ) , before Lenin was born as Vladimir " <unk> " Ilyich in Simbirsk on 10 April 1870 , and baptised several days later . They were followed by three more children , Olga ( born 1871 ) , Dmitry ( born 1874 ) , and Maria ( born 1878 ) . Two later siblings died in infancy . Ilya was a devout member of the Russian Orthodox Church and baptised his children into it , although Maria – a Lutheran – was largely indifferent to Christianity , a view that influenced her children . Both parents were monarchists and liberal conservatives , being committed to the emancipation reform of 1861 introduced by the reformist Tsar Alexander II ; they avoided political radicals and there is no evidence that the police ever put them under surveillance for subversive thought . Every summer they holidayed at a rural manor in <unk> . Among his siblings , Lenin was closest to his sister Olga , whom he often bossed around ; he had an extremely competitive nature and could be destructive , but usually admitted his misbehaviour . A keen sportsman , he spent much of his free time outdoors or playing chess , and excelled at school , the disciplinarian and conservative Simbirsk Classical <unk> . 
 Ilya Ulyanov died of a brain haemorrhage in January 1886 , when Lenin was 16 . Subsequently , Lenin 's behaviour became erratic and confrontational , and he soon renounced his belief in God . At the time , Lenin 's elder brother Aleksandr " Sasha " Ulyanov was studying at Saint Petersburg University . Involved in political agitation against the absolute monarchy of the reactionary Tsar Alexander III , he studied the writings of banned leftists and organised anti @-@ government protests . He joined a revolutionary cell bent on assassinating the Tsar and was selected to construct a bomb . However , before the attack the conspirators were arrested and tried , and in May , Sasha was executed by hanging . Despite the emotional trauma of his father 's and brother 's deaths , Lenin continued studying , graduated with a gold medal for exceptional performance , and decided to study law at Kazan University . 
 = = = University and political radicalisation : 1887 – 93 = = = 
 Upon entering Kazan University in August 1887 , Lenin moved into a nearby flat with his mother . Interested in his late brother 's radical ideas , he joined both a zemlyachestvo ( a university society ) and an agrarian @-@ socialist revolutionary cell . The zemlyachestvo elected him as its representative to the university 's zemlyachestvo council , and in December , he took part in a demonstration against government restrictions that banned student societies . The police arrested Lenin and accused him of being a ringleader in the demonstration ; he was expelled from the university , and the Ministry of Internal Affairs exiled him to his <unk> estate . There , he read voraciously , becoming enamoured with Nikolay Chernyshevsky 's 1863 pro @-@ revolutionary novel What is to be Done ? . Lenin 's mother was concerned by her son 's radicalization , and was instrumental in convincing the Interior Ministry to allow him to return to the city of Kazan , although not the university . On his return , he joined Nikolai Fedoseev 's revolutionary circle , through which he discovered Karl Marx 's 1867 book Capital . This sparked his interest in Marxism , a socio @-@ political theory that argued that society developed in stages , that this development resulted from class struggle , and that capitalist society would ultimately give way to socialist society and then communist society . 
 Wary of his political views , Lenin 's mother bought a country estate in <unk> village , Samara Oblast – made famous in the work of poet Gleb Uspensky , of whom Lenin was a great fan – in the hope that her son would turn his attention to agriculture . However , he had little interest in farm management , and his mother soon sold the land , keeping the house as a summer home . In September 1889 , the Ulyanov family moved to the city of Samara , where Lenin joined Alexei <unk> 's socialist discussion circle . Both Lenin and <unk> adopted Marxism , with Lenin translating Marx and Friedrich Engels ' 1848 political pamphlet , The Communist Manifesto , into Russian . He began to read the works of the Russian Marxist Georgi Plekhanov , a founder of the Black <unk> movement . Lenin agreed with Plekhanov 's argument that Russia was moving from feudalism to capitalism and so socialism would be implemented by the proletariat , or urban working class , rather than the peasantry . 
 This Marxist view contrasted with the view of the agrarian @-@ socialist Narodnik movement , which held that the peasantry could establish socialism in Russia by forming peasant communes . This view developed in the 1860s with the People 's Freedom Party and was dominant within the Russian revolutionary movement . Unlike the Marxists , Narodniks agitated for establishing socialism bypassing capitalism . Although opposing this perspective , Lenin was influenced by agrarian @-@ socialists like <unk> <unk> and Sergei <unk> , and befriended members of that movement , in particular Apollon <unk> , who asked Lenin to be his daughter 's godfather in 1893 . 
 In May 1890 , Maria persuaded the authorities to allow Lenin to take his exams externally at a university of his choice . He chose the University of St Petersburg , and obtained the equivalent of a first @-@ class degree with honours . The graduation celebrations were marred when his sister Olga died of typhoid . Lenin remained in Samara for several years . In January 1892 , he worked as a legal assistant for a regional court , and later worked with a local lawyer . He devoted much time to radical politics , remaining active in <unk> 's group and formulating ideas about how Marxism applied to Russia . Inspired by Plekhanov 's work , Lenin collected data on Russian society , using it to support a Marxist interpretation of societal development and increasingly rejecting the claims of the Narodniks . In spring 1893 , Lenin submitted his paper " New Economic Developments in Peasant Life " to the liberal journal Russian Thought , but it was rejected and appeared in print only much later . 
 = = Revolutionary activity = = 
 = = = Early activism and imprisonment : 1893 – 1900 = = = 
 In autumn 1893 , Lenin moved to Saint Petersburg . There , he worked as a barrister 's assistant and rose to a senior position in a Marxist revolutionary cell that called itself the " Social @-@ Democrats " after the Marxist Social Democratic Party of Germany . Publicly championing Marxism within the socialist movement , he encouraged the founding of revolutionary cells in Russia 's industrial centres . By autumn 1894 , he was leading a Marxist workers ' circle , and meticulously covered his tracks , knowing that police spies tried to infiltrate the movement . He began a romantic relationship with Nadezhda " Nadya " Krupskaya , a Marxist schoolteacher . He also authored a political tract criticising the Narodnik agrarian @-@ socialists , What the " Friends of the People " Are and How They Fight the Social @-@ Democrats , based largely on his experiences in Samara ; around 200 copies were illegally printed in 1894 . 
 Lenin hoped to cement connections between his Social @-@ Democrats and Emancipation of Labour , a group of Russian Marxist émigrés based in Switzerland ; he visited the country to meet group members Plekhanov and Pavel Axelrod . He proceeded to Paris to meet Marx 's son @-@ in @-@ law Paul Lafargue and to research the Paris Commune of 1871 , which he considered an early prototype for a proletarian government . Financed by his mother , he stayed in a Swiss health spa before travelling to Berlin , where he studied for six weeks at the Staatsbibliothek and met the Marxist activist Wilhelm Liebknecht . Returning to Russia with a stash of illegal revolutionary publications , he travelled to various cities distributing literature to striking workers . While involved in producing a news sheet , <unk> <unk> ( " Workers ' Cause " ) , he was among 40 activists arrested and charged with sedition . 
 Refused legal representation or bail , Lenin denied all charges against him but remained imprisoned for a year before sentencing . He spent this time theorising and writing , focusing on the revolutionary potential of the working @-@ class ; noting that the rise of industrial capitalism in Russia had led large numbers of peasants to move to the cities , where they formed a proletariat , from a Marxist perspective he argued that they would gain class consciousness and then violently overthrow <unk> , the aristocracy , and the bourgeoisie to establish a proletariat state that would move toward socialism . 
 In February 1897 , he was sentenced without trial to three years exile in eastern Siberia , although granted a few days in Saint Petersburg to put his affairs in order . He used this time to meet with the Social @-@ Democrats , who had renamed themselves the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class . His journey to eastern Siberia took 11 weeks , for much of which he was accompanied by his mother and sisters . Deemed only a minor threat to the government , he was exiled to a peasant 's hut in Shushenskoye , <unk> District , where he was kept under police surveillance ; he was nevertheless able to correspond with other revolutionaries , many of whom visited him , and permitted to go on trips to swim in the Yenisei River and to hunt duck and snipe . 
 In May 1898 , Nadya joined him in exile , having been arrested in August 1896 for organising a strike . Although initially posted to Ufa , she persuaded the authorities to move her to Shushenskoye , claiming that she and Lenin were engaged ; they married in a church on 10 July 1898 . Settling into a family life with Nadya 's mother Elizaveta <unk> , in Shushenskoye the couple translated English socialist literature into Russian . Keen to keep up with developments in German Marxism – where there had been an ideological split , with revisionists like Eduard Bernstein advocating a peaceful , electoral path to socialism – Lenin remained devoted to violent revolution , attacking revisionist arguments in A Protest by Russian Social @-@ Democrats . He also finished The Development of Capitalism in Russia ( 1899 ) , his longest book to date , which criticised the agrarian @-@ socialists and promoted a Marxist analysis of Russian economic development . Published under the pseudonym of " Vladimir <unk> " , upon publication it received predominantly poor reviews . 
 = = = Munich , London , and Geneva : 1900 – 05 = = = 
 After his exile , Lenin settled in Pskov in early 1900 . There , he began raising funds for a newspaper , Iskra ( " Spark " ) , a new organ of the Russian Marxist party , now calling itself the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party ( RSDLP ) . In July 1900 , Lenin left Russia for Western Europe ; in Switzerland he met other Russian Marxists , and at a Corsier conference they agreed to launch the paper from Munich , where Lenin relocated in September . Containing contributions from prominent European Marxists , Iskra was smuggled into Russia , becoming the country 's most successful underground publication for 50 years . He first adopted the pseudonym " Lenin " in December 1901 , possibly based on the River Lena ; he often used the fuller pseudonym of " N. Lenin " , and while the N did not stand for anything , a popular misconception later arose that it represented " Nikolai " . Under this pseudonym , he published the political pamphlet What Is to Be Done ? in 1902 ; his most influential publication to date , it dealt with Lenin 's thoughts on the need for a vanguard party to lead the proletariat to revolution . 
 Nadya joined Lenin in Munich , becoming his personal secretary . They continued their political agitation , with Lenin writing for Iskra and drafting the RSDLP programme , attacking ideological dissenters and external critics , particularly the Socialist Revolutionary Party ( SR ) , a Narodnik agrarian @-@ socialist group founded in 1901 . Despite remaining a Marxist , he accepted the Narodnik view on the revolutionary power of the Russian peasantry , accordingly penning the 1903 pamphlet To the Village Poor . To evade Bavarian police , Lenin moved to London with Iskra in April 1902 , there becoming friends with fellow Russian Marxist Leon Trotsky . In London , Lenin fell ill with erysipelas and was unable to take such a leading role on the Iskra editorial board ; in his absence , the board moved its base of operations to Geneva . 
 The 2nd RSDLP Congress was held in London in July 1903 . At the conference , a schism emerged between Lenin 's supporters and those of Julius Martov . Martov argued that party members should be able to express themselves independently of the party leadership ; Lenin disagreed , emphasising the need for a strong leadership with complete control over the party . Lenin 's supporters were in the majority , and Lenin termed them the " <unk> " ( bol <unk> in Russian ; thus Bolsheviks ) ; in response , Martov termed his followers the <unk> ( men <unk> in Russian ; thus Mensheviks ) . Arguments between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks continued after the conference ; the Bolsheviks accused their rivals of being opportunists and reformists who lacked discipline , while the Mensheviks accused Lenin of being a despot and autocrat . Enraged at the Mensheviks , Lenin resigned from the Iskra editorial board and in May 1904 published the anti @-@ Menshevik tract One Step Forward , Two Steps Back . The stress made Lenin ill , and to recuperate he went on a hiking holiday in rural Switzerland . The Bolshevik faction grew in strength ; by the spring , the whole RSDLP Central Committee was Bolshevik , and in December they founded the newspaper <unk> ( Forward ) . 
 = = = Revolution of 1905 and its aftermath : 1905 – 14 = = = 
 In January 1905 , the Bloody Sunday massacre of protesters in St. Petersburg sparked a spate of civil unrest known as the Revolution of 1905 . Lenin urged Bolsheviks to take a greater role in the events , encouraging violent insurrection . In doing so , he adopted SR slogans regarding " armed insurrection " , " mass terror " , and " the expropriation of gentry land " , resulting in Menshevik accusations that he had deviated from orthodox Marxism . In turn , he insisted that the Bolsheviks split completely with the Mensheviks , although many Bolsheviks refused and both groups attended the 3rd RSDLP Congress , held in London in April 1905 . Lenin presented many of his ideas in the pamphlet Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution , published in August 1905 . Here , he predicted that Russia 's liberal bourgeoisie would be sated by a transition to constitutional monarchy and thus betray the revolution ; instead he argued that the proletariat would have to build an alliance with the peasantry to overthrow the Tsarist regime and establish the " provisional revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry " . 
 In response to the Revolution of 1905 , Tsar Nicholas II accepted a series of liberal reforms in his October Manifesto , after which Lenin felt it safe to return to St. Petersburg . Joining the editorial board of Novaya Zhizn ( " New Life " ) , a radical legal newspaper run by Maria <unk> , he used it to discuss issues facing the RSDLP . He encouraged the party to seek out a much wider membership , and advocated the continual escalation of violent confrontation , believing both to be necessary for a successful revolution . Although he briefly supported the idea of reconciliation between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks , at the 4th Party Congress in Stockholm in April 1906 the Mensheviks condemned Lenin for supporting violence and encouraging bank robberies to obtain funds . Lenin was involved in setting up a Bolshevik Centre in <unk> , Grand Duchy of Finland , which was at the time a semi @-@ autonomous part of the Russian Empire , before the Bolsheviks regained dominance of the RSDLP at its 5th Congress , held in London in May 1907 . However , as the Tsarist government cracked down on opposition – both by disbanding Russia 's legislative assembly , the Second Duma , and by ordering its secret police , the Okhrana , to arrest revolutionaries – Lenin fled Finland for Switzerland . 
 Alexander Bogdanov and other prominent Bolsheviks decided to relocate the Bolshevik Centre to Paris ; although Lenin disagreed , he moved to the city in December 1908 . Lenin disliked Paris , lambasting it as " a foul hole " , and while there he sued a motorist who knocked him off his bike . He revived his polemics against the Mensheviks , who objected to his advocacy of violent expropriations and thefts such as the 1907 Tiflis bank robbery . Lenin also became very critical of Bogdanov 's view that Russia 's proletariat had to develop a socialist culture in order to become a successful revolutionary vehicle . Instead , Lenin favoured a vanguard of socialist intelligentsia who would lead the working @-@ classes in revolution . Furthermore , Bogdanov – influenced by Ernest Mach – believed that all concepts of the world were relative , whereas Lenin stuck to the orthodox Marxist view that there was an objective reality independent of human observation . Although Bogdanov and Lenin holidayed together at Maxim Gorky 's villa in Capri in April 1908 , on returning to Paris , Lenin encouraged a split within the Bolshevik faction between his and Bogdanov 's followers , accusing the latter of deviating from Marxism . 
 In May 1908 , Lenin lived briefly in London , where he used the British Museum Reading Room to write Materialism and <unk> @-@ criticism , an attack on what he described as the " bourgeois @-@ reactionary falsehood " of Bogdanov 's relativism . Lenin 's factionalism began to alienate increasing numbers of Bolsheviks , including his former close supporters Alexei Rykov and Lev Kamenev . The Okhrana exploited his factionalist attitude by sending a spy , Roman Malinovsky , to act as a vocal Lenin supporter within the party . Various Bolsheviks expressed their suspicions about Malinovsky to Lenin , although it is unclear if the latter was aware of the spy 's duplicity ; it is possible that he used Malinovsky to feed false information to the Okhrana . 
 In August 1910 , Lenin attended the 8th Congress of the Second International – an international meeting of socialists – in Copenhagen as the RSDLP 's representative , following this with a holiday in Stockholm with his mother . With his wife and sisters he then moved to France , settling first in <unk> and then Paris . Here , he became a close friend to the French Bolshevik Inessa Armand ; their friendship continued until 1912 , with some biographers suggesting that they had an extra @-@ marital affair . Meanwhile , at a Paris meeting in June 1911 , the RSDLP Central Committee decided to move their focus of operations back to Russia , ordering the closure of the Bolshevik Centre and its newspaper , <unk> . Seeking to rebuild his influence in the party , Lenin arranged for a party conference to be held in Prague in January 1912 , and although 16 of the 18 attendants were Bolsheviks , he was heavily criticised for his factionalist tendencies and failed to boost his status within the party . 
 Moving to Kraków in the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria , a culturally Polish part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire , he used <unk> University 's library to conduct research . He stayed in close contact with the RSDLP operating in the Russian Empire , convincing the Duma 's Bolshevik members to split from their parliamentary alliance with the Mensheviks . In January 1913 , the Bolshevik Joseph Stalin – whom Lenin referred to as the " wonderful Georgian " – visited him , and they discussed the future of non @-@ Russian ethnic groups in the Empire . Due to the ailing health of both Lenin and his wife , they moved to the rural town of Biały <unk> , before heading to Bern for Nadya to have surgery on her goitre . 
 = = = First World War : 1914 – 17 = = = 
 Lenin was in Galicia when the First World War broke out . The war pitted the Russian Empire against the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire , and due to his Russian citizenship , Lenin was arrested and briefly imprisoned until his anti @-@ Tsarist credentials were explained . Lenin and his wife returned to Bern , before relocating to Zürich in February 1916 . Lenin was angry that the German Social @-@ Democratic Party was supporting the German war effort – a direct contravention of the Second International 's Stuttgart resolution that socialist parties would oppose the conflict – and thus saw the Second International as defunct . He attended the <unk> Conference in September 1915 and the <unk> conference in April 1916 , urging socialists across the continent to convert the " imperialist war " into a continent @-@ wide " civil war " with the proletariat pitted against the bourgeoisie and aristocracy . In July 1916 , Lenin 's mother died , but he was unable to attend her funeral . Her death deeply affected him , and he became depressed , fearing that he too would die before seeing the proletariat revolution . 
 In September 1917 , Lenin published Imperialism , the Highest Stage of Capitalism , which argued that imperialism was a product of monopoly capitalism , as capitalists sought to increase their profits by extending into new territories where wages were lower and raw materials cheaper . He believed that competition and conflict would increase and that war between the imperialist powers would continue until they were overthrown by proletariat revolution and socialism established . At this time , he spent much time reading the works of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , Ludwig Feuerbach , and Aristotle , all of whom had been key influences on Marx . This changed Lenin 's interpretation of Marxism ; whereas he once believed that policies could be developed based on predetermined scientific principles , he concluded that the only test of whether a policy was correct was its practice . Although still perceiving himself as an orthodox Marxist , he began to divert from some of Marx 's predictions about societal development ; whereas Marx had believed that a " bourgeoisie @-@ democratic revolution " of the middle @-@ classes had to take place before a " socialist revolution " of the proletariat , Lenin believed that in Russia , the proletariat could overthrow the Tsarist regime without an intermediate revolution . 
 = = = February Revolution and the July Days : 1917 = = = 
 In February 1917 , the February Revolution broke out in St. Petersburg – renamed Petrograd at the beginning of the First World War – as industrial workers went on strike over food shortages and deteriorating factory conditions . The unrest spread to other parts of Russia , and fearing that he would be violently overthrown , Tsar Nicholas II abdicated . The State Duma took over control of the country , establishing a Provisional Government and converting the Empire into a new Russian Republic . When Lenin learned of this from his base in Switzerland , he celebrated with other dissidents . He decided to return to Russia to take charge of the Bolsheviks , but found that most passages into the country were blocked due to the ongoing conflict . He organised a plan with other dissidents to negotiate a passage for them through Germany , with whom Russia was then at war . Recognising that these dissidents could cause problems for their Russian enemies , the German government agreed to permit 32 Russian citizens to travel in a train carriage through their territory , among them Lenin and his wife . The group travelled by train from Zürich to Sassnitz , proceeding by ferry to Trelleborg , Sweden , and from there to Helsinki before taking the final train to Petrograd . 
 Arriving at Petrograd 's Finland Station , Lenin gave a speech to Bolshevik supporters condemning the Provisional Government and again calling for a continent @-@ wide European proletariat revolution . Over the following days , he spoke at Bolshevik meetings , lambasting those who wanted reconciliation with the Mensheviks and revealing his April Theses , an outline of his plans for the Bolsheviks which he had written on the journey from Switzerland . He publicly condemned both the Mensheviks and the Social Revolutionaries – who dominated the influential Petrograd Soviet – for supporting the Provisional Government , denouncing them as traitors to socialism . Considering the government to be just as imperialist as the Tsarist regime , he advocated immediate peace with Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary , rule by soviets , the nationalisation of industry and banks , and the state expropriation of land , all with the intention of establishing a proletariat government and pushing toward a socialist society . By contrast , the Mensheviks believed that Russia was insufficiently developed to transition to socialism and accused Lenin of trying to plunge the new Republic into civil war . Over the coming months , he campaigned for his policies , attending the meetings of the Bolshevik Central Committee , prolifically writing for the Bolshevik newspaper Pravda , and giving public speeches in Petrograd aimed at converting workers , soldiers , sailors , and peasants to his cause . 
 Sensing growing frustration among Bolshevik supporters , Lenin suggested an armed political demonstration in Petrograd to test the government 's response . However , amid deteriorating health , he left the city to recuperate in the Finnish village of <unk> . The Bolsheviks ' armed demonstration , the July Days , took place while Lenin was away , but upon learning that demonstrators had violently clashed with government forces , he returned to Petrograd and called for calm . Responding to the violence , the government ordered the arrest of Lenin and other prominent Bolsheviks , raiding their offices , and publicly alleging that he was a German agent provocateur . Evading arrest , Lenin hid in a series of Petrograd safe houses . Fearing that he would be killed , Lenin and fellow senior Bolshevik Grigory Zinoviev then escaped Petrograd in disguise , relocating to <unk> . There , Lenin began work on the book that became The State and Revolution , an exposition on how he believed the socialist state would develop after the proletariat revolution , and how from then on the state would gradually wither away , leaving a pure communist society . He began arguing for a Bolshevik @-@ led armed insurrection to topple the government , although at a clandestine meeting of the party 's central committee this idea was rejected . Lenin then headed by train and by foot to Finland , arriving at Helsinki on 10 August , where he hid away in safe houses belonging to Bolshevik sympathisers . 
 = = = October Revolution : 1917 = = = 
 In August 1917 , while Lenin was in Finland , General <unk> Kornilov , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Russian Army , sent troops to Petrograd in what appeared to be a military coup attempt against the Provisional Government . Premier Alexander Kerensky turned to the Petrograd Soviet – including its Bolshevik members – for help , allowing the revolutionaries to organise workers as Red Guards to defend the city . The coup petered out before it reached Petrograd , although the events had allowed the Bolsheviks to return to the open political arena . Fearing a counter @-@ revolution from right @-@ wing forces hostile to socialism , the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries who dominated the Petrograd Soviet had been instrumental in pressurising the government to normalise relations with the Bolsheviks . Both the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries had lost much popular support because of their affiliation with the Provisional Government and its unpopular continuation of the war . The Bolsheviks capitalised on this , and soon the pro @-@ Bolshevik Marxist Trotsky was elected leader of the Petrograd Soviet . In September , the Bolsheviks gained a majority in the workers ' sections of both the Moscow and Petrograd Soviets . 
 Recognising that the situation was safer for him , Lenin returned to Petrograd . There he attended a meeting of the Bolshevik Central Committee on 10 October , where he again argued that the party should lead an armed insurrection to topple the Provisional Government . This time the argument won with ten votes against two . Critics of the plan , Zinoviev and Kamenev , argued that Russian workers would not support a violent coup against the regime and that there was no clear evidence for Lenin 's assertion that all of Europe was on the verge of proletarian revolution . The party began plans to organise the offensive , holding a final meeting at the Smolny Institute on 24 October . This was the base of the Military Revolutionary Committee ( MRC ) , an armed militia largely loyal to the Bolsheviks that had been established by the Petrograd Soviet during Kornilov 's alleged coup . 
 In October , the MRC was ordered to take control of Petrograd 's key transport , communication , printing and utilities hubs , and did so without bloodshed . Bolsheviks besieged the government in the Winter Palace , and overcame it and arrested its ministers after the cruiser Aurora , controlled by Bolshevik seamen , fired on the building . During the insurrection , Lenin gave a speech to the Petrograd Soviet announcing that the Provisional Government had been overthrown . The Bolsheviks declared the formation of a new government , the Council of People 's Commissars or " Sovnarkom " . Lenin initially turned down the leading position of Chairman , suggesting Trotsky for the job , but other Bolsheviks insisted and ultimately Lenin relented . Lenin and other Bolsheviks then attended the Second Congress of Soviets on 26 and 27 October , and announced the creation of the new government . Menshevik attendees condemned the illegitimate seizure of power and the risk of civil war . In these early days of the new regime , Lenin avoided talking in Marxist and socialist terms so as not to alienate Russia 's population , and instead spoke about having a country controlled by the workers . Lenin and many other Bolsheviks expected proletariat revolution to sweep across Europe in days or months . 
 = = Lenin 's government = = 
 = = = Organising the Soviet government : 1917 – 18 = = = 
 The Provisional Government had planned for a Constituent Assembly to be elected in November 1917 ; against Lenin 's objections , Sovnarkom agreed for the vote to take place as scheduled . In the constitutional election , the Bolsheviks gained approximately a quarter of the vote , being defeated by the agrarian @-@ focused Socialist Revolutionary Party . Lenin argued that the election was not a fair reflection of the people 's will , that the electorate had not had time to learn the Bolsheviks ' political programme , and that the candidacy lists had been drawn up before the Left Socialist Revolutionaries split from the Socialist Revolutionaries . Nevertheless , the newly elected Russian Constituent Assembly convened in Petrograd in January 1918 . Sovnarkom argued that it was counter @-@ revolutionary because it sought to remove power from the soviets , but the Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviks denied this . The Bolsheviks presented the Assembly with a motion that would strip it of most of its legal powers ; when the Assembly rejected the motion , Sovnarkom declared this as evidence of its counter @-@ revolutionary nature and forcibly disbanded it . 
 Lenin rejected repeated calls – including from some Bolsheviks – to establish a coalition government with other socialist parties . However , Sovnarkom partially relented ; although refusing a coalition with the Mensheviks or Socialist Revolutionaries , in December 1917 they allowed the Left Socialist Revolutionaries five posts in the cabinet . This coalition only lasted four months , until March 1918 , when the Left Socialist Revolutionaries pulled out of the government over a disagreement about the Bolsheviks ' approach to ending the First World War . At their 7th Congress in March 1918 , the Bolsheviks changed their official name from the " Russian Social Democratic Labour Party " to the " Russian Communist Party " , as Lenin wanted to both distance his group from the increasingly reformist German Social Democratic Party and to emphasize its ultimate goal : a communist society . 
 Although ultimate power officially rested with the country 's government in the form of Sovnarkom and the Executive Committee ( <unk> ) elected by the All @-@ Russian Congress of Soviets ( <unk> ) , the Communist Party was de facto in control in Russia , as acknowledged by its members at the time . By 1918 , Sovnarkom began acting unilaterally , claiming a need for expediency , with the <unk> and <unk> becoming increasingly marginalized , so the soviets no longer had a role in governing Russia . During 1918 and 1919 , the government expelled Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries from the soviets . Russia had become a one @-@ party state . 
 Within the party was established a Political Bureau ( " Politburo " ) and Organisation Bureau ( " Orgburo " ) to accompany the existing Central Committee ; the decisions of these party bodies had to be adopted by Sovnarkom and the Council of Labour and Defence . Lenin was the most significant figure in this governance structure ; as well as being the Chairman of Sovnarkom and sitting on the Council of Labour and Defence , he was on the Central Committee and Politburo of the Communist Party . The only individual to have anywhere near this influence was Lenin 's right @-@ hand man , Yakov Sverdlov , who died in March 1919 during a flu pandemic . In November 1917 , Lenin and his wife took a two @-@ room flat within the Smolny Institute , although the following month left for a brief holiday in <unk> , Finland . In January 1918 , he survived an assassination attempt in Petrograd ; Fritz Platten , who was with Lenin at the time , shielded him and was injured by a bullet . 
 Concerned that the German Army posed a threat to Petrograd , in March 1918 Sovnarkom relocated to Moscow , initially as a temporary measure . There , Lenin , Trotsky , and other Bolshevik leaders moved into the Kremlin , where Lenin lived with his wife and sister Maria in a first floor apartment adjacent to the room in which the Sovnarkom meetings were held . Lenin disliked Moscow , although he rarely left the city centre during the rest of his life . It was in the city in August 1918 that he survived a second assassination attempt ; he was shot following a public speech and injured badly . A Socialist Revolutionary , Fanny Kaplan , was arrested and executed . The attack was widely covered in the Russian press , generating much sympathy for him and boosting his popularity . As a respite , in September 1918 Lenin was driven to the Gorki estate , just outside Moscow , recently acquired for him by the government . 
 = = = Social , legal , and economic reform : 1917 – 18 = = = 
 Upon taking power , Lenin 's regime issued a series of decrees . The first was a Decree on Land which declared that the landed estates of the aristocracy and the Orthodox Church should be nationalised and redistributed to peasants by local governments . This contrasted with Lenin 's desire for agricultural collectivisation but provided governmental recognition of the widespread peasant land seizures that had already occurred . In November 1917 , the government issued the Decree on the Press which closed many opposition media outlets deemed counter @-@ revolutionary . They claimed the measure would be temporary , although the decree was widely criticised , including by many Bolsheviks , for compromising freedom of the press . 
 In November 1917 , Lenin issued the Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia , which stated that non @-@ Russian ethnic groups living inside the Republic had the right to cede from Russian authority and establish their own independent nation @-@ states . As a result , many nations declared independence : Finland and Lithuania in December 1917 , Latvia and Ukraine in January 1918 , Estonia in February 1918 , Transcaucasia in April 1918 , and Poland in November 1918 . Soon , the Bolsheviks actively promoted communist parties in these independent nation @-@ states , while in July 1918 , at the Fifth All @-@ Russian Congress of the Soviets , a constitution was approved that reformed the Russian Republic into the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic . Seeking to modernise the country , the government officially converted Russia from the Julian calendar to the Gregorian calendar used in Europe . 
 In November 1917 , Sovnarkom issued a decree abolishing Russia 's legal system , calling on the use of " revolutionary conscience " to replace the abolished laws . The courts were replaced by a two @-@ tier system : Revolutionary Tribunals to deal with counter @-@ revolutionary crimes , and People 's Courts to deal with civil and other criminal offences . They were instructed to ignore pre @-@ existing laws , and base their rulings on the Sovnarkom decrees and a " socialist sense of justice " . November also saw an overhaul of the armed forces ; Sovnarkom implemented egalitarian measures , abolished previous ranks , titles , and medals , and called on soldiers to establish committees to elect their commanders . 
 In October 1917 , Lenin issued a decree limiting work for everyone in Russia to eight hours per day . He also issued the Decree on Popular Education which stipulated that the government would guarantee free , secular education for all children in Russia , and a decree establishing a system of state orphanages . To combat mass illiteracy , a literacy campaign was initiated ; an estimated 5 million people enrolled in crash courses of basic literacy from 1920 to 1926 . Embracing the equality of the sexes , laws were introduced that helped to emancipate women , by giving them economic autonomy from their husbands and removing restrictions on divorce . A Bolshevik women 's organisation , <unk> , was established to further these aims . <unk> atheist , Lenin and the Communist Party wanted to demolish organised religion , and in January 1918 the government decreed the separation of church and state and prohibited religious instruction in schools . 
 In November 1917 , Lenin issued the Decree on Workers ' Control , which called on the workers of each enterprise to establish an elected committee to monitor their enterprise 's management . That month they also issued an order requisitioning the country 's gold , and nationalised the banks , which Lenin saw as a major step toward socialism . In December , Sovnarkom established a Supreme Council of the National Economy ( <unk> ) which had authority over industry , banking , agriculture , and trade . The factory committees were subordinate to the trade unions , which were subordinate to <unk> ; thus , the state 's centralised economic plan was prioritised over the workers ' local economic interests . In early 1918 , Sovnarkom cancelled all foreign debts and refused to pay interest owed on them . In April 1918 , it nationalised foreign trade , establishing a state monopoly on imports and exports . In June 1918 , it decreed nationalisation of public utilities , railways , engineering , textiles , metallurgy , and mining , although often these were state @-@ owned in name only . Full @-@ scale nationalisation did not take place until November 1920 , when small @-@ scale industrial enterprises were brought under state control . 
 A faction of the Bolsheviks known as the " Left Communists " criticised Sovnarkom 's economic policy as too moderate ; they wanted nationalisation of all industry , agriculture , trade , finance , transport , and communication . Lenin believed that this was impractical at that stage , and that the government should only nationalise Russia 's large @-@ scale capitalist enterprises , such as the banks , railways , larger landed estates , and larger factories and mines , allowing smaller businesses to operate privately until they grew large enough to be successfully nationalised . Lenin also disagreed with the Left Communists about economic organisation ; in June 1918 , he argued that centralised economic control of industry was needed , whereas Left Communists wanted each factory to be controlled by its workers , a syndicalist approach that Lenin considered detrimental to the cause of socialism . 
 Adopting a left libertarian perspective , both the Left Communists and other factions in the Communist Party critiqued the decline of democratic institutions in Russia . Internationally , many socialists decried Lenin 's regime and denied that he was establishing socialism ; in particular , they highlighted the lack of widespread political participation , popular consultation , and industrial democracy . In autumn 1918 , the Czech @-@ Austrian Marxist Karl Kautsky authored an anti @-@ Leninist pamphlet condemning the anti @-@ democratic nature of Soviet Russia , to which Lenin published a vociferous reply . German Marxist Rosa Luxemburg echoed Kautsky 's views , while the Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin described the Bolshevik seizure of power as " the burial of the Russian Revolution " . 
 = = = Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk : 1917 – 18 = = = 
 Upon taking power , Lenin believed that a key policy of his government must be to withdraw from the First World War by establishing an armistice with the Central Powers of Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary . He believed that ongoing war would create resentment among war @-@ weary Russian troops – to whom he had promised peace – and that these troops and the advancing German Army threatened both his own government and international socialism . By contrast , other Bolsheviks – in particular Bukharin and the Left Communists – believed that peace with the Central Powers would be a betrayal of international socialism and that Russia should instead wage " a war of revolutionary defence " that would provoke an uprising of the German proletariat against their own government . 
 Lenin proposed a three @-@ month armistice in his Decree on Peace of November 1917 , which was approved by the Second Congress of Soviets and presented to the German and Austro @-@ Hungarian governments . The Germans responded positively , viewing this as an opportunity to focus on the Western Front and stave off looming defeat . In November , armistice talks began at Brest @-@ Litovsk , the headquarters of the German high command on the Eastern Front , with the Russian delegation being led by Trotsky and Adolph Joffe . Meanwhile , a ceasefire until January was agreed . During negotiations , the Germans insisted on keeping their wartime conquests – which included Poland , Lithuania , and Courland – whereas the Russians countered that this was a violation of these nations ' rights to self @-@ determination . Some Bolsheviks had expressed hopes of dragging out negotiations until proletarian revolution broke out throughout Europe . On 7 January 1918 , Trotsky returned from Brest @-@ Litovsk to St. Petersburg with an ultimatum from the Central Powers : either Russia accept Germany 's territorial demands or the war would resume . 
 In January and again in February , Lenin urged the Bolsheviks to accept Germany 's proposals . He argued that the territorial losses were acceptable if it ensured the survival of the Bolshevik @-@ led government . The majority of Bolsheviks rejected his position , hoping to prolong the armistice and call Germany 's bluff . On 18 February , the German Army relaunched the offensive , advancing further into Russian @-@ controlled territory and within a day conquering <unk> . At this point , Lenin finally convinced a small majority of the Bolshevik Central Committee to accept the Central Powers ' demands . However , on 23 February , the Central Powers issued a new ultimatum : Russia must recognise German control not only of Poland and the Baltic states but also Ukraine , or face a full @-@ scale invasion of Russia . 
 On 3 March , the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk was signed . It resulted in massive territorial losses for Russia , with 26 % of the former Empire 's population , 37 % of its agricultural harvest area , 28 % of its industry , 26 % of its railway tracks , and two @-@ thirds of its coal and iron reserves being transferred to German control . Accordingly , the Treaty was deeply unpopular across Russia 's political spectrum , and several Bolsheviks and Left Socialist Revolutionaries resigned from Sovnarkom in protest . After the Treaty , Sovnarkom focused on trying to foment proletarian revolution in Germany , issuing an array of anti @-@ war and anti @-@ government publications in the country ; the German government retaliated by expelling Russia 's diplomats . In that month the German Emperor Wilhelm II resigned and the country 's new administration signed the Armistice of 11 November 1918 . As a result , Sovnarkom proclaimed the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk void . 
 = = = Anti @-@ Kulak campaigns , Cheka , and Red Terror : 1918 – 22 = = = 
 By spring 1918 , many cities in western Russia faced famine as a result of chronic food shortages . Lenin blamed this on the kulaks , or wealthier peasants , who allegedly hoarded the grain that they had produced to increase its financial value . In May 1918 , he issued a requisitioning order that established armed detachments to confiscate grain from kulaks for distribution in the cities , and in June called for the formation of Committees of Poor Peasants to aid in requisitioning . This policy resulted in vast social disorder and violence , as armed detachments often clashed with peasant groups , helping to set the stage for the civil war . A prominent example of Lenin 's views was his August 1918 telegram to the Bolsheviks of Penza , which called upon them to suppress a peasant insurrection by publicly hanging at least 100 " known kulaks , rich men , [ and ] <unk> " . 
 <unk> <unk> peasants from producing more grain than they could personally consume , and thus production slumped . A booming black market supplemented the official state @-@ sanctioned economy , and Lenin called on speculators , black marketeers and looters to be shot . Both the Socialist Revolutionaries and Left Socialist @-@ Revolutionaries condemned the armed appropriations of grain at the Fifth All @-@ Russian Congress of Soviets in July 1918 . Realising that the Committees of the Poor Peasants were also persecuting peasants who were not kulaks and thus contributing to anti @-@ government feeling among the peasantry , in December 1918 Lenin abolished them . 
 Lenin repeatedly emphasised the need for terror and violence to overthrow the old order and for the revolution to succeed . Speaking to the All @-@ Russian Central Executive Committee of the Soviets in November 1917 , he declared that " the state is an institution built up for the sake of exercising violence . Previously , this violence was exercised by a handful of moneybags over the entire people ; now we want ... to organise violence in the interests of the people . " He strongly opposed suggestions to abolish capital punishment . Fearing anti @-@ Bolshevik forces would overthrow his administration , in December 1917 Lenin ordered the establishment of the Emergency Commission for Combating Counter @-@ Revolution and Sabotage , or Cheka , a political police force led by Felix <unk> . 
 In September 1918 , Sovnarkom passed a decree that inaugurated the Red Terror , a system of oppression orchestrated by the Cheka . Although sometimes described as an attempt to eliminate the entire bourgeoisie , Lenin did not want to exterminate all members of this class , merely those who sought to reinstate their rule . The majority of the Terror 's victims were well @-@ to @-@ do citizens or former members of the Tsarist administration , however others were non @-@ bourgeois anti @-@ Bolsheviks and perceived social undesirables such as prostitutes . The Cheka claimed the right to both sentence and execute anyone whom it deemed to be an enemy of the government , without recourse to the Revolutionary Tribunals . Accordingly , throughout Soviet Russia the Cheka carried out killings , often in large numbers . For example , the Petrograd Cheka executed 512 people in a few days . There are no surviving records to provide an accurate figure of how many perished in the Red Terror , although later estimates of historians have ranged from 10 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 in one estimate , and 50 @,@ 000 to 140 @,@ 000 in another . 
 Lenin never witnessed this violence or participated in it first @-@ hand , and publicly distanced himself from it . His published articles and speeches rarely called for executions , although he regularly did so in his coded telegrams and confidential notes . Many Bolsheviks expressed disapproval of the Cheka 's mass executions and feared the organisation 's apparent <unk> . The Party brought in attempts to restrain its activities in February 1919 , stripping it of its powers of tribunal and execution in those areas not under official martial law , although the Cheka continued as before in swathes of the country . By 1920 , the Cheka had become the most powerful institution in Soviet Russia , exerting influence over all other state apparatus . 
 A decree in April 1919 resulted in the establishment of concentration camps , which were entrusted to the Cheka , although they were later administered by a new government agency , Gulag . By the end of 1920 , 84 camps had been established across Soviet Russia , holding about 50 @,@ 000 prisoners ; by October 1923 , this had grown to 315 camps and about 70 @,@ 000 inmates . Those interned in the camps were used as slave labour . From July 1922 , intellectuals deemed to be opposing the Bolshevik government were exiled to inhospitable regions or deported from Russia altogether ; Lenin personally scrutinized the lists of those to be dealt with in this manner . In May 1922 , Lenin issued a decree calling for the execution of anti @-@ Bolshevik priests , causing between 14 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 deaths . Although the Russian Orthodox Church was worst affected , the government 's anti @-@ religious policies also impacted on Roman Catholic and Protestant churches , Jewish synagogues , and Islamic mosques . 
 = = = Civil War and Polish @-@ Soviet War : 1918 – 20 = = = 
 Although Lenin expected Russia 's aristocracy and bourgeoisie to oppose his government , he believed that the numerical superiority of the lower classes , coupled with the Bolsheviks ' ability to effectively organise them , guaranteed a swift victory in any conflict . In this , he failed to anticipate the intensity of the violent opposition to Bolshevik rule in Russia . The ensuing Russian Civil War pitted the pro @-@ Bolshevik Reds against the anti @-@ Bolshevik Whites , but also encompassed ethnic conflicts on Russia 's borders and conflict between both Red and White armies and local peasant groups , the Green armies , throughout the former Empire . Accordingly , various historians have seen the civil war as representing two distinct conflicts : one between the revolutionaries and the counter @-@ revolutionaries , and the other between different revolutionary factions . 
 The White armies were established by former Tsarist military officers , and included Anton Denikin 's Volunteer Army in South Russia , Alexander Kolchak 's forces in Siberia , and Nikolai <unk> 's troops in the newly independent Baltic states . The Whites were bolstered when 35 @,@ 000 members of the Czech Legion – prisoners of war from the conflict with the Central Powers – turned against Sovnarkom and allied with the Committee of Members of the Constituent Assembly ( <unk> ) , an anti @-@ Bolshevik government established in Samara . The Whites were also backed by Western governments who perceived the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk as a betrayal of the Allied war effort and feared the Bolsheviks ' calls for world revolution . In 1918 , the United Kingdom , France , United States , Canada , Italy , and Serbia landed 10 @,@ 000 troops in Murmansk , seizing Kandalaksha , while later that year British , American , and Japanese forces landed in Vladivostok . Western troops soon pulled out of the civil war , instead only supporting the Whites with officers , technicians and armaments , but Japan remained because they saw the conflict as an opportunity for territorial expansion . 
 Lenin tasked Trotsky with establishing a Workers ' and Peasants ' Red Army , and with his support , Trotsky organised a Revolutionary Military Council in September 1918 , remaining its chairman until 1925 . Recognising their valuable military experience , Lenin agreed that officers from the old Tsarist army could serve in the Red Army , although Trotsky established military councils to monitor their activities . The Reds held control of Russia 's two largest cities , Moscow and Petrograd , as well as most of Great Russia , while the Whites were located largely on the former Empire 's peripheries . The latter were therefore hindered by being both fragmented and geographically scattered , and because their ethnic Russian <unk> alienated the region 's national minorities . Anti @-@ Bolshevik armies carried out the White Terror , a campaign of violence against perceived Bolshevik supporters , although this was typically more spontaneous than the state @-@ sanctioned Red Terror . Both White and Red Armies were responsible for attacks against Jewish communities , prompting Lenin to issue a condemnation of anti @-@ Semitism , which he blamed on capitalist propaganda . 
 In July 1918 , Sverdlov informed Sovnarkom that the Ural Regional Soviet had overseen the execution of the former Tsar and his immediate family in Yekaterinburg to prevent them from being rescued by advancing White troops . Although lacking proof , biographers and historians like Richard Pipes and Dmitri Volkogonov have expressed the view that the killing was probably sanctioned by Lenin ; conversely , historian James Ryan cautioned that there was " no reason " to believe this . For Lenin , however , the killing was necessary ; he highlighted the precedent set by the execution of Louis XVI in the French Revolution . 
 After the Brest @-@ Litovsk Treaty , the Left Socialist Revolutionaries had abandoned the coalition and increasingly viewed the Bolsheviks as traitors to the revolution . In July 1918 , the Left Socialist Revolutionary Yakov <unk> <unk> assassinated the German ambassador to Russia , Wilhelm von Mirbach , hoping that the ensuing diplomatic incident would lead to a relaunched revolutionary war against Germany . The Left Socialist Revolutionaries then launched a coup in Moscow , shelling the Kremlin and seizing the city 's central post office before being stopped by Trotsky 's forces . The party 's leaders and many members were arrested and imprisoned , but were treated more leniently than many other opponents of the Bolsheviks . 
 By 1919 , the White armies were in retreat and by the start of 1920 they were defeated on all three fronts . However , the Polish @-@ Soviet War broke out that year , after Poland tried to annex parts of Belarus and Western Ukraine ; by May 1920 it had captured Kiev . After forcing the Polish Army back , Lenin urged the Red Army to push into Poland itself , believing that the Polish proletariat would rise up to support the Russian troops and thus spark European revolution . Although Trotsky and other Bolsheviks were sceptical , they eventually agreed to the invasion . However , the Polish proletariat did not rise up , and the Red Army was defeated at the Battle of Warsaw . The Polish armies began to push the Red Army back into Russia , forcing Sovnarkom to sue for peace ; the war culminated in the Peace of Riga , in which Russia ceded territory to Poland and paid it reparations . 
 = = = Comintern and world revolution : 1919 – 20 = = = 
 After the Armistice on the Western Front , Lenin believed that the breakout of European revolution was imminent . Seeking to promote this , Sovnarkom supported the establishment of Béla Kun 's Communist government in Hungary in March 1919 , followed by the Communist government in Bavaria and various revolutionary socialist uprisings in other parts of Germany , including that of the Spartacus League . During Russia 's Civil War , the Red Army was sent into the newly independent national republics on Russia 's borders to aid Marxists there in establishing soviet systems of government . In Europe , this resulted in the creation of new Communist @-@ led states in Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Belarus , and Ukraine , all of which were officially independent of Russia , while further east it led to the creation of Communist governments in Georgia , and then in Outer Mongolia . Various senior Bolsheviks wanted these absorbed into the Russian state ; Lenin insisted that national sensibilities should be respected , but reassured them that these nations ' new Communist Party administrations were de facto regional branches of Moscow 's government . 
 In late 1918 , the British Labour Party called for the establishment of an international conference of socialist parties , the Labour and Socialist International . Lenin saw this as a revival of the Second International which he had despised , and formulated his own rival international conference of socialists to offset its impact . He organised this conference with the aid of Zinoviev , Trotsky , Christian <unk> , and Angelica <unk> . In March 1919 , the First Congress of this Communist International ( " Comintern " ) opened in Moscow . It lacked global coverage ; of the 34 assembled delegates , 30 resided within the countries of the former Russian Empire , and most of the international delegates were not officially recognised by the socialist parties within their own nations . Accordingly , the Bolsheviks dominated proceedings , with Lenin subsequently authoring a series of regulations that meant that only socialist parties that endorsed the Bolsheviks ' views were permitted to join Comintern . During the first conference , Lenin spoke to the delegates , lambasting the parliamentary path to socialism espoused by revisionist Marxists like Kautsky and repeating his calls for a violent overthrow of Europe 's bourgeoisie governments . While Zinoviev became the International 's President , Lenin continued to wield great control over it . 
 The Second Congress of the Communist International opened in Petrograd 's Smolny Institute in June 1920 , representing the last time that Lenin visited a city other than Moscow . There , he encouraged foreign delegates to emulate the Bolsheviks ' seizure of power , and abandoned his longstanding viewpoint that capitalism was a necessary stage in societal development , instead encouraging those nations under colonial occupation to transform their pre @-@ capitalist societies directly into socialist ones . For this conference , he authored " Left @-@ Wing " Communism : An Infantile Disorder , a short book articulating his criticism of far @-@ left elements within the British and German communist parties who refused to enter those nations ' parliamentary systems and trade unions ; instead he urged them to do so to advance the revolutionary cause . The conference had to be suspended for several days due to the ongoing war with Poland , before the Congress subsequently moved to Moscow , where it continued to hold sessions until August . However , Lenin 's predicted world revolution did not materialise , as the Hungarian Communist government was overthrown and the German Marxist uprisings suppressed . 
 = = = Famine and the New Economic Policy : 1920 – 22 = = = 
 Within the Communist Party , there was dissent from two factions , the Group of Democratic <unk> and the Workers ' Opposition , both of which criticised the Russian state as too centralised and bureaucratic . The Workers ' Opposition , which had connections to the official state trade unions , also expressed the concern that the government had lost the trust of the Russian working class . The ' trade union discussion ' preoccupied the party in this period ; Trotsky angered the Workers ' Opposition by suggesting that the trade unions be eliminated , seeing them as superfluous in a " workers ' state " , but Lenin disagreed , believing it best to allow them to exist , and most of the Bolsheviks eventually embraced the latter view . To deal with the dissent , at the Tenth Party Congress in February 1921 , Lenin introduced a ban on factional activity within the party , under pain of expulsion . 
 Caused in part by a drought , the Russian famine of 1921 was the most severe that the country had experienced since that of 1891 , resulting in around five million deaths . The famine was exacerbated by government requisitioning , as well as the export of large quantities of Russian grain . To aid the famine victims , the U.S. government established an American Relief Administration to distribute food , although Lenin was suspicious of this aid and had it closely monitored . During the famine , Patriarch Tikhon called on Orthodox churches to sell unnecessary items to help feed the starving , an action endorsed by the government . In February 1922 Sovnarkom went further by calling on all valuables belonging to religious institutions to be forcibly appropriated and sold . Tikhon opposed the sale of any items used within the Eucharist and many clergy resisted the appropriations , resulting in violence . 
 In 1920 and 1921 , local opposition to requisitioning resulted in anti @-@ Bolshevik peasant uprisings breaking out across Russia , although these were suppressed . Among the most significant was the Tambov Rebellion , which was put down by the Red Army . In February 1921 , workers went on strike in Petrograd , resulting in the government proclaiming martial law in the city and sending in the Red Army to quell demonstrations . In March , the Kronstadt rebellion began when sailors in Kronstadt revolted against the Bolshevik government , demanding that all socialists be allowed to publish freely , that independent trade unions be given freedom of assembly and that peasants be allowed free markets and not be subject to requisitioning . Lenin declared that the mutineers had been misled by the Socialist Revolutionaries and foreign imperialists , calling for violent reprisals . Under Trotsky 's leadership , the Red Army put down the rebellion on 17 March , with thousands dead and many survivors sent to labour camps . 
 In February 1921 , Lenin introduced a New Economic Policy ( NEP ) to the Politburo , eventually convincing most senior Bolsheviks of its necessity , with it passing into law in April . Lenin explained the policy in a booklet , On the Food Tax , in which he stated that the NEP represented a return to the original Bolshevik economic plans ; he claimed that these had been derailed by the civil war , in which Sovnarkom had been forced to resort to the economic policies of " war communism " . The NEP allowed some private enterprise within Russia , permitting the reintroduction of the wage system and allowing peasants to sell produce on the open market while being taxed on their earnings . The policy also allowed for a return to privately owned small industry , although basic industry , transport and foreign trade remained under state control . Lenin termed this " state capitalism " , and many Bolsheviks thought it to be a betrayal of socialist principles . Lenin biographers have often characterised the introduction of the NEP as one of his most significant achievements , with some believing that had it not been implemented then Sovnarkom would have been quickly overthrown by popular uprisings . 
 In January 1920 , the government brought in universal labour conscription , ensuring that all citizens aged between 16 and 50 had to work . Lenin also called for a mass electrification project , the <unk> plan , which began in February 1920 ; Lenin 's declaration that " communism is Soviet power plus the electrification of the whole country " would be widely cited in later years . Seeking to advance the Russian economy through foreign trade , Sovnarkom sent delegates to the Genoa Conference ; Lenin had hoped to attend but was prevented by ill health . The conference resulted in a Russian agreement with Germany , the Treaty of Rapallo , and the Anglo @-@ Soviet Trade Agreement was negotiated . Lenin hoped that by allowing foreign corporations to invest in Russia , it would exacerbate rivalries between the capitalist nations and hasten their downfall ; he tried to rent the oil fields of Kamchatka to an American corporation to exacerbate tensions between the U.S. and Japan , who desired Kamchatka for their empire . 
 = = = Declining health and arguments with Stalin : 1920 – 23 = = = 
 To Lenin 's embarrassment and horror , in April 1920 the Bolsheviks held a party to celebrate his fiftieth birthday , which was also marked by widespread celebrations across Russia and the publication of poems and biographies dedicated to him . Between 1920 and 1926 , twenty volumes of Lenin 's Collected Works were published ; some material was omitted . During 1920 , a number of prominent Western figures visited Lenin in Russia ; these included the author H. G. Wells and the philosopher Bertrand Russell , as well as the anarchists Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman . Lenin was also visited at the Kremlin by Armand , who was in increasingly poor health . He sent her to a sanatorium in <unk> in the Northern Caucasus to recover , but she died there in September 1920 during a cholera epidemic . Her body was transported to Moscow , where a visibly grief @-@ stricken Lenin oversaw its burial beneath the Kremlin Wall . 
 Lenin was seriously ill by the latter half of 1921 , suffering from <unk> , insomnia , and regular headaches . At the Politburo 's insistence , in July he left Moscow for a month 's leave at his Gorki mansion , where he was cared for by his wife and sister . Lenin began to contemplate the possibility of suicide , asking both Krupskaya and Stalin to acquire potassium cyanide for him . 26 physicians would be hired to help Lenin during his final years ; many of them were foreign and had been hired at great expense . Some suggested that his sickness could have been caused by metal oxidation from the bullets that were lodged in his body from the 1918 assassination attempt ; in April 1922 he underwent a surgical operation to remove them . The symptoms continued after this , with Lenin 's doctors unsure of the cause ; some suggested that he was suffering from neurasthenia or cerebral arteriosclerosis , although others believed that he had syphilis , an idea endorsed in a 2004 report by a team of neuroscientists , who suggested that this was later deliberately concealed by the government . In May 1922 , he suffered his first stroke , temporarily losing his ability to speak and being paralysed on his right side . He convalesced at Gorki , and had largely recovered by July . In October he returned to Moscow , although in December he suffered a second stroke and returned to Gorki . 
 Despite his illness , Lenin remained keenly interested in political developments . When the Socialist Revolutionary Party 's leadership was found guilty of conspiring against the government in a trial held between June and August 1922 , Lenin called for their execution ; they were instead imprisoned indefinitely , only being executed during the Great Purges of Stalin 's leadership . With Lenin 's support , the government also succeeded in virtually eradicating <unk> in Russia by expelling all Mensheviks from state institutions and enterprises in March 1923 and then imprisoning the party 's membership in concentration camps . Lenin was concerned by the survival of the Tsarist bureaucratic system in Soviet Russia , and became increasingly worried by this in his final years . <unk> bureaucratic attitudes , he suggested a total overhaul to deal with such problems , in one letter complaining that " we are being sucked into a foul bureaucratic swamp " . 
 During December 1922 and January 1923 Lenin dictated " Lenin 's Testament " , in which he discussed the personal qualities of his comrades , particularly Trotsky and Stalin . He recommended that Stalin be removed from the position of General Secretary of the Communist Party , deeming him ill @-@ suited for the position . Instead he recommended Trotsky for the job , describing him as " the most capable man in the present Central Committee " ; he highlighted Trotsky 's superior intellect but at the same time criticised his self @-@ assurance and inclination toward excess administration . During this period he dictated a criticism of the bureaucratic nature of the Workers ' and Peasants ' Inspectorate , calling for the recruitment of new , working @-@ class staff as an antidote to this problem , while in another article he called for the state to combat illiteracy , promote punctuality and conscientiousness within the populace , and encourage peasants to join co @-@ operatives . 
 In Lenin 's absence , Stalin had begun consolidating his power both by appointing his supporters to prominent positions , and by cultivating an image of himself as Lenin 's closest intimate and deserving successor . In December 1922 , Stalin took responsibility for Lenin 's regimen , being tasked by the Politburo with controlling who had access to him . Lenin was however increasingly critical of Stalin ; while Lenin was insisting that the state should retain its monopoly on international trade during the summer of 1922 , Stalin was leading a number of other Bolsheviks in unsuccessfully opposing this . There were personal arguments between the two as well ; Stalin had upset Krupskaya by shouting at her during a phone conversation , which in turn greatly angered Lenin , who sent Stalin a letter expressing his annoyance . 
 The most significant political division between the two emerged during the Georgian Affair . Stalin had suggested that both Georgia and neighbouring countries like Azerbaijan and Armenia should be merged into the Russian state , despite the protestations of their national governments . Lenin saw this as an expression of Great Russian ethnic chauvinism by Stalin and his supporters , instead calling for these nation @-@ states to join Russia as semi @-@ independent parts of a greater union , which he suggested be called the Union of Soviet Republics of Europe and Asia . Stalin ultimately relented to this proposal , although – with Lenin 's agreement – he changed the name of the newly proposed state to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR ) . Lenin sent Trotsky to speak on his behalf at a Central Committee plenum in December , where the plans for the USSR were sanctioned ; these plans were then ratified on 30 December by the Congress of Soviets , resulting in the formation of the Soviet Union . Despite his poor health , Lenin was elected chairman of the new government of the Soviet Union . 
 = = = Death and funeral : 1923 – 24 = = = 
 In March 1923 , Lenin suffered a third stroke and lost his ability to speak ; that month , he experienced partial paralysis on his right side and began exhibiting sensory aphasia . By May , he appeared to be making a slow recovery , as he began to regain his mobility , speech , and writing skills . In October , he made a final visit to Moscow and the Kremlin . In his final weeks , Lenin was visited by Zinoviev , Kamenev , and Bukharin , with the latter visiting him at his Gorki dacha on the day of his death . Lenin died at his Gorki home on 21 January 1924 , having fallen into a coma earlier in the day . His official cause of death was recorded as an incurable disease of the blood vessels . 
 The government publicly announced Lenin 's death the following day . On 23 January , mourners from the Communist Party , trade unions , and soviets visited his Gorki home to inspect the body , which was carried aloft in a red coffin by leading Bolsheviks . Transported by train to Moscow , the coffin was taken to the House of Trade Unions , where the body lay in state . Over the next three days , around a million mourners came to see the body , many queuing for hours in the freezing conditions . On 26 January , the eleventh All @-@ Union Congress of Soviets met to pay respects to the deceased leader , with speeches being made by Kalinin , Zinoviev , and Stalin , but notably not Trotsky , who had been convalescing in the Caucasus . Lenin 's funeral took place the following day , when his body was carried to Red Square , accompanied by martial music , where assembled crowds listened to a series of speeches before the corpse was placed into the vault of a specially erected mausoleum . Despite the freezing temperatures , tens of thousands attended . 
 Against Krupskaya 's protestations , Lenin 's body was mummified to preserve it for long @-@ term public display in the Red Square mausoleum . During this process , Lenin 's brain was removed ; in 1925 an institute was established to dissect it , revealing that Lenin had suffered from severe sclerosis . In July 1929 , the Politburo agreed to replace the temporary mausoleum with a permanent granite alternative , which was finished in 1933 . The sarcophagus in which Lenin 's corpse was contained was replaced in 1940 and again in 1970 . From 1941 to 1945 the body was moved from Moscow and stored in Tyumen for safety amid the Second World War . 
 = = Political ideology = = 
 Lenin was a fervent believer in Marxism , and believed that his interpretation of Marxism – first termed " Leninism " by Martov in 1904 – was the sole authentic and orthodox one . According to his Marxist perspective , humanity would eventually reach pure communism , becoming a stateless , classless , egalitarian society of workers who were free from exploitation and alienation , controlled their own destiny , and abided by the rule " from each according to his ability , to each according to his needs " . According to Volkogonov , Lenin " deeply and sincerely " believed that the path which he was setting Russia on would ultimately lead to the establishment of this communist society . 
 However , Lenin 's Marxist beliefs led him to the view that society could not transform directly from its present state to communism , but must first enter a period of socialism , and so his main concern was how to convert Russia into a socialist society . To do so , he believed that a dictatorship of the proletariat was necessary to suppress the bourgeoisie and develop a socialist economy . He defined socialism as " an order of civilized co @-@ operators in which the means of production are socially owned " , and believed that this economic system had to be expanded until it could create a society of abundance . To achieve this , he saw bringing the Russian economy under state control to be his central concern , with – in his words – " all citizens " becoming " hired employees of the state " . Lenin 's interpretation of socialism was centralised , planned , and statist , with both production and distribution strictly controlled . He believed that all workers throughout the country would voluntarily join together to enable the state 's economic and political centralisation . In this way , his calls for " workers ' control " of the means of production referred not to the direct control of enterprises by their workers , but the operation of all enterprises under the control of a " workers ' state " . This resulted in two conflicting themes within Lenin 's thought : popular workers ' control , and a centralised , hierarchical , coercive state apparatus . 
 Before 1914 , Lenin mostly agreed with mainstream European Marxist orthodoxy . However , Leninism introduced revisions and innovations to orthodox Marxism , and adopted a more absolutist , doctrinaire perspective . Similarly , Leninism distinguished itself from established variants of Marxism by the emotional intensity of its <unk> vision and its focus on the leadership role of a revolutionary vanguard proletariat . Thus , Lenin came to deviate from the Marxist mainstream over the issue of how to establish a proletarian state ; his belief in a strong state apparatus that excluded the bourgeois conflicted with the views of European Marxists like Kautsky who envisioned a democratic parliamentary government in which the proletariat had a majority . Moreover , according to historian James Ryan , Lenin was " the first and most significant Marxist theorist to dramatically elevate the role of violence as revolutionary instrument " . Lenin incorporated changing circumstances into his belief system , and the pragmatic realities of governing Russia amid war , famine , and economic collapse resulted in him deviating from many of the Marxist ideas he had articulated before the October Revolution . 
 Lenin 's ideas were heavily influenced both by pre @-@ existing thought within the Russian revolutionary movement , and by theoretical variants of Russian Marxism which had focused heavily on how Marx and Engels ' writings would apply to Russia . Accordingly , Lenin was also influenced by earlier currents of Russian socialist thought such as those of the Narodnik agrarian @-@ socialists . Conversely , he derided Marxists who adopted from contemporary non @-@ Marxist philosophers and sociologists . In his theoretical writings , particularly Imperialism , he examined what he thought were the developments in capitalism since Marx 's death , arguing that it had reached a new stage , state monopoly capitalism . Before taking power in 1918 , he believed that while Russia 's economy was still dominated by the peasantry , the fact that monopoly capitalism existed in Russia meant that the country was sufficiently materially developed to move to socialism . 
 Lenin was an internationalist and a keen supporter of world revolution , deeming national borders to be an outdated concept and nationalism a distraction from class struggle . He believed that under revolutionary socialism , there would be " the inevitable merging of nations " and the ultimate establishment of " a United States of the World " . He opposed federalism , deeming it to be bourgeois , and instead emphasised the need for a centralised unitary state . Lenin was anti @-@ imperialist , and believed that all nations deserved " the right of self @-@ determination " . He thus supported wars of national liberation , accepting that such conflicts might be necessary for a minority group to break away from a socialist state , because socialist states are not " holy or insured against mistakes or weaknesses " . 
 He expressed the view that " Soviet government is many millions of times more democratic than the most democratic @-@ bourgeois republic " , the latter of which was simply " a democracy for the rich " . He deemed his " dictatorship of the proletariat " to be democratic through the election of representatives to the soviets , and by workers electing their own officials , with regular rotation and involvement of all workers in the administration of the country . Lenin believed that the representative democracy of capitalist countries had been used to give the illusion of democracy while maintaining the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie ; describing the representative democratic system of the United States , he referred to the " spectacular and meaningless duels between two bourgeois parties " , both of whom were led by " astute <unk> " that exploited the American proletariat . He also opposed liberalism , exhibiting a general antipathy toward liberty as a value , and believing that liberalism 's freedoms were fraudulent because it did not free labourers from capitalist exploitation . 
 = = Personal life and characteristics = = 
 Lenin saw himself as a man of destiny , and firmly believed in the righteousness of his cause and his own ability as a revolutionary leader . Biographer Louis Fischer described him as " a lover of radical change and maximum upheaval " , a man for whom " there was never a middle @-@ ground . He was an either @-@ or , black @-@ or @-@ red <unk> . " Highlighting Lenin 's " extraordinary capacity for disciplined work " and " devotion to the revolutionary cause " , Pipes noted that he exhibited much charisma . Similarly , Volkogonov believed that " by the very force of his personality , [ Lenin ] had an influence over people . " Conversely , Lenin 's friend Gorky commented that in his physical appearance as a " a <unk> , stocky , sturdy person " , the communist revolutionary was " too ordinary " and did not give " the impression of being a leader " . 
 Historian and biographer Robert Service asserted that Lenin had been an intensely emotional young man , who exhibited strong hatred for the Tsarist authorities . According to Service , Lenin developed an " emotional attachment " to his ideological heroes , such as Marx , Engels and Chernyshevsky ; he owned portraits of them , and privately described himself as being " in love " with Marx and Engels . According to Lenin biographer James D. White , Lenin treated their writings as " holy writ " , a " religious dogma " which should " not be questioned but believed in " . In Volkogonov 's view , Lenin accepted Marxism as " absolute truth " , and accordingly acted like " a religious fanatic " . Similarly , Bertrand Russell felt that Lenin exhibited " unwavering faith – religious faith in the Marxian gospel " . Biographer Christopher Read suggested that Lenin was " a secular equivalent of theocratic leaders who derive their legitimacy from the [ perceived ] truth of their doctrines , not popular mandates . " However , Lenin was an atheist and a critic of religion , believing that socialism was inherently atheistic ; he thus considered Christian socialism a contradiction in terms . 
 Service stated that Lenin could be " moody and volatile " , and Pipes deemed him to be " a thoroughgoing misanthrope " , a view rejected by Read , who highlighted many instances in which Lenin displayed kindness , particularly toward children . According to several biographers , Lenin was intolerant of opposition and often dismissed outright opinions that differed from his own . He could be " venomous in his critique of others " , exhibiting a propensity for mockery , ridicule , and ad hominem attacks on those who disagreed with him . He ignored facts which did not suit his argument , abhorred compromise , and very rarely admitted his own errors . He refused to bend his opinions , until he rejected them completely , after which he would treat the new view as if it was just as <unk> . Although he showed no sign of sadism or of personally desiring to commit violent acts , Lenin endorsed the violent actions of others and exhibited no remorse for those killed for the revolutionary cause . Adopting an amoral stance , in Lenin 's view the end always justified the means ; according to Service , Lenin 's " criterion of morality was simple : does a certain action advance or hinder the cause of the Revolution ? " 
 Aside from Russian , Lenin spoke and read French , German , and English . Concerned with physical fitness , he exercised regularly , enjoyed cycling , swimming , and hunting , and also developed a passion for mountain walking in the Swiss peaks . He was also fond of pets , in particular cats . <unk> to eschew luxury , he lived a spartan lifestyle , with Pipes noting that Lenin was " exceedingly modest in his personal wants " , leading " an austere , almost ascetic , style of life " . Lenin despised untidiness , always keeping his work desk tidy and his pencils sharpened , and insisted on total silence while he was working . According to Fischer , Lenin 's " vanity was minimal " , and for this reason he disliked the cult of personality that the Soviet administration began to build around him ; he nevertheless accepted that it might have some benefits in unifying the communist movement . 
 Despite his revolutionary politics , Lenin disliked revolutionary experimentation in literature and the arts , for instance expressing his dislike of expressionism , futurism , and cubism , and conversely favouring realism and Russian classic literature . Lenin also had a conservative attitude towards sex and marriage . Throughout his adult life , he was in a relationship with Krupskaya , a fellow Marxist whom he married . Lenin and Krupskaya were both sad that they never had children , although they enjoyed entertaining their friends ' offspring . Read noted that Lenin had " very close , warm , lifelong relationships " with his close family members , although he had no lifelong friends , and Armand has been cited as being his only close , intimate confidante . 
 Ethnically , Lenin identified as Russian . It is likely that he was unaware of his mother 's Jewish ancestry , which was only discovered by his sister Anna after his death . Service described Lenin as " a bit of a snob in national , social and cultural terms " . The Bolshevik leader believed that other European countries , especially Germany , were culturally superior to Russia , " one of the most benighted , medieval and shamefully backward of Asian countries " . He was annoyed at what he perceived as a lack of conscientiousness and discipline among the Russian people , and from his youth had wanted Russia to become more culturally European and Western . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Volkogonov claimed that " there can scarcely have been another man in history who managed so profoundly to change so large a society on such a scale " . Lenin 's administration laid the framework for the system of government that ruled Russia for seven decades and provided the model for later Communist @-@ led states which came to cover a third of the inhabited world in the mid @-@ 20th century . Thus , Lenin 's influence was global . A controversial figure , Lenin remains both reviled and revered ; he has been idolised by communists , and demonised by critics on both the left , such as democratic socialists and anarchists , and the right , such as conservatives and fascists . Even during his lifetime , Lenin " was loved and hated , admired and scorned " by the Russian people . 
 The historian Albert <unk> suggested that if the October Revolution is considered the most significant event of the 20th century , then Lenin " must for good or ill be considered the century 's most significant political leader " . White described Lenin as " one of the undeniably outstanding figures of modern history " , while Service noted that the Russian leader was widely understood to be one of the 20th century 's " principal actors " . Read considered him " one of the most widespread , universally recognizable icons of the twentieth century " , while Ryan called him " one of the most significant and influential figures of modern history " . Time magazine named Lenin one of the 100 most important people of the 20th century , and one of their top 25 political icons of all time . 
 In the Western world , biographers began writing about Lenin soon after his death ; some – like Christopher Hill – were sympathetic to him , and others – like Richard Pipes and Robert <unk> – expressly hostile . A number of later biographers , such as Read and Lars Lih , sought to avoid making either hostile or positive comments about him , thereby evading politicized stereotypes . Among sympathisers , he was portrayed as having made a genuine adjustment of Marxist theory that enabled it to suit Russia 's particular socio @-@ economic conditions . The Soviet view characterised him as a man who recognised the historically inevitable and accordingly helped to make the inevitable happen . Conversely , the majority of Western historians have perceived him as a person who manipulated events in order to attain and then retain political power , moreover considering his ideas as attempts to ideologically justify his pragmatic policies . More recently , revisionists in both Russia and the West have highlighted the impact that pre @-@ existing ideas and popular pressures exerted on Lenin and his policies . 
 Various historians and biographers have characterised Lenin 's administration as totalitarian , and as a police state , and many have described it as a one @-@ party dictatorship . Several such scholars have described Lenin as a dictator , although Ryan stated that he was " not a dictator in the sense that all his recommendations were accepted and implemented " , for many of his colleagues disagreed with him on various issues . Fischer noted that while " Lenin was a dictator , [ he was ] not the kind of dictator Stalin later became " , while Volkogonov believed that whereas Lenin established a " dictatorship of the Party " , it would only be under Stalin that the Soviet Union became the " dictatorship of one man " . Conversely , various Marxist observers – including Western historians Hill and John Rees – argued against the view that Lenin 's government was a dictatorship , viewing it instead as an imperfect way of preserving elements of democracy without some of the processes found in liberal democratic states . Ryan contends that the leftist historian Paul Le Blanc " makes a quite valid point that the personal qualities that led Lenin to brutal policies were not necessarily any stronger than in some of the major Western leaders of the twentieth century . " Historian J. Arch Getty remarked that " Lenin deserves a lot of credit for the notion that the meek can inherit the earth , that there can be a political movement based on social justice and equality . " Some left @-@ wing intellectuals , among them Slavoj Žižek , Alain <unk> , Lars T. Lih , and Fredric Jameson , advocate reviving Lenin 's uncompromising revolutionary spirit to address contemporary global problems . 
 = = = Within the Soviet Union = = = 
 In the Soviet Union , a cult of personality devoted to Lenin began to develop during his lifetime , but was only fully established after his death . According to historian Nina <unk> , it represented the world 's " most elaborate cult of a revolutionary leader " since that of George Washington in the United States , and has been repeatedly described as " quasi @-@ religious " in nature . Busts or statues of Lenin were erected in almost every village , and his face adorned postage stamps , crockery , posters , and the front pages of Soviet newspapers Pravda and <unk> . The places where he had lived or stayed were converted into museums devoted to him . Libraries , streets , farms , museums , towns , and whole regions were named after him , with the city of Petrograd being renamed " Leningrad " in 1924 , and his birthplace of Simbirsk becoming " Ulyanovsk " . The Order of Lenin was established as one of the country 's highest decorations . All of this was contrary to Lenin 's own desires , and was publicly criticised by his widow . 
 Various biographers have stated that Lenin 's writings were treated in a manner akin to holy scripture within the Soviet Union , while Pipes added that " his every opinion was cited to justify one policy or another and treated as gospel . " Stalin codified Leninism through a series of lectures at the Sverdlov University which were then published as Questions of Leninism . Stalin also had much of the deceased leader 's writings collated and stored in a secret archive in the Marx @-@ Engels @-@ Lenin Institute . Material , such as Lenin 's collection of books in Kraków , were also collected from abroad for storage in the Institute , often at great expense . During the Soviet era , these writings were strictly controlled and very few had access . All of Lenin 's writings that proved useful to Stalin were published , but the others remained hidden , and knowledge of both Lenin 's non @-@ Russian ancestry and his noble status was suppressed . In particular , his Jewish ancestry was suppressed until the 1980s , perhaps out of Soviet anti @-@ Semitism , and so as not to undermine Stalin 's Russification efforts , and perhaps so as not to provide fuel for anti @-@ Soviet sentiment among international anti @-@ <unk> . Under Stalin 's regime , Lenin was actively portrayed as a close friend of Stalin 's who had supported Stalin 's bid to be the next Soviet leader . During the Soviet era , five separate editions of Lenin 's published works were published in Russian , the first beginning in 1920 and the last from 1958 to 1965 ; although the fifth edition was described as " complete " , in reality it had much omitted for political expediency . 
 After Stalin 's death , Nikita Khruschev became leader of the Soviet Union and began a process of De @-@ Stalinization , citing Lenin 's writings , including those on Stalin , to legitimize this process . When Mikhail Gorbachev took power in 1985 and introduced the policies of <unk> and perestroika , he too cited these actions as a return to Lenin 's principles . In late 1991 , amid the dissolution of the Soviet Union , Russian President Boris Yeltsin ordered the Lenin archive be removed from Communist Party control and placed under the control of a state organ , the Russian Centre for the Preservation and Study of Documents of Recent History , at which it was revealed that over 6 @,@ 000 of Lenin 's writings had gone unpublished . These were declassified and made available for scholarly study . Yeltsin did not dismantle the Lenin mausoleum , however , recognising that Lenin was too popular and well respected among the Russian populace for this to be viable . 
 In Russia in 2012 , a proposal from the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia , with the support of some members of the governing United Russia party , proposed the removal of all Lenin monuments , a proposal strongly opposed by the Communist Party of the Russian Federation . In Ukraine , during the 2013 – 14 <unk> protests , several Lenin statues were damaged or destroyed by protesters who viewed them as a symbol of Russian imperialism , and in April 2015 the Ukrainian government ordered that all others be dismantled to comply with <unk> laws . After the discovery of Lenin 's Jewish ancestry , this aspect was repeatedly emphasised by the Russian far @-@ right , who claimed that his inherited Jewish genetics explained his desire to uproot traditional Russian society . 
 = = = In the international communist movement = = = 
 According to Lenin biographer David <unk> , writing in 1966 , it was Lenin 's ideas and example that " constitutes the basis of the Communist movement today " . Communist regimes professing allegiance to Lenin 's ideas appeared in various parts of the world during the 20th century . 
 After Lenin 's death , Stalin 's administration established an ideology known as Marxism @-@ Leninism , a movement which came to be interpreted differently by various contending factions in the Communist movement . After being forced into exile by Stalin 's administration , Trotsky argued that Stalinism was a debasement of Leninism which was dominated by bureaucratism and Stalin 's own personal dictatorship . Marxism @-@ Leninism would be adapted to many of the 20th century 's most prominent revolutionary movements , forming into variants such as Stalinism , Maoism , Juche , Ho Chi Minh Thought , and <unk> . Conversely , many later Western communists such as Manuel <unk> and Jean Ellenstein who were involved in the <unk> movement expressed the view that Lenin and his ideas were irrelevant to their own objectives , thereby embracing a Marxist but not Marxist @-@ Leninist perspective . 
 = Take a Bow ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Take a Bow " is a song by American singer Madonna from her sixth studio album Bedtime Stories ( 1994 ) . It was released as the album 's second single on October 28 , 1994 , by Maverick Records . It is a midtempo pop ballad written and produced by Madonna and Babyface . The song also appears on her compilation albums Something to Remember ( 1995 ) , GHV2 ( 2001 ) and Celebration ( 2009 ) . Following the sexually explicit persona portrayed by Madonna on her previous album , Erotica , the singer wanted to tone down her image for Bedtime Stories . She started collaborating with Babyface , whose work with other music artists had impressed her . " Take a Bow " was developed from this collaboration , after Madonna listened to the beat and the chords of the demo structure of the song . 
 Recorded at The Hit Factory Studios in New York , " Take a Bow " was backed by a full orchestra . It was also the first time that Babyface had worked with live strings , per Madonna 's suggestion . Containing oriental pentatonic strings , giving the impression of Chinese or Japanese opera , " Take a Bow " lyrically talks about unrequited love , and Madonna saying goodbye . It received favorable reviews from music critics , who praised the song 's soulful , poetic lyrics . It was a commercial success in the United States , becoming Madonna 's eleventh number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot 100 , topping the chart for seven weeks . It also reached number one in Canada , and the top ten in Italy , Switzerland and New Zealand . The single had moderate success in the United Kingdom , reaching number 16 on the UK Singles Chart , ending Madonna 's record @-@ holding string of 35 consecutive top @-@ ten hits there . 
 The music video for " Take a Bow " was directed by Michael Haussman , and was filmed in Ronda , Spain . The video depicts Madonna as a bullfighter 's ( played by real @-@ life Spanish bullfighter Emilio Muñoz ) neglected lover , yearning for his love . It won the Best Female Video award at the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards . Journalistic and academic analysis of the video included its plotline , usage of religious iconography , themes and motifs of feminism and submission , as well as its impact on contemporary music videos . In order to promote Bedtime Stories , Madonna performed " Take a Bow " on a few occasions , including live with Babyface at the 1995 American Music Awards . In 2016 , she added the song to the setlist of the Asian and Oceanian legs of her Rebel Heart Tour and her one @-@ off Sydney concert Tears of a Clown . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Following the release of Madonna 's first book publication , Sex , the erotic thriller , Body of Evidence , her fifth studio album , Erotica , as well as a disastrous interview on David Letterman 's show in the early 1990s , the media and public 's backlash against Madonna 's overtly sexual image was at a peak . Madonna wanted to tone down her explicit image . Her first attempt was to release the tender ballad " I 'll Remember " from the soundtrack of the film With Honors . Musically , she wanted to move in a new musical direction and started exploring new @-@ jack R & B styles with a generally mainstream , radio @-@ friendly sound . It was included on her sixth studio album , Bedtime Stories , released in October 1994 . In author Fred Bronson 's The Billboard Book of Number 1 Hits , Madonna explained : 
 The idea going in was to juxtapose my singing style with a hardcore hip @-@ hop sensibility and have the finished product still sound like a Madonna record . I began the process by meeting with the hip @-@ hop producers whose work I most admired . It was important , if I were to use a variety of collaborators , that the end product sound cohesive and thematically whole . I wasn 't interested in the variety pack approach . 
 After searching for prospective collaborators , Madonna chose to work with Babyface , whose previous work with artists like Whitney Houston , Boyz II Men , and Toni Braxton had resulted in successful smooth R & B songs . She was also fond of Babyface 's song , " When Can I See You " from his third studio album For the Cool in You ( 1994 ) . The singer 's management called Babyface to set up a meeting and see if they wanted to work together . Once met , both were surprised by their camaraderie and wanted to write songs . Madonna came over to Babyface 's house and after a couple of days they came up with two songs . One of them was based on a piece of music composed by Babyface , but he was not sure about its musical direction . He made Madonna listen to the composition , and she found a way to take the song forward . Babyface clarified that " [ i ] t was just a beat and the chords . From there we collaborated and built it up ... I was living in Beverly Hills and I created a little studio in my house , so she came over there to write . " Together they agreed that the first line of the song should be its title , and " Take a Bow " was written . The words were never repeated in the track again . 
 " Take a Bow " was released as the second single from Bedtime Stories on October 28 , 1994 , following " Secret " . The maxi single release of the song included two remixes . According to Jose F. Promis of AllMusic , the first remix , known as the " In Da Soul " mix , gives the ballad a funkier , more urban feel while the second remix , known as the " Silky Soul Mix " , is a little more " quiet storm " and " melancholy " than the first . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Take a Bow " was recorded at The Hit Factory studios , New York , and was mastered and mixed at Sterling Sound Studios , New York . Babyface recalled that he was nervous about recording with Madonna , since he feared that Madonna was a " perfectionist " in the studio , and that would ultimately be time consuming for the whole process . However , it was one of the fastest recording and mixing . The song was backed by a full orchestra and was also the first time that Babyface had worked with live strings . He recalled that using strings in the song was " [ Madonna 's ] suggestion , and it was Nellee Hooper who actually [ arranged the strings ] . She had worked with them before but for me it was a new experience " . Along with Hooper , Jessie Leavey , Craig Armstrong and Susie Katiyama also worked on the strings and conducting . 
 " Take a Bow " was written and produced by Madonna and Babyface , and is a midtempo pop ballad with Japanese musical influences , like that of Kyu Sakamoto 's 1961 song , " Sukiyaki " . It begins with sounds of oriental pentatonic strings , giving the impression of Chinese or Japanese opera . The verses consist of a descending chord sequence , containing twists at the end . Madonna 's vocals are in a " sleepy languid mood " that is the characteristic of the songs from Bedtime Stories . The lyrics during the chorus talk about Madonna saying goodbye to a lover , who had taken her for granted . The title plays upon the verse in the song " all the world is a stage and everyone has their part " , a reference to a line by William Shakespeare in his play As You Like It , " All the world 's a stage , and all the men and women mere players " . 
 In his book Madonna : An Intimate Biography , author J. Randy Taraborrelli describes the song as a " somber , sarcastic , all @-@ the @-@ world 's @-@ a @-@ stage song about unrequited love ... [ about a subject ] whose phoniness might have fooled everyone else , but not her . " He goes on to say that in the song Madonna tells the subject of her unrequited love to take a bow for " rendering a great , transparent performance in life and love . " Alongside the betrayal of her lover , the lyrics also talk about Madonna trying to understand the reasons behind adultery . As the song progresses , the listener realizes that through the lyrics the singer was talking about herself — " One lonely star and you don 't know who you are " . According to Musicnotes.com , the song has a moderate calypso feel and is set in the time signature of common time and progresses in 80 beats per minute . The composition is set in the key of A ♭ major with Madonna 's vocal ranging from E ♭ 3 to C5 . " Take a Bow " contains a basic sequence of A ♭ – B ♭ m7 / E ♭ – A ♭ – F ♭ maj7 during the opening strings , and A ♭ – A ♭ / G ♭ – Fm7 during the verses as its chord progression . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Taraborrelli called it a " melancholy and beautifully executed ballad " . Author Chris Wade wrote in his book The Music of Madonna that " Take a Bow " was a standout from the album . He complimented Madonna and Babyface 's vocals , while calling the music " stunning " . He declared it as one of the singer 's " purest songs , totally free of any gimmicks , self consciousness or knowing sexual references ; a graceful end to the album . " Encyclopedia Madonnica writer Matthew Rettenmund called it a " sentimental ballad with showbiz theme " while finding similarities in the song to that of " Superstar " by The Carpenters . In his review of Bedtime Stories , Billboard 's Paul Verna called it a " holiday feast for Top 40 , rhythm crossover , and AC " . Also from Billboard , Larry Flick gave the single a particularly positive review ; " The follow @-@ up to the top five smash ' Secret ' [ ... ] is as perfect as top 40 fare gets . This single has a delightful , immediately memorable melody and chorus , engaging romance @-@ novel lyrics and a lead vocal that is both sweet and quietly soulful . A lovely way for [ Madonna ] to kick out ' 95 " . J. D. Considine of The Baltimore Sun stated that the song , about " innocent romance " has a " gently cascading melody " . Peter Calvin from The Advocate praised the lyrical flow of the song , saying that the " effect is truly heartbreaking . The song ... shows that ultimately Madonna ... is just like you and me " . 
 James Hunter from Vibe called the song " a New Soul masterpiece " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic referred to " Take a Bow " as " tremendous " , listing it as one of the best songs from Bedtime Stories and stating that it " slowly works its melodies into the subconscious as the bass pulses " . He goes on to say that it " offer [ s ] an antidote to Erotica , which was filled with deep but cold grooves " . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani , called it " syrupy and bittersweet " . NME 's Alex Needham , opined it was a " gorgeously constructed song by any standards " . Matthew Jacobs , from The Huffington Post , placed it at number 19 of his list " The Definitive Ranking Of Madonna Singles " . Jacobs wrote : 
 " Take a Bow " is Madonna 's most poetic ballad . Much in the way that such hits as " Borderline " and " Into the Groove " act as the fuselage of ' 80s pop [ ... ] a lost @-@ love elegy that squares nicely with the burgeoning female singer @-@ songwriter movement of the ' 90s . Don 't mistake its sleepy quality for stuffiness . This song is Madonna at her loveliest . 
 Enio Chiola of PopMatters , included the song on his list of " Top 15 Madonna Singles of All Time " . He opined that " [ ' Take a Bow ' ] features a more demure Madonna , confident in her termination of a doomed relationship , and the music is accented by characteristically Asian orchestration and lovely poetic lyrics " , concluding that " [ Madonna ] quickly learned that the way back into the public 's collective hearts was to focus more attention on the music than on the frankness of her sexual image " . In his 2011 review of Bedtime Stories , Brett <unk> of the Detroit Metro Times called the song " spectacular " . NPR Multimedia senior producer Keith Jenkins gave a positive review of the song , stating that it " washes over you and gets your blood boiling . You may not walk on water after hearing it , but you may want to get your focus back by walking on broken glass " . Louis Virtel , from TheBacklot.com , placed " Take a Bow " at number 27 of his list " The 100 Greatest Madonna Songs " . He wrote ; " Madonna 's most successful single to date is a melancholic evisceration of a lover 's artifice , and its hopeless plain @-@ spokenness makes it one of the finest examples of 90s balladry " . Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , was less impressed with the track . Although he felt that it sounded " shockingly normal " after the " ambient ' Bedtime Story ' " , he found the song 's length as over @-@ long and deduced it to be " <unk> [ ting ] no sense whatsoever of the pain of a real goodbye . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Take a Bow " was a commercial success in the United States , reaching the top of the Billboard Hot 100 chart . It was Madonna 's second number @-@ one single since Billboard started using Nielsen SoundScan and Nielsen BDS data for tabulating its charts , the first being " This Used to Be My Playground " . The song topped the chart for seven weeks and is her longest @-@ running number @-@ one single on this chart . It was her 11th single to top the Billboard Hot 100 and her 23rd top five entry — both records for a female artist . She also replaced Carole King as the female who had written the most number @-@ one songs . It was present on the chart for a total of 30 weeks , tying up with " Borderline " as Madonna 's longest running song on the Hot 100 . With the song reaching number one on the Hot 100 , Madonna was at fourth place on the list of artists with most number @-@ one singles on the chart : She was behind The Beatles , Elvis Presley and Michael Jackson and The Supremes . In 2013 , Billboard allocated " Take a Bow " the number four spot on its list of " Madonna 's Biggest Billboard Hits " , declaring it Madonna 's second @-@ most successful single of the 1990s decade after " Vogue " . 
 " Take a Bow " became Madonna 's fifth number @-@ one single on the Adult Contemporary chart in the United States , following " Live to Tell " , " La Isla Bonita " , " Cherish " , and " I 'll Remember " . It was number @-@ one for nine weeks . The song is also notable as Madonna 's last single to make the top 40 of the US R & B chart . It also topped the Mainstream Top 40 chart , and reached number four on the Rhythmic chart . On February 27 , 1995 , the single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and according to Billboard , it was one of the best selling singles of 1995 , selling 500 @,@ 000 copies that year . With " Take a Bow " ' s certification , Madonna ranked with Janet Jackson as the female artists with most gold certified singles . In Canada the song debuted at number 85 on the RPM Singles Chart , and reached the top after 11 weeks , becoming Madonna 's 12th number @-@ one single in that country . " Take a Bow " was present for a total of 25 weeks and placed at number three on the RPM Year @-@ end ranking . It also reached number one on the RPM Adult Contemporary chart . 
 " Take a Bow " had moderate chart success in the United Kingdom , where it reached a peak of number 16 on the UK Singles Chart . This ended Madonna 's record @-@ holding string of 35 consecutive top @-@ ten singles on the chart from " Like a Virgin " ( 1984 ) to " Secret " ( 1994 ) . According to the Official Charts Company , the single has sold 102 @,@ 739 copies in the United Kingdom , as of August 2008 . In Australia , " Take a Bow " debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at number 21 on December 25 , 1994 , eventually peaking at number 15 , and was present on the chart for a total of 17 weeks . The song peaked at number two on the Italian Singles Chart and number eight on the Swiss Singles Chart . In New Zealand , the single peaked at number nine on the New Zealand Singles Chart , spending a total of 13 weeks on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and release = = = 
 The music video for " Take a Bow " was directed by Michael Haussman , and is a lavish period @-@ style piece filmed from November 3 – 8 , 1994 in Ronda and in the bullring of Antequera , Spain . In the video Madonna wore a fitted , classic suit by British fashion designer John Galliano . The costumes worn by Madonna in the video was created by stylist Lori Goldstein who received the VH1 Fashion and Media award for best styling . Other designers who provided clothing included Donatella Versace and a then @-@ unknown Christian Louboutin . Madonna had a 1940s style on her , with tight corset , silk dresses and a black @-@ veiled hat . The plot of the video was set in the 1940s , depicting Madonna as a neglected lover of a bullfighter , played by real @-@ life Spanish actor and bullfighter Emilio Muñoz . Madonna 's character yearns for the bullfighter 's presence , with erotic heartbreak . In an interview with MTV 's Kurt Loder on the set of the music video , Madonna said that when she was initially writing " Take a Bow " the inspiration for the song was an actor , but she wanted the male character in the video to be a matador instead because she wanted the video to be about an " obsessive , tragic love story that doesn 't work out in the end " and a matador would be more visually effective in expressing the emotion of the song . 
 Madonna arrived in Ronda in November 1994 with a team of 60 people and wanted to shoot at the <unk> in the city . However , her request was rejected by the Real <unk> de <unk> of Ronda ( Royal Cavalry Brotherhood of Ronda ) , who considered it as a desecration of the arenas if Madonna would have filmed there , since her name at that time was associated with provocative imagery . Also , Madonna had to give up shooting around the city 's square due to high economic demands of its owner , former bullfighter Antonio Ordóñez who demanded <unk> 17 million ( US $ 122 @,@ 302 in 1994 ) . Later it was clarified that Madonna was refused due to unknown moral reasons from the Brotherhood , who accused the media of making free publicity on the singer 's behalf . The refusal generated controversy in Ronda , whose political groups believed that allowing the video to be shot within its precipices would be great promotion for the city . Madonna later obtained permit to shoot inside the palace of the Marquis of Salvatierra . Bullfighting scenes were shot at the Plaza de Toros de Ronda ( The Toros Plaza of Ronda ) , where Muñoz acted along side three fighting bulls . The actor was paid <unk> 7 million ( US $ 50 @,@ 360 in 1994 ) for participating in the video . 
 The music video was released on November 22 , 1994 on MTV . It was also part of VH1 's relaunching promotional campaigns , where the channel used the video in its trio of 30 second commercials titled " The New VH1 " . The commercial showed a couple in a vintage <unk> pulling in front of an ATM cash machine . The man makes a transaction while the woman looks at VH1 playing at a store , showing " Take a Bow " . When the man turns back to the car , the woman is gone and can be seen inside the video along side Madonna , while the singer appears in the car , and utters the tagline : " The new VH1 ... It 'll suck you in " . According to Abbey Konowitch , who worked on Madonna 's Maverick Records , the singer had a long history with MTV and VH1 , and hence was eager to participate in the campaign when asked by VH1 president John Sykes . For filming the commercial , the cloths worn in the video had to be flown in from the different designers . Madonna was also impressed by the technology used in the commercial for transposing the woman and herself together . 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 The music video begins with showing Madonna , the torero ( Muñoz ) , and the townspeople preparing for , then attending , a bullfight . A secondary staging in the video presents Madonna standing or sitting near a television set in a room ( lit by a single light source from above ) , while a third staging depicts Madonna writhing around on a bed in her underwear as she watches Muñoz on the television . In the bullring , the torero kills the bull and then comes home and physically and emotionally abuses Madonna . The video can be viewed as a statement on classicism , supposing the bullfighter feels threatened and angered by the aristocrat 's station , resulting in his physically abusing and then coldly abandoning her . 
 The style of the music video has been compared to Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar 's 1986 film Matador , starring Antonio Banderas . Madonna requested that Haussman give the video a Spanish theme because , at the time , she was lobbying for the role of Eva Perón in the film version of Evita . She subsequently sent a copy of the video to director Alan Parker as a way of " auditioning " for the role . Madonna eventually won the role of Perón . The music video for Madonna 's 1995 single " You 'll See " is considered a follow up to the " Take a Bow " music video , as Madonna and Emilio Muñoz reprise their roles . In that video Madonna 's character walks out on Munoz 's ( bullfighter ) character , leaving him behind in despair . Madonna 's character is then seen on the train and later on a plane , while Munoz 's character tries to catch up with her in vain . 
 The video generated controversy with animal rights activists who accused the singer of glorifying bullfighting . In Australia , music video program Video Hits ran a ticker along the bottom of the screen when the video was playing , stating that the producers of the program did not endorse the glorification of the sport portrayed in the video , while ABC TV video program Rage simply refused to play the video at all during their G @-@ rated Top 50 program . Madonna won Best Female Video honors at the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards for the " Take a Bow " music video . It was also nominated for Best Art Direction in a Video , but lost to Michael Jackson and Janet Jackson 's " Scream " . The video also came in at number 27 on VH1 's 50 Sexiest Video Moments . In 2012 , the television program Extra included " Take a Bow " on their list of " The 10 Sexiest Madonna Music Videos . " 
 = = = Analysis and impact = = = 
 Like some of Madonna 's previous music videos , such as " La Isla Bonita " and " Like a Prayer " , religious imagery plays a big role in the music video . In the book Madonna 's Drowned Worlds the use of Catholic imagery in the video is discussed . Author Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández points out that unlike Madonna 's previous music videos , much of the religious imagery is associated with the torero , not Madonna , due to the fact that religious images are a strong part of the bullfighting ritual . It has also been argued that in the video Madonna " subverts the gender structure and masculine subjectivity implicit in traditional bullfighting . " This is achieved through the " feminization of the matador and the emphasis on Madonna 's character " and also through Madonna 's " dominant gaze " as she watches the matador perform . " Roger Beebe , one of the authors of Medium Cool : Music Videos from <unk> to <unk> , noted that the video was an example of " how music , image , and lyrics of a song possesses their own temporality " . He explained that the " graceful " nature of the song was contrast to the repetitive scenes in the video , which he felt indicated that the protagonist has long been engaging in the activities , including the " demoralizing sex scenes " . In Madonna as Postmodern Myth , author Georges @-@ Claude Guilbert felt the video " defied feminists of the Marilyn Frye and Adrienne Rich variety , who see in the video a disgusting example of passé female submissiveness . " Madonna responded to this criticism by stating " I don 't believe that any organization should dictate to me what I can and cannot do artistically . " Guilbert also noted the usage of religious iconography in the video , especially dubious representation of the Virgin . He explained that most of the times Madonna and the torero make love through the television screen , implying that " one of their purity had to be maintained always " . 
 When discussing " Take a Bow " , NPR Multimedia senior producer Keith Jenkins said the music video , with its " rich , sensually framed sepia tones " , doesn 't leave much to the imagination but rather , it becomes your imagination , with Madonna 's vision " drill [ ed ] into your brain , unlocking your waking eye . " Carol Vernallis , author of Experiencing Music Video : Aesthetics and Cultural Context , noted that the video exemplified the lyrics of the song . She clarified that the scenes featuring Madonna and Muñoz dressing up and putting on their gloves pointed to storyline and lyrics that appeared later , the lyrics being " all the world loves a clown " . During that line Muñoz as the torero is seen with a fatuous expression , which Vernallis deduced as " the beginning of the story of possession and fame " in the video . When Madonna sings " I 've always been in love with you " , she appeared in the video as sometimes adolescent and sometimes middle @-@ aged . For Vernallis it was not clear if the imagery was literal or figurative of the lyrics , " embodying a lasting affection , as separate parts of Madonna 's psyche , or as the exaggerated claims of a groupie . " The author also noted that the scene where Madonna pricks her hand with a needle makes her relationship with the torero as more ambiguous . The costumes and melody in the video reminded Vernallis of the 1904 opera Madame Butterfly by Giacomo Puccini although with an inverted plotline . The scenes showing Madonna in an enclosed room with a single light bulb also drew comparisons to Glenn Close 's character in the 1987 psychological thriller film , Fatal Attraction . Another observation by Vernallis was about the power struggle it showed in the video , with Madonna gradually losing and relegated to one corner of the room . 
 The " Take a Bow " video was a source of inspiration for Justin Timberlake 's music video for his 2006 single , " SexyBack " . According to Timberlake , he decided to work with director Michael Haussman on his " SexyBack " video because " Take a Bow " is one of his favorite Madonna videos . He went on to say " Even today , I still remember the visuals , the images , how he captured her . A lot of times , Madonna seems like she 's the person in control , and in that video , she seemed vulnerable . It was a cool thing to see . " According to director Dave Meyers , the music video for Britney Spears ' 2009 single " Radar " is a " tribute " to Madonna 's " Take a Bow " video . When speaking of Spears and the " Radar " video , Meyers explained , " [ we were ] looking for a way to take her into a contemporary , classy environment . I felt empowered by referencing Madonna 's [ ' Take a Bow ' ] video . Britney hasn 't done anything like that . " 
 = = Live performances , covers and usage in media = = 
 On February 18 , 1995 , Madonna arrived in Europe to promote Bedtime Stories . During the same day , she performed " Secret " and " Take a Bow " on German TV show Wetten , dass .. ? , while she was also interviewed on the program . Madonna went back to United States and performed " Take a Bow " on the American Music Awards of 1995 , accompanied by Babyface and a full orchestra . Babyface said the performance was terrifying for him : " I was nervous as hell . But you couldn 't actually see my legs shaking under the suit . When we finished , she told me she had never been that nervous before . That was crazy to me -- I was thinking , ' You 're Madonna , you 're on stage all the time ! ' " . She returned to Europe and sang the song Sanremo Music Festival . At the end of the performance , she thanked the audience in Italian language , and received standing ovation . Madonna did rehearse the song for 2004 's Re @-@ Invention World Tour , but it was ultimately cut from the setlist and not included in the show . 
 Madonna had never performed " Take a Bow " on any of her concert tours until February 4 , 2016 , when she performed the song during the Taipei stop of her Rebel Heart Tour . After the performance , she exclaimed " That was fun ! First time ever . Hit a few bad notes , but it felt good to sing it . " The singer subsequently performed the song in the other cities during the Asian and Oceanian legs of the Rebel Heart Tour . An acoustic version of " Take a Bow " was performed on Madonna 's one @-@ off concert in Sydney , Madonna : Tears of a Clown . The show started with Madonna appearing onstage , in a clown 's costume consisting of a billowing dress , pink and yellow <unk> , riding a tricycle and circled round it . 
 Hong Kong pop singer Sandy Lam recorded a version of the song for her 1997 English language covers album " Wonderful World ( <unk> ) " . Serbian pop singer <unk> Dol released Serbian language @-@ cover literally titled " <unk> se " , on her 1995 album <unk> <unk> . Philippine bossa nova singer Sitti recorded a cover of this song for her second album My Bossa Nova . Korean rock band <unk> covered the song on their album The Youth <unk> . Trisha Yearwood and Babyface covered the song on CMT 's Crossroads , which aired on September 21 , 2007 . Melissa Totten did a Hi @-@ NRG cover for her 2008 dance album Forever Madonna . American pop folk singer Matt Alber plays an acoustic cover on his 2011 album Constant Crows . " Take a Bow " was featured in the final episode of the first season of Friends , " The One Where Rachel Finds Out " , when Rachel goes to the airport to tell Ross that she knows he is in love with her . " Take a Bow " was used in promos for the final season of Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – songwriter , record producer , vocals 
 Babyface – songwriter , producer , background vocals , drum programming 
 Dallas Austin – drum programming 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – recording engineer 
 Alvin <unk> – audio mixing 
 Nellee Hooper – strings , conductor 
 Jessie Leavey – strings , conductor 
 Craig Armstrong – conductor 
 Susie Katiyama – conductor 
 Fabien Baron – art director 
 Patrick Demarchelier – cover art photographer 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Bedtime Stories album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Mountain nyala = 
 The mountain nyala ( Tragelaphus buxtoni ) or <unk> is an antelope found in high altitude woodland in a small part of central Ethiopia . It is a monotypic species ( without any identified subspecies ) first described by English naturalist Richard Lydekker in 1910 . The males are typically 120 – 135 cm ( 47 – 53 in ) tall while females stand 90 – 100 cm ( 35 – 39 in ) at the shoulder . Males weigh 180 – 300 kg ( 400 – 660 lb ) and females weigh 150 – 200 kg ( 330 – 440 lb ) . The coat is grey to brown , marked with two to five poorly defined white strips extending from the back to the underside , and a row of six to ten white spots . White markings are present on the face , throat and legs as well . Males have a short dark erect crest , about 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) high , running along the middle of the back . Only males possess horns . 
 The mountain nyala are shy and elusive towards human beings . Four to five individuals may congregate for short intervals of time to form small herds . Males are not territorial . Primarily a browser , the mountain nyala may switch to grazing occasionally . Females start mating at two years of age , and males too become sexually mature by that time . Gestation lasts for eight to nine months , after which a single calf is born . The lifespan of a mountain nyala is around 15 to 20 years . 
 The typical habitat for the mountain nyala is composed of montane woodlands at an altitude of 3 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 400 m ( 9 @,@ 800 – 11 @,@ 200 ft ) . Human settlement and large livestock population have forced the animal to occupy heath forests at an altitude of above 3 @,@ 400 m ( 11 @,@ 200 ft ) . Mountain nyala are endemic to the Ethiopian highlands east of the Rift Valley , between 6 ° N and 10 ° N. Up to half of the total population of the mountain nyala occurs in the 200 km2 ( 77 sq mi ) area of Gaysay , in the northern part of the Bale Mountains National Park . The mountain nyala has been classified under the Endangered category of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . Their influence on Ethiopian culture is notable , with the mountain nyala being featured on the obverse of Ethiopian ten cents coins . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The mountain nyala was first described by English naturalist Richard Lydekker in 1910 . Its scientific name is Tragelaphus buxtoni . The species has been classified under the genus Tragelaphus of the family Bovidae . The mountain nyala was first brought to England in 1908 by Major Ivor Buxton , after whom the species has been named . Major Buxton , who had returned from a hunting trip in Ethiopia , first presented a specimen he had shot to British taxidermist Rowland Ward , who later on notified Lydekker about the discovery . It was the last large antelope to be discovered in Africa . The spiral horns and white markings on the face and across the flanks established it as a species of Tragelaphus . Lydekker believed that the species was related more closely to the nyala ( T. angasii ) than to the two kudu species ( then placed under the genus <unk> ) . In fact , mountain nyala 's similarity to both Tragelaphus and <unk> led to the merger of the latter into the former genus . 
 In 2005 , Sandi Willows @-@ Munro of the University of KwaZulu @-@ Natal ( Durban ) carried out a mitochondrial analysis of the nine Tragelaphus species. mtDNA and nDNA data were compared . The results showed that the mountain nyala is sister taxon to kéwel ( T. scriptus ) , sitatunga ( T. spekii ) and bongo ( T. eurycerus ) in the mitochondrial tree ( phylogenetic relationships obtained using mitochondrial data ) . However , in the nuclear tree , kéwel , mountain nyala and sitatunga plus the bongo are three equal branches . Hence the mountain nyala forms a monophyletic clade with these three species . The greater kudu clade split from the clade formed by mountain nyala , bongo , sitatunga and kéwel approximately 8 @.@ 6 million years ago . 
 = = Description = = 
 The mountain nyala is a large sexually dimorphic bovid . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is approximately is 240 – 260 cm ( 94 – 102 in ) in males and 190 – 200 cm ( 75 – 79 in ) in females . The males are typically 120 – 135 cm ( 47 – 53 in ) tall while females stand 90 – 100 cm ( 35 – 39 in ) at the shoulder . Males weigh 180 – 300 kg ( 400 – 660 lb ) and females weigh 150 – 200 kg ( 330 – 440 lb ) . The bushy tail reaches the heel , and is 20 – 25 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 9 @.@ 8 in ) long . The sensitive ears are large and lined with white hair . 
 The coat is grey to brown , marked with two to five poorly defined white strips extending from the back to the underside , and a row of six to ten white spots . White markings are present on the face , throat and legs as well . The white chevron between the eyes and the white patch on the throat are among the most conspicuous markings . The chest and the rump are white . The lower part of the legs are pale on the inside and clear white spots are present just above the hooves . The coat is fawn brown in male juveniles , and grows darker with age , eventually becoming charcoal in old bulls . Males have a short dark erect crest , about 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) high , running along the middle of the back , from the neck to the tail . Coat texture may vary from smooth to rough , probably by season . Females resemble the red deer hind in size and proportions . Female juveniles are a bright rufous , and old females are as grey as young males . Females have two pairs of inguinal nipples . 
 Only males possess horns , whose maximum recorded length is 188 cm ( 74 in ) . Horns appear as cream @-@ coloured <unk> at around six months and start growing in a spiral pattern , reaching full growth by two years . The horns have only one or two spirals , though a few males have been reported to have two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half turns . The final form might vary in different males – the horns could form well @-@ defined spirals , or could diverge in a structure similar to a lyre , resembling the horns of an impala , but with the final spiral incomplete . Growth rings are visible on the horn sheaths , but the annual patterns might be difficult to comprehend . Though the horns might wear out with age , the cream colour of the tips persists . 
 The mountain nyala resembles the greater kudu in that both have an array of white spots along their flanks and possess spiral horns . However , the greater kudu can be told apart from the mountain nyala due to the former 's greater height and paler colour . Moreover , the horns in greater kudu have two to three spirals , and the tips are farther apart . Another species similar to the mountain nyala is the nyala , but the latter can be easily distinguished from the former due to its smaller size and a fringe of long hair along its throat and neck . The horns of nyala , though very similar , are slender and narrower . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The mountain nyala are shy and elusive towards human beings . They spend the night on the edges of forests , feeding part of the time . To avoid human disturbance , they choose to navigate at night . They come out in morning and late afternoon to browse in grasslands . They generally seek cover in woodlands and heather thickets when it is very hot or cold . Feeding may occur in midday , but is interspersed with resting intervals . They tend to come out when it is overcast or raining . In the dry season ( November to March ) , given the dilapidated state of grasslands , the mountain nyala travel up to the wooden areas rich in <unk> heath . 
 Four to five individuals may congregate for short intervals of time to form small herds . However , groups containing as many as 100 individuals have been reported from the Bale Zone , composed of several family units moving in and out periodically . Size and longevity of such large herds depends upon the season , habitat type and the time of the day . Female and juvenile groups have adult females accompanied by a calf of her previous year and another of the current year . These groups are led by adult males , depending on the presence of oestrus . Bachelor herds are formed by non @-@ dominant adult bulls and young males , consisting of up to 13 individuals . Mixed sex groups may also be formed . Old bulls tend to lead a solitary life , though they may occasionally visit female herds looking for females in oestrus . Dominance hierarchies are observed in both sexes . 
 Males are not territorial , and have home ranges covering 15 – 20 km2 ( 5 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ) in the wet season . Females and juveniles , on the other hand , occupy much smaller ranges of about 5 km2 ( 1 @.@ 9 sq mi ) in the wet season . Dry season ranges are much larger than the wet season ones for both sexes . Males often wrestle using their horns . Though usually silent , the mountain nyala may " cough " noticing a potential threat , or utter a low bark if the threat is more serious . The leopard is the main predator of the mountain nyala . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Primarily a browser , the mountain nyala may switch to grazing occasionally . It feeds on low @-@ height herbs , bushes , shrubs and general foliage . They might even eat lichens , ferns and aquatic plants . Grasses are specially preferred during the early wet season . They pick up fallen leaves and use their horns to reach higher branches . Favoured species include <unk> <unk> ( sage brush ) , Hypericum <unk> , <unk> foliosa , Solanum <unk> and <unk> <unk> leaves . They prefer Alchemilla rotti , Helichrysum splendidum and lower foliage of Lobelia <unk> . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Females start mating at two years of age , and males too become sexually mature by that time . Sexual dimorphism , larger home ranges for males , and a female @-@ biased population indicate polygyny in the species . The mountain nyala breed throughout the year , but the peak occurs in December . Prior to and during the breeding season the adult males tend to get associated with mixed sex herds . Bulls continuously follow receptive females and test their vulvas . Three to four males may seek a single female , and , if equally ranked in hierarchy , may engage in circling displays . In these displays the males move very slowly and stiffly , with the crest on the back erect and the tail raised . They are less likely to engage in aggressive fights , which , if they happen , last only for a brief period . Flehmen follows vulva @-@ testing . 
 Gestation lasts for eight to nine months , after which a single calf is born . In the Bale Mountains National Park , births occur throughout the year , but peak from September to November . Calves remain in cover for the first few weeks after birth . The calves remain close to their mothers for nearly two years . The young females may get pregnant by then . The young males , as they mature by two years , are challenged by other males and driven out of their herds . The lifespan of a mountain nyala is around 15 to 20 years . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The typical habitat for the mountain nyala is composed of montane woodlands at an altitude of 3 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 400 m ( 9 @,@ 800 – 11 @,@ 200 ft ) . The vegetation generally includes Juniper , Podocarpus and Olea at lower levels and <unk> , Juniper and Hypericum in the upper reaches . They often visit the edges of montane grasslands at 2 @,@ 800 – 3 @,@ 100 m ( 9 @,@ 200 – 10 @,@ 200 ft ) , which is covered with Artemesia <unk> , <unk> and evergreen Hypericum species . 
 Nowadays the continuous blocks of woodland habitat have been reduced to a series of pockets , interspersed in large cultivated lands . Human settlement and large livestock population have forced the animal to occupy heath forests at an altitude of above 3 @,@ 400 m ( 11 @,@ 200 ft ) rich in Erica , <unk> , Hypericum , Euphorbia and Helichrysum species . They may even be forced into <unk> grasslands containing Alchemilla and Festuca species , at an altitude of up to 4 @,@ 300 m ( 14 @,@ 100 ft ) . In the eastern borders of its range , the mountain nyala has usually been observed to occupy areas at lower altitudes of about 1 @,@ 800 – 2 @,@ 400 m ( 5 @,@ 900 – 7 @,@ 900 ft ) . 
 Mountain nyala are endemic to the Ethiopian highlands east of the Rift Valley , between 6 ° N and 10 ° N. Their former range was from Mount Gara <unk> in the east to <unk> and the northern Bale Zone to the south . Up to half of the total population of the mountain nyala occurs in the 200 km2 ( 77 sq mi ) area of Gaysay , in the northern part of the Bale Mountains National Park . Smaller relict populations occur in <unk> , mountains such as <unk> in <unk> Zone , and the western Bale . A study identified an area of 39 @.@ 38 km2 ( 15 @.@ 20 sq mi ) on the southern escarpment of the Bale Mountains as the most sustainable habitat for the mountain nyala . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Major threats to the survival of the mountain nyala include illegal hunting , habitat destruction , encroachment by livestock , predation of calves by dogs , expansion of montane cultivation and construction at high altitudes . The animal is extensively hunted for its horns and meat . The meat is utilised in local medicine and for making nipples for traditional milk bottles . Impact of trophy hunting programs is obscure , and current trophy hunting quotas have been deemed unsustainable in the long term . 
 The mountain nyala has been classified under the Endangered category of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . It has not been listed under the Washington Convention ( CITES ) . Though legal protection has been fully ensured for the species , the implementation has not been so effective . In 1991 , there was widespread unrest in Ethiopia during which several mountain nyala were killed and the population in the Bale Mountains National Park fell to 150 . After the Bale Mountains National Park , the small Kuni @-@ <unk> Mountain Nyala Sanctuary was established in 1990 was established as a second protected area . But by 1996 the sanctuary had been so severely affected by deforestation , poaching , cultivation and gully erosion , that the populations soon disappeared from there . 
 In the 1960s , the population was estimated at 7 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 ( and perhaps up to 12 @,@ 500 ) . This declined sharply to 2 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 individuals in the 1980s . The population is decreasing even now . The mountain nyala is feared to be extinct in the eastern and southern extremes of its range , though a few probably survive in Chiro ( <unk> Teferi ) and the border between Bale and Sidamo , south of <unk> . Apart from Gaysay about 80 to 120 mountain nyala occur in the rest of the Bale Mountains National Park , and a few hundred occur in the areas in the vicinity of the national park . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The influence of the mountain nyala , as well as the nyala , on Ethiopian culture can not be ignored . Although nyala is a South African word , several prominent businesses such as Nyala Motors use it in their names . The nyala and mountain nyala often regularly appear on walls , commercial products and tourist curios . The mountain nyala is featured on the obverse of the Ethiopian ten cents coin . 
 Mountain nyala are hunted by humans , for instance , by the Oromo people . The Oromo do not hunt these animals in general , except for a day close to Easter , when all able @-@ bodied men set out on horses for a hunt . 
 = Silent Civilian = 
 Silent Civilian is an American metalcore band originating from Los Angeles , California , United States . Following his departure from nu metal band Spineshank in 2004 , frontman Jonny Santos felt he wanted to move in a different direction musically and start from scratch . Silent Civilian was thus formed and the band faced trouble from the start after experiencing several line @-@ up changes and departing from their original record label Corporate Punishment Records . 
 The band signed with <unk> Records and released their debut record , Rebirth of the Temple , on May 2 , 2006 . Receiving generally positive reviews , the album has sold more than 25 @,@ 000 copies since its release in the United States . The band continues to tour supporting the record as Santos one day wants to establish the band as a headlining act . Their line @-@ up consists of Santos ( vocals and guitar ) , Matt <unk> ( guitar ) and Robbie Young ( bass ) . 
 Silent Civilian released their second album , Ghost Stories , on May 18 , 2010 . The band has plans to release a third studio album . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Jonny Santos , who is best known as the vocalist and song writer for the Grammy Award nominated industrial metal group Spineshank was displeased with the direction the band was going in and felt it had ' run its course ' . Santos felt it was time to move on and left Spineshank , although he was unsure what direction he wanted with his music career . He would play with local bands and friends , while performing production and engineering duties in studios to ' pay the bills ' . However , after leaving Spineshank , Santos lost everything and was basically homeless , ' couch surfing ' from friend ’ s house to friend ’ s house . 
 Realizing he wanted to start a band from scratch , Santos placed an ad for a drummer on the social networking website MySpace . After receiving a large number of e @-@ mails , Santos received an e @-@ mail from Chris Mora with a video of him drumming . Santos thought " You can ’ t be for real , dude " and asked Mora to come down for the first audition . 10 minutes into the audition Mora was hired as the drummer . Santos auditioned for an Australian band that moved to America called Cryogenic . Although he thought the band was not for him , he met the band 's bassist Henno . As Cryogenic and <unk> , who were working together , had both lost their vocalists , Henno contacted Santos and asked him to join the band , to which Santos accepted . Ryan Ready , who Santos had known since high @-@ school , was recruited as the second guitarist . The band 's original name was announced as Silent Civilians , which originates from the world 's climate change by that people have opinions on life and politics and they do not voice their beliefs , living in a nation full of ' silent civilians ' . 
 = = = Label and line @-@ up changes = = = 
 Silent Civilians signed to Corporate Punishment Records in January , 2005 and began work on their debut album , Rebirth of the Temple . However , in May Santos announced they left CPR for reasons he was unable to discuss . The band began talking to several labels after this and pushed the release of their debut to late 2005 or early 2006 . The album was recorded at Undercity Recordings , with production duties handled by former Machine Head and Soulfly guitarist Logan Mader , and co @-@ production handled by his partner , Lucas Banker . The band also announced they had changed their name to Silent Civilian . In June , guitarist Ryan Ready left the band due to personal reasons , not relating to the band . Santos sought a replacement , and the following day to Ready 's departure set up auditions . Tim Mankowski , who Santos had known for 15 years and played in the band Basic Enigma with him , was hired as the new guitarist . 
 In November 2005 , the band signed with <unk> records and planned a tentative release for their debut album for February 21 , 2006 . At this time , the band had three demo versions of the songs " Lies in the House of Shame " , " Divided " and the title track , " Rebirth of the Temple " . Mora and Santos were involved in the writing process of the album . While Mora was at work , Santos was at home writing riffs and would create roughly three to four ' skeletons of songs ' a week . When Mora finished work , he would help Santos with arrangements , the body of the song , and track it that night and record the vocals and melodies the following day . 30 songs were primarily written for the album as Santos wanted fans to get their moneys worth . 16 songs were recorded that included two cover versions of the thrash metal band Slayer 's " War Ensemble ” and Death Angel 's " Seemingly Endless Time " . Although neither cover songs made it onto the album . The length of the CD is 64 minutes , which features the video of the album 's title track , and an exclusive 10 @-@ minute documentary on the creation process of the album . 
 = = = Rebirth of the Temple ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 Silent Civilian released their debut album Rebirth of the Temple on May 2 , 2006 . Blabbermouth.net reviewer , Scott Alisoglu , thought " on virtually every track , the group meshes attacking riffs , searing solos , brutal drumming , and melody @-@ drenched bombast " . Although he did not believe it was a ' grand slam ' , he thought it was a " pleasant surprise and strong first effort " . Charlie Steffens of KNAC described the album as " goddamn electric " , while Greg Maki of live @-@ <unk> awarded the album a perfect 10 out of 10 selecting it as his " best album I have heard so far in 2006 . " As of June 5 , 2007 , Rebirth of the Temple has sold 25 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The video for the first single , " Rebirth of the Temple " , was directed by Scott Culver and was filmed at Santos ' childhood home . Santos invited 50 friends over for a party and posted a bulletin that read " If you ’ re in the L.A. area , if you ’ re a Silent Civilian fan , show up at this address " two hours before filming . This resulted in another 30 people turning up . Static @-@ X front @-@ man Wayne Static , Stone Sour drummer Roy Mayorga and Logan make appearances in the video . 
 Tim Mankowski departed the band and Henno broke his ankle on an on @-@ stage mishap . The band continued to tour as a three @-@ piece as they sought for a replacement guitarist and bassist as soon as possible — Henno was able to perform on a bar stool temporarily . While touring with Nothingface and <unk> , Santos had met guitarist Marcus Rafferty , who he became friends with and recruited him to replace Mankowski after an audition . Touring partners Bleed the Sky assisted in replacing members for live shows . Bassist Disco <unk> took to the stage replacing Henno and guitarist Kyle Moorman assisted with the replacement of the guitarist by playing half the set and Rafferty would play the other . Santos asked Rafferty if he knew any bass players who were interested in a position , he contacted a friend of his , Stan Derby , who replaced Disco after one month . 
 In a July 2006 interview with Live @-@ <unk> , Santos stated the band was planning on recording a tribute EP of cover versions on old Bay Area music , including such bands as Sacred Reich , Death Angel , Exodus and Testament . The band is touring on The Sweet Revenge Tour with Kittie , It Dies Today and Bring Me The Horizon and by the end of the year Santos hopes to establish the band as a headlining act . On December 28 , 2007 in a statement released to Blabbermouth.net , Mora explained his departure from the band was based on personal reasons . 
 = = = Ghost Stories ( 2008 – present ) = = = 
 As of November 12 , 2008 , their official Myspace page confirms that they are currently writing a new record . As of March 30 , 2009 , their Myspace ] page states that the new record will be called ' Ghost Stories ' . On June 11 , 2010 the band 's Myspace was updated with a new song titled " Ghost Stories " which would be featured on the upcoming album . Ryan Halpert ignited the band as Chris Mora 's replacement on drums in mid @-@ 2009 . Silent Civilian will be back on the road January 2010 with Blind Witness and Years of Red Skies . Their sophomore album Ghost Stories was released via Century Media on May 18 , 2010 . In 2013 , bassist Robbie Young launched his new project Atlas . 
 = = Members = = 
 Jonny Santos – vocals , guitar ( 2005 – present ) 
 Robbie Young – bass ( 2009 – present ) 
 Matt <unk> - guitar ( 2011 – present ) 
 Zac Morris - drums ( 2012 @-@ present ) 
 = = = Former = = = 
 Ryan Ready - guitar ( 2005 ) 
 Tim Mankowski - guitar ( 2005 @-@ 2006 recorded " Rebirth of the Temple " ) 
 Marcus Rafferty - guitar ( 2006 – 2007 ) 
 Henno – bass ( 2005 @-@ 2006 recorded " Rebirth of the Temple " ) 
 Shaun <unk> - bass ( 2008 - 2009 recorded " Ghost Stories " ) 
 Chris " Mad Man " Mora - drums ( 2005 @-@ 2007 recorded " Rebirth of the Temple " ) 
 David <unk> - lead guitar ( 2007 – 2010 recorded " Ghost Stories " ) 
 Ryan Halpert - drums ( 2009 @-@ 2010 recorded " Ghost Stories " ) 
 Rodolfo Perez " Rudy " - lead guitar 
 Jesse Nunn ( Saint ) - guitar ( 2005 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio Albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = SMS Augsburg = 
 SMS Augsburg was a Kolberg @-@ class light cruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) during the First World War . She had three sister ships , SMS Kolberg , Mainz , and Cöln . The ship was built by the Kaiserliche Werft in Kiel ; her hull was laid down in 1908 and she was launched in July 1909 . Augsburg was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in October 1910 . She was armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 25 @.@ 5 knots ( 47 @.@ 2 km / h ; 29 @.@ 3 mph ) . 
 After her commissioning , Augsburg spent her peacetime career first as a torpedo test ship and then as a gunnery training ship . After the outbreak of World War I , she was assigned to the Baltic Sea , where she spent the entire war . On 2 August 1914 , she participated in an operation that saw the first shots of the war with Russia fired , and she later took part in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 and Operation Albion in October 1917 , as well as numerous smaller engagements throughout the war . She struck a mine , once , in January 1915 , though the ship was again operational in a few months . After the end of the war , Augsburg was ceded to Japan as a war prize , and was subsequently broken up for scrap in 1922 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Augsburg was ordered as a replacement for SMS Sperber under the contract name Ersatz Sperber and was laid down in 1908 at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel . She was launched on 10 July 1909 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 October 1910 . The ship was 130 @.@ 50 meters ( 428 ft 2 in ) long overall and had a beam of 14 m ( 45 ft 11 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 45 m ( 17 ft 11 in ) forward . She displaced 4 @,@ 915 t ( 4 @,@ 837 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Parsons steam turbines driving four 2 @.@ 25 @-@ meter ( 7 ft 5 in ) propellers . They were designed to give 19 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 13 @,@ 974 kW ; 18 @,@ 740 shp ) . These were powered by fifteen coal @-@ fired Marine water @-@ tube boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 25 @.@ 5 knots ( 47 @.@ 2 km / h ; 29 @.@ 3 mph ) . Augsburg carried 940 t ( 930 long tons ; 1 @,@ 040 short tons ) of coal that gave her a range of approximately 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Augsburg had a crew of 18 officers and 349 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two were side by side aft . These were replaced in 1916 – 1917 with six 15 cm SK L / 45 guns . She also carried four 5 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 55 anti @-@ aircraft guns , though these were replaced with a pair of two 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns in 1918 . She was also equipped with a pair of 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . Two deck @-@ mounted 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tube launchers were added in 1918 She could also carry 100 mines . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Augsburg was used as a torpedo test ship . In 1912 , she was transferred to gunnery training . On the 20th of May 1914 she visited Dundee on a courtesy visit . Captain Fischer and his crew were welcomed by the Lord Provost and " the greatest friendliness was displayed " . Following the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she was assigned to the Baltic Sea , under the command of Rear Admiral Robert Mischke . On 2 August , Augsburg laid a minefield outside the Russian harbor of Libau , while Magdeburg shelled the port . The Russians had in fact already left Libau , which was seized by the German Army . The minefield laid by Augsburg was poorly marked and hindered German operations more than Russian efforts . Augsburg and the rest of the Baltic light forces then conducted a series of bombardments of Russian positions . On 17 August , Augsburg , Magdeburg , three destroyers , and the minelayer Deutschland encountered a pair of powerful Russian armored cruisers , Admiral Makarov and Gromoboi . The Russian commander , under the mistaken assumption that the German armored cruisers Roon and Prinz Heinrich were present , did not attack and both forces withdrew . 
 In September , the light forces in the Baltic were reinforced with the IV Battle Squadron , composed of the older Braunschweig and Wittelsbach @-@ class battleships , and the large armored cruiser Blücher . Starting on 3 September , the combined German force conducted a sweep into the Baltic . During the operation , Augsburg spotted the Russian cruisers Pallada and Bayan . She attempted to draw them closer to Blücher , but the Russians refused to take the bait and withdrew . On 7 September , Augsburg and the torpedo boat <unk> steamed into the Gulf of Bothnia and sank a Russian steamer off <unk> . By the 9th , the German fleet had returned to port . On the night of 24 – 25 January , Augsburg ran into a Russian minefield off Bornholm and struck a mine . The crew kept the ship afloat , and she was towed back to port for repairs . 
 Augsburg was back in service by April 1915 , ready for a major operation against Libau . The German Army planned to seize the port as a distraction from the main Austro @-@ German effort at Gorlice – Tarnów . They requested naval support , and so the Navy organized a force comprising the coastal defense ship Beowulf , three armored cruisers , three light cruisers , including Augsburg , and a large number of torpedo boats and minesweepers . In addition , the IV Scouting Group , consisting of four light cruisers and twenty @-@ one torpedo boats , was sent from the North Sea to reinforce the operation . The German Army captured Libau in May , and it was subsequently turned into an advance base for the German Navy . Later that month , the Navy assigned a mine @-@ laying operation to Augsburg and Lübeck ; they were to lay a minefield near the entrance to the Gulf of Finland . A submarine attack on the cruiser Thetis , however , prompted the German naval command to cancel the operation . 
 On 1 June , Augsburg , Roon , Lübeck , and seven torpedo boats escorted the minelaying cruiser SMS Albatross while she laid a field off Bogskär . Augsburg served as the flagship of Commodore Johannes von Karpf , the commander of the operation . After finishing laying the minefield , Karpf sent a wireless transmission informing headquarters he had accomplished the mission , and was returning to port . This message was intercepted by the Russians , allowing them to intercept the Germans . Four Russian armored cruisers , with the powerful armored cruiser Rurik steaming in support , attempted to ambush the German squadron . Karpf dispersed his force shortly before encountering the Russians ; Augsburg , Albatross , and three torpedo boats steamed to Rixhöft while the remainder went to Libau . Shortly after 06 : 30 on 2 June , lookouts on Augsburg spotted the Russian force ; Karpf ordered the slower Albatross to seek refuge in neutral Swedish waters , while Augsburg and the torpedo boats used their high speed to escape the Russians . In the engagement that followed , Albatross was badly damaged and ran aground in Swedish waters . The Russians then turned to engage the second German force , but were low on ammunition after the engagement with Augsburg and Albatross and broke off the engagement . 
 The Russian <unk> @-@ class submarine Okun fired two torpedoes at Augsburg on the night of 28 June , though both missed . Augsburg was assigned to the forces that took part in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . A significant detachment from the High Seas Fleet , including eight dreadnoughts and three battlecruisers , went into the Baltic to clear the Gulf of Riga of Russian naval forces . Augsburg participated in the second attack on 16 August , led by the dreadnoughts Nassau and Posen . On the night of 19 August , Augsburg encountered a pair of Russian gunboats — <unk> and Korietz ; Augsburg and Posen sank <unk> , though Korietz managed to escape . The Russian surface forces had by this time withdrawn to Moon Sound , and the threat of Russian submarines and mines still in the Gulf prompted the Germans to retreat . On 13 October , an unknown submarine fired a torpedo at Augsburg , though it did not hit her . In September 1916 , Augsburg participated in an attempt to force the Irben Strait into the Gulf of Riga in September 1916 . Heavy Russian resistance , primarily from the old battleship Slava , forced the Germans to retreat from the Gulf . 
 In November 1917 , Augsburg participated in another attack on the Gulf of Riga , Operation Albion . By this point , she had been assigned to the VI Scouting Group along with Strassburg and her sister Kolberg . At 06 : 00 on 14 October 1917 , the three ships left Libau to escort minesweeping operations in the Gulf of Riga . They were attacked by Russian 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) coastal guns on their approach and were temporarily forced to turn away . By 08 : 45 , however , they had anchored off the Mikailovsk Bank and the minesweepers began to clear a path in the minefields . Two days later , Augsburg joined the dreadnoughts König and Kronprinz for a sweep of the Gulf of Riga . While the battleships engaged the Russian naval forces , Augsburg was tasked with supervising the occupation of Arensburg . 
 According to the Armistice that ended the war , Augsburg and the rest of the German fleet not interned in Scapa Flow were to be returned to the main German ports and disarmed . In the subsequent Treaty of Versailles that formally ended the conflict , Augsburg was listed as a warship to be surrendered to the Allied powers ; she was to be disarmed in accordance with the terms of the Armistice , but her guns were to remain on board . After the end of World War I , Augsburg was surrendered to Japan as a war prize on 3 September 1920 , under the name " Y " . The Japanese had no use for the ship , and so she was broken up in Dordrecht in 1922 . 
 = 575 ( song ) = 
 " 575 " is a song recorded by Japanese recording girl group Perfume for their third studio album , JPN ( 2011 ) . It was written , composed , arranged , and produced by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . The song was included as a B @-@ side track for the group ’ s single , " Voice " . It was also released exclusively to Uta stores in Japan on July 14 , 2010 . Musically , " 575 " was described as a mellow Japanese pop song . It marks the first time that the group perform in a rap structure , delivered after the first chorus . 
 Upon its release , the track garnered positive reviews from music critics , who praised the song ’ s composition and the rap delivery . Due to the song being released digitally and as a B @-@ side to " Voice " , it was ruled ineligible to chart on Japan ’ s Oricon Singles Chart . However , it peaked at number 73 on Billboard 's Japan Hot 100 chart , and number four on the RIAJ Digital Track Chart . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for cellphone purchases of 100 @,@ 000 units . A music video was originally to debut on their JPN tour in 2012 , but the idea was scrapped . Instead , it was included on the live DVD . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " 575 " was written , composed , arranged , and produced by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . Alongside this , it was recorded , mixed , and mastered by him . The song was recorded in 2010 at Contemode Studios , Shibuya , Tokyo by Nakata . It was selected as a B @-@ side track to " Voice " , the second single to the groups album JPN ( 2011 ) . It also appeared on the album , listed at number 9 on the track list . The instrumental version appeared on the CD single and digital EP for the " Voice " single . The song was released exclusively to Uta stores in Japan on July 14 , 2010 . 
 Musically , the song has been described as a mellow Japanese pop song . It marks the first time that the group perform in a rap structure , delivered after the first chorus . Throughout a majority of the song , the girl ’ s vocals are heavily processed with post @-@ production tools such as vocoder and autotune . Only two English phrases are used in the song ; these being the lyrics , " Give it up " and " Good night " . Japanese music editor Random J reviewed the album on his personal blog , and commented about the songs composition , " ' 575 ' is Perfume 's equivalent of a slow jam ... And the girls even spit some bars on it . " Ian Martin from The Japan Times described the songs composition as , " a curiously mellow take on the 1990s ballad / rap hybrid J @-@ pop formula . " Perfume stated together that they were " very surprised , yet very anxious " about the rap section . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " 575 " received favorable reviews from most music critics . Japanese music editor Random J reviewed the song on his personal blog , and gave it a positive remark . He described it as a " really nice , spaced out , mellow song " . Regarding the song ’ s rap section , he commented " Their flow won 't have Jay @-@ Z throwing in the towel , but they sound a damn earshot better than most dudes in the rap game right now . " A staff editor from CD Journal gave the song a positive review . They compared the composition and delivery to the groups song " Macaroni " , from their 2008 debut album Game . The reviewer praised the groups " brave " vocal delivery . Another editor from the same publication reviewed the album , and gave it a positive review . The reviewer complimented the song 's rap section and praised the " new grounded " compositions . Ian Martin from The Japan Times gave the song a mixed review ; despite his appreciate of the slow composition , he criticized , in general , the lack of " creativity " and " invention " through the second half of the album and felt these factors were presented throughout other projects by Nakata apart from Perfume . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Due to the song being released digitally and as a B @-@ side to " Voice " , it was ineligible to chart on Japan ’ s Oricon Singles Chart because it does not count digital sales . However , it managed to chart on other record charts in Japan . It peaked at number 73 on Billboard 's Japan Hot 100 chart and is the highest charting non @-@ single track from JPN . It then charted on the RIAJ Digital Track Chart , peaking at number four and was the groups highest charting single on there . The song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for cell phone purchases of up to 100 @,@ 000 units . In conjunction with the sales of " Voice " and " 575 " on the CD Single , it was certified gold by the RIAJ for physical shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units in Japan . 
 = = Music video and live performances = = 
 A music video was used as a backdrop projection for their Tokyo dome 2010 tour [ <unk> ] , projected on all the screens . Instead , it was released on the limited edition DVD . It featured the girls singing the song in front of the songs title . Inter cut scenes of the live performance , and the girls getting ready for the show , were included in the video . 
 The song has been performed on one concert tour , and has appeared on one commercial in Japan . The song was used as the theme song for the KDDI Light Pool commercial in Japan . Japanese rapper , Kreva , performed a cover version of the song on Music Japan Broadcast in early 2011 . The song was performed on their 2010 Tokyo Dome concert tour , where it was included during the second segment . It was included on the live DVD , released on February 9 , 2011 . The performance included the girls dancing around geometrical shapes and was positively received from music critics . Yuki <unk> from Hot Express complimented the girls performance , alongside the stage production of the segment . The song was included on the group 's compilation box set , Perfume : Complete LP Box ( 2016 ) . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Details adapted from the liner notes of the JPN album . 
 Ayano Ōmoto – vocals 
 Yuka Kashino – vocals 
 Ayaka Nishiwaki – vocals 
 Yasutaka Nakata – producer , composer , arranger , mixing , mastering . 
 = = Chart and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas = 
 Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas is the third book of Maya Angelou 's seven @-@ volume autobiography series . Set between 1949 and 1955 , the book spans Angelou 's early twenties . In this volume , Angelou describes her struggles to support her young son , form meaningful relationships , and forge a successful career in the entertainment world . The work 's 1976 publication was the first time an African @-@ American woman had expanded her life story into a third volume . Scholar Dolly McPherson calls the book " a graphic portrait of the adult self in bloom " , while critic Lyman B. Hagen calls it " a journey of discovery and rebirth " . 
 In Singin ' and Swingin ' , Angelou examines many of the same subjects and themes in her previous autobiographies including travel , music , race , conflict , and motherhood . Angelou depicts the conflict she felt as a single mother , despite her success as a performer as she travels Europe with the musical Porgy and Bess . Her depictions of her travels , which take up 40 percent of the book , have roots in the African @-@ American slave narrative . Angelou uses music and musical concepts throughout Singin ' and Swingin ' ; McPherson calls it Angelou 's " praisesong " to Porgy and Bess . Angelou 's stereotypes about race and race relations are challenged as she interacts more with people of different races . During the course of this narrative , she changes her name from Marguerite Johnson to Maya Angelou for professional reasons . Her young son changes his name as well , from Clyde to Guy , and their relationship is strengthened as the book ends . 
 = = Background = = 
 Angelou followed her first two installations of her autobiography , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) and Gather Together in My Name ( 1974 ) , with Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas , published in 1976 . It marked the first time a well @-@ known African @-@ American woman writer had expanded her life story into a third autobiography . She also published two volumes of poetry entitled Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) , which was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize , and Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well ( 1975 ) . 
 According to writer Hilton Als , Angelou was one of the first African @-@ American female writers to publicly discuss her personal life , and one of the first to use herself as a central character in her books . Writer Julian Mayfield , who calls I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings " a work of art that eludes description " , states that Angelou 's work set a precedent in describing " the black experience " and in African American literature as a whole . 
 Als calls Angelou one of the " pioneers of self @-@ exposure " , willing to focus honestly on the more negative aspects of her personality and choices . For example , while Angelou was composing her second autobiography , Gather Together in My Name , she was concerned about how her readers would react to her disclosure that she had been a prostitute . Her husband Paul Du Feu talked her into publishing the book by encouraging her to " tell the truth as a writer " and " be honest about it " . Through the writing of her life stories , however , Angelou has become recognized and highly respected as a spokesperson for Blacks and women . It made her , as scholar Joanne Braxton stated , " without a doubt ... America 's most visible black woman autobiographer " . 
 = = Title = = 
 According to Angelou , the book 's title came from the rent parties of the 1920s and 1930s , where people would pay the host an inexpensive entry fee and then eat and drink throughout the weekend . As Angelou stated , people would " sing and swing and get merry like Christmas so one would have some fuel with which to live the rest of the week " . These parties , also called " parlor socials " , were attended by members of the working class who were unable to afford to go to Harlem 's more expensive clubs . As critic Mary Jane Lupton stated , " The concept of the rent party helps describe Angelou 's position ... She is a single mother from the South who goes to California and sings and swings for a living . She entertains others for little money as a singer , B @-@ girl , and dancer , without getting very merry at all " . Scholar Sondra O 'Neale described the phrase as " a folkloric title symbolic of the author 's long @-@ deserved ascent to success and fulfillment " . 
 Lupton insists that the title , one of the many similes Angelou used , is tied to the book 's themes . Lupton also considered the title " ironic " ; Angelou uses " old @-@ fashioned " and " positive " words — singin ' and swingin ' — that reflect several meanings related to the text . These words describe the beginnings of Angelou 's career as an entertainer , but the irony in the terms also depict the conflict Angelou felt about her son . The words gettin ' merry like Christmas are also ironic : " Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas was Angelou 's most <unk> autobiography " . Because music is one of the book 's themes , Angelou uses abbreviated verb endings in her title that reflect Black dialect and evoke the sound of a blues singer . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Singin ' and Swingin ' opens shortly after Angelou 's previous autobiography , Gather Together in My Name . Marguerite , or Maya , a single mother with a young son , is in her early twenties , struggling to make a living . Angelou writes in this book , like her previous works , about the full range of her own experiences . As scholar Dolly McPherson states , " When one encounters Maya Angelou in her story , one encounters the humor , the pain , the exuberance , the honesty , and the determination of a human being who has experienced life fully and retained her strong sense of self " . Many people around Angelou influence her growth and — as critic Lyman B. Hagen states — " propel Angelou ever forward " . The book 's opening chapters find Maya concerned with , as Hagen asserts , " apprehension about her son , a desire for a home , and facing racial conflicts , and seeking a career " . Maya is offered a job as a salesgirl in a record shop on Fillmore Street in San Francisco . At first she greets her boss ' offers of generosity and friendship with suspicion , but after two months of searching for evidence of racism , Maya begins to " relax and enjoy a world of music " . The job allows her to move back into her mother 's house and to spend more time with her son . 
 While working in the store , Maya meets Tosh Angelos , a Greek sailor . They fall in love , and he is especially fond of her son . Against her mother 's wishes , Maya marries Tosh in 1952 . At first , the marriage is satisfying , and it seems that Maya has fulfilled her dream of being a housewife , writing " My life began to resemble a Good Housekeeping advertisement . " Eventually , Maya begins to resent Tosh 's demands that she stay at home ; she is also bothered by her friends ' negative reaction to her interracial marriage . Maya is disturbed by Tosh 's atheism and his control of her life , but does little to challenge his authority . After Tosh tells her son Clyde that there is no God , Maya rebels by secretly attending Black churches . After three years the marriage disintegrates when Tosh announces to Maya that he is " tired of being married " . She goes into the hospital for an appendectomy , and after the operation , she announces her desire to return to her grandmother in Stamps , but Tosh informs her that Annie died the day of Maya 's operation . 
 A single mother once again , Maya begins to find success as a performer . She gets a job dancing and singing at The Purple Onion , a popular nightclub in San Francisco , and — on the recommendation of the club 's owners — she changes her name from Marguerite Johnson to the " more exotic " " Maya Angelou " . She gains the attention of talent scouts , who offer her a role in Porgy and Bess ; she turns down the part , however , because of her obligations to The Purple Onion . When her contract expires , Maya goes to New York City to audition for a part opposite Pearl Bailey , but she turns it down to join a European tour of Porgy and Bess . 
 Leaving Clyde with her mother , Maya travels to 22 countries with the touring company in 1954 and 1955 , expressing her impressions about her travels . She writes the following about Verona : " I was really in Italy . Not Maya Angelou , the person of pretensions and ambitions , but me , Marguerite Johnson , who had read about Verona and the sad lovers while growing up in a dusty Southern village poorer and more tragic than the historic town in which I now stood . " 
 Despite Maya 's success with Porgy and Bess , she is racked with guilt and regret about leaving her son behind . After receiving bad news about Clyde 's health , she quits the tour and returns to San Francisco . Both Clyde and Maya heal from the physical and emotional toll caused by their separation , and she promises never to leave him again . Clyde also announces that he wants to be called " Guy " . As Angelou writes : " It took him only one month to train us . He became Guy and we could hardly remember ever calling him anything else " . 
 Maya is true to her promise ; she accepts a job performing in Hawaii , and he goes with her . At the close of the book , mother and son express pride in each other . When he praises her singing , she writes : " Although I was not a great singer I was his mother , and he was my wonderful , dependently independent son " . 
 = = Style and genre = = 
 All seven of Angelou 's installments of her life story continue the tradition of African @-@ American autobiography . Starting with I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , Angelou makes a deliberate attempt while writing her books to challenge the usual structure of the autobiography by critiquing , changing , and expanding the genre . Her use of fiction @-@ writing techniques such as dialogue , characterization , and thematic development has often led reviewers to categorize her books as autobiographical fiction . Angelou stated in a 1989 interview that she was the only " serious " writer to choose the genre to express herself . As critic Susan Gilbert states , Angelou reports not one person 's story , but the collective 's . Scholar Selwyn R. Cudjoe agrees , and views Angelou as representative of the convention in African @-@ American autobiography as a public gesture that spoke for an entire group of people . 
 Lupton insists that all of Angelou 's autobiographies conformed to the genre 's standard structure : they were written by a single author , they were chronological , and they contained elements of character , technique , and theme . In a 1983 interview with African @-@ American literature critic Claudia Tate , Angelou calls her books autobiographies . When speaking of her unique use of the genre , Angelou acknowledges that she has followed the slave narrative tradition of " speaking in the first @-@ person singular talking about the first @-@ person plural , always saying I meaning ' we ' " . 
 Angelou recognizes that there are fictional aspects to all her books ; she tended to " diverge from the conventional notion of autobiography as truth " . Her approach parallel the conventions of many African @-@ American autobiographies written during the abolitionist period in the US , when truth was often censored for purposes of self @-@ protection . Author Lyman B. Hagen has placed Angelou in the long tradition of African @-@ American autobiography , but insists that she has created a unique interpretation of the autobiographical form . In a 1998 interview with journalist George Plimpton , Angelou discusses her writing process , and " the sometimes slippery notion of truth in nonfiction " and memoirs . When asked if she changed the truth to improve her story , she stated , " Sometimes I make a diameter from a composite of three or four people , because the essence in only one person is not sufficiently strong to be written about . " Although Angelou has never admitted to changing fact in her stories , she has used the facts to make an impact with the reader . As Hagen states , " One can assume that ' the essence of the data ' is present in Angelou 's work " . Hagen also states that Angelou " fictionalizes , to enhance interest " . Angelou 's long @-@ time editor , Robert Loomis , agrees , stating that she could rewrite any of her books by changing the order of her facts to make a different impact on the reader . 
 In Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas , Angelou utilizes repetition as a literary technique . For example , she leaves her child in the care of his grandmother , just as her own mother left her and her older brother in the care of their grandmother in Caged Bird . Much of Singin ' and Swingin ′ delves into Angelou 's guilt about accepting work that forces her to separate from her young son . As Angelou 's friend , scholar Dolly McPherson states , " The saddest part of Singin ' and Swingin ' is the young Guy , who , though deeply loved by Angelou , seems to be shoved into the background whenever a need to satisfy her monetary requirements or theatrical ambitions arises " . Despite her great success traveling Europe with the Porgy and Bess tour , she is distressed and full of indecision . For every positive description of her European experiences , there is a lament about Guy that " shuts off " these experiences and prevents her from enjoying the fruit of her hard work . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Travel = = = 
 Travel is a common theme in American autobiography as a whole ; as McPherson states , it is something of a national myth to Americans as a people . This is also the case for African American autobiography , which has its roots in the slave narrative . Like those narratives that focus on the writers ' search for freedom from bondage , modern African American autobiographers like Angelou seek to develop " an authentic self " and the freedom to find it in their community . As McPherson states , " The journey to a distant goal , the return home , and the quest which involves the voyage out , achievement , and return are typical patterns in Black autobiography " . 
 For Angelou , this quest takes her from her childhood and adolescence , as described in her first two books , into the adult world . McPherson sees Singin ' and Swingin ' as " a sunny tour of Angelou 's twenties " , from early years marked by disappointments and humiliation , into the broader world — to the white world and to the international community . This period describes " years of joy " , as well as the start of Angelou 's great success and fulfillment as an entertainer . Not all is " merry like Christmas " , however ; the book is also marked by negative events : her painful marriage and divorce , the death of her grandmother , and her long separation from her son . 
 In Angelou 's first two volumes , the setting is limited to three places ( Arkansas , Missouri , and California ) , while in Singin ' and Swingin ' , the " setting breaks open " to include Europe as she travels with the Porgy and Bess company . Lupton states that Angelou 's travel narrative , which takes up approximately 40 percent of the book , gives the book its organized structure , especially compared to Gather Together in My Name , which is more chaotic . Angelou 's observations about race , gender , and class serve to make the book more than a simple travel narrative . As a Black American , her travels around the world put her in contact with many nationalities and classes , expand her experiences beyond her familiar circle of community and family , and complicate her understandings of race relations . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 In Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas , Angelou continues an examination of her experiences with discrimination , begun in her first two volumes . Critic Selwyn R. Cudjoe refers to " the major problem of her works : what it means to be Black and female in America " . Cudjoe divides Singin ' and Swingin ' into two parts ; in the first part , Angelou works out her relationships with the white world , and in the second part , she evaluates her interactions with fellow Black cast members in Porgy and Bess , as well as her encounters with Europe and Africa . 
 Angelou comes into intimate contact with whites for the first time — whites very different from the racist people she encountered in her childhood . She discovers , as Cudjoe puts it , that her stereotypes of Whites were developed to protect herself from their cruelty and indifference . As McPherson states , " <unk> by earlier experiences , Angelou distrusts everyone , especially whites . Nevertheless , she is repeatedly surprised by the kindness and goodwill of many whites she meets , and , thus , her suspicions begin to soften into understanding " . Cudjoe states that in Singin ' and Swingin ' , Angelou effectively demonstrates " the inviolability of the African American personhood " , as well as her own closely guarded defense of it . In order for her to have any positive relationships with whites and people of other races , however , McPherson insists that Angelou " must examine and discard her stereotypical views about Whites " . Lyman agrees and points out that Angelou must re @-@ examine her lingering prejudices when faced with the broader world full of whites . As Hagen also states , however , this is a complex process , since most of Angelou 's experiences with whites are positive during this time . Cudjoe states that as the book 's main protagonist , Angelou moves between the white and Black worlds , both defining herself as a member of her community and encountering whites in " a much fuller , more sensuous manner " . 
 In her third autobiography , Angelou is placed in circumstances that force her to change her opinions about whites , not an easy change for her . Louise Cox , the co @-@ owner of the record store she frequents on Fillmore Street , generously offers Angelou employment and friendship . Angelou marries a white man , whose appreciation of Black music breaks her stereotype of whites . This is a difficult decision for Angelou , and she must justify it by rationalizing that Tosh is Greek , and not an American white . She was not marrying " one of the enemy " , but she could not escape the embarrassment and shame when they encountered other Blacks . Later , she has a friendship among equals with her white co @-@ workers , <unk> , Don , and Barrie , who assist her job quest at The Purple Onion . Cudjoe insists , " This free and equal relationship is significant to her in that it represents an important stage of her evolution toward adulthood " . 
 Angelou 's experiences with the Porgy and Bess tour expands her understanding of other races and race relations as she meets people of different nationalities during her travels . All these experiences are instrumental in Angelou 's " movement toward adulthood " and serve as a basis for her later acceptance and tolerance of other races . Porgy and Bess has had a controversial history ; many in the African American community consider it racist in its portrayal of Blacks . Angelou mentioned none of this controversy in Singin ' and Swingin ' , however . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 As Lupton states , there is " no doubt in the reader 's mind about the importance of music " in Singin ' and Swingin ' . Angelou 's use of opposition and her doubling of plot lines is similar to the polyphonic rhythms in jazz music . McPherson labels Angelou a " blues autobiographer " , someone who , like a blues musician , includes the painful details and episodes from her life . 
 Music appears throughout Angelou 's third autobiography , starting with the title , which evokes a blues song and references the beginnings of Angelou 's career in music and performance . She starts Singin ' and Swingin ' the same way she starts Caged Bird : with an epigraph to set the tone . Here , the epigraph is a quotation from an unidentified three @-@ line stanza in classic blues form . After the epigraph , " music " is the first word in the book . As the story opens , a lonely Angelou finds solace in Black music , and is soon hired as a salesgirl in a record store on Fillmore Street in San Francisco . She meets and falls in love with her first husband after she discovers their shared appreciation of Black music . After learning of her grandmother 's death , her reaction , " a dazzling passage three paragraphs long " according to Mary Jane Lupton , is musical ; not only does it rely upon gospel tradition , but is also influenced by African American literary texts , especially James Weldon Johnson 's " Go Down Death — A Funeral Sermon " . 
 After her divorce , Angelou earns a living for herself and her son with music and dance ; this decision marks a turning point in her life . Angelou 's new career seems , as Hagen asserts , to be propelled by a series of parties , evoking the title of this book . Hagen also calls her tour with Porgy and Bess " the biggest party by far of the book " . McPherson calls Singin ' and Swingin ' " Angelou 's praisesong " to the opera . Angelou has " fallen hopelessly in love with the musical " , even turning down other job offers to tour with its European company . McPherson also calls Porgy and Bess " an antagonist that <unk> Angelou , beckoning and seducing her away from her responsibilities " . As Lupton states , Porgy and Bess is Angelou 's " foundation for her later performances in dance , theater , and song " . 
 = = = Conflict = = = 
 Conflict , or Angelou 's presentation of opposites , is another theme in Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas . As Lupton states , Angelou constructs a plot by mixing opposing incidences and attitudes - Angelou 's " dialectical method " . The book is full of conflicts : in Angelou 's marriage , her feelings between being a good mother and a successful performer , the stereotypes about other races , and her new experiences with whites . Lupton believes this presentation of conflict is what makes Angelou 's writing " brilliant " ; she finds that the strength of Singin ' and Swingin ' comes , in part , from Angelou 's duplication of conflicts underlying the plot , characters , and thought patterns in the book . Lupton adds , " Not many other contemporary autobiographers have been able to capture , either in a single volume or in a series , the opposition of desires that is found in Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas and , to a lesser extent , in Angelou 's other volumes " . Even the closing sentence of the book ( " Although I was not a great singer I was his mother , and he was my wonderful , dependently independent son " ) demonstrates Angelou 's dialectical construction , sums up the contradictions of Angelou 's character , and alludes to mother / son patterns in her later books . 
 = = = Motherhood = = = 
 As Lupton states , motherhood is a " prevailing theme " throughout Angelou 's autobiographies : " Angelou presents a rare kind of literary model , the working mother " . Beginning in Caged Bird , when she gives birth to her son , the emphasis Angelou places on this theme increases in importance . Angelou finds herself in a situation " very familiar to mothers with careers " , and is forced to choose between being a loving mother or a " fully realized person " . As scholar Sondra O 'Neale puts it , in this book Angelou sheds the image of " unwed mother " with " a dead @-@ end destiny " that had followed her throughout her previous autobiography . 
 Angelou 's need for security for her young son motivates her choices in Singin ' and Swingin ' , especially her decision to marry Tosh Angelos . She feels a deep sense of guilt and regret when she has to leave her son to tour with Porgy and Bess , which prevents her from fully enjoying the experience . In spite of this , Singin ' and Swingin ' has been called " a love song to Angelou 's son " . Just as she changes her name as the story progresses , so does Guy , who becomes an intelligent , sensitive boy in the pages of this book . As Guy grows , so does his mother ; Hagen stated that this growth moves Angelou 's story forward . When Angelou discovers how deeply their separation injures Guy , she leaves the Porgy and Bess tour before it ends , at great personal cost . By the end of the book , their bond is deepened and she promises never to leave him again . As Hagen states , Maya embraces the importance of motherhood , just as she had done at the end of her previous autobiographies . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Like Angelou 's two previous autobiographies , Singin ' and Swingin ' received mostly positive reviews . Kathryn Robinson of the School Library Journal predicts that the book would be as enthusiastically received as the earlier installments in Angelou 's series , and that the author had succeeded in " sharing her vitality " with her audience . Linda Kuehl of the Saturday Review , although she prefers the rhythm of Caged Bird , found Singin ' and Swingin ' " very professional , even @-@ toned , and ... quite engaging " . Kuehl also finds that Angelou 's story translates smoothly to the printed page . R.E. Almeida of the Library Journal finds the book " a pleasant sequel " , one in which Angelou 's " religious strength , personal courage , and ... talent " was apparent in its pages . 
 One negative review was written by Margaret McFadden @-@ Gerber in Magill 's Literary Annual , who found the book disappointing and felt that it lacked the power and introspection of Angelou 's previous books . At least one reviewer expresses disappointment that Angelou did not use her status to effect any political change in Singin ' and Swingin ' . Critic Lyman B. Hagen responds to this criticism by stating that Angelou 's status during the events she describes in this autobiography did not lend itself to that kind of advocacy , and that as a person , Angelou had not evolved into the advocate that she would become later in her life . Reviewer John McWhorter finds many of the events Angelou describes throughout all of her autobiographies incoherent and confusing , and in need of further explanation as to her motives and reasons for her behavior . For example , McWhorter suggests that Angelou does a poor job of explaining her reasons for her marriage to Tosh Angelos , as well as their divorce . " In an autobiography in which a black woman marries outside of her race in the 1950s , we need to know more " . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = SMS Helgoland = 
 SMS Helgoland , the lead ship of her class , was a dreadnought battleship of the German Imperial Navy . Helgoland 's design represented an incremental improvement over the preceding Nassau class , including an increase in the bore diameter of the main guns , from 28 cm ( 11 in ) to 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) . Her keel was laid down on 11 November 1908 at the Howaldtswerke shipyards in Kiel . Helgoland was launched on 25 September 1909 and was commissioned on 23 August 1911 . 
 Like most battleships of the High Seas Fleet , Helgoland saw limited action against Britain 's Royal Navy during World War I. The ship participated in several fruitless sweeps into the North Sea as the covering force for the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . She saw some limited duty in the Baltic Sea against the Russian Navy , including serving as part of a support force during the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . Helgoland was present at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , though she was located in the center of the German line of battle and not as heavily engaged as the König- and Kaiser @-@ class ships in the lead . Helgoland was ceded to Great Britain at the end of the war and broken up for scrap in the early 1920s . Her coat of arms is preserved in the Military History Museum of the Bundeswehr in Dresden . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Helgoland was ordered by the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) under the provisional name Ersatz Siegfried , as a replacement for the old coastal defense ship Siegfried . The contract for the ship was awarded to Howaldtswerke in Kiel under construction number 500 . Work began on 24 December 1908 with the laying of her keel , and the ship was launched less than a year later , on 25 September 1909 . Fitting @-@ out , including completion of the superstructure and the installation of armament , lasted until August 1911 . Helgoland , named for the offshore islands seen as vital to the defense of the Kiel Canal , was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 23 August 1911 , just under three years from when work commenced , at a cost of 46 @.@ 196 million gold marks . 
 The ship was 167 @.@ 2 m ( 548 ft 7 in ) long , had a beam of 28 @.@ 5 m ( 93 ft 6 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 94 m ( 29 ft 4 in ) , and displaced 24 @,@ 700 metric tons ( 24 @,@ 310 long tons ) at full load . She was powered by three vertical triple expansion steam engines , which produced a top speed of 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 23 @.@ 9 mph ) . Helgoland stored up to 3 @,@ 200 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 100 long tons ) of coal , which allowed her to steam for 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . After 1915 the boilers were modified to burn oil ; the ship could carry up to 197 metric tons ( 194 long tons ) of fuel oil . 
 Helgoland was armed with a main battery of twelve 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns in six twin gun turrets , with one turret fore , one aft , and two on each flank of the ship . The ship 's secondary armament consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns and sixteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns . After 1914 , two of the 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were removed and replaced by 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns . Helgoland was also armed with six 50 cm ( 20 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Upon commissioning , Helgoland replaced the pre @-@ dreadnought Hannover in the I Battle Squadron . On 9 February 1912 , Helgoland 's crew beat the German record for loading coal , taking 1 @,@ 100 tons of coal on board in two hours ; the record was previously held by the crew of the Nassau @-@ class battleship Posen . Kaiser Wilhelm II congratulated the crew through a Cabinet order . In March , fleet training maneuvers were conducted in the North Sea , followed by another round of exercises in November . The fleet also trained in the Skagerrak and Kattegat during the November exercises . The next year followed a similar training pattern , though a summer cruise to Norway was instituted . 
 = = = 1914 summer training cruise = = = 
 On 10 July 1914 , Helgoland left the Jade Estuary to take part in the annual summer training cruise to Norway . The fleet , along with several German U @-@ boats , assembled at Skagen on 12 July to practice torpedo boat attacks , individual ship maneuvers , and searchlight techniques . The fleet arrived at the Fjord of Songe by 18 July , but Helgoland had to wait until after midnight for a harbor pilot to guide her into the confined waters of the fjord . Helgoland joined Friedrich der Grosse , the light cruiser Magdeburg , and the Kaiser 's yacht Hohenzollern in <unk> . 
 That same day , Helgoland took on 1250 tons of coal from a Norwegian collier . The following morning Helgoland was joined by her sister Oldenburg , and the two ships sailed back to Germany , arriving on the morning of 22 July . On the evening of 1 August , the captain announced to the crew that the Kaiser had ordered the navy to prepare for hostilities with the Russian Navy . 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 At the start of World War I , Helgoland was assigned to the I Division , I Battle Squadron . Helgoland was stationed off the heavily fortified island of Wangerooge on 9 August . Minefields and picket lines of cruisers , torpedo boats , and submarines were also emplaced there to defend Wilhelmshaven . Helgoland 's engines were kept running for the entirety of her deployment , so that she would be ready to respond at a moment 's notice . Four days later , on 13 August , Helgoland returned to Wilhelmshaven to refuel . The following day , naval reservists began arriving to fill out the wartime complements for the German battleships . 
 = = = Actions in the North Sea = = = 
 = = = = Battle of Helgoland Bight = = = = 
 The first major naval action in the North Sea , the Battle of Helgoland Bight , took place on 28 August 1914 . Helgoland was again stationed off Wangerooge . Despite her proximity to the battle , Helgoland was not sent to aid the beleaguered German cruisers , as she could not be risked in an unsupported attack against possibly superior British forces . Instead , the ship was ordered to drop anchor and await relief by Thüringen . By 04 : 30 , Helgoland received the order to join Ostfriesland and sail out of the harbor . At 05 : 00 , the two battleships met the battered cruisers Frauenlob and Stettin . By 07 : 30 , the ships had returned to port for the night . Three days later , on 31 August , Helgoland was put into drydock for maintenance . On the afternoon of 7 September , Helgoland and the rest of the High Seas Fleet conducted a training cruise to the main island of Heligoland . 
 = = = = Raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby = = = = 
 The first major operation of the war in which Helgoland took part was the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . The raid was conducted by the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group ; Helgoland and the other dreadnoughts of the High Seas Fleet steamed in distant support of Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers . Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , decided to take up station in the middle of the North Sea , about 130 miles east of Scarborough . 
 The Royal Navy , which had recently received the German code books captured from the beached cruiser Magdeburg , was aware that an operation was taking place , but was not sure where the Germans would strike . Therefore , the Admiralty ordered David Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , the six battleships of the 2nd Battle Squadron , and several cruisers and destroyers to intercept the German battlecruisers . However , Beatty 's task force nearly ran headlong into the entire High Seas Fleet . At 06 : 20 , Beatty 's destroyer screen came into contact with the German torpedo boat SMS V155 . This began a confused , 2 @-@ hour battle between the British destroyers and the German cruiser and destroyer screen , often at very close range . At the time of the first encounter , the Helgoland @-@ class battleships were less than 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) away from the six British dreadnoughts ; this was nearly within firing range , but in the darkness , neither British nor German admirals were aware of the composition of their opponents ' fleets . Admiral Ingenohl , aware of the Kaiser 's order not to risk the battle fleet without his express approval , concluded that his forces were engaging the screen of the entire Grand Fleet , and so , 10 minutes after the first contact , he ordered a turn to the southeast . Continued attacks delayed the turn , but by 06 : 42 , it had been carried out . For about 40 minutes , the two fleets were steaming on a parallel course . At 07 : 20 , Ingenohl ordered a further turn to port , which put his ships on a course for the safety of German bases . 
 = = = = Training in Kiel = = = = 
 On 17 January , Ingenohl ordered Helgoland to go back to the docks for more maintenance , but she did not enter the drydock until three days later , owing to difficulties getting through the canal locks . By the middle of the month , Helgoland left dock ; her berth was then filled by the armored cruiser SMS Roon . On 10 February , Helgoland and the rest of the I Squadron sailed out of Wilhelmshaven towards Cuxhaven , but heavy fog impeded movement for two days . The ships then anchored off Brunsbüttel before proceeding through the Kiel Canal to Kiel . The crews conducted gunnery training with the main and secondary guns and torpedo firing practice on 1 March . The following night the crews conducted night @-@ fighting training . On 10 March the squadron again passed through the locks to return to Wilhelmshaven . Fog again slowed progress , and the ships did not reach port until 15 March . 
 = = = Battle of the Gulf of Riga = = = 
 Helgoland , her three sister ships , and the four Nassau @-@ class battleships were assigned to the task force that was to cover the foray into the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . The German flotilla , which was under the command of Vice Admiral Franz von Hipper , also included the battlecruisers Von der Tann , Moltke , and Seydlitz , several light cruisers , 32 destroyers and 13 minesweepers . The plan called for channels in Russian minefields to be swept so that the Russian naval presence , which included the pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Slava , could be eliminated . The Germans would then lay minefields of their own to prevent Russian ships from returning to the gulf . Helgoland and the majority of the other big ships of the High Seas Fleet remained outside the gulf for the entirety of the operation . The dreadnoughts Nassau and Posen were detached on 16 August to escort the minesweepers and to destroy Slava , though they failed to sink the old battleship . After three days , the Russian minefields had been cleared , and the flotilla entered the gulf on 19 August , but reports of Allied submarines in the area prompted a German withdrawal from the gulf the following day . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Under the command of Captain von <unk> , Helgoland fought at the Battle of Jutland , alongside her sister ships in the I Battle Squadron . For the majority of the battle , the I Battle Squadron formed the center of the line of battle , behind Rear Admiral Behncke 's III Battle Squadron , and followed by Rear Admiral Mauve 's elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron . 
 Helgoland and her sisters first entered direct combat shortly after 18 : 00 . The German line was steaming northward and encountered the destroyers Nomad and Nestor , which had been disabled earlier in the battle . Nomad , which had been attacked by the Kaiser @-@ class ships at the head of the line , exploded and sank at 18 : 30 , followed five minutes later by the Nestor , sunk by main and secondary gunfire from Helgoland , Thüringen and several other German battleships . At 19 : 20 , Helgoland and several other battleships began firing on HMS Warspite , which , along with the other Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the 5th Battle squadron , had been pursuing the German battlecruiser force . The shooting stopped quickly though , as the Germans lost sight of their target ; Helgoland had fired only about 20 shells from her main guns . 
 At 20 : 15 , during the third Gefechtskehrtwendung , Helgoland was struck by a 15 @-@ inch ( 38 cm ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) shell , from either Barham or Valiant , in the forward part of the ship . The shell hit the armored belt about 0 @.@ 8 m ( 32 in ) above the waterline , where the armor was only 15 cm thick . The 15 @-@ inch shell broke up on impact , but it still managed to tear a 1 @.@ 4 @-@ meter ( 4 ft 7 in ) hole in the hull . It rained splinters on the foremost port side 15 cm gun , though it could still be fired . Approximately 80 tons of water entered the ship . 
 By 23 : 30 , the High Seas Fleet had entered its night cruising formation . The order had largely been inverted , with the four Nassau @-@ class ships in the lead , followed directly by the Helgolands , with the Kaisers and Königs astern of them . The rear was again brought up by the elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts ; the mauled German battlecruisers were by this time scattered . At around midnight on 1 June , the Helgoland- and Nassau @-@ class ships in the center of the German line came into contact with the British 4th Destroyer Flotilla . The 4th Flotilla broke off the action temporarily to regroup , but at around 01 : 00 , unwittingly stumbled into the German dreadnoughts a second time . Helgoland and Oldenburg opened fire on the two leading British destroyers . Helgoland fired six salvos from her secondary guns at the destroyer Fortune before she succumbed to the tremendous battering . Shortly after , Helgoland shifted fire to an unidentified destroyer ; Helgoland fired five salvos from her 15 cm guns to unknown effect . The British destroyers launched torpedoes at the German ships , but they managed to successfully evade them with a turn to starboard . 
 Following the return to German waters , Helgoland and Thüringen , along with the Nassau @-@ class battleships Nassau , Posen , and Westfalen , took up defensive positions in the Jade roadstead for the night . During the battle , the ship suffered only minor damage ; Helgoland was hit by a single 15 @-@ inch shell , but sustained minimal damage . Nevertheless , dry @-@ docking was required to repair the hole in the belt armor . Work was completed by 16 June . In the course of the battle , Helgoland had fired 63 main battery shells , and 61 rounds from her 15 cm guns . 
 = = = Later actions = = = 
 After the Battle of Jutland , Admiral Scheer argued that the fleet could not break the British naval blockade , that only the resumption of unrestricted U @-@ boat warfare would be successful . As a result , the High Seas Fleet largely remained in port , with the exception of two abortive sorties in August and October 1916 . In April 1917 , Helgoland accidentally rammed the new battlecruiser Hindenburg , which was in the process of fitting @-@ out , as she left her berth . In October 1917 Helgoland , in company with Oldenburg , went to <unk> to receive the light cruisers Brummer and Bremse , which were returning from a raid on a British convoy to Norway . On 27 November the ship traversed the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal into the Baltic , but did not participate in the occupation of the islands in the Gulf of Riga . A third and final fleet advance took place in April 1918 , but was cut short when the battlecruiser Moltke developed engine problems and had to be towed back to port . 
 = = = Wilhelmshaven mutiny = = = 
 Helgoland and her three sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , despite the expected casualties . However , many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . 
 On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . Early on the 31st , the crew of Helgoland , which was directly behind Thüringen in the harbor , joined in the mutiny . The I Squadron commander sent boats to Helgoland and Thüringen to take off the ships ' officers , who were allowed to leave unharmed . He then informed the rebellious crews that if they failed to stand down , both ships would be torpedoed . After two torpedo boats arrived on the scene , both ships surrendered ; their crews were taken ashore and incarcerated . The rebellion then spread ashore ; on 3 November , an estimated 20 @,@ 000 sailors , dock workers , and civilians fought a battle in Kiel in an attempt to secure the release of the jailed mutineers . By 5 November , the red flag of the Socialists flew above every capital ship in Wilhelmshaven save König . The following day , a sailors ' council took control of the base , and a train carrying the mutineers from Helgoland and Thüringen was stopped in Cuxhaven , where the men escaped . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 According to the terms of the Treaty of Versailles , all four Helgoland @-@ class battleships were disarmed and surrendered as prizes of war to the Allies as replacements for the ships scuttled in Scapa Flow . On 21 – 22 November 1918 , Helgoland steamed to Harwich to retrieve the crews of U @-@ boats that had been surrendered there . She was then removed from active service on 16 December 1918 . Helgoland and her sisters were stricken from the German navy on 5 November 1919 . Helgoland was formally handed over to the United Kingdom on 5 August 1920 . She was scrapped at Morecambe ; work began on 3 March 1921 . Helgoland 's coat of arms is currently preserved in the Military History Museum of the Bundeswehr in Dresden . 
 = Razer ( robot ) = 
 Razer is a combat robot that competes on the British television series Robot Wars . It was constructed by Simon Scott and Ian Lewis from Bournemouth ; the team later expanded to include webmaster Vincent Blood . Razer was designed and constructed in 1998 to participate in the second series of Robot Wars , but subsequent modifications and improvements enabled it to remain competitive until its retirement after the second series of Robot Wars Extreme . Despite gaining a reputation for being unreliable , it was champion of the fifth series of Robot Wars , runner @-@ up in the sixth , and won the first two Robot Wars World Championships . 
 Razer 's weapon is a piercing arm which exerts approximately three tonnes of pressure per square inch ( 465 kg / cm2 , 45 @.@ 6 MPa ) at its tip . The arm was designed to pierce opponents ' armour plating and break their internal components , rendering them impaired or immobile . This weapon was inspired by the principle of the brake press — a piece of industrial machinery used to bend metal — and maximises damage through the use of hydraulics . The arm is also an integral element of Razer 's winged self @-@ righting mechanism , which rolls the robot back onto its wheels if inverted . In later series of Robot Wars , an interchangeable hook was attached to the arm to lift robots immune from being pierced . The popularity of crushing and piercing weaponry in robot combat events is attributed to Razer , which inspired many imitations . 
 With a record of 40 wins and 6 losses ( one through concession ) in the UK Robot Wars series , Razer is recognised as one of the most successful competitors in the programme 's history . It was featured on Robot Wars merchandise including a DVD and video games , and had a pull @-@ back toy created in its image — one of which was later modified by Ian Lewis to function as a fully radio controllable miniature version of the team 's original heavyweight machine . Razer also competed in the American television series BattleBots , winning three of its five head @-@ to @-@ head battles and the 1999 Gigabot Rumble . The team behind Razer later constructed a new combatant called Warhead specifically for this competition . After retirement , Razer appears in non @-@ combat demonstrations as part of Robo Challenge educational displays and events . It returned to active combat in the 2016 revival of Robot Wars . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Razer was designed and built by Ian Lewis and Simon Scott who , after watching the first series of Robot Wars , agreed that combat robots had potential to be considerably more destructive than the pioneering machines on display . Their choice of weapon was a piercing arm attached to a hydraulic ram and powered by a pump , itself powered by a motorcycle starter motor . This was based on the principle of the brake press , a piece of industrial machinery used to bend metal through progressive force . 
 Razer 's hydraulic system pumped pressurised liquid , as opposed to pneumatics where a force is generated by the controlled release of a pressurised gas . Razer 's arm was often said to exert nine tonnes of force ; however , it was the hydraulic ram which produced up to nine tonnes of pressure per square inch ( 1 @,@ 395 kg / cm2 , 137 MPa ) at its output , and this was geared down to three tonnes per square inch ( 465 kg / cm2 , 45 @.@ 6 MPa ) at the tip of the arm . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 This iteration of Razer competed in the second series of Robot Wars , successfully passing the Gauntlet and Trials stages of its heat before being defeated in battle by a robot called Inquisitor . The cause of Razer 's immobilisation in this fight was the shearing of nylon <unk> drives — cushioning blocks designed to prevent stress fractures — in the machine 's drive wheels ; these were replaced with more robust metal ones for future competitions . As the Robot Wars television series evolved and grew , Razer 's design was revised and refined to counter weaknesses and take advantage of rule changes ; by series four , Lewis estimated that Razer had taken 1 @,@ 500 hours to build , at a cost of £ 1 @,@ 600 . 
 Razer 's four @-@ wheeled drive train used a skid @-@ steering arrangement , whereby the wheels on one side of the robot rotated faster than those on the other to turn the machine . Also , the weight of the robot was biased towards the rear so that its weapon stayed facing its opponent as Razer turned . However , the solid rubber rear wheels used in series two provided too much traction and were reluctant to ' swing ' the machine . For the third series , Razer used custom @-@ made aluminium drive wheels which incorporated rollers , reducing the amount of force required for simultaneous forward and sideways movement . These wheels were later upgraded with a stronger titanium construction , whilst the level of oversteer in the drive system was reduced through the implementation of an electronic gyroscope . For the series Robot Wars Extreme II , Razer 's rubber front wheels were replaced with metal ones bearing small spiked protrusions . 
 Whereas competitors in the first series of Robot Wars had largely featured passive weapons , the second series saw a greater number of robots — including the series champion , Panic Attack — using lifting and flipping weapons designed to overturn an opponent . Lewis and Scott noted that when Razer was overturned with its piercing arm fully upright , the robot was more than halfway towards naturally rolling back onto its wheels . Therefore , rather than equipping Razer with a powered mechanism for righting itself when inverted , two wings were attached to the arm . <unk> via cables , the wings opened when the arm was fully raised , levering Razer back onto its wheels . The unique design provided Razer with a " victory salute " — raising its claw and wings whilst standing on its tail — but had the downside of putting the machine over the weight limit of 79 @.@ 4 kilograms ( 175 lb ) . To redress the balance , approximately 450 holes were drilled in the robot 's metalwork . 
 From series five of Robot Wars onwards , the weight limit for heavyweight competitors was increased to 100 kilograms ( 220 lb ) . This allowed for improvements to the chassis and bodywork of Razer including new titanium outriggers , and 2 @.@ 5 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 098 in ) thick armour panels versus 1 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) before . The most noticeable alteration to this version of Razer was a redesigned front scoop . This enclosed the front wheels to reduce side @-@ on impact damage , and greatly decreased the robot 's ground clearance to reduce its vulnerability to being flipped , whilst also making it easier to get underneath opponents to crush them . This iteration of Razer won the first Robot Wars Extreme All @-@ Stars championship and series five of Robot Wars , alongside mounting a successful defence of its World Champion title . By the time of Razer 's Robot Wars Extreme II appearances , the machine weighed 92 kilograms ( 203 lb ) , was 1 @.@ 14 metres ( 3 @.@ 7 ft ) long , and reached a top speed of 11 miles per hour ( 18 km / h ) . 
 = = Combat history = = 
 For details of the television series and their formats , see Robot Wars and BattleBots . 
 = = = Series 2 – 4 and BattleBots = = = 
 Razer made its debut in the fourth heat of series two of Robot Wars , which was viewed by almost six million people on BBC Two . It had been finished late the night before the recording . Radio interference caused Razer to be hard to control in the Gauntlet stage of the competition , but it successfully navigated the obstacle course and progressed to the Trial . This phase was a robotic football match , wherein Razer scored the first goal to reach the heat semi @-@ final . Its opponent for this one @-@ on @-@ one battle was Inquisitor , a box @-@ shaped robot equipped with a rotating flail . Whilst Razer made the stronger start , crumpling Inquisitor 's flail support , the <unk> drives in its motors sheared after an impact on the arena floor . This rendered Razer immobile and ended a promising run . Despite its relatively early exit from the competition , Razer won the Best Design award for series two . After series two , Vincent Blood joined the Razer team after being taken up on his offer to create a basic website for Razer . 
 Before series three of Robot Wars , Razer was entered into the American robot combat programme BattleBots in Los Angeles after the team won an international scholarship along with fellow British robots , <unk> and Mortis . Razer 's first battle was against <unk> . It flipped Razer , but Lewis self @-@ righted and Scott pierced <unk> 's armour . Razer was given the victory on a crowd 's vote . Its next fight was against Agrippa , which Razer defeated by crushing through its opponent 's electrical system . Razer 's next adversary , <unk> , beat it after flipping it onto the arena saws which severed a cable and left Razer unable to self @-@ right . Razer dropped into the " best of the rest " competition . Therein it faced Kill @-@ O @-@ Amp which was defeated after Razer pulled a wheel off before crushing its opponent 's battery . It then faced Rhino in the next round , losing after Rhino 's spike pierced Razer 's armour , breaking the starter solenoid and knocking the radio switch into the off position . This also sent Razer into an uncontrolled spin , requiring Lewis to enter the arena to manually power Razer down . Finally , Razer competed in the 13 robot Gigabot Rumble . After the time limit expired , five robots including Razer were still mobile and the result went to an audience vote . After the crowd voted in their favour , Razer became the 1999 Gigabot Rumble Champion . 
 From series three of Robot Wars , the Gauntlet and Trial stages of each heat were dropped , with the whole of the main competition formed around direct combat . Razer 's first battle of the series was against Backstabber . Scott lowered Razer 's arm into an extrusion on Backstabber , and Lewis pushed their opponent into the ' pit ' , an open hole in the arena floor . In the second round , despite causing damage to <unk> , Razer lost due to a mechanical failure : the valve which controls the direction of hydraulic fluid in the arm jammed , causing Razer 's arm to raise to its full height and refuse to lower . With its rear wheels off the ground , Razer was weaponless and immobile , and eliminated early from the main competition once more . Outside of the main UK championship , Razer won the concurrent Pinball Warrior Tournament side event and retained the Best Design award . 
 Immediately after filming series three , Razer participated in the International Championship . Following forfeiture by Prometheus , its scheduled first opponent , Razer beat the Dutch representative Techno @-@ Lease and Irish entrant <unk> to win the tournament . Razer also fought in the direct @-@ to @-@ video First World Championship , representing England . Victories over the Scottish robot All Torque and fellow English entrants Chaos 2 , 101 and Behemoth saw Razer win the tournament and its associated title . 
 In the first round of its series four heat , Razer progressed alongside <unk> from a three @-@ way battle in which <unk> was eliminated . In its next battle against Milly @-@ Ann Bug , Razer methodically removed all of its opponent 's wheels , rendering Milly @-@ Ann Bug unable to move . In a post @-@ battle interview with host Craig Charles , Blood likened this attack to " pulling the legs off a spider " . Early on in its heat final against Pussycat , Razer malfunctioned . Stuck in forward drive , it careered into the arena side wall with the rear wheels spinning but unable to steer . Pussycat severely damaged the back end and wheels of Razer , until Dead Metal of the house robots pitted the machine . Although Scott and Blood were gracious in defeat , Lewis turned his back on the fight , left the control booth immediately afterwards , and refused to be interviewed by Craig Charles . Lewis accused the Pussycat team of breaking a gentlemen 's agreement that both teams would not seriously damage the other 's machine . However , Team Pussycat were unaware that Razer was immobilised . Razer also took part in the Pinball Warrior and Sumo Basho side tournaments of series four ; its performances were underwhelming in both events , scoring 95 points in the former having abandoned the run partway through to attack Sir <unk> , and lasting less than five seconds in the latter . 
 = = = Southern Annihilator – Series 5 = = = 
 Razer 's next appearance came in a Robot Wars Christmas special called the Southern Annihilator . Six robots fought at the same time until one was eliminated , either through immobilisation or judges ' decision . The remaining five robots then fought again , eliminating another , and so on until one robot remained and was declared the winner . Razer outlasted Vercingetorix , Spawn of <unk> , Behemoth and Attila the Drum to set up a final against Onslaught . An attack by Razer 's arm on one of Onslaught 's rear wheels saw its adversary shed a tyre , lose grip , and drive into an area patrolled by Matilda . The house robot flipped Onslaught onto its side , rendering it immobile . Assured of victory , Razer attacked and badly damaged Matilda 's bodywork and rear shell . 
 It next took part in the All @-@ Stars tournament of Robot Wars Extreme , beating Gemini , Behemoth and Firestorm 3 to establish a grand final against Tornado . In their first competitive encounter , Razer repeatedly pierced Tornado 's low , flat body , eventually breaking their drive chain . Tornado was immobilised , and Razer won a second consecutive trophy . Its only other battle in Extreme was a grudge match with Pussycat , in response to the accusation that the Pussycat team had broken an agreement with the Razer team during their series four heat . Razer punctured Pussycat 's body and lifted it with the arm but Pussycat fell and escaped . In doing so , Pussycat impacted the front wheel of Razer and rendered it immobile . Ian Lewis of Team Razer competed in a seven @-@ way melee featuring <unk> robots — miniature machines that weighed less than 150 grams ( 5 @.@ 3 oz ) and fitted into a four @-@ inch ( 10 @.@ 16 cm ) cube . Lewis 's robot for this battle was <unk> , a modified Razer toy . 
 Razer 's next tournament was the Second World Championship . Its title defence began with qualification from a melee against <unk> , <unk> Power and The Revolutionist . It then beat fellow English representative Tornado in the semi @-@ final before facing walking robot <unk> in the final . Unable to pierce <unk> 's 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) thick armour , Razer concentrated on inflicting cosmetic damage to its opponent 's legs . This proved enough to secure victory on a judges ' decision , enabling Razer to retain its World Champion title . 
 On a 12 @-@ battle victory streak , Razer fought in the eleventh heat of the fifth series of Robot Wars . Therein , it defeated Big Nipper , Widow 's Revenge — a machine reportedly constructed by the Razer team 's wives — and Rick to reach its first series semi @-@ final . Their next opponent was Spawn Again , which was armed with a pneumatic flipper . Equipped with a new lower front wedge , Razer was able to get underneath Spawn Again and crush it until it broke down . In the quarter finals , Razer faced S3 , a cylindrical robot with a vertical spinning blade . Razer 's arm sliced into S3 's weapon controls , stopping the disc , which allowed Razer to dominate the fight and win on a judges ' decision . 
 Team Razer faced Firestorm 3 in their first battle of the series grand final , in a rematch from the All @-@ Stars semi @-@ final from earlier that year . Whilst victory in that battle had been relatively straightforward , Firestorm 3 had increased the thickness of its armour for this battle to make it harder for Razer to inflict major damage . This tactic almost worked : Razer was unable to completely immobilise the robot . The fight ended in a close judges ' decision — in Razer 's favour . Victory handed Razer a place in the series five grand final against Bigger Brother , rebuilt after being heavily damaged by <unk> @-@ Disc in its previous battle . Razer gripped Bigger Brother early in the battle , causing damage to its opponent 's drive chain from which Bigger Brother never recovered . The final ended in a stalemate and went to the judges ; their decision came back in favour of Razer . Along with the UK Championship , Razer also took home a third Best Design award . 
 = = = Series 6 = = = 
 Coming into series six as reigning champion , Razer started its title defence by qualifying from a four @-@ way melee . It then defeated the pyramid @-@ shaped robot Cyrax on a judges ' decision to set up a heat final against Raging Reality . It pushed its opponent towards Matilda 's flywheel , which ripped off an entire side panel and caused Raging Reality to break down . This saw Razer reach the semi @-@ finals for a second consecutive series . Against Wild Thing , Razer damaged one of its opponent 's exposed drive wheels , hampering its movement . Subsequently , Razer grasped it with the arm and dropped Wild Thing into the pit . Razer next fought Dantomkia , which was armed with a pneumatic flipping arm . Although Razer was the early aggressor , Dantomkia retaliated by pushing Razer into the arena wall . The rest of the battle was similarly even , with Razer 's more potent attacks being matched by Dantomkia 's pushing power . The judges decided that Razer should move on to a second series final . 
 Reaching the grand final meant defeating the axe @-@ wielding robot Terrorhurtz . Razer avoided the axe and lowered its arm into Terrorhurtz 's polycarbonate armour panels . Terrorhurtz lined up for another strike , but Razer slid its wedge underneath Terrorhurtz 's chassis . It buried the arm into its opponent , carried Terrorhurtz to the pit release button , and dropped it into the pit . Only Tornado stood between Razer and a successful title defence . After twice losing to Razer that year , the developers of Tornado had constructed a large metal frame equipped with a rotating blade . Controversially qualifying as an " interchangeable weapon " , the size of this framework prevented Razer 's claw from reaching Tornado 's chassis . Team Razer responded by attaching a lifting hook to the front of the arm before the fight . Although Razer would still not be able to pierce Tornado , it could lift it by the framework . In the battle , Tornado used its superior pushing power to slam Razer into the arena wall and the house robots . Near the end of the fight , Razer managed to lift Tornado up and push it over the pit , but the size of the additional framework prevented Tornado from falling in . After a 45 minute discussion , the judges ruled in favour of Tornado becoming the new UK champion . 
 = = = Extreme II = = = 
 Although it had lost its UK title , Razer still reigned as champion of the Extreme All @-@ Stars tournament . Its first battle to defend this title was against twice UK champion Chaos 2 and dual @-@ spinner 13 Black . Razer and 13 Black joined forces to eliminate Chaos 2 , in what was its last ever fight on Robot Wars . Razer 's next battle against Spawn Again was a rematch from the series five semi @-@ finals . Razer was again the aggressor : it repeatedly punctured Spawn Again 's body panels , prompting its constructors to seek safety by driving themselves into the pit . Razer 's next battle was one @-@ on @-@ one versus 13 Black . Following an impact with the arena wall , 13 Black stopped spinning for long enough that Razer could lift it with the arm and lower it into the pit . In the All @-@ Stars grand final , Razer faced Firestorm 4 . Razer manoeuvred its wedge underneath Firestorm 4 , lowered the arm and immobilised its opponent . Razer was All @-@ Stars champion for a second time running . 
 The European Championship was Razer 's next — and final — televised tournament , for which it qualified as reigning World Champion . It defeated Dutch champions <unk> to set up a semi @-@ final against Tornado . Razer 's adversaries attached the anti @-@ crusher frame used in their previous meeting in the series six grand final ; the Razer team installed a revised version of the lifting hook . Tornado was the early aggressor , until Razer picked it up with the hook and dragged it towards the pit . The size of Tornado 's framework made it difficult for Razer to drop it in , and the strain of lifting Tornado burnt out Razer 's drive motors . Razer was immobile at the end of the match , but the result went to a judges ' decision . They awarded victory to Razer for being in control of the fight , but in a split decision the team decided this was unfair and conceded to Tornado , who beat <unk> 2 in the final to claim the European title . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 After five years of appearing on BBC channels , the seventh regular series of Robot Wars was broadcast by Five . Razer did not participate and , following the cancellation of the series , was retired from combat . The team then started to hire apprentices to help them in independent robotics demonstrations . Razer now appears in non @-@ combat demonstrations at displays and events organised by Robo Challenge , a robotics demonstration company . 
 Razer returned to action for the 2016 revival of Robot Wars , in which it was eliminated in the first round . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Team Razer was acknowledged for having devised and popularised the crushing and piercing arm weapon . Razer 's success spawned a number of imitations : Suicidal Tendencies , Ming 3 and Tiberius are amongst the other heavyweight robots to have adopted such a weapon , whilst the featherweight robot Venom is a scaled @-@ down replica of Razer . In 2001 , Razer appeared in cartoon form on the front cover of the seventeenth issue of Robot Wars Magazine . It was also included in the Robot Wars video games . The version of Razer which competed in the fourth series of Robot Wars was used as the model for a pull @-@ back toy powered by friction motors . This was sold alongside a model stunt ramp and barrels . A small metal toy based on Razer was available as part of the Robot Wars <unk> range and , alongside Chaos 2 and <unk> @-@ Disc , Razer was one of three competitor robots chosen to appear on a personalised DVD as part of the Robot Wars Ultimate Warrior Collection series . 
 = Bermuda at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Bermuda sent a delegation to compete at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . The games marked Bermuda 's twenty @-@ first Olympic appearance since its debut in 1936 . The 2008 delegation included six athletes : Tyrone Smith and Arantxa King in long jump , Jillian Terceira in individual jumping on horseback , Kiera Aitken and Roy @-@ Allan Burch in swimming ( Aitken in backstroke , and Burch in freestyle ) , and Flora Duffy in triathlon . Bermuda did not win any medals in the Beijing games . 
 = = Background = = 
 Bermuda 's debut in the Olympic Games began with the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin , Nazi Germany , when the Bermudian delegation included five athletes , all men . Bermuda had appeared in twenty @-@ one Olympic Games between 1936 and the 2008 Beijing Olympics , excluding the 1980 Summer Olympics . Of those twenty @-@ one games , sixteen of them were Summer Olympics . Bermuda had , prior to Beijing , earned one medal , when Clarence Hill won bronze in the 1976 Summer Olympics . The 2008 Bermudian delegation had fewer people than it usually sent abroad , prompting the president of the Bermudian Olympic Association Austin Woods to complain publicly that the year 's Olympic team lacked access to quality coaches , administrators , and facilities , and with the exception of several athletes , lacked the skill to be competitive . 
 Bermuda dispatched six athletes in total to the Beijing Olympics . Of the delegation , two of the athletes ( Roy @-@ Allen Burch and Tyrone Smith ) were men and four of the athletes ( Flora Duffy , Kiera Aitken , Arantxa King , and Jill Terceira ) were women . King was the youngest Bermudian participant during the 2008 Olympics , at 18 years of age , and Terceira was the oldest , at 37 . No Bermudian athlete advanced to a final round during the 2008 Games . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Two people competed in track and field representing Bermuda : Tyrone Smith and Arantxa King . Smith participated in men 's long jump , while Arantxa King participated in women 's long jump . Neither advanced past the qualifying rounds in Beijing . 
 Former Missouri S & T student Tyrone " Sticks " Smith earned a spot on Bermuda 's team when he finished in third place at the long jump event that took place during the 2008 Central American and Caribbean Championships in Cali , Columbia . Smith 's appearance at the Beijing Olympics was his first at any of the Olympic games . During the course of the event at the Olympics , Smith was placed in Heat 2 of the August 16 qualifying rounds , set to compete against athletes that included Irving <unk> Saladino Aranda of Panama ( who won the gold medal in finals ) and <unk> Makusha of Zimbabwe ( who was fourth @-@ place runner @-@ up in finals ) . Out of twenty competitors , Smith ranked seventh with a distance of 7 @.@ 91 meters . He was 0 @.@ 1 meters ahead of Fabrice Lapierre of Australia , who placed eighth in the qualifying round , and 0 @.@ 13 meters behind heat leader Makusha . Tyrone Smith was three centimeters short of a distance that would have qualified him for finals , and did not progress . 
 Stanford first @-@ year student Arantxa King was chosen by the Bermuda Olympic Association on Wednesday , July 23 , 2008 through the use of its IAAF female at @-@ large selection . Her participation in the 2008 Beijing Olympics marked her Olympic debut . During the August 18 Qualifying rounds , King was placed in Heat 2 versus competitors that included Russia 's Tatiana Lebedeva and Nigeria 's Blessing <unk> , both of whom received medals in the event finals . King jumped a distance of 6 @.@ 01 meters , 0 @.@ 69 meters behind leading qualifier Lebedeva 's score , placing nineteenth ( out of twenty @-@ one ) in the event . She placed last in the heat , ahead of two disqualified athletes , and thirty @-@ sixth ( out of forty @-@ two ) athletes when considering all heats at once . Arantxa King did not progress to the next and final round on August 22 . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 = = Equestrian = = 
 Jillian Terceira was not originally chosen to participate on Bermuda 's Olympic team , and was passed up for Patrick Nisbett and his horse , Antille 8 . This occurred when neither Terceira nor Nisbett qualified for an Olympic spot at the equestrian finals in Hong Kong , caused in part by the injury of Terceira 's horse , <unk> . Because Bermuda was allowed only one horse rider , the Bermuda Equestrian Federation awarded their one reserved Olympic spot to Nisbett because Terceira 's horse had been injured during the course of the event . 
 Terceira argued that she had a second horse , Chaka III , who should have been used in the injured <unk> ' place , was regularly faster than Nisbett 's Antille 8 and should have earned the qualification position . She also accused the Bermuda Equestrian Federation of making the decision based on political or racial motivations , which the organization denied . BEF president Mike Cherry explained that Chaka III did not qualify for the event until June 30 , the final day , which is the reason why the horse was not considered for Bermuda 's Olympic slot . The BEF organized a final day of competition between Nisbett 's Antille and Terceira 's Chaka to give Terceira one last opportunity to qualify for an Olympic position . Nisbett , however , withdrew from the Olympic position later that June . Terceira took his place . 
 Terceira competed in the August 15 preliminaries of individual equestrian jumping . As rankings are derived from the number of penalties that one accumulates , Terceira tied for 39th place with seven other horse riders , having accrued five penalties . Terceira also participated in the August 17th preliminary round , but was eliminated , and did not advance to the finals . 
 = = = Show jumping = = = 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Two swimmers represented Bermuda at the Beijing Olympics : Kiera Aitken and Roy @-@ Allan Burch . Aitken participated in the women 's 100 meter backstroke , and Burch swam the men 's 100 meter backstroke . Neither advanced past the preliminary round . 
 Former Dalhousie University student and national record holder Kiera Aitken participated on behalf of Bermuda for her second Olympic appearance after the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens . Aitken participated in the August 10 preliminaries for the 100 meters women 's backstroke , where she was placed in Heat 1 with Paraguay 's Maria Virginia Baez and Panama 's Christie Marie <unk> Baca . With a time of 1 : 02 @.@ 62 , Aitken ranked first in her heat , defeating Baez by almost three seconds . However , her overall ranking placed her thirty @-@ third out of forty @-@ nine swimmers between Alana Dillette of the Bahamas ( 32nd ) and Hiu Wai Sherry Tsai of Hong Kong ( 34th ) . Aitken was 3 @.@ 62 seconds slower than Kirsty Coventry of Zimbabwe , who set an Olympic record during the preliminary round with a time of 59 @.@ 00 seconds . Aitken did not make the time necessary to progress to the next round . 
 Former Springfield College student and national record @-@ setter Roy @-@ Allan Burch , the only male swimmer who participated on behalf of Bermuda 's Olympic team , swam in the 100 meter freestyle event after undergoing an irregular training schedule with coach John Taffe necessitated by the recent death of his mother by cancer . During August 12 , Burch competed in the preliminaries for his event , and was placed in Heat 2 . He swam the event in 52 @.@ 65 seconds , placing fifth out of six athletes in the heat , immediately after <unk> Ahmed <unk> of the United Arab Emirates . The heat leader , Jan Roodzant of the Dutch colony Aruba , completed the event in 51 @.@ 69 seconds . Overall , Roy @-@ Allan Burch ranked sixty out of sixty @-@ four athletes . Eamon Sullivan of Australia , the leader of the preliminary times , was approximately four seconds ahead of Burch . Roy @-@ Allan Burch did not proceed to the semifinal rounds . 
 = = Triathlon = = 
 Flora Duffy was invited to participate in the Beijing Olympics based on her performance in the qualification competitions . Participating on the August 18 event , Duffy competed in the women 's triathlon . Duffy swam the 1 @.@ 5 kilometers portion of the distance in 20 : 26 minutes , ranking 41st out of 55 in that portion of the event , behind Luxembourg 's Liz May ( 40th ) by under a second and ahead of Hungary 's Zita Szabó by two seconds . In this portion of the event , Duffy was 37 seconds behind the United States ' Laura Bennett , who finished the swimming portion of the event first at 19 : 49 . Duffy took 33 seconds to make the transition from swim to cycling , the second part of the event , tying with Mak So Ning of Hong Kong at 52nd place out of 55 . Duffy , however , was lapped on the bike leg and was disqualified before reaching the running portion or completing the event . 
 = The World Ends with You = 
 The World Ends with You , known in Japan as It 's a Wonderful World ( すばらしきこのせかい , Subarashiki Kono Sekai ) , is an action role @-@ playing game with urban fantasy elements developed by Square Enix 's Kingdom Hearts team and Jupiter for the Nintendo DS handheld console . Set in the modern @-@ day Shibuya shopping district of Tokyo , The World Ends with You features a distinctive art style inspired by Shibuya and its youth culture . Development was inspired by elements of Jupiter 's previous game , Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories . It was released in Japan in July 2007 , and in PAL regions and North America on April 22 , 2008 . An enhanced version for iOS devices , titled The World Ends With You -Solo Remix- , was released in August 2012 ( pulled in February 2015 due to incompatibility with iOS 8 ; restored in June 2015 ) and for Android devices in June 2014 . A social network spin @-@ off game titled The World Ends With You <unk> Remix- was released in May 2013 for Japan 's Android and iOS Stores developed by Square Enix in collaboration with GREE . The spinoff was shut down in February 2014 due to an increasing lack of interest . 
 In the game , Neku Sakuraba and his allies are forced to participate in a game that will determine their fate . The battle system uses many of the unique features of the Nintendo DS , including combat that takes place on both screens , and attacks performed by certain motions on the touchscreen or by shouting into the microphone . Elements of Japanese youth culture , such as fashion , food , and cell phones , are key aspects of the missions . 
 The World Ends with You received positive reviews , which praised the graphics , soundtrack , and integration of gameplay into the Shibuya setting . The few common complaints were related to the steep learning curve of the battle system as well as the imprecise touch @-@ screen controls . In the week of its release , the game was the second best @-@ selling DS title in Japan , and the top selling DS title in North America . Shiro Amano , writer and artist of the Kingdom Hearts manga , later created a manga based on the video game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game takes place in a fictional version of the Shibuya shopping district in Tokyo , Japan . While everyday life goes on in the <unk> ( RG ) , the chosen dead are brought to an alternate plane of existence called the Underground ( UG ) . The UG is also the venue for the Reapers ' Game . By offering their most treasured possession to enter the Game , the dead ( players ) gain the chance to contest for the prize : to be brought back to life or to transcend to a higher form of spiritual existence . Most of those who choose to transcend become Reapers , the opponents of players in future Games . Lasting a week , each Game is a contest to judge the worth of humanity . Players set out to accomplish objectives under the rules created by the Composer , who is a god @-@ like entity who maintains Shibuya . Another Reaper , the Conductor , tasks other Reapers to obstruct the players ' efforts . Failure to complete a mission will disperse the mind and spirit of the player or Reaper , thus erasing his or her existence . 
 A player in the UG is invisible to the living in the RG , though one can sometimes read and influence their thoughts . The UG is frequented by creatures called " Noise " , which are attracted by the negative feelings of the living . To progress in the Reapers ' Game , players are often required to defeat Noise by killing or " erasing " them . However , each Noise exists in two parallel universes ( or " zones " ) simultaneously , and can only be defeated by two players simultaneously fighting and defeating the Noise from these separate zones . In order to do this , Players are required to form a pact with another Player to survive the Noise . Players receive assignments via text messages sent to their cell phones , and their right hands are imprinted with a countdown indicating the time left in the mission . After a day 's mission is complete , the remaining players find themselves at the start of the next day 's mission , having no sense of the time that has passed in between . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player assumes the role of Neku Sakuraba ( <unk> <unk> , Sakuraba Neku , <unk> Neku ) , an anti @-@ social teenage boy who claims he does not " get " people , and rarely interacts with others . Computer @-@ controlled characters make up the rest of the cast , which includes Players who are paired with Neku . In the first Game , Neku is paired with Shiki Misaki ( <unk> <unk> , Misaki Shiki , <unk> Shiki ) , a teenage girl who takes on the form of her best friend , as her physical appearance was her price of entry for the Game . In the second Game , Neku 's partner is an intelligent and sly teenage boy , Yoshiya Kiryu ( <unk> <unk> , Kiryū Yoshiya ) , who prefers to be called Joshua ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Neku 's final partner is <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , an ex @-@ Reaper who calls himself " Beat " ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Beat became a Reaper to find a way to bring his younger sister , Raimu <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Raimu ) ( nicknamed " Rhyme " ( <unk> , Raimu ) ) , back to life . Rhyme had sacrificed herself to save her brother from a Noise attack . Sanae Hanekoma ( <unk> <unk> , Hanekoma Sanae , <unk> Hanekoma ) , the Producer , bound her soul to a pin from which her Noise could be summoned , and gave it to Beat . The final Game Master , Mitsuki Konishi ( <unk> <unk> , Konishi Mitsuki , <unk> Konishi ) , crushes her Noise form and transformed it back into a pin . 
 Besides the Composer and the Conductor , there are other high @-@ ranking Reapers . For each week of the Game , Game Masters are assigned by the Conductor to lead the opposition to the Players . Of the Game Masters opposing Neku , Sho Minamimoto ( <unk> <unk> , Minamimoto Shō , <unk> Minamimoto ) is the most dangerous . He willingly circumvents the rules in an attempt to supplant the Composer . Participating in the Games with the aim of earning promotions for their performance , the Reapers ' goal is to ascend to the highest form of spiritual existence , the Angels . Angels supervise the Games and if the stakes of a Game are particularly high , they send down one of their own to serve as the Producer . For the three weeks of the game 's story , Sanae Hanekoma is the Producer . Disguised as a Shibuya cafe owner , he guides new players and narrates the " Secret Reports " that are obtained by completing additional missions after completing the game . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game 's story follows Neku over the course of the three weeks that he plays the Game , paired with partners Shiki , Joshua , and Beat for each week , respectively . Neku is confused at first , lacking knowledge of how he died or how he arrived at the UG . As he develops friendships with his partners , he starts to understand the rules of the Game . After the first week , only Shiki is allowed to return to the living , and she promises to meet Neku at the statue of Hachiko . He also recovers his entry fee , which was his memories , except for the events leading up to his death . However , Shiki has become what Neku values most , and she is used as his new entry fee for the second week . During the second week he recalls small details of his death ; eventually , he recognizes that he was shot at by Sho Minamimoto , one of the Reapers he faced during the Game . At the end of the second week , Joshua seemingly sacrifices himself to save Neku from an explosion created by Minamimoto . 
 However , because Joshua did not actually die , the Game was nullified and Neku is forced to replay the game a third time . His entry fee this time is all of the other players , meaning Neku cannot form any pacts and stands no chance against the Noise . However , Beat immediately defects from the Reapers and rejoins Neku . Neku and Beat find that the Reapers and the entire population of Shibuya are wearing special red pins that cause them to think the same harmonious thoughts . Without any missions to complete , the two venture to the fabled " Shibuya River " , which Joshua was looking for during the second week . At the river , they find Megumi Kitaniji ( <unk> <unk> , Kitaniji Megumi , <unk> Kitaniji ) , the Game 's Conductor . Kitaniji explains that he created the red pins in an attempt to remake Shibuya , which the Composer challenged him to do . If he fails , both he ( as his price for losing the Game ) and Shibuya will be erased . 
 At that moment , Joshua reappears and reveals himself to be the Composer . Joshua returns the missing part of Neku 's memory of death : Joshua himself shot Neku , choosing him to be his proxy in his challenge with Kitaniji . Minamimoto , who had been trying to usurp the position of Composer , was trying to kill Joshua in his weakened state as a human . After failing to defeat Neku by using his friends against him , Joshua gives Neku one last challenge : To fire upon Joshua to determine the fate of Shibuya . Neku is too conflicted to make a choice , and is shot down by Joshua . Neku finds himself once again at the scramble crossing , confused by events , but alive this time . 
 The game 's credits show scenes seven days later in the RG . As Neku walks from <unk> to Hachiko to meet Beat , Rhyme , and Shiki , he discusses how the past three weeks have changed him for the better . In a statement directed at an absent Joshua , Neku says that although he will not forgive him for what he has done , he trusts him . Neku then asks if Joshua will be present at Hachiko as well . Secret reports that can be obtained by completing additional missions after beating the game reveal that Joshua , after seeing the change in personality of Neku over the weeks of playing the game , decides to spare Shibuya , now believing the city to be ideal . The game ends with Neku abandoning his headphones , before a title card appears entitled " The World Begins with You " . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The World Ends with You is an action role @-@ playing game , arranged into three chapters based on the three weeks that Neku is involved in the Reaper 's Game , with each chapter further divided by each day of the week . The player controls Neku and his partner as they explore Shibuya to complete each day 's mission . Although most missions require completion within a certain time for Neku and his partner , this timer is not correlated to the passage of time for the player . 
 Shibuya is divided into several districts , some of which may be inaccessible on certain days or blocked by a wall that can only be removed by satisfying the request of a nearby Reaper , such as erasing Noise symbols , putting on a certain brand of clothing , or bringing an item . Neku can scan the area by activating a special pin . This scan reveals the thoughts of the non @-@ player characters in the <unk> and memes , which may help to progress the plot . The scan also reveals random Noise symbols that drift about the area , or in some cases , float around a specific character . The player initiates a battle by touching Noise symbols ; each symbol constitutes one round of battle . Selecting more than one Noise symbol at a time results in a multi @-@ round battle ( referred to in @-@ game as multiple noise " reductions " ) that gradually increases in difficulty with each round , but conversely leads to greater rewards upon success . Altering the difficulty of the Noise and the amount of health for Neku and his partner also alter the benefits conferred . 
 Each district has fashion trends that affect gameplay . By wearing pins or clothing from the more popular brands in that district , items ' effects will be improved ; wearing the least fashionable items will do the opposite , and items from brands in between are not affected . However , the player can increase a brand 's popularity in one district by repeatedly fighting battles in that district while wearing items of that brand . The player can enter shops to buy new pins , clothes , and food items that are gradually consumed during battles to improve the characters ' basic attributes . 
 After completing the game , the player can return to any day in the story and play those events again , keeping the characters ' current statistics and inventory . " Secret Reports " , written segments that reveal background elements of the story , can be unlocked through this mode by completing specific missions during each day . Completing the game allows the player to access " Another Day " from the game 's menus , an additional day of missions that explains certain events related to the main storyline . The World Ends with You has one minigame called Tin Pin Slammer ( or Marble Slash ) that can be played against computer opponents or with up to 3 others via a wireless connection . Tin Pin Slammer is similar to the marble game ringer in that each player attempts to use their pins one at a time to knock the other players ' pins off the gameboard . 
 = = = Pins = = = 
 The World Ends with You features " psych pins " , decorative pins which possess powers that only Neku can activate while wearing them . Psych pins are used for combat , for " Tin Pin Slammer / Marble Slash " , or as trade value for money or equipment . Most pins , particularly those used in combat , can become more powerful as the player accumulates " Pin Points " ( PP ) which can also lead to evolution of the pins into more potent versions . Pin Points are commonly earned through battle , but can also be earned through a period of inactivity with the game , or by interacting with other DS players or randomly if none are found . Each of these methods influences the growth of pins within the game . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 The game 's combat system is called the Stride Cross Battle System . The combat takes place across both screens on the DS , with Neku on the touchscreen and his partner on the top screen , representing the different " zones " of the same local area ; the two characters battle the same enemies that exist in both " zones " simultaneously . Neku and his partner are synchronized during battle ; they share the same health bar so that even if one character does not take any damage , the pair can fail in battle if the other takes too much . A green " light puck " will pass between the characters during battle ; by alternating battle between the character who possesses the puck , damage is increased . The movement of the light puck is determined by the " sync ratio " between Neku and his partner ; the puck stays longer with the character with higher ratios . The player can equip Neku and his partner with clothing that can alter the light puck 's speed . The light puck also has the ability to magnify Neku and his partner 's attacks as long as when they hold the puck , they are not attacked by an enemy and can continue this in a volley . 
 The player controls Neku by performing touchscreen actions based on the currently equipped pins . These actions may include slashing across an enemy , tapping the screen rapidly to fire bullets , holding down on an enemy to inflict damage or shouting into the microphone to cause a full screen attack . Other pins need to be touched to activate them , such as for health restoration . Each pin has a limited number of uses before it must recharge for a certain time . Other pins may only be used a fixed number of times during a series of battles , and do not recharge until the battle sequence is over . Neku can only be equipped with a maximum of two pins at the game 's start ; this can eventually be upgraded to a maximum of six . 
 Neku 's partner on the top screen can be controlled by the player using the face buttons , although players can use options to have the computer assist them . Each of Neku 's partners has a card game @-@ based mechanic ; for example , Shiki 's card game requires the player to match face @-@ down <unk> cards . The partner can make a basic attack after the player navigates through a pathway of arrows to select one of several shown cards using the directional pad or face buttons . By navigating to a card that fits within the card game rules , the player earns a star . Once enough stars are collected , the player can launch a powerful " Fusion " attack using both Neku and his partner through the " <unk> Pin " that appears on the upper right of the touchscreen ( assuming that the player has not rearranged where it 's displayed ) . The player can also help the partner character dodge attacks . 
 = = Development = = 
 The World Ends with You was developed by the same team that created the Kingdom Hearts series , with input from Jupiter , the company that developed Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories . The development of the game started two and a half years before its Japanese release , during the development of Kingdom Hearts II and the end of development of Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories . At that time , Nintendo had announced the DS , but it was not yet on the market ; Square Enix asked the team to make a game specifically for the handheld system . The creative team — consisting of Tatsuya Kando ( director ) , Tomohiro Hasegawa ( co @-@ director ) , Takeshi Arakawa ( planning director ) , and Tetsuya Nomura ( character design ) — were able to experience the DS during the " Touch DS " event in November 2004 . From this demonstration , they had envisioned a version of Chain of Memories in which the card game aspects would be present on the bottom screen and an action role @-@ playing game on the top . As they continued to work on the game , the developers realized that they wanted to use the touchscreen more , to make " a game that can only be played on the DS " . However , they also encountered the problem that by focusing heavily on the touchscreen , the top screen would be ignored . From this , the idea of the dual screen battle system arose . Several other options were explored for the top @-@ screen game , including command @-@ based battles or a music game , but once they reviewed the game from the eyes of the player , they ultimately settled on the card @-@ game approach with the player having the option to control the game if they wanted to . Even with the completion of the Japanese version of the game , the team felt the dual screen system was too much for overseas audiences , and attempted to change the card @-@ game mechanic into a special meter that would fill up with normal attacks from Neku , but this was not completed in time for release . However , the team was able to alter the " information overload " of the numerous tutorials at the start of the game in the North American release , reducing the amount of text presented as well as allowing the tutorials to be skipped . The " Active Encounter " system , the ability for the player to select when and how to go into battle , was developed specifically to avoid the issues of " grinding " that are common with most standard RPG systems . While they included the mechanics of being able to scan non @-@ playable characters to see their thoughts , the team was not able to integrate this mechanic more into the game . 
 In addition to creating unique gameplay , the designers wanted to build the game around a real location . Initially , they had planned to use a large number of locations across the entire world as the setting . They narrowed down the settings to specific cities due to practicality issues . Ultimately , Kando selected Shibuya as the main setting within the first year of development , despite concerns that overseas players would find the setting unfamiliar . The team wanted to make sure the city was represented accurately within the game , and went on " location hunts " onto building rooftops without permission to get photographs . The layout of Shibuya was duplicated for the game , retaining the real @-@ world landmarks while rebranding the names of stores and buildings for copyright reasons ; for example , the 109 Building was renamed to be the " 104 Building " , while one of the busiest Starbucks , adjacent to the scramble crossing , was renamed " Outback Cafe " . The success of the game has led to fans going on tours of the district to match physical locations in Shibuya with those in the game . The selection of Shibuya led to the incorporation of much of the game 's other features , including food , clothing , and cell phone usage . The team initially thought of the idea of using graffiti around Shibuya as the source of the player 's power in the game but had difficulty representing it ; this led to the creation of the psych pins used in the game . 
 The team decided to stay with two @-@ dimensional graphics instead of three @-@ dimensional graphics , believing it would help differentiate themselves from other Square Enix titles as well as better represent their vision for the game . When first approached with the task of creating the art for the game , background art director Takayuki <unk> thought the modern @-@ day setting would be too boring , and opted to use highly skewed and angular images of Shibuya to avoid this ; the rest of the creative team found this approach to fit the game quite well . For combat , the background of the top screen was selected for visual interest , while the bottom touchscreen background was designed to emphasize the gameplay . <unk> was also responsible for the artwork for the psych pins , and used a mix of pop art and tribal designs for the various graphics . Character designs were handled by Tetsuya Nomura and Gen Kobayashi . Character designs were made to match with the real @-@ world Tokyo setting , after which their outfits were designed based on the character 's personality . Kobayashi was also in charge of designing the game 's non @-@ player characters and noted how most designs made it to the final product . Hasegawa was responsible for creating the designs for the Noise creatures , and wanted to have them recognizable as creatures before they decay into skeletons . In keeping with the theme of human emotion in the game , Hasegawa selected creatures that conveyed such feelings , such as wolves and crows . Representation of the Noise in the game required drawing the 2D sprites from several angles to match the action on screen as well as using rotoscoping on pre @-@ rendered sprites , and took several iterations between Square Enix and Jupiter to make sure that the sprites ' art matched the style of game , with Kando making the two @-@ hour trip between Tokyo and Kyoto weekly to check on the progress . 
 The developers knew that for the story they wanted to " throw the player right in the action , with things he had to do without explanation " in addition to creating a sense of urgency and mystery for the player . They developed an initial draft of the game 's plot and gave it to script writer <unk> Hirano and scenario event planner Yukari Ishida to expand on . The returned version was very close to the initial vision for the game 's story . However , there were still difficulties in filling out the story , only achieving some smooth development about halfway through the process , and even then , there were still changes made just prior to creating the master image for the game . Several inconsistencies with the game 's story were found in the final quality checks that had to be resolved . The Square Enix localization team , while translating most of the dialog and interface items into English and other European languages , preserved many Japanese elements to avoid losing the culture of the game . The team was also limited by the size of the dialog balloons used within game , and took several steps to avoid losing the meaning of the story within the game . 
 As The World Ends with You focuses on the character of Neku Sakuraba , in order to create a believable story the developers put a lot of focus on his development , such as how he would feel , what thoughts lie behind his actions , how he interacted with other characters , and how the people around him feel about him . The developers included aspects and daily concerns , hoping that they could be things that players would have to deal with their personal lives and therefore would let them relate with Neku . 
 The Japanese title , translated as It 's a Wonderful World , was not used internationally due to copyright issues . Instead , the game was released in North America and Europe under the name The World Ends with You . The game was officially announced on September 13 , 2006 by Square Enix , and premiered at the 2006 Tokyo Game Show two weeks later . On December 5 , 2007 , Square Enix announced that the game would be released for Europe and Australia in April 2008 , while a similar announcement was made for a North American release on December 17 , 2007 . 
 A special " Wonderful World " edition of the " Gloss Silver " Nintendo DS Lite was created and sold as a bundle with the game as part of its Japanese release . The game 's early plot was adapted into a two @-@ chapter one @-@ shot manga by Shiro Amano , published over two issues of Monthly Shōnen Gangan . In North America , the manga has been released online via the Square Enix Members website , along with mobile phone ring tones . Both Nomura and Tatsuya Kando stated that they hoped they would be given the opportunity to create a sequel to the game . Neku , Shiki , Joshua , Beat , and Rhyme appear in the video game Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance as non @-@ playable characters who are challenged to a task similar to the Reapers ' Game . The cameos are the first non @-@ Disney and non @-@ Final Fantasy characters to appear in the Kingdom Hearts franchise . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The soundtrack to The World Ends with You was composed and produced by Takeharu Ishimoto . The game 's music encompasses many genres , combining rock , hip hop , and electronica and was designed to fit the various moods of Shibuya . The song appearing during the credits of the game is " Lullaby for You " by Japanese pop artist , <unk> . Vocal artists featured in the game include Sawa Kato , Makiko Noda , Leah , <unk> Tanaka , Mai Matsuda , Wakako , <unk> , Cameron Strother , Andy <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> " Taz " Hicks . The developers used CRI Middleware 's Kyuseishu Sound Streamer , a compression algorithm normally used for voice @-@ overs , to compress the soundtrack and fit more songs on the game media , while replacing full motion video cutscenes with Flash @-@ style animations to save more space . The ADX @-@ compressed soundtrack and cutscene audio on the final version of the game take up approximately one @-@ fourth ( 42 of 128 total MB ) of the game media . 
 The official soundtrack of the game , The World Ends with You Original Soundtrack ( すばらしきこのせかい <unk> <unk> , Subarashiki Kono Sekai Original Soundtrack , meaning " It 's a Wonderful World Original Soundtrack " ) was released in Japan on August 22 , 2007 and is on sale in most English @-@ language iTunes Stores . This release , however , does not include the four tracks unique to localizations outside Japan and is simply a digital version of the Japanese soundtrack . Three of the tracks , " Someday " , " Calling " and " Twister " , were later remixed for the 2012 Nintendo 3DS title , Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance . " Calling " and " Twister " were also remixed for downloadable tracks for Theatrhythm Final Fantasy : Curtain Call . 
 A revised soundtrack , The World Ends With You - Crossover , was released on September 20 , 2012 . It includes the original tracks from the DS game , remixes of " Calling " , " Someday " and " Twister " from Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance , and the remixes from the iOS version . 
 Square Enix , however , released the digital 6 @-@ track EP Subarashiki <unk> + The World Ends with You ( すばらしきこのせかい + The World Ends with You , Subarashiki Kono Sekai + The World Ends with You , meaning " It 's a Wonderful World + The World Ends with You " ) on June 25 , 2008 through the Japanese iTunes Store . This release contains the four songs unique to the international version of the game , along with the English version of " Owari @-@ Hajimari " and a remix of " Twister " . A 19 @-@ track version of the album was given a physical CD and iTunes release on July 30 , 2008 . 
 = = = Solo Remix = = = 
 A port for mobile devices , entitled The World Ends With You -Solo Remix- , was released on iOS on August 27 , 2012 , and on Android on June 26 , 2014 . The Solo Remix version of the game for iOS and Android systems maintains much of the core game features , but modifies the combat system for the single screen . Both Neku and his partner battle on the same screen . The player does not have direct control of their partner , but still must work with the sync puck between the two . As the two attack , the Fusion meter will build up , and eventually reveal a Fusion attack button . Upon striking this , the player is then given a mini @-@ game based on their partner that 's similar to the card @-@ matching game in the DS version : for example , with Shiki , the player is briefly shown the faces of several cards , and then must make matches as fast as possible . The success rate of the mini @-@ game influences the power of the subsequent Fusion attack . 
 In addition to combat changes , the Solo Remix includes redrawn high @-@ definition sprites and is optimized for the Retina display of iOS devices . The original soundtrack and additional remixes of these songs are included . Wireless and social media features are also included : the Tin Pin Slammer can be played with other players via wireless connections , and the game can connect with the player 's social media applications to display these as scanned thoughts from non @-@ player characters within the game . The Solo Remix version features a remixed soundtrack from the original DS release . New assets at the conclusion of the iOS game hint at a possible sequel , but no confirmation has been made by Square Enix . The iOS version of the game was pulled from the iOS App Store in February 2015 due to an issue that prevented the game from working with the iOS 8 operating system launched in September 2014 , though the Android version remains available . It has returned to the App Store in June 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The World Ends with You received positive reviews and has been commercially successful . Game Informer named the game its Handheld Game of the Month award for May 2008 . IGN gave The World Ends with You its Editors ' Choice Award , and named it the DS Game of the Month for April . In Japan , the game premiered as the second @-@ best selling DS title during the week of July 27 , 2007 . Nearly 193 @,@ 000 units were sold in Japan by the end of 2007 . The World Ends with You sold 43 @,@ 000 copies during April 2008 in North America . The first shipment of the game sold out mid @-@ May and a second shipment was made in mid @-@ June 2008 . The game was the top @-@ selling DS title the week of its release and again two weeks later . As of September 30 , 2008 , The World Ends With You has sold approximately 140 @,@ 000 copies in North America and 20 @,@ 000 copies in Europe . 
 Critics praised the departure from other popular titles such as Square Enix 's Final Fantasy and Kingdom Hearts series . Both the graphical presentation and the soundtrack were very well received . Reviews also commented that , initially , the character designs were too similar to previous Square Enix titles and may be off @-@ putting to some though in the Shibuya setting they were " absolutely in their element . " Some reviewers also complained that the Stride Cross Battle System was too complex for new players ; Eurogamer 's review felt the " sink or swim " reliance on learning the complex battle system was a significant stumbling block for the game . GamePro noted that the stylus input was imprecise , often mistaking movement and attack actions . On the other hand , the system was praised for its approach , and for the ability to alter the difficulty of the system within the game . Neku Sakuraba 's character arc was praised by several reviewers , such as G4TV editor Jonathan Hunt , who praised his growth from a " mute teenager " to a " civil human " . 1UP.com 's review summarized that the game is much more than the sum of its parts : " By all rights , The World Ends With You should be an annoying disaster , a bundle of tired gimmicks and trite clichés . Yet somehow all the things that should be unbearable fall into place and create a game that 's far more unique , interesting , and addictive than it has any right to be . " 
 The World Ends with You won several awards from IGN.com , including best Nintendo DS role @-@ playing game , best story for a Nintendo DS game , best new IP for the DS , as the best Nintendo DS game of the year . It was also nominated for other awards , including best original score for a Nintendo DS game and best artistic design for a Nintendo DS game . It was ranked as the tenth best game of the 2000s released on a Nintendo system by Nintendo Power . 
 The World Ends with You -Solo Remix- received a score of 9 @.@ 5 and an Editor 's Choice from IGN , who praised the port and its additions , although criticized its price point and lack of universal compatibility ( the iPhone / iPod Touch and iPad versions of the game must be purchased separately . ) Kotaku also criticized the high price and lack of universal compatibility as ' indefensible ' , though it praised the port for its controls , saying " in many ways , it feels more suited to ( the iPad ) than it ever did on the DS . " 
 = Jeannette Expedition = 
 The Jeannette Expedition of 1879 – 81 , officially the U.S. Arctic Expedition , was an attempt led by George W. De Long to reach the North Pole by pioneering a route from the Pacific Ocean through the Bering Strait . The premise was that a temperate current , the Kuro Siwo , flowed northwards into the strait , providing a gateway to an Open Polar Sea and thus to the pole . This theory proved illusory ; the expedition 's ship , USS Jeannette , was trapped by ice and drifted for nearly two years before she was crushed and sunk , north of the Siberian coast . De Long then led his men on a perilous journey by boat and sled to the Lena Delta . During this journey , and in the subsequent weeks of wandering in the Arctic wastes before rescue , more than half the ship 's complement died , including De Long . 
 The chief exponent of the theory of a warm @-@ water gateway to the North Pole was the German cartographer , August Petermann . He encouraged James Gordon Bennett Jr . , the proprietor of the New York Herald , to finance a polar expedition based on the untried Pacific route . Bennett acquired a former Royal Navy gunboat , the Pandora , and changed her name to Jeannette . De Long , whom Bennett chose to lead the expedition , was a serving naval officer with previous Arctic experience . Although essentially a private venture , in which Bennett paid all the bills , the expedition had the full support of the U.S. Government . Before departure the ship was commissioned into the U.S. Navy , and sailed under navy laws and discipline . 
 Before its demise , the expedition discovered new islands — the <unk> De @-@ Longa — and collected valuable meteorological and oceanographic data . Although Jeannette 's fate demolished the widely believed Open Polar Sea theory , the appearance in 1884 of debris from the wreck on the south @-@ west coast of Greenland indicated the existence of an ocean current moving the permanent Arctic ice from east to west . This discovery inspired Fridtjof Nansen to mount his Fram expedition nine years later . A monument to the Jeannette dead was erected at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis , in 1890 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early Arctic exploration = = = 
 European exploration of the Arctic regions began in the 16th century , with searches for new routes to the Pacific via the Northeast and Northwest passages . The possibility of a third route , directly across the North Pole , was raised by early geographer Richard Hakluyt . The early explorers had little success in finding these routes , but made important geographical discoveries . In time , the search for trade routes became secondary to the prestige objective of reaching the North Pole itself , or at least of registering a " Farthest North " . In 1773 a British naval expedition under Captain Constantine Phipps sought a route to the pole from the Seven Islands , but found the way <unk> blocked by ice . On May 28 , 1806 , the Whitby whaling captain William Scoresby achieved a new record northern latitude of 81 ° 30 ' to the north of Svalbard before being stopped by ice . 
 The prevalent theory of polar geography throughout this period was that of a temperate " Open Polar Sea " surrounding the North Pole . The observable southward drift of Arctic ice was thought to result from the " pushing " effect of this warmer water . According to the historian Hampton Sides , despite the lack of scientific evidence the theory " gathered a logic of its own ... No amount of contrary evidence could dislodge it from the collective imagination " . The fact that all northbound voyages had , sooner or later , been stopped by ice was rationalized through a belief that the undiscovered sea was encircled in a ring or " annulus " of ice which , it was thought , could be penetrated via one of several warm @-@ water gateways or portals . The initial quest for the North Pole thus became a search for one of these portals . 
 After British naval expeditions in 1818 and 1827 – 28 had probed north of Spitsbergen and found no sign of the supposed polar sea , the quest was in abeyance for 25 years . In the 1850s , the search for the lost Franklin expedition generated a rash of incursions into the Canadian Arctic . From these forays , particularly that of Edward Inglefield in 1852 , emerged the theory that Smith Sound , a northerly channel between Greenland and Ellesmere Island , might be one of the fabled gateways to the polar sea . This brought a succession of expeditions to this area : Elisha Kent Kane in 1853 – 55 , Isaac Israel Hayes in 1860 – 61 , Charles Francis Hall in 1872 – 74 , and George Nares in 1875 – 76 . No gateway was found , although both Kane and Hayes claimed , mistakenly , to have seen the Open Polar Sea from a distance . 
 = = = August Petermann = = = 
 The Smith Sound route was not favored by everyone ; among those who rejected it was leading geographer and map @-@ maker August Petermann , from Gotha in Germany , widely known as the " Sage of Gotha " . A firm believer in the Open Polar Sea theory , he believed that the most likely portal would be found by following the Gulf Stream , which swept up the coast of Norway to the unexplored Arctic regions . Peterman thought the current would weaken or even penetrate the protective ice ring , and that a sturdily @-@ built steamer following the course of the stream might thus be able to break through into the supposed polar sea . 
 After two expeditions sponsored by Petermann — the German North Polar Expedition of 1869 led by Carl <unk> , and the Austro @-@ Hungarian North Pole Expedition of 1872 under Karl <unk> and Julius von Payer — had followed separate branches of the Gulf Stream but ultimately failed to break through the ice , Petermann grew dispirited . In the year before he took his own life in 1878 he transferred his advocacy to the Kuro Siwo , a Pacific Ocean current analyzed in the 1850s by the hydrographer Silas Bent . Petermann followed Bent in believing that a branch of the Kuro Siwo flowed through the Bering Strait , and might be powerful enough to create a path to the polar sea . At the time no one had attempted to reach the polar sea by this route . 
 = = = George De Long = = = 
 In July 1873 the U.S. Navy dispatched USS Juniata to Greenland , to search for survivors from the Polaris expedition which had disintegrated after the death of its leader Charles Francis Hall . Juniata 's second @-@ in @-@ command was George De Long , a 28 @-@ year @-@ old graduate of the United States Naval Academy , making his first visit to the Arctic . Ice conditions prevented Juniata from advancing beyond Upernavik ; De Long volunteered to take the ship 's tender , a small steamer named the Little Juniata , in the hope of finding survivors at Cape York , a further 400 nautical miles ( 740 km ) north . 
 The attempt failed ; Little Juniata faced extreme weather conditions , and was forced to retreat a few miles from Cape York . De Long returned to Juniata in mid @-@ August , having found no trace of the Polaris crew ( who had meanwhile been rescued by the Scottish whaler Ravenscraig ) , but the experience had profoundly affected his outlook . Having earlier described the Greenland coast in a letter to his wife Emma as " a dreary land of desolation ... I hope I may never find myself cast away in such a perfectly God @-@ forsaken place " , he returned home captivated by the Arctic . Emma later wrote : " The polar virus was in his blood and would not let him rest " . 
 The abortive Little Juniata mission brought De Long to public notice , and he saw himself as a possible leader of the next U.S. Arctic expedition . He approached Henry Grinnell , the philanthropic shipping magnate who had funded several previous expeditions . Grinnell was not prepared to offer financial support , instead advising De Long to approach James Gordon Bennett Jr . , owner and publisher of the New York Herald and a known sponsor of bold schemes . De Long met Bennett in New York early in 1874 ; the newspaperman was impressed by De Long , and assured him that his Arctic ambitions would have the enthusiastic support of the Herald . In the meantime De Long had applied to the Navy Department for an Arctic command , a request that he was informed would " receive due attention " . 
 = = = James Gordon Bennett = = = 
 James Gordon Bennett Jr . , had succeeded his father as proprietor of the New York Herald in 1866 . He had won renown in 1872 , when his reporter Henry Morton Stanley , sent by Bennett to Africa in search of the British missionary @-@ explorer David Livingstone , cabled that Livingstone had been found . Bennett knew the news value of Arctic exploration ; two Herald reporters had accompanied Juniata , and in 1874 Bennett was helping to fund British sailor Allen Young and his decommissioned former gunboat Pandora , on one of the final Franklin searches . 
 Bennett was interested in Petermann 's theories , and in 1877 traveled to Gotha to discuss possible Arctic routes with the geographer . Petermann thought that as well as providing the best path to the pole , passage through the Bering Strait using the Kuro Siwo would enable investigation of the unexplored , barely glimpsed land mass known since 1867 as " Wrangel 's Land " . He theorized that this land might form part of a transpolar continent , connected to Greenland ; if so , it might provide an alternative , land @-@ based route to the pole should the expedition fail to find a portal to the polar sea . " My idea " , he told Bennett , " is that if one door will not open , try another " . He offered Bennett full use of his maps and charts . 
 Petermann 's advice convinced Bennett that a new American polar venture should go ahead . On his return from Gotha , he cabled De Long requesting him to seek leave of absence from the Navy , and to begin the search for a ship suitable for Arctic exploration using Petermann 's Bering Strait route . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 = = = Ship = = = 
 As no suitable ship was available in the United States , De Long went to England , where he found Young 's Pandora on offer at $ 6 @,@ 000 . The vessel 's Arctic pedigree made it seem ideal , but Young 's hesitancy about selling delayed the purchase until late 1877 . At Bennett 's instigation , Congress passed legislation that gave the Navy Department full control over the expedition ; it would fly the American flag , the crew would be engaged by the navy , and would be subject to naval discipline . Bennett remained responsible for financing the enterprise , and undertook to reimburse the government for all costs incurred . Meanwhile , De Long was released from active duty , to oversee Pandora 's refit in England . 
 In June 1878 , after a thorough overhaul at Deptford on the Thames Estuary , Pandora was sailed to Le Havre in France where , on July 4 , she was renamed Jeannette , after Bennett 's sister who performed the ceremony . On July 15 the ship , manned by De Long and a small crew , sailed from Le Havre to begin the 18 @,@ 000 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 33 @,@ 000 km ) voyage to San Francisco , the port from which the Arctic expedition was to sail . They arrived on 27 December 1878 , and transferred Jeannette to Mare Island Naval Shipyard to undergo further work in readiness for a prolonged journey in the Arctic ice . 
 De Long spent much of the early part of 1879 in Washington , D.C. , promoting the expedition among officials , searching for appropriate crew members , and harrying Navy Secretary Richard W. Thompson for practical support . His requests included the use of a supply ship to accompany Jeannette as far as Alaska . Among the less standard equipment acquired by De Long was an experimental arc lamp system devised by Thomas Edison , which would supposedly provide light equivalent to 3 @,@ 000 candles and thus transform the Arctic winter darkness . Having successfully undergone her sea trials , on June 28 , ten days before her scheduled departure , Jeannette was formally commissioned into the U.S. Navy as USS Jeannette . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 In selecting his crew , De Long 's priority was men with Arctic experience . For his second @-@ in @-@ command he chose Lieutenant Charles Chipp , who had served with him on the Little Juniata adventure . Another veteran of the Polaris rescue mission , George Melville , was appointed as ship 's engineer . Other experienced Arctic hands were William Nindemann , a Polaris survivor , and the ice pilot William Dunbar , who had many years ' experience in whalers . The appointment of the expedition 's navigating officer was problematic ; John Wilson Danenhower , a young naval officer from a well @-@ connected Washington family , was recommended to Bennett by the former president Ulysses S. Grant . Such sponsorship won Danenhower his place , despite a history of depression that had seen him briefly incarcerated at the Government Hospital for the Insane . On Bennett 's request , Danenhower accompanied De Long on the voyage from Le Havre to San Francisco , during which he confided details of his medical history . The navigator 's competent performance persuaded De Long that such troubles were in the past . 
 The ship 's surgeon , James Ambler , was assigned to the expedition by the Navy 's Bureau of Medicine and Surgery , only because he was next on the list of medical officers available for sea duty . Ambler deduced from Danenhower 's medical records that a probable cause of the navigator 's medical lapses was syphilis , but Danenhower 's influential connections ensured that he kept his place on the expedition . 
 Two others from Jeannette 's voyage from Le Havre , carpenter Albert Sweetman and boatswain John Cole , were enlisted , as was the Herald 's meteorologist , Jerome Collins . Dubbed " chief scientist " , he was in charge of the Edison apparatus and of a rudimentary telephone system that De Long hoped to utilize . The remaining places were filled from a long list of applicants ; the cook and steward were recruited by Danenhower from San Francisco 's Chinatown . 
 = = = Problems = = = 
 De Long quickly found himself at odds with the naval engineers at Mare Island , whose estimates of the work required to prepare Jeannette for the Arctic greatly exceeded his own judgement of what was necessary . De Long spent much time negotiating on Bennett 's behalf with the Navy Department , in an effort to reduce costs . In this he was broadly successful , but in other areas he faced setbacks . In April he learned that the navy was unable to provide a supply ship to accompany Jeannette northward , a decision which , he thought , left the fate of the expedition " hanging by a thread " . Bennett eventually resolved this difficulty by chartering a schooner , the Frances Hyde , to carry extra coal and provisions as far as Alaska . 
 Late in his preparations , De Long received orders from Secretary Thompson that , before proceeding with his own Arctic mission he should enquire along the Siberian coast for news of Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld and his ship Vega . The Swedish explorer was currently attempting the first navigation of the Northeast passage ; he was not overdue , and there was no evidence that he was in difficulty . Nevertheless , Bennett sensed the opportunity for a rescue story to equal his Stanley @-@ Livingstone scoop , and persuaded Thompson to issue the order . De Long , unaware that his patron was the originator , protested that this requirement would jeopardize his primary mission , but was forced to modify his plans . 
 De Long was unaware , as he prepared to sail , that the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey was studying the latest <unk> and meteorological data obtained from its research ships in the Bering Sea . The material indicated conclusively that , contrary to Bent 's theories , the Kuro Siwo had no perceptible effect on the areas north of the Bering Strait . The survey 's report went on to dismiss the entire concept of " gateways " and the warm polar sea . By the time these conclusions were published , Jeannette had sailed , and De Long remained in ignorance of this information . 
 = = Voyage = = 
 = = = Towards the Arctic = = = 
 Jeannette 's departure from San Francisco , on July 8 , 1879 , was a popular spectacle , witnessed by large crowds who came from all quarters of the city . The army at Fort Point provided an eleven @-@ gun salute ; in contrast , De Long noted that none of the naval vessels in and around San Francisco made any formal acknowledgement of their sister @-@ ship 's departure , " [ not even ] the blast of a steam whistle " . Bennett , absent in Europe , cabled that he hoped to be present when Jeannette made its triumphant return . 
 The first weeks on the journey northwards were uneventful . On August 3 Jeannette reached Unalaska in the Aleutian Islands , where De Long sought information on Nordenskiöld from the crew of a revenue cutter , newly returned from the Bering Strait . The cutter had no news of him . On August 12 , Jeannette reached St. Michael , a small port on the Alaskan mainland , and waited for the Francis Hyde to arrive with extra provisions and coal . 
 At St Michael , De Long hired two experienced Inuit dog drivers , and took on board a number of sled dogs . On August 21 , after transferring provisions and fuel , Francis Hyde departed ; Jeannette set out for the Chukchi Peninsula on the Siberian coast , to enquire after Nordenskiöld . At Saint Lawrence Bay the Chukchi people reported that an unidentified steamer had recently passed by , going south . De Long then headed through the Bering Strait towards Cape <unk> , where he learned from locals that a ship had called at Cape Serdtse @-@ Kamen , further along the coast . Here , a shore party from Jeannette quickly established from artifacts left behind with villagers that this ship was Vega and that Nordenskiöld 's expedition had therefore safely completed the Northeast passage . De Long left a note of his findings for transmission to Washington . On August 31 Jeannette left , in the assumed direction of Wrangel 's Land , where De Long hoped to establish his winter quarters . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Jeannette initially made good speed northward ; on September 2 she was about 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) from the charted position of Wrangel 's Land , but with ice thickening all around , movement became slow and erratic . On September 4 , from the crow 's nest , Dunbar sighted the known landmark of Herald Island , but the ice now presented an almost insuperable obstacle to progress . De Long raised steam and repeatedly charged the pack , seeking to batter a way forward . The thick plume of smoke from Jeanette 's stack , observed by whalers , was the final sighting of Jeannette by the outside world . 
 The next day , September 5 , the crew caught a brief glimpse of Wrangel 's Land — or perhaps , as De Long surmised , a mirage . Ice conditions now made it impossible to move closer to this tantalizing shore , and De Long made Herald Island his new objective . Shortly afterwards , Jeannette was sealed within the pack , " as tightly as a fly in amber " according to historian Leonard Guttridge . Herald Island was still about 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) away ; a sled party under Chipp set off across the ice , to investigate the possibility of a winter harbor should the ship regain maneuverability . Chipp 's party was unable to get closer to the island than 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ) , before the volatile ice conditions forced their return to the ship . De Long still hoped for a change in the weather that would release them from the ice , writing in his journal : " I am told that in the later part of September and early part of October there is experienced in these latitudes quite an Indian Summer " . The following weeks brought no increase in temperature , and De Long reluctantly accepted that Jeannette was trapped for the winter . 
 = = = Drifting = = = 
 The initial direction of the ship 's drift was haphazard , back and forth — on October 3 , nearly a month after Jeannette was first trapped , Herald Island was still in sight . As October developed , the direction of drift shifted to the northwest , and it became apparent to de Long that " Wrangel 's Land " was not after all a land mass , but was a relatively small island . At the same time , analyses of sea currents , salinity and temperature provided data confirming the Geodetic Survey 's findings , by then known in Washington , that the Kuro Siwo had no effect north of the Bering Strait . The vista of endless ice surrounding the ship raised profound doubts about the entire concept of the Open Polar Sea . 
 Amid the boredom of the largely <unk> drift , the crew ate well ; ship 's stores were boosted by regular hunting parties which brought a harvest of seal and polar bear meat . In late October , as winter approached , De Long ordered the Edison arc lighting system erected , but the generating mechanism failed to produce even the dimmest of lights , and the apparatus was swiftly abandoned , along with the equally ineffective telephone system . Christmas 1879 , and the start of the new year , were celebrated without great joy ; De Long wrote of Christmas as " the dreariest day of my life , and it is certainly the dreariest part of the world " . 
 On January 19 , 1880 , Jeannette 's hull was breached by the ice , and she began to take in water rapidly . De Long prepared to abandon ship , but she was saved by the actions of Nindemann and Sweetman , who waded into the freezing water in the hold and <unk> the inflow by stuffing whatever materials were available into the breaches . Melville used elements of the discarded Edison apparatus to build a mechanical pumping system , and the problem was largely resolved by the construction of a new watertight bulkhead . De Long noted in his journal that the efforts of Nindemann and Sweetman were worthy of recommendation for the Medal of Honor . 
 For months on end Jeannette hardly moved at all ; De Long recorded on March 2 that their position was almost precisely what it had been three months earlier . On May 5 , the ship passed to the west of the 180 ° meridian , but two months later had retreated back to the other side of the line . The summer brought no relief ; although it briefly seemed possible in August that Jeannette might break free and find open water , this proved a false hope . The condition of Danenhower was a further source of anxiety . His syphilis began to take toll of his body , particularly his left eye which , despite Ambler 's repeated operations — stoically endured , given the lack of anesthetic — left the navigator largely incapacitated and unable to perform his duties . On the last day of 1880 De Long wrote in his journal : " I begin the new year by turning over a new leaf , and I hope to God we are turning over a new leaf in our book of luck " . 
 = = = Crushed = = = 
 At the beginning of 1881 De Long noted that , after 16 months , Jeannette was still only 220 nautical miles ( 410 km ; 250 mi ) from the point where she had been trapped . He wrote : " We are drifting about like a modern Flying Dutchman ... thirty @-@ three people are wearing out their lives and souls " . On May 16 an island was sighted , followed almost immediately by another — the first land seen for well over a year . " There is something then beside ice in the world ! " , wrote De Long . They were in uncharted seas , so these islands were discoveries . De Long named the first " Henrietta Island " , after Bennett 's mother , and the second " Jeannette Island " . A sled party under Melville was despatched to Henrietta Island , to claim the territories for the United States . 
 At around this time , the revenue cutter Thomas L. Corwin was in Alaskan waters , seeking news of De Long 's expedition . Corwin 's captain , Calvin Hooper , heard stories of a shipwreck in the far north , and set off to investigate . For five weeks he circled the Bering Sea ; encounters with locals convinced him that the wreck was not that of Jeannette . On June 16 , 1881 , another relief vessel , USS Rodgers left San Francisco , but was destroyed by fire in Saint Lawrence Bay in November . 
 On board Jeannette , the discovery of the islands had raised De Long 's spirits — the expedition would , wherever the drift took it , have some concrete geographical achievement to its credit . The onset of the brief Arctic summer brought fresh hopes that Jeannette would at last be released from the ice , and on June 11 she was briefly free , afloat in a small pool . However , the next day the ice returned with renewed force , which battered the ship and finally penetrated the hull beyond repair . De Long supervised an orderly evacuation of men , dogs , equipment and provisions . On the evening of June 12 , 1881 , Jeannette sank , her final recorded position being 77 ° 15N , 155 ° E , around 300 nautical miles ( 560 km ; 350 mi ) from the Siberian coast . 
 = = = Ice journey = = = 
 De Long 's general plan was to march with dogs and sleds to the New Siberian Islands , somewhere to the south , and then use the boats to carry his party to the Siberian mainland . According to Petermann 's maps his intended landfall , the Lena Delta , was studded with settlements that would provide them with shelter and safety . By June 25 , after a week 's hard traveling on the ice , the northward drift had nullified their progress ; they were further from land then they had been when they set out . When the direction of the ice shifted , the party was finally able to advance in the right direction , but the going was slow and difficult . Part of the problem lay with the dogs who , after nearly two years of relative idleness , were either lethargic or quarrelsome , unable to work in harness . Some of the worst offenders were shot for food . On July 12 , land appeared to the south ; fleetingly , De Long thought this was part of the New Siberian Islands , but it was another uncharted island . When the party reached it on July 29 , De Long named it Bennett Island , and called the point of landing " Cape Emma " , after his wife . Meanwhile , hundreds of miles to the east , the Corwin had given up on its rescue mission . After months of searching vainly for definite news or traces of Jeannette , Hooper had concluded that the vessel was lost , and headed back to San Francisco . 
 After a week 's rest , the party departed Bennett Island on August 6 , leaving a message in a rock cairn . The ice was now too loose for sled travel , so the party transferred to the boats . Having no further use for the dogs , De Long ordered them shot . The general direction of the ice flow carried the party south @-@ west , and on August 20 the most easterly of the New Siberian Islands , Novaya Sibir , was in sight . For the first time since moving away from Herald Island nearly two years previously , they were in the charted world . De Long steered the boats through the channel between Novaya Sibir and <unk> Island , before skirting the southern coast of <unk> Island and beginning the final stage of the journey , across the open sea to the Lena Delta . Their last halt , on September 10 , was on the tiny <unk> Island , less than 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) from the Siberian coast . 
 = = Lena Delta = = 
 = = = Storm and landfall = = = 
 The boats left <unk> Island early in the morning of September 12 , in fair weather . Thirteen men were with De Long in the large cutter , Chipp with seven others took the smaller cutter , while Melville and ten men sailed in the whaleboat . Danenhower , who outranked Melville , complained bitterly to De Long about being placed under the engineer 's command , but De Long replied that Danenhower was unfit for duty , a view confirmed by Ambler . De Long instructed that the boats should each aim for a point indicated as " Cape Barkin " on the Petermann map ; if they became separated , and landed in different areas , the parties should rendezvous at Bulun , a sizeable settlement about 100 miles ( 160 km ) from the coast . 
 The boats made good progress through the morning , and Melville initially thought they might strike land after a single night at sea . In the afternoon the weather worsened ; the boats separated and lost sight of each other . De Long used a sea anchor to stabilize his craft in the ferocious seas , and despite having his sail torn away by the wind , managed to hold a course to the west . The storm had largely subsided by the morning of September 14 , but progress was erratic in the absence of the sail , and it was three more days before the cutter ran aground at the most northerly limit of the Lena Delta . De Long and his crew waded ashore , carrying their provisions from the boat , and prepared for a long foot journey . Based on their map , the nearest settlement appeared to lie 95 miles ( 153 km ) away . De Long thought their rations would last for three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half days . 
 In the whaleboat , Melville had , like De Long , ridden out the storm by means of a sea anchor . The boat 's course was far to the south of De Long 's ; they finally reached land at one of the main mouths of the Lena , and were able to navigate upriver . Within a few days they encountered a native fishing camp , and by September 25 had reached the settlement of <unk> . Chipp 's cutter never reached land ; overwhelmed by the storm , it foundered , with the loss of all eight on board . 
 = = = De Long party = = = 
 The De Long party found no immediate sign at their landing @-@ place of any human habitation , and had only a sketchy idea of where they were — Petermann 's map provided few useful details . On September 19 , having buried their non @-@ essential possessions in a mound marked by a tent pole , they set out in search of settlements . Progress was hampered by the poor physical condition of the men , in particular Eriksen , who was badly affected by frostbite . On September 21 they halted at two empty huts , probably part of a hunting camp , where Alexey raised spirits by shooting a deer to replenish their dwindling food stocks . De Long allowed his exhausted party several days ' rest before resuming the march . 
 On September 28 the party found a large hut , with signs of recent occupation – edible food in the store , and moccasin tracks in the snow . When searches in the locality brought no sign of people , De Long decided to move on . By October 4 , Eriksen could not continue ; the party halted at another abandoned hut where , on October 6 , Eriksen died . On October 9 , with the condition of several men worsening , De Long decided to send two of the fittest in the group , Nindemann and Noros , to seek help . Ambler was offered the opportunity to go with them , but felt that his duty as a doctor required him to stay with the main body . 
 For the next week De Long 's party struggled on , sometimes making barely a mile a day . Although they jettisoned more of their possessions on the way , De Long insisted on carrying his maps and journals . His entry for October 10 recorded that there was " nothing for supper but a spoonful of glycerine " . A few days later Alexey , the group 's principal hunter , shot a ptarmigan which provided soup . But Alexey was weakening , and on October 17 he died . On October 20 , trapped by the weather and without supplies , the party came to a final halt . Throughout the march De Long had written up his journal each day , but after October 20 his entries became intermittent , largely limited to terse statements of the dying and the dead . He noted the deaths of <unk> and Lee on October 21 , Iverson on the 28th , Dressler on the 29th . His last entry , dated October 30 , records the deaths of Boyd and <unk> and ends " Mr Collins dying " . 
 = = = Melville , Nindemann , Noros = = = 
 After resting at <unk> , Melville 's group moved out , aiming for the agreed rendezvous at Bulun . On September 19 they encountered native Tungus huntsmen , who led the party first to the tiny settlement of Little <unk> , and then on to the larger village of <unk> . Here , locals advised them that they would have to wait for the river to freeze before attempting to reach Bulun . 
 After several weeks , Melville learned from a Russian traveler that two Americans were recuperating at Bulun . Weather conditions were now suitable for travel , so Melville hired a pair of expert local dog drivers to take him to Bulun . He left Danenhower in charge , with instructions to lead the party to Bulun as soon as practicable , and from there to proceed as best he could to Yakutsk , a large city hundreds of miles to the south . Melville arrived in Bulun on November 3 , where he found Nindemann and Noros , weak but recovering . From them , Melville learned of De Long 's plight and his urgent need for rescue . The pair had endured a harrowing experience since leaving De Long nearly a month previously . They had struggled for ten days , sleeping in improvised shelters and eating what they could catch or shoot . In this fashion they reached a small , abandoned camp which they later learned was named <unk> . Here , they had been found by a nomadic band of Yakut hunters , who had taken them to a large camp at <unk> @-@ Surt . To their great frustration they were unable to make the <unk> understand that they were shipwrecked mariners whose comrades were in dire straits . They did manage to convey their desire to reach Bulun , and were taken there by sled , arriving on October 29 a few days before Melville joined them there . 
 = = = Searches = = = 
 From Bulun , Melville sent messages to Washington and the Herald , advising them of Jeannette 's loss and listing the survivors and missing parties . On November 5 he set out with two local guides , using rough maps supplied by Nindemann and Noros , to begin his search for De Long . At the village of North Bulun , natives brought him notes left by De Long 's party in cairns . One note directed Melville to the cache of logbooks and instruments that De Long had buried at his landing @-@ place . Although now convinced that De Long and his comrades must have died , Melville continued the search , but the encroaching Arctic winter meant that he could do no more that season . He returned to Bulun at the end of November , and then traveled on to Yakutsk to be reunited with the other Jeannette survivors . 
 In January 1882 , while most of the survivors began their long journey home , Melville , Nindemann and James Bartlett prepared to head a new search in the delta when weather allowed . They left Yakutsk on January 16 , and resumed their search when the thaw began in mid @-@ March . Beginning at the spot where Nindemann and Noros had left De Long the previous October , Melville began a systematic examination of the area . On March 23 he found Alexey 's hunting rifle and , nearby , the remains of a camp . The team found further artifacts , a frozen human arm protruding from the snow , and finally De Long 's journal . From this they learned the story of the party 's final days . 
 Soon , all the bodies except that of Alexey , which was never found , had been recovered . Those of the last three to die — De Long , Ambler and Ah Sam — were some distance from the rest , where they had evidently attempted to set up a final camp on higher ground . Melville 's party wrapped all the bodies in canvas , and carried them to a hill high enough to be safe from seasonal flooding . There they placed them in a large coffin improvised from driftwood , which they covered with rocks surmounted by a large wooden cross , inscribed with the names of the lost men . Melville 's group left the site on April 7 , 1882 , then spent a further month in the delta , searching without success for signs of Chipp and his crew . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Of the total expedition party of 33 men , 13 returned alive to the United States . The first group of survivors landed in New York in May 1882 , but celebrations were deferred until the arrival , on September 13 , of Melville , Nindemann and Noros . They were welcomed as heroes , given a civic reception , and treated to a banquet at the celebrated restaurant Delmonico 's . Public interest in the Jeannette story had been high since the first news of the ship 's fate had been received from Yakutsk . Bennett had dispatched several reporters to Russia , including John P. Jackson , who had reached the Lena Delta and found the tomb of De Long . In his zeal for a story , Jackson had opened the tomb to search for papers or other records , an act of desecration that Emma De Long described to Bennett as " the bitterest potion I had to swallow in my whole life " . Jackson had also interviewed Danenhower , who made allegations of discord within the party and of ill @-@ treatment of certain officers , particularly himself . 
 A naval inquiry into the loss of the Jeannette convened at the beginning of October , at which the survivors were the principal witnesses . In February 1883 the board announced its findings : Jeannette was a fit vessel for Arctic service ; difficulties such as the late start and the diversion to search for news of Vega were not De Long 's fault , nor was he to blame for the ship 's loss . He had conducted the subsequent retreat in an exemplary manner . Not everybody was satisfied ; relatives of Collins , who had heard during the evidence of trouble between De Long and the meteorologist , did not believe that the whole truth had been told , and termed the enquiry a " whitewash " . In April 1884 a United States House of Representatives Naval Affairs subcommittee reviewed the evidence , and confirmed the findings of the earlier enquiry . 
 In February 1882 Secretary Thompson had despatched naval lieutenants Giles Harber and William Schuetze to the delta to search for any traces of the lost explorers , particularly of Chipp 's party . They were unsuccessful , but in November received orders from the secretary to supervise the return of the bodies of De Long and his comrades to the United States . Weather and bureaucracy delayed them for a year ; finally , in November 1883 the bodies were taken from Yakutsk by train to Moscow , Berlin , and finally Hamburg . Here they were placed on board the U.S. steamer Frisia , which arrived in New York in February 1884 . The funeral cortège was escorted by naval and military detachments to the Church of the Holy Trinity on Madison Avenue for a memorial service . Afterwards the bodies of Ambler , Collins and Boyd were claimed for private burial ; those of De Long and six others were taken to Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx , and buried together there . In October 1890 a large monument to the expedition 's dead was unveiled at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis . Its design is based on the original cairn and cross raised at the burial site on the Lena Delta . 
 A mountain range in Alaska , and two naval ships , were named in De Long 's honor . The three Arctic islands discovered during the expedition bear the name <unk> De Longa ; despite Melville 's planting of the American flag , the islands have always been accepted as Russian territory . Although the Open Polar Sea theory ended with Jeannette 's voyage , the ship 's meteorological and oceanographic records have provided 21st @-@ century climatologists with valuable data relating to climate change and the shrinking of the polar icecap . On June 18 , 1884 , wreckage from Jeannette was found on an ice floe near <unk> ( now Qaqortoq ) , near the south @-@ western corner of Greenland . This proved that a continuous ocean current flowed from east to west across the polar sea , and was the basis of Nansen 's Fram expedition of 1893 – 96 . 
 On 30 September 1890 Congress authorized that suitable medals be struck in commemoration of the perils encountered by the officers and men of the expedition . Alone of the main survivors in the Jeannette drama , Melville returned to the Arctic , where he helped rescue survivors of Adolphus Greely 's Lady Franklin Bay Expedition of 1881 – 84 . Melville 's naval career prospered , and he eventually achieved the rank of rear admiral . He died in 1912 . Danenhower continued in the navy , but shot himself during a fit of depression in 1887 . Nindemann worked as a naval engineer until his death in 1913 . The last survivor of the expedition was Herbert Leach , who became a factory worker ; he lived until 1933 . Emma De Long died at the age of 91 , in 1940 . 
 In February 2015 the Russian adventurer Andrey <unk> announced that he proposed to locate and raise the wreck of the Jeannette . <unk> told The Siberian Times that the vessel was in a known location , in relatively shallow water , " not such a hard task " . The event would , he thought , boost Russia 's deteriorating relations with America . 
 = New York State Route 270 = 
 New York State Route 270 ( NY 270 ) is a north – south state highway in western New York in the United States . It runs through rural and wooded areas of the town of Amherst in Erie County and the town of Pendleton in Niagara County . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 263 south of the hamlet of Getzville . Its northern terminus is at a junction with NY 31 and NY 93 west of the city of Lockport . The entirety of NY 270 is known as Campbell Boulevard . 
 NY 270 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . The route once extended as far south as NY 5 and as far north as NY 104 ; however , it was gradually truncated to its current length as other routes were realigned or extended onto NY 270 's alignment . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 270 begins at an intersection with NY 263 ( Millersport Highway ) in the town of Amherst NY 270 proceeds north through Amherst as Campbell Boulevard , a two @-@ lane commercial street . The route quickly becomes residential and enters the hamlet of Getzville , where it intersects with County Route 45 ( CR 45 ; Dodge Road ) . After CR 45 , NY 270 continues north , immediately crossing under the lanes of I @-@ 990 ( Lockport Expressway ) . After I @-@ 990 , the route continues north along Campbell Boulevard as a two @-@ lane residential roadway through Amherst , entering an intersection with CR 299 ( North French Road ) . 
 After CR 299 , NY 270 bends northwest along Campbell Boulevard as the two @-@ lane residential street through Amherst , with the residences becoming less dense as the route proceeds north . Large fields begin to surround NY 270 through Amherst as the route bends northeast into an intersection with CR 2 ( Tonawanda Creek Road ) . Just east of that intersection is the Duane B. <unk> Memorial Athletic Field , where NY 270 crosses over Tonawanda Creek via a truss bridge . Now in the Niagara County town of Pendleton , NY 270 intersects with CR 60 ( North Tonawanda Creek Road ) . Through Pendleton , the route remains rural , passing homes and large fields as it proceeds north . 
 A distance to the north , NY 270 intersects with CR 96 ( Bear Ridge Road ) . After CR 96 , the route becomes residential once again , entering the hamlet of Pendleton Center , crossing over former railroad right @-@ of @-@ way near Pendleton Town Park . Continuing northward , NY 270 enters the center of the hamlet , intersecting with the termini of both CR 40 ( Beach Ridge Road ) and CR 121 ( <unk> Road ) at the same intersection . After Pendleton Center , NY 270 bends northeast running along Campbell Boulevard through the town of Pendleton as a two @-@ lane residential street . Serving the eastern terminus of CR 32 ( Mapleton Road ) , NY 270 begins bending north , intersecting with CR 6 ( Lockport Road ) . 
 Continuing northward , NY 270 enters the town of Cambria , where it intersects with NY 31 ( Saunders Settlement Road ) and NY 93 ( Junction Road ) . This intersection serves as the western terminus of the NY 31 / NY 93 concurrency and the northern terminus of NY 270 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 When NY 270 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it began at Main Street ( NY 5 ) in the hamlet of Eggertsville and followed Eggert Road north to Millersport Highway . Here , it turned to the northeast , utilizing what is now NY 263 to the modern campus of SUNY Buffalo . While today 's Millersport Highway veers east to bypass the college , the highway originally went straight through the grounds , partially by way of what is now St. Rita 's Lane . North of Ellicott Creek , NY 270 proceeded to Getzville via North Forest and Stahl Roads . At Getzville , NY 270 joined its modern alignment and followed it to Saunders Settlement Road ( now NY 31 ) , where it turned northeast onto Saunders Settlement Road for a short distance to Upper Mountain Road , where it ended at NY 3 outside of Lockport . 
 Both extents of NY 270 were realigned slightly by 1932 . In the vicinity of Eggertsville , the route was reconfigured to follow Bailey Avenue and Grover Cleveland Highway between Main Street and Eggert Road . Near Lockport , NY 270 was shifted southward onto Hinman Road and Ohio Street . The latter change was made as part of a larger realignment of NY 3 through central Niagara County . The realignment of NY 270 near Lockport was short @-@ lived as the route was moved back onto Campbell Boulevard c . 1935 ; however , it was also truncated to end at the junction of Campbell Boulevard and Saunders Settlement Road . NY 270 was truncated again in the mid @-@ 1930s after U.S. Route 62 ( US 62 ) and NY 18 were realigned to follow Bailey Avenue between Main Street and Sheridan Drive ( NY 324 ) . 
 = = = Truncations = = = 
 By 1935 , NY 270 was realigned to bypass North Forest and Stahl Roads by way of a new section of Millersport Highway . In the early 1940s , NY 270 was extended north over Junction Road to meet US 104 at Warrens Corners . Around the same time , NY 263 was extended southwest to Buffalo over NY 270 . Initially , NY 263 overlapped with NY 270 along Millersport Highway ; however , the overlap was eliminated in the late 1940s after NY 270 was truncated to begin at NY 263 in Getzville . Similarly , NY 270 initially overlapped with NY 93 along Junction Road from Lower Mountain Road to US 104 . At Lower Mountain Road , NY 93 left NY 270 and proceeded east toward Lockport on Lower Mountain and Gothic Hill Roads . NY 270 was truncated to the southern end of the overlap c . 1963 . 
 In the late 1970s , NY 93 was realigned to use Junction and Upper Mountain Roads instead . As a result , NY 270 was cut back to its junction with Upper Mountain Road . On November 1 , 2005 , the Niagara County Legislature voted on a measure that , if passed , would allow the county to ask the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to remove the NY 93 designation from Upper Mountain Road , a county @-@ maintained highway , and reassign it to Junction Road ( NY 270 ) and Saunders Settlement Road ( NY 31 ) . The change was intended to eliminate truck traffic on Upper Mountain Road while providing additional capacity to NY 93 . This part of the agenda was passed . NYSDOT obliged to the request in 2006 , rerouting NY 93 as proposed and truncating NY 270 southward to NY 31 . 
 = = = Other developments = = = 
 On December 1 , 2008 , the bridge carrying NY 270 over Tonawanda Creek ( also the Erie Canal ) was closed to traffic to allow construction to begin on a replacement bridge over the creek . The existing bridge was built in 1941 and considered to be structurally deficient . During construction , commuter traffic was detoured onto Tonawanda Creek and Bear Ridge Roads while trucks were instructed to follow NY 263 , NY 78 , and NY 93 around the closed bridge . The new bridge was opened to traffic in July 2009 . NY 270 's intersections with Tonawanda Creek Road ( Erie CR 2 ) and Tonawanda Creek Road North ( Niagara CR 60 ) on the north and south approaches to the bridge were reconstructed as part of the $ 10 @.@ 9 million project . The new bridge is similar to the former , two @-@ lane structure ; however , unlike the old one , it has wide shoulders for bicyclists and includes new sidewalks for pedestrians . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Sirius = 
 Sirius ( / <unk> / ) is a star system and the brightest star in the Earth 's night sky . With a visual apparent magnitude of − 1 @.@ 46 , it is almost twice as bright as Canopus , the next brightest star . The name " Sirius " is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " glowing " or " scorcher " . The system has the Bayer designation Alpha Canis Majoris ( α <unk> ) . What the naked eye perceives as a single star is actually a binary star system , consisting of a white main @-@ sequence star of spectral type A1V , termed Sirius A , and a faint white dwarf companion of spectral type <unk> , called Sirius B. The distance separating Sirius A from its companion varies between 8 @.@ 2 and 31 @.@ 5 AU . 
 Sirius appears bright because of both its intrinsic luminosity and its proximity to Earth . At a distance of 2 @.@ 6 parsecs ( 8 @.@ 6 ly ) , as determined by the Hipparcos astrometry satellite , the Sirius system is one of Earth 's near neighbors . Sirius is gradually moving closer to the Solar System , so it will slightly increase in brightness over the next 60 @,@ 000 years . After that time its distance will begin to increase and it will become fainter , but it will continue to be the brightest star in the Earth 's sky for the next 210 @,@ 000 years . 
 Sirius A is about twice as massive as the Sun ( M ☉ ) and has an absolute visual magnitude of 1 @.@ 42 . It is 25 times more luminous than the Sun but has a significantly lower luminosity than other bright stars such as Canopus or Rigel . The system is between 200 and 300 million years old . It was originally composed of two bright bluish stars . The more massive of these , Sirius B , consumed its resources and became a red giant before shedding its outer layers and collapsing into its current state as a white dwarf around 120 million years ago . 
 Sirius is also known colloquially as the " Dog Star " , reflecting its prominence in its constellation , Canis Major ( Greater Dog ) . The heliacal rising of Sirius marked the flooding of the Nile in Ancient Egypt and the " dog days " of summer for the ancient Greeks , while to the Polynesians in the Southern Hemisphere the star marked winter and was an important reference for their navigation around the Pacific Ocean . 
 = = Observational history = = 
 Sirius , known in ancient Egypt as <unk> ( Greek : <unk> Sothis ) , is recorded in the earliest astronomical records . During the era of the Middle Kingdom , Egyptians based their calendar on the heliacal rising of Sirius , namely the day it becomes visible just before sunrise after moving far enough away from the glare of the Sun . This occurred just before the annual flooding of the Nile and the summer solstice , after a 70 @-@ day absence from the skies . The hieroglyph for Sothis features a star and a triangle . Sothis was identified with the great goddess Isis , who formed a part of a triad with her husband Osiris and their son Horus , while the 70 @-@ day period symbolised the passing of Isis and Osiris through the <unk> ( Egyptian underworld ) . 
 The ancient Greeks observed that the appearance of Sirius heralded the hot and dry summer , and feared that it caused plants to wilt , men to weaken , and women to become aroused . Due to its brightness , Sirius would have been noted to twinkle more in the unsettled weather conditions of early summer . To Greek observers , this signified certain emanations which caused its malignant influence . Anyone suffering its effects was said to be <unk> ( <unk> ) or " star @-@ struck " . It was described as " burning " or " flaming " in literature . The season following the star 's heliacal rising ( i.e. rising with the Sun ) came to be known as the Dog Days of summer . The inhabitants of the island of <unk> in the Aegean Sea would offer sacrifices to Sirius and Zeus to bring cooling breezes , and would await the reappearance of the star in summer . If it rose clear , it would portend good fortune ; if it was misty or faint then it foretold ( or emanated ) pestilence . Coins retrieved from the island from the 3rd century BC feature dogs or stars with emanating rays , highlighting Sirius ' importance . The Romans celebrated the heliacal setting of Sirius around April 25 , sacrificing a dog , along with incense , wine , and a sheep , to the goddess <unk> so that the star 's emanations would not cause wheat rust on wheat crops that year . 
 Ptolemy of Alexandria mapped the stars in Books VII and VIII of his Almagest , in which he used Sirius as the location for the globe 's central meridian . He curiously depicted it as one of six red @-@ coloured stars ( see the Red controversy section below ) . The other five are class M and K stars , such as Arcturus and Betelgeuse . 
 Bright stars were important to the ancient Polynesians for navigation between the many islands and atolls of the Pacific Ocean . Low on the horizon , they acted as stellar compasses to assist mariners in charting courses to particular destinations . They also served as latitude markers ; the declination of Sirius matches the latitude of the archipelago of Fiji at 17 ° S and thus passes directly over the islands each night . Sirius served as the body of a " Great Bird " constellation called Manu , with Canopus as the southern wingtip and Procyon the northern wingtip , which divided the Polynesian night sky into two hemispheres . Just as the appearance of Sirius in the morning sky marked summer in Greece , so it marked the chilly onset of winter for the Māori , whose name Takurua described both the star and the season . Its culmination at the winter solstice was marked by celebration in Hawaii , where it was known as Ka <unk> , " Queen of Heaven " . Many other Polynesian names have been recorded , including Tau @-@ ua in the Marquesas Islands , Rehua in New Zealand , and Ta 'urua @-@ <unk> @-@ papa " Festivity of original high chiefs " and Ta 'urua @-@ e @-@ <unk> @-@ i @-@ te @-@ tara @-@ te @-@ <unk> " Festivity who rises with prayers and religious ceremonies " in Tahiti . The Hawaiian people had many names for Sirius , including Aa ( " glowing " ) , Hoku @-@ <unk> , Kau @-@ ano @-@ <unk> ( also <unk> ) , " Standing @-@ alone @-@ and @-@ sacred " , Hiki @-@ <unk> or Hiki @-@ <unk> ( the navigational name ) , Hiki @-@ kau @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " star of solitary <unk> " , the astrological name ) , Kaulua ( also Kaulua @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> , " flower of the heavens " ) , Hiki @-@ <unk> , Hoku @-@ hoo @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " star which causes the canoe to sail " , a marine navigation name ) , and Kaulua @-@ lena ( " yellow star " ) . The people of the Society Islands called Sirius variously Taurua @-@ <unk> @-@ papa , Taurua @-@ nui @-@ te @-@ amo @-@ <unk> , and Taurua @-@ e @-@ <unk> @-@ i @-@ tara @-@ te @-@ <unk> . Other names for Sirius included <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Futuna ) , Mere ( Mangaia ) , <unk> ( Manihiki ) , Taku @-@ ua ( Marquesas Islands ) , and <unk> ( Pukapuka ) . In the cosmology of the Tuamotus , Sirius had various names , including Takurua @-@ te @-@ <unk> , Te Kaha ( " coconut fiber " ) , Te <unk> , <unk> , and Vero @-@ ma @-@ <unk> ( " flaming and diminishing " ) . 
 The indigenous Boorong people of northwestern Victoria named Sirius as <unk> . 
 = = = Kinematics = = = 
 In 1718 , Edmond Halley discovered the proper motion of the hitherto presumed " fixed " stars after comparing contemporary astrometric measurements with those given in Ptolemy 's Almagest . The bright stars Aldebaran , Arcturus and Sirius were noted to have moved significantly , the last of which having progressed 30 arc minutes ( about the diameter of the Moon ) southwards in 1 @,@ 800 years . 
 In 1868 , Sirius became the first star to have its velocity measured . Sir William Huggins examined the spectrum of this star and observed a noticeable red shift . He concluded that Sirius was receding from the Solar System at about 40 km / s . Compared to the modern value of − 5 @.@ 5 km / s , this both was an overestimate and had the wrong sign ; the minus means it is approaching the Sun . However , it is notable for introducing the study of celestial radial velocities . 
 = = = Distance = = = 
 In his 1698 book <unk> , Christiaan Huygens estimated the distance to Sirius at <unk> times the distance of the earth to the sun ( about 0 @.@ 437 light years ) . 
 The parallax of Sirius was measured by Thomas Henderson using his observations made in 1832 @-@ 1833 and <unk> 's observations made in 1836 @-@ 1837 , and was published in 1839 . The value of the parallax was 0 @.@ 23 arcseconds , and error of the parallax was estimated not to exceed a quarter of a second . 
 Also , there were earlier attempts to measure the parallax of Sirius : by the second Cassini ( 6 seconds ) ; by some astronomers ( including Nevil Maskelyne ) using Lacaille 's observations made at the Cape of Good Hope ( 4 seconds ) ; by Piazzi ( the same amount ) ; using Lacaille 's observations made at Paris , more numerous and certain than those made at the Cape ( no sensible parallax ) ; by Bessel ( no sensible parallax ) . 
 = = = Discovery of a companion = = = 
 In 1844 the German astronomer Friedrich Bessel deduced from changes in the proper motion of Sirius that it had an unseen companion . Nearly two decades later , on January 31 , 1862 , American telescope @-@ maker and astronomer Alvan Graham Clark first observed the faint companion , which is now called Sirius B , or affectionately " the Pup " . This happened during testing of an 18 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 470 mm ) aperture great refractor telescope for Dearborn Observatory , which was the largest refracting telescope lens in existence at the time , and the largest telescope in the United States . Sirius B sighting was confirmed on March 8 with smaller telescopes as well . 
 The visible star is now sometimes known as Sirius A. Since 1894 , some apparent orbital irregularities in the Sirius system have been observed , suggesting a third very small companion star , but this has never been definitely confirmed . The best fit to the data indicates a six @-@ year orbit around Sirius A and a mass of only 0 @.@ 06 M ☉ . This star would be five to ten magnitudes fainter than the white dwarf Sirius B , which would account for the difficulty of observing it . Observations published in 2008 were unable to detect either a third star or a planet . An apparent " third star " observed in the 1920s is now confirmed as a background object . 
 In 1915 , Walter Sydney Adams , using a 60 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) reflector at Mount Wilson Observatory , observed the spectrum of Sirius B and determined that it was a faint whitish star . This led astronomers to conclude that it was a white dwarf , the second to be discovered . The diameter of Sirius A was first measured by Robert Hanbury Brown and Richard Q. Twiss in 1959 at Jodrell Bank using their stellar intensity interferometer . In 2005 , using the Hubble Space Telescope , astronomers determined that Sirius B has nearly the diameter of the Earth , 12 @,@ 000 kilometers ( 7 @,@ 500 mi ) , with a mass that is 98 % of the Sun . 
 = = = Red controversy = = = 
 Around 150 AD , the Greek astronomer of the Roman period Claudius Ptolemy described Sirius as reddish , along with five other stars , Betelgeuse , Antares , Aldebaran , Arcturus and Pollux , all of which are clearly of orange or red hue . The discrepancy was first noted by amateur astronomer Thomas Barker , squire of Lyndon Hall in Rutland , who prepared a paper and spoke at a meeting of the Royal Society in London in 1760 . The existence of other stars changing in brightness gave credence to the idea that some may change in color too ; Sir John Herschel noted this in 1839 , possibly influenced by witnessing Eta Carinae two years earlier . Thomas Jefferson Jackson See resurrected discussion on red Sirius with the publication of several papers in 1892 , and a final summary in 1926 . He cited not only Ptolemy but also the poet Aratus , the orator Cicero , and general Germanicus as coloring the star red , though acknowledging that none of the latter three authors were astronomers , the last two merely translating Aratus ' poem <unk> . Seneca , too , had described Sirius as being of a deeper red color than Mars . However , not all ancient observers saw Sirius as red . The 1st century AD poet Marcus Manilius described it as " sea @-@ blue " , as did the 4th century Avienus . It is the standard star for the color white in ancient China , and multiple records from the 2nd century BC up to the 7th century AD all describe Sirius as white in hue . 
 In 1985 , German astronomers Wolfhard Schlosser and Werner Bergmann published an account of an 8th @-@ century Lombardic manuscript , which contains De <unk> <unk> ratio by St. Gregory of Tours . The Latin text taught readers how to determine the times of nighttime prayers from positions of the stars , and Sirius is described within as <unk> — " reddish " . The authors proposed this was further evidence Sirius B had been a red giant at the time . However , other scholars replied that it was likely St. Gregory had been referring to Arcturus instead . 
 The possibility that stellar evolution of either Sirius A or Sirius B could be responsible for this discrepancy has been rejected by astronomers on the grounds that the timescale of thousands of years is too short and that there is no sign of the nebulosity in the system that would be expected had such a change taken place . An interaction with a third star , to date undiscovered , has also been proposed as a possibility for a red appearance . Alternative explanations are either that the description as red is a poetic metaphor for ill fortune , or that the dramatic scintillations of the star when it was observed rising left the viewer with the impression that it was red . To the naked eye , it often appears to be flashing with red , white and blue hues when near the horizon . 
 = = Visibility = = 
 With an apparent magnitude of − 1 @.@ 46 , Sirius is the brightest star system in the night sky , almost twice the brightness of the second brightest star , Canopus . However , it is not as bright as the Moon , Venus , or Jupiter ; at times , Mercury and Mars are also brighter than Sirius . Sirius can be seen from almost everywhere on the Earth 's surface , with only observers north of 73 degrees latitude unable to see it , and it does not rise very high when viewed from some northern cities , reaching only 13 ° above the horizon from Saint Petersburg . Sirius , along with Procyon and Betelgeuse , forms one of the three vertices of the Winter Triangle to observers in the Northern Hemisphere . Due to its declination of roughly − 17 ° , Sirius is a circumpolar star from latitudes south of 73 ° S. From the Southern Hemisphere in early July , Sirius can be seen in both the evening where it sets after the Sun , and in the morning where it rises before the Sun . Due to precession ( and slight proper motion ) , Sirius will move further south in the future . Starting in the year 9000 , Sirius will not be visible any more from northern and central Europe , and in 14000 its declination will be <unk> ° and thus it will be circumpolar throughout South Africa and in most parts of Australia . 
 Sirius can even be observed in daylight with the naked eye under the right conditions . Ideally , the sky should be very clear , with the observer at a high altitude , the star passing overhead , and the Sun low down on the horizon . These observing conditions are more easily met in the southern hemisphere , due to the southerly declination of Sirius . 
 The orbital motion of the Sirius binary system brings the two stars to a minimum angular separation of 3 arcseconds and a maximum of 11 arcseconds . At the closest approach , it is an observational challenge to distinguish the white dwarf from its more luminous companion , requiring a telescope with at least 300 mm ( 12 in ) aperture and excellent seeing conditions . A periastron occurred in 1994 and the pair have since been moving apart , making them easier to separate with a telescope . 
 At a distance of 2 @.@ 6 parsecs ( 8 @.@ 6 ly ) , the Sirius system contains two of the eight nearest stars to the Solar System ( not including the Sun ) , and is the fifth closest stellar system to ours ( again not including the Sun ) . This proximity is the main reason for its brightness , as with other near stars such as Alpha Centauri and in stark contrast to distant , highly luminous supergiants such as Canopus , Rigel or Betelgeuse . However , it is still around 25 times more luminous than the Sun . The closest large neighbouring star to Sirius is Procyon , 1 @.@ 61 parsecs ( 5 @.@ 24 ly ) away . The Voyager 2 spacecraft , launched in 1977 to study the four Jovian planets in the Solar System , is expected to pass within 4 @.@ 3 light @-@ years ( 1 @.@ 3 pc ) of Sirius in approximately 296 @,@ 000 years . 
 = = System = = 
 Sirius is a binary star system consisting of two white stars orbiting each other with a separation of about 20 AU ( roughly the distance between the Sun and Uranus ) and a period of 50 @.@ 1 years . The brighter component , termed Sirius A , is a main @-@ sequence star of spectral type A1V , with an estimated surface temperature of 9 @,@ 940 K. Its companion , Sirius B , is a star that has already evolved off the main sequence and become a white dwarf . Currently 10 @,@ 000 times less luminous in the visual spectrum , Sirius B was once the more massive of the two . The age of the system has been estimated at around 230 million years . Early in its lifespan it was thought to have been two bluish white stars orbiting each other in an elliptical orbit every 9 @.@ 1 years . The system emits a higher than expected level of infrared radiation , as measured by IRAS space @-@ based observatory . This may be an indication of dust in the system , and is considered somewhat unusual for a binary star . The Chandra X @-@ ray Observatory image shows Sirius B outshining its bright partner as it is a brighter X @-@ ray source . 
 In 2015 , Vigan and colleagues used the VLT to search for evidence of substellar companions , and were able to rule out the presence of giant planets 11 times more massive than Jupiter at 0 @.@ 5 au distance from Sirius A , 6 – 7 times the mass of Jupiter at 1 – 2 au distance , and down to around 4 times the mass of Jupiter at 10 au distance . 
 = = = Sirius A = = = 
 Sirius A has a mass of 2 M ☉ . The radius of this star has been measured by an astronomical interferometer , giving an estimated angular diameter of 5 @.@ 936 ± 0 @.@ 016 mas . The projected rotational velocity is a relatively low 16 km / s , which does not produce any significant flattening of its disk . This is at marked variance with the similar @-@ sized Vega , which rotates at a much faster 274 km / s and bulges prominently around its equator . A weak magnetic field has been detected on the surface of Sirius A. 
 Stellar models suggest that the star formed during the collapsing of a molecular cloud , and that after 10 million years , its internal energy generation was derived entirely from nuclear reactions . The core became convective and utilized the CNO cycle for energy generation . It is predicted that Sirius A will have completely exhausted the store of hydrogen at its core within a billion ( 109 ) years of its formation . At this point it will pass through a red giant stage , then settle down to become a white dwarf . 
