 Sirius A is classed as an Am star because the spectrum shows deep metallic absorption lines , indicating an enhancement in elements heavier than helium , such as iron . When compared to the Sun , the proportion of iron in the atmosphere of Sirius A relative to hydrogen is given by <formula> , which is equivalent to 100 @.@ 5 , meaning it has 316 % of the proportion of iron in the Sun 's atmosphere . The high surface content of metallic elements is unlikely to be true of the entire star , rather the iron @-@ peak and heavy metals are radiatively levitated towards the surface . 
 = = = Sirius B = = = 
 With a mass nearly equal to the Sun 's , Sirius B is one of the more massive white dwarfs known ( 0 @.@ 98 M ☉ ) ; it is almost double the 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 6 M ☉ average . Yet that same mass is packed into a volume roughly equal to the Earth 's . The current surface temperature is 25 @,@ 200 K. However , because there is no internal heat source , Sirius B will steadily cool as the remaining heat is radiated into space over a period of more than two billion years . 
 A white dwarf forms only after the star has evolved from the main sequence and then passed through a red @-@ giant stage . This occurred when Sirius B was less than half its current age , around 120 million years ago . The original star had an estimated 5 M ☉ and was a B @-@ type star ( roughly B4 – 5 ) when it still was on the main sequence . While it passed through the red giant stage , Sirius B may have enriched the metallicity of its companion . 
 This star is primarily composed of a carbon – oxygen mixture that was generated by helium fusion in the progenitor star . This is overlaid by an envelope of lighter elements , with the materials segregated by mass because of the high surface gravity . Hence the outer atmosphere of Sirius B is now almost pure hydrogen — the element with the lowest mass — and no other elements are seen in its spectrum . 
 = = = Sirius star cluster = = = 
 In 1909 , Ejnar Hertzsprung was the first to suggest that Sirius was a member of the Ursa Major Moving Group , based on his observations of the system 's movements across the sky . The Ursa Major Group is a set of 220 stars that share a common motion through space and were once formed as members of an open cluster , which has since become gravitationally unbound . However , analyses in 2003 and 2005 found Sirius 's membership in the group to be questionable : the Ursa Major Group has an estimated age of 500 ± 100 million years , whereas Sirius , with metallicity similar to the Sun 's , has an age that is only half this , making it too young to belong to the group . Sirius may instead be a member of the proposed Sirius Supercluster , along with other scattered stars such as Beta Aurigae , Alpha Coronae Borealis , Beta <unk> , Beta Eridani and Beta Serpentis . This is one of three large clusters located within 500 light @-@ years ( 150 pc ) of the Sun . The other two are the Hyades and the Pleiades , and each of these clusters consists of hundreds of stars . 
 = = Etymology and cultural significance = = 
 The most commonly used proper name of this star comes from the Latin <unk> , from the Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> , " glowing " or " scorcher " ) , although the Greek word itself may have been imported from elsewhere before the Archaic period , one authority suggesting a link with the Egyptian god Osiris . The name 's earliest recorded use dates from the 7th century BC in Hesiod 's poetic work Works and Days . Sirius has over 50 other designations and names attached to it . In Geoffrey Chaucer 's essay Treatise on the Astrolabe , it bears the name <unk> , and is depicted by a hound 's head . This name is widely used on medieval astrolabes from Western Europe . In Sanskrit it is known as <unk> " deer hunter " , or <unk> " hunter " . As <unk> , the star represents Rudra ( Shiva ) . The star is referred as <unk> in Malayalam and has religious significance to the pilgrim center Sabarimala . In Scandinavia , the star has been known as <unk> ( " burning done by Loki " , or " Loki 's torch " ) . In the astrology of the Middle Ages , Sirius was a Behenian fixed star , associated with beryl and juniper . Its astrological symbol was listed by Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa . 
 Many cultures have historically attached special significance to Sirius , particularly in relation to dogs . Indeed , it is often colloquially called the " Dog Star " as the brightest star of Canis Major , the " Great Dog " constellation . 
 It was classically depicted as Orion 's dog . The Ancient Greeks thought that Sirius 's emanations could affect dogs adversely , making them behave abnormally during the " dog days , " the hottest days of the summer . The Romans knew these days as dies <unk> , and the star Sirius was called <unk> , " little dog . " The excessive panting of dogs in hot weather was thought to place them at risk of desiccation and disease . In extreme cases , a foaming dog might have rabies , which could infect and kill humans whom they had bitten . Homer , in the Iliad , describes the approach of Achilles toward Troy in these words : 
 In Iranian mythology , especially in Persian mythology and in Zoroastrianism , the ancient religion of Persia , Sirius appears as Tishtrya and is revered as the rain @-@ maker divinity ( <unk> of New Persian poetry ) . Beside passages in the sacred texts of the Avesta , the Avestan language Tishtrya followed by the version Tir in Middle and New Persian is also depicted in the Persian epic Shahnameh of Ferdowsi . Due to the concept of the <unk> , powers which are " worthy of worship " , Tishtrya is a divinity of rain and fertility and an antagonist of <unk> , the demon of drought . In this struggle , Tishtrya is beautifully depicted as a white horse . 
 In Chinese astronomy the star is known as the star of the " celestial wolf " ( Chinese and Japanese : <unk> Chinese romanization : <unk> ; Japanese romanization : <unk> ; ) in the Mansion of <unk> ( <unk> ) . Farther afield , many nations among the indigenous peoples of North America also associated Sirius with canines ; the Seri and Tohono O 'odham of the southwest note the star as a dog that follows mountain sheep , while the Blackfoot called it " Dog @-@ face " . The Cherokee paired Sirius with Antares as a dog @-@ star guardian of either end of the " Path of Souls " . The Pawnee of Nebraska had several associations ; the Wolf ( Skidi ) tribe knew it as the " Wolf Star " , while other branches knew it as the " Coyote Star " . Further north , the Alaskan Inuit of the Bering Strait called it " Moon Dog " . 
 Several cultures also associated the star with a bow and arrows . The ancient Chinese visualized a large bow and arrow across the southern sky , formed by the constellations of Puppis and Canis Major . In this , the arrow tip is pointed at the wolf Sirius . A similar association is depicted at the Temple of Hathor in Dendera , where the goddess Satet has drawn her arrow at Hathor ( Sirius ) . Known as " Tir " , the star was portrayed as the arrow itself in later Persian culture . 
 Sirius is mentioned in Surah , An @-@ Najm ( " The Star " ) , of the Qur 'an , where it is given the name <unk> ( transliteration : <unk> @-@ <unk> ‘ <unk> or ash @-@ <unk> ; the leader ) . The verse is : " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " , " That He is the Lord of Sirius ( the Mighty Star ) . " ( An @-@ Najm : 49 ) Ibn Kathir said in his commentary " that it is the bright star , named Mirzam Al @-@ <unk> ' ( Sirius ) , which a group of Arabs used to worship . " The alternate name <unk> , used by Johann Bayer , is derived from this . 
 In Theosophy , it is believed the Seven Stars of the Pleiades transmit the spiritual energy of the Seven Rays from the Galactic Logos to the Seven Stars of the Great Bear , then to Sirius . From there is it sent via the Sun to the god of Earth ( <unk> Kumara ) , and finally through the seven Masters of the Seven Rays to the human race . 
 = = = Dogon = = = 
 The Dogon people are an ethnic group in Mali , West Africa , reported by some researchers to have traditional astronomical knowledge about Sirius that would normally be considered impossible without the use of telescopes . According to Marcel Griaule 's books Conversations with <unk> and The Pale Fox they knew about the fifty @-@ year orbital period of Sirius and its companion prior to western astronomers . They also refer to a third star accompanying Sirius A and B. Robert Temple 's 1976 book The Sirius Mystery , credits them with knowledge of the four Galilean moons of Jupiter and the rings of Saturn . This has been the subject of controversy and speculation . 
 Doubts have been raised about the validity of Griaule and <unk> 's work . In a 1991 article in Current Anthropology anthropologist Walter van Beek concluded after his research among the Dogon that , " Though they do speak about sigu <unk> [ which is what Griaule claimed the Dogon called Sirius ] they disagree completely with each other as to which star is meant ; for some it is an invisible star that should rise to announce the sigu [ festival ] , for another it is Venus that , through a different position , appears as sigu <unk> . All agree , however , that they learned about the star from Griaule . " 
 Noah Brosch explained in his book Sirius Matters that the cultural transfer of relatively modern astronomical information could have taken place in 1893 , when a French expedition arrived in Central West Africa to observe the total eclipse on April 16 . 
 = = = Serer religion = = = 
 In the religion of the Serer people of Senegal , The Gambia and Mauritania , Sirius is called <unk> from the Serer language ( and some of the <unk> language speakers , who are all ethnically Serers ) . The star Sirius is one of the most important and sacred stars in Serer religious cosmology and symbolism . The Serer high priests and priestesses , ( <unk> , the hereditary " rain priests " ) chart <unk> in order to forecast rain fall and enable Serer farmers to start planting seeds . In Serer religious cosmology , it is the symbol of the universe . 
 = = = Modern significance = = = 
 Sirius is a frequent subject of science fiction , and has been the subject of poetry . Dante and John Milton reference the star , while Tennyson 's poem The Princess wonderfully describes the star 's scintillation : 
 Several pop songs reference Sirius directly or using the ' Dog Star ' name : 
 The Grateful Dead mention the dog star in the song " Lost Sailor " . 
 The The Alan Parsons Project song " Eye in the Sky " is preceded by an instrumental titled " Sirius " . 
 Sting references the ' dog star ' in many of his songs , including : 
 Why Should I Cry For You - " Under the Dog Star sail , over the reefs of moonshine " 
 <unk> - " Chase the dog star , over the sea " 
 This Cowboy Song - " You 'll be my dog @-@ star shining tonight " 
 French progressive metal band Gojira has produced an album titled From Mars to Sirius , the title track of which describes a spiritual journey to the speculative third star " Sirius C " . 
 Other modern references : 
 Sirius is featured on the coat of arms of Macquarie University , and is the name of its alumnae journal . 
 The name of the North American satellite radio company , Satellite CD Radio , Inc . , was changed to Sirius Satellite Radio in November 1999 , being named after " the brightest star in the night sky " . 
 Composer Karlheinz Stockhausen , who wrote a piece called Sirius , has been claimed to have said on several occasions that he came from a planet in the Sirius system . To Stockhausen , Sirius stood for ' the place where music is the highest of vibrations ' and where music had been developed in the most perfect way . 
 Astronomer Noah Brosch has speculated that the name of the character Sirius Black from the Harry Potter stories , who owns a unique ability to transform into a black dog , might have been inspired by " Sirius B " . 
 Sirius is one of the 27 stars on the flag of Brazil , where it represents the state of Mato Grosso . 
 Vehicles : 
 Seven ships of Great Britain 's Royal Navy have been called HMS Sirius since the 18th century , with the first being the flagship of the First Fleet to Australia in 1788 . 
 The Royal Australian Navy subsequently named a vessel HMAS Sirius in honor of the flagship . 
 American vessels include the USNS Sirius as well as a monoplane model — the Lockheed Sirius , the first of which was flown by Charles Lindbergh . The name was also adopted by Mitsubishi Motors for the Mitsubishi Sirius engine in 1980 . 
 = Brisingr = 
 Brisingr is the third novel in the Inheritance Cycle by Christopher Paolini . It was released on September 20 , 2008 . Originally , Paolini intended to conclude the then Inheritance Trilogy in three books , but during writing the third book he decided that the series was too complex to conclude in one book , the reason being is that the single book would be close to 1 @,@ 500 pages long . A deluxe edition of Brisingr , which includes removed scenes and previously unseen art , was released on October 13 , 2009 . 
 Brisingr focuses on the story of Eragon and his dragon Saphira as they continue their quest to overthrow the corrupt ruler of the Empire , Galbatorix . Eragon is one of the last remaining Dragon Riders , a group that governed the fictional nation of Alagaësia , where the series takes place . Brisingr begins almost immediately after the preceding novel Eldest concludes . 
 Published by Alfred A. Knopf Books for Young Readers , an imprint of Random House Children 's Books , the book sold 550 @,@ 000 copies on its first day of sale , a record for a Random House children 's book . The novel debuted at number one on USA Today 's top 150 bestsellers list . Reviewers criticized the book for its length , while commenting on Paolini 's growing maturity in his treatment of characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Brisingr begins about three days after the events in Eldest conclude . It continues the story of the Inheritance Cycle and takes place on the fictional continent of Alagaësia during a struggle for power as the small country Surda and a rebel group called the Varden attempts to overthrow the larger Empire . They are supported mainly by elves , dwarves , and Urgals , but the Empire is populated with large numbers of humans , who far outnumber Surda and its allies . The Inheritance Cycle focuses on the story of a teenage boy named Eragon and his dragon Saphira . Eragon is one of the few remaining Dragon Riders , a group that governed Alagaësia in past times but were almost destroyed by a Rider named Galbatorix , who took control of the land . Galbatorix 's greatest fear is that a new Rider will rise up and usurp his position as king of the Empire , so when he finds out about Eragon and his dragon , he sends his servants after them in an effort to capture them . Eragon and Saphira are forced to flee from their home , and decide to join the Varden . 
 Brisingr is told in third @-@ person from the perspectives of multiple primary protagonists . These characters include the humans Eragon , Roran , and Nasuada , and the dragons Saphira and Glaedr . The humans Galbatorix and Murtagh return as antagonists , along with Murtagh 's dragon , Thorn . The Ra 'zac return for a minor antagonist role , and Varaug , a Shade , also appears for a main antagonist role . Many minor characters reprise their roles in Brisingr from previous installments of the Inheritance Cycle , including the elves Arya , <unk> , and Oromis ; the dwarf Orik ; the humans Angela , Katrina and Elva ; and the dragon Glaedr . 
 = = = Plot summary = = = 
 Brisingr begins as Eragon , Saphira , and Roran travel to Helgrind , the home of the Ra 'zac , the creatures that had killed Eragon 's uncle , Garrow . There they rescue Roran 's betrothed , Katrina , who was being held prisoner , and kill one of the Ra 'zac . Saphira , Roran , and Katrina return to the Varden , while Eragon stays behind to kill the remaining Ra 'zac and dole out a suitable punishment to Sloan , Katrina 's father who was imprisoned in Helgrind . ( Eragon was reluctant to kill him ) . While he is fighting the remaining Ra 'zac , it mentions that Galbatorix has discovered the name of all names . Eragon doesn 't understand , and ignores the Ra 'zac after it pleads for mercy , and kills him . After consulting the elven Queen <unk> , they come to an agreement on how to punish Sloan . Sloan is condemned to never meet his daughter again . Eragon arranges affairs so that Sloan will regain eyesight in the future , should he repent for his crimes . As Eragon travels back to the Varden , he confronts a hermit in the name Of <unk> ( He is later revealed to be a teacher of the herbalist , Angela ) . Arya the elf had come in order to protect Eragon , as he traveled through the Empire . They have a conflict with a group of Soldiers , meet some spirits as they travel to the Varden . Arya reveals about her association with <unk> and crafts a boat made of grass , whilst Eragon sings a flower for her . Once they return to the Varden , Eragon discovers that Katrina is pregnant with Roran 's child and a wedding is arranged , which Eragon is to conduct . Just before it begins , a small force of enchanted troops attack alongside Murtagh and his dragon , Thorn . The enchanted soldiers had spells cast by Galbatorix that couldn 't allow them to feel pain . King Orrin , King of Surda , discovers a method to kill the soldiers , behead them . Elven spell @-@ casters aid Eragon and Saphira and cause Murtagh and Thorn to flee back to the Empire , winning the battle . After the fight , Roran marries Katrina . The leader of the Varden , Nasuada , then orders Eragon to attend the election of the new dwarf king in the <unk> Mountains . He leaves with much reluctance as Nasuada forced Saphira to remain in the Varden , in order to protect the Varden from Murtagh and Thorn . Eragon travels with Nar <unk> , Leader of the Urgals to Bergan Hold , ancestral home of the <unk> <unk> . They see a <unk> , Nagra and an enormous bear , which Eragon regarded as a threat even for Saphira , on the way . After staying for a brief period in Bergan Hold , where he is shown the forest of stone , Eragon heads to Farthen Dur where the new dwarf king is to be elected . Once among the dwarves in Farthen Dur , Eragon is the target of a failed assassination , found to be the work of the dwarf clan Az <unk> <unk> <unk> , whom the dwarf Orik then forces into exile . Having earned the sympathies of the dwarves , Orik is elected the new king . Saphira arrives to Farthen Dur for Orik 's coronation and reconstructs <unk> <unk> , the star rose which was destroyed in the battle of Farthen Dur . 
 After Orik 's coronation , Eragon and Saphira return to the elven capital Ellesméra to train . There , Saphira revealed from a memory that Eragon 's deceased mentor , Brom , is Eragon 's father ; which Brom asked her to show him when the time was right . Oromis and Glaedr too justify Saphira 's revelation . Glaedr also reveals the source of Galbatorix 's power : Eldunari , or heart of hearts . An <unk> allows the holder to communicate with or draw energy from the dragon it belongs to , even if the dragon is deceased , or a great distance away . Galbatorix spent years collecting Eldunari , and forcing the deceased dragons to channel their energy to him through their Eldunari . Saphira is delighted to learn of the existence of the dragons , although imprisoned by Galbatorix 's dark magics . After training , Eragon visits Rhunön , the elven blacksmith who forges swords for Riders . But Rhunön wouldn 't create a weapon for him because long ago she swore an oath never to create a weapon again after the Fall of the Riders . Also her stocks of the metal , required to forge rider 's swords was completely exhausted . But by deciphering the werecat Solembum 's instructions Eragon is able to acquire the metal he requires , from under the roots of the <unk> Tree . After Eragon 's repeated requests , Rhunön creates a weapon by controlling Eragon 's body . Eragon gives a name to the sword , " Brisingr . " As Eragon 's body itself forged the sword , a special bond between the sword and Eragon had been created , thus making the sword burst into flames whenever Eragon utters Brisingr , even when he does not intend to use magic . Oromis suspects that " Brisingr " is part of the sword 's true name . Before Eragon and Saphira depart for the Varden , Oromis says that the time has come for him and Glaedr to openly oppose the Empire in combat alongside the Queen of the Elves , <unk> . Thus , Glaedr gives his own Eldunari to Eragon . If anything should happen to Glaedr , Eragon would still be able to get advice from him . Then Glaedr and Oromis fly to Gil 'ead , while Eragon and Saphira fly to <unk> , the city that the Varden are laying siege to . 
 Meanwhile , Roran is sent on various missions as part of the military force of the Varden . One of the targets is a convoy of supply wagons guarded by enchanted soldiers that can 't feel pain . The unit suffers extreme casualties , and the commander Martland Redbeard is replaced after losing his hand . During a mission to attack a large enemy force raiding a village , plans made by the new commander , Captain Edric almost cause the operation to fail , but Roran gives new orders and kills one hundred and ninety @-@ three enemy soldiers by himself , leading the Varden to victory . Despite saving the mission , Roran is charged with insubordination and is flogged as a punishment . After the public whipping , Nasuada promotes Roran to commander and sends his unit on a mission . He leaves in command of a group of both men and Urgals to enforce the idea of men and Urgals working together . When an Urgal , <unk> , challenges Roran for leadership of the unit , he wrestles the Urgal and forces him to submit . After returning to the Varden , his squad joins the siege of <unk> , a city in the Empire . As the siege begins , Eragon rescues the elf Arya and departs to find the leader of the city , but discovers that three magicians are attempting to create a Shade . While racing to kill the magicians , Eragon has a vision through Glaedr 's <unk> showing Oromis and Murtagh fighting . Murtagh is using power of several Eldunari , and Glaedr and Thorn fight in the sky . Soon Glaedr is badly wounded . In the midst of the fighting , Galbatorix possesses Murtagh and tries to lure Oromis to his side : when he fails , and after Oromis suffers a seizure , Galbatorix uses Murtagh to kill him and Glaedr is killed shortly after . After the vision , the magicians have managed to create the Shade Varaug . Eragon and Arya fight desperately to slay Varaug . Eragon then distracts Varaug by battling him through the mind . Arya then stabs Varaug in the heart . After the successful siege , Nasuada tells Eragon the Varden 's plans for invading the Empire . Arya and Eragon are now both known as <unk> . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The first two books in the Inheritance Cycle , Eragon and Eldest , sold over 15 million copies worldwide together . Alfred A. Knopf Books for Young Readers , an imprint of Random House Children 's Books and the publisher of the books , prepared Brisingr 's release by printing 2 @.@ 5 million copies in advance , Random House 's biggest initial print run of a children 's book . Paolini said he tried not to let the expectations surrounding Brisingr affect him , stating that " As an author , I found that I can 't really allow myself to think about those things . I actually fell into that trap with the first part of Brisingr . I sat there and I started obsessing about every single word . " He turned away from his computer and began writing on parchment paper instead . The pages were rewritten on a computer document afterwards by his mother . 
 Unlike Eragon , Brisingr features multiple points of view . Parts of the book are written in Saphira 's perspective for the first time in the series . Paolini based the dragon 's behavior and attitude on the pets and animals he grew up around , particularly his pet cats : " I thought a dragon would be like a cat in some ways , that same sort of self @-@ satisfied attitude . " He added that it was challenging to depict scenes from the standpoint of a dragon , but he enjoyed doing it because Saphira " has so many interesting thoughts and opinions . " 
 The Ancient Language used by the elves in the Inheritance Cycle is partly based on Old Norse . The word <unk> is an ancient Old Norse word meaning " fire " , which Paolini found while reading through a dictionary of word origins . Paolini said he " loved it so much , he decided to base the rest of [ the Ancient Language ] on Old Norse . To find more words , I went online and dug up dictionaries and guides to the language . I invented more words based on what I learned and then formed a system of grammar and a pronunciation guide to fit my world . Developing this has probably been the most difficult part of writing the books . " The languages used by the dwarves and Urgals in the book were created from scratch by Paolini . 
 When asked by Sci Fi Wire what kind of challenges he faced while writing the book , Paolini said it was trying to avoid any references to modern items or actions . Brisingr takes place long before the industrial revolution , which Paolini said " limits not only the things my characters use and do , but it also informs their worldview . This constraint extends to more recent words and phrases as well . For example , in Brisingr , I was going to use the description short @-@ order . When I researched its origins , however , I discovered that it was coined to describe modern cooking : a short @-@ order cook . " 
 = = = Split and editing = = = 
 According to its author , Brisingr features a complex story with " weighty moral dilemmas " and " a sheer number of events that gives it a rich narrative . " Halfway through the writing of the book , Paolini realized the story was so complex that it was going to end up being 2 @,@ 000 pages . He decided to split it into two books , and thus the Inheritance Trilogy became the Inheritance Cycle . Paolini revealed this decision in an October 2007 press release , and stated that his development as a writer since Eragon is what caused the book to become so complex . 
 The decision to bring in and then kill a Shade at the end of the book was made when Paolini realized he needed a new ending for the book after it was split up . He was in need of plot points that were strong enough to keep the reader interested through the ending of the book . The point of view of Glaedr and Oromis ' confrontation with Thorn and Murtagh was combined with the Shade battle to further keep the reader interested . 
 The first draft of the book was finished in April 2008 . In a newsletter sent out that month , Paolini said he was busy " chewing [ his ] way through the editing , which has been a surprisingly enjoyable experience this time around . " The hardest part of editing was having to excise material that he spent days and weeks working on . " However , as most any writer will tell you , just because you spent ten days slaving over a certain scene is no reason to keep it in the final manuscript . The only question that matters is whether the scene contributes to the book as a whole , " he said . Michelle Frey , executive editor at Alfred A. Knopf who worked with Paolini on Eragon and Eldest , assisted Paolini as the editor of Brisingr . 
 = = = Title , cover , and audio book = = = 
 Paolini said " Brisingr " was one of the first words he thought of for the book 's title , as it was the first Ancient Language word that Eragon learned in the series , and it holds a particular significance for him . Unlike the first two books in the series , Brisingr has a subtitle : The Seven Promises of Eragon <unk> and Saphira <unk> . Paolini revealed it in a newsletter at his official website , in which he said that it was added " because I felt it suited the story , and also because , in a way , I still view Brisingr and Book Four as two halves of the same volume ; the subtitle is merely the name of the first of these two sections . " 
 John Jude Palencar illustrated the English cover featuring the golden dragon Glaedr . The content of the cover was one of the few things initially confirmed by Paolini before he wrote the book . He had originally planned for it to feature a green dragon , but later indicated that this was affected by the expansion of the series to a four @-@ book cycle . Paolini liked the cover because it reflects that Brisingr is the longest and " most intense entry in the series so far . " The Japanese translation of Brisingr was so large that the publisher split it into two volumes . Since the Japanese did not want the same cover on two volumes , they commissioned Palencar to paint one of the Lethrblaka for the second volume . The Lethrblaka are the Ra 'zac 's steeds and parents . Paolini made drawings based on the book for the deluxe edition of Brisingr , including one with Eragon 's arm and hand holding the sword he receives in the book . The sword , named Brisingr , has flames around its blade . 
 Gerard Doyle provided the voice for the English audio book of Brisingr . In order to help Doyle with this , Paolini recorded the pronunciation of every invented name and word in Brisingr from a list over nine pages long . It was tricky even for Paolini to do this because he cannot " roll [ his ] r 's " properly . Doyle said he prepared for narrating Brisingr by going " largely by physical description . If there are specific details about the voices , I latch onto those as best I can . But if a creature ’ s anatomical features are described , I try to imagine , for example , how the jaw might work ... and then try and adapt that and attach it to something that sounds okay to the ear and is still slightly stranger than normal . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 In March 2008 , a spoiler about the book was released on the Inheritance Cycle 's official website , stating that " In Brisingr , Eragon will meet a god . " In May 2008 , Paolini posted a video message on his website stating that in the book , Eragon will meet " a new , rather terrifying enemy " that " likes to laugh , but not in a good way . " A third and final spoiler was released by Paolini in July 2008 , stating that one of the characters will become pregnant in the book . Excerpts from Brisingr were released both on the official Inheritance Cycle website and on MSNBC , which held an interview with Paolini the day before the release of the book . Paolini toured across ten cities in the North America to promote the book ; his first visit was to New York City on September 19 , 2008 , and his last was to Bozeman on November 22 , 2008 . 
 Brisingr was released in the United States , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , Singapore , and the United Kingdom on September 20 , 2008 , though it was originally supposed to be released on September 23 , 2008 . Nancy <unk> , publishing director of Alfred A. Knopf Books for Young Readers , said the company received " an outpouring of requests from booksellers hoping to host midnight launch parties . We have responded to their enthusiasm by advancing the date , and we know fans will welcome the opportunity to celebrate the publication together . " More than 2 @,@ 500 midnight party events were held in the United States for the September 20 release . A deluxe edition of Brisingr was released on October 13 , 2009 , including deleted scenes , foldout posters , never @-@ before @-@ seen art by the author , and a guide to dwarf runes . 
 Brisingr sold 550 @,@ 000 copies in North America on its first day of an initial print run of 2 @.@ 5 million copies . Both the initial print run and first @-@ day sales were the largest ever for the Random House Children 's Book division . Brisingr sold 45 @,@ 000 copies on its first day in the United Kingdom and was the fastest @-@ selling children 's book in the country in 2008 . In Australia , the book sold 141 @,@ 000 copies in 2008 , making it one of the country 's top ten best @-@ selling books of the year . Brisingr debuted at number one on USA Today 's top 150 bestsellers list . It stayed on the list for 25 consecutive weeks until March 3 , 2009 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Brisingr received mixed to positive reviews , with critical reviewers commenting on the book 's length and Paolini 's growing maturity in his treatment of characters . David Durham of the Washington Post gave the novel a moderately negative review , praising Paolini for his streamlined prose , but said the novel loses focus in the middle . He added , though , that Brisingr " reconnects with the core elements that animate Eragon 's tale " toward the end of the book , and Paolini shows growing maturity during some " quiet " moments in Brisingr , although Durham noted these parts could bore younger readers . Durham also found that Paolini 's new characters are original , and that Paolini added depth to some characters from the previous novels in the Inheritance Cycle . In contrast , Sheena McFarland of The Salt Lake Tribune said that Paolini " hasn 't learned how to create characters that readers can relate to , " although she praised him for strong female characters in Brisingr such as Arya and Nasuada . McFarland calls the last fifty pages " riveting " , but says they are a " paltry reward for trudging through the 700 preceding pages . " 
 Publishers Weekly gave Brisingr a negative review , criticizing the novel for relying on " classic fantasy tropes " , and noting that Brisingr might appeal to younger readers , but older readers might be unimpressed . Voice of Youth Advocates ( VOYA ) reviewer Kathleen Beck criticized the length of the book , accusing Paolini of " plainly [ enjoying ] wandering around in his fantasy world " and urging him to provide a cleaner finish to the series . She further criticized the content of the book , asserting that " there is a lot of action in [ Brisingr ] but paradoxically not much forward motion . " Haley Keeley of The Buffalo News , however , commented that with alternating points of views every few chapters , Paolini " manages to convey the complexity of the situation while offering refreshing new perspectives . " Children 's Literature writer Jamie Hain gave the book a positive review , praising the action scenes , as well as the appeal to both male and female readers . She asserts that it is a " long read " , but it is " worth it for those who reach the end . " 
 = 2003 – 04 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 2003 – 04 season was the 106th season of competitive football played by Arsenal . It began on 1 July 2003 and concluded on 30 June 2004 , with competitive matches played between August and May . The club ended the Premier League campaign as champions without a single defeat – a record of 26 wins and 12 draws . Arsenal fared below par in the cups , eliminated in the FA Cup and League Cup semi @-@ finals to Manchester United and Middlesbrough respectively , and at the quarter @-@ final stage of the UEFA Champions League to Chelsea . 
 Arsenal did little business in the transfer market early in the season due to the financial demands that came with the club 's new stadium project . The main addition to the first team was goalkeeper Jens Lehmann for £ 1 @.@ 5 million ; striker José Antonio Reyes was later purchased in the winter transfer window . Arsenal retained their best players and successfully negotiated new contracts for captain Patrick Vieira and midfielder Robert Pirès . The stability of the squad meant Arsenal were considered front @-@ runners for the Premier League , along with Manchester United , and Chelsea who were taken over by Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich . 
 A strong start to the season saw Arsenal top the league table after four matches . The team 's draw at Manchester United in September marked an unsavoury episode between both clubs : several Arsenal players were charged and fined accordingly by The Football Association for their part in a mass brawl that occurred after the match . In November , Arsenal beat Dynamo Kyiv by a single goal and more impressively scored five past Inter Milan at the San Siro – two results which kick @-@ started their Champions League campaign . At the turn of the year , the team won nine league matches in a row to consolidate first position . In the first week of April , they were eliminated from the FA Cup and Champions League , but by the end of the month had secured their status as league champions , with a 2 – 2 draw against local rivals Tottenham Hotspur . 
 34 different players represented the club in five competitions and there were 15 different goalscorers . Arsenal 's top goalscorer for the third year running was Thierry Henry , who scored 39 goals in 51 games . The Frenchman was given the accolade of PFA Players ' Player of the Year by his fellow peers and the FWA Footballer of the Year by football writers . Although the Arsenal team were unsuccessful in cup competitions , their dominance in the league was regarded by many commentators as a standalone achievement . They acquired the nickname " The Invincibles " , much like the Preston North End team that went unbeaten in the inaugural Football League season . The club was awarded a golden replica trophy by the Premier League once the season concluded and they remained unbeaten for 49 games , setting a new record . In 2012 , the Arsenal team of 2003 – 04 won the " Best Team " category in the Premier League 20 Seasons Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 Arsenal had finished the previous season as runners @-@ up in the Premier League , overhauled by Manchester United in the final ten weeks of the season . The club did , however , retain the FA Cup , with a 1 – 0 win against Southampton . Such was Arsenal 's effective start to the 2002 – 03 campaign , manager Arsène Wenger suggested his team could remain the whole season undefeated in all competitions : " It 's not impossible as AC Milan once did it but I can 't see why it 's so shocking to say it . Do you think Manchester United , Liverpool or Chelsea don 't dream that as well ? They 're exactly the same . They just don 't say it because they 're scared to look ridiculous , but nobody is ridiculous in this job as we know anything can happen . " The team lost to Everton a month after Wenger 's proclamation ; teenager Wayne Rooney scored the match winner , which ended a run of 30 league games without defeat . By February 2003 , Arsenal moved five points clear of Manchester United at the top of the league table , but injuries to key players , not least captain Patrick Vieira , had destabilised the team . Draws in April , coupled with a defeat to Leeds United at home , mathematically ended Arsenal 's chances of retaining the title . Wenger refuted opinions from the media that their season was a failure and said : 
 Of course we want to win the league , but I think the most difficult thing for the club is to be consistent and we have been remarkably consistent . We lose the league to a team [ Manchester United ] who spends 50 % more money every year – last year they bought a player for £ 30m pounds when they lost the championship . They will do the same next year and we [ have ] done miracles just to fight with them . 
 In the close season , Chelsea was sold to Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich for £ 140 million , the biggest takeover in British football history at the time . The takeover was welcomed by journalist Daniel King , who commented the club were better able to " break the Manchester United @-@ Arsenal duopoly " in the league . Arsenal vice @-@ chairman David Dein however was displeased , and quipped that Abramovich had " parked his Russian tanks on our lawn and is firing £ 50 notes at us " , Abramovich was said to have placed a bid for Arsenal striker Thierry Henry , which was turned down at once . 
 Arsenal 's transfer activity in the summer was relatively quiet , given the financial constraints that came with the club 's new stadium project . The club were able to keep the core of its team , successfully negotiating new contracts for Vieira and winger Robert Pirès . German goalkeeper Jens Lehmann was the only major addition to the first team ; he replaced David Seaman who joined Manchester City . Ukrainian defender Oleh <unk> ended his four @-@ year association with the club by joining Wolverhampton Wanderers on a free transfer , while striker Graham Barrett moved to Coventry City . Striker Francis Jeffers , who found opportunities limited in the first team , joined his former club Everton on a season @-@ long loan . Giovanni van Bronckhorst moved to Barcelona on a similar deal , with a view to a permanent transfer at the end of the season . Several young players were acquired from academies abroad , namely Gaël Clichy from Cannes and Johan <unk> , formerly of Étoile Carouge . In January 2004 , Arsenal signed Spanish striker José Antonio Reyes from Sevilla and in April agreed a deal with Feyenoord for winger Robin van Persie . 
 Wenger at the start of the season prioritised regaining the league title : " I feel it is very important in our minds to do this and I know the hunger is strong to do it , " and named Newcastle United and Liverpool , along with Manchester United and Chelsea to be Arsenal 's main rivals for the Premier League . Former Arsenal midfielder Paul Merson asserted that his old club were favourites because they had the " best players … If they all remain fit week @-@ in week @-@ out then they will not be beaten . " Glenn Moore of The Independent wrote of Arsenal 's chances : " They will be thereabouts , but unless Wenger finally puts his faith in youth , and the likes of Jérémie Aliadière , Jermaine Pennant and Phillipe Senderos repay him , they may lack the depth to sustain a title campaign . " Defender Sol Campbell however believed the squad was " strong enough for the league and FA Cup " , but doubted their chances of winning the UEFA Champions League . 
 The club 's home strip remained unchanged from the previous season ; a red jersey with white sleeves , shorts and socks . The new away kit , a retro yellow jersey with a blue collar trim and shorts , was based on the Arsenal strip worn in the 1979 FA Cup Final . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 = = Pre @-@ season = = 
 In preparation for the forthcoming season , Arsenal played a series of friendles across Western Europe . Their first match ended in defeat against Peterborough United of the Second Division ; goalkeeper Stuart Taylor was forced to come off the field after colliding with Peterborough substitute Lee Clarke in the second half . Arsenal then played out a draw against Barnet , where trialist Yaya Touré – the brother of Kolo , was included in the team . In a 2011 interview , Wenger recalled Yaya 's performance as being " completely average on the day " and noted his impatience stopped him from joining Arsenal ; Touré went on to play for Barcelona before joining Manchester City in 2010 . Arsenal undertook a tour in Austria , a year after crowd troubles forced their match in Eisenstadt to be abandoned . Wenger was absent with a stomach upset so assistant manager Pat Rice took charge of Arsenal against SC <unk> on 22 July 2003 ; the team came from two goals down to draw their second consecutive friendly . Rice was pleased with Philippe Senderos cameo in defence and said : " Still some rough edges but he will only get better working with Martin Keown and Sol Campbell . " 
 Arsenal recorded their first win of the pre @-@ season against Austria Wien . Bergkamp capped off a " superb individual display " by scoring the first goal and setting up the second for Jeffers . The final match of the tour was against Beşiktaş , which required security to be tightened given the history between English and Turkish football supporters . Bergkamp scored the only goal of the match in the second half , " a cheeky effort through keeper Óscar Córdoba 's legs " . An Arsenal XI in England two days later faced St Albans City , where they won 3 – 1 . The main squad then travelled to Scotland to play Celtic on 2 August 2003 . Both goals in the one @-@ all draw came in the second half ; the match marked the return of Vieira after three months out with a knee problem . Wenger revealed afterwards that he intended to use the pre @-@ season as an experiment for his defence . He <unk> centre back Campbell with Touré , who for much of last season played in midfield . Wenger was pleased with Touré 's performance against Celtic and said : " He has quality . He was originally a central defender and , because we have kept a few clean sheets recently and he 's played well , I thought we 'd keep him there . " An Arsenal XI travelled to Belgium for a game against Beveren and conceded two goals in the final five minutes to draw the match 2 – 2 . Arsenal rounded off their pre @-@ season preparations with a 3 – 0 win against Rangers on 5 August 2003 . 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = FA Community Shield = = 
 The 2003 edition of the FA Community Shield , an annual English football match , was contested between Manchester United and Arsenal at Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium on August 10 . Lehmann made his first competitive start for Arsenal and Touré continued to partner Campbell in central defence . United took a 15th @-@ minute lead through Mikaël Silvestre , but Henry equalised for Arsenal soon after , from a free @-@ kick . Jeffers was sent off in the second half for kicking out at Phil Neville and no further goals scored meant the outcome of the match was decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out . Goalkeeper Tim Howard saved Van Bronckhorst and Pirès ' spot kicks as United won the game 4 – 3 on penalties . Wenger made reference to Arsenal 's low crowd turnout after the match and suggested it meant there was " less and less appetite " for the Shield . He was unhappy with the league season commencing on the following Saturday : " I would have preferred to have had two more weeks , especially for the French players who were in the Confederations Cup . We certainly were not as fit as Manchester United and know many of our players were behind them fitness @-@ wise . " 
 = = Premier League = = 
 A total of 20 teams competed in the Premier League in the 2003 – 04 season . Each team played 38 matches ; two against every other team and one match at each club 's stadium . Three points were awarded for each win , one point per draw , and none for defeats . At the end of the season the top two teams qualified for the group stages of the UEFA Champions League ; teams in third and fourth needed to play a qualifier . 
 The provisional fixture list was released on 19 June 2003 , but was subject to change in the event of clashes with other competitions , international football , inclement weather , or matches chosen for television coverage . Five of Arsenal 's first eight fixtures were broadcast on Sky Sports , three of which on the network 's flagship programme Ford Super Sunday . 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal hosted Everton at Highbury on the opening weekend of the season . Campbell was sent off in the 25th minute , for a professional foul on Everton midfielder Thomas <unk> . Arsenal , despite their man disadvantage , went two goals up after 58 minutes , before Tomasz <unk> scored for the visitors late on . A trip to the Riverside Stadium to face Middlesbrough a week after ended in a 4 – 0 win ; the first three goals , scored by Henry , Gilberto Silva and Sylvain Wiltord all came in the first half . Three days later , Campbell and Henry each scored as Aston Villa were beaten by two goals . Arsenal continued their perfect start to the season , with an away win against Manchester City on 31 August 2003 . As Campbell was suspended , Martin Keown came into the first team to partner Touré . Although Arsenal conceded first – a " comical " own goal by Lauren and played " the worst 45 minutes that any of their fans could remember " according to journalist Matt Dickinson , Wiltord equalised in the second half , before Fredrik Ljungberg had taken advantage of a Seaman error to score the winning goal . After four matches , Arsenal stood in first position , three points clear of Manchester United . 
 Due to international fixtures , Arsenal did not play another game for two weeks . On the resumption of club football , they faced newly promoted Portsmouth at home . Striker Teddy Sheringham gave the visitors a deserved lead , before Arsenal were awarded a penalty when Pirès was adjudged to have been fouled in the penalty area by Dejan Stefanović . Henry scored , and though their performance noticeably improved in the second half , the game ended in a draw . Portsmouth manager Harry Redknapp complained about the penalty decision post @-@ match and felt Pirès " … was going to get a yellow card [ for diving ] . " The player himself denied accusations that he deceived the referee : " I did not dive and I am not a cheat . That is not the way I play . " 
 A week later , Arsenal travelled to face Manchester United at Old Trafford . Pirès and Wiltord were dropped by Wenger in favour of Ray Parlour and Ljungberg ; Campbell did not travel due to family bereavement . In the 80th minute , Vieira was sent off for a second bookable offence ; he attempted to kick out at striker Ruud van Nistelrooy , which was seen by referee Steve Bennett . With the score 0 – 0 , United were awarded a penalty in the 90th minute , but Van Nistelrooy 's spot kick hit the bar and rebounded back into play . At the final whistle , Van Nistelrooy was immediately confronted by several Arsenal players , which escalated into an altercation between both teams . Six of Arsenal 's players ( Ashley Cole , Lauren , Keown , Parlour , Lehmann , Vieira ) were later charged with improper conduct by The Football Association ( FA ) , while the club were fined £ 175 @,@ 000 , the largest ever given to a club by the FA . Lauren received a four @-@ game ban , whereas Vieira and Parlour were given a one @-@ match suspension . 
 In their next match , Arsenal defeated Newcastle United by three goals to two ; the winner was a penalty scored by Henry . Vieira suffered an injury during the game ; this commenced a period of him being in and out of the side , for two months . Arsenal then faced Liverpool on the first weekend of October at Anfield . In the absence of Vieira , Parlour was on duty as captain , while Campbell replaced Keown in defence . Aliadière was paired alongside Henry in attack . Arsenal went a goal down after 11 minutes , but equalised when Sami Hyypiä unintentionally diverted Edu 's header , from an Arsenal free @-@ kick . Pirès in the second half scored the winner , which maintained the team 's lead at the top of the league table . The Times correspondent Oliver Kay described Arsenal 's comeback as " spirited " and noted a difference with the team , in comparison to the previous season : 
 … recent events have taught them to place substance ahead of style . It may be less attractive to the purists , but there is no doubt that their new rugged approach has given them a more fearsome look . A year ago , they were producing football of a splendour rarely witnessed in this country or elsewhere . This season , with such fluency proving elusive , they have been grinding out results with an efficiency bordering on the Teutonic . 
 A tightly @-@ fought match against Chelsea at home was settled by a second half error by goalkeeper Carlo Cudicini , which presented Henry with his seventh league goal in nine matches . Both teams up until that point were level on points at the top of the table and unbeaten . Wenger noted after the match that Chelsea 's bigger squad would serve them well as the season progressed , but stressed his smaller squad had stability : " We have been together for years and have the comfort of knowing we have won things before . When we are challenged , we become even more united . " Arsenal ended October with a 1 – 1 draw against Charlton Athletic . After 10 games , Arsenal garnered 24 points . The point earnt at Charlton was enough for the team to move back into first position , which had been occupied by Chelsea . 
 = = = November – December = = = 
 Arsenal began November with a trip to Elland Road to face Leeds United . There were no changes to the team from the Charlton game ; for Leeds , Pennant started against his parent club after being granted permission by Wenger . Arsenal 's victory by four goals to one was identical to the scoreline in the corresponding fixture of last season . In a match report for the News of the World , journalist Martin Samuel picked Henry as the man of the match and asserted Arsenal remained the team to beat . Attention soon turned to the North London derby , where Arsenal played Tottenham Hotspur on 8 November 2003 . Tottenham had not beaten their rivals since November 1999 and their last win at Highbury came a decade ago . Kanu was brought into the starting line @-@ up to partner Henry , as Wiltord was ruled out with a calf strain . Arsenal conceded an early goal after Darren Anderton capitalised on a defensive mix @-@ up , but they scored two late goals in what was described as " another stuttering " performance in The Observer . The result put Arsenal four points clear in first , albeit temporary as Chelsea 's win at home to Newcastle United 24 hours later cut their gap to one point . 
 Arsenal did not play another game for a fortnight because of the international football break . On the resumption of club football , they played Birmingham City away from home . As suspensions came into action and there were injuries to first @-@ team players , Wenger was forced to reshuffle his team . Clichy was handed his full debut and Pascal Cygan made his first start of the season , partnering Campbell . Ljungberg opened the scoring for Arsenal inside four minutes and further goals by Bergkamp and Pirès ensured the team won their third straight match of November . By extending their unbeaten run from the start of the season to 13 league matches , Arsenal set a new record . They were then held by Fulham to a goalless draw who became the first team to deny Arsenal from scoring in 46 league matches at Highbury . The Guardian correspondent David Lacey summarised Arsenal 's football on the day as " strong in the string section but short on percussion " and noted they reverted to the pattern of scoring a perfect goal , instead of being efficient . Chelsea 's 1 – 0 win over Manchester United meant Arsenal moved down to second place on the final day of November . 
 Two more points were dropped in Arsenal 's next match , away to Leicester City on the first weekend of December . Henry was absent from the starting team as was captain Vieira . Arsenal had taken the lead at the hour mark through a Gilberto header , but conceded the equaliser in stoppage time . What made matters worse was the dismissal of Cole for a two @-@ footed lunge on Ben Thatcher ; he missed the team 's next three fixtures as a result . Wenger said afterwards : " It looked like Ashley wanted to get the ball but it was a two @-@ footed tackle that was too high , it was a red card and we have to accept it . " A goal from Bergkamp earned Arsenal a 1 – 0 win the following week , at home to Blackburn Rovers . Chelsea 's defeat a day before meant the win for Arsenal was enough to take them back top , a point clear of Manchester United who now lay in second place . 
 Arsenal then travelled to the Reebok Stadium to play Bolton on 20 December 2003 , the setting for where their title challenge " derailed " eight months ago . Although they again picked up just a point , Wenger believed it was a useful one : " Provided Bolton keep playing like that , we will look back at this result and feel very happy . They are as good as a team as we have played . " On Boxing Day , Henry scored twice for Arsenal in a 3 – 0 win against Wolverhampton Wanderers . Three days later , the team played Southampton . The only goal of the match came in the first half : Henry 's through pass found Pirès " who slid the ball beneath the exposed Antti Niemi " . The win meant Arsenal had gone half the season without losing and the team according to The Times had begun to " establish an aura of invincibility " . Arsenal ended the calendar year in second place , with 45 points from 19 matches . They were one point behind leaders Manchester United and three ahead of Chelsea . 
 = = = January – February = = = 
 On 7 January 2004 , Arsenal played Everton at Goodison Park . Wenger made a host of changes : Cygan was recalled in central defence , which meant Touré was shifted onto the right and Lauren was dropped , while Parlour started in place of Gilberto in midfield . Kanu had given Arsenal the lead in the first half , only for <unk> to score a " richly deserved late equaliser " for Everton with fifteen minutes remaining . Manchester United 's victory at Bolton on the same night increased the champions ' lead at the top to three points . Three days after the Everton match , Arsenal hosted Middlesbrough and put on a display Wenger reflected as being one of the best of the season . The 4 – 1 win meant Arsenal moved back top of the league , albeit alphabetically as their points , goal difference and goals scored were identical to that of Manchester United . A week later Arsenal beat Aston Villa by two goals to nil ; both of the team 's goals were scored by Henry . Controversy surrounded the Frenchman 's first goal , a quickly taken free @-@ kick which prompted confusion amongst Villa 's players and brought about a reaction towards referee Mark Halsey , who signalled it was permissible . After 22 games played , Arsenal stood in first spot – two points clear of Manchester United . 
 Arsenal remained unbeaten throughout February , winning five out of five matches . In a home match against Manchester City , Reyes made his first appearance for the club , coming on as a substitute in the second half . He had no part in the winning goal , a " crunching , beautifully judged 25 @-@ yarder " scored by Henry . Arsenal recorded an away win at Wolverhampton Wanderers on 7 February 2004 , their 24th league match , which eclipsed a club record set by George Graham 's team of 1990 – 91 . Wenger in his pre @-@ match press conference played down the record " unless they guarantee [ d ] trophies " . Henry reached a personal landmark against Southampton three days later , scoring his 100th and 101st Premier League goals . The victory moved Arsenal five points clear at the top , although they played one more game than Manchester United . 
 A Saturday lunchtime kick @-@ off against Chelsea saw the return of Henry ; he was absent in Arsenal 's FA Cup fifth round win against the same opposition . Arsenal found themselves a goal down after 27 seconds , but responded with an equaliser in the 15th minute – Bergkamp 's " delicately curving pass " found Vieira on the left side to shoot the ball past goalkeeper Neil Sullivan . The winner came six minutes later : Sullivan misjudged a corner taken by Henry , which allowed Edu to shoot into an empty net . Arsenal 's lead was now seven and it represented " a stronger position than any they held last season " according to Wenger . Touré 's transition into a defender was highlighted in The Times football supplement : 
 Combined with Manchester United 's loss of Rio Ferdinand , Kolo Touré 's emergence as a capable centre half has probably represented a ten @-@ point swing in the Premiership . If Touré and Campbell stay fit , Arsenal should be more than capable of holding on to their seven @-@ point advantage and in Gaël Clichy , they have a promising replacement for Ashley Cole . 
 The final match of the month was against Charlton at Highbury . Arsenal scored twice in the space of the opening four minutes , but by the end were " clinging to their lead like nervous kittens " . After 27 games , the team stood in first position and had accumulated 67 points . They were nine points clear of both Chelsea and Manchester United . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 Arsenal carried their good form into March ; Henry and Pirès scored in the defeat of Blackburn Rovers . It was a laboured performance from the league leaders , one which served a " … reminder of the old maxim that championships are won by teams who can pick up points when they are not playing well . " Arsenal then played Bolton Wanderers at home ; Wenger made one change from the previous match – Bergkamp replaced Reyes upfront . The blustery conditions forced the game to be delayed by 15 minutes , approximately the same amount of time it took Pirès to score Arsenal 's opening goal . By the 24th minute , it was 2 – 0 : Henry 's cross found Bergkamp who shot the ball past Jussi Jääskeläinen at the first attempt . Although Bolton 's performance improved after scoring just before half time , the result was a ninth straight league win for Arsenal and kept them nine points clear at the top . 
 The visit of Manchester United on 28 March 2004 provided a stern test for Arsenal ; it was both clubs ' first meeting since the fiasco at Old Trafford . Cole , injured in the midweek Champions League game against Chelsea was replaced by Clichy in the starting line @-@ up , while Bergkamp was dropped for Reyes . Henry gave Arsenal the lead , with a long range shot that swerved past goalkeeper Roy Carroll . With five minutes of the game left , Louis Saha evaded the Arsenal defence and scored the equaliser for Manchester United . Arsenal came close to a winner in injury time , but for Lauren to have his shot saved . The draw was no good for Sir Alex Ferguson , the manager of Manchester United , who afterwards conceded his team 's chances : " They 'll ( Arsenal ) go on to win the league now – I 'm sure of that . They are playing with great determination … a very strong team , so should win the league really " . In avoiding defeat , Arsenal set a league record of 30 matches unbeaten from the start of the season . They remained in first position at the end of March and were seven points in front of Chelsea , with eight matches remaining . 
 After two cup exits in the space of a week , Arsenal faced Liverpool on Good Friday at Highbury . Hyypiä opened the scoring for the visitors after five minutes , and in spite of Henry 's equaliser just after the half @-@ hour mark , Liverpool led again before the interval . Arsenal responded to what was described as a " pivotal moment " in their season by scoring twice in a minute ; Henry 's second goal saw the player hold off Dietmar Hamann in midfield , weave through defender Jamie Carragher and place the ball past Jerzy Dudek . The striker completed his hat @-@ trick in the 78th minute , after good work by Bergkamp . Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier likened Arsenal to a " wounded animal " after the match and believed Henry was " the man who made the difference … he set the tempo " . Arsenal played out a goalless draw with Newcastle United on Bank Holiday Monday , and five days later faced Leeds United . On a night where Henry scored four goals and was described by his manager as " the best striker in the world " , Arsenal moved to within two wins of regaining the league title . 
 With Chelsea unable to garner maximum points in their next two matches , Arsenal knew before their game away at Tottenham that a draw would guarantee their status as champions . Cole returned for the derby , after sitting out the Leeds match with an ankle injury . Arsenal took an early lead when Vieira finished off a counter @-@ attacking move . <unk> football brought about the second goal , ten minutes before the break . Bergkamp passed the ball to a moving Vieira , who cut it back for Pirès to <unk> . Tottenham replied in the second half by scoring twice – the equaliser a penalty , but it did not stop the Arsenal players celebrating at the final whistle " in front of their supporters ' White Hart Lane enclave " . This marked the second time the club had been crowned league champions at their rivals ' ground , the first in 1971 . Wenger praised his team for their success , telling the BBC : " We 've been remarkably consistent , haven 't lost a game and we have played stylish football . We have entertained people who just love football . " 
 In May , successive draws at home to Birmingham City and Portsmouth left Arsenal with 84 points from 36 games . Reyes scored the only goal of the match against Fulham ; he profited from a mistake by goalkeeper Edwin van der Sar : " The Dutchman tried to go past the Arsenal forward , but instead gifted possession and with it the easiest of open goals . " Arsenal 's final game of the league season was against Leicester City . They conceded the opening goal , but turned the match around in the second half through goals from Henry and Vieira . With 26 wins , 12 draws and no defeats , the team became the first since Preston North End in 1888 – 89 to go through a league season undefeated . Reviewing the match and overall season , Amy Lawrence of The Observer wrote : " Arsenal 's achievement may not make them ' great ' in everyone 's opinion – those who define greatness only by European Cups , back @-@ to @-@ back titles , and triple cartwheels on the way to every goal – but it is staggering in its own right . " 
 = = = Matches = = = 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = = League table = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : Ground : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 The FA Cup is English football 's primary cup competition . It was first held in 1871 – 72 with only 15 teams entering ; the growth of the sport and changes to the competition 's structure meant by the 2002 – 03 season , more than 600 teams took part . Clubs in the Premier League enter the FA Cup in the third round and are drawn randomly out of a hat with the remaining clubs . If a match is drawn , a replay comes into force , ordinarily at the ground of the team who were away for the first game . As with league fixtures , FA Cup matches are subject to change in the event of games being selected for television coverage and this often can be influenced by clashes with other competitions . In the case of Arsenal , all but one of their ties ( fourth round ) was televised to the British audience . 
 Arsenal entered the 2003 – 04 edition as holders of the cup . The team were undefeated in 14 cup ties since their 2 – 1 loss to Liverpool in the 2001 FA Cup Final , and aimed to win the competition for a third season in succession , something last achieved by Blackburn Rovers from 1884 to 1886 . Henry believed Arsenal 's good cup form showed they were " interested " in the competition and hoped their success would continue . The FA Cup was not high in Wenger 's priority list – " The [ Premier League ] and the Champions League are more important , " but he clarified this never meant Arsenal intended to neglect the competition : " You win what you can and go as far as you can . " 
 Arsenal were drawn to face Leeds United away in the third round ; the match was played on the first weekend of January . Wenger made six changes to the team which started at Southampton in the league , one of which Cole replacing Clichy at left @-@ back after serving his three @-@ match suspension . After eight minutes , Leeds went ahead when Lehmann 's goal clearance hit striker Mark Viduka and rebounded into the net . Arsenal equalised through Henry , who converted Ljungberg 's cross from the right on a volley . Additional goals from Edu , Pirès and Touré inflicted a third consecutive 4 – 1 defeat for Leeds against Arsenal at Elland Road . At home to Middlesbrough in the fourth round , Bergkamp opened the scoring for Arsenal , following good play from Parlour . Joseph @-@ Désiré Job however equalised for the away team four minutes after . Ljungberg restored Arsenal 's lead with a shot outside the penalty box and scored a second , direct from a corner . George Boateng was sent off for the visitors in the 86th minute for two bookable offences and substitute David Bentley added a fourth goal for Arsenal , chipping the ball over goalkeeper Schwarzer in the last minute of normal time . 
 In the fifth round , Arsenal played Chelsea at Highbury . Five minutes before the end of the first half , striker Adrian Mutu gave Chelsea the lead , with a shot from 20 yards . Reyes , who replaced Henry in the starting eleven for the tie , levelled the scoreline with a long range effort . He beat goalkeeper Sullivan for pace to score his second , which later proved to be the winning goal of the match . The quarter @-@ final pitted Arsenal against Portsmouth at Fratton Park on 6 March 2004 . Henry opened the scoring in the 25th minute and further goals from himself , Ljungberg and Touré secured the team 's passage into the last four of the competition . Edu was singled out for praise by The Guardian correspondent Kevin McCarra , who enthused over the visitors ' performance : " Arsenal echoed the Ajax philosophy as players swapped position and kept changing the point of attack before the mesmerised eyes of the opposition . " 
 Manchester United were Arsenal 's opponents for the semi @-@ final , staged at Villa Park on 3 April 2004 . Both teams settled for a draw in the league the previous Sunday and given this was for a place in the final , the stakes were much higher . United defender Gary Neville described the game as his team 's " most important " of the season after they were eliminated from the Champions League and he deemed them " too far behind " in the Premier League . Wenger rested Henry to a place on the substitutes ' bench , in mind of the team 's upcoming fixture congestion . Although Arsenal started the better of the two teams , it was United midfielder Paul Scholes who scored the only goal of the game which ensured their progress into the final . 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Red = 
 opponents win . 
 = = Football League Cup = = 
 The Football League Cup is a cup competition open to clubs in the Premier League and Football League . Like the FA Cup it is played on a knockout basis , with the exception of the semi @-@ finals , which are contested over a two @-@ legged tie . Wenger 's tenure at Arsenal has seen him use the competition to field younger and lesser known players , something he and Ferguson were initially criticised for in 1997 . While Ferguson felt it was an unwanted distraction at the time , Wenger said : " If the competition wants to survive it must offer the incentive of a European place . " The winners of the League Cup in the 2003 – 04 season earnt entry into the UEFA Cup , unless they qualified for the UEFA Champions League through their league position . League Cup matches are subject to change in the event of games being selected for television coverage , inclement weather and potential competition clashes . All rounds up until the final are played in midweek . 
 Arsenal entered the League Cup in the third round and were drawn at home to Rotherham United . Wenger handed midfielder Cesc Fàbregas his debut at 16 years and 177 days ; he as of 2013 is still the youngest player to turn out for the club . Arsenal led from the 11th minute through an Aliadière goal , but conceded an equaliser late on which forced extra time . Rotherham goalkeeper Mike Pollitt was sent off for handling the ball in his penalty area ; his substitute Gary Montgomery denied Wiltord from scoring the winner . As there were no further goals , the match was decided on penalties which Arsenal won 9 – 8 in the shootout . Fellow divisional opponents Wolverhampton Wanderers were defeated 5 – 1 by Arsenal in the fourth round ; Vieira , absent through injury in September and October , made his first team return and played the full match . 
 In the fifth round , Arsenal travelled to The Hawthorns to play West Brom . Wenger added experience to the side to complement youth , with Parlour , Edu , Kanu and Keown all featuring . Arsenal took the lead in the 25th minute through Kanu . Lauren 's cross from the right @-@ hand side deflected in the direction of the striker . His header was saved by goalkeeper Russell Hoult , who was unable to deny Kanu shooting the rebounded ball into the net . Aliadière scored Arsenal 's second goal of the match following Hoult 's poor clearance . 
 Arsenal exited the competition in the semi @-@ finals against Middlesbrough . At Highbury , the setting for the first leg , Juninho scored the only goal of the tie . Arsenal ’ s task of progressing was made more difficult after Keown was sent off in the second leg and Boudewijn Zenden doubled Middlesbrough ’ s aggregate scoreline . Though Edu equalised for Arsenal on the night , Reyes ’ own goal earnt Middlesbrough the win . Wenger opined of the result : " I don 't think we deserved to lose ; even when we were down to 10 men we were running the game . " 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = UEFA Champions League = = 
 = = = Group stage = = = 
 Arsenal were drawn in Group B , along with Italian club Inter Milan , Lokomotiv Moscow of Russia and Ukraine 's Dynamo Kyiv . Wenger believed the trips to Eastern Europe threatened his team 's chances of winning the Premier League : " The other English teams have more comfortable groups than we do . It is tough to go to Russia – I always say that if you have to travel more than two hours it is difficult . Sometimes the players pay a high price in the games that follow the Champions League matches . " 
 Arsenal opened their Champions League campaign with a 3 – 0 defeat against Inter Milan . Goals from Julio Ricardo Cruz , Andy van der <unk> and Obafemi Martins all in the first half extended Arsenal ’ s run of six home games in the competition without a win . Wenger said afterwards : " We can complain and cry the whole night but that will not change the result . The only thing we can do is to respond . " The team , without Campbell and Vieira , earned a draw away to Lokomotiv Moscow , but remained bottom of the group . Arsenal lost to Dynamo Kyiv in late October ; Wenger ’ s decision to shift from his preferred 4 – 4 – 2 formation caused the team to play more narrow than usual . Cole scored the winning goal in the reverse fixture at Highbury . A cross by Wiltord was flicked on by Henry in the direction of an incoming Cole , who dived to head the ball past goalkeeper Oleksandr <unk> . 
 The team scored four goals in the second half against Inter Milan and won 5 – 1 . Wenger felt the result showed there was " … a special mental strength in the team " , while Cole compared it to England ’ s victory against Germany in 2001 but added " this was even better . " Arsenal won 2 – 0 against Lokomotiv Moscow to top Group B. Jacob <unk> 's dismissal in the eighth minute meant the visitors played the remainder of the match with ten men . 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = = Knockout phase = = = 
 = = = = Round of 16 = = = = 
 Arsenal were paired up against Celta Vigo in the last 16 stage and the first leg was held at the Balaídos . Although they conceded two goals from set pieces , Arsenal scored three times to win the game which put the team in a favourable position given the away goals rule . Their passage was secured with a 2 – 0 win on 10 March 2004 ; Henry scored both goals for the team . 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = = = Quarter @-@ finals = = = = 
 In the quarter @-@ finals , Arsenal met fellow English club Chelsea . The draw disappointed vice @-@ chairman Dein : “ One of the joys of playing in Europe is playing teams from overseas – and having played Chelsea three times , it is a bit anti @-@ climactic . ” The first leg , played at Stamford Bridge ended in a draw with Guðjohnsen and Pirès scoring for their respective clubs . Arsenal were unable to take advantage of Marcel Desailly ’ s dismissal in the second half , but Wenger felt his team were in a good position to progress : " Our main aim will be to win the game at Highbury and we know we can do that . ” 
 Henry , rested for the FA Cup semi @-@ final match , started alongside Reyes for the second leg . It was the latter forward who gave Arsenal the lead in the first half of injury time , but Frank Lampard equalised for Chelsea in the 51st minute . With three minutes remaining of the match , defender Wayne Bridge scored to eliminate Arsenal from the competition . 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 Arsenal used a total of 34 players during the 2003 – 04 season and there were 15 different goalscorers . There were also three squad members who did not make a first @-@ team appearance in the campaign . The team played in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation throughout the season , with two wide midfielders . Touré featured in 55 matches – the most of any Arsenal player in the campaign and Lehmann started in all 38 league matches . 
 The team scored a total of 114 goals in all competitions . The highest scorer was Henry , with 39 goals , followed by Pirès who scored 19 goals . Three of Arsenal 's goals in the 2003 – 04 season ( Henry against Manchester City and Liverpool , Vieira against Tottenham Hotspur ) were shortlisted for Goal of the Season by viewers of ITV 's The Premiership . Five Arsenal players were sent off during the season : Jeffers , Vieira , Campbell , Cole and Keown . 
 Key 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . Players with name struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Source : 
 = = Awards = = 
 In recognition of the team 's achievement , Wenger was awarded the Barclaycard Manager of the Year . A spokesperson of the awards panel said of the decision : " Arsène Wenger is a very worthy recipient of this accolade and has sent his team into the history books . Arsenal have played exciting attacking football throughout the season and finishing it unbeaten is a feat that may not be repeated for another 100 years . " Henry was given the accolade of PFA Players ' Player of the Year by his fellow peers and the FWA Footballer of the Year by football writers for the second consecutive season . He came runner @-@ up in both the 2003 FIFA World Player of the Year and the Ballon d 'Or 2003 . 
 Three Arsenal players received the Premier League Player of the Month award – Henry twice in January and April 2004 , and Bergkamp and Edu shared the accolade in February 2004 after the judges " felt it was appropriate that we make a joint award " . Wenger was the Premier League Manager of the Month in August 2003 and February 2004 . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 A day after the Leicester City match , Arsenal paraded the Premier League trophy on an open @-@ top bus , in front of more than 250 @,@ 000 fans . The victory parade commenced at Highbury and ended at Islington Town Hall . At the town hall balcony , Vieira addressed the crowd : " It has been a fantastic season . We achieved something unbelievable but we couldn 't have done it without the fans . " In an interview with the BBC , Dein added : " We 've seen history made and I 'd be surprised if it happens again . It 's just been a privilege to watch Arsenal this season . " 
 Arsenal 's achievement of going through the league season unbeaten received considerable praise from those involved in football . Derek Shaw , the chairman of Preston North End offered his congratulations as they equalled Preston 's record of completing a league season without defeat , set 115 years previously . Brazilian Roberto Carlos likened Arsenal 's style of play to " samba football " while Michel Platini applauded the team 's " great flair and spirit " . Former Arsenal manager George Graham pinpointed the success to defensive improvements , which rued them a year ago and former striker Alan Smith felt the team were " certainly the best Highbury 's ever seen " . 
 The British press unanimously praised Arsenal 's feat once the season drew to a close ; the News of the World branded the team as " Immortals " , while The Sunday Times led with the headline " Arsenal the New Invincibles " . In an otherwise positive reflection of Arsenal 's season , Glenn Moore wrote for The Independent : " There may thus have been some truth in Arsène Wenger 's declaration that Arsenal 's achievement was a greater triumph than winning the Champions ' League . Arsenal 's prolonged celebrations reflected the scale of this landmark and yet , when they reflect in the summer break , how many players will agree with Wenger ? " . 
 A one @-@ off golden replica trophy was commissioned by the Premier League thereafter ; it was awarded to Arsenal before their first home game of the following season . The team eclipsed the league record of 42 matches without defeat ( set by Nottingham Forest ) against Blackburn Rovers and went seven more matches unbeaten until they lost – away to Manchester United in October 2004 . Although Arsenal regained the FA Cup – on penalties against United , they finished second to Chelsea in the league . The move to the Emirates Stadium in 2006 coincided with a transitional phase for the club . Several experienced first teamers were displaced in favour of youth and the style of football became shifted more towards ball retention . Arsenal have since failed to regain the league title ; they nevertheless remain a fixture in the Champions League under Wenger 's stewardship as of 2016 . 
 The title win at White Hart Lane came third in a list of Arsenal 's Greatest 50 Moments , whereas the performance at the San Siro was ranked tenth . In 2012 , the Arsenal team of 2003 – 04 won the " Best Team " category in the Premier League 20 Seasons Awards . 
 = Buildings of Jesus College , Oxford = 
 The main buildings of Jesus College , one of the colleges of the University of Oxford , are located in the centre of the city of Oxford , England , between Turl Street , Ship Street , Cornmarket Street , and Market Street . Jesus College was founded in 1571 by Elizabeth I upon the petition of a Welsh clergyman , Hugh Price , who was treasurer of St David 's Cathedral . Her foundation charter gave to the college the land and buildings of White Hall , a university hall that had experienced a decline in student numbers . Price added new buildings to those of White Hall , and construction work continued after his death in 1574 . The first of the college 's quadrangles , which includes the hall , chapel , and principal 's lodgings was completed between 1621 and 1630 . Construction of the second quadrangle began in the 1630s , but was interrupted by the English Civil War and was not completed until about 1712 . Further buildings were erected in a third quadrangle during the 20th century , including science laboratories ( now closed ) , a library for undergraduates , and additional accommodation for students and fellows . In addition to the main site , the college owns flats in east and north Oxford , and a sports ground . 
 The chapel , which was dedicated in 1621 and extended in 1636 , was extensively altered in 1864 under the supervision of the architect George Edmund Street . The alterations have had their supporters and their critics ; one historian of the college ( Ernest Hardy , principal from 1921 to 1925 ) described the work as " ill @-@ considered " . The hall 's original hammerbeam roof was hidden by a plaster ceiling in 1741 when rooms were installed in the <unk> . The principal 's lodgings , the last part of the first quadrangle to be constructed , contain wooden panelling from the early 17th century . The Fellows ' Library in the second quadrangle dates from 1679 and contains 11 @,@ 000 antiquarian books ; it was restored at a cost of £ 700 @,@ 000 in 2007 . A new Junior Common Room , about twice the size of its predecessor , was completed in the third quadrangle in 2002 . Further student and teaching rooms were added in Ship Street , opposite the college , in 2010 . 
 Eleven parts of the college are listed buildings , including all four sides of the first and second quadrangles . Nine parts , including the chapel , hall , and principal 's lodgings , have the highest Grade I designation , given to buildings of exceptional interest . Two other parts ( an external wall and an early 20th @-@ century addition in the third quadrangle ) have a Grade II designation , given to buildings of national importance and special interest . The architectural historian Sir Nikolaus Pevsner described the first quadrangle as " small and pretty " , and said that the reredos behind the chapel altar was " heavily gorgeous " ; he was , however , critical of the Old Members ' Building in the third quadrangle , opened in 1971 , describing it as a " mannered and modish design " . The historian John Julius Norwich said that the first quadrangle had " a curious charm " , while the second quadrangle had " a strong feeling of unity owing to the somewhat relentless succession of ogival gables " . The poet Sir John Betjeman said that the clear planning of the first and second quadrangles , coupled with the relationship of their size to the heights of the buildings around them , " make what would be undistinguished buildings judged on their detail , into something distinguished " . However , he regarded the early 20th @-@ century additions in the third quadrangle as " dull " . 
 = = Layout = = 
 The college buildings on the main site are arranged in three quadrangles , the first quadrangle containing the oldest college buildings and the third quadrangle the newest . The quadrangles are often referred to as " First Quad " , " Second Quad " and " Third Quad " for short . As is often the case in Oxford colleges , the rooms in the older buildings are connected to the quadrangles by a series of staircases , rather than horizontally to each other by internal corridors . The staircases are numbered ( sometimes using Roman numerals ) : staircases 1 to 5 are in the first quadrangle ; staircases 6 to 13 in the second quadrangle ; and staircases 14 to 21 in the third quadrangle . The stairs on staircase 3 were replaced with stone steps in 1878 , setting what one historian of the college ( J. N. L. Baker , a fellow of the college from 1939 to 1971 ) termed " an unfortunate precedent " , since the " ugly pattern " of staircase 3 was adopted when repairs were carried out to staircase 13 after a fire in 1882 . 
 = = Foundation and buildings in 1571 = = 
 The foundation charter of the college , issued by Elizabeth I on 27 June 1571 upon the petition of Hugh Price ( treasurer of St David 's Cathedral ) , gave to the college a site located between the present @-@ day Market Street ( to the south ) and Ship Street ( to the north ) ; this remains part of the college 's site . The charter also gave the buildings of White Hall , one of a number of university halls in this location . Halls provided lodgings and meals for students at the university , and sometimes lectures and tuition as well . As the system of colleges grew , however , halls declined in popularity and their sites and buildings tended to be taken over by colleges . White Hall itself had previously belonged to St Frideswide 's Priory and dated back to the 13th century ; it was described as " a large tenement with a great stone gate " and was sometimes known as Great White Hall . Over time , it seems to have absorbed neighbouring halls , including Little White Hall on Ship Street from about 1450 , which was at one time owned by Osney Abbey . By 1571 , however , White Hall was either completely or virtually deserted by students , making it possible for Price to secure the site for the new college . The college paid a quit @-@ rent for the land upon which White Hall stood to Christ Church , Oxford , which had acquired the assets of St Frideswide 's Priory . This was initially 26 shillings and 8 pence , but it had been reduced to 8 pence before 1631 ; it was paid until 1866 , when the charge was redeemed . The land was described in Christ Church 's records as extending " from the Street to the Walnut tree ; & in breadth from the Bowling @-@ Alley to the mud @-@ wall " , although no measurements were given . 
 The college also acquired the sites of other former halls in the vicinity , including Laurence Hall , previously owned by Lincoln College . The last principal of White Hall , James Charnock , had taken a lease on Laurence Hall , but was unable to attract sufficient students to satisfy Lincoln College and so he transferred the lease to Griffith Lloyd , who was principal of Jesus College from 1572 until his death in 1586 ; Lloyd bequeathed the lease to the college in his will . Part of the college chapel was later erected on the site , which measured 32 by 30 yards ( 29 by 27 m ) . 
 = = First quadrangle = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The first quadrangle is smaller than the later second quadrangle , measuring 93 feet 6 inches by 77 feet ( 28 @.@ 50 by 23 m ) . The buildings that now surround the first quadrangle were erected in stages between 1571 and the 1620s ; the principal 's lodgings were the last to be built . Progress was slow because the new college lacked the " generous endowments " that earlier colleges enjoyed . Before new buildings were completed , the students lived in the old buildings of White Hall . Between 1571 and his death in 1574 , Price spent about £ 1 @,@ 500 on the construction of buildings that were two storeys high . These ran from Turl Street ( on the east of the site ) south towards the corner of Cheyney Lane ( as Market Street was then known ) and then west along Cheyney Lane to the buildings of the old Great White Hall . Land at the corner of Turl Street and Cheyney Lane was leased and built upon , and then purchased in 1580 . There is a college tradition , recorded in the college 's first book of benefactors in the 17th century , that Elizabeth I gave " all kind of timber " from Shotover and Stow Wood for buildings erected by Price . Until the later building works of Griffith Powell and Sir Eubule Thelwall ( principals from 1613 to 1620 and 1621 to 1630 respectively ) , the college site consisted of " a number of smallish , mainly detached buildings with nothing resembling a formal garden layout in between " . 
 Ralph Agas 's 1578 map of Oxford shows the extent of the buildings at that time . Laurence Hall is the " isolated group of buildings " on the corner of Turl Street and Ship Street . There is then a gap along Turl Street before a building positioned south of the current entrance with glazed windows facing Turl Street and a large window or loft door at its north end ; another building then runs to the old White Hall buildings . The Turl Street entrance appears from Agas 's map to date from after Price 's death , and the north side of the building on Turl Street may have been integrated into an extension early in the 17th century , although the date of such work is unclear ; Price is nevertheless sometimes given the credit for the archway on the inside of the entrance on the first quadrangle . Overall , whilst the structure of the buildings erected by Price remains , only a little of his work can be seen from the outside , after various alterations in the intervening centuries ; nevertheless , his buildings have been said to retain " much of their original character " . 
 Some land in Ship Street to the west of the college was leased from Exeter College in 1590 , and further construction work took place after Powell was appointed principal in 1613 . Powell raised money from donors in Oxford , London , and Wales , collecting £ 838 12s 2d in what has been described as " an elaborate fundraising scheme " , with efforts to attract donations from old members of the college . Ann Lloyd , the widow of Griffith Lloyd ( principal from 1572 to 1586 ) gave £ 100 . Richard Parry , the Bishop of St Asaph , gave £ 66 13s 4d out of the total from Welsh clergy of £ 78 7s 4d . The old Great White Hall buildings were demolished around 1620 and replaced , and a kitchen and buttery were constructed . Work also started on building the hall and the chapel under Powell ; both were completed after his death in 1620 . Sir Eubule Thelwall , who became principal in 1621 , raised £ 465 15s 6d from donors , including Sir Julius Caesar , the Master of the Rolls , and Edward Littleton , the Recorder of London . This was used for " the perfecting of the Quadrangle of the building and furnishing of the library " . The college then had a complete quadrangle of buildings , save for a gap between the chapel and the hall that would later be filled by the principal 's lodgings , built by Thelwall at his own expense ; the library ( later demolished ) was outside the quadrangle , to the west of the north end of the lodgings . 
 The walls of the college were built using rubble from Oxfordshire dressed with local stone . The remaining parts of the 17th @-@ century walls are dressed with Headington stone , which was a common building material in Oxford at that time : the geologist W. J. Arkell wrote that it was used for every building in Oxford constructed during this century for which records exist . Areas of Headington stone can be seen in the first quadrangle on the wall of the hall . It was only discovered towards the end of the 18th century that it did not weather well : the surface of the stone develops a hard crust , which blisters , bursts and comes off . Much of it has subsequently been replaced with other materials as a result . 
 = = = Later work = = = 
 Further work was carried out to the east side of the college , fronting onto Turl Street , in 1756 under Thomas Pardo ( principal from 1727 to 1763 ) . A new doorway replaced the previous Elizabethan one , and the front of the college was remodelled in the Palladian style – oblong sash windows were inserted at all levels and the original gables on the Turl Street side of the building were removed . Pardo himself gave £ 157 10s towards this work , although this only met the mason 's bill of £ 156 18s 11d and not the other large bills for the work . In the opinion of Ernest Hardy , a college fellow who wrote a history of the college in 1899 and who served as principal from 1921 to 1925 , this " complete transformation " gave the college a " somewhat incongruous appearance " . The result was also said to resemble a " prison " . One writer at the time , however , thought that the changes had not gone far enough . Thomas Warton , the Oxford Professor of Poetry , wrote a letter about architecture in Oxford to Jackson 's Oxford Journal in 1766 . He included Pardo 's alterations to Jesus College in his list of improvements , but advocated replacing the chapel window with one in another design : 
 The Front of Jesus College , within these few years , has been cleared from the Bronze of Antiquity , and beautified with a modern Portico . But , with due Submission , I am of Opinion , that the contiguous Eastern Window of the Chapel , which is still absurdly suffered to remain with its antique <unk> and Ramifications , is by no means of a piece with the rest . I would therefore humbly suggest in it 's [ sic ] stead , a spacious Venetian @-@ Window . 
 Joseph Hoare ( principal from 1768 to 1802 ) gave £ 200 in total in 1791 and 1792 for repairs in the first quadrangle , part of a general pattern of expenditure upon repair of the older college buildings in the 18th century . In 1815 , the original gables in the first quadrangle were removed and replaced with a third storey and battlements , matching the lodgings where battlements had been erected between 1733 and 1740 . The height of the chapel wall was increased , and many of the windows were altered . The college received advice from the architect John Nash about this work ; he requested that , instead of paying him , the college should commission a portrait of him from Sir Thomas Lawrence to hang in the hall . Lawrence depicted Nash in his house in Regent Street , London ; the portrait has been described by Lawrence 's biographer , the art historian Sir Michael Levey , as " pungently vivid " . 
 In 1853 , under the direction of John Chessell Buckler ( architect to the college from 1852 to 1882 ) , the south front of the buildings was restored ; the exterior of the buildings on Turl Street was re @-@ faced in Bath stone in 1856 , with the tower over the gateway being built at the same time . The total cost of this work was £ 3 @,@ 349 . Pardo 's changes from the 18th century were removed . The Gentleman 's Magazine in 1856 complimented Buckler on " resisting the stream " and following the style of the 15th century . Peter Howell , a writer on Victorian architecture , referred to Buckler 's work as " [ providing ] Jesus with an attractive new front which represents the beau <unk> of an Oxford college " . The poet John Betjeman said that the front of the college opposite Exeter College was " a good specimen " of Gothic Revival work . In contrast , the architectural historian Geoffrey Tyack noted that the refacing came not long after the two other colleges in Turl Street ( Exeter and Lincoln ) had been refaced , and commented that Buckler 's work , in " Collegiate Gothic " style , " completed a process whereby the façades of the colleges in Turl Street acquired a somewhat lifeless homogeneity which they had never possessed in the past " . W. J. Arkell wrote that " some of the worst horrors of the Gothic revival " cluster on either side of Turl Street . When writing a history of the college in 1891 , the vice @-@ principal Llewellyn Thomas said that the work was " admitted to be very well done " , but that there were those who thought that " the old Jacobean gateway was more in harmony with the domestic architecture of the College , and more suitable to its position in a narrow street " . The stonework on the front of the college was last cleaned in 2000 , when the porters ' lodge by the Turl Street entrance was also rebuilt , to provide better office accommodation for the porters , individual post boxes for students , and greater security . Four grass plots were added to the centre of the quadrangle in 1896 , crossed by Yorkstone paths ; before that , it had been gravelled since 1662 . 
 The architectural historian Sir Nikolaus Pevsner described the first quadrangle as " small and pretty , especially because of the variety of its ranges " . He noted the part @-@ Elizabethan and part @-@ Jacobean architecture on the south side , where Price 's building stops – the join between the two , he pointed out , is " easily visible " in Market Street . The windows in the first quadrangle , he noted , were Elizabethan in style , with mullioned windows and arched lights , arranged symmetrically , whereas the hall windows were Gothic in style . The historian John Julius Norwich wrote that the first quadrangle had " a curious charm , due partly to its size and partly due to its several small eccentricities " , including the curved path crossing the quadrangle from the entrance to the hall . The architect and designer Sir Hugh Casson , though , thought that the " crooked off @-@ axis line " of the path was the college 's oddest feature . All four sides of the first quadrangle are Grade I listed buildings ( the highest grade , for buildings of exceptional importance and international interest ) : the lodgings and chapel on the north side , the hall on the west side , and the buildings on the east and south sides . 
 = = = Chapel = = = 
 = = = = Construction and fittings = = = = 
 Construction of the chapel began when Griffith Powell was Principal ( 1613 – 1620 ) . It was finished under Sir Eubule Thelwall ( who took office in 1621 ) , with the Bishop of Oxford leading the dedication ceremony on 28 May 1621 . Thelwall 's portrait , displayed in the hall , shows him holding a roll enscribed " A plan of the Chappell in Jesus Coll . , Oxford built by Sir Eubule Thelwall " , reflecting the fact that he was the main donor towards the chapel 's construction . There are four windows facing the quadrangle in the Perpendicular style . Seats were added in 1633 , and it was extended in two directions in 1636 . The east end was moved to reach Turl Street , a new east window was added and the previous window was converted into an arch ; at the other end , the entrance was moved further to the west . Sir Charles Williams of Monmouthshire , south Wales , paid £ 200 towards the final bill of £ 211 . 
 The architectural historian Giles Worsley has described the chapel 's east window as an instance of Gothic Revival architecture , rather than Gothic Survival , since a choice was made to use an outdated style – classical architecture had become accepted as " the only style in which it was respectable to build " . The window has seven main sections ( " lights " ) topped with five @-@ headed flower shapes , or cinquefoils , and tracery running vertically . The chapel is one of various buildings at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge from the first half of the 17th century where Gothic designs were deliberately chosen in preference to Classical ; other examples are the chapel of Lincoln College , Oxford , the chapel windows and hall roof at Wadham College , Oxford , and the library of St John 's College , Cambridge , where the library of 1624 was built with Gothic windows since " some men of judgement " preferred the old fashion as it was " most meet for such a building " . Similarly , the artist and art historian Aymer Vallance , writing in 1908 , said that Gothic architecture , though " ailing and doomed " , " lingered longest " at Oxford University , adding that the chapel windows of Jesus and Wadham were " almost as astonishing for their period " as the " magnificent " 1640 fan @-@ vaulted entrance to the hall of Christ Church , Oxford , built nearly three hundred years after fan vaulting had been used in the cloisters of Gloucester Cathedral . The only examples of classical style in Oxford before the Civil War were Archbishop Laud 's Canterbury Quad at St John 's and a few gateways such as those at the Botanic Garden by Nicholas Stone ; Cambridge had even less . The chapel has not been universally appreciated , however : the antiquarian and archivist Rowley Lascelles wrote in 1821 that " excepting that it was built by private contributions from the gentry of Wales , it would be cruel to say any thing about it " . 
 The chancel measures 16 feet 6 inches by 22 feet 9 inches ( 5 @.@ 03 by 6 @.@ 93 m ) , and the main body of the chapel measures 52 feet 6 inches by 22 feet ( 16 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) . A London merchant , Lewis Roberts , gave " some hundreds of white and black marble stones ... towards ye paving of the upper part of the chapel " , according to Francis Mansell in his inventory of 1648 . It is unclear when these were added to the floor ; some are still in position , although others were removed in the 1864 renovation . The oak pulpit dates from the early 17th century , and has moulded rectangular panels . There is a bell turret on the west end of the roof , which has trefoil @-@ shaped openings on the west and east sides , and panels decorated with trefoils on the other two sides . It was built in about 1915 , replacing an earlier turret of similar shape . 
 The porch at the chapel entrance was moved to its present position when the chapel was extended in 1636 . The door jambs are moulded , as are the tops of the columns . The arch is divided into segments , with a rose in the left spandrel and a thistle in the right spandrel . The use of the rose and thistle ( national emblems of England and Scotland respectively ) in this way dates the porch to the reign of King James I , who used these flowers , halved , as his badge after his accession to the English throne in 1603 . <unk> brackets support the entablature , within which the pediment contains palms and cherub @-@ heads in the tympanum . The Latin inscription above the archway is <unk> <unk> <unk> Gratia ( " Let prayers ascend , and grace descend " ) . The original entrance was covered up when the chapel was extended ; it was only re @-@ discovered when the chapel was refaced in Bath stone in 1869 . 
 Jonathan Edwards ( principal from 1686 to 1712 ) is reported to have spent £ 1 @,@ 000 during his lifetime on the interior of the chapel , particularly in the chancel ( at the east end ) , but also including the addition of a screen separating the main part of the chapel from the ante @-@ chapel ( at the west end ) in 1693 . The screen bears the coat of arms of Sir Leoline Jenkins ( principal 1661 – 1673 ) and , until 1899 , also bore Thelwall 's coat of arms . His arms were moved to a position above the door ( where , says one writer , " they can scarcely be seen " ) when an organ by J. J. Binns was installed in the ante @-@ chapel in 1899 . The current organ , by William Drake , was installed in 1994 to replace the Binns organ . The screen has open ovals rather than blank ovals – an example , said Pevsner , of " the importance given to openwork carving " in the later 17th century . After the installation of the screen , little changed in the chapel until the middle of the 19th century , save for some donations of items such as a brass desk and two silver candlesticks . 
 = = = = Victorian changes = = = = 
 In 1853 , Henry Foulkes ( principal 1817 – 1857 ) , the fellows of the college and the incumbents of most of the livings within its gift donated £ 350 10s for stained glass by George Hedgeland to be added to the east window ; the final cost was £ 399 . It shows various biblical episodes , including three instances of Christ raising people from the dead : the daughter of Jairus , the son of the widow of Nain , and Lazarus . There are also pairs of scenes from the New Testament and the Old Testament to demonstrate the typological relationship between them : for example , the Passover is paired with the Last Supper , Jonah escaping from the whale with the Resurrection of Jesus , and the ascension of Elijah with the ascension of Jesus . Pevsner described it as " a busy , somewhat gloomy piece with many small scenes " . A copy of Guido Reni 's painting St Michael subduing the dragon , which had been presented to the college by Thomas Bulkeley , 7th Viscount Bulkeley ( a student who matriculated at the university in 1769 ) , had previously been hung in front of the east window . When the stained glass was installed , the painting was moved to the ante @-@ chapel ; it was moved to the south wall of the chancel when the Binns organ was installed . The panels of Hedgeland 's window were removed and cleaned in the summer of 2000 , while maintenance was being carried out to the Turl Street stonework . 
 On 15 June 1863 , the principal Charles Williams ( principal 1857 – 1877 ) and fellows agreed to renovate the chapel . One of the prime movers behind the decision was the vice @-@ principal , Lewis Gilbertson , as part of his unsuccessful attempt to move the college towards Anglo @-@ Catholicism . The architect George Edmund Street was appointed , and had almost free rein in his work . In 1863 , he said to the bursar that the chapel was " so good in style considering its late date " that it would be " very inadvisable to alter it in any respect , save one , the old features of the walls and roofing " . However , he later said that the fittings were " incongruous " , with the seats being " so thoroughly uncomfortable that kneeling is rendered all but impossible , and sitting even is concerted into a sort of penance " . His work was completed in 1864 , at a cost of £ 1 @,@ 679 18s 10d . The arch of the chancel was widened and the memorials to Sir Eubule <unk> and Francis Mansell , which had been on each side of the arch , were moved to the north wall of the chancel . The original Jacobean woodwork was removed , with the exception of the screen donated by Edwards and the pulpit , new seats were installed and new paving was placed in the main part of the chapel . A stone reredos was added behind the altar , although the design originally submitted by Street was not approved and he was asked to make changes . The reredos as finally installed has three marble panels : a crucifixion scene ( centre ) , Christ carrying his cross ( right ) and Christ on the knees of St Mary ( left ) . The altar has a slab and six pillars , all made from granite . 
 Views of Street 's alterations have differed . On 21 October 1864 , Building News reported that the restoration was nearing completion and was of " a very spirited character " . It said that the new " handsome " arch showed the east window " to great advantage " , with " other improvements " including a " handsome reredos " and an " exceedingly beautiful " pavement of marble , alabaster and Minton 's encaustic tiles . Llewellyn Thomas said that there might be two opinions as to the success of the restoration , but there was " no doubt " that widening the arch was a mistake , since " it has permanently dwarfed the proportions of the building " . He said that the new woodwork , " though good of its kind " , presented " too violent a contrast " with the ante @-@ chapel screen . Hardy was also critical , calling the work " ill @-@ considered " . He complained that the Jacobean woodwork had been sold for too little , saying that it had been " ruthlessly torn up and sold for a mere song to a passing stranger " , and described the reredos as " somewhat tawdry " . William Stride , writing at about the same time as Hardy , said that the " beautiful " Jacobean interior of the chapel had been " destroyed " , and Oxford had " narrowly escaped other irreparable losses " . Norwich said that the restoration was " good in individual details " but was " sadly damaging to its character and atmosphere " . 
 In contrast , Pevsner called the reredos " heavily gorgeous " . One chaplain in the 20th century covered up the reredos with curtains , describing the brown and white marbling as looking like " corned beef " . Betjeman , however , was heard when showing a group around the college to describe the altar as " delicious " ; he also wrote that the chapel 's " fine classic screen " had " somehow survived a fearful ' restoration ' " . The curtains around the altar and a carpet covering the tiling in the aisle were removed when the new organ was installed in 1994 , following the organ builder 's advice that these items detracted from the chapel acoustics . The work proved to be Street 's only commission at the university , although he built or restored a number of churches in the city . In his biography of his father , Arthur Street said that it was possible that George Street 's " very decided adherence to the earlier phase of Gothic , and the eagerness with which he argued that Oxford had already enough of debased types , and should revert to the purity of the early forms , may have frightened the authorities " . Casson , although referring to the chapel and other parts of the college from the Victorian era as " mostly pretty dull " , thought that the " sturdy pews with their flatly modelled leafy finials hold their own " . 
 The woodwork removed by Street was sold for a nominal sum , with a condition that it could only be used for a hall , chapel or library . Some pieces ended up in the library and chapel of Forest School in Walthamstow , east London ( an institution that previously had no link to the college ) . Panels under the communion rail were also removed from the chapel , even though Street had reported to the college that these carvings were the only portion of the chapel woodwork with any real value , and had suggested at one point reusing them in connection with the ante @-@ chapel screen and the adjoining seats . Some of the woodwork was transferred to St Edern 's Church , Bodedern , in Anglesey , which had links with the college from 1648 until the Church in Wales was disestablished in 1920 . Some of the panels may also have been re @-@ used in the Fellows ' Library ( in the second quadrangle ) ; other panelling at Bodedern came from the college , but not apparently from the chapel , and so may have been from a disused library gallery . 
 = = = = Memorials = = = = 
 The chapel contains monuments to several former principals . In addition to those of Sir Eubule <unk> and Francis Mansell relocated to the north wall of the chancel , there are monuments to Sir Leoline Jenkins ( who is buried in the chapel ) , William Jones , Jonathan Edwards , Thomas Pardo , Joseph Hoare , Henry Foulkes , Charles Williams and Daniel Harper . Thelwall 's monument is one of the few in Oxford to include kneeling figures . There are painted glass windows in memory of Llewellyn Thomas ( by Charles Kempe ) , of Charles Williams ( by Clayton and Bell ) , of Samuel Morris , a victim of the sinking of HMS Eurydice in 1878 ( by Westlake and Lavers ) , and of Lewis Gilbertson . The Garter banner of Harold Wilson ( who studied at the college in the 1930s , and was twice Prime Minister ) hangs on the south wall ; it was donated by his widow after his death in 1995 . Formerly displayed in the chapel was a bust of T. E. Lawrence ( better known as " Lawrence of Arabia " ) by the sculptor Eric Kennington , which is a copy of the one in St Paul 's Cathedral . Lawrence was a student at the college , graduating in 1910 . 
 = = = Principal 's lodgings = = = 
 The principal of the college resides in the lodgings , a Grade I listed building , on the north side of the first quadrangle between the chapel ( to the east ) and the hall ( to the west ) . They were the last part of the first quadrangle to be built . Sir Eubule Thelwall , principal from 1621 to 1630 , built the lodgings at his own expense , to include ( in the words of the antiquarian Anthony Wood ) " a very fair dining @-@ room adorned with wainscot curiously engraven " . Tyack said that " the carved wooden panelling of the main rooms [ set ] a new standard of luxury for the heads of colleges " . Pevsner commented that the panelling , set in three tiers with ovals placed vertically rather than horizontally , " looks both dignified and splendid " . In 1637 , the lodgings were considerably changed with the installation of five " <unk> " . The shell @-@ hood over the doorway ( which Pevsner and Casson both called " beautiful " ) was added at some point between 1670 and 1740 ; Pevsner dates it to about 1700 . It is elaborately carved on the inside with a decorated cartouche and a cherub @-@ head . Casson called it the college 's " most engaging " feature . The original gables over the front of the lodgings were removed and replaced with battlements between 1733 and 1740 . 
 John Nash drew up plans to alter the lodgings in 1802 . His plans were not used immediately ( although other work was carried out at that time ) but they were partly implemented in 1884 when a north wing was added , using Milton stone . This extension was later converted into general college accommodation . An oriel window on the west side of the lodgings , overlooking the second quadrangle , was also added in 1884 . Much of the lodgings were refaced between 1927 and 1935 , using Clipsham stone on the side facing the front quadrangle in place of the original Headington stone . 
 In 1654 , when Michael Roberts was principal , the college accounts record payment for construction of a ball court . This was to the west of the principal 's garden ( which is to the north of the lodgings , alongside Ship Street ) , between a privy , stables , and the wall of the garden . Ball courts , bowling greens and groves were often added within the precincts of colleges during the 17th century so that undergraduates could amuse themselves under the watchful eyes of their tutors , rather than indulge in forbidden pursuits such as drinking in alehouses . In 1757 , principal Thomas Pardo added the area of the ball court to the garden of the lodgings and had a coach @-@ house built there , which was reached from an entrance on the corner of Turl Street and Ship Street along a driveway across the north of the garden . 
 The garden and the ball court are depicted in David <unk> 's 1675 engraving of the college , which shows an " attractive pleasure garden with box @-@ edged paths and dense patterns of formal beds " . In 1826 , the garden was renovated and a Bath stone gateway installed on the corner of Turl Street and Ship Street . The size of the garden has been reduced at the west end by the 1884 extension to the lodgings ( which was built on the area of the old ball court ) and at the east end by the construction of a bicycle shed and garage . The boundary wall that runs from the north of the chapel along Turl Street and along Ship Street to the north of the garden is a Grade II listed building ( a designation given to buildings of national importance and special interest ) . 
 = = = Hall = = = 
 The hall , like the chapel , was largely built by Griffith Powell between 1613 and 1620 , and was finally completed soon after his death in 1620 . The panelling , three tables and two benches date from Powell 's time . It measures 54 by 25 feet ( 16 @.@ 5 by 7 @.@ 6 m ) and is a Grade I listed building . The fireplace was set in an enclosed hearth with a large projecting chimney @-@ breast , in contrast to the traditional method of heating the hall , which was by a brazier on an open hearth . A screen was installed in 1634 at a cost of £ 3 1s . Pevsner noted the screen 's " elaborately decorated columns " and the dragons along the frieze , and said that it was one of the earliest examples in Oxford of panelling using four " L " shapes around a centre . Norwich said that the dragons on the screen were " rather lovable " , and Tyack said that they underlined the Welsh connections of the college : the red dragon is one of the national symbols of Wales . The stone steps from the first quadrangle to the hall were added in 1637 . During the 17th century , changes were made to the interior of the hall . Windows painted with various coats of arms were removed and a bay window was added on the west side . Pevsner commented that " the hall windows themselves are different from all other 17th @-@ century Gothic windows in Oxford except for the exactly contemporary hall bay @-@ window of Exeter " . 
 In 1741 and 1742 , a total of £ 423 17s 4d was spent on the hall , which included the cost of covering the oak @-@ beamed roof with plaster and making rooms in the original roof space . Writing in 1891 , Llewellyn Thomas noted that the plaster roof was added to create attic rooms to increase the accommodation of the lodgings . He expressed the hope that the hall might soon regain its original proportions , following the enlargement of the lodgings a few years previously . This has not happened , and the plaster ceiling remains . However , in 2003 , partitions between the rooms were knocked through to convert them into teaching rooms and the renovations enabled the upper part of the hall 's hammerbeam roof to be seen from inside the rooms . Pevsner described the 1741 cartouche on the north wall , which contains the college crest , as " large [ and ] rich " . Tyack noted the " lively Rococo plasterwork " of the flat ceiling . In the early 19th century the east and west sides of the hall were crenellated , and the roof was re @-@ slated . A clock was installed on the external wall of the hall in 1831 by the principal Henry Foulkes . There is a college tradition that students aim a champagne cork at the clock after finishing their final university examinations ; hitting it is supposed to mean that the student will obtain a first class honours degree . An extensive fire on 4 December 1913 threatened to destroy the hall before it was brought under control . In the rebuilding work that followed , a gallery was added to the hall , with the balustrade joining the 1634 screen . The hall contains a portrait of Elizabeth I , as well as portraits of former principals and benefactors . There are also portraits by court artists of two other monarchs who were college benefactors : Charles I ( by Anthony van Dyck ) and Charles II ( by Sir Peter Lely ) . It has been said to be " among the most impressive of all the Oxford college halls " , with its " fine panelling , austere ceiling , and its notable paintings " . 
 = = Second quadrangle = = 
 = = = Expansion and the Civil War = = = 
 Francis Mansell , who was appointed principal in 1630 , raised hundreds of pounds from donors towards the building of a second quadrangle in 1640 . Buildings along part of the north and south sides were completed at this time , and in 1638 he purchased some land known as Coggan 's Garden adjoining Market Street for £ 90 , upon which much of the west side of the second quadrangle was later built . The college also unsuccessfully proposed to the city council in 1638 that it should be permitted to expand to the north by closing Ship Street and purchasing the council 's properties there . According to his successor and biographer , Sir Leoline Jenkins , Mansell had sufficient benefactors to be able to complete the quadrangle , including the construction of a library on the west side , but the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1641 put paid to his plans . Welsh tenants who supported Charles I refused to pay rent to the college after Michael Roberts was installed as principal in 1648 by the puritan regime , leaving the college " on the verge of financial collapse " . Overall , the college was " reduced ... to administrative chaos " and in 1660 it was said to be in a " shatter 'd condition " , having suffered " a decade of corruption and internal strife quite unique in Oxford during the revolutionary period " . The college obtained further land on Market Street in 1675 , and building work began again in 1676 . Sir Leoline Jenkins built the library on the west side , which was completed by 1679 . After further land was obtained to link the Market Street and Ship Street sides of the college , further rooms , including what is now known as the Senior Common Room ( SCR ) , were built at the instigation of Jonathan Edwards ( principal from 1688 to 1712 ) to complete the inner quadrangle ; the project was completed just after his death in 1712 . Work to add a ceiling and wainscotting in the SCR took place in 1736 , at a cost of £ 52 4s 5d , with the walls to the west of the college placed further back to enlarge the common room 's garden and increase the light . Some minor work to repair and restore the walls has been carried out using Doulting stone . 
 The second quadrangle is larger than the first quadrangle , measuring 103 feet 6 inches by 94 feet 6 inches ( 31 @.@ 55 by 28 @.@ 80 m ) . The central plot of the quadrangle was filled with gravel from at least 1695 ; grass was laid in 1859 . All four sides of the quadrangle are Grade I listed buildings . Pevsner described the second quadrangle as " a uniform composition " , noting the " regular fenestration by windows with round @-@ arched lights , their hood @-@ moulds forming a continuous frieze " . The Dutch gables have ogee sides and semi @-@ circular pediments . Norwich described the second quadrangle as having " a strong feeling of unity owing to the somewhat relentless succession of ogival gables " , adding that " One is grateful for the projecting bay , oriel , <unk> and clock on the east side for breaking the monotony " . He pointed out that it was " almost a carbon copy " of the front quadrangle of University College , Oxford , which was begun in 1634 : in describing University College , he wrote that " There are the same two @-@ light windows , the same continuous rising and falling head @-@ moulds on the three storeys , even the same oddly shaped gables " as in Jesus College . Tyack , too , said that the gables were " clearly influenced " by University College . The writer Simon Jenkins said that the quadrangle has " the familiar Oxford Tudor windows and decorative Dutch gables , crowding the skyline like Welsh dragons ' teeth and lightened by exuberant flower boxes " . Betjeman , describing the first and second quadrangles , said that they had " what look like Cotswold manors on all sides " , adding that " The clearness of the planning of Jesus College and the relation of the heights of the buildings to the size of the quadrangles make what would be undistinguished buildings judged on their detail , into something distinguished " . The 19th @-@ century antiquarian Rowley Lascelles , however , described the ogee gables as " dismal " and called for them to be cut down into " battlements " ( crenellations ) to match those on the hall bay window ; he went further , saying that " this whole College requires to be <unk> , as it is called ; that is , mannered into the pointed style . It is a good subject for it " . Casson said that the second quadrangle was " much the same mixture " as the first , but looked " a bit cramped and stiff " . 
 = = = Fellows ' Library = = = 
 What is now called the Fellows ' Library , on the west side of the second quadrangle , dates from 1679 ; it was built by Sir Leoline Jenkins ( appointed principal in 1661 ) , one of the project 's donors . It replaced the college 's first purpose @-@ built library , built by Sir Eubule Thelwall to the west of the hall , in line with the lodgings , on the north side of what is now the college 's second quadrangle . Until that time , the books had been kept in rooms above the kitchen and buttery . Thelwall 's library appears to have been built over a covered walkway , with rooms for students above it . It fell into a " ruinous condition " and was pulled down by 1640 when Francis Mansell ( principal since 1630 ) erected further buildings on the north and south sides of the quadrangle . After a long delay in building work caused by the effects of the civil war , the college purchased three properties on Market Street adjoining Coggan 's Garden in 1675 , and development of the south @-@ west corner of the second quadrangle took place between 1676 and 1678 at a cost of £ 1 @,@ 439 14s <unk> . 
 The library , which is 65 feet ( 20 m ) long and 21 feet 9 inches ( 6 @.@ 63 m ) wide , was built on the first floor of a free @-@ standing building , above common rooms for students and fellows , and largely followed the layout of Thelwall 's earlier library . The books were moved to their new location in 1679 . The library contains bookcases dating from about 1628 , which are decorated with strapwork and were used in the earlier library . The bookcases are 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) long , with hinged desks . Some of the books were secured with chains ; these were removed at an unknown date , although some payments for chains were made until 1765 . A gallery storey was added , probably in 1691 , and a wood @-@ panelled gallery runs the length of the east side . It is reached by " an ingenious and graceful spiral staircase " . On the west side of the library , there are nine windows on two levels ; on the east side , there are now six on the lower level and four ( blocked by gallery bookcases ) on the upper level . The layout of the library , as well as the position of an exposed timber , suggests that there was previously a gallery on the west side . If so , it was not used after 1800 , when the library was re @-@ arranged . It may have been removed and transferred to St Edern 's , Bodedern , along with some woodwork from the chapel after Street 's renovations , with other sections of the chapel woodwork re @-@ used in the east gallery – some of the carved patterns in the gallery are identical to those in Bodedern , and some of the gallery panels have been cut to fit their position , or are loose @-@ fitting or upside down , suggestive of repositioning from a previous location . 
 Hardy 's opinion was that , " if only it had an open timber roof instead of the plain ceiling , it would be one of the most picturesque College Libraries " . Another author said ( in 1914 , after the provision of a library for undergraduates elsewhere in the quadrangle ) that it was " one of the most charming of Oxford libraries , and one of the least frequented " . The window at the south end has four lights ; Pevsner noted that it was Gothic in style , despite the date of construction . Simon Jenkins said that the library is " a delight " . Betjeman wrote in 1938 that " The woodwork , the brown leather of the books , the clear windows and the slim height of the room make it one of the best little @-@ known sights of Oxford " . 
 The library holds 11 @,@ 000 antiquarian printed books and houses many of the college 's rare texts , including a Greek bible dating from 1545 and signed by Philipp Melanchthon and others , much of the library of the scholar and philosopher Lord Herbert of Cherbury and 17th @-@ century volumes by Robert Boyle and Sir Isaac Newton . The library also holds the undergraduate thesis of T. E. Lawrence ( " Lawrence of Arabia " ) , entitled " The Influence of the Crusades on European Military Architecture to the end of <unk> Century " . The college launched a restoration appeal in 2007 for work that was anticipated to cost £ 700 @,@ 000 . The roof was leaking , the floorboards had been affected by dry rot and death watch beetle , and new heating and ultra @-@ violet light controls were needed to help preserve the books . The work to remedy these problems , and others , was completed in 2008 . 
 = = Third quadrangle = = 
 = = = Expansion in the 20th century = = = 
 The long but narrow third quadrangle adjoins Ship Street , on the north of the site and to the west of the garden of the principal 's lodgings , where the college has owned some land since its foundation . In the 18th century , this was home to the college stables . A fire in 1904 led to the demolition of the stables and the gateway to Ship Street . The fire also caused considerable damage to another building , about 80 metres ( 260 ft ) long , owned by the college . The ground floor had been rented out to the Oxford Electric Light Company – the fire originated in their premises when cables overheated – and the first floor had been used as a carpenter 's shop and a bookseller 's stores . This building was also demolished , along with houses occupied by the college porter and the college butler . Some stones from the demolished building were used to build a house in Kennington , Oxfordshire . 
 Replacement buildings adjoining Ship Street , effectively creating a third quadrangle for the college , were constructed between 1906 and 1908 . These were designed by the college architect and surveyor ( Reuben England ) and built in Doulting stone with Clipsham stone dressings , experience having shown that Doulting stone lasts longer when used in combination with a harder stone . The buildings , which have been given a Grade II listing , have been said to be keeping with the medieval look of the college as refaced by Buckler in the 19th century . However , Howell 's description of England 's work on Ship Street is that the design was " in an almost comically ' traditional ' style " , and Betjeman thought that the buildings were " dull " . Casson described the third quadrangle as " a long , narrow court with a jumble of nineteenth- and twentieth @-@ century buildings trying a bit too hard to be interesting " . The extension cost £ 13 @,@ 656 . It contained the college 's science laboratories and a new gate @-@ tower , as well as further living accommodation and a library for students , known as the Meyricke Library , after a major donor – there had been an undergraduate library in the second quadrangle since 1865 , known as the Meyricke Library from 1882 onwards . A small block of toilets and bathrooms was also built in the third quadrangle in 1908 ; it was nicknamed the " fourth quad " . Until then , students had had to use tin baths in their rooms to wash . It was not until 1946 that the college began to install baths and wash @-@ basins on each staircase in the quadrangles . The " fourth quad " was demolished as part of the work to erect the Old Members ' Building in 1971 . The third quadrangle also contains the bar ( in the basement beneath the library ) , the computer room , and student laundry facilities . 
 = = = Laboratories = = = 
 The laboratories , which were in use from 1907 to 1947 , occupied three floors . They were overseen ( for all but the last three years ) by the physical chemist David Chapman , a college fellow from 1907 to 1944 . At the time of their closure , they were the last college @-@ based science laboratories at the university . They were named the Sir Leoline Jenkins laboratories , after the former principal of the college . The laboratories led to scientific research and tuition ( particularly in chemistry ) becoming an important part of the college 's academic life . The brochure produced for the opening ceremony noted that the number of science students at the college had increased rapidly in recent years , and that provision of college laboratories would assist the tuition of undergraduates , as well as attracting to Jesus College graduates of the University of Wales who wished to continue their research at Oxford . The laboratories became unnecessary when the university began to provide centralised facilities for students ; they were closed in 1947 . The college then converted the laboratories ( along with other rooms in the buildings adjoining Ship Street ) into further accommodation for students and fellows , as well as relocating the Meyricke Library and providing a separate library for Celtic studies . The total cost was £ 25 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Old Members ' Building and Junior Common Room = = = 
 The Old Members ' Building , which contains a music room , 24 study @-@ bedrooms and some lecture rooms , was built between 1969 and 1971 , and designed by John Fryman of the Architects ' Design Partnership . It was built after a fundraising appeal to Old Members to mark the college 's quatercentenary , and was opened by Charles , Prince of Wales , in 1971 . When the plans for the building were being drawn up , the college stated that it was " prepared to sacrifice some accommodation to obtain a scheme of architectural merit " . The result is a concrete building , faced with grit @-@ blasted concrete and , as elsewhere in the third quadrangle , Clipsham limestone . Part of the ground floor is an extension at the rear of W. H. Smith on Cornmarket Street , and so access is at first @-@ floor level . The windows , which project from the bedrooms in a V @-@ shape , were said to have been intended to " reflect the intricacy of the older building " , and to help improve the views from within . 
 Pevsner was critical of the use of canting in the design . He wrote that the entrance was reached by staircases set diagonally , which is " typical of the building " , and that Fryman had " succumbed to the canting fashion of today : canted back , canted exposed supports on the entrance floor , canted base to the two upper floors " . He called it a " mannered and modish design " . Tyack referred to the building 's " brutalism " . Norwich said that it displays " an antipathy to the right @-@ angle that makes the Front Quad look positively Pythagorean " . Another reviewer , though , said that whilst the building tried too hard to be " Oxford " with " quirky and derivative details " , the design made " ingenious use of minimal space " and filled a " drab " corner with " something lively and intimate " ; overall , the review concluded , the virtues of the building overcame its faults . 
 A conference room , known as the Habakkuk Room after a former principal , was added in 1989 . The Old Members ' Building is connected by a bridge ( Pevsner adding , " Of course it runs diagonally " ) to further college rooms above shops on Ship Street . These were added in 1908 – 1909 and were also designed by England . Pevsner noted the " four symmetrically grouped gables " . There are also some student rooms above the shops in Cornmarket Street , some of which were refurbished in 2000 . 
 In 2002 , a two @-@ year project to rebuild the property above the shops on Ship Street was completed . As part of the work , carried out by the architects Maguire & Co . , the bottom floor was converted from rooms occupied by students and fellows into a new Junior Common Room ( JCR ) , to replace the common room in the second quadrangle , which was by then too small to cope with the increased numbers of students . The new JCR , about twice the size of the previous one , can be partitioned into smaller rooms or kept open for large meetings ; there is also a kitchen , a student committee room and a glazed conservatory extending onto the adjoining terrace . Above the JCR are three floors of new student rooms . The two rooms of the old JCR , each of which contain war memorials , have been converted into seminar and meeting rooms , and are now known as the Harold Wilson Room and the Memorial Room . 
 = = = Fellows ' Garden = = = 
 The Fellows ' Garden runs behind the west side of the second quadrangle , behind the SCR ; it can be reached from there or from the third quadrangle . It dates from 1683 , when 3s 6d was spent on making a garden ; it would have been about 100 feet ( 30 m ) long and between 10 to 20 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 to 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide , but a further purchase of land in 1735 extended its length to about 170 feet ( 52 m ) . It is now overshadowed by adjoining buildings ( including the Old Members ' Building ) . The college archivist , Brigid Allen , has described it as " a kind of gated tunnel between high buildings , paved , scattered with seats and tables , and filled with gloomy foliage of the purple @-@ leaved plum " . 
 = = Other buildings = = 
 The college purchased 10 acres ( 0 @.@ 040 km2 ; 0 @.@ 016 sq mi ) of land in east Oxford ( near the Cowley Road ) in 1903 for use as a sports ground . The 1905 pavilion was replaced in 1998 by a new pavilion on the opposite side of the sports ground ; the old pavilion is now used as a table @-@ tennis room ( ground floor ) with a three @-@ bedroomed flat for graduates above . Residential accommodation was first built at the sports ground in 1967 ( Thelwall House , rebuilt in 1998 ) , with additions between 1988 and 1990 ( Hugh Price House and Leoline Jenkins House ) . Writing in 1974 , Pevsner said that Thelwall House was one of the recent college buildings that deserved note . 
 A further development , known as Hazel Court ( after Alfred Hazel , principal 1925 – 1944 ) , was built in 2000 , bringing the total number of students who can be housed at the sports ground to 135 . Writing in the Royal Institute of British Architects Journal in 2002 , Jeremy Melvin praised the architects of Hazel Court , Maguire & Co . , for their " crispness of detail " and " richness of composition " ; he said that " the sense of ordered space ... recalls the way in which the traditional collegiate quads gave architectural expression to the then @-@ new idea of a university " . He noted that , whilst the first impression of the houses was Elizabethan with the air of a courtyard garden , " closer inspection reveals a contemporary design sensibility " ; there was , he wrote , " the impression of an order that comes from making the construction explicit <unk> combining sensitivity to function and use " . However , he commented that whilst there was plenty of space inside , the furniture " would not look out of place in a motorway hotel " . 
 Donations from Edwin Stevens , an Old Member of the college , enabled the construction in 1974 of student flats at a site in north Oxford on the Woodstock Road , named " Stevens Close " in his honour . The flats were opened by Elizabeth II in 1976 . The college also owns a number of houses on Ship Street , which are used for student accommodation . It has purchased a further site in Ship Street at a cost of £ 1.8M , which will be converted at a projected cost of £ 5.5M to provide 31 student rooms with en @-@ suite facilities , a 100 @-@ seat lecture theatre and other teaching rooms . The site includes a bastion from the Oxford city wall , which is a scheduled ancient monument . The plans provide for the inner curve of the bastion to be used as a featured alcove in the ground floor reception area and for study bedrooms on the upper floors . The Ship Street Centre was officially opened by the Chancellor of the University of Oxford , Lord Patten of Barnes , on 25 September 2010 . 
 = What If ? : Serious Scientific Answers to Absurd Hypothetical Questions = 
 What If ? : Serious Scientific Answers to Absurd Hypothetical Questions is a non @-@ fiction book by Randall Munroe in which he answers hypothetical science questions sent to him by readers of his webcomic , xkcd . The book contains a selection of questions and answers originally published on his blog What If ? , along with several new ones . The book is divided into several dozen chapters , most of which are devoted to answering a unique question . What If ? was released in September 2 , 2014 and was received positively by critics . 
 = = Conception of the blog = = 
 In the introduction section of the book , Randall Munroe recounts wondering as a child whether " there were more hard things or soft things in the world , " concluding that " the world contained about three billion soft things and five billion hard things . " The conversation that was produced by this question impressed Munroe 's mother to such a degree that she wrote it down . Though Munroe later stated this his question was rather meaningless , he used it as an example of how " thoroughly answer [ ing ] a stupid question can take you to some pretty interesting places " . 
 Since 2012 , Munroe has been answering unusual questions sent in by readers of xkcd on his blog What If ? . The concept was inspired by a weekend program organized by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in which volunteers can teach classes to groups of high school students on any chosen subject . Munroe signed up after hearing about it from a friend and decided to teach a class on energy . Though the lecture felt " dry " at first , once Munroe started bringing up examples from Star Wars and The Lord of the Rings , the students became more excited . The entire second half of the class was eventually spent solving mathematical and physics problems . Munroe wrote the first entries a few years before the start of the blog , based on questions he was asked that day . 
 Because he was delayed in getting the website online , Munroe had a lot of time thinking about the design of the blog . He eventually chose to display his entries as individual pages rather than using an infinite scrolling page , as he considers the latter more difficult to digest . Munroe usually chooses questions he already knows something interesting about , or after reading a scientific paper , he keeps an eye out for questions in which he can bring it up . Munroe has said that the volume of questions has been high enough that it is impossible to read all of them . Answering a question and writing a post takes him about a day of solid work . 
 = = Production = = 
 Munroe announced in March , 2014 that he had signed a deal with publisher Houghton Mifflin Harcourt to compile a large number of his What If ? entries into a book . What If ? : Serious Scientific Answers to Absurd Hypothetical Questions would eventually be released in September that year . 
 The What If ? book contains a selection of questions and answers from the original blog , as well as nineteen new ones . Furthermore , Munroe selected a few unanswered questions from his inbox and collected those in separate sections in the book . Alt text , which was commonly used for illustrations on the original blog , was omitted from the book in many cases , though is sometimes included as small captions underneath the images . Instead , Munroe has added footnotes to the essays in the book to inform or entertain the reader . The cover of the book depicts a Tyrannosaurus rex being lowered into a Sarlacc from Star Wars , a topic not covered in the book . 
 What If ? is Munroe 's second published book , his first being <unk> : Volume 0 , a curated collection of xkcd comics released in 2009 . Munroe released a third book , titled Thing <unk> , in 2015 . 
 = = Content = = 
 What If ? is mainly composed of answers Munroe gives to readers ' hypothetical questions on various scientific topics . The questions tend to be rather unusual , assuming an improbable scenario and inquiring a logical conclusion to the situation . The first question Munroe answered for the blog was the following : 
 What would happen if you tried to hit a baseball pitched at 90 % the speed of light ? 
 Using mathematics and physics , Munroe concluded such a situation would result in a large explosion . What If ? approaches its subject matter with a sense of wit and sometimes makes use of approximations to answer questions that seem impossible to solve . Most questions demand assumptions and cross @-@ disciplinary science skills to answer , resulting in " back @-@ of @-@ the @-@ envelope " calculations . What If ? is interspersed with " charmingly @-@ amateur " stick figure illustrations . 
 The book also features periodic sections titled " Weird ( and Worrying ) Questions from the What If ? <unk> " , which are short collections of questions Munroe had not answered because he " don 't want to think about that " . In an interview , Munroe stated that he " never got past the initial mental image " of the question " How cold would your teeth have to get in order for a cup of hot coffee to make them shatter on contact ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The book was received positively by critics . Ethan Gilsdorf of the Boston Globe stated that " it ’ s fun to watch as Munroe tackles each question and examines every possible complication . " According to Gilsdorf , What If ? gives a view into " Munroe ’ s playful yet existentially @-@ tinged worldview " by contrasting cataclysmic scenarios with more heady ideas , such as examining the effects of a magnitude minus @-@ 7 Richter scale earthquake . The Huffington Post remarked that " What makes Munroe 's work so fantastic is a combination of two elements : his commitment to trying to answer even the weirdest question with solid science , and his undeniable sense of humor . " Rhett Allain of Wired praised What If ? because even his 12 @-@ year old son was able to enjoy it , though he found a minor error in one of the sections . 
 Sam Hewitt of Varsity and Marla <unk> of The Escapist noted that the first print run had some issues processing mathematical symbols , as a square box was displayed where a delta is supposed to be printed . 
 What If ? was released on September 2 , 2014 and reached the top of the New York Times bestsellers list on September 21 , while getting featured as the " Amazon Best Book of the Month " . The book was a Goodreads Choice Awards " Best Nonfiction " nominee in 2014 as well . 
 = Andrew Johnson = 
 Andrew Johnson ( December 29 , 1808 – July 31 , 1875 ) was the 17th President of the United States , serving from 1865 to 1869 . Johnson became president as he was vice president at the time of President Abraham Lincoln 's assassination . A Democrat who ran with Lincoln on the National Union ticket , Johnson came to office as the Civil War concluded . The new president favored quick restoration of the seceded states to the Union . His plans did not give protection to the former slaves , and he came into conflict with the Republican @-@ dominated Congress , culminating in his impeachment by the House of Representatives . The first American president to be impeached , he was acquitted in the Senate by one vote . 
 Johnson was born in poverty in Raleigh , North Carolina . Apprenticed as a tailor , he worked in several frontier towns before settling in Greeneville , Tennessee . He served as alderman and mayor there before being elected to the Tennessee House of Representatives in 1835 . After brief service in the Tennessee Senate , Johnson was elected to the federal House of Representatives in 1843 , where he served five two @-@ year terms . He became Governor of Tennessee for four years , and was elected by the legislature to the Senate in 1857 . In his congressional service , he sought passage of the Homestead Bill , which was enacted soon after he left his Senate seat in 1862 . 
 As Southern slave states , including Tennessee , seceded to form the Confederate States of America , Johnson remained firmly with the Union . He was the only sitting senator from a Confederate state who did not resign his seat upon learning of his state 's secession . In 1862 , Lincoln appointed him as military governor of Tennessee after most of it had been retaken . In 1864 , Johnson , as a War Democrat and Southern Unionist , was a logical choice as running mate for Lincoln , who wished to send a message of national unity in his re @-@ election campaign ; their ticket easily won . When Johnson was sworn in as vice president in March 1865 , he gave a rambling speech . He later secluded himself to avoid public ridicule . Six weeks later , the assassination of Lincoln made him president . 
 Johnson implemented his own form of Presidential Reconstruction – a series of proclamations directing the seceded states to hold conventions and elections to re @-@ form their civil governments . When Southern states returned many of their old leaders , and passed Black Codes to deprive the freedmen of many civil liberties , Congressional Republicans refused to seat legislators from those states and advanced legislation to overrule the Southern actions . Johnson vetoed their bills , and Congressional Republicans overrode him , setting a pattern for the remainder of his presidency . Johnson opposed the Fourteenth Amendment , which gave citizenship to former slaves . In 1866 , Johnson went on an unprecedented national tour promoting his executive policies , seeking to destroy his Republican opponents . As the conflict between the branches of government grew , Congress passed the Tenure of Office Act , restricting Johnson 's ability to fire Cabinet officials . When he persisted in trying to dismiss Secretary of War Edwin Stanton , he was impeached by the House of Representatives , and narrowly avoided conviction in the Senate and removal from office . Returning to Tennessee after his presidency , Johnson sought political vindication , and gained it in his eyes when he was elected to the Senate again in 1875 ( the only former president to serve there ) , just months before his death . Many historians rank Johnson among the worst American presidents for his strong opposition to federally guaranteed rights for African Americans , while some historians admire Johnson for his strict constitutionalism . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Andrew Johnson was born in Raleigh , North Carolina , on December 29 , 1808 , to Jacob Johnson ( 1778 – 1812 ) and Mary ( " Polly " ) McDonough ( 1783 – 1856 ) , a laundress . He was of English , Scottish , and Irish ancestry . He had a brother William , four years his senior , and an older sister Elizabeth , who died in childhood . Johnson 's birth in a log cabin was a political asset in the mid @-@ 19th century , and he would frequently remind voters of his humble origins . Jacob Johnson was a poor man , as had been his father , William Johnson , but he became town constable of Raleigh before marrying and starting a family . He died of an apparent heart attack while ringing the town bell , shortly after rescuing three drowning men , when his son Andrew was three . Polly Johnson worked as a washerwoman and became the sole support of her family . Her occupation was then looked down on , as it often took her into other homes unaccompanied . There were even rumors that Andrew , who did not resemble his brother or sister , had been fathered by another man . Polly Johnson eventually remarried , to Turner <unk> , who was as poor as she was . 
 Johnson 's mother apprenticed her son William to a tailor , James Selby . Andrew also became an apprentice in Selby 's shop at age ten and was legally bound to serve until his 21st birthday . Johnson lived with his mother for part of his service , and one of Selby 's employees taught him rudimentary literacy skills . His education was augmented by citizens who would come to Selby 's shop to read to the tailors as they worked . Even before he became an apprentice , Johnson came to listen . The readings caused a lifelong love of learning , and one of his biographers , Annette Gordon @-@ Reed , suggests that Johnson , later a gifted public speaker , learned the art as he threaded needles and cut cloth . 
 Andrew Johnson was not happy at James Selby 's , and after about five years , both he and his brother ran away . Selby responded by placing a reward for their return : " Ten Dollars Reward . Ran away from the subscriber , two apprentice boys , legally bound , named William and Andrew Johnson ... [ payment ] to any person who will deliver said apprentices to me in Raleigh , or I will give the above reward for Andrew Johnson alone . " The brothers went to Carthage , North Carolina , where Andrew Johnson worked as a tailor for several months . Fearing he would be arrested and returned to Raleigh , Johnson moved to Laurens , South Carolina . He found work quickly , met his first love , Mary Wood , and made her a quilt as a gift . However , she rejected his marriage proposal . He returned to Raleigh , hoping to buy out his apprenticeship , but could not come to terms with Selby . Unable to stay in Raleigh , where he risked being apprehended for abandoning Selby , he decided to move west . 
 = = = Move to Tennessee = = = 
 Johnson left North Carolina for Tennessee , traveling mostly on foot . After a brief period in Knoxville , he moved to Mooresville , Alabama . He then worked as a tailor in Columbia , Tennessee , but was called back to Raleigh by his mother and stepfather , who saw limited opportunities there and who wished to emigrate west . Johnson and his party traveled through the Blue Ridge Mountains to Greeneville , Tennessee . Andrew Johnson fell in love with the town at first sight , and when he became prosperous purchased the land where he had first camped and planted a tree in commemoration . 
 In Greeneville , Johnson established a successful tailoring business in the front of his home . In 1827 , at the age of 18 , he married 16 @-@ year @-@ old Eliza <unk> , the daughter of a local shoemaker . The pair were married by Justice of the Peace Mordecai Lincoln , first cousin of Thomas Lincoln , whose son would become president . The Johnsons were married for almost 50 years and had five children : Martha ( 1828 ) , Charles ( 1830 ) , Mary ( 1832 ) , Robert ( 1834 ) , and Andrew Jr . ( 1852 ) . Though she suffered from Tuberculosis , Eliza supported her husband 's endeavors . She taught him mathematics skills and tutored him to improve his writing . Shy and retiring by nature , Eliza Johnson usually remained in Greeneville during Johnson 's political rise . She was not often seen during her husband 's presidency ; their daughter Martha usually served as official hostess . 
 Johnson 's tailoring business prospered during the early years of the marriage , enabling him to hire help and giving him the funds to invest profitably in real estate . He later boasted of his talents as a tailor , " my work never ripped or gave way . " He was a voracious reader . Books about famous orators aroused his interest in political dialogue , and he had private debates on the issues of the day with customers who held opposing views . He also took part in debates at Greeneville College . 
 = = Political rise = = 
 = = = Tennessee politician = = = 
 Johnson helped organize a mechanics ' ( working men 's ) ticket in the 1829 Greeneville municipal election . He was elected town alderman , along with his friends <unk> <unk> and Mordecai Lincoln . Following the 1831 Nat Turner slave rebellion , a state convention was called to pass a new constitution , including provisions to disenfranchise free people of color . The convention also wanted to reform real estate tax rates , and provide ways of funding improvements to Tennessee 's infrastructure . The constitution was submitted for a public vote , and Johnson spoke widely for its adoption ; the successful campaign provided him with statewide exposure . On January 4 , 1834 , his fellow aldermen elected him mayor of Greeneville . 
 In 1835 , Johnson made a bid for election to the " floater " seat which Greene County shared with neighboring Washington County in the Tennessee House of Representatives . According to his biographer , Hans L. Trefousse , Johnson " demolished " the opposition in debate and won the election with almost a two to one margin . Soon after taking his seat , Johnson purchased his first slave , Dolly , aged 14 . Dolly had three children over the years . Johnson had the reputation of treating his slaves kindly , and the fact that Dolly was dark @-@ skinned , and her offspring much lighter , led to speculation both during and after his lifetime that he was the father . During his Greeneville days , Johnson joined the Tennessee Militia as a member of the 90th Regiment . He attained the rank of colonel , though while an enrolled member , Johnson was fined for an unknown offense . Afterwards , he was often addressed or referred to by his rank . 
 In his first term in the legislature , which met in the state capital of Nashville , Johnson did not consistently vote with either the Democratic or the newly formed Whig Party , though he revered President Andrew Jackson , a Democrat and Tennessean . The major parties were still determining their core values and policy proposals , with the party system in a state of flux . The Whig Party had organized in opposition to Jackson , fearing the concentration of power in the Executive Branch of the government ; Johnson differed from the Whigs as he opposed more than minimal government spending and spoke against aid for the railroads , while his constituents hoped for improvements in transportation . After Brookins Campbell and the Whigs defeated Johnson for re @-@ election in 1837 , Johnson would not lose another race for thirty years . In 1839 , he sought to regain his seat , initially as a Whig , but when another candidate sought the Whig nomination , he ran as a Democrat and was elected . From that time he supported the Democratic party and built a powerful political machine in Greene County . Johnson became a strong advocate of the Democratic Party , noted for his oratory , and in an era when public speaking both informed the public and entertained it , people flocked to hear him . 
 In 1840 , Johnson was selected as a presidential elector for Tennessee , giving him more statewide publicity . Although Democratic President Martin Van Buren was defeated by former Ohio senator William Henry Harrison , Johnson was instrumental in keeping Tennessee and Greene County in the Democratic column . He was elected to the Tennessee Senate in 1841 , where he served a two @-@ year term . He had achieved financial success in his tailoring business , but sold it to concentrate on politics . He had also acquired additional real estate , including a larger home and a farm ( where his mother and stepfather took residence ) , and among his assets numbered eight or nine slaves . 
 = = = Congressman ( 1843 – 1853 ) = = = 
 Having served in both houses of the legislature , Johnson saw election to Congress as the next step in his political career . He engaged in a number of political maneuvers to gain Democratic support , including the displacement of the Whig postmaster in Greeneville , and defeated Jonesborough lawyer John A. Aiken by 5 @,@ 495 votes to 4 @,@ 892 . In Washington , he joined a new Democratic majority in the House of Representatives . Johnson advocated for the interests of the poor , maintained an anti @-@ abolitionist stance , argued for only limited spending by the government and opposed protective tariffs . With Eliza remaining in Greeneville , Congressman Johnson shunned social functions in favor of study in the Library of Congress . Although a fellow Tennessee Democrat , James K. Polk , was elected president in 1844 , and Johnson had campaigned for him , the two men had difficult relations , and President Polk refused some of his patronage suggestions . 
 Johnson believed , as did many Southern Democrats , that the Constitution protected private property , including slaves , and thus prohibited the federal and state governments from abolishing slavery . He won a second term in 1845 against Wiliam G. Brownlow , presenting himself as the defender of the poor against the aristocracy . In his second term , Johnson supported the Polk administration 's decision to fight the Mexican War , seen by some Northerners as an attempt to gain territory to expand slavery westward , and opposed the Wilmot Proviso , a proposal to ban slavery in any territory gained from Mexico . He introduced for the first time his Homestead Bill , to grant 160 acres ( 65 ha ) to people willing to settle the land and gain title to it . This issue was especially important to Johnson because of his own humble beginnings . 
 In the presidential election of 1848 , the Democrats split over the slavery issue , and abolitionists formed the Free Soil Party , with former president Van Buren as their nominee . Johnson supported the Democratic candidate , former Michigan senator Lewis Cass . With the party split , Whig nominee General Zachary Taylor was easily victorious , and carried Tennessee . Johnson 's relations with Polk remained poor ; the President recorded of his final New Year 's reception in 1849 that 
 Among the visitors I observed in the crowd today was Hon. Andrew Johnson of the Ho . <unk> . [ House of Representatives ] Though he represents a Democratic District in Tennessee ( my own State ) this is the first time I have seen him during the present session of Congress . Professing to be a Democrat , he has been politically , if not personally hostile to me during my whole term . He is very vindictive and perverse in his temper and conduct . If he had the manliness and independence to declare his opposition openly , he knows he could not be elected by his constituents . I am not aware that I have ever given him cause for offense . 
 Johnson , due to national interest in new railroad construction and in response to the need for better transportation in his own district , also supported government assistance for the East Tennessee and Virginia Railroad . 
 In his campaign for a fourth term , Johnson concentrated on three issues : slavery , homesteads and judicial elections . He defeated his opponent , Nathaniel G. Taylor , in August 1849 , with a greater margin of victory than in previous campaigns . When the House convened in December , the party division caused by the Free Soil Party precluded the formation of the majority needed to elect a Speaker . Johnson proposed adoption of a rule allowing election of a Speaker by a plurality ; some weeks later others took up a similar proposal , and Democrat Howell Cobb was elected . 
 Once the Speaker election had concluded and Congress was ready to conduct legislative business , the issue of slavery took center stage . Northerners sought to admit California , a free state , to the Union . Kentucky 's Henry Clay introduced in the Senate a series of resolutions , the Compromise of 1850 , to admit California and pass legislation sought by each side . Johnson voted for all the provisions except for the abolition of slavery in the nation 's capital . He pressed resolutions for constitutional amendments to provide for popular election of senators ( then elected by state legislatures ) and of the president ( chosen by the Electoral College ) , and limiting the tenure of federal judges to 12 years . These were all defeated . 
 A group of Democrats nominated Landon Carter Haynes to oppose Johnson as he sought a fifth term ; the Whigs were so pleased with the internecine battle among the Democrats in the general election that they did not nominate a candidate of their own . The campaign included fierce debates : Johnson 's main issue was the passage of the Homestead Bill ; Haynes contended it would facilitate abolition . Johnson won the election by more than 1600 votes . Though he was not enamored of the party 's presidential nominee in 1852 , former New Hampshire senator Franklin Pierce , Johnson campaigned for him . Pierce was elected , but he failed to carry Tennessee . In 1852 , Johnson managed to get the House to pass his Homestead Bill , but it failed in the Senate . The Whigs had gained control of the Tennessee legislature , and , under the leadership of Gustavus Henry , redrew the boundaries of Johnson 's First District to make it a safe seat for their party . The Nashville Union termed this " Henry @-@ <unk> " ; lamented Johnson , " I have no political future . " 
 = = = Governor of Tennessee ( 1853 – 57 ) = = = 
 If Johnson considered retiring from politics upon deciding not to seek re @-@ election , he soon changed his mind . The congressman 's political friends began to maneuver to get him the nomination for governor . The Democratic convention unanimously named him , though some party members were not happy at his selection . The Whigs had won the past two gubernatorial elections , and still controlled the legislature . That party nominated Henry , making the " Henry @-@ <unk> " of the First District an immediate issue . The two men debated in county seats the length of Tennessee before the meetings were called off two weeks before the August 1853 election due to illness in Henry 's family . Johnson won the election by 63 @,@ 413 votes to 61 @,@ 163 ; some votes for him were cast in return for his promise to support Whig Nathaniel Taylor for his old seat in Congress . 
 Tennessee 's governor had little power — Johnson could propose legislation but not veto it , and most appointments were made by the Whig @-@ controlled legislature . Nevertheless , the office was a bully pulpit that allowed him to publicize himself and his political views . He succeeded in getting the appointments he wanted in return for his endorsement of John Bell , a Whig , for one of the state 's U.S. Senate seats . In his first biennial speech , Johnson urged simplification of the state judicial system , abolishment of the Bank of Tennessee and establishment of an agency to provide uniformity in weights and measures ; the last was passed . Johnson was critical of the Tennessee common school system and suggested funding be increased via taxes , either statewide or county by county — a mixture of the two was passed . Reforms carried out during Johnson 's time as governor included the foundation of the State 's public library ( making books available to all ) and its first public school system , and the initiation of regular State fairs to benefit craftsmen and farmers . 
 Although the Whig Party was on its final decline nationally , it remained strong in Tennessee , and the outlook for Democrats there in 1855 was poor . Feeling that re @-@ election as governor was necessary to give him a chance at the higher offices he sought , Johnson agreed to make the run . Meredith P. Gentry received the Whig nomination . A series of more than a dozen vitriolic debates ensued . The issues in the campaign were slavery , the prohibition of alcohol , and the nativist positions of the Know Nothing Party . Johnson favored the first , but opposed the others . Gentry was more equivocal on the alcohol question , and had gained the support of the Know Nothings , a group Johnson portrayed as a secret society . Johnson was unexpectedly victorious , albeit with a narrower margin than in 1853 . 
 When the presidential election of 1856 approached , Johnson hoped to be nominated ; some Tennessee county conventions designated him a favorite son . His position that the best interests of the Union were served by slavery in some areas made him a practical compromise candidate for president . He was never a major contender ; the nomination fell to former Pennsylvania senator James Buchanan . Though he was not impressed by either , Johnson campaigned for Buchanan and his running mate , John C. Breckinridge , who were elected . 
 Johnson decided not to seek a third term as governor , with an eye towards election to the U.S. Senate . In 1857 , while returning from Washington , his train derailed , causing serious damage to his right arm . This injury would trouble him in the years to come . 
 = = = United States Senator = = = 
 = = = = Homestead Bill advocate = = = = 
 The victors in the 1857 state legislative campaign would , once they convened in October , elect a United States Senator . Former Whig governor William B. Campbell wrote to his uncle , " The great anxiety of the Whigs is to elect a majority in the legislature so as to defeat Andrew Johnson for senator . Should the Democrats have the majority , he will certainly be their choice , and there is no man living to whom the Americans and Whigs have as much antipathy as Johnson . " The governor spoke widely in the campaign , and his party won the gubernatorial race and control of the legislature . Johnson 's final address as governor gave him the chance to influence his electors , and he made proposals popular among Democrats . Two days later the legislature elected him to the Senate . The opposition was appalled , with the Richmond Whig newspaper referring to him as " the vilest radical and most unscrupulous demagogue in the Union . " 
 Johnson gained high office due to his proven record as a man popular among the small farmers and self @-@ employed tradesmen who made up much of Tennessee 's electorate . He called them the " <unk> " ; he was less popular among the planters and lawyers who led the state Democratic Party , but none could match him as a vote @-@ getter . After his death , one Tennessee voter wrote of him , " Johnson was always the same to everyone ... the honors heaped upon him did not make him forget to be kind to the humblest citizen . " Always seen in impeccably tailored clothing , he cut an impressive figure , and had the stamina to endure lengthy campaigns with daily travel over bad roads leading to another speech or debate . Mostly denied the party 's machinery , he relied on a network of friends , advisers , and contacts . One friend , Hugh Douglas , stated in a letter to him , " you have been in the way of our would be great men for a long time . At heart many of us never wanted you to be Governor only none of the rest of us Could have been elected at the time and we only wanted to use you . Then we did not want you to go to the Senate but the people would send you . " 
 The new senator took his seat when Congress convened in December 1857 ( the term of his predecessor , James C. Jones , had expired in March ) . He came to Washington as usual without his wife and family ; Eliza would visit Washington only once during Johnson 's first time as senator , in 1860 . Johnson immediately set about introducing the Homestead Bill in the Senate , but as most senators who supported it were Northern ( many associated with the newly founded Republican Party ) , the matter became caught up in suspicions over the slavery issue . Southern senators felt that those who took advantage of the provisions of the Homestead Bill were more likely to be Northern non @-@ slaveholders . The issue of slavery had been complicated by the Supreme Court 's ruling earlier in the year in Dred Scott v. Sandford that slavery could not be prohibited in the territories . Johnson , a slaveholding senator from a Southern state , made a major speech in the Senate the following May in an attempt to convince his colleagues that the Homestead Bill and slavery were not incompatible . Nevertheless , Southern opposition was key to defeating the legislation , 30 – 22 . In 1859 , it failed on a procedural vote when Vice President Breckinridge broke a tie against the bill , and in 1860 , a watered @-@ down version passed both houses , only to be vetoed by Buchanan at the urging of Southerners . Johnson continued his opposition to spending , chairing a committee to control it . 
 He argued against funding to build Washington , D.C. ' s infrastructure , stating that it was unfair to expect state citizens to pay for the city 's streets , even if it was the seat of government . He opposed spending money for troops to put down the revolt by the Mormons in Utah Territory , arguing for temporary volunteers as the United States should not have a standing army . 
 = = = = Secession crisis = = = = 
 In October 1859 , abolitionist John Brown and sympathizers raided the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry , Virginia ( today West Virginia ) . Tensions in Washington between pro- and anti @-@ slavery forces increased greatly . Johnson gave a major speech in the Senate in December , decrying Northerners who would endanger the Union by seeking to outlaw slavery . The Tennessee senator stated that " all men are created equal " from the Declaration of Independence did not apply to African @-@ Americans , since the Constitution of Illinois contained that phrase — and that document barred voting by African @-@ Americans . 
 Johnson hoped that he would be a compromise candidate for the presidential nomination as the Democratic Party tore itself apart over the slavery question . Busy with the Homestead Bill during the 1860 Democratic National Convention in Charleston , South Carolina , he sent two of his sons and his chief political adviser to represent his interests in the backroom deal @-@ making . The convention deadlocked , with no candidate able to gain the required two @-@ thirds vote , but the sides were too far apart to consider Johnson as a compromise . The party split , with Northerners backing Illinois Senator Stephen Douglas while Southerners , including Johnson , supported Vice President Breckinridge for president . With former Tennessee senator John Bell running a fourth @-@ party candidacy and further dividing the vote , the Republican Party elected its first president , former Illinois representative Abraham Lincoln . The election of Lincoln , known to be against the spread of slavery , was unacceptable to many in the South . Although secession from the Union had not been an issue in the campaign , talk of it began in the Southern states . 
 Johnson took to the Senate floor after the election , giving a speech well received in the North , " I will not give up this government ... No ; I intend to stand by it ... and I invite every man who is a patriot to ... rally around the altar of our common country ... and swear by our God , and all that is sacred and holy , that the Constitution shall be saved , and the Union preserved . " As Southern senators announced they would resign if their states seceded , he reminded Mississippi Senator Jefferson Davis that if Southerners would only hold to their seats , the Democrats would control the Senate , and could defend the South 's interests against any infringement by Lincoln . Gordon @-@ Reed points out that while Johnson 's belief in an indissoluble Union was sincere , he had alienated Southern leaders , including Davis , who would soon be the president of the Confederate States of America , formed by the seceding states . If the Tennessean had backed the Confederacy , he would have had small influence in its government . 
 Johnson returned home when his state took up the issue of secession . His successor as governor , Isham G. Harris , and the legislature , organized a referendum on whether to have a constitutional convention to authorize secession ; when that failed , they put the question of leaving the Union to a popular vote . Despite threats on Johnson 's life , and actual assaults , he campaigned against both questions , sometimes speaking with a gun on the lectern before him . Although Johnson 's eastern region of Tennessee was largely against secession , the second referendum passed , and in June 1861 , Tennessee joined the Confederacy . Believing he would be killed if he stayed , Johnson fled through the Cumberland Gap , where his party was in fact shot at . He left his wife and family in Greeneville . 
 As the only member from a seceded state to remain in the Senate and the most prominent Southern Unionist , Johnson had Lincoln 's ear in the early months of the war . With most of Tennessee in Confederate hands , Johnson spent congressional recesses in Kentucky and Ohio , trying in vain to convince any Union commander who would listen to conduct an operation into East Tennessee . 
 = = = Military Governor of Tennessee = = = 
 Johnson 's first tenure in the Senate came to a conclusion in March 1862 when Lincoln appointed him military governor of Tennessee . Much of the central and western portions of that seceded state had been recovered . Although some argued that civil government should simply resume once the Confederates were defeated in an area , Lincoln chose to use his power as commander in chief to appoint military governors over Union @-@ controlled Southern regions . The Senate quickly confirmed Johnson 's nomination along with the rank of brigadier general . In response , the Confederates confiscated his land and his slaves , and turned his home into a military hospital . Later in 1862 , after his departure from the Senate and in the absence of most Southern legislators , the Homestead Bill was finally enacted . Along with legislation for land @-@ grant colleges and for the transcontinental railroad , the Homestead Bill has been credited with opening the American West to settlement . 
 As military governor , Johnson sought to eliminate rebel influence in the state . He demanded loyalty oaths from public officials , and shut down all newspapers owned by Confederate sympathizers . Much of eastern Tennessee remained in Confederate hands , and the ebb and flow of war during 1862 sometimes brought Confederate control again close to Nashville . However , the Confederate allowed his wife and family to pass through the lines to join him . Johnson undertook the defense of Nashville as best he could , though the city was continually harassed by cavalry raids led by General Nathan Bedford Forrest . Relief from Union regulars did not come until William S. Rosecrans defeated the Confederates at Murfreesboro in early 1863 . Much of eastern Tennessee was captured later that year . 
 When Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation in January 1863 , declaring freedom for all slaves in Confederate @-@ held areas , he exempted Tennessee at Johnson 's request . The proclamation increased the debate over what should become of the slaves after the war , as not all Unionists supported abolition . Johnson finally decided that slavery had to end . He wrote , " If the institution of slavery ... seeks to overthrow it [ the Government ] , then the Government has a clear right to destroy it " . He reluctantly supported efforts to enlist former slaves into the Union Army , feeling that African @-@ Americans should perform menial tasks to release white Americans to do the fighting . Nevertheless , he succeeded in recruiting 20 @,@ 000 black soldiers to serve the Union . 
 = = Vice President ( 1865 ) = = 
 In 1860 , Lincoln 's running mate had been Maine Senator Hannibal Hamlin . Vice President Hamlin had served competently , was in good health , and was willing to run . Nevertheless , Johnson emerged as running mate for Lincoln 's re @-@ election bid in 1864 . 
 Lincoln considered several War Democrats for the ticket in 1864 , and sent an agent to sound out General Benjamin Butler as a possible running mate . In May 1864 , the President dispatched General Daniel Sickles to Nashville on a fact @-@ finding mission . Although Sickles denied he was there either to investigate or interview the military governor , Johnson biographer Hans L. Trefousse believes Sickles 's trip was connected to Johnson 's subsequent nomination for vice president . According to historian Albert Castel in his account of Johnson 's presidency , Lincoln was impressed by Johnson 's administration of Tennessee . Gordon @-@ Reed points out that while the Lincoln @-@ Hamlin ticket might have been considered geographically balanced in 1860 , " having Johnson , the southern War Democrat , on the ticket sent the right message about the folly of secession and the continuing capacity for union within the country . " Another factor was the desire of Secretary of State William Seward to frustrate the vice @-@ presidential candidacy of his fellow New Yorker , former senator Daniel S. Dickinson , a War Democrat , as Seward would probably have had to yield his place if another New Yorker became vice president . Johnson , once he was told by reporters the likely purpose of Sickles ' visit , was active on his own behalf , giving speeches and having his political friends work behind the scenes to boost his candidacy . 
 To sound a theme of unity , Lincoln in 1864 ran under the banner of the National Union Party , rather than the Republicans . At the party 's convention in Baltimore in June , Lincoln was easily nominated , although there had been some talk of replacing him with a Cabinet officer or one of the more successful generals . After the convention backed Lincoln , former Secretary of War Simon Cameron offered a resolution to nominate Hamlin , but it was defeated . Johnson was nominated for vice president by C.M. Allen of Indiana with an Iowa delegate as <unk> . On the first ballot , Johnson led with 200 votes to 150 for Hamlin and 108 for Dickinson . On the second ballot , Kentucky switched to vote for Johnson , beginning a stampede . Johnson was named on the second ballot with 491 votes to Hamlin 's 17 and eight for Dickinson ; the nomination was made unanimous . Lincoln expressed pleasure at the result , " Andy Johnson , I think , is a good man . " When word reached Nashville , a crowd assembled and the military governor obliged with a speech contending his selection as a Southerner meant that the rebel states had not actually left the Union . 
 Although it was unusual at the time for a national candidate to actively campaign , Johnson gave a number of speeches in Tennessee , Kentucky , Ohio , and Indiana . He also sought to boost his chances in Tennessee while re @-@ establishing civil government by making the loyalty oath even more restrictive , in that voters would now have to swear they opposed making a settlement with the Confederacy . The Democratic candidate for president , George McClellan , hoped to avoid additional bloodshed by negotiation , and so the stricter loyalty oath effectively disenfranchised his supporters . Lincoln declined to override Johnson , and their ticket took the state by 25 @,@ 000 votes . Congress refused to count Tennessee 's electoral votes , but Lincoln and Johnson did not need them , having won in most states that had voted , and easily secured the election . 
 Now Vice President @-@ elect , Johnson was anxious to complete the work of re @-@ establishing civilian government in Tennessee , although the timetable for the election of a new governor did not allow it to take place until after Inauguration Day , March 4 . He hoped to remain in Nashville to complete his task , but was told by Lincoln 's advisers that he could not stay , but would be sworn in with Lincoln . In these months , Union troops finished the retaking of eastern Tennessee , including Greeneville . Just before his departure , the voters of Tennessee ratified a new constitution , abolishing slavery , on February 22 , 1865 . One of Johnson 's final acts as military governor was to certify the results . 
 Johnson traveled to Washington to be sworn in , although according to Gordon @-@ Reed , " in light of what happened on March 4 , 1865 , it might have been better if Johnson had stayed in Nashville . " He may have been ill ; Castel cited typhoid fever , though Gordon @-@ Reed notes that there is no independent evidence for that diagnosis . On the evening of March 3 , Johnson attended a party in his honor ; he drank heavily . Hung over the following morning at the Capitol , he asked Vice President Hamlin for some whiskey . Hamlin produced a bottle , and Johnson took two stiff drinks , stating " I need all the strength for the occasion I can have . " In the Senate Chamber , Johnson delivered a rambling address as Lincoln , the Congress , and dignitaries looked on . Almost incoherent at times , he finally meandered to a halt , whereupon Hamlin hastily swore him in as vice president . Lincoln , who had watched sadly during the debacle , was sworn in , and delivered his acclaimed Second Inaugural Address . 
 In the weeks after the inauguration , Johnson only presided over the Senate briefly , and hid from public ridicule at the Maryland home of a friend , Francis Preston Blair . When he did return to Washington , it was with the intent of leaving for Tennessee to re @-@ establish his family in Greeneville . Instead , he remained after word came that General Ulysses S. Grant had captured the Confederate capital of Richmond , Virginia , presaging the end of the war . Lincoln stated , in response to criticism of Johnson 's behavior , that " I have known Andy Johnson for many years ; he made a bad slip the other day , but you need not be scared ; Andy ain 't a drunkard . " 
 = = President ( 1865 – 69 ) = = 
 = = = Accession = = = 
 On the afternoon of April 14 , 1865 , Lincoln and Johnson met for the first time since the inauguration . Trefousse states that Johnson wanted to " induce Lincoln not to be too lenient with traitors " ; Gordon @-@ Reed agrees . 
 That night , President Lincoln was shot and mortally wounded by John Wilkes Booth , a Confederate sympathizer . The shooting of the President was part of a conspiracy to assassinate Lincoln , Johnson , and Seward the same night . Seward barely survived his wounds , while Johnson escaped attack as his would @-@ be assassin , George Atzerodt , got drunk instead of killing the vice president . Leonard J. Farwell , a fellow boarder at the Kirkwood House , awoke Johnson with news of Lincoln 's shooting at Ford 's Theatre . Johnson rushed to the President 's deathbed , where he remained a short time , on his return promising , " They shall suffer for this . They shall suffer for this . " Lincoln died at 7 : 22 am the next morning ; Johnson 's swearing in occurred between 10 and 11 am with Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase presiding in the presence of most of the Cabinet . Johnson 's demeanor was described by the newspapers as " solemn and dignified " . Some Cabinet members had last seen Johnson , apparently drunk , at the inauguration . At noon , Johnson conducted his first Cabinet meeting in the Treasury Secretary 's office , and asked all members to remain in their positions . 
 The events of the assassination resulted in speculation , then and subsequently , concerning Johnson and what the conspirators might have intended for him . In the vain hope of having his life spared after his capture , Atzerodt spoke much about the conspiracy , but did not say anything to indicate that the plotted assassination of Johnson was merely a ruse . Conspiracy theorists point to the fact that on the day of the assassination , Booth came to the Kirkwood House and left one of his cards . This object was received by Johnson 's private secretary , William A. Browning , with an inscription , " Are you at home ? Don 't wish to disturb you . J. Wilkes Booth . " 
 Johnson presided with dignity over Lincoln 's funeral ceremonies in Washington , before his predecessor 's body was sent home to Springfield , Illinois , for burial . Shortly after Lincoln 's death , Union General William T. Sherman reported he had , without consulting Washington , reached an armistice agreement with Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston for the surrender of Confederate forces in North Carolina in exchange for the existing state government remaining in power , with private property rights to be respected . This did not even acknowledge the freedom of those in slavery . This was not acceptable to Johnson or the Cabinet who sent word for Sherman to secure the surrender without making political deals , which he did . Further , Johnson placed a $ 100 @,@ 000 bounty ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 5 million in 2015 ) on Confederate President Davis , then a fugitive , which gave him the reputation of a man who would be tough on the South . More controversially , he permitted the execution of Mary Surratt for her part in Lincoln 's assassination . Surratt was executed with three others , including Atzerodt , on July 7 , 1865 . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 Upon taking office , Johnson faced the question of what to do with the Confederacy . President Lincoln had authorized loyalist governments in Virginia , Arkansas , Louisiana , and Tennessee as the Union came to control large parts of those states and advocated a ten percent plan that would allow elections after ten percent of the voters in any state took an oath of future loyalty to the Union . Congress considered this too lenient ; its own plan , requiring a majority of voters to take the loyalty oath , passed both houses in 1864 , but Lincoln pocket vetoed it . 
 Johnson had three goals in Reconstruction . He sought a speedy restoration of the states , on the grounds that they had never truly left the Union , and thus should again be recognized once loyal citizens formed a government . To Johnson , African @-@ American suffrage was a delay and a distraction ; it had always been a state responsibility to decide who should vote . Second , political power in the Southern states should pass from the planter class to his beloved " <unk> " . Johnson feared that the freedmen , many of whom were still economically bound to their former masters , might vote at their direction . Johnson 's third priority was election in his own right in 1868 , a feat no one who had succeeded a deceased president had managed to accomplish , attempting to secure a Democratic anti Congressional Reconstruction coalition in the South . 
 The Republicans had formed a number of factions . The Radical Republicans sought voting and other civil rights for African @-@ Americans . They believed that the freedmen could be induced to vote Republican in gratitude for emancipation , and that black votes could keep the Republicans in power and Southern Democrats , including former rebels , out of influence . They believed that top Confederates should be punished . The Moderate Republicans sought to keep the Democrats out of power at a national level , and prevent former rebels from resuming power . They were not as enthusiastic about the idea of African @-@ American suffrage as their Radical colleagues , either because of their own local political concerns , or because they believed that the freedman would be likely to cast his vote badly . Northern Democrats favored the unconditional restoration of the Southern states . They did not support African @-@ American suffrage , which might threaten Democratic control in the South . 
 = = = = Presidential Reconstruction = = = = 
 Johnson was initially left to devise a Reconstruction policy without legislative intervention , as Congress was not due to meet again until December 1865 . Radical Republicans told the President that the Southern states were economically in a state of chaos and urged him to use his leverage to insist on rights for freedmen as a condition of restoration to the Union . But Johnson , with the support of other officials including Seward , insisted that the franchise was a state , not a federal matter . The Cabinet was divided on the issue . 
 Johnson 's first Reconstruction actions were two proclamations , with the unanimous backing of his Cabinet , on May 29 . One recognized the Virginia government led by provisional Governor Francis Pierpont . The second provided amnesty for all ex @-@ rebels except those holding property valued at $ 20 @,@ 000 or more ; it also appointed a temporary governor for North Carolina and authorized elections . Neither of these proclamations included provisions regarding black suffrage or freedmen 's rights . The President ordered constitutional conventions in other former rebel states . 
 As Southern states began the process of forming governments , Johnson 's policies received considerable public support in the North , which he took as unconditional backing for quick reinstatement of the South . While he received such support from the white South , he underestimated the determination of Northerners to ensure that the war had not been fought for nothing . It was important , in Northern public opinion , that the South acknowledge its defeat , that slavery be ended , and that the lot of African @-@ Americans be improved . Voting rights were less important — after all , only a handful of Northern states ( mostly in New England ) gave African @-@ American men the right to vote on the same basis as whites , and in late 1865 , Connecticut , Wisconsin , and Minnesota voted down African @-@ American suffrage proposals by large margins . Northern public opinion tolerated Johnson 's inaction on black suffrage as an experiment , to be allowed if it quickened Southern acceptance of defeat . Instead , white Southerners felt emboldened . A number of Southern states passed Black Codes , binding African @-@ American laborers to farms on annual contracts they could not quit , and allowing law enforcement at whim to arrest them for vagrancy and rent out their labor . Most Southerners elected to Congress were former Confederates , with the most prominent being Georgia Senator @-@ designate and former Confederate vice president Alexander Stephens . Congress assembled in early December 1865 ; Johnson 's conciliatory annual message to them was well received . Nevertheless , Congress refused to seat the Southern legislators and established a committee to recommend appropriate Reconstruction legislation . 
 Northerners were outraged at the idea of unrepentant Confederate leaders , such as Stephens , rejoining the federal government at a time when emotional wounds from the war remained raw . They saw the Black Codes placing African @-@ Americans in a position barely above slavery . Republicans also feared that restoration of the Southern states would return the Democrats to power . In addition , according to David O. Stewart in his book on Johnson 's impeachment , " the violence and poverty that oppressed the South would galvanize the opposition to Johnson " . 
 = = = = Break with the Republicans : 1866 = = = = 
 Congress was reluctant to confront the President , and initially only sought to fine @-@ tune Johnson 's policies towards the South . According to Trefousse , " If there was a time when Johnson could have come to an agreement with the moderates of the Republican Party , it was the period following the return of Congress " . The President was unhappy about the provocative actions of the Southern states , and about the continued control by the antebellum elite there , but made no statement publicly , believing that Southerners had a right to act as they did , even if it was unwise to do so . By late January 1866 , he was convinced that winning a showdown with the Radical Republicans was necessary to his political plans – both for the success of Reconstruction and for re @-@ election in 1868 . He would have preferred that the conflict arise over the legislative efforts to enfranchise African @-@ Americans in the District of Columbia , a proposal that had been defeated overwhelmingly in an all @-@ white referendum . A bill to accomplish this passed the House of Representatives , but to Johnson 's disappointment , stalled in the Senate before he could veto it . 
 Illinois Senator Lyman Trumbull , leader of the Moderate Republicans and Chairman of the Judiciary Committee , was anxious to reach an understanding with the President . He ushered through Congress a bill extending the Freedmen 's Bureau beyond its scheduled abolition in 1867 , and the first Civil Rights Bill , to grant citizenship to the freedmen . Trumbull met several times with Johnson , and was convinced the President would sign the measures ( Johnson rarely contradicted visitors , often fooling those who met with him into thinking he was in accord ) . In fact , the President opposed both bills as infringements on state sovereignty . Additionally , both of Trumbull 's bills were unpopular among white Southerners , whom Johnson hoped to include in his new party . Johnson vetoed the Freedman 's Bureau bill on February 18 , 1866 , to the delight of white Southerners and the puzzled anger of Republican legislators . He considered himself vindicated when a move to override his veto failed in the Senate the following day . Johnson believed that the Radicals would now be isolated and defeated , and that the Moderate Republicans would form behind him ; he did not understand that Moderates too wanted to see African @-@ Americans treated fairly . 
 On February 22 , 1866 , Washington 's Birthday , Johnson gave an impromptu speech to supporters who had marched to the White House and called for an address in honor of the first president . In his hour @-@ long speech , he instead referred to himself over 200 times . More <unk> , he also spoke of " men ... still opposed to the Union " to whom he could not extend the hand of friendship he gave to the South . When called upon by the crowd to say who they were , Johnson named Pennsylvania Congressman Thaddeus Stevens , Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner , and abolitionist Wendell Phillips , and accused them of plotting his assassination . Republicans viewed the address as a declaration of war , while one Democratic ally estimated Johnson 's speech cost the party 200 @,@ 000 votes in the 1866 congressional midterm elections . 
 Although strongly urged by Moderates to sign the Civil Rights Bill , Johnson broke decisively with them by vetoing it on March 27 . In his veto message , he objected to the measure because it conferred citizenship on the freedmen at a time when 11 out of 36 states were unrepresented in the Congress , and that it discriminated in favor of African @-@ Americans and against whites . Within three weeks , Congress had overridden his veto , the first time that had been done on a major bill in American history . The veto of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 , often seen as a key mistake of Johnson 's presidency , convinced Moderates there was no hope of working with him . Historian Eric Foner in his volume on Reconstruction views it as " the most disastrous miscalculation of his political career " . According to Stewart , the veto was " for many his defining blunder , setting a tone of perpetual confrontation with Congress that prevailed for the rest of his presidency " . 
 Congress also proposed the Fourteenth Amendment to the states . Written by Trumbull and others , it was sent for ratification by state legislatures in a process in which the president plays no part , though Johnson opposed it . The amendment was designed to put the key provisions of the Civil Rights Act into the Constitution , but also went further . The amendment extended citizenship to every person born in the United States ( except Indians on reservations ) , penalized states that did not give the vote to freedmen , and most importantly , created new federal civil rights that could be protected by federal courts . It also guaranteed that the federal debt would be paid and forbade repayment of Confederate war debts . Further , it disqualified many former Confederates from office , although the disability could be removed — by Congress , not the president . Both houses passed the Freedmen 's Bureau Act a second time , and again the President vetoed it ; this time , the veto was overridden . By the summer of 1866 , when Congress finally adjourned , Johnson 's method of restoring states to the Union by executive fiat , without safeguards for the freedmen , was in deep trouble . His home state of Tennessee ratified the Fourteenth Amendment despite the President 's opposition . When Tennessee did so , Congress immediately seated its proposed delegation , embarrassing Johnson . 
 Efforts to compromise failed , and a political war ensued between the united Republicans on one side , and on the other , Johnson and his allies in the Democratic Party , North and South . He called a convention of the National Union Party . Republicans had returned to using their previous identifier ; Johnson intended to use the discarded name to unite his supporters and gain election to a full @-@ term , in 1868 . The battleground was the election of 1866 ; Southern states were not allowed to vote . Johnson campaigned vigorously , undertaking a public speaking tour , known as the " Swing Around the Circle " . The trip , including speeches in Chicago , St. Louis , Indianapolis and Columbus , proved politically disastrous , with the President making controversial comparisons between himself and Christ , and engaging in arguments with hecklers . These exchanges were attacked as beneath the dignity of the presidency . The Republicans won by a landslide , increasing their two @-@ thirds majority in Congress , and made plans to control Reconstruction . Johnson blamed the Democrats for giving only lukewarm support to the National Union movement . 
 = = = = Radical Reconstruction = = = = 
 Even with the Republican victory in November 1866 , Johnson considered himself in a strong position . The Fourteenth Amendment had been ratified by none of the Southern or border states except Tennessee , and had been rejected in Kentucky , Delaware , and Maryland . As the amendment required ratification by three @-@ quarters of the states to become part of the Constitution , he believed the deadlock would be broken in his favor , leading to his election in 1868 . Once it reconvened in December 1866 , an energized Congress began passing legislation , often over a presidential veto ; this included the District of Columbia voting bill . Congress admitted Nebraska to the Union over a veto , and the Republicans gained two senators , and a state that promptly ratified the amendment . Johnson 's veto of a bill for statehood for Colorado Territory was sustained ; enough senators agreed that a district with a population of 30 @,@ 000 was not yet worthy of statehood to win the day . 
 In January 1867 , Congressman Stevens introduced legislation to dissolve the Southern state governments and reconstitute them into five military districts , under martial law . The states would begin again by holding constitutional conventions . African @-@ Americans could vote for or become delegates ; former Confederates could not . In the legislative process , Congress added to the bill that restoration to the Union would follow the state 's ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment , and completion of the process of adding it to the Constitution . Johnson and the Southerners attempted a compromise , whereby the South would agree to a modified version of the amendment without the disqualification of former Confederates , and for limited black suffrage . The Republicans insisted on the full language of the amendment , and the deal fell through . Although Johnson could have pocket vetoed the First Reconstruction Act as it was presented to him less than ten days before the end of the Thirty @-@ Ninth Congress , he chose to veto it directly on March 2 , 1867 ; Congress overruled him the same day . Also on March 2 , Congress passed the Tenure of Office Act over the President 's veto , in response to statements during the Swing Around the Circle that he planned to fire Cabinet secretaries who did not agree with him . This bill , requiring Senate approval for the firing of Cabinet members during the tenure of the president who appointed them and for one month afterwards , was immediately controversial , with some senators doubting that it was constitutional or that its terms applied to Johnson , whose key Cabinet officers were Lincoln holdovers . 
 = = = Impeachment = = = 
 Secretary of War Edwin Stanton was an able and hard @-@ working man , but difficult to deal with . Johnson both admired and was exasperated by his War Secretary , who , in combination with General of the Army Grant , worked to undermine the president 's Southern policy from within his own administration . Johnson considered firing Stanton , but respected him for his wartime service as secretary . Stanton , for his part , feared allowing Johnson to appoint his successor and refused to resign , despite his public disagreements with his president . 
 The new Congress met for a few weeks in March 1867 , then adjourned , leaving the House Committee on the Judiciary behind , charged with reporting back to the full House whether there were grounds for Johnson to be impeached . This committee duly met , examining the President 's bank accounts , and summoning members of the Cabinet to testify . When a federal court released former Confederate president Davis on bail on May 13 ( he had been captured shortly after the war ) , the committee investigated whether the President had impeded the prosecution . It learned that Johnson was eager to have Davis tried . A bipartisan majority of the committee voted down impeachment charges ; the committee adjourned on June 3 . 
 Later in June , Johnson and Stanton battled over the question of whether the military officers placed in command of the South could override the civil authorities . The President had Attorney General Henry Stanbery issue an opinion backing his position that they could not . Johnson sought to pin down Stanton either as for , and thus endorsing Johnson 's position , or against , showing himself to be opposed to his president and the rest of the Cabinet . Stanton evaded the point in meetings and written communications . When Congress reconvened in July , it passed a Reconstruction Act against Johnson 's position , waited for his veto , overruled it , and went home . In addition to clarifying the powers of the generals , the legislation also deprived the President of control over the Army in the South . With Congress in recess until November , Johnson decided to fire Stanton and relieve one of the military commanders , General Philip Sheridan , who had dismissed the governor of Texas and installed a replacement with little popular support . He was initially deterred by a strong objection from Grant . On August 5 , the President demanded Stanton 's resignation ; the secretary refused to quit with Congress out of session . Johnson then suspended him pending the next meeting of Congress as permitted under the Tenure of Office Act ; Grant agreed to serve as temporary replacement while continuing to lead the Army . 
 Grant , under protest , followed Johnson 's order transferring Sheridan and another of the district commanders , Daniel Sickles , who had angered Johnson by firmly following Congress 's plan . The President also issued a proclamation pardoning most Confederates , exempting those who held office under the Confederacy , or who had served in federal office before the war and had breached their oaths . Although Republicans expressed anger with his actions , the 1867 elections generally went Democratic . No seats in Congress were directly elected in the polling , but the Democrats took control of the Ohio General Assembly , allowing them to defeat for re @-@ election one of Johnson 's strongest opponents , Senator Benjamin Wade . Voters in Ohio , Connecticut , and Minnesota turned down propositions to grant African @-@ Americans the vote . The adverse results momentarily put a stop to Republican calls to impeach Johnson , who was elated by the elections . Nevertheless , once Congress met in November , the Judiciary Committee reversed itself and passed a resolution of impeachment against Johnson . After much debate about whether anything the President had done was a high crime or misdemeanor , the standard under the Constitution , the resolution was defeated by the House of Representatives on December 7 , 1867 , by a vote of 57 in favor to 108 opposed . 
 Johnson notified Congress of Stanton 's suspension and Grant 's interim appointment . In January 1868 , the Senate disapproved of his action , and reinstated Stanton , contending the President had violated the Tenure of Office Act . Grant stepped aside over Johnson 's objection , causing a complete break between them . Johnson then dismissed Stanton and appointed Lorenzo Thomas to replace him . Stanton refused to leave his office , and on February 24 , 1868 , the House impeached the President for intentionally violating the Tenure of Office Act , by a vote of 128 to 47 . The House subsequently adopted eleven articles of impeachment , for the most part alleging that he had violated the Tenure of Office Act , and had questioned the legitimacy of Congress . 
 On March 5 , 1868 , the impeachment trial began in the Senate and lasted almost three months ; Congressmen George S. Boutwell , Benjamin Butler and Thaddeus Stevens acted as managers for the House , or prosecutors , and William M. Evarts , Benjamin R. Curtis and former Attorney General Stanbery were Johnson 's counsel ; Chief Justice Chase served as presiding judge . The defense relied on the provision of the Tenure of Office Act that made it applicable only to appointees of the current administration . Since Lincoln had appointed Stanton , the defense maintained Johnson had not violated the act , and also argued that the President had the right to test the constitutionality of an act of Congress . Johnson 's counsel insisted that he make no appearance at the trial , nor publicly comment about the proceedings , and except for a pair of interviews in April , he complied . 
 Johnson maneuvered to gain an acquittal ; for example , he pledged to Iowa Senator James W. Grimes that he would not interfere with Congress 's Reconstruction efforts . Grimes reported to a group of Moderates , many of whom voted for acquittal , that he believed the President would keep his word . Johnson also promised to install the respected John Schofield as War Secretary . Kansas Senator Edmund G. Ross received assurances that the new , Radical @-@ influenced constitutions ratified in South Carolina and Arkansas would be transmitted to the Congress without delay , an action which would give him and other senators political cover to vote for acquittal . One reason senators were reluctant to remove the President was that his successor would have been Ohio Senator Wade , the president pro tempore of the Senate . Wade , a lame duck who left office in early 1869 , was a Radical who supported such measures as women 's suffrage , placing him beyond the pale politically in much of the nation . Additionally , a President Wade was seen as an obstacle to Grant 's ambitions . 
 With the <unk> , Johnson was confident of the result in advance of the verdict , and in the days leading up to the ballot , newspapers reported that Stevens and his Radicals had given up . On May 16 , the Senate voted on the 11th article of impeachment , accusing Johnson of firing Stanton in violation of the Tenure of Office of Act once the Senate had overturned his suspension . Thirty @-@ five senators voted " guilty " and 19 " not guilty " , thus falling short by a single vote of the two @-@ thirds majority required for conviction under the Constitution . Seven Republicans — Senators Grimes , Ross , Trumbull , William Pitt Fessenden , Joseph S. Fowler , John B. Henderson , and Peter G. Van Winkle — voted to acquit the President . With Stevens bitterly disappointed at the result , the Senate then adjourned for the Republican National Convention ; Grant was nominated for president . The Senate returned on May 26 and voted on the second and third articles , with identical 35 – 19 results . Faced with those results , Johnson 's opponents gave up and dismissed proceedings . Stanton " relinquished " his office on May 26 , and the Senate subsequently confirmed Schofield . When Johnson renominated Stanbery to return to his position as Attorney General after his service as a defense manager , the Senate refused to confirm him . 
 Allegations were made at the time and again later that bribery dictated the outcome of the trial . Even when it was in progress , Representative Butler began an investigation , held contentious hearings , and issued a report , unendorsed by any other congressman . Butler focused on a New York – based " Astor House Group " , supposedly led by political boss and editor Thurlow Weed . This organization was said to have raised large sums of money from whiskey interests through Cincinnati lawyer Charles Woolley to bribe senators to acquit Johnson . Butler went so far as to imprison Woolley in the Capitol building when he refused to answer questions , but failed to prove bribery . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Soon after taking office as president , Johnson reached an accord with Secretary of State William H. Seward that there would be no change in foreign policy . In practice , this meant that Seward would continue to run things as he had under Lincoln . Seward and Lincoln had been rivals for the nomination in 1860 ; the victor hoped that Seward would succeed him as president in 1869 . At the time of Johnson 's accession , the French had intervened in Mexico , sending troops there . While many politicians had indulged in saber @-@ rattling over the Mexican matter , Seward preferred quiet diplomacy , warning the French through diplomatic channels that their presence in Mexico was not acceptable . Although the President preferred a more aggressive approach , Seward persuaded him to follow his lead . In April 1866 , the French government informed Seward that its troops would be brought home in stages , to conclude by November 1867 . 
 Seward was an expansionist , and sought opportunities to gain territory for the United States . By 1867 , the Russian government saw its North American colony ( today Alaska ) as a financial liability , and feared losing control as American settlement reached there . It instructed its minister in Washington , Baron Eduard de Stoeckl , to negotiate a sale . De Stoeckl did so deftly , getting Seward to raise his offer from $ 5 million ( coincidentally , the minimum that Russia had instructed de Stoeckl to accept ) to $ 7 million , and then getting $ 200 @,@ 000 added by raising various objections . This sum of $ 7 @.@ 2 million is equivalent to $ 122 million in present @-@ day terms . On March 30 , 1867 , de Stoeckl and Seward signed the treaty , working quickly as the Senate was about to adjourn . Johnson and Seward took the signed document to the President 's Room in the Capitol , only to be told there was no time to deal with the matter before adjournment . The President summoned the Senate into session to meet on April 1 ; that body approved the treaty , 37 – 2 . Emboldened by his success in Alaska , Seward sought acquisitions elsewhere . His only success was staking an American claim to uninhabited Wake Island in the Pacific , which would be officially claimed by the U.S. in 1898 . He came close with the Danish West Indies as Denmark agreed to sell and the local population approved the transfer in a plebiscite , but the Senate never voted on the treaty and it expired . 
 Another treaty that fared badly was the Johnson @-@ Clarendon convention , negotiated in settlement of the Alabama Claims , for damages to American shipping from British @-@ built Confederate raiders . <unk> by the United States Minister to Britain , former Maryland senator Reverdy Johnson , in late 1868 , it was ignored by the Senate during the remainder of the President 's term . The treaty was rejected after he left office , and the Grant administration later negotiated considerably better terms from Britain . 
 = = = Administration and Cabinet = = = 
 = = = = Judicial appointments = = = = 
 Johnson appointed nine Article III federal judges during his presidency , all to United States district courts ; he did not appoint a justice to serve on the Supreme Court . In April 1866 , he nominated Henry Stanbery to fill the vacancy left with the death of John Catron , but Congress eliminated the seat to prevent the appointment , and to ensure that he did not get to make any appointments eliminated the next vacancy as well , providing that the court would shrink by one justice when one next departed from office . Johnson appointed his Greeneville crony , Samuel Milligan , to the United States Court of Claims , where he served from 1868 until his death in 1874 . 
 = = = Reforms initiated = = = 
 In June 1866 , Johnson signed the Southern Homestead Act into law , believing that the legislation would assist poor whites . Around 28 @,@ 000 land claims were successfully patented , although few former slaves benefitted from the law , fraud was rampant , and much of the best land was off @-@ limits ; reserved for grants to veterans or railroads . In June 1868 , Johnson signed an eight @-@ hour law passed by Congress that established an eight @-@ hour workday for laborers and mechanics employed by the Federal Government . Although Johnson told members of a Workingmen ’ s party delegation in Baltimore that he could not directly commit himself to an eight @-@ hour day , he nevertheless told the same delegation that he greatly favoured the “ shortest number of hours consistent with the interests of all . ” According to Richard F. <unk> , however , the good intentions behind the law were “ immediately frustrated ” as wages were cut by 20 % . 
 = = = Completion of term = = = 
 Johnson sought nomination by the 1868 Democratic National Convention in New York in July 1868 . He remained very popular among Southern whites , and boosted that popularity by issuing , just before the convention , a pardon ending the possibility of criminal proceedings against any Confederate not already indicted , meaning that only Davis and a few others still might face trial . On the first ballot , Johnson was second to former Ohio representative George H. Pendleton , who had been his Democratic opponent for vice president in 1864 . Johnson 's support was mostly from the South , and fell away as the ballots passed . On the 22nd ballot , former New York governor Horatio Seymour was nominated , and the President received only four votes , all from Tennessee . 
 The conflict with Congress continued . Johnson sent Congress proposals for amendments to limit the president to a single six @-@ year term and make the president and the Senate directly elected , and for term limits for judges . Congress took no action on them . When the President was slow to officially report ratifications of the Fourteenth Amendment by the new Southern legislatures , Congress passed a bill , again over his veto , requiring him to do so within ten days of receipt . He still delayed as much as he could , but was required , in July 1868 , to report the ratifications making the amendment part of the Constitution . 
 Seymour 's operatives sought Johnson 's support , but he long remained silent on the presidential campaign . It was not until October , with the vote already having taken place in some states , that he mentioned Seymour at all , and he never endorsed him . Nevertheless , Johnson regretted Grant 's victory , in part because of their animus from the Stanton affair . In his annual message to Congress in December , Johnson urged the repeal of the Tenure of Office Act and told legislators that had they admitted their Southern colleagues in 1865 , all would have been well . He celebrated his 60th birthday in late December with a party for several hundred children , though not including those of President @-@ elect Grant , who did not allow his to go . 
 On Christmas Day 1868 , Johnson issued a final amnesty , this one covering everyone , including Davis . He also issued , in his final months in office , pardons for crimes , including one for Dr. Samuel Mudd , controversially convicted of involvement in the Lincoln assassination ( he had set Booth 's broken leg ) and imprisoned in Fort Jefferson on Florida 's Dry Tortugas . 
 On March 3 , the President hosted a large public reception at the White House on his final full day in office . Grant had made it known that he was unwilling to ride in the same carriage as Johnson , as was customary , and Johnson refused to go to the inauguration at all . Despite an effort by Seward to prompt a change of mind , he spent the morning of March 4 finishing last @-@ minute business , and then shortly after noon rode from the White House to the home of a friend . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 After leaving the presidency , Johnson remained for some weeks in Washington , then returned to Greeneville for the first time in eight years . He was honored with large public celebrations along the way , especially in Tennessee , where cities hostile to him during the war hung out welcome banners . He had arranged to purchase a large farm near Greeneville to live on after his presidency . 
 Some expected Johnson to seek to be Tennessee 's governor again or to attempt a return to the Senate , others that he would become a railroad executive . Johnson found Greeneville boring , and his private life was embittered by the suicide of his son Robert in 1869 . Seeking vindication for himself , and revenge against his political enemies , he launched a Senate bid soon after returning home . Tennessee had gone Republican , but court rulings restoring the vote to some whites and the violence of the Ku Klux Klan kept down the African @-@ American vote , leading to a Democratic victory in the legislative elections in August 1869 . Johnson was seen as a likely victor in the Senate election , although hated by Radical Republicans , and also by some Democrats because of his wartime activities . Although he was at one point within a single vote of victory in the legislature 's balloting , the Republicans eventually elected Henry Cooper over Johnson , 54 – 51 . In 1872 , there was a special election for an at @-@ large congressional seat for Tennessee ; Johnson initially sought the Democratic nomination , but when he saw that it would go to former Confederate general Benjamin F. Cheatham , decided to run as an independent . The former president was defeated , finishing third , but the split in the Democratic Party defeated Cheatham in favor of an old Johnson Unionist ally , Horace Maynard . 
 In 1873 Johnson contracted cholera during an epidemic but recovered ; that year he lost about $ 73 @,@ 000 , when the First National Bank of Washington went under , though he was eventually repaid much of the sum . He began looking towards the next Senate election , to take place in the legislature in early 1875 . Johnson began to woo the farmers ' Grange movement ; with his Jeffersonian leanings , he easily gained their support . He spoke throughout the state in his final campaign tour . Few African @-@ Americans outside the large towns were now able to vote as Reconstruction faded in Tennessee , setting a pattern that would be repeated in the other Southern states ; the white domination would last almost a century . In the Tennessee legislative elections in August , the Democrats elected 92 legislators to the Republicans ' eight , and Johnson went to Nashville for the legislative session . When the balloting for the Senate seat began on January 20 , 1875 , he led with 30 votes , but did not have the required majority as three former Confederate generals , one former colonel , and a former Democratic congressman split the vote with him . Johnson 's opponents tried to agree on a single candidate who might gain majority support and defeat him , but failed , and he was elected on January 26 on the 54th ballot , with a margin of a single vote . Nashville erupted in rejoicing ; remarked Johnson , " Thank God for the vindication . " 
 Johnson 's comeback garnered national attention , with the St. Louis Republican calling it , " the most magnificent personal triumph which the history of American politics can show " . At his swearing @-@ in in the Senate on March 5 , 1875 , he was greeted with flowers and sworn in with his predecessor as vice president , Hamlin , by that office 's current incumbent , Henry Wilson , who as senator had voted for his ousting . Many Republicans ignored Senator Johnson , though some , such as Ohio 's John Sherman ( who had voted for conviction ) , shook his hand . Johnson remains the only former president to serve in the Senate . He spoke only once in the short session , on March 22 lambasting President Grant for his use of federal troops in support of Louisiana 's Reconstruction government . The former president asked , " How far off is military despotism ? " and concluded his speech , " may God bless this people and God save the Constitution . " 
 Johnson returned home after the special session concluded . In late July , convinced some of his opponents were defaming him in the Ohio gubernatorial race , he decided to travel there to give speeches . He began the trip on July 28 , and broke the journey at his daughter Mary 's farm near Elizabethton , where his daughter Martha was also staying . That evening he suffered a stroke , but refused medical treatment until the next day , when he did not improve and two doctors were sent for from Elizabethton . He seemed to respond to their ministrations , but suffered another stroke on the evening of July 30 , and died early the following morning at the age of 66 . President Grant had the " painful duty " of announcing the death of the only surviving past president . Northern newspapers , in their obituaries , tended to focus on Johnson 's loyalty during the war , while Southern ones paid tribute to his actions as president . Johnson 's funeral was held on August 3 in Greeneville . He was buried with his body wrapped in an American flag and a copy of the U.S. Constitution placed under his head , according to his wishes . The burial ground was dedicated as the Andrew Johnson National Cemetery in 1906 , and with his home and tailor 's shop , is part of the Andrew Johnson National Historic Site . 
 = = Historical view and legacy = = 
 According to Castel , " historians [ of Johnson 's presidency ] have tended to concentrate to the exclusion of practically everything else upon his role in that titanic event [ Reconstruction ] " . Through the remainder of the 19th century , there were few historical evaluations of Johnson and his presidency . Memoirs from Northerners who had dealt with him , such as former vice president Henry Wilson and Maine Senator James G. Blaine , depicted him as an obstinate boor who tried to favor the South in Reconstruction , but who was frustrated by Congress . According to historian Howard K. Beale in his journal article about the historiography of Reconstruction , " Men of the postwar decades were more concerned with justifying their own position than they were with painstaking search for truth . Thus [ Alabama congressman and historian ] Hilary Herbert and his <unk> presented a Southern indictment of Northern policies , and Henry Wilson 's history was a brief for the North . " 
 The turn of the 20th century saw the first significant historical evaluations of Johnson . Leading the wave was Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning historian James Ford Rhodes , who wrote of the former president : 
 Johnson acted in accordance with his nature . He had intellectual force but it worked in a groove . <unk> rather than firm it undoubtedly seemed to him that following counsel and making concessions were a display of weakness . At all events from his December message to the veto of the Civil Rights Bill he yielded not a jot to Congress . The moderate senators and representatives ( who constituted a majority of the Union party ) asked him for only a slight compromise ; their action was really an entreaty that he would unite with them to preserve Congress and the country from the policy of the radicals ... His quarrel with Congress prevented the readmission into the Union on generous terms of the members of the late Confederacy ... His pride of opinion , his desire to beat , blinded him to the real welfare of the South and of the whole country . 
 Rhodes ascribed Johnson 's faults to his personal weaknesses , and blamed him for the problems of the postbellum South . Other early 20th @-@ century historians , such as John Burgess , Woodrow Wilson ( who later became president himself ) and William Dunning , all Southerners , concurred with Rhodes , believing Johnson flawed and politically inept , but concluding that he had tried to carry out Lincoln 's plans for the South in good faith . Author and journalist Jay Tolson suggests that Wilson " depict [ ed Reconstruction ] as a vindictive program that hurt even repentant southerners while benefiting northern opportunists , the so @-@ called Carpetbaggers , and cynical white southerners , or Scalawags , who exploited alliances with blacks for political gain " . 
 Even as Rhodes and his school wrote , another group of historians was setting out on the full rehabilitation of Johnson , using for the first time primary sources such as his papers , provided by his daughter Martha before her death in 1901 , and the diaries of Johnson 's Navy Secretary , Gideon Welles , first published in 1911 . The resulting volumes , such as David Miller DeWitt 's The Impeachment and Trial of President Andrew Johnson ( 1903 ) , presented him far more favorably than they did those who had sought to oust him . In James Schouler 's 1913 History of the Reconstruction Period , the author accused Rhodes of being " quite unfair to Johnson " , though agreeing that the former president had created many of his own problems through inept political moves . These works had an effect ; although historians continued to view Johnson as having deep flaws which sabotaged his presidency , they saw his Reconstruction policies as fundamentally correct . A series of highly favorable biographies in the late 1920s and early 1930s that " glorified Johnson and condemned his enemies " accelerated this trend . 
 Beale wondered in 1940 , " is it not time that we studied the history of Reconstruction without first assuming , at least subconsciously , that carpetbaggers and Southern white Republicans were wicked , that Negroes were illiterate incompetents , and that the whole white South owes a debt of gratitude to the restorers of ' white supremacy ' ? " Despite these doubts , the favorable view of Johnson survived for a time . In 1942 , Van Heflin portrayed the former president as a fighter for democracy in the Hollywood film Tennessee Johnson . In 1948 , a poll of his colleagues by historian Arthur M. Schlesinger deemed Johnson among the average presidents ; in 1956 , one by Clinton L. Rossiter named him as one of the near @-@ great Chief Executives . Foner notes that at the time of these surveys , " the Reconstruction era that followed the Civil War was regarded as a time of corruption and misgovernment caused by granting black men the right to vote " . 
 Earlier historians , including Beale , believed that money drives events , and had seen Reconstruction as an economic struggle . They also accepted , for the most part , that reconciliation between North and South should have been the top priority of Reconstruction . In the 1950s , historians began to focus on the African @-@ American as central to Reconstruction . They rejected completely any claim of black inferiority , which had marked many earlier historical works , and saw the developing Civil Rights Era as a second Reconstruction ; some writers stated they hoped their work on the postbellum era would advance the cause of civil rights . These authors sympathized with the Radical Republicans for their desire to help the African @-@ American , and saw Johnson as callous towards the freedman . In a number of works from 1956 onwards by such historians as Fawn Brodie , the former president was depicted as a successful saboteur of efforts to better the freedman 's lot . These volumes included major biographies of Stevens and Stanton . Reconstruction was increasingly seen as a noble effort to integrate the freed slaves into society . 
 In the early 21st century , Johnson is among those commonly mentioned as the worst presidents in U.S. history . According to historian Glenn W. <unk> , who believes Buchanan the worst president , " Johnson is a particular favorite for the bottom of the pile because of his impeachment ... his complete mishandling of Reconstruction policy ... his bristling personality , and his enormous sense of self @-@ importance . " Tolson suggests that " Johnson is now scorned for having resisted Radical Republican policies aimed at securing the rights and well @-@ being of the newly emancipated African @-@ Americans " . Gordon @-@ Reed notes that Johnson , along with his contemporaries Pierce and Buchanan , are generally listed among the five worst presidents , but states , " there have never been more difficult times in the life of this nation . The problems these men had to confront were enormous . It would have taken a succession of Lincolns to do them justice . " 
 Trefousse considers Johnson 's legacy to be " the maintenance of white supremacy . His boost to Southern conservatives by undermining Reconstruction was his legacy to the nation , one that would trouble the country for generations to come . " Gordon @-@ Reed states of Johnson : 
 We know the results of Johnson 's failures — that his preternatural stubbornness , his mean and crude racism , his primitive and instrumental understanding of the Constitution stunted his capacity for enlightened and forward @-@ thinking leadership when those qualities were so desperately needed . At the same time , Johnson 's story has a miraculous quality to it : the poor boy who systematically rose to the heights , fell from grace , and then fought his way back to a position of honor in the country . For good or ill , ' only in America , ' as they say , could Johnson 's story unfold in the way that it did . 
 In 2002 , historian Castel took a stern view of Johnson 's presidency , saying Johnson " suffered from serious defects of mind and character . " According to Castel , Johnson " lacked flexibility and adroitness " and made hasty decisions without foresight . Castel said Johnson 's presidency failed because Johnson was a Democrat who led a government controlled by Northern Republicans . Since Johnson was not elected President , he lacked political and moral authority over Congress . Johnson never realized that the Civil War was a revolution and that federal power had superseded state rights . Additionally Johnson believed blacks were inferior to whites , a common view for most white Americans during his presidency . Although Johnson had gained the highest office " he proved incapable of using it in an effective and beneficial manner . " 
 = M @-@ 136 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 136 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that runs from Brockway to Fort Gratiot in the lower part of The Thumb of the Lower Peninsula . The highway serves as a connector between M @-@ 19 on the west and M @-@ 25 northwest of Port Huron . In between , the highway runs through rural St. Clair County through farm fields and along a creek and river . The trunkline uses roads that were part of the state highway system in 1919 . The M @-@ 136 designation was assigned in 1931 and extended to its current length in 1961 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 136 begins at a junction with M @-@ 19 just south of Brockway on the north side of Mill Creek . The highway heads eastward through farm fields on Metcalf Road for about two @-@ thirds mile ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) before bending to the southeast on Beard Road , parallel to the creek . The road then turns eastward on Avoca Road near <unk> Airport and heads toward Avoca . The trunkline continues in this direction through farm fields and the community of Avoca before turning southward on <unk> Road near the Black River . M @-@ 136 turns east , returning to Beard Road , and running through a wooded area to cross the river . From here , it continues through farm fields again on a generally east @-@ southeast track on N and <unk> roads as it heads towards Gardendale . The highway then branches southeastward on Pine Grove Avenue to connect with M @-@ 25 two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) and I @-@ 69 and their international border crossing on the Blue Water Bridge in Port Huron . 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , M @-@ 136 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 6 @,@ 070 vehicles used the highway daily on the eastern segment along Beard Road and 1 @,@ 894 vehicles did so each day near the western terminus , the highest and lowest counts along the highway , respectively . No section of M @-@ 136 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 When the state highway system was initially signposted in 1919 , the westernmost section of today 's M @-@ 136 was designated as part of M @-@ 19 . In 1927 , that section of highway was redesignated as M @-@ 13 and extended through Avoca . During 1929 , the trunkline was extended eastward to terminate at the contemporary M @-@ 51 near Gardendale . 
 M @-@ 136 was commissioned in 1931 to replace M @-@ 13 between what was M @-@ 19 and M @-@ 51 . The highway was fully paved in 1940 as the last section of gravel road was hard @-@ surfaced through Avoca that year . In 1961 , M @-@ 136 was extended further east to replace the section of M @-@ 51 between Gardendale and Fort Gratiot on present day Pine Grove Avenue . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in St. Clair County . 
 = Itchy & Scratchy & Marge = 
 " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " is the ninth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 20 , 1990 . In the episode , which is a satire of censorship issues , Maggie attacks Homer with a mallet and Marge blames The Itchy & Scratchy Show for Maggie 's actions . It was written by John Swartzwelder and was the first episode to be directed by Jim Reardon . Alex Rocco makes his first of three guest appearances as Roger Meyers , Jr . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer clumsily attempts to build Marge a spice rack . While he is doing so , Maggie sneaks up behind Homer and hits him on the head with a mallet , similar to the famed stabbing scene in the movie Psycho . Marge is initially clueless as to what would motivate Maggie to do such a deed , but then notices that , when Maggie sees an episode of The Itchy & Scratchy Show , a cartoon which is known for its violence , she mimics its content . As a result , Marge immediately blames the makers of the show for Maggie 's actions and bans Bart and Lisa from watching the show , but the two still manage to watch Itchy & Scratchy at their friends ' houses . Marge writes a letter to the producers of the show asking them to tone down their violence , but in response , Roger Meyers , Jr . — the chairman of Itchy & Scratchy International — writes a letter to Marge , telling her one @-@ person can not make a difference and calls her a " screwball " . In response , Marge decides to " show what one screwball can do " . 
 Marge forms " <unk> for Nonviolence , Understanding , and Helping " ( <unk> as acronym ) , and forces the family to picket outside the Itchy & Scratchy Studios . Marge 's protest gains momentum and soon more people join the group and even start to picket The Krusty the Klown Show , on which Itchy & Scratchy is shown . Marge appears on Kent Brockman 's show , Smartline where she confronts Roger Meyers over the violence and suggests that concerned parents send letters to Meyers . Many angry letters are sent to the Studio and Roger Meyers concedes defeat , and agrees to eliminate violence in Itchy & Scratchy . Eventually , a new short in which Itchy & Scratchy sit on a porch drinking lemonade airs , but Bart , Lisa , and other kids across Springfield reject the cleaned @-@ up show . A lengthy montage follows , in which the children of Springfield go outside and engage in various wholesome activities and that night Bart and Lisa brag about their various outdoor activities while Marge listens happily . 
 Meanwhile , Michelangelo 's David goes on a coast @-@ to @-@ coast tour of the United States , and Springfield is one of its scheduled destinations . The members of <unk> try to urge Marge to protest the sculpture , insisting that it is offensive and unsuitable . However , Marge , being an artist herself , reveals that she believes that the sculpture is a masterpiece . While appearing on Smartline , Marge admits that it is wrong to censor one form of art but not another , and sadly concludes that while one person can make a difference , at the end of the day they probably should not . Freed from public protest , Itchy & Scratchy immediately returns to its old form and Springfield 's children abandon their wholesome activities and return to spending every day indoors watching the violent Itchy & Scratchy cartoons . Homer and Marge go to see David and Marge expresses her disappointment that the kids are at home watching " a cat and mouse disembowel each other " rather than seeing the sculpture . She cheers up when Homer tells her that the school will be forcing them to see the sculpture on a school trip . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " is an acclaimed episode which dealt with censorship issues and allowed the writers to have a lot of Itchy & Scratchy cartoons , which many fans had been clamoring for . The episode was written by John Swartzwelder , who loved Itchy & Scratchy and wrote several episodes that have them at the center . The episode was partially inspired by Terry <unk> , who protested the Fox network over the show Married ... with Children . For the episode , which handles a large issue , the writers tried not to have a point of view and looked at both sides , despite what the writers personally felt . During the original airing of the episode , the Fox satellite blew out and the entire West coast of the United States missed the first act of the episode . 
 This was the first episode directed by Jim Reardon , who had previously made a student film called " Bring Me the Head of Charlie Brown " which was very violent and the experience served him well for this episode . There are several characters who work at I & S studios who are caricatures of real people : the cartoonist who draws the Marge / Squirrel is based on Eddie Fitzgerald , who worked at Filmation and the three people with Meyers when he is asking Marge for suggestions are caricatures of Rich Moore , David Silverman and Wes Archer . 
 Alex Rocco makes his first of three appearances as Roger Meyers . Many people behind The Simpsons were huge fans of The Godfather and Jim Reardon looked for a way to shoot him in the eye as a reference to Rocco 's character , Moe Greene . 
 The long montage of the Kids of Springfield playing was directed by Bob Anderson and is making a satirical point by saying the opposite of what the writers believed . The segment was written by John Swartzwelder and the idea of using Beethoven 's 6th Symphony was in the original script . James L. Brooks had wanted the episode to end with the montage , but the writers disagreed . Roger Meyers , Jr. makes his first appearance in this episode , as does Sideshow Mel , although he does not have any lines until the later episode " Black Widower " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The scene where Maggie hits Homer over the head with a mallet is an extensive parody of the shower scene from Psycho , in which the music and camera angles are almost identical . The music heard while the children play outside is the first movement of Beethoven 's Pastoral Symphony , and is similar to a segment of the Disney film Fantasia . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " was watched by 22 @.@ 2 million viewers , finishing 34th in ratings for the week of December 17 – 23 , 1990 with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 9 . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Married ... with Children . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide praised the episode , stating that " Homer 's doomed attempt to build a spice rack is only the start of another great episode , which works as a superb debate about television violence and politically inspired censorship . " As well as noting that " the ending is especially poignant , as the pedagogues of Springfield swoop on Michelangelo 's David as an example of filth and degradation " . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club praised the episode for its satire . He wrote , " [ The episode ] contains one of my favorite sequences not just in The Simpsons but in television as a whole . In it , a censorship @-@ happy Marge has neutered Itchy & Scratchy to the point where the children of Springfield are moved to do the unthinkable : stop watching television . [ ... ] A dystopia instantly becomes a small @-@ town paradise , a happy realm of frolicking children and sunny innocence as kids wake up from a TV fog and embrace life 's rich pageantry . It ’ s a lovely , lyrical , even beautiful sequence even if it ’ s light on gags . It presents , then ruthlessly yanks back , an alternate universe Springfield ruled by dewy innocence rather than greed and mob mentality . " He also felt that the episode " got to make a relevant point in line with writer John Swartzwelder ’ s libertarianism without sacrificing the momentum of the episode or losing track of the characters and turning them into mere sounding boards for their creator ’ s beliefs . " 
 Empire named the Psycho parody as the second best film parody in the show . " The best throwaway gags blindside the unsuspecting viewer in episodes that are nominally about something else [ ... ] Hitchcock is ripped off more than any other director but this is the most lovingly rendered reference . " The Psycho parody was named the 22nd greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 = Northern bald ibis = 
 The northern bald ibis , hermit ibis , or waldrapp ( Geronticus eremita ) is a migratory bird found in barren , semi @-@ desert or rocky habitats , often close to running water . This 70 – 80 cm ( 28 – 31 in ) glossy black ibis , which , unlike other members of the ibis family , is non @-@ wading , has an unfeathered red face and head , and a long , curved red bill . It breeds colonially on coastal or mountain cliff ledges , where it typically lays two to three eggs in a stick nest , and feeds on lizards , insects , and other small animals . 
 The northern bald ibis was once widespread across the Middle East , northern Africa , southern and central Europe , with a fossil record dating back at least 1 @.@ 8 million years . It disappeared from Europe over 300 years ago , and is now considered critically endangered . There are believed to be about 500 wild birds remaining in southern Morocco , and fewer than 10 in Syria , where it was rediscovered in 2002 . To combat this ebb in numbers , recent reintroduction programs have been instituted internationally , with a semi @-@ wild breeding colony in Turkey , as well as sites in Austria , Spain , and northern Morocco . 
 The reasons for the species ' long @-@ term decline are unclear , but hunting , loss of foraging habitat , and pesticide poisoning have been implicated in the rapid loss of colonies in recent decades . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The ibises are gregarious , long @-@ legged wading birds with long down @-@ curved bills . Along with the spoonbills they form one subfamily within the <unk> family . The northern bald ibis ' closest relative , and the only other member of the genus , is the southern bald ibis , G. calvus , of southern Africa . The two Geronticus species differ from other ibises in that they have unfeathered faces and heads , breed on cliffs rather than in trees , and prefer arid habitats to the wetlands used by their relatives . 
 The northern bald ibis was described and illustrated by Swiss naturalist Conrad Gesner in his Historiae animalium in 1555 , and given the binomial name Upupa eremita by Carl Linnaeus in his 1758 Systema Naturae . It was moved to its current genus by the German herpetologist Johann Georg Wagler in 1832 . This species has an interesting history of description , oblivion and rediscovery . 
 The species probably split into two distinct populations at least 400 years ago and , since then , the two populations have been diverging morphologically , ecologically , and genetically ; nevertheless , the Turkish and Moroccan populations of this ibis are not currently classed as separate subspecies . One consistent difference between the eastern and western birds is a single mutation in the cytochrome b gene of their mitochondrial DNA . 
 Fossils of the northern bald ibis have been found at a Holocene ( c . 10 @,@ 000 years ago ) site in southern France , in middle Pleistocene ( c . 900 @,@ 000 years ago ) strata in Sicily , and in Pliocene @-@ Pleistocene boundary ( c . 1 @.@ 8 million years ago ) deposits on the Mediterranean coast of Spain . What appears to be an ancestral form , Geronticus <unk> , was found in the late Pliocene of Bulgaria , further illustrating the early widespread presence of this genus in Europe , and suggesting that Geronticus eremita may have originated in south @-@ eastern Europe or the Middle East . 
 The genus name , Geronticus , is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> , meaning old man and refers to the bald head of the aged . Eremita is Late Latin for hermit , from the Greek <unk> , meaning desert , and refers to the arid habitats inhabited by this species . The alternative common name waldrapp is German for forest crow , the equivalent of the Latin Corvo <unk> of Gesner , adapted as Corvus sylvaticus by Linnaeus . 
 = = Description = = 
 The northern bald ibis is a large , glossy black bird , 70 – 80 cm ( 28 – 31 in ) long with a 125 – 135 cm ( 49 – 53 in ) wingspan and an average weight of 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 3 kg ( 35 – 46 oz ) . The plumage is black , with bronze @-@ green and violet iridescence , and there is a wispy ruff on the bird 's hind neck . The face and head are dull red and unfeathered , and the long , curved bill and the legs are red . In flight , this bird has powerful , shallow , and flexible wing beats . It gives guttural <unk> and high , hoarse <unk> calls at its breeding colonies , but is otherwise silent . 
 The sexes are similar in plumage , although males are generally larger than females , and , as with other ibises that breed in colonies , have longer bills . The longer @-@ billed males are more successful in attracting a mate . The downy chick has uniformly pale brown plumage , and the fledged juvenile resembles the adult except that it has a dark head , light grey legs , and a pale bill . The unfeathered areas of the young bird 's head and neck gradually become red as it matures . Moroccan birds have a significantly longer bill than Turkish birds of the same sex . 
 If the eastern and western populations are considered to be separable subspecies , it is unclear which should be considered to be the nominate ( first @-@ named ) form , since the first description of this species was based on a now @-@ extinct population from Switzerland which is of unknown race . 
 The northern bald ibis is readily distinguished from its close relative , the southern bald ibis of Southern Africa , by the southern species ' whitish face . The northern bald can also be confused with the similarly dark @-@ plumaged glossy ibis , which overlaps its range , but it is larger and stockier than that species . In flight , when the bill and face colouration may not be visible , the bald ibis ' less rounded wings and shorter neck give it a different profile from glossy ibis , and its relatively short legs mean that its feet do not project beyond the tail , unlike those of the glossy ibis . 
 = = Habitat and range = = 
 Unlike other ibises , which nest in trees and feed in wetlands , the northern bald ibis breeds on undisturbed cliff ledges , and forages for food in irregularly cultivated , grazed dry areas such as semi @-@ arid steppes , and fallow fields . The close proximity of adequate steppe feeding areas to breeding cliffs is an important habitat requirement . 
 The northern bald ibis was once widespread across the Middle East , northern Africa , and southern and central Europe ; it bred along the Danube and Rhone Rivers , and in the mountains of Spain , Italy , Germany , Austria and Switzerland ( Gesner 's original description was of a Swiss bird ) , and most probably also in the Upper Adriatic region . It used castle battlements as well as cliff ledges for nesting before vanishing from Europe at least three centuries ago . It is also extinct over most of its former range , and now almost the entirety of the wild breeding population of just over 500 birds is in Morocco , at Souss @-@ Massa National Park , where there are three documented colonies , and near the mouth of the Oued <unk> ( north of Agadir ) , where there is a single colony containing almost half the Moroccan breeding population . There is some movement of birds between these two sites . 
 Religious traditions helped this species to survive in one Turkish colony long after the species had disappeared from Europe , since it was believed that the ibis migrated each year to guide Hajj pilgrims to Mecca . The ibis was protected by its religious significance , and a festival was held annually to celebrate its return north . The Turkish ibis population was centred near the small town of Birecik in the south @-@ east of the country , and during the first half of the 20th century , the Birecik colony maintained a relatively stable population of about 500 breeding pairs , reaching an estimated total population of about 3 @,@ 000 around 1930 . By the 1970s , numbers had drastically declined and a captive breeding program was initiated in 1977 with one adult pair and nine chicks taken from the wild . This program largely failed to revert the decline ; there were 400 birds in 1982 , five pairs in 1986 , and seven pairs in 1987 . Only three birds returned from their wintering grounds in 1989 , and just one in 1990 . The returning birds died before they could reproduce , thus rendering the species extinct in the wild in Turkey as of 1992 . Once the wild Turkish population became non @-@ viable , the colony was maintained as a flock which was free @-@ flying for most of the year but caged in autumn to prevent migration . 
 After the demise of the migratory Turkish colony , the northern bald ibis was known to survive in the wild only at the Moroccan sites , although occasional sightings of birds in Yemen , Eritrea , Saudi Arabia , and Israel during the 1980s and 1990s suggested that there was still a colony somewhere in the Middle East . Intensive field surveys in spring 2002 , based on the knowledge of Bedouin nomads and local hunters , revealed that the species had never become completely extinct on the Syrian desert steppes . Following systematic searches , 15 old nesting sites were found , one , near Palmyra , was still hosting an active breeding colony of seven individuals . Although the ibis had been declared extinct in Syria more than 70 years earlier , the bird appears to have been relatively common in the desert areas until 20 years ago , when a combination of overexploitation of its range lands and increasing hunting pressures initiated a dramatic decline . 
 The Moroccan breeding birds are resident , dispersing along the coast after the nesting season . It has been suggested that coastal fog provides extra moisture for this population , and enables the ibises to remain year @-@ round . In the rest of its former range , away from the Moroccan coastal locations , the northern bald ibis migrated south for the winter , and formerly occurred as a vagrant to Spain , Iraq , Egypt , the Azores , and Cape Verde . 
 Satellite tagging of 13 Syrian birds in 2006 showed that the three adults in the group , plus a fourth untagged adult , wintered together from February to July in the highlands of Ethiopia , where the species had not been recorded for nearly 30 years . They travelled south on the eastern side of the Red Sea via Saudi Arabia and Yemen , and returned north through Sudan and Eritrea . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The northern bald ibis breeds in loosely spaced colonies , nesting on cliff ledges or amongst boulders on steep slopes , usually on the coast or near a river . Volunteer climbers have created extra ledge spaces in the Souss @-@ Massa colonies to ensure that breeding population is not limited by the availability of nest ledges , and artificial nest boxes are used in the managed colony at Birecik . In the past , the birds also nested in buildings . 
 This ibis starts breeding at three to five years of age , and pairs for life . The male chooses a nest site , cleans it , and then advertises for a female by waving his crest and giving low rumbling calls . Once the birds have paired , the bond is reinforced through bowing displays and mutual preening . The nest is a loose construction of twigs lined with grass or straw . G. eremita normally lays two to four rough @-@ surfaced eggs , which weigh an average of 50 @.@ 16 g ( 1 @.@ 769 oz ) , and are initially blue @-@ white with brown spots , becoming brown during incubation . An egg in the collection of the British Museum was marked more thickly at the broad end , with " spots and very small blotches of yellowish brown and pale rufous " . It was 0 @.@ 93 in long and 0 @.@ 68 in wide ( 2 @.@ 37 × 1 @.@ 73 cm ) . The clutch is incubated for 24 – 25 days to hatching , the chicks fledge in another 40 – 50 days , and the first flight takes place at about two months . Both parents incubate and feed the chicks . 
 The northern bald ibis lives for an average of 20 to 25 years in captivity ( oldest recorded male 37 years , oldest recorded female 30 years ) . The average age in the wild has been estimated as 10 to 15 years . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 This gregarious species commutes in flocks from the cliff breeding sites or winter roosts to its feeding areas , flying in a V formation . The flocks may contain up to 100 birds in winter . During the breeding season , the ibises regularly forage up to 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from the colony , and , although steppe not in current cultivation is preferred for feeding , they will also use fallow ground , and occasionally even actively cultivated fields . 
 The northern bald ibis consumes a very wide variety of mainly animal food ; faecal analysis of the Moroccan breeding population has shown that lizards and <unk> beetles predominate in the diet , although small mammals , ground @-@ nesting birds , and invertebrates such as snails , scorpions , spiders , and caterpillars are also taken . Males will sometimes " scrounge " food from females . As the flock moves across the ground , the ibis uses its long bill to feel for food items in the loose , sandy soil . Since this bird hunts mainly by probing , a soft surface seems to be vital , and it is important that any vegetation is sparse , and not more than 15 – 20 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) high . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Although the northern bald ibis was long extinct in Europe , many colonies in Morocco and Algeria survived until the early 20th century , when they began to decline more rapidly , the last colony in Algeria disappearing in the late 1980s . In Morocco there were about 38 colonies in 1940 and 15 in 1975 , but the last migratory populations in the Atlas Mountains had vanished by 1989 . The species is now officially critically endangered according to the IUCN scale , with an estimated population in 2008 of around 500 in the wild and over 1 @,@ 000 in captivity . The northern bald ibis is one of the key species to which the draft Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies , and it has a detailed , internationally agreed conservation action plan under the agreement . As a species that is threatened with extinction , it is listed on Appendix 1 of CITES ( the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ) , which means that trade in wild @-@ caught birds is illegal , and may be licensed only in exceptional circumstances . 
 The northern bald ibis has declined for several centuries , at least partly as a consequence of unidentified natural causes . The more rapid decline in the past hundred years , with a loss of 98 % of the population between 1900 and 2002 , is the result of a combination of factors . These include significant human persecution , especially hunting , and also the loss of steppe and non @-@ intensive agricultural areas ( particularly in Morocco ) , pesticide poisoning , disturbance , and dam construction . The discovery in Jordan of three dead adults from the Turkish colony confirmed that the overuse of pesticides is still a cause of death on migration . These birds were tracked by satellite after leaving Birecik ; they stopped off briefly at the Syrian colony , and were later found dead in the Jordanian desert . Although the cause of death was initially thought to have been from poison , probably laid by chicken farmers to kill rodents , the autopsy revealed that they had actually been electrocuted whilst standing on electricity pylons 
 = = = Wild populations = = = 
 = = = = Morocco = = = = 
 Monitoring of Moroccan wild population is guaranteed by BirdLife International partners , especially by RSPB , SEO / BirdLife and , recently <unk> in cooperation with Souss @-@ Massa National Park administration and the support of institutions like Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation which is the Species Champion for Northern Bald Ibis . For the first time in the species ' recorded history , there is now evidence of population growth in the wild , and the population in Morocco increased to 100 breeding pairs in the decade prior to 2008 and reached a record of 113 breeding pairs in 2013 . Simple site and species protection has facilitated this growth . Quantitative assessments of the importance of sites for breeding , roosting , and foraging have guided actions to prevent disturbance and the loss of key areas to mass tourism development . <unk> by members of the local community has reduced human intrusion and increased the perceived value of the birds . The provision of drinking water and the removal and deterrence of predators and competitors enhances breeding prospects , and monitoring has confirmed that steppe and two @-@ year <unk> are key feeding habitats . 
 Maintaining such non @-@ intensive land uses in the future may present major management challenges , and the recovery in the Souss @-@ Massa region remains precarious because the population is concentrated in just a few places . However , it could provide opportunities for natural extension of the range to formerly occupied sites further north in Morocco . 
 The main cause of breeding failure at the Souss @-@ Massa National Park is the loss of eggs to predators , especially the common raven which nest monitoring has shown to have had a serious impact at one sub @-@ colony . The effects of predators on adult birds have not been studied , but the very similar southern bald ibis , Geronticus calvus , is hunted by large raptors , particularly those that share its breeding cliffs . There is evidence of chick starvation in some years , but the main threats to breeding birds are human disturbance and the loss of feeding habitat . There was a dramatic mortality incident at the Moroccan colonies in May 1996 , when 40 adults died or disappeared over a period of nine days . Although analyses have not identified the cause , an obscure virus , a toxin , or botulism are thought to be the most likely causes of the deaths . 
 = = = = Syria = = = = 
 The Syrian Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform has now put protection measures in place to protect the tiny breeding population in that country , and Yemen and Ethiopia , which provide migration stop @-@ offs and wintering areas , have a good record for conservation . However , young birds do not winter nor return with the adults and their wintering grounds are still unknown . Although the wild Syrian population is very small , the discovery that semi @-@ wild Turkish birds on a migration trial visited the Palmyra colony has led to hopes that some migrants may join the Syrian breeding population and boost the numbers in that country . 
 An intensive community @-@ based protection program in Palmyra under an FAO / Italian cooperation project during 2002 – 2004 recorded an average breeding performance that was higher than in Turkey and in Morocco . From 2005 to 2010 the protection program , under BirdLife Middle East management , had a much lower effort and lack of constant external scientific and technical assistance to local authorities . This resulted in a very variable breeding performance ; two fatal and predictable breeding failures occurred in 2005 and 2008 . During 2004 – 2007 , due to prior high breeding performance , four subadults returned to the colony and three recruited successfully , compensating the natural mortality of adults . The unsustainably high mortality of young ibises outside the breeding grounds ( an estimated 85 % ) and the breeding failures in 2009 and 2010 ( due to unknown causes ) meant that the colony reached its lowest size ever in 2010 , only one pair , and three adults . In summer 2012 , amidst the ongoing Syrian civil war , only one pair returned to the site and did not breed . Four adults had been observed in January 2013 at their wintering grounds in Ethiopia , but none of these birds returned to the breeding grounds by summer , and all of their tracking devices stopped working . A lone adult was sighted in Palmyra that summer . Extinction at this point seems unavoidable . 
 = = = Turkey = = = 
 With the loss of the genuinely wild Turkish population , the Ministry of Environment and Forestry 's Directorate of Natural Preservation and National Parks established a new semi @-@ wild colony at Birecik . This was heavily managed , with birds taken into captivity after the breeding season to prevent migration . The program was successful , with numbers at 205 as of March 2016 . The intent is to allow the birds to migrate once the population reaches a stable 100 pairs , excluding young . 
 The birds are released in late January or early February to breed outside the cages on ledges and , mainly , in the nest boxes in the breeding station compound . The ibises are free flying and forage around the Birecik area in forest nurseries , agricultural fields , and along the Euphrates , but supplementary food is also provided . Following the end of the breeding season , the birds are taken into cages in late July or early August to prevent migration . A trial migration using tagged birds confirmed the risks presented to travelling birds by pesticides . Later on the Syrian Civil War added one more reason to keep preventing migration . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The guidelines for the conservation and reintroduction of the northern bald ibis were established in 2003 at an International Advisory Group for Northern Bald Ibis ( <unk> ) conference in Innsbruck at the <unk> , which maintains the European studbook for the northern bald ibis . 
 Decisions taken at the meeting included : 
 There should be no augmenting of the wild populations at Souss @-@ Massa or in Palmyra using zoo @-@ bred ibises . 
 There are two distinctive populations of northern bald ibis , and the separate ranges of the eastern and western forms should be respected . 
 In order to prepare birds for release , groups of chicks should be hand @-@ reared by human " parents " . 
 Migration routes and stop @-@ over points will have to be taught to young birds , since it is unlikely that they will discover this information by themselves . 
 A second conference in Spain in 2006 stressed the need to survey potential and former sites in north @-@ west Africa and the Middle East for currently undetected colonies . The need to raise the standards of hygiene and husbandry in the Birecik aviaries was reiterated , and the prevalence of skin problems in a number of zoos reinforced the view that no zoo birds should be used for any free @-@ flying trials . In future captive breeding and releasing programmes , only birds of known origin should be used . 
 = = = = Zoo populations = = = = 
 There are 850 northern bald ibises in European zoos and a further 250 in captivity in Japan and North America . The 49 European zoos keeping this species produce 80 to 100 young birds per year , and earlier attempts at releasing captive @-@ bred birds included close to 150 birds between 1976 and 1986 from an aviary at Birecik , 75 from Tel Aviv Zoo in 1983 , and an unspecified number from a project in Almería , Spain , from 1991 to 1994 ; all these attempts were unsuccessful . All northern bald ibises in zoos , other than those in Turkey , are of the western population , and were imported from Morocco . Three bloodlines exist ; the earliest relates to importations to Zoo Basel , Switzerland in the 1950s and 1960s , the next is the descendants of birds taken in the 1970s to stock Rabat Zoo , and the last captured wild birds were those taken to the <unk> , Rheine , in 1976 and 1978 . Captive birds have a high incidence of skin problems , and 40 % of those birds that had to be put down suffered from chronic ulcerative dermatitis , characterised by feather loss , rawness , and ulceration on the back , neck , and the undersides of the wings . The cause of this disease is unknown . Other major disease problems reported in zoo collections have been avian tuberculosis , gastric foreign bodies , bone disease , and heart problems . An outbreak of West Nile virus in Bronx Park , New York , involved northern bald ibises amongst many other species of birds and mammals . 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 In 1504 , a decree by Archbishop Leonhard of Salzburg made the northern bald ibis one of the world 's earliest officially protected species . Despite the decree , it died out in Austria as elsewhere in Europe . There are now two ibis reintroduction projects in the country , at Grünau and <unk> . A research station at Grünau has a breeding colony managed , like the Turkish population , as a free @-@ flying flock which is caged at migration time . The aim here is to investigate flock interactions and hormonal status , behavioural and ecological aspects of natural foraging , and the establishment of traditions via social learning . 
 The <unk> Project is an attempt to establish a migratory waldrapp colony by using ultralight planes to teach a migration route . The scheme builds on the Grünau research by developing a method to control and guide the autumn migration of a founder population , which then can pass this migration tradition to subsequent generations . In May 2002 , 11 birds from the Vienna Zoo and the Grünau colony were trained to follow two microlight planes , and in 2003 , a first attempt was made to lead a group of birds from <unk> to southern Tuscany . Due to adverse weather and technical problems , the birds had to be transported by road over a considerable part of the distance . The subsequent releases were more successful , with birds wintering in Tuscany , and , from 2005 , returning to northern Austria . In 2008 , a female ibis named Aurelia flew 930 km ( 580 mi ) back to Austria for her fourth return to the breeding site . The hazards of the journey are shown by the loss of her two offspring and her mate while on the southern journey in the autumn of 2007 . 
 Proyecto Eremita is a Spanish reintroduction involving the release of nearly 30 birds in the Ministry of Defence training ground in La Janda district , <unk> , Cádiz Province . It had its first success in 2008 , when a pair laid two eggs . This is probably the first attempt to breed in the wild in Spain for 500 years as the last definite reference to the northern bald ibis breeding in Spain is from a 15th @-@ century falconry book . This effort has been undertaken by the Andalusian government 's Environmental Ministry , the Spanish Ministry of Defence , and the <unk> de <unk> ( Jerez Zoo and Botanical Gardens ) , with the assistance of the Doñana Biological Station , CSIC and volunteers from the Cádiz Natural History Society . Previously , two birds left the area in 2005 and 14 in 2006 , but nothing is known of their whereabouts other than that a ringed bird from Spain was seen in the Middle Atlas , Morocco in 2005 . Internet pictures of this species taken near <unk> da Pera , Algarve , Portugal in 2009 and later , may be related to those releases in Spain . In the interim , the Spanish colony has been growing very well , from 9 breeding pairs in 2011 , 10 in 2012 and 15 in 2013 to 23 breeding pairs in 2014 , which successfully raised 25 chicks in 2014 ( Quercus 349 ( 2015 ) : 14 @-@ 23 ) . In 2014 the total population of this colony was 78 wild birds split into two colonies , originally along the cliffs of the Atlantic coast and in 2012 with a second colony of 5 @-@ 6 breeding pairs that started at the cliffs 10 km inland next to a country road at La Barca de Vejer ( Vejer de la Frontera ) . 
 = = = = Northern Morocco = = = = 
 There is a planned reintroduction of the ibis at Ain <unk> @-@ <unk> in the north @-@ east of Morocco . Since the wild populations further south remain vulnerable , and the porous sandstone of their breeding ledges is exposed to erosion , the intention is to establish a non @-@ migratory population ( stocked from German , Swiss , and Austrian zoos ) in an area where this species was known to have bred up to about 1980 . The station in the Rif mountains was built in 2000 , and stocked with the first group of zoo @-@ bred birds . A second importation of zoo @-@ bred birds and the construction of an information centre took place in 2004 . Six pairs bred in 2006 subsequent to a change in the birds ' diet , and six offspring from five nests were successfully reared . In 2007 there were 19 birds ( 13 adults and six juveniles ) in the aviary . 
 The rock walls of the mountains have many potential breeding ledges , and an artificial lake provides water to the birds and to the local human population . Steppe pasture which is not exposed to herbicides or pesticides gives good foraging . Once the population reaches around 40 birds , a release will be initiated , subject to international agreement . The reintroduction site is 760 km ( 470 mi ) from Agadir on the other side of the Atlas Mountains , so accidental contamination of the wild colonies is unlikely . 
 = = In culture = = 
 According to local legend in the Birecik area , the northern bald ibis was one of the first birds that Noah released from the Ark as a symbol of fertility , and a lingering religious sentiment in Turkey helped the colonies there to survive long after the demise of the species in Europe , as described above . 
 This ibis was revered as a holy bird and a symbol of brilliance and splendour in Ancient Egypt , where , together with the sacred ibis , it was regarded as a reincarnation of Thoth , scribe of the gods , who was usually depicted with a man 's body and the head of an ibis . The Old Egyptian word akh , " to be resplendent , to shine " , was denoted in hieroglyphs by a bald ibis , presumably as a reference to its glossy plumage . In a more abstract sense , akh stood for excellence , glory , honour , and virtue . It has also been used to signify the soul or spirit , one of five elements constituting personality . 
 Herodotus wrote of the man @-@ eating <unk> birds , which had wings of brass and sharp metallic feathers they could fire at their victims . Ridding Lake <unk> in Arcadia of these creatures was one of the twelve labours of Heracles . These mythical birds are sometimes considered to be based on the northern bald ibis , but since they were described as marsh birds , and usually depicted without crests , the legendary species is more likely to be derived from the sacred ibis . Some depictions , such as the 6th @-@ century BC Athenian black @-@ figure amphora in the British Museum , clearly show the black head and white body of the latter species . After the bald ibis became extinct in Central Europe , some later writers thought that Gesner 's description was itself one of several in his book depicting mythical creatures . 
 The bird painted in 1490 in one of the Gothic frescoes in the Holy Trinity Church in <unk> ( now south @-@ western Slovenia ) in the Karst by John of Kastav was most probably the northern bald ibis . It is believed that it had also been depicted at other places in Istria and Dalmatia , where it was presumably endemic in the Middle Ages , e.g. in the local church in <unk> pri <unk> and in the coat of arms of the noble family Elio from Koper . The portal of <unk> Castle in <unk> pri <unk> ( central Slovenia ) also features this species . 
 Several countries have produced postage stamps which depict the northern bald ibis . They include Algeria , Morocco , Sudan , Syria , Turkey , and Yemen , which are breeding or migration locations ; Austria , which is seeking to reintroduce the bird ; and Jersey , which has a small captive population . 
 = Jacob L. Devers = 
 Jacob Loucks Devers ( / <unk> / ; 8 September 1887 – 15 October 1979 ) was a general in the United States Army who commanded the 6th Army Group in the European Theater during World War II . He was involved in the development and adoption of numerous weapons , including the M4 Sherman and M26 Pershing tanks , the DUKW amphibious truck , the Bell H @-@ 13 Sioux helicopter and the M16 rifle . 
 A graduate of the U.S. Military Academy , Devers was commissioned in the field artillery in 1909 . During World War I , he was an instructor at the School of Fire at Fort Sill , Oklahoma , and did not serve in France until after the November 11 armistice ended the fighting , when he attended the French artillery school at Treves . Between the two world wars he was a staunch advocate of mechanization at a time when the idea of phasing out horses met strong resistance from conservative gunners . 
 When World War II broke out in Europe , Devers was stationed in Panama . He was promoted to major general in October 1940 and took command of the newly formed 9th Infantry Division at Fort Bragg , North Carolina , a base whose construction he oversaw . Appointed Chief of the Armored Force in August 1941 , he supervised its expansion from four armored divisions to sixteen . He was an articulate proponent of the emerging tactical doctrine of combined arms , and rejected the American doctrine that held that tanks were for exploitation , not for fighting other tanks . He pressed American industry to produce more powerful engines , and , often against the views of his superiors , pushed the development of the M4 Sherman , a medium tank with a 75mm gun . Not satisfied with the Sherman , he called for still more heavily armed and armored tanks . He wanted 250 of the new M26 Pershing tanks for Operation Overlord , but was overruled . 
 In May 1943 , Devers became European Theater of Operations , United States Army ( ETOUSA ) commander . His principal tasks were overseeing preparation of detailed plans and the buildup of men and materiel for Overlord , and supporting the Combined Bomber Offensive . He clashed with General Dwight D. Eisenhower over the diversion of ETOUSA resources to Eisenhower 's North African Theater of Operations . Eisenhower succeeded him at ETOUSA in January 1944 , and Devers went to the Mediterranean as Commander North African Theater of Operations , United States Army ( NATOUSA ) , and Deputy Supreme Allied Commander , Mediterranean Theater , to British General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson . Devers was involved in the organization , planning and leadership of Operation Dragoon , the invasion of southern France in August 1944 . He led the 6th Army Group in France and Germany through the advance to the Rhine , the German counterattack in Operation Northwind , the operations to reduce the Colmar Pocket and the Western Allied invasion of Germany . After the war he commanded the Army Ground Forces . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Jacob Loucks Devers was born on 8 September 1887 , in York , Pennsylvania , a small industrial town in the southeastern corner of the state . His parents were Philip Devers , a watchmaker and partner in a jewellery store , and Ella Kate Loucks Devers , a homemaker . He was the first of the couple 's four children . He had two younger brothers , Frank and Phillip , and a younger sister , Catherine , known as Kitts . The Devers , of Irish and German @-@ Alsatian ancestry , were strict , hardworking and religious . The family belonged to the Evangelical Lutheran Church , which did not believe in smoking or drinking . While providing a comfortable middle @-@ class life for their children , the couple taught them to value dependability , integrity and industriousness . 
 Growing up in the heart of Pennsylvania Dutch country , young Jamie Devers ( as he was called by his family ) enjoyed the outdoors : camping , fishing and hunting . He played all the usual boyhood sports and made friends easily with his engaging smile and cheerful personality . In addition to his household chores , he did odd jobs around the neighborhood and worked on his maternal grandfather Jacob Loucks ' farm . Initially , he was educated at Garfield Elementary School in York . He entered York High School in September 1901 . A popular student , he was elected Class President . He had an excellent academic record , earning high marks in mathematics and science . Always competitive though slightly built , the 120 @-@ pound ( 54 kg ) 5 @-@ foot @-@ 10 @-@ inch ( 178 cm ) Devers captained the basketball team , played defensive quarterback in football and starred in baseball . 
 Devers graduated from York High School in May 1905 . He applied to , and was accepted by , Lehigh University , with the intention of studying engineering , but then Congressman Daniel F. <unk> offered him an appointment to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point , New York . He entered the Academy in June with the class of 1909 . Among his classmates were George S. Patton , William Hood Simpson , and Robert L. Eichelberger , who would also become four @-@ star generals in World War II , and John C. H. Lee , who would become a three @-@ star general . He did well in his studies , and excelled in sports , playing shortstop on the Army baseball team and guard on the Army Black Knights ' basketball squad . He also played polo . He graduated from West Point on 11 June 1909 , ranking 39th in his class of 103 , and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in his chosen branch : the field artillery . There were only nine positions available , but enough of the higher @-@ ranking cadets chose other branches for Devers to secure his first preference . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Devers ' first posting was to the 1st Battalion , 4th Mountain Artillery , based at Vancouver Barracks in Washington state . This was a pack artillery unit , meaning that its howitzers , ammunition and equipment were all carried by mules . It was equipped with the obsolescent QF 2 @.@ 95 @-@ inch mountain gun . Three months after Devers joined , the unit moved to Fort David A. Russell , Wyoming , where it rejoined the 2nd Battalion , returning from the Philippines . The post also hosted the 11th Infantry and the African @-@ American 9th Cavalry . Devers was assigned to Battery C. Soon afterwards , First Lieutenant Leslie J. McNair became the battery commander . On 11 October 1911 , Devers married Georgie Hayes Lyon of Arlington , Virginia , visiting niece of Major LeRoy S. Lyon , his battalion commander , in a ceremony at her parents ' home in Arlington , Virginia . 
 For his next assignment in December , 1912 , Devers was sent back to West Point to teach mathematics . He also managed the baseball program and coached the Cadet basketball team . His ballplayers included Dwight D. Eisenhower and Omar N. Bradley . On 1 April 1916 , he was promoted to first lieutenant . That August he was transferred to the newly activated 9th Field Artillery at Schofield Barracks , in what was then the Territory of Hawaii . His only child , daughter Frances Lyon , was born there on 20 July 1917 . The 9th Field Artillery had a battalion of 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns and one of 155mm guns . Medium artillery was new in the United States Army , and the 9th was its first artillery tractor @-@ drawn regiment . Devers was given command of Battery F. 
 The United States entered World War I against Germany on 6 April 1917 . Devers was promoted to captain on May 15 , and major on August 5 , but he did not see action . He was posted to the School of Fire at Fort Sill , Oklahoma , on December 10 as an instructor . He received promotions to lieutenant colonel on 30 July 1918 , and colonel on 24 October 1918 . He became Executive Officer of the 9th Field Artillery Regiment , his former unit from Hawaii now at Fort Sill , on 15 October 1918 . In September he was nominated to command the 60th Field Artillery , which was under orders to move to the Western Front in France , but never took up the post . The armistice of 11 November 1918 ended the fighting , and the orders were cancelled . A disappointed Devers instead became commanding officer of the 1st Field Artillery at Fort Sill on 5 March 1919 . In May 1919 , Devers was sent on a three @-@ month temporary duty assignment to Europe with the American Army of Occupation . He attended the French artillery school at Treves to study guns , ammunition , equipment and tactics used by the Allies and the Germans during the war . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Returning to the United States , Devers began a second tour of duty at West Point , serving as Senior Field Artillery Instructor and Commander , Field Artillery Detachment . He reverted from colonel to his substantive rank of captain on taking up the appointment on 20 August 1919 . He was promoted to major again on 1 July 1920 . At the time , the superintendent was Brigadier General Douglas MacArthur . MacArthur fought an uphill and unpopular battle to bring the curriculum up to date , and Devers defended MacArthur and his methods , but his own department was unaffected . 
 After five years at West Point , Devers was selected to attend the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas . He began his studies there on 3 September 1924 , and finished as a Distinguished Graduate on 28 June 1925 . He was ranked 42nd in the class of 258 , which was topped by Dwight Eisenhower . He was then posted once again to Fort Sill , this time as the director the Field Artillery School 's Gunnery Department until 31 August 1929 . Among the officers he worked with was Captain Edward H. Brooks . During his tour , Devers was credited with making a number of innovative artillery tactical and technical improvements , including advanced fire @-@ support techniques that would later be successfully used during World War II . He remained a staunch advocate of mechanization throughout the inter @-@ war period . The idea of phasing out horses met strong resistance from conservative gunners . 
 In September 1929 , Devers was ordered to Washington , D.C. , to serve on the staff of the Chief of Field Artillery . Chosen to attend the Army War College in Washington , he began his studies there on 15 August 1932 , and graduated on 29 June 1933 . This was followed by a one @-@ year assignment to Fort Hoyle , Maryland , as executive officer of the 1st Field Artillery Brigade , and then as commander of the 2nd Battalion , 6th Field Artillery . After 14 years as a major , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel again on 26 February 1934 . On 15 June 1934 , he was sent to Fort Myer , Virginia , near the District of Columbia , as commander of the 1st Battalion , 16th Field Artillery . Young regimental officers like Second Lieutenant Alexander Graham were surprised when Devers had them fire their 75mm guns . Graham , who married Devers ' daughter Frances on 30 July 1935 , was impressed that Devers had them do so at every opportunity . 
 Devers returned to the Military Academy for the third time , this time as graduate manager of athletics . The superintendent was now Major General William Durward Connor , an officer renowned for his sharp tongue . Devers later recalled that " A lot of people were afraid of General Connor . He called me a moron once a week " . The responsibility had grown considerably since the days when Devers was a cadet . Then there were only six varsity team sports ; by 1936 there were eighteen . Despite the Great Depression , the Athletic Boards , which Devers ran , had accumulated considerable funds . His major task was the construction of new playing fields where there did not appear to be any available land . He came up with a plan to move the right of way of the West Shore Railroad . He found the railroad welcoming of the plan , as a shorter , straighter route saved them money . The new fields were completed in December 1936 . He was promoted to full colonel on 1 July 1938 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Emergency = = = 
 In August 1939 , Devers and his wife Georgie boarded the Army transport Leonard Wood bound for the Panama Canal Zone . There was at the time genuine fear that a hostile nation might strike at the United States with an attack on the Panama Canal , thereby preventing the movement of ships between the Pacific and Atlantic . The outbreak of World War II in Europe in September 1939 led to an escalation of fears . Reinforcements including the 5th and 13th Infantry were sent to Panama . Devers became Chief of Staff to Major General David L. Stone , and then to Daniel Van Voorhis , who replaced Stone in December . He supervised construction projects and other improvements to the Panama Canal Zone defenses . 
 On the recommendation of the new Chief of Staff of the Army , General George C. Marshall , and with the approval of Secretary of War Henry H. Woodring , Devers was advanced in rank to brigadier general on 1 May 1940 . His promotion over 474 other colonels made him at age 52 the youngest brigadier general in the Army . In July Devers was recalled to Washington from the Panama Canal Zone to assume command of the Provisional Brigade in the District of Columbia area . That September Marshall , with the approval of new Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson , named Devers Senior U.S. Army representative to the Presidential Board tasked with surveying bases in the Caribbean and Newfoundland to be leased from the British as part of the Destroyers for Bases Agreement . When Devers said he could use an Air Corps officer , Marshall told him to take the one outside his door , who happened to be Lieutenant Colonel Townsend E. Griffiss . 
 Devers was promoted to major general on 1 October 1940 , and sent to command the newly formed 9th Infantry Division at Fort Bragg , North Carolina , replacing Brigadier General Francis W. Honeycutt , who had been killed in an air crash . He would supervise training of the 9th while managing Bragg 's huge base expansion program . Devers directed basic and advanced infantry training at Bragg for the thousands of troops under his command , regular army , national guard , reservists and draftees . Among his colonels was Alexander M. ( Sandy ) Patch , the commander of the 47th Infantry . During Devers ' tour Fort Bragg 's strength grew from 5 @,@ 400 to 67 @,@ 000 soldiers . At the same time , he pushed forward immense construction projects for base housing , training facilities and roads on the overcrowded post . By working closely and cooperatively with engineers , local contractors , quartermasters and staff — and by cutting through red tape — in six months Devers oversaw completion of 2 @,@ 500 buildings and 93 miles ( 150 km ) of roads . 
 = = = Armored Force = = = 
 On 1 August 1941 , General Marshall named Devers Chief of the Armored Force , which was headquartered at Fort Knox , Kentucky . Devers replaced a mechanized cavalry legend , the terminally ill Major General Adna R. Chaffee , Jr . , who had been appointed the first Chief just a year earlier . Devers reported directly to Marshall . He was responsible for inspecting , organizing and training the Army 's armored divisions and separate non @-@ divisional tank battalions , including all non @-@ tank personnel assigned . McNair 's Army General Headquarters ( GHQ ) was in tactical charge of all U.S. ground forces , but GHQ specifically did not control the semi @-@ autonomous Armored Force , which was considered a " quasi @-@ arm " . The Armored Force had complete control of its own training , doctrine and organization . In a major reorganization of the War Department in March 1942 , McNair was named Commander of a new component , Army Ground Forces ( AGF ) , which replaced GHQ . Relations between GHQ / AGF and the Armored Force were distant and lines of authority and responsibility were often unclear . McNair seemed to prefer leaving Devers alone . 
 At the time Devers took command , the Armored Force had two operational armored divisions : the 1st Armored Division at Fort Polk , Louisiana , and the 2nd Armored Division at Fort Knox , and one independent tank battalion , the 70th Tank Battalion at Fort George G. Meade , Maryland . Both divisions participated in the large @-@ scale war games of the Louisiana Maneuvers in August and September 1941 , and the Carolina Maneuvers in November 1941 . Despite some successes , the maneuvers revealed armored unit and equipment operational deficiencies , plus a general lack of combat readiness . Devers attributed much of the poor performance to poorly @-@ trained junior and staff officers , but also saw doctrinal deficiencies that hampered the coordination of tanks , infantry and artillery . 
 In particular , post @-@ maneuver reports emphasized the vulnerability of tanks to antitank fire . This bolstered the pro @-@ antitank philosophy strongly held by McNair . Devers differed , countering that the number of tank " kills " credited to antitank gunners was unrealistic and biased , feeling that " we were licked by a set of umpires ' rules " . McNair continued to push for an independent tank destroyer force , while Devers argued that " the weapon to best the tank is a better tank " . Nevertheless , in November Marshall authorized creation of a tank destroyer force . The Tank Destroyer Center was created , and the War Department ordered the activation of 53 tank destroyer battalions . Battlefield experience would prove that Devers was right . In combat most tanks were knocked out by other tanks while tank destroyers were mainly used as mobile artillery support . The tank destroyer program was scaled back , and tank destroyer battalions were deactivated . At the end of the war , the tank destroyer quasi @-@ arm was disbanded . 
 Before Devers ' arrival , Armored Force doctrine emphasized light tanks weighing no more than 15 short tons ( 14 t ) . American doctrine held that tanks were for exploitation , not fighting other tanks . He rejected the M6 heavy tank and recommended to McNair that it be cancelled , citing its tremendous weight and concerns about its mobility and reliability . This was seen as support for this position , but Devers wanted a medium tank , preferably mounting something like a 105mm howitzer . He was appalled to find that the Armored Force 's tanks were armed with nothing heavier than a 37mm gun . A new medium tank was beginning to come off the production line : the M3 Lee . Devers observed testing of one just days after taking command , and was unimpressed . American industry was unable to cast a turret large enough to hold a 75mm gun , so the M3 carried a 37mm gun , with a 75mm in a sponson . This gave it a limited traverse , rendering it difficult to engage moving targets . To make matters worse , the designers shortened the barrel to improve the M3 's mobility , which Devers realized also reduced the gun 's muzzle velocity , and hence its effectiveness against armor . In practice , M3 crews attempted to engage German armor with the 75mm , as the 37mm was ineffective against it . It was found that the 75mm could penetrate the frontal armor of German tanks at 400 yards ( 370 m ) , but German tanks destroyed M3s at up to 1 @,@ 100 yards ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) . Devers pronounced the M3 " overweight , underpowered , and insufficiently armed " . 
 Often against the views of his superiors , Devers lobbied for a still more heavily armored and better armed medium tank , the M4 Sherman . He played an important role in the M4 's design , development and manufacturing , particularly its engine and armament . Throughout his tour as Chief of the Armored Force he worked closely with the Ordnance Department , manufacturers and the Armored Force Board at Fort Knox on the research and testing of tanks , guns , armored vehicles and ammunition . The biggest obstacle was engines . Those of pre @-@ war tanks were rated at 250 horsepower ( 190 kW ) , which was insufficient for a 35 short tons ( 32 t ) medium tank . Devers wanted an 800 horsepower ( 600 kW ) engine , but this was beyond the ability of the American automotive industry to produce . Extraordinary efforts resulted in the development of a number of 400 horsepower ( 300 kW ) engines . He controversially rejected the General Motors <unk> diesel engine in favor of gasoline engines . Battlefield experience would demonstrate that the diesel engine was superior . The quest for a better engine eventually settled on the Ford GAA engine , but there was a persistent shortage of tank engines . Some 49 @,@ 234 of the reliable , versatile , low @-@ cost M4 Sherman and its variants would be produced . 
 After the GHQ Maneuvers , the Army expected to have a period of " remedial training " to fix problems . The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor 7 December 1941 , shattered those expectations and plunged a not fully prepared United States into the war . At the beginning of 1942 , two armored divisions were operational and three were in training ; the 6th Armored Division was activated in February , followed by the 7th Armored Division in March . McNair recommended that one division in five be an armored division ; that meant up to fifty armored divisions by the end of 1943 . Increased pressure was on Devers , promoted to lieutenant general ( equal in rank to McNair ) on 6 September 1942 , to push more armored units through the pipeline even faster . Training was sometimes neglected because of the pressing need to get units ready for overseas deployment . Initially the Armored Force trained all the components of the armored division , but after March 1942 it became restricted to tank personnel , with other personnel coming from their own branch training centers . Devers sent Patton , now commander of I Armored Corps , to set up the Desert Training Center ( DTC ) in the California @-@ Arizona Mojave Desert , where soldiers could train for desert warfare . By the time it closed in 1944 , 20 infantry and armored divisions had trained there , although none fought in the desert , and five of them were sent to the Pacific . 
 Devers was an articulate proponent of the Army 's now @-@ emerging tactical doctrine of combined arms : infantry @-@ artillery @-@ armor @-@ close air support . He carried a translation of a German manual on the components of the panzer division . Devers was neither the first nor the only general to embrace combined arms as the doctrinal solution to the problem of how best to employ tanks , but he was well @-@ placed to act upon it . At his direction an updated , comprehensive ( 460 pages ) Armed Force Field Manual : Tactics and Technique FM 17 – 10 was written , published and distributed in March 1942 . A German manual on tank platoon tactics , with a foreword by Heinz Guderian , was translated into English and issued as an Armored Force publication . March 1942 saw a reorganization of the armored divisions in the wake of the 1941 maneuvers . Devers added an artillery headquarters to the armored division , and reorganized the artillery component into three battalions , each of three batteries of six M7 Priest self @-@ propelled guns . A division trains headquarters was added to coordinate logistical activities . In a first , at Devers ' insistence , a flight of light aircraft to be used for artillery spotting and reconnaissance were included in the new Table of Organization and Equipment ( TO & E ) for each division . He was a strong and early supporter of the development of the DUKW , an amphibious truck . Vannevar Bush later recalled that in the early stages of its development , Devers was the only man in the Army who fully appreciated its possibilities . Its value would be demonstrated during the Allied invasion of Sicily in July 1943 . 
 From 14 December 1942 to 28 January 1943 , Devers went on an inspection tour of the battlefields in North Africa , taking with him Brigadier Generals Edward H. Brooks and Williston B. Palmer from the Armored Force , and <unk> M. Barnes from the Ordnance Department . He spoke with key British generals including Harold Alexander , Bernard Montgomery and Richard McCreery , and American commanders including Eisenhower , Patton , Thomas B. Larkin and Orlando Ward . Eisenhower was defensive , suspicious that Marshall may have sent Devers to replace him , and nervous when Devers had critical comments about the handling of the 1st Armored Division . Devers and his party received a great deal of feedback , both positive and negative about American equipment . Devers noted that the M4 Sherman was superior to the M3 Lee that the 1st Armored Division was equipped with , but urged the development of the more powerful 76mm gun . 
 In 1943 , McNair took an axe to the armored division organization , dramatically downsizing it . For all but the 2nd and 3rd Armored Divisions , the number of armored battalions was reduced to three . Devers favored the older , larger organization . The surplus armored battalions were utilized as separate armored battalions , so by the end of 1943 there were 54 armored battalions in armored divisions and 65 non @-@ divisional battalions . By this time , the planned number of Army Ground Force divisions had been dramatically cut to 90 , and McNair considered that only ten armored divisions were required , and he suggested that six of the sixteen armored divisions already active be broken up . This proposal was not accepted , and the number of armored divisions was frozen at sixteen . 
 = = = European Theater of Operations , United States Army ( ETOUSA ) = = = 
 On 3 May 1943 , while on an aerial inspection tour , Lieutenant General Frank M. Andrews , European Theater of Operations , United States Army ( ETOUSA ) commander since replacing Eisenhower on 5 February 1943 , was killed in an aircraft crash in Iceland . Marshall appointed Devers to take command of ETOUSA in his place . Devers arrived in England on 9 May 1943 . His principal tasks were overseeing preparation of detailed plans and the buildup of men and materiel for Operation Overlord , and supporting the Combined Bomber Offensive . At the end of May 1943 , there were 133 @,@ 000 US troops in the United Kingdom , of which 19 @,@ 000 were in the ground forces , 74 @,@ 000 in the air forces , and 34 @,@ 000 in the services of supply . By the end of the year , their numbers had grown to 774 @,@ 000 , of which 265 @,@ 000 were in the ground forces , 286 @,@ 000 in the air forces , and 220 @,@ 000 in the services of supply . In preparing the plans for Overlord , he worked closely with the chief of staff to the Supreme Allied Commander ( COSSAC ) , British Lieutenant General Frederick E. Morgan , with whom he had a good working relationship . Devers ' main objection to the COSSAC plan was that he did not want American units smaller than corps directly subordinated to British command , based on what he called " the Pershing Principle " . 
 Devers clashed with Eisenhower over the diversion of ETOUSA resources to Eisenhower 's North African Theater of Operations . On 28 July 1943 , Eisenhower and Lieutenant General Carl Spaatz asked that four groups of Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers be sent to the North African Theater to help support Operation Avalanche , the Allied invasion of Italy . The planned assault area at Salerno was at the extreme range of Allied fighters based in Sicily , and long @-@ range bombers were needed to isolate the battlefield . Eisenhower and Spaatz felt that their theater should have priority . However , the four groups represented about a third of the Eighth Air Force 's heavy bombers , and their departure would greatly impact the Combined Bomber Offensive , so Devers turned down the request . Devers and Eighth Air Force 's commander , Brigadier General Ira C. Eaker , spoke to the British Chiefs of Staff Committee , who agreed with them . When Eisenhower appealed to Washington , Marshall and General Henry H. Arnold , the Chief of Army Air Forces , also supported Devers . In August , Eisenhower asked for permission to retain three groups of Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator bombers in the North African Theater . Devers again turned down his request , and Marshall and Arnold again supported him . In September though , when Avalanche came under severe pressure from German counterattacks , Devers readily acceded to a request for the return of the three groups . Stephen Ambrose later noted that " Eisenhower was not accustomed to having his requests to Marshall turned down and found it difficult to accept . " 
 In September 1943 , AGF representatives met with Devers to discuss his needs , and he asked for 250 of the new <unk> tanks ( later redesignated the M26 Pershing ) to be produced and shipped as a matter of urgency . The Ordnance Department concurred , but added on 1 @,@ 000 <unk> series tanks , an advanced design handicapped by problems with the reliability of its electric transmission . McNair disapproved the request , writing that " the M4 tank , particularly the M4A3 , has been widely hailed as the best tank on the battlefield today ... Other than this particular request , which represents the British view — there has been no call from any theater for a <unk> tank gun . There appears to be no fear on the part of our forces of the German Mark VI ( Tiger ) tank ... there can be no basis for the <unk> tank other than the conception of a tank versus tank duel — which is believed unsound and unnecessary ... there is no indication that the 76mm antitank gun is inadequate against the Mark VI ( Tiger ) tank . " 
 = = = North African Theater of Operations , United States Army ( NATOUSA ) = = = 
 At the Tehran Conference in November 1943 , President Roosevelt named Eisenhower as the Supreme Allied Commander for Overlord . Devers hoped that he would be appointed commander of the First Army Group , but instead was sent to the Mediterranean as Commander North African Theater of Operations , United States Army ( NATOUSA ) , primarily a logistical administrative organization . American formations in the theater included Lieutenant General Mark W. Clark 's Fifth Army and Patton 's Seventh Army ; the Twelfth Air Force , led by Major General John K. Cannon ; the Fifteenth Air Force , commanded by Major General Nathan Twining ; and the NATOUSA Services of Supply headed by Lieutenant General Thomas B. Larkin . Eaker went with Devers as Commander in Chief of the Mediterranean Allied Air Forces . Devers , who arrived at Allied Force Headquarters ( AFHQ ) in Algiers on 4 January 1944 , was also deputy to the Supreme Allied Commander , Mediterranean Theater , British General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson . Devers and Wilson worked well together , and despite the administrative nature of his position , Devers spent most of his time at the front . Wilson often had Devers deal with difficult cases like the French and the Poles , and Devers was later decorated by the Polish government in exile for allowing Poles captured in German uniform to join the Polish II Corps in Italy . 
 At the beginning of 1944 , Allied ground forces fighting on the Italian Front were bogged down south of Rome in front of the German Gustav Line . This chain of strong defensive positions in mountainous terrain was anchored in the middle at Monte Cassino . Operation Shingle , Clark 's plan for a surprise end run to outflank the German Winter Line , called for Allied landings at Anzio on Italy 's west coast thirty miles south of Rome . On 7 January 1944 , just days after he had become Wilson 's deputy , Devers attended a conference in Marrakesh to discuss Shingle . In attendance was Winston Churchill , General Wilson , General Alexander , Admiral of the Fleet Sir Andrew Cunningham and Major General Walter Bedell Smith . Devers wondered why such a high @-@ level conference was required for what he saw as a simple military decision , but noted in his diary that " the individuals present all favored an amphibious operation at Anzio . " 
 Devers clashed with Smith over the latter 's attempt to obtain officers for Eisenhower 's command . He tried to be accommodating , and consented to release a number of officers , including Patton and Major General Everett Hughes , but declined to give up others , including Larkin , Brigadier General Clarence Adcock and , in particular , Major General Lucian Truscott . Eisenhower wanted Truscott to command a corps in the assault in Operation Overlord ; Devers foresaw him doing the same in southern France . Eisenhower appealed to Marshall , who supported him ; but Devers protested that Truscott was about to lead the 3rd Infantry Division ashore at Anzio in a few days ' time . Not wanting to deprive Devers of a key subordinate on the eve of battle , Marshall backed down . Soon after the landing , Devers flew to the beachhead to see Truscott , but was dismayed to find that the advance had halted on Clark 's orders . Major General John P. Lucas ' VI Corps did not achieve the desired result at Anzio , and Clark 's attempted crossing of the Rapido River was a disaster . 
 At Monte Cassino the historic abbey overlooked Allied positions below . Ground commanders were sure the monastery was being used by the Germans as an observation post . Lieutenant @-@ General Bernard C. Freyberg , commander of the New Zealand Corps preparing for a new assault on the mountain , had repeatedly requested that the abbey be bombed . Taking advantage of the German practice of not giving away their positions by firing on small planes , Devers and Eaker flew low over the monastery , and saw what they believed to be a radio aerial and enemy soldiers moving in and out . Wilson reluctantly agreed to its bombing . On 15 February Devers watched waves of American bombers level the monastery with Alexander , Clark , Freyberg and Eaker . But follow @-@ up attacks that day , and over the next eight days , failed to take the position , much less break the Gustav Line . Devers visited Anzio on 16 February , and agreed with Alexander that Lucas should be relieved . Clark did so on 22 February . 
 The continuing failure to advance in Italy prompted the Combined Chiefs of Staff to postpone Operation Anvil , the on @-@ again @-@ off @-@ again proposal for Allied landings along the coast of southern France coinciding with Overlord . Clark told Devers that another attack on the Gustav Line could not be mounted until May , and VI Corps could not be withdrawn from Anzio until it succeeded . But planning for Anvil , begun in mid @-@ January by AFHQ 's Force 163 in Algiers continued . Initially Clark was to lead the assault , with Lucas taking over Fifth Army . Devers did not have much faith in either of them , even before Lucas ' relief . Lyman Lemnitzer later recalled that Fifth Army staff feared that Devers would relieve Clark every time the two met . 
 Marshall insisted that Anvil required an experienced commander , and with Patton gone , Clark was the only one in the theater . Then Devers received a cable that IV Corps headquarters was on its way to the theater . It was commanded by Sandy Patch , who had a distinguished combat record leading the soldiers and marines of XIV Corps in the Guadalcanal Campaign in the Pacific . With Marshall 's concurrence , Devers appointed Patch to replace Patton as commander of the Seventh Army and Force 163 on 2 March . While Patch and his staff planned the operation , Devers ensured that the supplies accumulated for it were not dissipated . 
 A successful Allied offensive in May finally broke through the Gustav Line , and Rome fell to Clark 's army on 4 June . On 13 June , Devers ordered Larkin to shift priority for supplies from Fifth Army in Italy to Seventh Army . Two days later , Wilson ordered VI Corps to be withdrawn from the front line in preparation for Anvil . Virtually all the material needed for the assault was on hand , on the way , or promised , thanks to Devers ' efforts to preserve the stockpile of Anvil stores and supplies even when the operation was in doubt . To command the assault , he created a special headquarters on Corsica called Advanced Detachment AFHQ , with Devers in command . 
 Devers sent a cable to Marshall on 1 July proposing that an army group be formed , with himself as commander . Eisenhower concurred with this on 12 July . While it would have been easy enough to add the Seventh Army to Bradley 's 12th Army Group , this would have meant that Eisenhower would have to deal with the French , and after his experience in Operation Torch , Eisenhower preferred to let Devers do it . Marshall made the appointment on 16 July . Thus , Devers wore four " hats " for the operation : Deputy Supreme Allied Commander , Mediterranean Theater ; Commanding General NATOUSA ; Commander , Advanced Detachment AFHQ , which was activated on 29 July ; and Commanding General , 6th Army Group , which Devers activated on 1 August . 
 = = = France and Germany 1944 – 45 = = = 
 Operation Anvil was a crushing success . In a few short weeks , the French and American forces drove the Germans from southeastern France and captured major ports including Marseille on 28 August . On 15 September 1944 , the 6th Army Group became operational , assuming control of Patch 's Seventh Army and General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny 's French First Army ( as it became on 19 September ) . The French First Army was the largest French force ever amassed under a foreign military leader . Eisenhower 's SHAEF assumed operational control of the 6th Army Group , although Devers retained his own logistical system via the Mediterranean . The campaign was not without cost , and concurrent combat in Normandy and Italy created a shortage of replacements , especially infantry , that left VI Corps about 5 @,@ 200 men short . 
 Devers remained in command of NATOUSA , so he sent Clark a message on 19 October suggesting that units be rested in order to keep casualties down . Devers had written to McNair on 4 February 1944 , noting that when divisions were left in the line for more than 30 to 40 days , fatigue , carelessness and exposure resulted in increased casualty and sickness rates . Clark replied that " your radio indicates a lack of appreciation of our tactical situation , the terrain , enemy resistance , and my mission . " Devers noted in his diary that Clark 's response " shows quite well his lack of judgment and tact and indicate definitely that he is not a team player " , and he recommended to Marshall that Eaker and not Clark be his successor in the Mediterranean . Marshall chose to appoint Lieutenant General Joseph T. McNarney on 22 October . 
 The activation of the French First Army left Seventh Army with only one corps . Devers asked for IV Corps to be transferred from Italy , but Wilson argued that this would adversely affect operations in Italy against the Gothic Line , and the Combined Chiefs agreed . Instead , Devers proposed on 26 September that Major General Wade H. Haislip 's XV Corps to be transferred from Patton 's Third Army , which had severe logistical difficulties , to the Seventh Army . Devers argued that they could better be supported over the 6th Army Group 's line of communications from the Mediterranean . Eisenhower agreed , and further ordered that three more divisions scheduled to join Bradley 's 12th Army Group in northern France , but unlikely to do so until the supply and transport situation improved , be diverted to Marseilles , and join the 6th Army Group . Haislip was a good choice for the 6th Army Group . He spoke French fluently , having fought in France during World War I and attended the Ecole Superieure de Guerre from 1925 to 1927 , and was attuned to French sensibilities . Above all , Haislip got along well with Major General Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque , the mercurial commander of the French 2nd Armored Division . Devers was shocked when Leclerc informed him that he and his men wanted to serve with the American Army , not the French First Army , which he considered dominated by Vichy French traitors . 
 Devers may have oversold the benefits of the southern line of communications . Marseille had been captured , but the harbor entrance was blocked with 75 sunken ships ; the harbor basin had been sown with naval mines ; the quays , jetties and cranes had been demolished ; and the surrounding area had been mined and booby trapped . While the US Navy cleared the harbor , the <unk> Port Construction and Repair Group undertook the rehabilitation of the port . Ships were able to discharge in the stream from 5 September , and the first Liberty ship docked on 15 September . Beyond the port , there were numerous breakages in the rail network , and many bridges were down . To get the railroad from Marseille working , Devers turned to Brigadier General Carl R. Gray , Jr . , the commander of the 1st Military Railway Service . By 25 September , the railroad reached Lyon with a capacity of 3 @,@ 000 short tons ( 2 @,@ 700 t ) per day . Devers pressed Gray for 15 @,@ 000 short tons ( 14 @,@ 000 t ) . By 1 October , when Devers had promised Eisenhower that he could support ten divisions by rail , sufficient supplies were arriving for just one . The rest had to be supported by road . Not until the third week in October could all of the Seventh Army 's needs , including those of XV Corps , be met . 
 Devers conceded that he would only be able to supply Patton with 1 @,@ 000 short tons ( 910 t ) per day from 15 November , which only increased Eisenhower 's resolve to give priority to opening the port of Antwerp in the north . Devers was ordered to clear the Germans from the west bank of the Rhine in his sector . His offensive went well ; the French 1st Armored Division reached the Rhine on 19 November , and Leclerc captured Strasbourg on 23 November . Devers inflicted a crushing defeat on General Friedrich Wiese 's Nineteenth Army , nearly destroying six of its eight divisions . A large German presence remained west of the Rhine , which came to be called the Colmar Pocket . When Eisenhower and Bradley visited 6th Army Group on 24 November , they were astonished to find Devers , Patch and Haislip energetically planning a crossing of the Rhine in early December . Bradley drew attention to the formidable defenses on the far bank , and Devers told him that he had spoken to patrols that had found them empty . Eisenhower would have none of it . His strategy remained to destroy the German forces on the west bank before attempting a crossing . The official historians described this decision as " difficult to understand " . 
 An attempt to reduce the Colmar Pocket on 15 December was called off by Eisenhower when Bradley was hit by the German Ardennes Offensive , which Brigadier General Garrison H. Davidson , the Seventh Army Engineer , felt might have been avoided entirely if Devers had been allowed to proceed with the Rhine crossing . In response to the crisis , Eisenhower ordered Devers to cease offensive operations and assume responsibility for much of Patton 's front , allowing the Third Army to turn north . This left the Seventh Army holding a 126 @-@ mile ( 203 km ) front with six infantry and two armored divisions . Eisenhower ordered Devers to effect a major withdrawal to a shorter line , but Devers baulked at this , and there was a violent French reaction to the prospect of abandoning Strasbourg . On 31 December 1944 , the Seventh Army was struck by Operation Nordwind . Between 5 and 25 January 1945 , there were four more major German attacks against the 6th Army Group by Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler 's Army Group <unk> . Seventh Army suffered some 14 @,@ 000 casualties , but the Germans did not break through and Strasbourg was held . In Devers ' estimation Brooks , the commander of VI Corps , " fought one of the great defensive battles of all times with very little " . 
 Devers now turned his attention to the Colmar Pocket . He had expected the Germans to withdraw , and thought that the French First Army would be able to eliminate the pocket . He later admitted that he had underestimated both the German determination to hold it , and the strength of the French First Army . Eisenhower regarded it as a " sore " , and sent five additional American divisions to 6th Army Group to help clean it out . After the Ardennes Offensive and Northwind , Devers regarded it as petty of Bradley to begrudge him the additional divisions . French and American troops finally eliminated the Colmar Pocket on 5 February 1945 . Against Eisenhower 's preference , Devers was promoted to general on 8 March 1945 ahead of Spaatz , Bradley and Patton . He therefore remained the second @-@ highest ranking American officer in Europe after Eisenhower . 
 Seventh Army crossed the Rhine on 26 March , and began its final advance into Germany . On 5 May 1945 , General Hermann Foertsch surrendered Army Group G unconditionally to Devers . Patch , Haislip and other American generals were present , but no representative of the French First Army . This caused a final diplomatic tussle with the French over the status of the General Hans Schmidt 's Twenty @-@ Fourth Army , which de Lattre insisted should surrender to him . Devers refused to hand Schmidt over to de Lattre . Two days later , Eisenhower accepted a general surrender of the German armed forces at his headquarters at Rheims . 
 = = = Army Ground Forces = = = 
 The Seventh Army was transferred to the 12th Army Group , and the French First Army reverted to national control , leaving the 6th Army Group with little to do , although Devers acted as commander of the 12th Army Group in Bradley 's absence . In June 1945 , Devers was appointed Chief of Army Ground Forces , in succession to General Joseph Stilwell , who had left to command the Tenth United States Army on Okinawa . Army Ground Forces still controlled schools and training centers in the United States , but its focus was demobilization and coordinating the redeployment of units from Europe to the Pacific , where the war with Japan continued until it too surrendered on 14 August 1945 . Devers hired a civilian secretary , Dorothy Benn , a widow whose husband , an Army Air Forces pilot , had been listed as missing in action in New Guinea in 1943 and was presumed dead until his body was found in 1957 . 
 The Army Service Forces was abolished on 14 May 1946 , on the recommendation of War Department 's Simpson Board , but the Army Ground Forces remained . Devers ' November 1945 testimony before the board had urged that the Army Service Forces be retained . Army Ground Forces was given control of the six armies in the United States , but as demobilization gathered pace , the strength of the army shrank dramatically . Devers was faced with the unpleasant task of informing many officers that they were being demoted . One reform that he did achieve was to reduce the number of combat branches to just three : infantry , armor and artillery . 
 McNair had established Army Ground Forces headquarters at the Army War College campus , where Devers lived , but Stilwell had moved the headquarters into the Pentagon . Eisenhower , as the new Chief of Staff of the Army , decided that the Army Ground Forces headquarters should be co @-@ located with the Army Air Forces ' Tactical Air Command , so it was moved to Fort Monroe , Virginia , not far from Langley Field . Devers opened his headquarters there on 1 October 1946 . Further reorganization occurred on 10 March 1948 , when Army Ground Forces was renamed Army Field Forces . Control of the armies was transferred to the Department of the Army , and Army Field Forces was reduced to a coordinating staff agency . 
 As a member of the Joint Research and Development Committee with Spaatz , Devers took an interest in the development of helicopters , taking rides in different machines . He met with Larry Bell , the founder of Bell Aircraft . Bell 's company was in a poor financial situation , and he was hoping that the Army would buy fifty of his new Bell 47 helicopters . Devers was impressed with the aircraft , and agreed to do so , although for $ 25 @,@ 000 each rather than the $ 35 @,@ 000 Bell was asking for , and found the money from Army Ground Forces funds . The Bell H @-@ 13 Sioux would go on to become one of the world 's most recognizable helicopters . 
 = = Retirement and post @-@ military career = = 
 Under the rules of the time , Devers was given mandatory retirement on his 62nd birthday on 30 September 1949 . Devers and his wife Georgie decided to buy a farm in Herndon , West Virginia , although they retained their " Yellow House " in Georgetown , Virginia , where Georgie had resided during the war . Devers settled into the role of a cattle rancher . He hired Curtis and Beatrix Murphy as handyman and cook . When he discovered that they owed $ 2 @,@ 000 in hospital bills , he paid it for them , and never accepted repayment . They continued working for him until his death . 
 Finding that the life of a rancher did not sufficiently hold his interest , Devers accepted a job as managing director of the American Automobile Association Foundation for Traffic Safety . He hired Dorothy Benn as his executive assistant . The job mostly involved fund @-@ raising , which Devers did not enjoy , and he left when a better opportunity as technical assistant to the president of Fairchild Aircraft presented itself in 1950 . He successfully lobbied the United States Air Force to buy the Fairchild C @-@ 123 Provider . He was also a strong advocate of Fairchild 's AR @-@ 15 rifle , which he maintained was a much better weapon that the Army 's M14 rifle , which Devers described as " obsolescent " . As the M16 rifle , the AR @-@ 15 would ultimately supplant the M14 . 
 Devers also served briefly in 1951 as military advisor to Frank P. Graham , the United Nations mediator in the dispute between India and Pakistan over the status of Kashmir . Eisenhower , now president , had Devers represent the United States at tenth anniversary ceremonies for the invasion of southern France in 1954 , for the dedication of <unk> American Cemetery and Memorial and the Rhone American Cemetery and Memorial in France , and for that of the Sicily – Rome American Cemetery and Memorial in Italy . In 1960 , as Devers was leaving Fairchild , Eisenhower asked him to replace Marshall as chairman of the American Battle Monuments Commission . He would remain in this role until 1969 . In May 1964 , he joined a number of other retired generals , including Eaker , Clyde Eddleman and Merrill B. Twining , for Joint Exercise Desert Strike , a major military exercise . 
 The farm was sold , and Devers and Georgie moved back to the Yellow House in 1957 . Her health declined in the 1960s , and she died on 8 February 1967 , and was buried at Arlington National Cemetery . Dorothy Benn 's second husband , a Harvard economics professor who worked for the Department of Agriculture , died in 1973 , and she married Devers on 28 May 1975 . He died at Walter Reed Army Medical Center on 15 October 1979 , and was buried with Georgie at Arlington National Cemetery . He was survived by wife Dorothy , who died in 2007 , and his daughter Frances , who died in 1986 , his sister Catherine , stepdaughter Bonnie Benn Stratton , and her sons Troy <unk> Stratton and W. Benn Stratton , who graduated with the West Point class of 1983 . Alex Graham died in 1977 ; Alex and Frances are buried at Arlington near Devers and Georgie . Devers ' papers are at the York County Heritage Trust in York . 
 = = Dates of rank = = 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 = Washington Metro = 
 The Washington Metro , commonly called Metro and branded Metrorail , is the rapid transit system serving the Washington , D.C. metropolitan area in the United States . It is administered by the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority ( WMATA ) , which also operates Metrobus service under the Metro name . Besides the District , Metro serves several jurisdictions in Maryland and Virginia . In Maryland , Metro provides service to Montgomery and Prince George 's counties ; in Virginia , to Arlington and Fairfax counties and the independent city of Alexandria . Combined with its ridership in the independent Virginia cities of Falls Church and Fairfax , the Metro service area is largely coextensive with the inner ring of the Washington metropolitan area . The system is currently being expanded into Loudoun County , Virginia . It operates mostly as a subway in the District itself , while most of the suburban tracks are at surface level or elevated . 
 Opened in 1976 , the network now includes six lines , 91 stations , and 117 miles ( 188 km ) of route . 
 Metro is the second @-@ busiest rapid transit system in the United States in number of passenger trips , after the New York City Subway . There were 215 @.@ 3 million trips , or 712 @,@ 843 trips per weekday , on Metro in fiscal year 2015 . In June 2008 , Metro set a monthly ridership record with 19 @,@ 729 @,@ 641 trips , or 798 @,@ 456 per weekday . Fares vary based on the distance traveled , the time of day , and the type of card used by the passenger . Riders enter and exit the system using a proximity card called SmarTrip . Metro also has the distinction of having the longest , single @-@ tier escalator in the Western Hemisphere in the Wheaton station ( 230 feet long ) . 
 = = History = = 
 During the 1960s , plans were laid for a massive freeway system in Washington . Harland Bartholomew , who chaired the National Capital Planning Commission , thought that a rail transit system would never be self @-@ sufficient because of low density land uses and general transit ridership decline . But the plan met fierce opposition , and was altered to include a Capital Beltway system plus rail line radials . The Beltway received full funding ; funding for the ambitious Inner Loop Freeway system was partially reallocated toward construction of the Metro system . 
 In 1960 , the federal government created the National Capital Transportation Agency to develop a rapid rail system . In 1966 , a bill creating WMATA was passed by the federal government , the District of Columbia , Virginia , and Maryland , with planning power for the system being transferred to it from the NCTA . 
 WMATA approved plans for a 98 @-@ mile ( 158 km ) regional system in 1968 . Construction began after a groundbreaking ceremony on December 9 , 1969 , when Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe , District Mayor Walter Washington , and Maryland Governor Marvin Mandel tossed the first spade of dirt at Judiciary Square . The first portion of the system opened March 27 , 1976 , with 4 @.@ 6 miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) available on the Red Line with five stations from Rhode Island Avenue to Farragut North , all in the District of Columbia . Arlington County , Virginia was linked to the system on July 1 , 1977 ; Montgomery County , Maryland , on February 6 , 1978 ; Prince George 's County , Maryland , on November 20 , 1978 ; and Fairfax County , Virginia , and Alexandria , Virginia , on December 17 , 1983 . Underground stations were built with cathedral @-@ like arches of concrete , highlighted by soft , indirect lighting . The name Metro was suggested by Massimo Vignelli , who designed the subway maps for the New York City Subway . 
 The 103 @-@ mile ( 166 km ) , 83 @-@ station system was completed with the opening of the Green Line segment to Branch Avenue on January 13 , 2001 . This did not mean the end of the growth of the system : a 3 @.@ 22 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 18 km ) extension of the Blue Line to Largo Town Center and Morgan Boulevard opened on December 18 , 2004 . The first in @-@ fill station , <unk> – Gallaudet University ( at the time called the New York Ave – Florida Ave – Gallaudet University station ) on the Red Line between Union Station and Rhode Island Ave @-@ Brentwood , opened November 20 , 2004 . Construction began in March 2009 for an extension to Dulles Airport to be built in two phases and opening in 2014 and 2018 . The first phase , five stations connecting East Falls Church to Tysons Corner and Wiehle Avenue in Reston , opened on July 26 , 2014 . 
 Metro construction required billions of federal dollars , originally provided by Congress under the authority of the National Capital Transportation Act of 1969 ( Public Law 91 @-@ 143 ) . The cost was paid with 67 % federal money and 33 % local money . This act was amended on January 3 , 1980 by Public Law 96 @-@ 184 , " The National Capital Transportation Amendment of 1979 " ( also known as the Stark @-@ Harris Act ) , which authorized additional funding of $ 1 @.@ 7 billion to permit the completion of 89 @.@ 5 miles ( 144 @.@ 0 km ) of the system as provided under the terms of a full funding grant agreement executed with WMATA in July 1986 , which required 20 % to be paid from local funds . On November 15 , 1990 , Public Law 101 @-@ 551 , " The National Capital Transportation Amendments of 1990 " , authorized an additional $ 1 @.@ 3 billion in federal funds for construction of the remaining 13 @.@ 5 miles ( 21 @.@ 7 km ) of the 103 @-@ mile ( 166 km ) system , completed via the execution of full funding grant agreements , with a 63 % federal / 37 % local matching . 
 The highest ridership for a single day was on the day of the inauguration of Barack Obama , January 20 , 2009 , with 1 @,@ 120 @,@ 000 riders . It broke the previous record , set the day before , of 866 @,@ 681 riders . June 2008 set several ridership records : it set the single @-@ month ridership record of 19 @,@ 729 @,@ 641 total riders , the record for highest average weekday ridership with 1 @,@ 044 @,@ 400 weekday trips , had five of the ten highest ridership days , and had 12 weekdays in which ridership exceed 800 @,@ 000 trips . 
 In February 2006 , Metro officials chose Randi Miller , a car dealership employee from Woodbridge , Virginia , to record new " doors opening " , " doors closing " , and " please stand clear of the doors , thank you " announcements after winning an open contest to replace the messages recorded by Sandy Carroll in 1996 . The " Doors Closing " contest attracted 1 @,@ 259 contestants from across the country . 
 On October 30 , 2010 , the crowd at the Rally to Restore Sanity and / or Fear broke a 19 @-@ year record in Saturday ridership , with 825 @,@ 437 trips . The previous record had been set on June 8 , 1991 at 786 @,@ 358 trips during the Desert Storm rally . 
 = = = Opening dates = = = 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Many Metro stations were designed by Chicago architect Harry Weese and are examples of late @-@ 20th century modern architecture . With their heavy use of exposed concrete and repetitive design motifs , Metro stations display aspects of brutalist design . The stations also reflect the influence of Washington 's neoclassical architecture in their overarching coffered ceiling vaults . Weese worked with Cambridge , Massachusetts @-@ based lighting designer Bill Lam for the indirect lighting used throughout the system . All of Metro 's original Brutalist stations are found in Downtown Washington , D.C. and neighboring urban corridors of Arlington , Virginia , with newer stations incorporating simplified cost @-@ efficient designs . 
 In 2007 , the design of the Metro 's vaulted @-@ ceiling stations was voted number 106 on the " America 's Favorite Architecture " list compiled by the American Institute of Architects ( AIA ) , and was the only brutalist design to win a place among the 150 selected by this public survey . 
 In January 2014 , the AIA announced that it would present its Twenty @-@ five Year Award to the Washington Metro system for " an architectural design of enduring significance " that " has stood the test of time by embodying architectural excellence for 25 to 35 years " . The announcement cited the key role of Weese , who conceived and implemented a " common design kit @-@ of @-@ parts " , which continues to guide the construction of new Metro stations over a quarter @-@ century later , albeit with designs modified slightly for cost reasons . 
 = = System = = 
 Since opening in 1976 , the Metro network has grown to include six lines , 91 stations , and 118 miles ( 190 km ) of route . The rail network is designed according to a spoke @-@ hub distribution paradigm , with rail lines running between downtown Washington and its nearby suburbs . The system makes extensive use of interlining – running more than one service on the same track . There are six operating lines . The system 's iconic official map was designed by noted graphic designer Lance Wyman and Bill Cannan while they were partners in the design firm of Wyman & Cannan in New York City . 
 About 50 miles ( 80 km ) of Metro 's track is underground , as are 47 of the 91 stations . Track runs underground mostly within the District and high @-@ density suburbs . Surface track accounts for about 46 miles ( 74 km ) of the total , and aerial track makes up 9 miles ( 14 km ) . 
 In an effort to gain revenues , WMATA has started to allow retail ventures in Metro stations . WMATA has authorized DVD @-@ rental vending machines and ticket booths for the Old Town Trolley Tours and is seeking additional retail tenants . 
 = = = Financing = = = 
 Metro relies extensively on passenger fares and appropriated financing from the Maryland , Virginia , and Washington DC governments , which are represented on Metro 's board of directors . The system does not have a dedicated revenue stream as other city 's mass transit systems do . Critics allege that this has contributed to Metro 's recent history of maintenance and safety problems . 
 For Fiscal Year 2015 , the estimated farebox recovery ratio ( fare revenue divided by operating expenses ) was 66 percent , based on the WMATA approved budget . 
 = = = Infrastructure = = = 
 = = = = Stations = = = = 
 There are 40 stations in the District of Columbia , 15 in Prince George 's County , 11 in Montgomery County , 11 in Arlington County , 11 in Fairfax County , and three in the City of Alexandria . The second phase of the Silver Line will add 6 new stations — three more in Fairfax County and three in Loudoun County , Virginia — in 2019 or 2020 . 
 At 196 feet ( 60 m ) below the surface , the Forest Glen station on the Red Line is the deepest in the system . There are no escalators ; high @-@ speed elevators take 20 seconds to travel from the street to the station platform . The Wheaton station , next to Forest Glen station on the Red Line , has the longest continuous escalator in the USA and in the Western Hemisphere , at 230 feet ( 70 m ) . The Rosslyn station is the deepest station on the Orange / Blue Line , at 117 feet ( 36 m ) below street level . The station features the second @-@ longest continuous escalator in the Metro system at 194 feet ( 59 m ) ; an escalator ride between the street level and the mezzanine level takes nearly two minutes . 
 The system is not centered on any single station , but Metro Center is at the intersection of the Red , Orange , Blue , and Silver Lines . The station is also the location of WMATA 's main sales office . Metro has designated five other " core stations " that have high passenger volume , including : Gallery Place , transfer station for the Red , Green and Yellow Lines ; L 'Enfant Plaza , transfer station for the Orange , Blue , Silver , Green and Yellow Lines ; Union Station , the busiest station by passenger boardings ; Farragut North ; and Farragut West . 
 In order to deal with the high number of passengers in transfer stations , Metro is studying the possibility of building pedestrian connections between nearby core transfer stations . For example , a 750 @-@ foot ( 230 m ) passage between Metro Center and Gallery Place stations would allow passengers to transfer between the Orange / Blue / Silver and Yellow / Green Lines without going one stop on the Red Line . Another tunnel between Farragut West and Farragut North stations would allow transfers between the Red and Orange / Blue / Silver lines , decreasing transfer demand at Metro Center by an estimated 11 % . The Farragut pedestrian tunnel has yet to be physically implemented , but was added in virtual form effective October 28 , 2011 . The SmarTrip system now interprets an exit from one Farragut station and entrance to the other as part of a single trip , allowing card holders to transfer on foot without having to pay a second full fare . 
 = = = = Rolling stock = = = = 
 Metro ’ s fleet consists of 1 @,@ 126 rail cars , each 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 86 m ) long . Trains have a maximum speed of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) , and average 33 mph ( 53 km / h ) including stops . Operating rules presently limit their top speed to 59 mph ( 95 km / h ) . All cars operate as married pairs ( consecutively numbered even @-@ odd ) , with systems shared across the pair . Metro currently operates 850 cars during rush hours . 814 cars are in active service , four cars have been permanently removed from revenue service for use as the " money train " , and the remaining 36 cars compose gap trains to serve as backup should a train experience problems . 
 Metro 's rolling stock was acquired in six phases , and each version of car is identified with a separate series number . The original order of 300 rail cars ( 290 of which are in operation as of June 2009 ) was manufactured by Rohr Industries , with final delivery in 1978 . These cars are numbered 1000 – 1299 and were rehabilitated in the mid @-@ 1990s . Breda Costruzioni <unk> ( Breda ) , now AnsaldoBreda , manufactured the second order of 76 cars delivered in 1983 and 1984 . These cars , numbered 2000 – 2075 , were rehabilitated in the early 2000s by Alstom in Hornell , New York . A third order of 288 cars , also from Breda , were delivered between 1984 and 1988 . These cars are numbered 3000 – <unk> and were rehabilitated by Alstom in the early 2000s . An order of 100 cars from Breda , numbered 4000 – <unk> , were delivered between 1992 and 1994 . A fifth order of 192 cars was manufactured by Construcciones y <unk> de Ferrocarriles ( CAF ) of Spain . These cars are numbered 5000 – 5191 and were delivered from 2001 through 2004 . A sixth order of 184 cars from Alstom Transportation , are numbered 6000 @-@ <unk> and were delivered between 2005 and 2007 . The cars have body shells built in Barcelona , Spain with assembly completed in Hornell , New York . 
 The 7000 series of cars , currently being built by Kawasaki Heavy Industries Rolling Stock Company of Kobe , Japan are being delivered for on @-@ site testing during winter 2013 , and first entered service April 14 , 2015 on the Blue Line . The new cars are different from previous models in that while still operating as married pairs , the cab in one car can be removed , essentially turning it into a B car . The new design allows for increased passenger capacity , elimination of redundant equipment , greater energy efficiency , and lower maintenance costs . Metro plans to eventually purchase up to 748 cars to increase system capacity and replace its older rolling stock . The National Transportation Safety Board investigation of the fatal June 22 , 2009 , accident led it to conclude that the 1000 series cars are unsafe and unable to protect customers in a crash . 
 As a result , on July 26 , 2010 , Metro voted to purchase 300 7000 series cars to replace the remaining 1000 series cars . An additional 128 7000 series cars were also ordered to serve the new Silver Line to Dulles Airport ( 64 for each phase ) . In May 2013 , Metro placed another order for 100 7000 series cars , which will replace all of the 4000 series cars . By June 2015 WMATA plans to exercise their remaining options to purchase an additional 220 7000 series railcars for fleet expansion , bringing the total number of 7000 series railcars on order to 748 . 
 In May , 2015 , WMATA 's plan to replace 192 of the chronically problematic 5000 @-@ series cars built in the early 2000s with 220 new 7000 @-@ series cars was at risk because the older cars were funded by federal money and requires FTA approval . 
 = = = = Signaling and operation = = = = 
 During normal passenger operation on revenue tracks , trains are designed to be controlled by an integrated Automatic Train Operation ( ATO ) and Automatic Train Control ( ATC ) system that accelerates and brakes trains automatically without operator intervention . All trains are still manned with train operators who open and close the doors , make station announcements , and supervise their trains . The system was designed so that an operator could manually operate a train when necessary . 
 Since June 2009 , when two Red Line trains collided and killed nine people due in part to malfunctions in the ATC system , all Metro trains have been manually operated . The current state of manual operation has led to heavily degraded service , with new manual requirements such as absolute blocks , speed restrictions , and end @-@ of @-@ platform stopping leading to increased headways between trains , increased dwell time , and worse on @-@ time performance . Metro will begin phasing back in ATC in October 2014 . 
 The train doors were originally designed to be opened and closed automatically and the doors would re @-@ open if an object blocked them , much as elevator doors do . Almost immediately after the system opened in 1976 Metro realized these features were not conducive to safe or efficient operation and they were disabled . At present the doors may be opened automatically or manually . If a door tries to close and it meets an obstruction , the operator must re @-@ open the door . 
 = = = Hours and headways = = = 
 Metrorail begins service at 5 am Monday through Friday and at 7 am Saturdays and Sundays ; it ends service at midnight seven nights a week , although the last trains leave the end stations inbound about half an hour before these times . Trains run more frequently during rush hours on all lines , with scheduled peak hour headways of 3 minutes on the Red Line and 6 minutes on all other lines . <unk> are much longer during midday and evening on weekdays and all weekend . The midday six @-@ minute headways are based on a combination of two Metrorail lines ( Orange / Blue and Yellow / Green ) as each route can run every 12 minutes ; in the case of the Red Line , every other train bound for Glenmont terminates at Silver Spring instead . Night and weekend service varies between 8 and 24 minutes , with trains generally scheduled only every 20 minutes . As of 2012 , the WMATA board of directors was considering adopting a new policy that would codify maximum acceptable headways as 15 minutes during peak hours and 30 minutes during off @-@ peak . 
 Other service truncations also occur in the system during rush hour service only . On the Red Line , every other train bound for Shady Grove terminates at Grosvenor @-@ Strathmore , in addition to the alternating terminations at Silver Spring mentioned above . For the Yellow Line , all non @-@ Rush + trains ( that is , all trains originating from Huntington , not Franconia @-@ Springfield ) bound for Fort Totten terminate at Mount Vernon Square . These are primarily instituted due to a limited supply of rail cars and the locations of pocket tracks throughout the system . 
 Until 1999 , Metro ended service at midnight every night , and weekend service began at 8 am . That year , WMATA began late night service on Fridays and Saturdays until 1 am . By 2007 , with encouragement from businesses , that closing time had been pushed back to 3 am . There were plans floated to end late night service due to costs in 2011 , but they were met with resistance by riders . WMATA discontinued late night rail service on May 30 , 2016 , so that Metro can conduct an extensive track rehabilitation program in an effort to improve the system 's reliability . 
 = = = = Special service patterns = = = = 
 Metro runs special service patterns on holidays and when events in Washington may require additional service . Independence Day activities require Metro to adjust service to provide extra capacity to and from the National Mall . WMATA makes similar adjustments during other events , such as presidential inaugurations . Metro has altered service and used some stations as entrances or exits only to help manage congestion . 
 = = = = Rush Plus = = = = 
 In 2012 , WMATA announced enhanced rush period service that was implemented on June 18 , 2012 under the name Rush + ( or Rush Plus ) . Rush Plus service occurs only during portions of peak service : 6 : 30 @-@ 9 AM and 3 : 30 @-@ 6 PM , Monday through Friday . 
 The Rush + realignment was intended to free up space in the Rosslyn Portal ( the tunnel between Rosslyn and Foggy Bottom ) , which operates at full capacity already . When Silver Line service began , those trains would be routed through the tunnel , and so some of what were Blue Line trains to Largo Town Center were now diverted across the Fenwick Bridge to become Yellow Line trains running all the way up the Green Line to Greenbelt . Select Yellow Line trains running south diverted along the Blue Line to Franconia @-@ Springfield ( as opposed to the normal Yellow line terminus at Huntington ) . Until the start of Silver Line service , excess Rosslyn Tunnel capacity was used by additional Orange Line trains that traveled along the Blue Line to Largo ( as opposed to the normal Orange Line terminus at New Carrollton ) . Rush + had the additional effect of giving some further number of passengers transfer @-@ free journeys , though severely increasing headways for the portion of the Blue Line running between Pentagon and Rosslyn . 
 = = = Passenger information systems = = = 
 A Passenger Information Display System ( <unk> ) was installed in all Metrorail stations in 2000 . Displays are located on all track platforms and at the mezzanine entrances of stations , and provide real @-@ time information on next train arrivals , delayed trains , emergency announcements , and related information . WMATA also provides current train and related information to customers with conventional web browsers , as well as users of smartphones and other mobile devices . In 2010 Metro began sharing its <unk> data with outside software developers , for use in creating additional real @-@ time applications for mobile devices . Free apps are available to the public on major mobile device software platforms ( iPhone / iPad , Android , Windows Phone , Palm ) . WMATA also began providing real @-@ time train information by phone in 2010 . 
 = = Fare structure = = 
 Riders enter and exit the system using a stored @-@ value card in the form of a paper magnetic stripe farecard or a proximity card known as SmarTrip . The fare is deducted from the balance of the card ; on paper farecards , the new balance is printed upon exiting the system . <unk> are purchased primarily at vending machines in each station . Paper farecards can hold up to $ 45 in value and are reused until the value of the card reaches zero . If the card contains the exact fare needed to exit , leaving the card at a zero balance , the card is not returned by the exit gate . SmarTrip cards can be purchased at station vending machines , online or at retail outlets , and can store up to $ 300 in value . 
 Metro fares vary based on the distance traveled and the time of day at entry . During peak hours ( weekdays from opening until 9 : 30 a.m. and 3 – 7 p.m. , and Friday and Saturday nights from midnight to closing ) , fares ( effective 2014 ) range from $ 2 @.@ 15 to $ 5 @.@ 90 , depending on distance traveled . At all other times , fares range from $ 1 @.@ 75 to $ 3 @.@ 60 based on distance traveled . Customers using a paper farecard must add an additional $ 1 @.@ 00 fee for each ride . Discounted fares are available for school children , the disabled , and the elderly . Metro charges reduced fares on all federal holidays . 
 Passengers may purchase passes at most farecard vending machines . The passes are used the same way as farecards but grant riders unlimited travel within the system for a certain period of time . All the passes are gate @-@ activated , with the period of validity starting with the first use of the pass , and for the paper versions , the expiration date of the pass is printed on the pass when exiting the system at the end of the first trip . Four types of passes are currently sold : 
 A One Day Pass for $ 14 @.@ 50 , valid for one day of unlimited Metrorail travel . The pass expires at the end of the operating day . Since July 1 , 2012 , this pass has been available on SmarTrip as well as a paper pass . Prior to that time the cost of the pass was much less ( $ 9 vs. $ 14 ) , but it was not valid for the morning peak period on weekdays . Since June 1 , 2013 , this has been the only pass available on a paper card . 
 A 7 @-@ Day Short Trip Pass for $ 36 , valid for seven consecutive days for Metrorail trips costing up to $ 3 @.@ 60 ( the maximum off @-@ peak fare ) during peak fare times and any trip during off @-@ peak hours . ( The $ 1 paper farecard surcharge is not applicable . ) If the trip costs more than $ 3 @.@ 60 the difference had to be paid at the <unk> machine ( for paper passes ) before leaving , or is deducted from the cash balance of a SmarTrip card . A positive stored value is required to enter the Metrorail system . It became available on SmarTrip on May 20 , 2013 , and has not been sold as a paper pass after May 31 , 2013 . 
 A 7 @-@ Day Fast Pass for $ 59 @.@ 25 , valid for seven consecutive days of unlimited Metrorail travel . Since April 16 , 2012 , users have been able to purchase the Fast Pass on a SmarTrip card . The 7 @-@ Day Fast Pass has not been sold as a paper pass since September 1 , 2012 , and has not been accepted on a paper pass after December 31 , 2012 . 
 Since July 1 , 2012 , a 28 @-@ Day Metrorail Fast Pass available on SmarTrip only for $ 237 . Like the version of this pass offered years ago on a thin plastic mag @-@ stripe farecard , this is for convenience only , offering no savings over four uses of the 7 @-@ Day Fast Pass . 
 Users can add value to any farecard , but riders must pay an exit fare if the cost of a trip is higher than their card ’ s balance . Riders may transfer for free , provided they do not exit through the faregates . SmarTrip users receive a $ 0 @.@ 50 discount on bus @-@ to @-@ rail and rail @-@ to @-@ bus transfers . On October 28 , 2011 Metro launched Farragut Crossing , a “ virtual tunnel ” between Farragut West and Farragut North stations that allows SmarTrip customers to transfer above ground for free , provided that they do so within 30 minutes . 
 The contract for Metro 's fare collection system was awarded in 1975 to Cubic Transportation Systems . The current electronic fare collection started on July 1 , 1977 , a little more than a year after the first stations opened . Prior to electronic fare collection , exact change fareboxes were used . Metro 's paper farecard system is also shared by Bay Area Rapid Transit , which Cubic won a contract for in 1974 . In May 2014 , Metro announced plans to retrofit more than 500 fare vending machines throughout the system to dispense SmarTrip cards , rather than paper fare cards , and eventually eliminate magnetic fare cards entirely . This was completed in early December 2015 when the last paper farecard was sold . The faregates stopped accepting paper farecards on March 6 , 2016 . 
 Students at District of Columbia public schools ride both Metrobus and Metrorail for free . 
 = = Safety and security = = 
 = = = Security = = = 
 Metro planners designed the system with passenger safety and order maintenance as primary considerations . The open vaulted ceiling design of stations and the limited obstructions on platforms allow few opportunities to conceal criminal activity . Station platforms are built away from station walls to limit vandalism and provide for diffused lighting of the station from recessed lights . Metro 's attempts to reduce crime , combined with how the station environments were designed with crime prevention in mind , has contributed to Metro being among the safest and cleanest subway systems in the United States . There are nearly 6 @,@ 000 video surveillance cameras used across the system to enhance security . 
 Metro is patrolled by its own police force , which is charged with ensuring the safety of passengers and employees . Transit Police officers patrol the Metro system and Metrobuses , and they have jurisdiction and arrest powers throughout the 1 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 3 @,@ 900 km2 ) Metro service area for crimes that occur on or against transit authority facilities , or within 150 feet ( 46 m ) of a Metrobus stop . The Metro Transit Police Department is one of two U.S. police agencies that has local police authority in three " state " -level jurisdictions ( Maryland , Virginia , and the District of Columbia ) , the U.S. Park Police being the other . 
 Each city and county in the Metro service area has similar ordinances that regulate or prohibit vending on Metro @-@ owned property , and which prohibit riders from eating , drinking , or smoking in Metro trains , buses , and stations ; the Transit Police have a reputation for enforcing these laws rigorously . One widely publicized incident occurred in October 2000 when police arrested 12 @-@ year @-@ old Ansche Hedgepeth for eating french fries in the Tenleytown @-@ AU station . In a 2004 opinion by John Roberts , now Chief Justice of the United States , the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals upheld Hedgepeth 's arrest . By then WMATA had answered negative publicity by adopting a policy of first issuing warnings to juveniles , and arresting them only after three violations within a year . 
 Metro 's zero @-@ tolerance policy on food , trash and other sources of disorder embodies the " broken windows " philosophy of crime reduction . This philosophy also extends to the use of station restroom facilities . A longstanding policy , intended to curb unlawful and unwanted activity , has been to only allow employees to use Metro restrooms . Station managers may make exceptions for passengers with small children , the elderly , or the disabled . Metro now allows the use of restrooms by passengers who gain a station manager 's permission , except during periods of heightened terror alerts . 
 = = = = Random bag searches = = = = 
 On October 27 , 2008 , the Metro Transit Police Department announced plans to immediately begin random searches of backpacks , purses , and other bags . Transit police would search riders at random before boarding a bus or entering a station . It also explained its intent to stop anyone acting suspiciously . Metro claims that the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit decision in <unk> v. Kelly , which upheld random searches on the New York City Subway , allows Metro Transit Police to take similar action . Metro Transit Police Chief Michael Taborn stated that , if someone were to turn around and simply enter the system through another escalator or elevator , Metro has " a plan to address suspicious behavior " . Security expert Bruce <unk> characterized the plan as " security theater against a movie plot threat " and does not believe random bag searches actually improve security . 
 The Metro Riders ' Advisory Council recommended to WMATA ’ s board of directors that Metro hold at least one public meeting regarding the search program . As of December 2008 , Metro had not conducted a single bag search . 
 In 2010 Metro once again announced that it would implement random bag searches , and conducted the first such searches on December 21 , 2010 . The searches consist of <unk> bags and packages for explosive residue , and X @-@ raying or opening any packages which turned up positive . On the first day of searches , at least one false positive for explosives was produced , which Metro officials indicated could occur for a variety of reasons including if a passenger had recently been in contact with firearms or been to a firing range . The DC Bill of Rights Coalition and the Montgomery County Civil Rights Coalition circulated a petition against random bag searches , taking the position that the practice violates the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and would not improve security . On January 3 , 2011 Metro held a public forum for the searches at a Metro Riders ' Advisory Council meeting , at which more than 50 riders spoke out , most of them in opposition to the searches . However at the meeting Metro officials called random bag inspections a " success " and claimed that few riders had complained . 
 = = = Safety = = = 
 = = = = Accidents and incidents = = = = 
 Several collisions have occurred on Washington Metro , resulting in injuries and fatalities , along with numerous derailments with few or no injuries . WMATA has been criticized for disregarding safety warnings and advice from experts . The Tri @-@ State Oversight Committee oversees WMATA , but has no regulatory authority . Metro 's safety department is usually in charge of investigating incidents , but cannot require other Metro departments to implement its recommendations . 
 = = = = = Collisions = = = = = 
 During the Blizzard of 1996 , on January 6 , a Metro operator was killed when a train failed to stop at the Shady Grove station . The four @-@ car train overran the station platform and struck an unoccupied train that was awaiting assignment . The National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) investigation found that the crash was a result of a failure in the train 's computer @-@ controlled braking system . The NTSB recommended that Metro grant train operators the ability to manually control the braking system , even in inclement weather , and recommended that Metro prohibit parked rail cars on tracks used by incoming outbound trains . 
 On November 3 , 2004 , an out @-@ of @-@ service Red Line train rolled backwards into the Woodley Park station , hitting an in @-@ service train stopped at the platform . The rear car ( 1077 ) was telescoped by the first car of the standing train ( <unk> ) . No one was killed , but 20 people were injured . A 14 @-@ month investigation concluded that the train operator was most likely not alert as the train rolled backwards into the station . Safety officials estimated that had the train been full , at least 79 people would have died . The train operator was dismissed and Metro officials agreed to add rollback protection to more than 300 rail cars . 
 On June 22 , 2009 at 5 : 02 pm , two trains on the Red Line collided . A southbound train heading toward Shady Grove stopped on the track short of the Fort Totten station , and another southbound train collided with its rear . The front car of the moving train ( 1079 ) was telescoped by the rear car of the standing train ( 5066 ) , and passengers were trapped . Nine people died and more than 70 were injured , dozens of whom were described as " walking wounded " . Red Line service was suspended between the Fort Totten and Takoma stations , and New Hampshire Avenue was closed . One of the dead was the operator of the train that collided with the stopped train . 
 On November 29 , 2009 , at 4 : 27 am , two trains collided at the West Falls Church train yard . One train pulled in and collided into the back of the other train . No customers were aboard , and only minor injuries to the operators and cleaning staff were reported . However , three cars ( 1106 , 1171 , and 3216 ) were believed to be damaged beyond repair . 
 = = = = = <unk> = = = = = 
 On January 13 , 1982 , a train derailed at a malfunctioning crossover switch south of the Federal Triangle station . In attempting to restore the train to the rails , supervisors failed to notice that another car had also derailed . The other rail car slid off the track and hit a tunnel support , killing three people and injuring 25 . Coincidentally , this accident occurred about 30 minutes after Air Florida Flight 90 crashed into the nearby 14th Street Bridge during a major snowstorm . 
 On January 20 , 2003 , during construction of a new canopy at the National Airport station , Metro began running trains through the center track even though it had not been constructed for standard operations , and a Blue Line train derailed at the switch . No injuries resulted , but the accident delayed construction by a number of weeks . 
 On January 7 , 2007 , a Green Line train carrying approximately 120 people derailed near the Mount Vernon Square station in downtown Washington . Trains were single @-@ tracking at the time , and the derailment of the fifth car occurred where the train was switching from the south to northbound track . The accident injured at least 18 people and prompted the rescue of 60 people from a tunnel . At least one person had a serious but non @-@ life @-@ threatening injury . 
 The Mount Vernon Square accident was one of a series of five derailments involving 5000 @-@ Series cars , with four of those occurring on side tracks and not involving passengers . 
 On June 9 , 2008 , an Orange Line train ( 2000 @-@ series ) derailed between the Rosslyn and Court House stations . 
 On February 12 , 2010 , a Red Line train derailed at about 10 : 13 am as it left the Farragut North station in downtown Washington . After leaving the station , the train entered the pocket track north of the station . As it continued , an automatic <unk> at the end of the pocket track intentionally derailed the train as a safety measure . If the train had continued moving forward on the pocket track , it would have entered the path of an oncoming train . The wheels of the first two cars in the six @-@ car , White @-@ Flint @-@ bound train were forced off the tracks , stopping the train . Almost all of the estimated 345 passengers were evacuated from the damaged train by 11 : 50 am and the NTSB arrived on the accident scene by noon . Two minor injuries were reported , and a third passenger was taken to George Washington University Hospital . The NTSB ruled the accident was due to the train operator 's failure to follow standard procedures , and WMATA management for failure to provide proper supervision of the train operator which resulted in the incomplete configuration of the train identification and destination codes leading to the routing of the train into the pocket track . 
 On April 24 , 2012 , around 7 : 15 pm , a Blue Line train bound for Franconia – Springfield derailed near Rosslyn . No injuries were reported . 
 On July 6 , 2012 , around 4 : 45 pm , a Green Line train bound for downtown Washington , DC and Branch Avenue derailed near West Hyattsville . No injuries were reported . A heat kink , due to the hot weather , was identified as the probable cause of the accident . 
 On August 6 , 2015 , a non @-@ passenger train derailed outside Smithsonian station . The track condition that caused the derailment had been detected a month earlier but was not repaired . 
 = = = = Safety measures = = = = 
 On July 13 , 2009 , WMATA adopted a " zero tolerance " policy for train or bus operators found to be texting or using other hand @-@ held devices while on the job . This new and stricter policy came after investigations of several mass @-@ transit accidents in the U.S. found that operators were texting at the time of the accident . The policy change was announced the day after a passenger of a Metro train videotaped the operator texting while operating the train . 
 = = = = = Smoke incidents = = = = = 
