 = = Assessments = = 
 = = = Foreign and military affairs = = = 
 As a young man , Manuel had been determined to restore by force of arms the predominance of the Byzantine Empire in the Mediterranean countries . By the time he died in 1180 , 37 years had passed since that momentous day in 1143 when , amid the wilds of Cilicia , his father had proclaimed him emperor . These years had seen Manuel involved in conflict with his neighbours on all sides . Manuel 's father and grandfather before him had worked patiently to undo the damage done by the battle of Manzikert and its aftermath . Thanks to their efforts , the empire Manuel inherited was stronger and better organised than at any time for a century . While it is clear that Manuel used these assets to the full , it is not so clear how much he added to them , and there is room for doubt as to whether he used them to best effect . 
 Manuel had proven himself to be an energetic emperor who saw possibilities everywhere , and whose optimistic outlook had shaped his approach to foreign policy . However , in spite of his military prowess Manuel achieved but a slight degree of his object of restoring the Byzantine Empire . Retrospectively , some commentators have criticised some of Manuel 's aims as unrealistic , in particular citing the expeditions he sent to Egypt as proof of dreams of grandeur on an unattainable scale . His greatest military campaign , his grand expedition against the Turkish Sultanate of Iconium , ended in humiliating defeat , and his greatest diplomatic effort apparently collapsed , when Pope Alexander III became reconciled to the German emperor Frederick Barbarossa at the Peace of Venice . Historian Mark C. <unk> argues that Manuel ( and his father as well ) tried to rebuild a national army , but his reforms were adequate for neither his ambitions nor his needs ; the defeat at Myriokephalon underscored the fundamental weakness of his policies . According to Edward Gibbon , Manuel 's victories were not productive of any permanent or useful conquest . 
 His advisors on western church affairs included the Pisan scholar Hugh <unk> . 
 = = = Internal affairs = = = 
 Choniates criticised Manuel for raising taxes and pointed to Manuel 's reign as a period of <unk> ; according to Choniates , the money thus raised was spent lavishly at the cost of his citizens . Whether one reads the Greek encomiastic sources , or the Latin and oriental sources , the impression is consistent with Choniates ' picture of an emperor who spent lavishly in all available ways , rarely economising in one sector in order to develop another . Manuel spared no expense on the army , the navy , diplomacy , ceremonial , palace @-@ building , the Komnenian family , and other seekers of patronage . A significant amount of this expenditure was pure financial loss to the Empire , like the subsidies poured into Italy and the crusader states , and the sums spent on the failed expeditions of 1155 – 1156 , 1169 , and 1176 . 
 The problems this created were counterbalanced to some extent by his successes , particularly in the Balkans ; Manuel extended the frontiers of his Empire in the Balkan region , ensuring security for the whole of Greece and Bulgaria . Had he been more successful in all his ventures , he would have controlled not only the most productive farmland around the Eastern Mediterranean and Adriatic seas , but also the entire trading facilities of the area . Even if he did not achieve his ambitious goals , his wars against Hungary brought him control of the Dalmatian coast , the rich agricultural region of Sirmium , and the Danube trade route from Hungary to the Black Sea . His Balkan expeditions are said to have taken great booty in slaves and livestock ; Kinnamos was impressed by the amount of arms taken from the Hungarian dead after the battle of 1167 . And even if Manuel 's wars against the Turks probably realised a net loss , his commanders took livestock and captives on at least two occasions . 
 This allowed the Western provinces to flourish in an economic revival that had begun in the time of his grandfather Alexios I and continued till the close of the century . Indeed , it has been argued that Byzantium in the 12th century was richer and more prosperous than at any time since the Persian invasion during the reign of <unk> , some five hundred years earlier . There is good evidence from this period of new construction and new churches , even in remote areas , strongly suggesting that wealth was widespread . Trade was also flourishing ; it has been estimated that the population of Constantinople , the biggest commercial center of the Empire , was between half a million and one million during Manuel 's reign , making it by far the largest city in Europe . A major source of Manuel 's wealth was the <unk> , a customs duty levied at Constantinople on all imports and exports . The <unk> was stated to have collected 20 @,@ 000 hyperpyra each day . 
 Furthermore , Constantinople was undergoing expansion . The cosmopolitan character of the city was being reinforced by the arrival of Italian merchants and Crusaders en route to the Holy Land . The Venetians , the Genoese , and others opened up the ports of the Aegean to commerce , shipping goods from the Crusader kingdoms of Outremer and Fatimid Egypt to the west and trading with Byzantium via Constantinople . These maritime traders stimulated demand in the towns and cities of Greece , Macedonia , and the Greek Islands , generating new sources of wealth in a predominantly agrarian economy . Thessaloniki , the second city of the Empire , hosted a famous summer fair that attracted traders from across the Balkans and even further afield to its bustling market stalls . In Corinth , silk production fuelled a thriving economy . All this is a testament to the success of the Komnenian Emperors in securing a Pax <unk> in these heartland territories . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 To the <unk> of his court , Manuel was the " divine emperor " . A generation after his death , Choniates referred to him as " the most blessed among emperors " , and a century later John <unk> described him as " great in fine deeds " . John Phokas , a soldier who fought in Manuel 's army , characterised him some years later as the " world saving " and glorious emperor . Manuel would be remembered in France , Italy , and the Crusader states as the most powerful sovereign in the world . A Genoese analyst noted that with the passing of " Lord Manuel of divine memory , the most blessed emperor of Constantinople ... all Christendom incurred great ruin and detriment . " William of Tyre called Manuel " a wise and discreet prince of great magnificence , worthy of praise in every respect " , " a great @-@ souled man of incomparable energy " , whose " memory will ever be held in benediction . " Manuel was further extolled by Robert of Clari as " a right worthy man , [ ... ] and richest of all the Christians who ever were , and the most bountiful . " 
 A telling reminder of the influence that Manuel held in the Crusader states in particular can still be seen in the church of the Holy Nativity in Bethlehem . In the 1160s the nave was redecorated with mosaics showing the councils of the church . Manuel was one of the patrons of the work . On the south wall , an inscription in Greek reads : " the present work was finished by Ephraim the monk , painter and mosaicist , in the reign of the great emperor Manuel Porphyrogennetos Komnenos and in the time of the great king of Jerusalem , Amalric . " That Manuel 's name was placed first was a symbolic , public recognition of Manuel 's overlordship as leader of the Christian world . Manuel 's role as protector of the Orthodox Christians and Christian holy places in general is also evident in his successful attempts to secure rights over the Holy Land . Manuel participated in the building and decorating of many of the basilicas and Greek monasteries in the Holy Land , including the church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem , where thanks to his efforts the Byzantine clergy were allowed to perform the Greek liturgy each day . All this reinforced his position as overlord of the Crusader states , with his hegemony over Antioch and Jerusalem secured by agreement with Raynald , Prince of Antioch , and Amalric , King of Jerusalem respectively . Manuel was also the last Byzantine emperor who , thanks to his military and diplomatic success in the Balkans , could call himself " ruler of Dalmatia , Bosnia , Croatia , Serbia , Bulgaria and Hungary " . 
 Byzantium looked impressive when Manuel died in 1180 , having just celebrated the betrothal of his son Alexios II to the daughter of the king of France . Thanks to the diplomacy and campaigning of Alexios , John , and Manuel , the empire was a great power , economically prosperous , and secure on its frontiers ; but there were serious problems as well . Internally , the Byzantine court required a strong leader to hold it together , and after Manuel 's death stability was seriously endangered from within . Some of the foreign enemies of the Empire were lurking on the flanks , waiting for a chance to attack , in particular the Turks in Anatolia , whom Manuel had ultimately failed to defeat , and the Normans in Sicily , who had already tried but failed to invade the Empire on several occasions . Even the Venetians , the single most important western ally of Byzantium , were on bad terms with the empire at Manuel 's death in 1180 . Given this situation , it would have taken a strong Emperor to secure the Empire against the foreign threats it now faced , and to rebuild the depleted Imperial Treasury . But Manuel 's son was a minor , and his unpopular regency government was overthrown in a violent coup d 'état . This troubled succession weakened the dynastic continuity and solidarity on which the strength of the Byzantine state had come to rely . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Conclusion of the American Civil War = 
 This is a timeline of the conclusion of the American Civil War which includes important battles , skirmishes , raids and other events of 1865 . These led to additional Confederate surrenders , key Confederate captures , and disbandments of Confederate military units that occurred after Gen. Robert E. Lee ’ s surrender on April 9 , 1865 . 
 The fighting of the Eastern Theater of the American Civil War between Lieutenant General Ulysses S. Grant ’ s Army of the Potomac and Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia was reported considerably more often in the newspapers than the battles of the Western Theater . Reporting of the Eastern Theater skirmishes largely dominated the newspapers as the Appomattox Campaign developed . 
 Lee ’ s army fought a series of battles in the Appomattox Campaign against Grant that ultimately stretched thin his lines of defense . Lee 's extended lines were mostly on small sections of thirty miles of strongholds around Richmond and Petersburg , Virginia . His troops ultimately became exhausted defending this line because they were too thinned out . Grant then took advantage of the situation and launched attacks on this thirty mile long poorly defended front . This ultimately led to the surrender of Lee and the Army of Northern Virginia at Appomattox . 
 The Army of Northern Virginia surrendered on April 9 around noon followed by General St. John Richardson Liddell 's troops some six hours later . Mosby 's Raiders disbanded on April 21 , General Joseph E. Johnston and his various armies surrendered on April 26 , the Confederate departments of Alabama , Mississippi and East Louisiana surrendered on May 4 , and the Confederate District of the Gulf , commanded by Major General Dabney Herndon Maury , surrendered on May 5 . Confederate President Jefferson Davis was captured on May 10 and the Confederate Departments of Florida and South Georgia , commanded by Confederate Major General Samuel Jones , surrendered the same day . Thompson 's Brigade surrendered on May 11 , Confederate forces of North Georgia surrendered on May 12 , and Kirby Smith surrendered on May 26 ( officially signed June 2 ) . The last battle of the American Civil War was the Battle of Palmito Ranch in Texas on May 12 and 13 . The last significant Confederate active force to surrender was the Confederate allied Cherokee Brigadier General Stand Watie and his Indian soldiers on June 23 . The last Confederate surrender occurred on November 6 , 1865 , when the Confederate warship CSS Shenandoah surrendered at Liverpool , England . President Andrew Johnson formally declared the end of the war on August 20 , 1866 . 
 = = Surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia ( April 9 ) = = 
 General Robert E. Lee commanded the Army of Northern Virginia , while Major General John Brown Gordon commanded its Second Corps . Early in the morning of April 9 , Gordon attacked , aiming to break through Federal lines at the Battle of Appomattox Court House , but failed , and the Confederate Army was then surrounded . At 8 : 30 A.M. that morning , Lee requested a meeting with Lieutenant General Ulysses S. Grant to discuss surrendering the Army of Northern Virginia . Shortly after twelve o 'clock , Grant 's reply reached Lee , and in it Grant said he would accept the surrender of the Confederate Army under certain conditions . Lee then rode into the little hamlet of Appomattox Court House , where the Appomattox county court house stood , and waited for Grant 's arrival to surrender his army . 
 = = Surrender of General St. John Richardson Liddell 's troops ( April 9 ) = = 
 The Confederates lost the city of Spanish Fort in Alabama at the Battle of Spanish Fort , which took place between March 27 and April 8 , 1865 in Baldwin County . After losing Spanish Fort , the Confederates went on to lose Fort Blakely to Union forces at the Battle of Fort Blakely , between April 2 and 9 , 1865 . This is considered to be the last major battle of the American Civil War involving large numbers of United States Colored Troops . 
 The Battle of Fort Blakely happened six hours after Lee 's surrender to Grant at Appomattox . In the course of the battle , Brigadier General St. John Richardson Liddell was captured and surrendered his men . Out of 4 @,@ 000 soldiers originally , Liddell lost 3 @,@ 400 that were captured in this battle . About 250 were killed and only some 200 men escaped . The successful Union assault can be attributed in large part to African @-@ American forces . 
 = = Union Capture of Columbus , Georgia ( Easter Sunday , April 16 ) = = 
 Unaware of Lee 's surrender on April 9 and the assassination of President Lincoln on April 14 , General James H. Wilson 's Raiders continued their march through Alabama into Georgia . On April 16 , the Battle of Columbus , Georgia was fought . This battle - erroneously - has been argued to be the " last battle of the Civil War " and equally erroneously asserted to be " widely regarded " as such . Columbus fell to Wilson 's Raiders about midnight on April 16 , and most of its manufacturing capacity was destroyed on the 17th . Confederate Colonel John Stith Pemberton , the inventor of Coca @-@ Cola , was wounded in this battle which resulted in his obsession with pain @-@ killing formulas , ultimately ending in the recipe for his celebrated drink . 
 = = Disbanding of Mosby 's Raiders ( April 21 ) = = 
 Mosby 's Rangers , also known as the 43rd Battalion Virginia Cavalry , were a special force of Confederate military troops who opposed the Union control of the Loudoun Valley area . Under the command of General Robert E. Lee , John S. Mosby had formed the battalion on June 10 , 1863 , at Rector 's Cross Roads near <unk> , Virginia . Mosby practiced psychological and guerrilla warfare techniques to disrupt the Union stronghold . Mosby 's men never formally surrendered and were disbanded on April 21 , 1865 , almost two weeks after Lee had surrendered the Army of Northern Virginia to Grant . On the last day of Mosby 's striking force , a letter from him was read aloud to his men : 
 Soldiers ! 
 I have summoned you together for the last time . The vision we have cherished of a free and independent country , has vanished , and that country is now the spoil of a conqueror . I disband your organization in preference to surrendering it to our enemies . I am no longer your commander . After association of more than two eventful years , I part from you with a just pride , in the fame of your achievements , and grateful recollections of your generous kindness to myself . And now at this moment of bidding you a final adieu accept the assurance of my unchanging confidence and regard . 
 Farewell . 
 John S. Mosby , Col. 
 With no formal surrender , however , Union Major General Winfield S. Hancock offered a reward of $ 2 @,@ 000 for Mosby 's capture , later raised to $ 5 @,@ 000 . On June 17 , Mosby surrendered to Major General John Gregg in Lynchburg , Virginia . 
 = = Surrender of General Joseph E. Johnston and his various armies ( April 26 ) = = 
 The next major stage in the peace making process concluding the American Civil War was the surrender of General Joseph E. Johnston and his armies to Major General William T. Sherman on April 26 , 1865 , at Bennett Place . Johnston 's Army of Tennessee was among nearly one hundred thousand Confederate soldiers that were surrendered from North Carolina , South Carolina , Georgia , and Florida . The conditions of surrender were in a document called " Terms of a Military Convention " signed by Sherman , Johnston , and Lieutenant General Ulysses S. Grant at Raleigh , North Carolina . 
 The first major stage in the peace making process was when Lee 's surrender occurred at Appomattox on April 9 , 1865 . This , coupled with Lincoln 's assassination induced Johnston to act , believing : " With such odds against us , without the means of procuring ammunition or repairing arms , without money or credit to provide food , it was impossible to continue the war except as robbers . " On April 17 Sherman and Johnston met at Bennett Place , and the following day an armistice was arranged , when terms were discussed and agreed upon . Grant had authorized only the surrender of Johnston 's forces , but Sherman exceeded his orders by providing very generous terms . These included : that the warring states be immediately recognized after their leaders signed loyalty oaths ; that property and personal rights be returned to the Confederates ; the reestablishment of the Federal court system ; and that a general amnesty would be given . On April 24 the authorities in Washington rejected Sherman 's proposed terms , and two days later Johnston agreed to the same terms Lee had received previously on April 9 . 
 General Johnston surrendered the following commands under his direction on April 26 , 1865 : the Department of Tennessee and Georgia ; the Army of Tennessee ; the Department of South Carolina , Georgia , and Florida ; and the Department of North Carolina and Southern Virginia . In doing so , Johnston surrendered to Sherman around 30 @,@ 000 men . On April 27 his adjutant announced the terms to the Army of Tennessee in General Orders # 18 , and on May 2 he issued his farewell address to the Army of Tennessee as General Orders # 22 . The remaining parts of the Florida " Brigade of the West " surrendered with the rest of Johnston ’ s forces on May 4 , 1865 , at Greensboro , North Carolina . 
 There is a historical marker at the farm house in Durham , North Carolina , where Johnston surrendered his departments and armies . 
 = = Surrender of the Confederate departments of Alabama , Mississippi and East Louisiana regiments ( May 4 ) = = 
 The documentation of the surrender of Lieutenant General Richard Taylor 's small force in Alabama was another stage in the process of concluding the American Civil War . The son of former U.S. President Zachary Taylor , Richard Taylor commanded the Confederate troops in the Department of Alabama , Mississippi and East Louisiana of about ten thousand troops . On May 4 Taylor 's subordinate Col. <unk> <unk> surrendered the Department to Union officer Col. John A. <unk> . 
 Mobile , Alabama , had fallen to Union control on April 12 , 1865 . Reports reached Taylor of the meeting between Johnston and Sherman about the terms of Johnston 's surrender of his armies . Taylor agreed to meet with Major General Edward R. S. Canby for a conference north of Mobile , and they settled on a 48 hour 's truce on April 30 . Taylor agreed to a surrender after this time elapsed , which he did on May 4 at Citronelle , Alabama . 
 Lieutenant General Nathan Bedford Forrest surrendered on May 9 at Gainesville , Alabama . His troops were included with Taylor 's . The terms stated that Taylor could retain control of the railway and river steamers to be able to get his men as near as possible to their homes . Taylor stayed in Meridian , Mississippi , until the last man was sent on his way . He was paroled May 13 and then went to Mobile to join Canby . Canby took him to his home in New Orleans by boat . 
 = = Surrender of the Confederate District of the Gulf ( May 5 ) = = 
 The Confederate District of the Gulf was commanded by Major General Dabney Herndon Maury . On April 12 Maury retreated with his troops after the two major Confederate forts of Spanish Fort and Fort Blakely were lost to the Union forces . He declared Mobile , Alabama , an open city after these battles . Maury went to Meridian , Mississippi , with his remaining men . He wanted to join the remains of the Army of Tennessee in North Carolina . However , hearing of Johnston 's surrender to Sherman on April 26 he soon ran out of options . Ultimately Maury surrendered Mobile 's about four thousand men to the Union army on May 5 at Citronelle , Alabama . 
 = = Andrew Johnson 's May 9 Declaration ( May 9 ) = = 
 Despite the fact that there were still small pockets of resistance in the South , the president declared that the armed resistance was " virtually " ended and that nations or ships still harboring fugitives would be denied entry into U.S. ports . Persons found aboard such vessels would no longer be given immunity from prosecution of their crimes . 
 = = Capture of President Davis ( May 10 ) = = 
 On May 10 , Union cavalrymen , under Major General James H. Wilson , captured Confederate President Jefferson Davis after he fled Richmond , Virginia , following its evacuation in the early part of April 1865 . On May 5 , 1865 , in Washington , Georgia , Davis had held the last meeting of his Cabinet . At that time , the Confederate Government was declared dissolved . 
 The sequence of events that led to Davis ' capture began early in May 1865 , when the 4th Michigan Cavalry was set up in an encampment of tents at Macon , Georgia . The military unit of several battalions was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Benjamin D. Pritchard . On May 7 , he was given orders to join many other units searching for the Confederate president . Pritchard 's troops scouted through the country along the Ocmulgee River , and by the next day the Michiganders had come to Hawkinsville , Georgia , about fifty miles south of Macon , from where they continued along the river to Abbeville , Georgia . There , Pritchard learned from Lieutenant Colonel Henry Harnden that his First Wisconsin Cavalry was hot on Davis 's trail . After a meeting between the two colonels , Harnden and his men headed off towards <unk> , some twenty miles south of their position . 
 Pritchard received word from local residents that on the night before a party , probably including the Confederate President , had crossed the Ocmulgee River just north of Abbeville . Since there were two roads to Irwindale , one of which had been taken by Harnden and his men , Pritchard decided to take the other , to see if he could capture Davis . He took with him about a hundred and forty men and their horses , while the balance of the Michiganders stayed on the Ocmulgee River near Abbeville . Some seven hours later , at 1 A.M. on May 10 , Pritchard arrived at Irwindale . There was no evidence of Harnden 's men being there yet . 
 Pritchard learned from local residents that about a mile and a half to the north there was a military camp . Not knowing whether this was Davis and his group or the 1st Wisconsin Cavalry , he approached cautiously . He soon identified the camp as Davis 's . At first dawn , Pritchard charged the camp , which was so surprised and overwhelmed that it offered no resistance and yielded immediately . 
 About ten minutes after the surrender , Pritchard heard rapid gunfire to the north . He left Davis and the captured men in the hands of his 21 @-@ year @-@ old adjutant . Once he had approached the gunfire , he realized it was the 4th Michigan and the 1st Wisconsin shooting at each other with Spencer repeating carbines , neither realizing who they were shooting at . Pritchard immediately ordered his men to stop and shouted to the 1st Wisconsin to identify the parties . In the five @-@ minute skirmish , the 1st Wisconsin Cavalry had suffered eight men wounded , while the 4th Michigan Cavalry had lost two men killed and one wounded . 
 Back at camp , Pritchard 's adjutant was almost fooled into letting Davis escape by a ruse . Davis 's wife had persuaded the adjutant to let her " old mother " go to fetch some water . The adjutant allowed this , and walked away from their tent . Mrs. Davis and a person dressed as an old woman then left the tent to go for the water . One of the other ranking officers noticed the " old woman " was wearing men 's riding boots with spurs . Immediately , they were stopped and the woman 's overcoat and black head shawl were removed , to reveal Davis himself . The plan of escape thus failed . The Confederate president was subsequently held prisoner for two years in Fort Monroe , Virginia . 
 = = Surrender of the Confederate Department of Florida and South Georgia ( May 10 ) = = 
 In 1864 , Major General Samuel Jones commanded the Departments of Florida , South Carolina , and South Georgia , with his headquarters in Pensacola , Florida . His primary orders were to guard the coastal areas of these states and to destroy Union gunboats . He also destroyed all the machinery and sawmills that would be beneficial to the Union armies . 
 In the early part of 1865 , Jones was transferred to Tallahassee , soon after Savannah had fallen to Sherman and the Union forces in December 1864 . There , Jones headquartered the District of Florida . On May 10 , at Tallahassee , he surrendered about eight thousand troops to Brigadier General Edward M. McCook . In military action east of the Mississippi River , the city of Tallahassee was the only Confederate state capital not captured during the Civil War . 
 = = Surrender of the Northern Sub @-@ District of Arkansas ( May 11 ) = = 
 Confederate Brigadier General " Jeff " Meriwether Thompson commanded Thompson 's Brigade . Wittsburg , Arkansas ( the county seat of Cross County from 1868 through 1886 ) , would witness one of the final acts in the American Civil War . This happened after the collapse of Confederate forces east of the Mississippi . Major General Grenville M. Dodge sent Lieutenant Colonel Charles W. Davis of the 51st Illinois Infantry on April 30 , 1865 , to Arkansas to seek the surrender of Thompson , commander of Confederate troops in the northeast portion of Arkansas . Davis , arriving at Chalk Bluff ( now non @-@ extant ) in Clay County , Arkansas , on the St. Francis River , sent communications to Thompson asking that they have a conference . These two officers met on May 9 to negotiate a surrender . 
 Thompson requested from Davis two days to work out the details of the surrender with his officers . The Confederates under the command of Thompson agreed to surrender all the troops in the area on May 11 . They picked Wittsburg and <unk> , Arkansas , as the sites where Thompson 's five thousand military troops would gather to receive their paroles . Ultimately Thompson surrendered about seventy @-@ five hundred men all total that were under his command consisting of 1 @,@ 964 enlisted men with 193 officers paroled at Wittsburg in May 1865 and 4 @,@ 854 enlisted men with 443 officers paroled at <unk> on June 6 , 1865 . 
 = = Surrender of Confederate forces of North Georgia ( May 12 ) = = 
 The surrender of between 3000 and 4000 soldiers under Brigadier General William T. Wofford 's command took place at Kingston , Georgia , and was received by Brig. Gen. Henry M. Judah on May 12 , 1865 . There were several letters between the various generals involved in the negotiation of this surrender , including Wofford , Judah , William D. Whipple and Robert S. Granger . 
 Colonel Louis Merrill kept the Headquarters Department of the Cumberland in Nashville , Tennessee informed and according to a letter he wrote on May 4 , 1865 , there were about 10 @,@ 000 soldiers under Wofford 's command , " on paper . " These consisted of all the Confederate troops in northwestern Georgia , however only about a third could actually be collected as the rest were deserters . From this group there were a number of soldiers that resisted General Wofford 's efforts to make them follow his commands . 
 There is a Georgia historical marker in Kingston , Georgia , in Bartow County at the intersection of West Main Street and Church Street to denote where this surrender took place . It further explains that the Confederate soldiers were given rations after their release . 
 = = Disbandment after the Battle at Palmito Ranch ( May 13 ) = = 
 The last land battle of the Civil War took place near Brownsville , Texas , and it was won by the Confederates . The Confederates held the city of Brownsville in the early part of 1865 . In January or February Major General Lew Wallace was sent by the Union government to Texas . On March 11 Wallace had a meeting with the two major Confederate commanders of the region , Brigadier General James Slaughter and Colonel John " Rip " Ford , under the premise that the official purpose was the " rendition of criminals . " The real reason was to agree that any fighting in the region would be pointless and negotiate an unofficial indefinite cease fire . Slaughter and Ford , at this point in time , occupied Fort Brown near Brownsville . 
 In May Colonel Theodore H. Barrett was in temporary command of Union troops at Brazos Santiago Island . He had little military field experience and desired , it is surmised , " to establish for himself some notoriety before the war closed . " Barrett knew that an attack on Fort Brown was in violation of orders from headquarters , since the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia already surrendered by Lee at Appomattox on April 9 and many other Confederate forces had surrendered or disbanded by then . In spite of these known facts Barrett decided anyway to go ahead with his plans . 
 On May 12 , Barrett instructed Colonel David Branson of the 34th Indiana Veteran Volunteer Infantry to attack the Confederate encampment at Brazos Santiago Depot near Fort Brown . Barrett commanded the 62nd United States Colored Infantry and the 2nd Texas Cavalry , and advanced towards Fort Brown with the intention of reoccupying Brownsville with Union forces thinking they would not encounter any problems , assuming all the Confederates surely had heard of Lee 's surrender by this time . To their surprise they encountered Confederates that did not know of Lee 's surrender . 
 A ferocious battle erupted at Palmito Ranch , about 12 miles outside Brownsville . The battle was lost by Barrett 's Union regiments mainly because they were outmaneuvered and overrun . Of the original 300 Union troops that fought at Palmito Ranch , they lost over one third , mostly to capture with a few killed or seriously injured . 
 = = Surrender of Kirby Smith ( May 26 ) = = 
 General Kirby Smith tried to send reinforcements from his Army of the Trans @-@ Mississippi east of the Mississippi River to relieve Vicksburg , Mississippi , in the spring of 1864 following the Battle of Mansfield and the Battle of Pleasant Hill . This was not practicable due to the Union naval control of the Mississippi River . Smith instead dispatched Major General Sterling Price and his cavalry on an invasion of Missouri that was ultimately not successful . Thereafter the war west of the Mississippi River was principally one of small raids . By May 26 a representative of Smith 's negotiated and signed surrender documents with a representative of Major General Edward Canby . Canby in Shreveport , Louisiana , then took custody of Smith 's force of 43 @,@ 000 soldiers when they surrendered , by then the only significant Confederate forces left west of the Mississippi River . With this ended all organized Southern military resistance to the Union forces . Smith signed the surrender papers on June 2 on board the U.S.S. Fort Jackson just outside Galveston Harbor . 
 = = Surrender of Cherokee chief Stand Watie ( June 23 ) = = 
 Cherokee Brigadier General Stand Watie commanded the Confederate Indians when he surrendered on June 23 . This was the last significant Confederate active force . Watie formed the Cherokee Mounted Rifles . He was a guerrilla fighter commanding Cherokee , Seminole , Creek , and Osage Indian soldiers . They earned a notorious reputation for their bold and brave fighting . Yearly , Federal troops all over the western United States hunted for Watie , but they never captured him . He surrendered June 23 at Fort Towson in the Choctaw Nations area at the village of <unk> ( now a ghost town ) of the Indian Territory , being the last Confederate general to surrender in the American Civil War . 
 = = Surrender of CSS Shenandoah ( November 6 ) = = 
 The CSS Shenandoah was commissioned as a commerce raider by the Confederacy to interfere with Union shipping and hinder their efforts in the American Civil War . A Scottish @-@ built merchant ship originally called the Sea King , it was secretly purchased by Confederate agents in September 1864 . Captain James Waddell renamed the ship Shenandoah after she was converted to a warship off the coast of Spain on October 19 , shortly after leaving England . William Conway Whittle , Waddell 's right @-@ hand man , was the ship 's executive officer . 
 The Shenandoah , sailing south then east across the Indian Ocean and into the South Pacific , was in Micronesia at the Island of Ponape ( called Ascension Island by Whittle ) at the time of the surrender of Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia to the Union forces on April 9 , 1865 . Waddell had already captured and disposed of thirteen Union merchantmen . 
 The Shenandoah destroyed one more prize in the Sea of Okhotsk , north of Japan , then continued to the Aleutians and into the Bering Sea and Arctic Ocean , crossing the Arctic Circle on June 19 . Continuing then south along the coast of Alaska the Shenandoah came upon a fleet of Union ships whaling on June 22 . She opened continuous fire , destroying a major portion of the Union whaling fleet . Capt. Waddell took aim at a fleeing whaler , Sophia Thornton , and at his signal , the gunner jerked a wrist strap and fired the last two shots of the American Civil War . Shenandoah had so far captured and burned eleven ships of the American whaling fleet while in Arctic waters . 
 Waddell finally learned of Lee 's surrender on June 27 when the captain of the prize Susan & Abigail produced a newspaper from San Francisco . The same paper contained Confederate President Jefferson Davis 's proclamation that the " war would be carried on with re @-@ <unk> vigor " . Shenandoah proceeded to capture a further ten whalers in the following seven hours . Wadell then steered Shenandoah south , intending to raid the port of San Francisco which he believed to be poorly defended . En route they encountered an English barque , <unk> , on August 2 from which Wadell learned of the final collapse of the Confederacy including the surrenders of Johnston 's , Kirby Smith 's , and Magruder 's armies and the capture of President Davis . The long log entry of the Shenandoah for August 2 , 1865 , begins " The darkest day of my life . " Captain Waddell realized then in his grief that they had taken innocent unarmed Union whaling ships as prizes when the rest of the country had ended hostilities . 
 Waddell immediately converted the warship back to a merchant ship , storing her cannon below and repainting the hull . At this point all Waddell wanted to do was surrender the Shenandoah and the proper place to do this , in his mind , was at a European port . Surrendering in an American port carried the certainty of facing a court with a Union point of view and the very real risk of a trial for piracy , for which he and the crew could be hanged . Sailing south around Cape Horn and staying well off shore to avoid shipping that might report Shenandoah 's position , they saw no land for another 9 @,@ 000 miles until they arrived back in England , having logged a total of over 58 @,@ 000 miles around the world in a year 's travel — the only Confederate ship to circumnavigate the globe . 
 The last Confederate surrender did not occur until November 6 , 1865 , when the notorious ship under Capt. Waddell 's command surrendered at Liverpool to Capt. R. N. Paynter , commander of HMS Donegal of the British Royal Navy . The Shenandoah was surrendered by letter to the British Prime Minister , the Earl Russell . Ultimately , after an investigation by the British Admiralty court , Waddell and his crew were exonerated of doing anything that violated the laws of war and were unconditionally released . Shenandoah herself was sold to Sultan Majid bin Said of Zanzibar in 1866 and renamed El <unk> . 
 = = Great Dismal Swamp = = 
 According to one source , a detachment of three Confederate soldiers who had been posted to defend the Great Dismal Swamp of Virginia didn 't surrender until the summer of 1866 . 
 = = Presidential proclamation ending the war = = 
 On August 20 , 1866 , President Andrew Johnson signed a Proclamation — Declaring that Peace , Order , <unk> , and Civil Authority Now Exists in and Throughout the Whole of the United States of America . It cited the end of the insurrection in Texas , and declared 
 ... that the insurrection which heretofore existed in the State of Texas is at an end and is to be henceforth so regarded in that State as in the other States before named in which the said insurrection was proclaimed to be at an end by the aforesaid proclamation of the 2d day of April , 1866 . 
 And I do further proclaim that the said insurrection is at an end and that peace , order , tranquillity , and civil authority now exist in and throughout the whole of the United States of America . 
 = Pretty Baby .... = 
 " Pretty Baby .... " is an episode of the British television soap opera EastEnders , broadcast on BBC One on 31 January 2008 . It is the only EastEnders episode to feature just one character and the first of its kind in soap . It was written by Tony Jordan , directed by Clive Arnold and produced by Diederick Santer . The episode features Dot Branning , played by June Brown , recording a message for her husband Jim Branning ( John Bardon ) , who is in hospital recovering from a stroke , reflecting Bardon 's real @-@ life stroke , which saw him written out of the show and allowed the opportunity for the single @-@ hander to arise . Jordan 's scripting was inspired by Samuel Beckett 's Krapp 's Last Tape . 
 The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 86 million viewers and received mixed reviews from critics . Brown 's acting attracted praise , with both Nancy Banks @-@ Smith of The Guardian and Mark Wright of The Stage doubting that any other actress would have been capable of carrying Dot 's monologue . Banks @-@ Smith and The Times 's Tim Teeman questioned Dot 's characterisation , and Teeman ultimately found the episode " much @-@ loved character overkill " , while Gerard O 'Donovan of The Daily Telegraph called Brown 's performance " mesmerising " but said the episode was " fuss over nothing " . Brown received a British Academy Television Award nomination for Best Actress in 2009 for her performance in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 It is night time , and as Dot Branning ( June Brown ) makes herself a cup of cocoa at home , she records a message on a tape recorder for her husband Jim ( John Bardon ) , who is in hospital recovering from a stroke . Dot tells Jim everyone is missing him , and that she has been dreading recording the message . She talks about her Christian faith and remembers her childhood , her first marriage to Charlie Cotton ( Christopher Hancock ) and her friendship with Ethel Skinner ( Gretchen Franklin ) . She talks about when she was evacuated to Wales during the Second World War and how she did not cry when she left her mother . She says she was happy moving away to live with her guardians , a Welsh couple named Gwen and Will , as they made her feel special , and recalls the happiest day of her life . She remembers how Will would sing " Pretty Baby " to her at night , but says since then everyone she has cared about has died . She finishes by telling Jim that the hospital staff want to send him home , but she fears she will not be able to cope and concludes she is better on her own . 
 = = Production = = 
 On 14 November 2007 , it was announced that former EastEnders scriptwriter Tony Jordan had been contacted by Controller of BBC Drama Production John Yorke with an idea for an episode and that Jordan had returned to EastEnders having written the script for the episode . The single @-@ hander episode was announced the next day , the first episode of any soap opera to feature just one character . Jordan had wanted to write a solo episode for EastEnders – well known for its two @-@ hander episodes – for some time , but the opportunity had never arisen until Bardon had a stroke in real life , which was reflected in <unk> when Jim was said to have suffered a stroke when visiting relatives off screen . Cast and crew were grateful for the opportunity to make the episode but were aware it had come about due to the suffering of somebody they loved . Brown was initially sceptical that her character could carry an entire episode by herself , but stated that Dot has a lot of history so there was a lot to call upon . 
 When writing the script , Jordan had in his head an image of Samuel Beckett 's play Krapp 's Last Tape . The script was 27 pages long , instead of the normal average of about 65 , due to lack of stage directions . Clive Arnold was asked to direct the episode , and was allowed to input more into the script than would be normal , which he said was due to his good working relationship with Jordan . Jordan also gave Brown the opportunity to change anything she wanted to . Arnold was careful that the episode would not alienate regular EastEnders viewers by making it too left of field , ensuring that it would be recognisable as an EastEnders episode , and made sure viewers would identify with the character , emphasising her state of mind with visual links . Brown found her lines for the episode easy to learn as they " flowed " and the script was well written . Arnold and Brown worked closely together , rehearsing and working on the script in detail . Rehearsals went on for a number of weeks and after being able to judge the pace of the episode , Arnold was able to introduce choreography and stage directions . He stated that the rehearsals were invaluable as he , Brown and Jordan could work together to develop and tweak the script as they progressed . He broke the script down into scenes to aid Brown 's performance by giving her one scene to concentrate on per day of filming . 
 The episode was filmed over a number of afternoons at the end of 2007 , with each day 's filming beginning with a repeat of the last section from the previous day , to help blend each scene into the next . It was filmed with a " single camera mentality " but with up to five cameras running to give Brown a " freedom of performance away from hitting marks or favouring one particular camera position . " This also helped in the case of technical problems , meaning that second takes were not necessary . Brown cried when she read the script and though she did not cry during <unk> , she had expected to , planning to pause the tape recorder if she did . She stated that the most difficult part of the script was the line about Jim being " here , but not here " because she felt that way about Bardon . Arnold admitted to " [ wiping ] away the tears " many times and noted that several other crew cried , and that one of the toughest things about it was that it mirrored real @-@ life events . Brown found the episode easy to film due to the fact there were no other cast members to make mistakes , and because she " knew the character backwards " and " exactly how she 'd behave and what she 'd feel and [ ... ] her history . " She praised Arnold and the crew , stating that the episode was " lovely " to make and she felt " very fortunate to be given the opportunity . " The performance was edited in post production after being committed to tape , where usually all scenes are vision mixed , and the usual EastEnders theme tune was replaced at the end of the episode with Tony Jackson 's " Pretty Baby " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and critical reception = = = 
 Overnight figures indicated that the episode averaged 8 @.@ 7 million viewers and a 37 % audience share . Official figures gave the episode ratings of 8 @.@ 86 million for its original airing and 740 @,@ 000 for its 10pm repeat on BBC Three . Brown 's performance in the episode was praised by Robert Hanks of The Independent who wrote : " I don 't ever remember hearing anybody on a soap talk like this before . I mean , like a real person , with real feelings , such as self @-@ pity and a desperate urge for self @-@ preservation . Brown conveyed the seedy gloom of it all beautifully , as well . " Nancy Banks @-@ Smith of The Guardian deemed Brown possibly the only member of the cast , with the exception of Barbara Windsor ( Peggy Mitchell ) , capable of carrying such a monologue , opining that she " carried it off magnificently " . She took issue with Dot 's characterisation , however , believing that Dot is presented as the serial 's " moral compass " , and would not leave her husband in a nursing home . 
 Jim Shelley from the Daily Mirror praised Jordan 's writing and Brown 's acting , saying " tonight 's episode of EastEnders is as powerful and poignant a piece of drama as you will see on TV all year " . Shelley opined that " June [ ... ] proves what the soaps can achieve when they use actors of genuine class and let them show what they are capable of " and stated " The fact that co @-@ star John Bardon [ ... ] is recovering from a stroke in real life adds an extra terrible pathos to the episode . " Cole Moreton of The Independent wrote " The preview disc had revealed it to be a mesmerising piece of television , a kind of cor blimey Samuel Beckett , in which Brown conveyed her character 's conflicting emotions beautifully . " Mark Wright of The Stage praised Brown 's acting as " amazing " , observing that she made the episode look " effortless " and commenting : " I don 't think there 's another soap actress out there who could carry this . " Virgin Media selected the episode as showcasing one of the best ever soap opera performances , deeming Brown 's portrayal " comic and endearing " and the episode " never less than riveting . " 
 However , reviews were not uniformly positive . Tim Teeman posed the question in The Times : " I know she 's a national institution and June Brown plays her like a dream , but was last night 's Dot Cotton extravaganza really that great ? Or even necessary ? " Teeman opined that : " Quite rightly , the producers want to eke as much gold out of the character and actress as possible : both are fantastic . But this was much @-@ loved character overkill . " He noted that Jordan 's script worked best as Dot remembered Ethel , but assessed that the episode was overly indulgent , and did not reveal anything " substantially new " about Dot . As with Banks @-@ Smith 's review , Teeman felt that the episode was incompatible with Dot 's former characterisation , suggesting that her Christian faith ought to have tempered her decision not to care for Jim . He felt that overall , the episode was somewhat dull and boring , describing Dot as an EastEnders " jewel " who should be cherished , not turned into a " drag act " . 
 The Guardian 's Gareth McLean described the episode as a " bold move " on the part of the EastEnders producers in deviating from the serial 's usual format , and found it to be " compelling and brave " , but " not as convincing as it should be " . The Daily Telegraph 's Gerard O 'Donovan felt that Brown gave a " mesmerising " performance , but was critical of the episode as a whole , concluding : " Overall [ ... ] the feeling couldn 't be avoided that in the greater scheme of things this was a fuss over nothing . Had it been a swan song , it would have been a worthy one . But doubtless Dot will be out and about again tonight , fag in hand , quoting from the Good Book . Enjoyable as this Albert Square indulgence was , I suspect that most fans will be hoping this one @-@ hander remains a one @-@ off . " Leigh Holmwood for The Guardian suggested that viewers may have agreed with O 'Donovan 's assessment , highlighting the fact that the episode received only 8 @.@ 7 million viewers , compared to 9 @.@ 4 million watching EastEnders the previous week . O 'Donovan compared the episode to Krapp 's Last Tape , saying " it must be said there were quite a few moments of positively ( or perhaps that should be negatively ) <unk> bleakness here as Dot recalled , in painfully vivid detail , how time and time again ' life took away everything I ever cared about ' and ' all that I ever ' ad , I <unk> ' . " 
 = = = Award nomination = = = 
 Brown was nominated in the Best Actress category at the 2009 British Academy Television Awards based on her performance in the episode , becoming the first soap actress nominated in the category since 1988 , when Jean Alexander was shortlisted for her role as Hilda Ogden in Coronation Street . She commented that she was proud to be nominated , but was not overly excited as : " I don 't believe anything is going to happen until it does , until you see your name on a paper or it actually happens and you have something in your hand . " Brown lost out to Anna Maxwell Martin , but the show 's executive producer , Diederick Santer , described the nomination as his proudest moment of 2009 , saying : " I 'm not one to complain to the referee , but it 's beyond me why she didn 't win . Week in , week out , she turns out amazing performances . The audience knew it and we knew it . With the greatest respect to the actress who won , you could hear the audience in the Royal Festival Hall that night sigh with disappointment . It was a missed opportunity by BAFTA [ ... ] to connect with a big audience . " McLean agreed that Brown deserved to win , but commented on the awards : " never underestimate snobbery towards soap . " Brown spoke of the nomination in 2013 , saying : " You never [ win ] if you 're in a soap . [ ... ] I would 've liked it , yes . I would 've felt it had crowned my acting in a way , made it sound worthwhile , I think . So I didn 't care that I didn 't get nominated for any other awards that time ! " 
 = World War II = 
 World War II ( often abbreviated to WWII or WW2 ) , also known as the Second World War , was a global war that lasted from 1939 to 1945 , although related conflicts began earlier . It involved the vast majority of the world 's nations — including all of the great powers — eventually forming two opposing military alliances : the Allies and the Axis . It was the most widespread war in history , and directly involved more than 100 million people from over 30 countries . In a state of " total war " , the major participants threw their entire economic , industrial , and scientific capabilities behind the war effort , erasing the distinction between civilian and military resources . Marked by mass deaths of civilians , including the Holocaust ( in which approximately 11 million people were killed ) and the strategic bombing of industrial and population centres ( in which approximately one million were killed , and which included the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki ) , it resulted in an estimated 50 million to 85 million fatalities . These made World War II the deadliest conflict in human history . 
 The Empire of Japan aimed to dominate Asia and the Pacific and was already at war with the Republic of China in 1937 , but the world war is generally said to have begun on 1 September 1939 with the invasion of Poland by Germany and subsequent declarations of war on Germany by France and the United Kingdom . From late 1939 to early 1941 , in a series of campaigns and treaties , Germany conquered or controlled much of continental Europe , and formed the Axis alliance with Italy and Japan . Under the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact of August 1939 , Germany and the Soviet Union partitioned and annexed territories of their European neighbours , Poland , Finland , Romania and the Baltic states . The war continued primarily between the European Axis powers and the coalition of the United Kingdom and the British Commonwealth , with campaigns including the North Africa and East Africa campaigns , the aerial Battle of Britain , the Blitz bombing campaign , the Balkan Campaign as well as the long @-@ running Battle of the Atlantic . In June 1941 , the European Axis powers launched an invasion of the Soviet Union , opening the largest land theatre of war in history , which trapped the major part of the Axis ' military forces into a war of attrition . In December 1941 , Japan attacked the United States and European territories in the Pacific Ocean , and quickly conquered much of the Western Pacific . 
 The Axis advance halted in 1942 when Japan lost the critical Battle of Midway , near Hawaii , and Germany was defeated in North Africa and then , decisively , at Stalingrad in the Soviet Union . In 1943 , with a series of German defeats on the Eastern Front , the Allied invasion of Sicily and the Allied invasion of Italy which brought about Italian surrender , and Allied victories in the Pacific , the Axis lost the initiative and undertook strategic retreat on all fronts . In 1944 , the Western Allies invaded German @-@ occupied France , while the Soviet Union regained all of its territorial losses and invaded Germany and its allies . During 1944 and 1945 the Japanese suffered major reverses in mainland Asia in South Central China and Burma , while the Allies crippled the Japanese Navy and captured key Western Pacific islands . 
 The war in Europe concluded with an invasion of Germany by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union , culminating in the capture of Berlin by Soviet and Polish troops and the subsequent German unconditional surrender on 8 May 1945 . Following the Potsdam Declaration by the Allies on 26 July 1945 and the refusal of Japan to surrender under its terms , the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on 6 August and 9 August respectively . With an invasion of the Japanese archipelago imminent , the possibility of additional atomic bombings , and the Soviet Union 's declaration of war on Japan and invasion of Manchuria , Japan surrendered on 15 August 1945 . Thus ended the war in Asia , cementing the total victory of the Allies . 
 World War II altered the political alignment and social structure of the world . The United Nations ( UN ) was established to foster international co @-@ operation and prevent future conflicts . The victorious great powers — the United States , the Soviet Union , China , the United Kingdom , and France — became the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council . The Soviet Union and the United States emerged as rival superpowers , setting the stage for the Cold War , which lasted for the next 46 years . Meanwhile , the influence of European great powers waned , while the decolonisation of Asia and Africa began . Most countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery . Political integration , especially in Europe , emerged as an effort to end pre @-@ war enmities and to create a common identity . 
 = = Chronology = = 
 The start of the war in Europe is generally held to be 1 September 1939 , beginning with the German invasion of Poland ; Britain and France declared war on Germany two days later . The dates for the beginning of war in the Pacific include the start of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War on 7 July 1937 , or even the Japanese invasion of Manchuria on 19 September 1931 . 
 Others follow the British historian A. J. P. Taylor , who held that the Sino @-@ Japanese War and war in Europe and its colonies occurred simultaneously and the two wars merged in 1941 . This article uses the conventional dating . Other starting dates sometimes used for World War II include the Italian invasion of Abyssinia on 3 October 1935 . The British historian Antony Beevor views the beginning of World War II as the Battles of Khalkhin Gol fought between Japan and the forces of Mongolia and the Soviet Union from May to September 1939 . 
 The exact date of the war 's end is also not universally agreed upon . It was generally accepted at the time that the war ended with the armistice of 14 August 1945 ( V @-@ J Day ) , rather than the formal surrender of Japan ( 2 September 1945 ) . A peace treaty with Japan was signed in 1951 to formally tie up any loose ends such as compensation to be paid to Allied prisoners of war who had been victims of atrocities . A treaty regarding Germany 's future allowed the reunification of East and West Germany to take place in 1990 and resolved other post @-@ World War II issues . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 World War I had radically altered the political European map , with the defeat of the Central Powers — including Austria @-@ Hungary , Germany and the Ottoman Empire — and the 1917 Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia , which eventually led to the founding of the Soviet Union . Meanwhile , the victorious Allies of World War I , such as France , Belgium , Italy , Greece and Romania , gained territory , and new nation @-@ states were created out of the collapse of Austria @-@ Hungary and the Ottoman and Russian Empires . 
 To prevent a future world war , the League of Nations was created during the 1919 Paris Peace Conference . The organisation 's primary goals were to prevent armed conflict through collective security , military and naval disarmament , and settling international disputes through peaceful negotiations and arbitration . 
 Despite strong pacifist sentiment after World War I , its aftermath still caused irredentist and revanchist nationalism in several European states . These sentiments were especially marked in Germany because of the significant territorial , colonial , and financial losses incurred by the Treaty of Versailles . Under the treaty , Germany lost around 13 percent of its home territory and all of its overseas colonies , while German annexation of other states was prohibited , reparations were imposed , and limits were placed on the size and capability of the country 's armed forces . 
 The German Empire was dissolved in the German Revolution of 1918 – 1919 , and a democratic government , later known as the Weimar Republic , was created . The interwar period saw strife between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the right and left . Italy , as an Entente ally , had made some post @-@ war territorial gains ; however , Italian nationalists were angered that the promises made by Britain and France to secure Italian entrance into the war were not fulfilled with the peace settlement . From 1922 to 1925 , the Fascist movement led by Benito Mussolini seized power in Italy with a nationalist , totalitarian , and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy , repressed socialist , left @-@ wing and liberal forces , and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at making Italy a world power , promising the creation of a " New Roman Empire " . 
 Adolf Hitler , after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the German government in 1923 , eventually became the Chancellor of Germany in 1933 . He abolished democracy , espousing a radical , racially motivated revision of the world order , and soon began a massive rearmament campaign . It was at this time that political scientists began to predict that a second Great War might take place . Meanwhile , France , to secure its alliance , allowed Italy a free hand in Ethiopia , which Italy desired as a colonial possession . The situation was aggravated in early 1935 when the Territory of the Saar Basin was legally reunited with Germany and Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles , accelerated his rearmament programme , and introduced conscription . 
 Hoping to contain Germany , the United Kingdom , France and Italy formed the <unk> Front ; however , in June 1935 , the United Kingdom made an independent naval agreement with Germany , easing prior restrictions . The Soviet Union , concerned by Germany 's goals of capturing vast areas of eastern Europe , drafted a treaty of mutual assistance with France . Before taking effect though , the Franco @-@ Soviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the League of Nations , which rendered it essentially toothless . The United States , concerned with events in Europe and Asia , passed the Neutrality Act in August of the same year . 
 Hitler defied the Versailles and Locarno treaties by <unk> the Rhineland in March 1936 . He encountered little opposition from other European powers . In October 1936 , Germany and Italy formed the Rome – Berlin Axis . A month later , Germany and Japan signed the Anti @-@ Comintern Pact , which Italy would join in the following year . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 The Kuomintang ( KMT ) party in China launched a unification campaign against regional warlords and nominally unified China in the mid @-@ 1920s , but was soon embroiled in a civil war against its former Chinese communist allies . In 1931 , an increasingly militaristic Japanese Empire , which had long sought influence in China as the first step of what its government saw as the country 's right to rule Asia , used the Mukden Incident as a pretext to launch an invasion of Manchuria and establish the puppet state of Manchukuo . 
 Too weak to resist Japan , China appealed to the League of Nations for help . Japan withdrew from the League of Nations after being condemned for its incursion into Manchuria . The two nations then fought several battles , in Shanghai , <unk> and Hebei , until the <unk> Truce was signed in 1933 . Thereafter , Chinese volunteer forces continued the resistance to Japanese aggression in Manchuria , and <unk> and <unk> . After the 1936 Xi 'an Incident , the Kuomintang and communist forces agreed on a ceasefire to present a united front to oppose Japan . 
 = = Pre @-@ war events = = 
 = = = Italian invasion of Ethiopia ( 1935 ) = = = 
 The Second Italo – Abyssinian War was a brief colonial war that began in October 1935 and ended in May 1936 . The war began with the invasion of the Ethiopian Empire ( also known as Abyssinia ) by the armed forces of the Kingdom of Italy ( Regno d 'Italia ) , which was launched from Italian Somaliland and Eritrea . The war resulted in the military occupation of Ethiopia and its annexation into the newly created colony of Italian East Africa ( Africa Orientale Italiana , or <unk> ) ; in addition , it exposed the weakness of the League of Nations as a force to preserve peace . Both Italy and Ethiopia were member nations , but the League did nothing when the former clearly violated the League 's own Article X. Germany was the only major European nation to support the invasion . Italy subsequently dropped its objections to Germany 's goal of absorbing Austria . 
 = = = Spanish Civil War ( 1936 – 39 ) = = = 
 When civil war broke out in Spain , Hitler and Mussolini lent military support to the Nationalist rebels , led by General Francisco Franco . The Soviet Union supported the existing government , the Spanish Republic . Over 30 @,@ 000 foreign volunteers , known as the International Brigades , also fought against the Nationalists . Both Germany and the USSR used this proxy war as an opportunity to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics . The bombing of Guernica by the German Condor Legion in April 1937 heightened widespread concerns that the next major war would include extensive terror bombing attacks on civilians . The Nationalists won the civil war in April 1939 ; Franco , now dictator , bargained with both sides during the Second World War , but never concluded any major agreements . He did send volunteers to fight on the Eastern Front under German command but Spain remained neutral and did not allow either side to use its territory . 
 = = = Japanese invasion of China ( 1937 ) = = = 
 In July 1937 , Japan captured the former Chinese imperial capital of Beijing after instigating the Marco Polo Bridge Incident , which culminated in the Japanese campaign to invade all of China . The Soviets quickly signed a non @-@ aggression pact with China to lend materiel support , effectively ending China 's prior co @-@ operation with Germany . Generalissimo Chiang Kai @-@ shek deployed his best army to defend Shanghai , but , after three months of fighting , Shanghai fell . The Japanese continued to push the Chinese forces back , capturing the capital Nanking in December 1937 . After the fall of Nanking , tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians and disarmed combatants were murdered by the Japanese . 
 In March 1938 , Nationalist Chinese forces won their first major victory at <unk> but then the city of Xuzhou was taken by Japanese in May . In June 1938 , Chinese forces stalled the Japanese advance by flooding the Yellow River ; this manoeuvre bought time for the Chinese to prepare their defences at Wuhan , but the city was taken by October . Japanese military victories did not bring about the collapse of Chinese resistance that Japan had hoped to achieve ; instead the Chinese government relocated inland to Chongqing and continued the war . 
 = = = Soviet @-@ Japanese border conflicts = = = 
 In the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1930s , Japanese forces in Manchukuo had sporadic border clashes with the Soviet Union and Mongolia . The Japanese doctrine of Hokushin @-@ ron , which emphasised Japan 's expansion northward , was favoured by the Imperial Army during this time . With the devastating Japanese defeat at Khalkin Gol in 1939 and ally Nazi Germany pursuing neutrality with the Soviets , this policy would prove difficult to maintain . Japan and the Soviet Union eventually signed a Neutrality Pact in April 1941 , and Japan adopted the doctrine of Nanshin @-@ ron , promoted by the Navy , which took its focus southward , eventually leading to its war with the United States and the Western Allies . 
 = = = European occupations and agreements = = = 
 In Europe , Germany and Italy were becoming more aggressive . In March 1938 , Germany annexed Austria , again provoking little response from other European powers . Encouraged , Hitler began pressing German claims on the Sudetenland , an area of Czechoslovakia with a predominantly ethnic German population ; and soon Britain and France followed the counsel of British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain and conceded this territory to Germany in the Munich Agreement , which was made against the wishes of the Czechoslovak government , in exchange for a promise of no further territorial demands . Soon afterwards , Germany and Italy forced Czechoslovakia to cede additional territory to Hungary and Poland . 
 Although all of Germany 's stated demands had been satisfied by the agreement , privately Hitler was furious that British interference had prevented him from seizing all of Czechoslovakia in one operation . In subsequent speeches Hitler attacked British and Jewish " war @-@ mongers " and in January 1939 secretly ordered a major build @-@ up of the German navy to challenge British naval supremacy . In March 1939 , Germany invaded the remainder of Czechoslovakia and subsequently split it into the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a pro @-@ German client state , the Slovak Republic . Hitler also delivered an ultimatum to Lithuania , forcing the concession of the Klaipėda Region . 
 Greatly alarmed and with Hitler making further demands on the Free City of Danzig , Britain and France guaranteed their support for Polish independence ; when Italy conquered Albania in April 1939 , the same guarantee was extended to Romania and Greece . Shortly after the Franco @-@ British pledge to Poland , Germany and Italy formalised their own alliance with the Pact of Steel . Hitler accused Britain and Poland of trying to " encircle " Germany and renounced the Anglo @-@ German Naval Agreement and the German – Polish Non @-@ Aggression Pact . 
 In August 1939 , Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact , a non @-@ aggression treaty with a secret protocol . The parties gave each other rights to " spheres of influence " ( western Poland and Lithuania for Germany ; eastern Poland , Finland , Estonia , Latvia and Bessarabia for the USSR ) . It also raised the question of continuing Polish independence . The agreement was crucial to Hitler because it assured that Germany would not have to face the prospect of a two @-@ front war , as it had in World War I , after it defeated Poland . 
 The situation reached a general crisis in late August as German troops continued to mobilise against the Polish border . In a private meeting with the Italian foreign minister , Count Ciano , Hitler asserted that Poland was a " doubtful neutral " that needed to either yield to his demands or be " liquidated " to prevent it from drawing off German troops in the future " unavoidable " war with the Western democracies . He did not believe Britain or France would intervene in the conflict . On 23 August Hitler ordered the attack to proceed on 26 August , but upon hearing that Britain had concluded a formal mutual assistance pact with Poland and that Italy would maintain neutrality , he decided to delay it . 
 In response to British requests for direct negotiations to avoid war , Germany made demands on Poland , which only served as a pretext to worsen relations . On 29 August , Hitler demanded that a Polish plenipotentiary immediately travel to Berlin to negotiate the handover of Danzig , and to allow a plebiscite in the Polish Corridor in which the German minority would vote on secession . The Poles refused to comply with the German demands and on the night of 30 – 31 August in a violent meeting with the British ambassador Neville Henderson , Ribbentrop declared that Germany considered its claims rejected . 
 = = Course of the war = = 
 = = = War breaks out in Europe ( 1939 – 40 ) = = = 
 On 1 September 1939 , Germany invaded Poland under the false pretext that the Poles had carried out a series of sabotage operations against German targets near the border . Two days later , on 3 September , after a British ultimatum to Germany to cease military operations was ignored , Britain and France , followed by the fully independent Dominions of the British Commonwealth — Australia ( 3 September ) , Canada ( 10 September ) , New Zealand ( 3 September ) , and South Africa ( 6 September ) — declared war on Germany . However , initially the alliance provided limited direct military support to Poland , consisting of a cautious , half @-@ hearted French probe into the Saarland . The Western Allies also began a naval blockade of Germany , which aimed to damage the country 's economy and war effort . Germany responded by ordering U @-@ boat warfare against Allied merchant and warships , which was to later escalate into the Battle of the Atlantic . 
 On 17 September 1939 , after signing a cease @-@ fire with Japan , the Soviets invaded Poland from the east . The Polish army was defeated and Warsaw surrendered to the Germans on 27 September , with final pockets of resistance surrendering on 6 October . Poland 's territory was divided between Germany and the Soviet Union , with Lithuania and Slovakia also receiving small shares . After the defeat of Poland 's armed forces , the Polish resistance established an Underground State and a partisan Home Army . About 100 @,@ 000 Polish military personnel were evacuated to Romania and the Baltic countries ; many of these soldiers later fought against the Germans in other theatres of the war . Poland 's Enigma codebreakers were also evacuated to France . 
 On 6 October Hitler made a public peace overture to Britain and France , but said that the future of Poland was to be determined exclusively by Germany and the Soviet Union . Chamberlain rejected this on 12 October , saying " Past experience has shown that no reliance can be placed upon the promises of the present German Government . " After this rejection Hitler ordered an immediate offensive against France , but bad weather forced repeated postponements until the spring of 1940 . 
 After signing the German – Soviet Treaty of Friendship , Cooperation and Demarcation , the Soviet Union forced the Baltic countries — Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania — to allow it to station Soviet troops in their countries under pacts of " mutual assistance " . Finland rejected territorial demands , prompting a Soviet invasion in November 1939 . The resulting Winter War ended in March 1940 with Finnish concessions . Britain and France , treating the Soviet attack on Finland as tantamount to its entering the war on the side of the Germans , responded to the Soviet invasion by supporting the USSR 's expulsion from the League of Nations . 
 In June 1940 , the Soviet Union forcibly annexed Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , and the disputed Romanian regions of Bessarabia , Northern Bukovina and <unk> . Meanwhile , Nazi @-@ Soviet political rapprochement and economic co @-@ operation gradually stalled , and both states began preparations for war . 
 = = = Western Europe ( 1940 – 41 ) = = = 
 In April 1940 , Germany invaded Denmark and Norway to protect shipments of iron ore from Sweden , which the Allies were attempting to cut off by unilaterally mining neutral Norwegian waters . Denmark capitulated after a few hours , and despite Allied support , during which the important harbour of Narvik temporarily was recaptured from the Germans , Norway was conquered within two months . British discontent over the Norwegian campaign led to the replacement of the British Prime Minister , Neville Chamberlain , with Winston Churchill on 10 May 1940 . 
 Germany launched an offensive against France and , adhering to the Manstein Plan also attacked the neutral nations of Belgium , the Netherlands , and Luxembourg on 10 May 1940 . That same day British forces landed in Iceland and the Faroes to preempt a possible German invasion of the islands . The U.S. in close co @-@ operation with the Danish envoy to Washington D.C. , agreed to protect Greenland , laying the political framework for the formal establishment of bases in April 1941 . The Netherlands and Belgium were overrun using blitzkrieg tactics in a few days and weeks , respectively . The French @-@ fortified Maginot Line and the main body the Allied forces which had moved into Belgium were circumvented by a flanking movement through the thickly wooded Ardennes region , mistakenly perceived by Allied planners as an impenetrable natural barrier against armoured vehicles . As a result , the bulk of the Allied armies found themselves trapped in an encirclement and were beaten . The majority were taken prisoner , whilst over 300 @,@ 000 , mostly British and French , were evacuated from the continent at Dunkirk by early June , although abandoning almost all of their equipment . 
 On 10 June , Italy invaded France , declaring war on both France and the United Kingdom . Paris fell to the Germans on 14 June and eight days later France signed an armistice with Germany and was soon divided into German and Italian occupation zones , and an unoccupied rump state under the Vichy Regime , which , though officially neutral , was generally aligned with Germany . France kept its fleet but the British feared the Germans would seize it , so on 3 July , the British attacked it . 
 The Battle of Britain began in early July with Luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbours . On 19 July , Hitler again publicly offered to end the war , saying he had no desire to destroy the British Empire . The United Kingdom rejected this ultimatum . The main German air superiority campaign started in August but failed to defeat RAF Fighter Command , and a proposed invasion was postponed indefinitely on 17 September . The German strategic bombing offensive intensified as night attacks on London and other cities in the Blitz , but largely failed to disrupt the British war effort . 
 Using newly captured French ports , the German Navy enjoyed success against an over @-@ extended Royal Navy , using U @-@ boats against British shipping in the Atlantic . The British scored a significant victory on 27 May 1941 by sinking the German battleship Bismarck . Perhaps most importantly , during the Battle of Britain the Royal Air Force had successfully resisted the Luftwaffe 's assault , and the German bombing campaign largely ended in May 1941 . 
 Throughout this period , the neutral United States took measures to assist China and the Western Allies . In November 1939 , the American Neutrality Act was amended to allow " cash and carry " purchases by the Allies . In 1940 , following the German capture of Paris , the size of the United States Navy was significantly increased . In September , the United States further agreed to a trade of American destroyers for British bases . Still , a large majority of the American public continued to oppose any direct military intervention into the conflict well into 1941 . 
 Although Roosevelt had promised to keep the United States out of the war , he nevertheless took concrete steps to prepare for war . In December 1940 he accused Hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out negotiations as useless , calling for the US to become an " arsenal for democracy " and promoted the passage of Lend @-@ Lease aid to support the British war effort . In January 1941 secret high level staff talks with the British began for the purposes of determining how to defeat Germany should the US enter the war . They decided on a number of offensive policies , including an air offensive , the " early elimination " of Italy , raids , support of resistance groups , and the capture of positions to launch an offensive against Germany . 
 At the end of September 1940 , the Tripartite Pact united Japan , Italy and Germany to formalise the Axis Powers . The Tripartite Pact stipulated that any country , with the exception of the Soviet Union , not in the war which attacked any Axis Power would be forced to go to war against all three . The Axis expanded in November 1940 when Hungary , Slovakia and Romania joined the Tripartite Pact . Romania would make a major contribution ( as did Hungary ) to the Axis war against the USSR , partially to recapture territory ceded to the USSR , partially to pursue its leader Ion Antonescu 's desire to combat communism . 
 = = = Mediterranean ( 1940 – 41 ) = = = 
 Italy began operations in the Mediterranean , initiating a siege of Malta in June , conquering British Somaliland in August , and making an incursion into British @-@ held Egypt in September 1940 . In October 1940 , Italy started the Greco @-@ Italian War because of Mussolini 's jealousy of Hitler 's success but within days was repulsed and pushed back into Albania , where a stalemate soon occurred . The United Kingdom responded to Greek requests for assistance by sending troops to Crete and providing air support to Greece . Hitler decided that when the weather improved he would take action against Greece to assist the Italians and prevent the British from gaining a foothold in the Balkans , to strike against the British naval dominance of the Mediterranean , and to secure his hold on Romanian oil . 
 In December 1940 , British Commonwealth forces began counter @-@ offensives against Italian forces in Egypt and Italian East Africa . The offensive in North Africa was highly successful and by early February 1941 Italy had lost control of eastern Libya and large numbers of Italian troops had been taken prisoner . The Italian Navy also suffered significant defeats , with the Royal Navy putting three Italian battleships out of commission by a carrier attack at Taranto , and neutralising several more warships at the Battle of Cape Matapan . 
 The Germans soon intervened to assist Italy . Hitler sent German forces to Libya in February , and by the end of March they had launched an offensive which drove back the Commonwealth forces which had been weakened to support Greece . In under a month , Commonwealth forces were pushed back into Egypt with the exception of the besieged port of Tobruk . The Commonwealth attempted to dislodge Axis forces in May and again in June , but failed on both occasions . 
 By late March 1941 , following Bulgaria 's signing of the Tripartite Pact , the Germans were in position to intervene in Greece . Plans were changed , however , because of developments in neighbouring Yugoslavia . The Yugoslav government had signed the Tripartite Pact on 25 March , only to be overthrown two days later by a British @-@ encouraged coup . Hitler viewed the new regime as hostile and immediately decided to eliminate it . On 6 April Germany simultaneously invaded both Yugoslavia and Greece , making rapid progress and forcing both nations to surrender within the month . The British were driven from the Balkans after Germany conquered the Greek island of Crete by the end of May . Although the Axis victory was swift , bitter partisan warfare subsequently broke out against the Axis occupation of Yugoslavia , which continued until the end of the war . 
 The Allies did have some successes during this time . In the Middle East , Commonwealth forces first quashed an uprising in Iraq which had been supported by German aircraft from bases within Vichy @-@ controlled Syria , then , with the assistance of the Free French , invaded Syria and Lebanon to prevent further such occurrences . 
 = = = Axis attack on the USSR ( 1941 ) = = = 
 With the situation in Europe and Asia relatively stable , Germany , Japan , and the Soviet Union made preparations . With the Soviets wary of mounting tensions with Germany and the Japanese planning to take advantage of the European War by seizing resource @-@ rich European possessions in Southeast Asia , the two powers signed the Soviet – Japanese Neutrality Pact in April 1941 . By contrast , the Germans were steadily making preparations for an attack on the Soviet Union , massing forces on the Soviet border . 
 Hitler believed that Britain 's refusal to end the war was based on the hope that the United States and the Soviet Union would enter the war against Germany sooner or later . He therefore decided to try to strengthen Germany 's relations with the Soviets , or failing that , to attack and eliminate them as a factor . In November 1940 , negotiations took place to determine if the Soviet Union would join the Tripartite Pact . The Soviets showed some interest , but asked for concessions from Finland , Bulgaria , Turkey , and Japan that Germany considered unacceptable . On 18 December 1940 , Hitler issued the directive to prepare for an invasion of the Soviet Union . 
 On 22 June 1941 , Germany , supported by Italy and Romania , invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa , with Germany accusing the Soviets of plotting against them . They were joined shortly by Finland and Hungary . The primary targets of this surprise offensive were the Baltic region , Moscow and Ukraine , with the ultimate goal of ending the 1941 campaign near the Arkhangelsk @-@ Astrakhan line , from the Caspian to the White Seas . Hitler 's objectives were to eliminate the Soviet Union as a military power , exterminate Communism , generate Lebensraum ( " living space " ) by <unk> the native population and guarantee access to the strategic resources needed to defeat Germany 's remaining rivals . 
 Although the Red Army was preparing for strategic counter @-@ offensives before the war , Barbarossa forced the Soviet supreme command to adopt a strategic defence . During the summer , the Axis made significant gains into Soviet territory , inflicting immense losses in both personnel and materiel . By the middle of August , however , the German Army High Command decided to suspend the offensive of a considerably depleted Army Group Centre , and to divert the 2nd Panzer Group to reinforce troops advancing towards central Ukraine and Leningrad . The Kiev offensive was overwhelmingly successful , resulting in encirclement and elimination of four Soviet armies , and made further advance into Crimea and industrially developed Eastern Ukraine ( the First Battle of Kharkov ) possible . 
 The diversion of three quarters of the Axis troops and the majority of their air forces from France and the central Mediterranean to the Eastern Front prompted Britain to reconsider its grand strategy . In July , the UK and the Soviet Union formed a military alliance against Germany The British and Soviets invaded Iran to secure the Persian Corridor and Iran 's oil fields . In August , the United Kingdom and the United States jointly issued the Atlantic Charter . 
 By October Axis operational objectives in Ukraine and the Baltic region were achieved , with only the sieges of Leningrad and Sevastopol continuing . A major offensive against Moscow was renewed ; after two months of fierce battles in increasingly harsh weather the German army almost reached the outer suburbs of Moscow , where the exhausted troops were forced to suspend their offensive . Large territorial gains were made by Axis forces , but their campaign had failed to achieve its main objectives : two key cities remained in Soviet hands , the Soviet capability to resist was not broken , and the Soviet Union retained a considerable part of its military potential . The blitzkrieg phase of the war in Europe had ended . 
 By early December , freshly mobilised reserves allowed the Soviets to achieve numerical parity with Axis troops . This , as well as intelligence data which established that a minimal number of Soviet troops in the East would be sufficient to deter any attack by the Japanese Kwantung Army , allowed the Soviets to begin a massive counter @-@ offensive that started on 5 December all along the front and pushed German troops 100 – 250 kilometres ( 62 – 155 mi ) west . 
 = = = War breaks out in the Pacific ( 1941 ) = = = 
 In 1939 the United States had renounced its trade treaty with Japan and beginning with an aviation gasoline ban in July 1940 Japan had become subject to increasing economic pressure . During this time , Japan launched its first attack against Changsha , a strategically important Chinese city , but was repulsed by late September . Despite several offensives by both sides , the war between China and Japan was stalemated by 1940 . To increase pressure on China by blocking supply routes , and to better position Japanese forces in the event of a war with the Western powers , Japan invaded and occupied northern Indochina . Afterwards , the United States embargoed iron , steel and mechanical parts against Japan . Other sanctions soon followed . 
 In August of that year , Chinese communists launched an offensive in Central China ; in retaliation , Japan instituted harsh measures in occupied areas to reduce human and material resources for the communists . Continued antipathy between Chinese communist and nationalist forces culminated in armed clashes in January 1941 , effectively ending their co @-@ operation . In March , the Japanese 11th army attacked the headquarters of the Chinese 19th army but was repulsed during Battle of <unk> . In September , Japan attempted to take the city of Changsha again and clashed with Chinese nationalist forces . 
 German successes in Europe encouraged Japan to increase pressure on European governments in Southeast Asia . The Dutch government agreed to provide Japan some oil supplies from the Dutch East Indies , but negotiations for additional access to their resources ended in failure in June 1941 . In July 1941 Japan sent troops to southern Indochina , thus threatening British and Dutch possessions in the Far East . The United States , United Kingdom and other Western governments reacted to this move with a freeze on Japanese assets and a total oil embargo . 
 Since early 1941 the United States and Japan had been engaged in negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in China . During these negotiations Japan advanced a number of proposals which were dismissed by the Americans as inadequate . At the same time the US , Britain , and the Netherlands engaged in secret discussions for the joint defence of their territories , in the event of a Japanese attack against any of them . Roosevelt reinforced the Philippines ( an American protectorate scheduled for independence in 1946 ) and warned Japan that the US would react to Japanese attacks against any " neighboring countries " . 
 Frustrated at the lack of progress and feeling the pinch of the American @-@ British @-@ Dutch sanctions , Japan prepared for war . On 20 November it presented an interim proposal as its final offer . It called for the end of American aid to China and to supply oil and other resources to Japan . In exchange they promised not to launch any attacks in Southeast Asia and to withdraw their forces from their threatening positions in southern Indochina . The American counter @-@ proposal of 26 November required that Japan evacuate all of China without conditions and conclude non @-@ aggression pacts with all Pacific powers . That meant Japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in China , or seizing the natural resources it needed in the Dutch East Indies by force ; the Japanese military did not consider the former an option , and many officers considered the oil embargo an unspoken declaration of war . 
 Japan planned to rapidly seize European colonies in Asia to create a large defensive perimeter stretching into the Central Pacific ; the Japanese would then be free to exploit the resources of Southeast Asia while exhausting the over @-@ stretched Allies by fighting a defensive war . To prevent American intervention while securing the perimeter it was further planned to neutralise the United States Pacific Fleet and the American military presence in the Philippines from the outset . On 7 December 1941 ( 8 December in Asian time zones ) , Japan attacked British and American holdings with near @-@ simultaneous offensives against Southeast Asia and the Central Pacific . These included an attack on the American fleet at Pearl Harbor , the Philippines , landings in Thailand and Malaya and the battle of Hong Kong . 
 These attacks led the United States , Britain , China , Australia and several other states to formally declare war on Japan , whereas the Soviet Union , being heavily involved in large @-@ scale hostilities with European Axis countries , maintained its neutrality agreement with Japan . Germany , followed by the other Axis states , declared war on the United States in solidarity with Japan , citing as justification the American attacks on German war vessels that had been ordered by Roosevelt . 
 = = = Axis advance stalls ( 1942 – 43 ) = = = 
 In January 1942 , the Big Four ( the United States , Britain , Soviet Union , China ) and 22 smaller or exiled governments issued the Declaration by United Nations , thereby affirming the Atlantic Charter , and agreeing to not to sign a separate peace with the Axis powers . 
 During 1942 , Allied officials debated on the appropriate grand strategy to pursue . All agreed that defeating Germany was the primary objective . The Americans favoured a straightforward , large @-@ scale attack on Germany through France . The Soviets were also demanding a second front . The British , on the other hand , argued that military operations should target peripheral areas to wear out German strength , lead to increasing demoralisation , and bolster resistance forces . Germany itself would be subject to a heavy bombing campaign . An offensive against Germany would then be launched primarily by Allied armour without using large @-@ scale armies . Eventually , the British persuaded the Americans that a landing in France was infeasible in 1942 and they should instead focus on driving the Axis out of North Africa . 
 At the Casablanca Conference in early 1943 , the Allies reiterated the statements issued in the 1942 Declaration by the United Nations , and demanded the unconditional surrender of their enemies . The British and Americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the Mediterranean by invading Sicily to fully secure the Mediterranean supply routes . Although the British argued for further operations in the Balkans to bring Turkey into the war , in May 1943 , the Americans extracted a British commitment to limit Allied operations in the Mediterranean to an invasion of the Italian mainland and to invade France in 1944 . 
 = = = = Pacific ( 1942 – 43 ) = = = = 
 By the end of April 1942 , Japan and its ally Thailand had almost fully conquered Burma , Malaya , the Dutch East Indies , Singapore , and Rabaul , inflicting severe losses on Allied troops and taking a large number of prisoners . Despite stubborn resistance by Filipino and US forces , the Philippine Commonwealth was eventually captured in May 1942 , forcing its government into exile . On 16 April , in Burma , 7 @,@ 000 British soldiers were encircled by the Japanese 33rd Division during the Battle of <unk> and rescued by the Chinese 38th Division . Japanese forces also achieved naval victories in the South China Sea , Java Sea and Indian Ocean , and bombed the Allied naval base at Darwin , Australia . In January 1942 , the only Allied success against Japan was a Chinese victory at Changsha . These easy victories over unprepared US and European opponents left Japan overconfident , as well as overextended . 
 In early May 1942 , Japan initiated operations to capture Port Moresby by amphibious assault and thus sever communications and supply lines between the United States and Australia . The planned invasion was thwarted when an Allied task force centered on two American fleet carriers fought Japanese naval forces to a draw in the Battle of the Coral Sea . Japan 's next plan , motivated by the earlier Doolittle Raid , was to seize Midway Atoll and lure American carriers into battle to be eliminated ; as a diversion , Japan would also send forces to occupy the Aleutian Islands in Alaska . In early June , Japan put its operations into action but the Americans , having broken Japanese naval codes in late May , were fully aware of the plans and force dispositions and used this knowledge to achieve a decisive victory at Midway over the Imperial Japanese Navy . 
 With its capacity for aggressive action greatly diminished as a result of the Midway battle , Japan chose to focus on a belated attempt to capture Port Moresby by an overland campaign in the Territory of Papua . The Americans planned a counter @-@ attack against Japanese positions in the southern Solomon Islands , primarily Guadalcanal , as a first step towards capturing Rabaul , the main Japanese base in Southeast Asia . 
 Both plans started in July , but by mid @-@ September , the Battle for Guadalcanal took priority for the Japanese , and troops in New Guinea were ordered to withdraw from the Port Moresby area to the northern part of the island , where they faced Australian and United States troops in the Battle of Buna @-@ Gona . Guadalcanal soon became a focal point for both sides with heavy commitments of troops and ships in the battle for Guadalcanal . By the start of 1943 , the Japanese were defeated on the island and withdrew their troops . In Burma , Commonwealth forces mounted two operations . The first , an offensive into the Arakan region in late 1942 , went disastrously , forcing a retreat back to India by May 1943 . The second was the insertion of irregular forces behind Japanese front @-@ lines in February which , by the end of April , had achieved mixed results . 
 = = = = Eastern Front ( 1942 – 43 ) = = = = 
 Despite considerable losses , in early 1942 Germany and its allies stopped a major Soviet offensive in central and southern Russia , keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year . In May the Germans defeated Soviet offensives in the Kerch Peninsula and at Kharkov , and then launched their main summer offensive against southern Russia in June 1942 , to seize the oil fields of the Caucasus and occupy Kuban steppe , while maintaining positions on the northern and central areas of the front . The Germans split Army Group South into two groups : Army Group A advanced to the lower Don River and struck south @-@ east to the Caucasus , while Army Group B headed towards the Volga River . The Soviets decided to make their stand at Stalingrad on the Volga . 
 By mid @-@ November , the Germans had nearly taken Stalingrad in bitter street fighting when the Soviets began their second winter counter @-@ offensive , starting with an encirclement of German forces at Stalingrad and an assault on the Rzhev salient near Moscow , though the latter failed disastrously . By early February 1943 , the German Army had taken tremendous losses ; German troops at Stalingrad had been forced to surrender , and the front @-@ line had been pushed back beyond its position before the summer offensive . In mid @-@ February , after the Soviet push had tapered off , the Germans launched another attack on Kharkov , creating a salient in their front line around the Russian city of Kursk . 
 = = = = Western Europe / Atlantic & Mediterranean ( 1942 – 43 ) = = = = 
 Exploiting poor American naval command decisions , the German navy ravaged Allied shipping off the American Atlantic coast . By November 1941 , Commonwealth forces had launched a counter @-@ offensive , Operation Crusader , in North Africa , and reclaimed all the gains the Germans and Italians had made . In North Africa , the Germans launched an offensive in January , pushing the British back to positions at the Gazala Line by early February , followed by a temporary lull in combat which Germany used to prepare for their upcoming offensives . Concerns the Japanese might use bases in Vichy @-@ held Madagascar caused the British to invade the island in early May 1942 . An Axis offensive in Libya forced an Allied retreat deep inside Egypt until Axis forces were stopped at El Alamein . On the Continent , raids of Allied commandos on strategic targets , culminating in the disastrous Dieppe Raid , demonstrated the Western Allies ' inability to launch an invasion of continental Europe without much better preparation , equipment , and operational security . 
 In August 1942 , the Allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against El Alamein and , at a high cost , managed to deliver desperately needed supplies to the besieged Malta . A few months later , the Allies commenced an attack of their own in Egypt , dislodging the Axis forces and beginning a drive west across Libya . This attack was followed up shortly after by Anglo @-@ American landings in French North Africa , which resulted in the region joining the Allies . Hitler responded to the French colony 's defection by ordering the occupation of Vichy France ; although Vichy forces did not resist this violation of the armistice , they managed to scuttle their fleet to prevent its capture by German forces . The now <unk> Axis forces in Africa withdrew into Tunisia , which was conquered by the Allies in May 1943 . 
 In early 1943 the British and Americans began the Combined Bomber Offensive , a strategic bombing campaign against Germany . The goals were to disrupt the German war economy , reduce German morale , and " de @-@ house " the civilian population . 
 = = = Allies gain momentum ( 1943 – 44 ) = = = 
 After the Guadalcanal Campaign , the Allies initiated several operations against Japan in the Pacific . In May 1943 , Canadian and U.S. forces were sent to eliminate Japanese forces from the Aleutians . Soon after , the U.S. with support from Australian and New Zealand forces began major operations to isolate Rabaul by capturing surrounding islands , and to breach the Japanese Central Pacific perimeter at the Gilbert and Marshall Islands . By the end of March 1944 , the Allies had completed both of these objectives , and additionally neutralised the major Japanese base at Truk in the Caroline Islands . In April , the Allies launched an operation to retake Western New Guinea . 
 In the Soviet Union , both the Germans and the Soviets spent the spring and early summer of 1943 preparing for large offensives in central Russia . On 4 July 1943 , Germany attacked Soviet forces around the Kursk Bulge . Within a week , German forces had exhausted themselves against the Soviets ' deeply echeloned and well @-@ constructed defences and , for the first time in the war , Hitler cancelled the operation before it had achieved tactical or operational success . This decision was partially affected by the Western Allies ' invasion of Sicily launched on 9 July which , combined with previous Italian failures , resulted in the ousting and arrest of Mussolini later that month . Also , in July 1943 the British firebombed Hamburg killing over 40 @,@ 000 people . 
 On 12 July 1943 , the Soviets launched their own counter @-@ offensives , thereby dispelling any chance of German victory or even stalemate in the east . The Soviet victory at Kursk marked the end of German superiority , giving the Soviet Union the initiative on the Eastern Front . The Germans tried to stabilise their eastern front along the hastily fortified Panther @-@ Wotan line , but the Soviets broke through it at Smolensk and by the Lower Dnieper Offensives . 
 On 3 September 1943 , the Western Allies invaded the Italian mainland , following Italy 's armistice with the Allies . Germany responded by disarming Italian forces , seizing military control of Italian areas , and creating a series of defensive lines . German special forces then rescued Mussolini , who then soon established a new client state in German occupied Italy named the Italian Social Republic , causing an Italian civil war . The Western Allies fought through several lines until reaching the main German defensive line in mid @-@ November . 
 German operations in the Atlantic also suffered . By May 1943 , as Allied counter @-@ measures became increasingly effective , the resulting sizeable German submarine losses forced a temporary halt of the German Atlantic naval campaign . In November 1943 , Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met with Chiang Kai @-@ shek in Cairo and then with Joseph Stalin in Tehran . The former conference determined the post @-@ war return of Japanese territory , while the latter included agreement that the Western Allies would invade Europe in 1944 and that the Soviet Union would declare war on Japan within three months of Germany 's defeat . 
 From November 1943 , during the seven @-@ week Battle of Changde , the Chinese forced Japan to fight a costly war of attrition , while awaiting Allied relief . In January 1944 , the Allies launched a series of attacks in Italy against the line at Monte Cassino and tried to outflank it with landings at Anzio . By the end of January , a major Soviet offensive expelled German forces from the Leningrad region , ending the longest and most lethal siege in history . 
 The following Soviet offensive was halted on the pre @-@ war Estonian border by the German Army Group North aided by Estonians hoping to re @-@ establish national independence . This delay slowed subsequent Soviet operations in the Baltic Sea region . By late May 1944 , the Soviets had liberated Crimea , largely expelled Axis forces from Ukraine , and made incursions into Romania , which were repulsed by the Axis troops . The Allied offensives in Italy had succeeded and , at the expense of allowing several German divisions to retreat , on 4 June , Rome was captured . 
 The Allies had mixed success in mainland Asia . In March 1944 , the Japanese launched the first of two invasions , an operation against British positions in Assam , India , and soon besieged Commonwealth positions at Imphal and Kohima . In May 1944 , British forces mounted a counter @-@ offensive that drove Japanese troops back to Burma , and Chinese forces that had invaded northern Burma in late 1943 besieged Japanese troops in Myitkyina . The second Japanese invasion of China aimed to destroy China 's main fighting forces , secure railways between Japanese @-@ held territory and capture Allied airfields . By June , the Japanese had conquered the province of Henan and begun a new attack on Changsha in the Hunan province . 
 = = = Allies close in ( 1944 ) = = = 
 On 6 June 1944 ( known as D @-@ Day ) , after three years of Soviet pressure , the Western Allies invaded northern France . After reassigning several Allied divisions from Italy , they also attacked southern France . These landings were successful , and led to the defeat of the German Army units in France . Paris was liberated by the local resistance assisted by the Free French Forces , both led by General Charles de Gaulle , on 25 August and the Western Allies continued to push back German forces in western Europe during the latter part of the year . An attempt to advance into northern Germany spearheaded by a major airborne operation in the Netherlands failed . After that , the Western Allies slowly pushed into Germany , but failed to cross the Rur river in a large offensive . In Italy , Allied advance also slowed due to the last major German defensive line . 
 On 22 June , the Soviets launched a strategic offensive in Belarus ( " Operation Bagration " ) that destroyed the German Army Group Centre almost completely . Soon after that another Soviet strategic offensive forced German troops from Western Ukraine and Eastern Poland . The Soviet advance prompted resistance forces in Poland to initiate several uprisings against the German occupation . However , the largest of these in Warsaw where German soldiers massacred 200 @,@ 000 civilians and a national uprising in Slovakia did not receive Soviet support and were subsequently suppressed by the Germans . The Red Army 's strategic offensive in eastern Romania cut off and destroyed the considerable German troops there and triggered a successful coup d 'état in Romania and in Bulgaria , followed by those countries ' shift to the Allied side . 
 In September 1944 , Soviet troops advanced into Yugoslavia and forced the rapid withdrawal of German Army Groups E and F in Greece , Albania and Yugoslavia to rescue them from being cut off . By this point , the Communist @-@ led Partisans under Marshal Josip Broz Tito , who had led an increasingly successful guerrilla campaign against the occupation since 1941 , controlled much of the territory of Yugoslavia and engaged in delaying efforts against German forces further south . In northern Serbia , the Red Army , with limited support from Bulgarian forces , assisted the Partisans in a joint liberation of the capital city of Belgrade on 20 October . A few days later , the Soviets launched a massive assault against German @-@ occupied Hungary that lasted until the fall of Budapest in February 1945 . Unlike impressive Soviet victories in the Balkans , bitter Finnish resistance to the Soviet offensive in the Karelian Isthmus denied the Soviets occupation of Finland and led to a Soviet @-@ Finnish armistice on relatively mild conditions , although Finland later shifted to the Allied side . 
 By the start of July 1944 , Commonwealth forces in Southeast Asia had repelled the Japanese sieges in Assam , pushing the Japanese back to the Chindwin River while the Chinese captured Myitkyina . In China , the Japanese had more successes , having finally captured Changsha in mid @-@ June and the city of Hengyang by early August . Soon after , they invaded the province of Guangxi , winning major engagements against Chinese forces at Guilin and Liuzhou by the end of November and successfully linking up their forces in China and Indochina by mid @-@ December . 
 In the Pacific , US forces continued to press back the Japanese perimeter . In mid @-@ June 1944 , they began their offensive against the Mariana and Palau islands , and decisively defeated Japanese forces in the Battle of the Philippine Sea . These defeats led to the resignation of the Japanese Prime Minister , Hideki Tojo , and provided the United States with air bases to launch intensive heavy bomber attacks on the Japanese home islands . In late October , American forces invaded the Filipino island of Leyte ; soon after , Allied naval forces scored another large victory in the Battle of Leyte Gulf , one of the largest naval battles in history . 
 = = = Axis collapse , Allied victory ( 1944 – 45 ) = = = 
 On 16 December 1944 , Germany made a last attempt on the Western Front by using most of its remaining reserves to launch a massive counter @-@ offensive in the Ardennes to split the Western Allies , encircle large portions of Western Allied troops and capture their primary supply port at Antwerp to prompt a political settlement . By January , the offensive had been repulsed with no strategic objectives fulfilled . In Italy , the Western Allies remained stalemated at the German defensive line . In mid @-@ January 1945 , the Soviets and Poles attacked in Poland , pushing from the Vistula to the Oder river in Germany , and overran East Prussia . On 4 February , US , British , and Soviet leaders met for the Yalta Conference . They agreed on the occupation of post @-@ war Germany , and on when the Soviet Union would join the war against Japan . 
 In February , the Soviets entered Silesia and Pomerania , while Western Allies entered western Germany and closed to the Rhine river . By March , the Western Allies crossed the Rhine north and south of the Ruhr , encircling the German Army Group B , while the Soviets advanced to Vienna . In early April , the Western Allies finally pushed forward in Italy and swept across western Germany , while Soviet and Polish forces stormed Berlin in late April . American and Soviet forces joined on Elbe river on 25 April . On 30 April 1945 , the Reichstag was captured , signalling the military defeat of Nazi Germany . 
 Several changes in leadership occurred during this period . On 12 April , President Roosevelt died and was succeeded by Harry Truman . Benito Mussolini was killed by Italian partisans on 28 April . Two days later , Hitler committed suicide , and was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz . 
 German forces surrendered in Italy on 29 April . Total and unconditional surrender was signed on 7 May , to be effective by the end of 8 May . German Army Group Centre resisted in Prague until 11 May . 
 In the Pacific theatre , American forces accompanied by the forces of the Philippine Commonwealth advanced in the Philippines , clearing Leyte by the end of April 1945 . They landed on Luzon in January 1945 and recaptured Manila in March following a battle which reduced the city to ruins . Fighting continued on Luzon , Mindanao , and other islands of the Philippines until the end of the war . On the night of 9 – 10 March , B @-@ 29 bombers of the US Army Air Forces struck Tokyo with incendiary bombs , which killed 100 @,@ 000 people within a few hours . Over the next five months , American bombers firebombed 66 other Japanese cities , causing the destruction of untold numbers of buildings and the deaths of between 350 @,@ 000 – 500 @,@ 000 Japanese civilians . 
 In May 1945 , Australian troops landed in Borneo , over @-@ running the oilfields there . British , American , and Chinese forces defeated the Japanese in northern Burma in March , and the British pushed on to reach Rangoon by 3 May . Chinese forces started to counterattack in Battle of West Hunan that occurred between 6 April and 7 June 1945 . American naval and amphibious forces also moved towards Japan , taking Iwo Jima by March , and Okinawa by the end of June . At the same time American bombers were destroying Japanese cities , American submarines cut off Japanese imports , drastically reducing Japan 's ability to supply its overseas forces . 
 On 11 July , Allied leaders met in Potsdam , Germany . They confirmed earlier agreements about Germany , and reiterated the demand for unconditional surrender of all Japanese forces by Japan , specifically stating that " the alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction " . During this conference , the United Kingdom held its general election , and Clement Attlee replaced Churchill as Prime Minister . 
 The Allies called for unconditional Japanese surrender in the Potsdam declaration of 27 July , but the Japanese government was internally divided on whether to make peace and did not respond . In early August , the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Like the Japanese cities previously bombed by American airmen , the US and its allies justified the atomic bombings as a military necessity , to avoid invading the Japanese home islands which would cost the lives of between 250 @,@ 000 – 500 @,@ 000 Allied troops and millions of Japanese troops and civilians . Between the two bombings , the Soviets , pursuant to the Yalta agreement , invaded Japanese @-@ held Manchuria , and quickly defeated the Kwantung Army , which was the largest Japanese fighting force . The Red Army also captured Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands . On 15 August 1945 , Japan surrendered , with the surrender documents finally signed aboard the deck of the American battleship USS Missouri on 2 September 1945 , ending the war . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Allies established occupation administrations in Austria and Germany . The former became a neutral state , non @-@ aligned with any political bloc . The latter was divided into western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the Western Allies and the USSR , accordingly . A denazification program in Germany led to the prosecution of Nazi war criminals and the removal of ex @-@ Nazis from power , although this policy moved towards amnesty and re @-@ integration of ex @-@ Nazis into West German society . 
 Germany lost a quarter of its pre @-@ war ( 1937 ) territory . Among the eastern territories , Silesia , Neumark and most of Pomerania were taken over by Poland , East Prussia was divided between Poland and the USSR , followed by the expulsion of the 9 million Germans from these provinces , as well as the expulsion of 3 million Germans from the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia to Germany . By the 1950s , every fifth West German was a refugee from the east . The Soviet Union also took over the Polish provinces east of the Curzon line , from which 2 million Poles were expelled ; north @-@ east Romania , parts of eastern Finland , and the three Baltic states were also incorporated into the USSR . 
 In an effort to maintain peace , the Allies formed the United Nations , which officially came into existence on 24 October 1945 , and adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 , as a common standard for all member nations . The great powers that were the victors of the war — the United States , Soviet Union , China , Britain , and France — formed the permanent members of the UN 's Security Council . The five permanent members remain so to the present , although there have been two seat changes , between the Republic of China and the People 's Republic of China in 1971 , and between the Soviet Union and its successor state , the Russian Federation , following the dissolution of the Soviet Union . The alliance between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union had begun to deteriorate even before the war was over . 
 Germany had been de facto divided , and two independent states , the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic were created within the borders of Allied and Soviet occupation zones , accordingly . The rest of Europe was also divided into Western and Soviet spheres of influence . Most eastern and central European countries fell into the Soviet sphere , which led to establishment of Communist @-@ led regimes , with full or partial support of the Soviet occupation authorities . As a result , Poland , Hungary , East Germany , Czechoslovakia , Romania , and Albania became Soviet satellite states . Communist Yugoslavia conducted a fully independent policy , causing tension with the USSR . 
 Post @-@ war division of the world was formalised by two international military alliances , the United States @-@ led NATO and the Soviet @-@ led Warsaw Pact ; the long period of political tensions and military competition between them , the Cold War , would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and proxy wars . 
 In Asia , the United States led the occupation of Japan and administrated Japan 's former islands in the Western Pacific , while the Soviets annexed Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands . Korea , formerly under Japanese rule , was divided and occupied by the US in the South and the Soviet Union in the North between 1945 and 1948 . Separate republics emerged on both sides of the 38th parallel in 1948 , each claiming to be the legitimate government for all of Korea , which led ultimately to the Korean War . 
 In China , nationalist and communist forces resumed the civil war in June 1946 . Communist forces were victorious and established the People 's Republic of China on the mainland , while nationalist forces retreated to Taiwan in 1949 . In the Middle East , the Arab rejection of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine and the creation of Israel marked the escalation of the Arab @-@ Israeli conflict . While European colonial powers attempted to retain some or all of their colonial empires , their losses of prestige and resources during the war rendered this unsuccessful , leading to decolonisation . 
 The global economy suffered heavily from the war , although participating nations were affected differently . The US emerged much richer than any other nation ; it had a baby boom and by 1950 its gross domestic product per person was much higher than that of any of the other powers and it dominated the world economy . The UK and US pursued a policy of industrial disarmament in Western Germany in the years 1945 – 1948 . Because of international trade interdependencies this led to European economic stagnation and delayed European recovery for several years . 
 Recovery began with the mid @-@ 1948 currency reform in Western Germany , and was sped up by the liberalisation of European economic policy that the Marshall Plan ( 1948 – 1951 ) both directly and indirectly caused . The post @-@ 1948 West German recovery has been called the German economic miracle . Italy also experienced an economic boom and the French economy rebounded . By contrast , the United Kingdom was in a state of economic ruin , and although it received a quarter of the total Marshall Plan assistance , more than any other European country , continued relative economic decline for decades . 
 The Soviet Union , despite enormous human and material losses , also experienced rapid increase in production in the immediate post @-@ war era . Japan experienced incredibly rapid economic growth , becoming one of the most powerful economies in the world by the 1980s . China returned to its pre @-@ war industrial production by 1952 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Casualties and war crimes = = = 
 Estimates for the total number of casualties in the war vary , because many deaths went unrecorded . Most suggest that some 75 million people died in the war , including about 20 million military personnel and 40 million civilians . Many of the civilians died because of deliberate genocide , massacres , mass @-@ bombings , disease , and starvation . 
 The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people during the war , including 8 @.@ 7 million military and 19 million civilian deaths . The largest portion of military dead were 5 @.@ 7 million ethnic Russians , followed by 1 @.@ 3 million ethnic Ukrainians . A quarter of the people in the Soviet Union were wounded or killed . Germany sustained 5 @.@ 3 million military losses , mostly on the Eastern Front and during the final battles in Germany . 
 Of the total number of deaths in World War II , approximately 85 percent — mostly Soviet and Chinese — were on the Allied side and 15 percent were on the Axis side . Many of these deaths were caused by war crimes committed by German and Japanese forces in occupied territories . An estimated 11 to 17 million civilians died either as a direct or as an indirect result of Nazi ideological policies , including the systematic genocide of around 6 million Jews during the Holocaust , along with a further 5 to 6 million ethnic Poles and other Slavs ( including Ukrainians and Belarusians ) — Roma , homosexuals , and other ethnic and minority groups . Hundreds of thousands ( varying estimates ) of ethnic Serbs , along with gypsies and Jews , were murdered by the Axis @-@ aligned Croatian Ustaše in Yugoslavia , and retribution @-@ related killings were committed just after the war ended . 
 In Asia and the Pacific , between 3 million and more than 10 million civilians , mostly Chinese ( estimated at 7 @.@ 5 million ) , were killed by the Japanese occupation forces . The best @-@ known Japanese atrocity was the Nanking Massacre , in which fifty to three hundred thousand Chinese civilians were raped and murdered . <unk> <unk> reported that 2 @.@ 7 million casualties occurred during the <unk> <unk> . General <unk> Okamura implemented the policy in <unk> and Shantung . 
 Axis forces employed biological and chemical weapons . The Imperial Japanese Army used a variety of such weapons during its invasion and occupation of China ( see Unit 731 ) and in early conflicts against the Soviets . Both the Germans and Japanese tested such weapons against civilians and , sometimes on prisoners of war . 
 The Soviet Union was responsible for the Katyn massacre of 22 @,@ 000 Polish officers , and the imprisonment or execution of thousands of political prisoners by the NKVD , in the Baltic states , and eastern Poland annexed by the Red Army . 
 The mass @-@ bombing of civilian areas , notably the cities of Warsaw , Rotterdam and London ; including the aerial targeting of hospitals and fleeing refugees by the German Luftwaffe , along with the bombing of Tokyo , and German cities of Dresden , Hamburg and Cologne by the Western Allies may be considered as war crimes . The latter resulted in the destruction of more than 160 cities and the death of more than 600 @,@ 000 German civilians . However , no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during World War II . 
 = = = Concentration camps , slave labour , and genocide = = = 
 The German government led by Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party was responsible for the Holocaust , the killing of approximately 6 million Jews , as well as 2 @.@ 7 million ethnic Poles , and 4 million others who were deemed " unworthy of life " ( including the disabled and mentally ill , Soviet prisoners of war , homosexuals , Freemasons , Jehovah 's Witnesses , and Romani ) as part of a programme of deliberate extermination . About 12 million , most of whom were Eastern Europeans , were employed in the German war economy as forced labourers . 
 In addition to Nazi concentration camps , the Soviet gulags ( labour camps ) led to the death of citizens of occupied countries such as Poland , Lithuania , Latvia , and Estonia , as well as German prisoners of war ( POWs ) and even Soviet citizens who had been or were thought to be supporters of the Nazis . Sixty percent of Soviet POWs of the Germans died during the war . Richard Overy gives the number of 5 @.@ 7 million Soviet POWs . Of those , 57 percent died or were killed , a total of 3 @.@ 6 million . Soviet ex @-@ POWs and repatriated civilians were treated with great suspicion as potential Nazi collaborators , and some of them were sent to the Gulag upon being checked by the NKVD . 
 Japanese prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps , many of which were used as labour camps , also had high death rates . The International Military Tribunal for the Far East found the death rate of Western prisoners was 27 @.@ 1 percent ( for American POWs , 37 percent ) , seven times that of POWs under the Germans and Italians . While 37 @,@ 583 prisoners from the UK , 28 @,@ 500 from the Netherlands , and 14 @,@ 473 from the United States were released after the surrender of Japan , the number of Chinese released was only 56 . 
 According to historian <unk> Ju , at least five million Chinese civilians from northern China and Manchukuo were enslaved between 1935 and 1941 by the East Asia Development Board , or <unk> , for work in mines and war industries . After 1942 , the number reached 10 million . The US Library of Congress estimates that in Java , between 4 and 10 million <unk> ( Japanese : " manual laborers " ) , were forced to work by the Japanese military . About 270 @,@ 000 of these Javanese labourers were sent to other Japanese @-@ held areas in South East Asia , and only 52 @,@ 000 were repatriated to Java . 
 On 19 February 1942 , Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066 , interning about 100 @,@ 000 Japanese living on the West Coast . Canada had a similar program . In addition , 14 @,@ 000 German and Italian citizens who had been assessed as being security risks were also interned . 
 In accordance with the Allied agreement made at the Yalta Conference millions of POWs and civilians were used as forced labour by the Soviet Union . In Hungary 's case , Hungarians were forced to work for the Soviet Union until 1955 . 
 = = = Occupation = = = 
 In Europe , occupation came under two forms . In Western , Northern and Central Europe ( France , Norway , Denmark , the Low Countries , and the annexed portions of Czechoslovakia ) Germany established economic policies through which it collected roughly 69 @.@ 5 billion <unk> ( 27 @.@ 8 billion US Dollars ) by the end of the war , this figure does not include the sizeable plunder of industrial products , military equipment , raw materials and other goods . Thus , the income from occupied nations was over 40 percent of the income Germany collected from taxation , a figure which increased to nearly 40 percent of total German income as the war went on . 
 In the East , the much hoped for bounties of Lebensraum were never attained as fluctuating front @-@ lines and Soviet scorched earth policies denied resources to the German invaders . Unlike in the West , the Nazi racial policy encouraged excessive brutality against what it considered to be the " inferior people " of Slavic descent ; most German advances were thus followed by mass executions . Although resistance groups formed in most occupied territories , they did not significantly hamper German operations in either the East or the West until late 1943 . 
 In Asia , Japan termed nations under its occupation as being part of the Greater East Asia Co @-@ Prosperity Sphere , essentially a Japanese hegemony which it claimed was for purposes of liberating colonised peoples . Although Japanese forces were originally welcomed as liberators from European domination in some territories , their excessive brutality turned local public opinion against them within weeks . During Japan 's initial conquest it captured 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 barrels ( 640 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil ( ~ 5 @.@ 5 × 105 tonnes ) left behind by retreating Allied forces , and by 1943 was able to get production in the Dutch East Indies up to 50 million barrels ( ~ 6 @.@ 8 × 10 ^ 6 t ) , 76 percent of its 1940 output rate . 
 = = = Home fronts and production = = = 
 In Europe , before the outbreak of the war , the Allies had significant advantages in both population and economics . In 1938 , the Western Allies ( United Kingdom , France , Poland and British Dominions ) had a 30 percent larger population and a 30 percent higher gross domestic product than the European Axis ( Germany and Italy ) ; if colonies are included , it then gives the Allies more than a 5 : 1 advantage in population and nearly 2 : 1 advantage in GDP . In Asia at the same time , China had roughly six times the population of Japan , but only an 89 percent higher GDP ; this is reduced to three times the population and only a 38 percent higher GDP if Japanese colonies are included . 
 Though the Allies ' economic and population advantages were largely mitigated during the initial rapid blitzkrieg attacks of Germany and Japan , they became the decisive factor by 1942 , after the United States and Soviet Union joined the Allies , as the war largely settled into one of attrition . While the Allies ' ability to out @-@ produce the Axis is often attributed to the Allies having more access to natural resources , other factors , such as Germany and Japan 's reluctance to employ women in the labour force , Allied strategic bombing , and Germany 's late shift to a war economy contributed significantly . Additionally , neither Germany nor Japan planned to fight a protracted war , and were not equipped to do so . To improve their production , Germany and Japan used millions of slave labourers ; Germany used about 12 million people , mostly from Eastern Europe , while Japan used more than 18 million people in Far East Asia . 
 = = = Advances in technology and warfare = = = 
 Aircraft were used for reconnaissance , as fighters , bombers , and ground @-@ support , and each role was advanced considerably . Innovation included airlift ( the capability to quickly move limited high @-@ priority supplies , equipment , and personnel ) ; and of strategic bombing ( the bombing of enemy industrial and population centres to destroy the enemy 's ability to wage war ) . Anti @-@ aircraft weaponry also advanced , including defences such as radar and surface @-@ to @-@ air artillery , such as the German 88 mm gun . The use of the jet aircraft was pioneered and , though late introduction meant it had little impact , it led to jets becoming standard in air forces worldwide . 
 Advances were made in nearly every aspect of naval warfare , most notably with aircraft carriers and submarines . Although aeronautical warfare had relatively little success at the start of the war , actions at Taranto , Pearl Harbor , and the Coral Sea established the carrier as the dominant capital ship in place of the battleship . 
 In the Atlantic , escort carriers proved to be a vital part of Allied convoys , increasing the effective protection radius and helping to close the Mid @-@ Atlantic gap . Carriers were also more economical than battleships because of the relatively low cost of aircraft and their not requiring to be as heavily armoured . Submarines , which had proved to be an effective weapon during the First World War , were anticipated by all sides to be important in the second . The British focused development on anti @-@ submarine weaponry and tactics , such as sonar and convoys , while Germany focused on improving its offensive capability , with designs such as the Type VII submarine and wolfpack tactics . Gradually , improving Allied technologies such as the Leigh light , hedgehog , squid , and homing torpedoes proved victorious . 
 Land warfare changed from the static front lines of World War I to increased mobility and combined arms . The tank , which had been used predominantly for infantry support in the First World War , had evolved into the primary weapon . In the late 1930s , tank design was considerably more advanced than it had been during World War I , and advances continued throughout the war with increases in speed , armour and firepower . 
 At the start of the war , most commanders thought enemy tanks should be met by tanks with superior specifications . This idea was challenged by the poor performance of the relatively light early tank guns against armour , and German doctrine of avoiding tank @-@ versus @-@ tank combat . This , along with Germany 's use of combined arms , were among the key elements of their highly successful blitzkrieg tactics across Poland and France . Many means of destroying tanks , including indirect artillery , anti @-@ tank guns ( both towed and self @-@ propelled ) , mines , short @-@ ranged infantry antitank weapons , and other tanks were utilised . Even with large @-@ scale mechanisation , infantry remained the backbone of all forces , and throughout the war , most infantry were equipped similarly to World War I. 
 The portable machine gun spread , a notable example being the German <unk> , and various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings . The assault rifle , a late war development incorporating many features of the rifle and submachine gun , became the standard postwar infantry weapon for most armed forces . 
 Most major belligerents attempted to solve the problems of complexity and security involved in using large codebooks for cryptography by designing <unk> machines , the most well known being the German Enigma machine . Development of SIGINT ( signals intelligence ) and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption . Notable examples were the Allied decryption of Japanese naval codes and British Ultra , a pioneering method for decoding Enigma benefiting from information given to Britain by the Polish Cipher Bureau , which had been decoding early versions of Enigma before the war . Another aspect of military intelligence was the use of deception , which the Allies used to great effect , such as in operations Mincemeat and Bodyguard . Other technological and engineering feats achieved during , or as a result of , the war include the world 's first programmable computers ( Z3 , Colossus , and ENIAC ) , guided missiles and modern rockets , the Manhattan Project 's development of nuclear weapons , operations research and the development of artificial harbours and oil pipelines under the English Channel . 
 = London Symphony Orchestra = 
 The London Symphony Orchestra ( LSO ) , founded in 1904 , is the oldest of London 's symphony orchestras . It was set up by a group of players who left Henry Wood 's Queen 's Hall Orchestra because of a new rule requiring players to give the orchestra their exclusive services . The LSO itself later introduced a similar rule for its members . From the outset the LSO was organised on co @-@ operative lines , with all players sharing the profits at the end of each season . This practice continued for the orchestra 's first four decades . 
 The LSO underwent periods of eclipse in the 1930s and 1950s when it was regarded as inferior in quality to new London orchestras , to which it lost players and bookings : the BBC Symphony Orchestra and the London Philharmonic in the 1930s and the Philharmonia and Royal Philharmonic after the Second World War . The profit @-@ sharing principle was abandoned in the post @-@ war era as a condition of receiving public subsidy for the first time . In the 1950s the orchestra debated whether to concentrate on film work at the expense of symphony concerts ; many senior players left when the majority of players rejected the idea . By the 1960s the LSO had recovered its leading position , which it has retained subsequently . In 1966 , to perform alongside it in choral works , the orchestra established the LSO Chorus , originally a mix of professional and amateur singers , later a wholly amateur ensemble . 
 As a self @-@ governing body , the orchestra selects the conductors with whom it works . At some stages in its history it has dispensed with a principal conductor and worked only with guests . Among conductors with whom it is most associated are , in its early days , Hans Richter , Sir Edward Elgar , and Sir Thomas Beecham , and in more recent decades Pierre Monteux , André Previn , Claudio Abbado , Sir Colin Davis and Valery Gergiev . 
 Since 1982 , the LSO has been based in the Barbican Centre in the City of London . Among its programmes there have been large @-@ scale festivals celebrating composers as diverse as Berlioz , Mahler and Bernstein . The LSO claims to be the world 's most recorded orchestra ; it has made gramophone recordings since 1912 and has played on more than 200 soundtrack recordings for the cinema , of which the best known include the Star Wars series . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 At the turn of the twentieth century there were no permanent salaried orchestras in London . The main orchestras were those of Covent Garden , the Philharmonic Society and the Queen 's Hall ; their proprietors engaged players individually for each concert or for a season . As there were competing demands for the services of the finest players it was an accepted practice that , even though under contract to play for a concert , a player was at liberty to accept a better @-@ paid engagement if it were offered . He would then engage another player to deputise at him for the original concert and the rehearsals for it . The treasurer of the Philharmonic Society described the system thus : " A , whom you want , signs to play at your concert . He sends B ( whom you don 't mind ) to the first rehearsal . B , without your knowledge or consent , sends C to the second rehearsal . Not being able to play at the concert , C sends D , whom you would have paid five shillings to stay away . " There was much competition for good orchestral players , with well @-@ paid engagements offered by more than fifty music halls , by pit bands in West End musical comedies , and by grand hotels and restaurants which maintained orchestras . 
 In 1904 , the manager of the Queen 's Hall , Robert Newman and the conductor of his promenade concerts , Henry Wood , agreed that they could no longer tolerate the deputy system . After a rehearsal in which Wood was faced with dozens of unfamiliar faces in his own orchestra , Newman came to the platform and announced : " Gentlemen , in future there will be no deputies ! Good morning ! " This caused a furore . Orchestral musicians were not highly paid , and removing their chances of better @-@ paid engagements permitted by the deputy system was a serious financial blow to many of them . While travelling by train to play under Wood at a music festival in the north of England in May 1904 , soon after Newman 's announcement , some of his leading players discussed the situation and agreed to try to form their own orchestra . The principal movers were three horn players ( Adolf Borsdorf , Thomas Busby , and Henri van der <unk> ) and a trumpeter , John Solomon . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 Busby organised a meeting at St. Andrew 's Hall , not far from the Queen 's Hall . Invitations were sent to present and former members of the Queen 's Hall Orchestra . About a hundred players attended . Busby explained the scheme : a new ensemble , the London Symphony Orchestra , to be run on co @-@ operative lines , " something akin to a Musical Republic " , with a constitution that gave the organisation independence . At concerts promoted by the LSO the members played without fee , their remuneration coming at the end of each season in a division of the orchestra 's profits . This worked well in good years , but any poorly @-@ patronised series left members out of pocket , and reliant on the LSO 's engagements to play for provincial choral societies and other managements . The proposal was approved unanimously , and a management committee was elected , comprising the four original movers and Alfred Hobday ( viola ) and E F ( Fred ) James ( bassoon ) . Busby was appointed chief executive , a post variously titled " Secretary " , " Managing Director " , " General Secretary " and " General Manager " over the years . 
 Borsdorf was a player of international reputation , and through his influence the orchestra secured Hans Richter to conduct its first concert . Newman held no grudge against the rebels , and made the Queen 's Hall available to them . He and Wood attended the LSO 's first concert , on 9 June 1904 . The programme consisted of the prelude to Die Meistersinger , music by Bach , Mozart , Elgar and Liszt , and finally Beethoven 's Fifth Symphony . In a favourable review in The Times , J A Fuller Maitland noted that 49 members of the new orchestra were rebels against Newman 's no @-@ deputy rule , 32 had left the Queen 's Hall Orchestra earlier , and the other 21 had no connexion with Wood and Newman . 
 In a profile of the orchestra in 1911 , The Musical Times commented : 
 Thus encouraged , the committee ventured to arrange for a series of symphony concerts at Queen 's Hall . They had no regular conductor , and to this day they have pursued this policy of freedom . Dr. ( now Sir ) Frederic Cowen conducted the first concert of the series on October 27 , 1904 , and the others were conducted by Herr Arthur Nikisch , Mr. Fritz Steinbach , Sir Charles Stanford , M. Edouard Colonne , Sir Edward Elgar , and Mr. Georg Henschel . At every one of these concerts brilliant performances were given , and the reputation of the organization as one of the finest of its kind in the world was made . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The orchestra made its first British tour in 1905 , conducted by Sir Edward Elgar . Elgar 's conducting was highly praised ; as to the orchestra , Ernest Newman wrote in The Manchester Guardian , " Its brass and its wood @-@ wind were seen to be of exceptional quality , but the strings , fine as they are , have not the substance nor the colour of the Hallé strings . " The following year the LSO played outside Britain for the first time , giving concerts in Paris , conducted by Edouard Colonne , Sir Charles Stanford and André Messager . Richard Morrison , in his centenary study of the LSO , writes of " stodgy programmes of insipid Cowen , worthy Stanford , dull Parry and mediocre Mackenzie " ; they put the Parisian public off to a considerable degree , and the players ended up out of pocket . 
 In its early years , Richter was the LSO 's most frequently @-@ engaged conductor , with four or five concerts every season ; the orchestra 's website and Morrison 's 2004 book both count him as the orchestra 's first chief conductor , though the 1911 Musical Times article indicates otherwise . Richter retired from conducting in 1911 , and Elgar was elected conductor @-@ in @-@ chief for the 1911 – 12 season . Elgar conducted six concerts , Arthur Nikisch three , and Willem Mengelberg , Fritz Steinbach and Gustave Doret one each . As a conductor Elgar did not prove to be a big enough box @-@ office draw , and after one season he was replaced by the charismatic Hungarian maestro Nikisch . 
 Nikisch was invited to tour North America in 1912 , and despite his long association with the Berlin Philharmonic and Leipzig Gewandhaus orchestras , he insisted that the LSO should be contracted for the tour . The orchestra , 100 @-@ strong ( all men except for the harpist ) , was booked to sail on the Titanic , but the tour schedule was changed at the last minute , and the players sailed safely on the Baltic . The tour was arduous , but a triumph . The New York Press said , " The great British band played with a vigor , force and temperamental impetuousness that almost lifted the listener out of his seat . " The New York Times praised all departments of the orchestra , though , like The Manchester Guardian , it found the strings " brilliant rather than mellow " . The paper had a little fun at the LSO 's expense : from the viewpoint of a country that had long enjoyed permanent , salaried orchestras such as the Boston Symphony , it gently mocked the LSO 's " bold stand for the sacred right of sending substitutes " 
 = = = First World War and 1920s = = = 
 Shortly after the beginning of the war the board of the orchestra received a petition from rank and file players protesting about Borsdorf 's continued membership of the LSO . Although he had done as much as anyone to found the orchestra , had lived in Britain for 30 years and was married to an Englishwoman , Borsdorf was regarded by some colleagues as an enemy alien and was forced out of the orchestra . 
 During the war the musical life of Britain was drastically curtailed . The LSO was helped to survive by large donations from Sir Thomas Beecham , who also subsidised the Hallé and the Royal Philharmonic Society . For a year he took the role , though not the title , of chief conductor of the LSO . In 1916 his millionaire father died and Beecham 's financial affairs became too complicated for any further musical philanthropy on his part . In 1917 the LSO 's directors agreed unanimously that they would promote no more concerts until the end of the war . The orchestra played for other managements , and managed to survive , although the hitherto remunerative work for regional choral societies dwindled to almost nothing . 
 When peace resumed , many of the former players were unavailable . A third of the orchestra 's pre @-@ war members were in the armed forces , and rebuilding was urgently needed . The orchestra was willing to allow the ambitious conductor Albert Coates to put himself forward as chief conductor . Coates had three attractions for the orchestra : he was a pupil of Nikisch , he had rich and influential contacts , and he was willing to conduct without fee . He and the orchestra got off to a disastrous start . Their first concert featured the premiere of Elgar 's Cello Concerto . Apart from the concerto , which the composer conducted , the rest of the programme was conducted by Coates , who overran his rehearsal time at the expense of Elgar 's . Lady Elgar wrote , " that brutal selfish ill @-@ mannered bounder ... that brute Coates went on rehearsing . " In The Observer Newman wrote , " There have been rumours about during the week of inadequate rehearsal . Whatever the explanation , the sad fact remains that never , in all probability , has so great an orchestra made so lamentable an exhibition of itself . " Coates remained as chief conductor for two seasons , and after the initial debacle is credited by Morrison with " breathing life and energy into the orchestra " . 
 After Coates left , the orchestra reverted to its preferred practice of engaging numerous guest conductors rather than a single principal conductor . Among the guests were Elgar , Beecham , Otto Klemperer , Bruno Walter , Wilhelm Furtwängler and Serge Koussevitzky ; soloists in the 1920s included Sergei Rachmaninoff , Artur Schnabel and the young Yehudi Menuhin . Revenues were substantial , and the orchestra seemed to many to be entering into a golden age . In fact , for lack of any serious competition in the 1920s , the LSO allowed its standards of playing to slip . In 1927 the Berlin Philharmonic , under Furtwängler , gave two concerts at the Queen 's Hall . These , and later concerts by the same orchestra in 1928 and 1929 , made obvious the poor standards then prevailing in London . Both the BBC and Beecham had ambitions to bring London 's orchestral standards up to those of Berlin . After an early attempt at co @-@ operation between the BBC and Beecham , they went their separate ways . In 1929 the BBC began recruiting for the new BBC Symphony Orchestra under Adrian Boult . The prospect of joining a permanent , salaried orchestra was attractive enough to induce some LSO players to defect . The new orchestra immediately received enthusiastic reviews that contrasted starkly with the severe press criticisms of the LSO 's playing . According to the critic W J Turner the LSO 's problem was not that its playing had deteriorated , but that it had failed to keep up with the considerable improvements in playing achieved over the past two decades by the best European and American orchestras . 
 = = = 1930s = = = 
 In 1931 , Beecham was approached by the rising young conductor Malcolm Sargent with a proposal to set up a permanent , salaried orchestra with a subsidy guaranteed by Sargent 's patrons , the Courtauld family . Originally Sargent and Beecham had in mind a reorganised version of the LSO , but the orchestra balked at weeding out and replacing underperforming players . In 1932 Beecham lost patience and agreed with Sargent to set up a new orchestra from scratch . The London Philharmonic Orchestra ( LPO ) , as it was named , consisted of 106 players including a few young musicians straight from music college , many established players from provincial orchestras , and 17 of the LSO 's leading members . 
 To try to raise its own standards , the LSO had engaged Mengelberg , a famous orchestral trainer , known as a perfectionist . He made it a precondition that the deputy system must be abandoned , which occurred in 1929 . He conducted the orchestra for the 1930 season , and music critics commented on the improvement in the playing . Nonetheless , as patently the third @-@ best orchestra in London , the LSO lost work it had long been used to , including the Covent Garden seasons , the Royal Philharmonic Society concerts and the Courtauld @-@ Sargent concerts . The orchestra persuaded Sir Hamilton Harty , the popular conductor of the Hallé Orchestra , to move from Manchester to become the LSO 's principal conductor . Harty brought with him eight of the Hallé 's leading players to replenish the LSO 's ranks , depleted by defections to the BBC and Beecham . Critics including Neville Cardus recognised the continued improvement in the LSO 's playing : " On this evening 's hearing the London Symphony Orchestra is likely , after all , to give its two rivals a gallant run . Under Sir Hamilton it will certainly take on a style of sincere expression , distinguished from the virtuoso brilliance cultivated by the B.B.C. Orchestra and the London Philharmonic Orchestra under Beecham . " Among the milestones on the orchestra 's path to recovery were the premieres of Walton 's Belshazzar 's Feast ( 1930 ) and First Symphony ( 1934 ) , showing the orchestra " capable of rising to the challenge of the most demanding contemporary scores " ( Morrison ) . 
 The foundation of the Glyndebourne Festival in 1934 was another good thing for the LSO , as its players made up nearly the entirety of the festival orchestra . An important additional source of income for the orchestra was the film industry . In March 1935 the LSO recorded Arthur Bliss 's incidental music for Alexander Korda 's film Things to Come . According to the LSO 's website the recording took 14 full orchestral sessions and " started a veritable revolution in film production history . ... For the first time , music for the cinema , previously regarded as a lowly art form , captured the attention of classical music scholars and enthusiasts , music critics and the film and music public . The LSO had begun its long historic journey as the premier film orchestra . " 
 In London Harty did not prove to be a box @-@ office draw , and according to Morrison , he was " brutally and <unk> " dropped in 1934 , as his LSO predecessor Elgar had been in 1912 . After this the orchestra did not appoint a chief conductor for nearly 20 years . By 1939 the orchestra 's board was planning an ambitious programme for 1940 , with guests including Bruno Walter , Leopold Stokowski , Erich Kleiber and George Szell . 
 = = = 1940s and 50s = = = 
 When the Second World War broke out the orchestra 's plans had to be almost completely changed . During the First World War the public 's appetite for concert @-@ going diminished drastically , but from the start of the Second it was clear that there was a huge demand for live music . The LSO arranged a series of concerts conducted by Wood , with whom the orchestra was completely reconciled . When the BBC evacuated its orchestra from London and abandoned the Proms , the LSO took over for Wood . The Carnegie Trust , with the support of the British government , contracted the LSO to tour Britain , taking live music to towns where symphony concerts were hitherto unknown . 
 The orchestra 's loss of manpower was far worse in the Second World War than in the First . Between 1914 and 1918 there were 33 members of the LSO away on active service ; between 1939 and 1945 there were more than 60 , of whom seven were killed . The orchestra found replacements wherever it could , including the bands of army regiments based in London , whose brass and woodwind players were unofficially recruited . 
 During the war it had become clear that private patronage was no longer a practical means of sustaining Britain 's musical life ; a state body , the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts – the forerunner of the Arts Council – was established , and given a modest budget for public subsidy . The council made it a condition of sponsoring the LSO that the profit @-@ sharing principle should be abandoned and the players made salaried employees . This renunciation of the principles for which the LSO had been founded was rejected by the players , and the offered subsidy was declined . 
 At the end of the war the LSO had to face new competition . The BBC SO and the LPO had survived the war intact , the latter , abandoned by Beecham , as a self @-@ governing body . All three were quickly overshadowed by two new orchestras : Walter Legge 's Philharmonia and Beecham 's Royal Philharmonic ( RPO ) . To survive , the LSO played in hundreds of concerts of popular classics under undistinguished conductors . By 1948 the orchestra was anxious to resume promoting its own concert series . The players decided to accept the Arts Council 's conditions for subsidy , and changed the LSO 's constitution to replace profit @-@ sharing with salaries . With a view to raising its playing standards it engaged Josef Krips as conductor . His commitments in Vienna preventing him from becoming the LSO 's chief conductor until 1950 , but from his first concert with the orchestra in December 1948 he influenced the playing for the better . His chosen repertoire was good for the box office : cycles of Beethoven symphonies and concertos ( the latter featuring Wilhelm Kempff in one season and Claudio Arrau in another ) helped restore the orchestra 's finances as well as its musical standards . With Krips and others the orchestra recorded extensively for the Decca Record Company during the early 1950s . The orchestra 's workload in these years was second only to the other self @-@ governing London orchestra , the LPO : the LPO played 248 concerts in the 1949 – 50 season ; the LSO 103 ; the BBC SO 55 ; the Philharmonia and RPO 32 each . When the Royal Festival Hall opened in 1951 the LSO and LPO engaged in a mutually bruising campaign for sole residency there . Neither was successful , and the Festival Hall became the main London venue for both orchestras and for the RPO and Philharmonia . 
 Krips left the LSO in 1954 , and the following year tensions between the orchestral principals and the rank @-@ and @-@ file players erupted into an irreconcilable dispute . The principals argued that the future of the LSO lay in profitable session work for film companies , rather than in the overcrowded field of London concerts . They also wished to be free to accept such engagements individually , <unk> themselves from concerts if there were a clash of dates . The LSO 's board , which reflected the majority opinion of the players , refused to accommodate the principals , most of whom resigned en masse , to form the Sinfonia of London , a session ensemble that flourished from the mid @-@ 1950s to the early 1960s , and then faded away . For fifteen years after the split the LSO did little film work , recording only six soundtracks between 1956 and 1971 , compared with more than 70 films between 1940 and 1955 . 
 To replace the departing principals the LSO recruited rising young players including Hugh Maguire , Neville Marriner and Simon Streatfeild in the string sections , Gervase de Peyer and William Waterhouse in the woodwinds , and Barry <unk> and Denis Wick in the brass . With the new intake the orchestra rapidly advanced in standards and status . The average age of the LSO players dropped to about 30 . In 1956 the orchestra visited South Africa to play at the Johannesburg Festival . The players were impressed by the dynamic director of the festival , Ernest Fleischmann , and engaged him as general secretary of the orchestra when the post fell vacant in 1959 . He was the LSO 's first professional manager ; all his predecessors as secretary / managing director had been orchestral players combining the duties with their orchestral playing . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 To raise the profile and prestige of the orchestra , <unk> strove to attract top soloists and conductors to work with the LSO . After Krips 's resignation the orchestra had worked with a few leading conductors , including Klemperer , Stokowski , Jascha <unk> and Pierre Monteux , but also with many less eminent ones . Fleischmann later said , " It wasn 't difficult to change the list of conductors that the orchestra worked with , because one couldn 't do much worse , really " . A rising conductor of a younger generation , Georg Solti , began working with the LSO ; Fleischmann persuaded the management of the Vienna Festival to engage the LSO with Solti , Stokowski and Monteux for the 1961 Festwochen . 
 While in Vienna , Fleischmann persuaded Monteux to accept the chief conductorship of the orchestra . Though 86 years old , Monteux asked for , and received , a 25 @-@ year contract with a 25 @-@ year option of renewal . He lived for another three years , working with the LSO to within weeks of his death . Members of the LSO believed that in those few years he had transformed the orchestra ; Neville Marriner said that Monteux " made them feel like an international orchestra ... He gave them extended horizons and some of his achievements with the orchestra , both at home and abroad , gave them quite a different constitution . " Announcing Monteux 's appointment , Fleischmann added that the LSO would also work frequently with Antal Doráti and the young Colin Davis . 
 Together with <unk> , chairman of the orchestra , Fleischmann worked to create the LSO Trust , a fund to finance tours and provide sick and holiday pay for LSO players , thus ending , as Morrison says , " nearly sixty years of ' no play , no pay ' ... this was a revolution . " They also pioneered formal sponsorship by commercial firms : the orchestra 's " Peter Stuyvesant " concerts , underwritten by the tobacco company of that name , were given in London , Guildford , Bournemouth , Manchester and Swansea . The company also sponsored LSO commissions of new works by British composers . 
 In 1964 the LSO undertook its first world tour , taking in Israel , Turkey , Iran , India , Hong Kong , Korea , Japan and the United States . The following year István Kertész was appointed principal conductor . Negotiations with the Corporation of the City of London with a view to establishing the LSO as the resident orchestra of the planned Barbican Centre began in the same year . In 1966 Leonard Bernstein conducted the LSO for the first time , in Mahler 's Symphony of a Thousand at the Royal Albert Hall . This was another coup for Fleischmann , who had to overcome Bernstein 's scorn for the inadequate rehearsal facilities endured by London orchestras . Bernstein remained associated with the LSO for the rest of his life , and was its president from 1987 to 1990 . 
 Mindful of the enormous success of the Philharmonia Chorus , founded in 1957 by Legge to work with his Philharmonia Orchestra , the LSO decided to establish its own chorus . The LSO Chorus ( later called the London Symphony Chorus ) was formed in 1966 under John Alldis as chorus master . Its early years were difficult ; Kertész did not get on with Alldis , and there were difficulties within the chorus . Most of its members were amateurs , but at first they were reinforced by a small number of professionals . This led to disputes over the balance between amateurs and professionals . There was a brief crisis , after which the professional element was removed , and the LSO chorus became , and remains , an outstanding amateur chorus . 
 By 1967 many in the LSO felt that Fleischmann was seeking to exert too much influence on the affairs of the orchestra , and he resigned . Kertész , too , was dispensed with when he sought control of all artistic matters ; his contract was not renewed when it expired in 1968 . His successor as principal conductor was André Previn , who held the post for 11 years – at 2013 the longest tenure of the post to date . 
 By the Previn era the LSO was being described as the finest of the London orchestras . A reviewer of an Elgar recording by one of the other orchestras remarked , " these symphonies really deserve the LSO at its peak . " The implication that the LSO was not always at its peak was illustrated when Sir Adrian Boult , who was recording Elgar and Vaughan Williams with the LSO , refused to continue when he discovered that five leading principals had absented themselves . EMI took Boult 's side , and the orchestra apologised . 
 = = = 1970s and 80s = = = 
 In 1971 John Culshaw of BBC television commissioned " André Previn 's Music Night " , bringing classical music to a large new audience . Previn would talk informally direct to camera and then turn and conduct the LSO , whose members were dressed in casual sweaters or shirts rather than formal evening clothes . The programme attracted unprecedented viewing figures for classical music ; Morrison writes , " More British people heard the LSO play in Music Night in one week than in sixty @-@ five years of LSO concerts . " Several series of the programme were screened between 1971 and 1977 . Previn 's popularity with the public enabled him and the LSO to programme works that under other conductors could have been box @-@ office disasters , such as Messiaen 's <unk> Symphony . In the early 1970s the LSO recorded two firsts for a British orchestra , appearing at the Salzburg Festival , conducted by Previn , Seiji Ozawa and Karl Böhm , in 1973 , and playing at the Hollywood Bowl the following year . 
 The lack of good rehearsal facilities to which Bernstein had objected was addressed in the 1970s when , jointly with the LPO , the LSO acquired and restored a disused church in Southwark , converting it into the Henry Wood Hall , a convenient and acoustically excellent rehearsal space and recording studio , opened in 1975 . 
 In 1978 two aspects of the LSO 's non @-@ symphonic work were recognised . The orchestra shared in three Grammy awards for the score to Star Wars ; and the LSO " Classic Rock " recordings , in the words of the orchestra 's website , became hugely popular and provided handsome royalties . The recordings led to " Classic Rock " tours by the orchestra , characterised by Morrison as " enormously lucrative but artistically demeaning . " 
 Claudio Abbado , principal guest conductor since 1971 , succeeded Previn as chief conductor in the orchestra 's diamond jubilee year , 1979 . In a 1988 study of the LSO in Gramophone magazine James Jolly wrote that Abbado was in many ways the antithesis of Previn in terms of style and repertoire , bringing to the orchestra a particular authority in the Austro @-@ German classics as well as a commitment to the avant @-@ garde . From the orchestra 's point of view there were disadvantages to his appointment . His relationship with the players was distant and he was unable to impose discipline on the orchestra in rehearsals . He insisted on conducting without a score , and many times this led to barely @-@ avoided disaster in concerts . Abbado had considerable international prestige , but this too had its downside for the LSO : he frequently made his major recordings with the Boston or Chicago Symphony Orchestras or the Vienna Philharmonic . One of the LSO 's principals commented , " Although we were sweating our guts playing those vast Mahler symphonies for ... Abbado , he would go and record them with other orchestras , which made us feel like second , maybe even third choice " . 
 In 1982 the LSO took up residence at the Barbican . In the first years of the residency the orchestra came close to financial disaster , primarily because of over @-@ ambitious programming and the poor ticket sales that resulted . The Times commented that the LSO " were tempted by their own need for challenge ( and a siren chorus of critics ) to begin a series of more modern and adventurous music : six nights a week of Tippett , Berlioz , Webern , Stockhausen designed to draw in a new public . Instead it put an old audience to flight . " The LSO 's difficulties were compounded by the satirical magazine Private Eye , which ran a series of defamatory articles about the orchestra . The articles were almost wholly untrue and the magazine was forced to pay substantial libel damages , but in the short term serious damage was done to the orchestra 's reputation and morale . 
 In August 1984 the orchestra 's managing director , Peter Hemmings , resigned . For the first time since 1949 the orchestra appointed one of its players to the position . Clive <unk> , a cellist , took over at a bad time in the LSO 's fortunes , and played a central role in turning them round . He negotiated what Morrison calls " a dazzling series of mega @-@ projects , each built around the personal enthusiasm of a ' star ' conductor or soloist " , producing sell @-@ out houses . In 1985 the orchestra mounted " Mahler , Vienna and the Twentieth Century " , planned by Abbado , followed the next year by an equally successful Bernstein festival . 
 During 1988 the orchestra adopted an education policy which included the establishment of " LSO Discovery " , offering " people of all ages , from babies through music students to adults , an opportunity to get involved in music @-@ making " . The programme was still in place in 2012 , benefiting more than 60 @,@ 000 people every year . In September 1988 Michael Tilson Thomas succeeded Abbado as chief conductor . 
 In 1989 the Royal Philharmonic Society established its Orchestra Award for " excellence in playing and playing standards " ; the LSO was the first winner . 
 = = = 1990s to 2010s = = = 
 The LSO visited Japan in 1990 with Bernstein and Tilson Thomas . The conductors and players took part in the inaugural Pacific Music Festival in Sapporo , teaching and giving masterclasses for 123 young musicians from 18 countries . Colin Matthews was appointed as the orchestra 's associate composer in 1991 , and the following year Richard <unk> became LSO Discovery 's first music <unk> . Gillison secured increased funding from the Arts Council , the City of London Corporation and commercial sponsors , enabling the orchestra to set up a system of joint principals , attracting top musicians who could play in the LSO without having to give up their solo or chamber careers . 
 In 1993 the LSO again featured in a British television series , playing in Concerto ! with Tilson Thomas and Dudley Moore . Among those appearing were Alicia de Larrocha , James Galway , Steven Isserlis , Barry Douglas , Richard Stoltzman and Kyoko <unk> . The series received an Emmy Award . In 1994 the orchestra and the Royal Shakespeare Company ( RSC ) , resident at the Barbican Theatre , came under threat from a new managing director of the Barbican Centre , Baroness O <unk> , an economist with no cultural background . O <unk> , described by Morrison as " a Thatcherite free marketeer " , dismissed the LSO and RSC as " arty @-@ <unk> types " , and opposed public subsidy . Such was the press and public reaction that she was obliged to seek a vote of confidence from the LSO and RSC ; failing to gain it , she resigned , and was succeeded by John <unk> , whom Morrison calls " steeped in culture . " The danger that the concert hall would become a conference centre was averted . 
 In 1995 Sir Colin Davis was appointed chief conductor . He had first conducted the LSO in 1959 , and had been widely expected to succeed Monteux as principal conductor in 1964 . Among the most conspicuous of Davis 's projects with the orchestra was the LSO 's most ambitious festival thus far , the " Berlioz Odyssey " , in which all Berlioz 's major works were given . The festival continued into 2000 . Many of the performances , including Les Troyens , were recorded for the orchestra 's new CD label , LSO Live , launched in 2000 . Les Troyens won two Grammy awards . 
 In 2003 , with backing from the banking firm UBS , the orchestra opened LSO St Luke 's , its music education centre , in a former church near the Barbican . The following year the orchestra celebrated its centenary , with a gala concert attended by the LSO 's Patron , the Queen . After serving as managing director for 21 years , Clive <unk> left to become chief executive of Carnegie Hall , New York . His successor was Kathryn McDowell . 
 During the second half of the decade major changes were made to the conductorship of the orchestra . In 2006 Daniel Harding joined Michael Tilson Thomas as principal guest , and the following year Davis retired as chief conductor and was appointed president of the orchestra , its first since the death of Bernstein in 1990 . Davis was succeeded as chief conductor by Valery Gergiev . In Gergiev 's first season in charge , a complete cycle of Mahler Symphonies was given , with the Barbican Hall sold out for every concert . In 2009 Davis and the LSO celebrated 50 years of working together . In the same year the LSO took over from the Berlin Philharmonic as the resident orchestra at the Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence Festival , adding to a roster of international residences at venues including the Lincoln Center in New York , the Salle Pleyel in Paris and the Daytona Beach International Festival in Florida . In 2010 the LSO visited Poland and Abu Dhabi for the first time , and made its first return to India since the 1964 world tour . The orchestra played at the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony , conducted by Sir Simon Rattle . 
 It was announced in March 2015 that Gergiev would leave the principal conductorship at the end of the year , to be succeeded by Sir Simon Rattle from September 2017 , with an initial contract of five years . In February , 2016 , the orchestra further announced that beginning with the 2016 @-@ 17 season <unk> <unk> will be titled " Principal Guest Conductor " ( joining the orchestra 's other Principal Guest Conductor , Daniel Harding , who has held that post since 2006 ) , and that Michael Tilson Thomas will be titled " Conductor Laureate " and Andre Previn will be titled " Conductor Emeritus . " 
 = = Reputation = = 
 In a 1988 Gramophone article James Jolly said of the LSO : 
 Some would claim ... that it is the most American of our orchestras , thinking no doubt of the Previn legacy , Bernstein 's Presidency and Tilson Thomas 's appointment . Others , looking back further to Pierre Monteux 's reign , think it our most French orchestra , a quality nurtured by Previn and latterly Claudio Abbado . But what of their <unk> of the Slavonic repertoire under Istvan Kertész , or of Mahler , whose idiom has been finely honed by Abbado ? No , the LSO remains enigmatic , unpredictable and supremely individual . Of all the London orchestras the LSO seems to have more " personalities " , more " individuals " and has given the solo world more than its fair share of " star " performers . As an orchestra the LSO has never been prepared to submit to one principal conductor for long ( one thinks of Karajan in Berlin , Haitink in Amsterdam or Mravinsky in Leningrad ) but one of its greatest strengths remains its ability to attract fine conductors and dedicate itself wholeheartedly to creating a genuine performance . 
 For many years the LSO had a reputation as an almost exclusively male ensemble ( women harpists excepted ) . Morrison describes the LSO of the 1960s and 1970s as " a rambunctious boys ' club that <unk> round the globe . " Before the 1970s one of the few women to play in the orchestra was the oboist Evelyn Rothwell , who joined in the 1930s and found herself regarded as an outsider by her male colleagues . She was not admitted to full membership of the orchestra : the first woman to be elected as a member of the LSO was Renata <unk> @-@ Stein in 1975 . By that time other British orchestras had left the LSO far behind in this regard . 
 By the time of its centenary about 20 per cent of the LSO 's members were women . Some musicians , including Davis , judged that this improved the orchestra 's playing as well as its behaviour . Others , including Previn and the veteran principal trumpet Maurice Murphy , felt that although the technical standard of playing had improved , the diminution of the orchestra 's machismo was a matter for regret . Comparing the LSO of 2004 with the orchestra of the 1960s and 1970s , Murphy said , " Now the strings have improved so much , the playing is fantastic , but it has lost something of its gung @-@ ho quality . " The orchestra of the 1960s had a reputation for tormenting conductors it disliked ; even such notorious <unk> as George Szell were given a hard time . By the 21st century the orchestra had long abandoned such aggression ; civilities were maintained even with conductors whom the orchestra took against : they were simply never re @-@ engaged . 
 = = Recordings and films = = 
 = = = Audio recordings = = = 
 The LSO has made recordings since the early days of recording , beginning with acoustic versions under Nikisch of Beethoven 's Egmont Overture , Weber 's Oberon Overture , and Liszt 's Hungarian Rhapsody in F minor , followed soon after by the overtures to Der Freischütz and The Marriage of Figaro . HMV 's Fred Gaisberg , who supervised the sessions , wrote of " virtuoso playing which was unique at that time " . Since then , according to the orchestra 's website , the LSO has made more recordings than any other orchestra , a claim endorsed by Gramophone magazine . In 1920 the LSO signed a three @-@ year contract with the Columbia Graphophone Company and what Jolly calls " a magnificent series of recordings " followed . Under Felix Weingartner the orchestra recorded Mozart ( Symphony No 39 ) , Beethoven ( the Fifth , Seventh and Eighth Symphonies ) and Brahms 's First . Other recordings from this period included the premiere recording of Holst 's The Planets , conducted by the composer , and Richard Strauss 's Don Juan , Ein Heldenleben and Tod und <unk> , likewise conducted by their composer . 
 When Elgar recorded his major works for HMV in the late 1920s and early 1930s , the LSO was chosen for most of the recordings . The LSO 's pre @-@ war recordings for Decca include Hamilton Harty 's version of Walton 's First Symphony , of which Gramophone magazine said , " There are one or two moments where the LSO are audibly hanging on by the skin of their teeth , but these moments simply add to the ferocious impact of the music " . 
 In the 1950s and early 1960s EMI generally made its British recordings with the Royal Philharmonic and Philharmonia orchestras ; the LSO 's recordings were chiefly for Decca , including a Sibelius symphony cycle with Anthony Collins , French music under Monteux , early recordings by Solti , and a series of Britten 's major works , conducted by the composer . Of the later 1960s Jolly writes , " Istvan Kertész 's three @-@ year Principal <unk> has left a treasure trove of memorable and extraordinarily resilient recordings – the Dvořák symphonies are still competitive ... and his classic disc of Bartók 's Duke Bluebeard 's Castle admirably demonstrates what a superb ensemble the LSO were under his baton . " 
 Since 2000 , the LSO has published commercial CD recordings on its own label , LSO Live . Recordings are made live at the Barbican hall over several dates and are edited in post @-@ production . Initially available on CD they have since been issued on Super Audio CD and also as downloads . LSO Live has published more than 70 recordings featuring conductors including Gergiev , Davis and Bernard Haitink . Gergiev 's version of Prokofiev 's Romeo and Juliet was BBC Music Magazine 's Disc of the Year in 2011 , and Davis 's discs of Berlioz 's Symphonie Fantastique and Les Troyens and Dvořák 's Eighth Symphony were BBC Radio 3 's top recommendations in comparative reviews of all available versions . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Even in the era of silent films the LSO was associated with the cinema . During the 1920s the orchestra played scores arranged and conducted by Eugene Goossens to accompany screenings of The Three Musketeers ( 1922 ) , The <unk> ( 1924 ) , The Constant Nymph ( 1927 ) and The Life of Beethoven ( 1929 ) . 
 Since 1935 the LSO has recorded the musical scores of more than 200 films . The orchestra owed its engagement for its first soundtrack sessions to Muir Mathieson , musical director of Korda Studios . On the LSO 's website , the film specialist Robert Rider calls Mathieson " the most important single figure in the early history of British film music , who enlisted Bliss to write a score for Things to Come , and who was subsequently responsible for bringing the most eminent British 20th @-@ century composers to work for cinema . " Mathieson described the LSO as " the perfect film orchestra " . Among the composers commissioned by Mathieson for LSO soundtracks were Vaughan Williams , Walton , Britten and Malcolm Arnold and lighter composers including Eric Coates and Noël Coward . 
 As a pinnacle of Mathieson 's collaboration with the LSO , Rider cites the 1946 film Instruments of the Orchestra , a film record of the LSO at work . Sargent conducted the orchestra in a performance of Britten 's The Young Person 's Guide to the Orchestra , composed for the film . Rider adds , " Mathieson 's documentary , with its close @-@ ups of the musicians and their instruments , beautifully captures the vibrancy and texture of the Orchestra amidst the optimism of the post @-@ Second World War era . " 
 Another milestone in the LSO 's history in film music was in 1977 with the recording of John Williams 's score for the first of the Star Wars films . Rider comments that this film and its sequels " attracted a new group of admirers and consolidated the period of film music activity for the Orchestra , which continues unabated to this day " . The LSO also recorded other Williams film scores , including Superman ( 1978 ) and Raiders of the Lost Ark ( 1981 ) . 
 = Boyfriend ( Justin Bieber song ) = 
 " Boyfriend " is a song by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber , taken from his third studio album Believe ( 2012 ) . Bieber explained that the track would surprise people in different ways , since it is a musical departure from his previous material . A snippet of " Boyfriend " was previewed on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on March 1 , 2012 , Bieber 's 18th birthday . The song was announced as a single on the same day , and was released on March 26 , 2012 . The cover art was revealed on March 19 , 2012 . 
 Musically , " Boyfriend " is a R & B influenced song that features pop beats reminiscent of American record producer Pharrell Williams and boy band ' N Sync . The instrumentation is kept in a lower sound to highlight Bieber 's vocals . However , critics dismissed the lyrics as immature and silly . " Boyfriend " was a commercial success , debuting at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 after selling a total of 521 @,@ 000 digital units of the single . The song is the fifth @-@ highest @-@ ever debut digital sales week in the United States and has also charted at number 9 on the Pop Songs component chart . It also debuted at number one in Canada and number two in the United Kingdom . 
 Island Records initially commissioned a music video to be directed by Colin Tilley ; however , the video was later scrapped and re @-@ shot with Director X. Released on May 3 , 2012 , the video broke the VEVO record for having the most views in a 24 @-@ hour period with 8 @.@ 00 million , later bested by One Direction 's " Live While We 're Young " ( 8 @.@ 24 million ) . As part of promotion for the song , Bieber performed " Boyfriend " in a number of live appearances , including at the second season finale of The Voice , and at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards . The rapping duo Ying Yang Twins also released a remixed version of the track with new verses added . Another remix of " Boyfriend " features 2 Chainz , Mac Miller and Asher Roth . 
 = = Background and artwork = = 
 In late 2011 , Bieber confirmed to radio network Capital FM that he was recording material for his third studio album , which was originally going to be released in early 2012 . He later spoke to MTV News and revealed that Believe would surprise people in different ways , since it musically is a departure from his previous works . " Boyfriend " was written by Bieber , Michael Posner , Mason D. Levy and Mat <unk> . During an interview with radio DJ Bootleg Kev , Posner revealed that he was impressed with Bieber 's work ethic , and further commented , " he 's super talented . At first I didn 't know what to expect because he 's super young , but dude can write . " Posner said that people would " flip " over the beat and that radio stations would want to play the song . Levy also commented on the track , and described it as " definitely edgier , it 's more grown @-@ up , it 's more developed and it 's sexier . " Prior to the song 's release , it had been previewed by several industry insiders , including radio host Mick Lee of <unk> , who said that the song was " so much different than his previous music . 
 On March 1 , 2012 , Bieber was featured as a guest on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , where he announced that the song would be officially released on March 26 . He said , " My big announcement is that on March 26 , my first single is coming out and it 's called ' Boyfriend . ' The song , it 's basically I 'm talking to this girl , [ saying ] if I was your boyfriend , I would never let you go . We wrote it , and the verses I 'm talking / rapping and then on the hook I 'm singing . It 's a really awesome song . " Bieber also previewed the song 's introduction on the show . Through his Twitter account , the singer released a poll in which fans were allowed to choose between two artworks for the single . Jessica Sager of Pop Crush noted that Bieber sports a mature look on both covers , using Elvis Presley 's hair style and wearing a white t @-@ shirt underneath a short sleeved , navy and white plaid button down with a thin chain necklace . The winning artwork was revealed on March 19 , 2012 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Boyfriend " is a R & B influenced track that lasts for two minutes and 50 seconds , which incorporates elements of acoustic music , while still having club beats . The song was written in the key of B ♭ minor and its tempo is 54 beats per minute . The song opens with Bieber using a lower @-@ register and breathy vocals while rapping , " If I was your boyfriend , I ’ d never let you go / I can take you places you ain ’ t never been before / Baby , take a chance or you ’ ll never ever know / I got money in my hands that I ’ d really like to blow / Swag , swag , swag on you / Chillin ' by the fire while we eatin ’ fondue . " As the chorus follows , he adopts a Michael Jackson similar falsetto , and sings about being " everything you want " . 
 The instrumentation , produced by Posner and Levy , infuses hand claps and Pharrell Williams similar style beats , and , as noted by Pop Crush reviewer Amy Sciaretto , " is kept to a minimum , allowing The Biebs ’ voice , which has strengthened and deepened as he matures and grows up , to shine and take center stage . " Sciaretto also thought that " Boyfriend " is similar to Timberlake 's song " Cry Me a River " ( 2002 ) , while it was perceived by Robbie Daw of Idolator as a homage to the early 1990s . Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone dismissed the lyrical content , and summarized it as " Justin Has Actually Had Sexual Intercourse – But He Won 't Harm Your Nine @-@ Year @-@ Old . " Spin writer Marc Hogan said that the lyrics have references to several tracks , including Beyoncé 's " Party " ( 2011 ) , Britney Spears ' " Till the World Ends " ( 2011 ) , and Janet Jackson 's " If " ( 1993 ) . Andrew Hampp of Billboard said that " the club @-@ ready beat and guitar @-@ plucked chorus " recalls ' N Sync 's final single " Girlfriend " ( 2002 ) , and compared it to early songs by Justin Timberlake and Usher . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Boyfriend " has received mixed reviews . Andrew Hampp of Billboard rated it 82 out of 100 , stating that Bieber sounds more adult than ever , but noted that most of his fans are still 12 @-@ year @-@ old girls . Amy Sciaretto of Pop Crush praised the track , and said that the result of trying new music styles resulted on " a more mature , more well @-@ rounded Justin Bieber song . " Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV said that " Boyfriend " is " crazy dope " , and realized that the lyrics are directed to the things Bieber does with his current girlfriend Selena Gomez . Becca Grim of Rolling Stone thought that the song is " edgier @-@ than @-@ usual , " while Artistdirect reviewer <unk> <unk> said that " Boyfriend " not only marks Bieber 's transition to an adult , but also deemed it as a " new dawn for pop . " Marc Hogan of magazine Spin said that Bieber " wants to sex you up " with the track , but thought that " Bieber might be a wealthy suitor , but he 's not grown up just yet . " A Rap @-@ Up reviewer complimented " Boyfriend " for showcasing a mature Bieber and urban sound on it . The A.V. Club editors Steven Hyden and Genevieve Koski rated the song an A- , complimenting its production and vocals and considering it " irresistible , and when Bieber launches into that <unk> falsetto , it all feels pretty perfect . " They also ranked it among his best singles , although they criticized its lyrical content . 
 Jordan Zakarin of The Hollywood Reporter described the song as a " more or less a proposition , with Bieber outlining both solid small town date ideas and eternal promises . " Raju Mudhar of Toronto Star commented that , lyrically , Bieber is " nowhere near bringing ' SexyBack ' , but sounds like he 's love to walk home holding your hand . " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone also rated it three out of five stars , and , while seeing its background as a " expertly calculated to ease the Biebs ' transition from <unk> dreamboat to post @-@ <unk> dreamboat " , questioned , " how can a song that begins with Bieber rapping in his thickest patois about his " swag " not be hater @-@ bait ? " About.com critic Bill Lamb considered it a " simplistic song derivative of Justin Timberlake " , and stated that the lyrics does not have " substance to expand into an entire song . " HitFix blogger Chris <unk> thought that " Boyfriend " is lyrically the same song Bieber has sung since his career first started , but noted that none of his fans would notice such aspect . Gregory Hicks of The Michigan Daily commented that Bieber is copying Timberlake 's R & B style on the song , and described the lyrics as original " in the sense that few artists are willing to introduce this much poetic stupidity into their music . " . RedEye 's Ernest Wilkins said that Bieber doesn 't know how to rap well , adding that " I yearn for the days of the Wahlberg men being the most awkward white male rappers on Earth . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 A few hours after its release , " Boyfriend " reached the top position on the US iTunes Store . According to Keith Caulfied of Billboard , industry sources suggested that the track could sell around 400 @,@ 000 downloads by the end of the tracking week on April 1 , 2012 , and noted that it could debut into the top five of the Hot 100 chart . The song debuted at number two on the chart , only being held off the top spot by " We Are Young " by <unk> featuring Janelle Monáe . It sold a total of 521 @,@ 000 digital units , the second @-@ highest @-@ ever debut digital sales week . Bill Werde of Billboard noted that it failed to debut at number one because the digital download of the track was only available through iTunes Store , " restricting the buying option for those that do not frequent the Apple retail store . " The song has sold 3 @,@ 216 @,@ 000 downloads in the US by December 2012 . " Boyfriend " is also Bieber 's first single to ever reach the top position on the Canadian Hot 100 by debuting at number one and staying on for one week . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number two with sales of 54 @,@ 817 on the week ending April 15 , 2012 , held off from achieving his first number one in the country by his own protégée Carly Rae Jepsen , with her single " Call Me Maybe " . The track was also able to reach the top ten in Denmark , Ireland , Netherlands , Norway , and Sweden , while attaining top twenty positions in Belgium ( Flanders ) , France , Finland , Germany , Spain , and Switzerland . In Australia , " Boyfriend " debuted and peak at number five on the chart issue dated April 8 , 2012 . The track failed to reach the top position in New Zealand , where it debuted and peaked at number two . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 Island Def Jam Music Group commissioned a music video to be directed by Colin Tilley , who previously worked with Bieber on the music video for " U Smile " ( 2010 ) . Filming sessions occurred on the week of March 28 , 2012 , and took place in a studio located in California . Bieber revealed that the music video doesn 't have a " steady concept , " adding that it mostly features artistic shots intercalated with dance scenes . He continued to explain , " It 's not like ' Justin follows this girl to this spot . ' No , it 's a bunch of amazing scenes : Like a fire scene , we have an ice scene . " On April 3 , 2012 , a teaser of the clip was unveiled by Bieber . Becky Bain of Idolator revealed that the following number of teasers featured Bieber " being groped by several female hands , dancing in front of a large white spotlight a la Michael Jackson , [ and ] posing menacingly in front of a fire and floating underwater . " Nicola Sia also of Idolator considered the scenes where the singer " provocatively whispering into girls ’ ears " as too " erotic " . 
 However , it was later reported that the music video directed by Tilley was scrapped , and re @-@ shot with Director X on the week of April 21 , 2012 . The second version of the video premiered on May 3 , 2012 on MTV . Director X summarized the synopsis of the video saying , " it was just cars and the simplicity that they liked . Cars , girls , just young people hanging out , having fun , that kind of thing . When I heard it , I thought that 's what it should be . " 
 Brogan Driscoll of The Huffington Post wrote that Bieber " shows he 's all grown up , driving fast cars and taking one rather scantily @-@ clad young lady into his arms " . James Montgomery of MTV News wrote that " Filled with cool clothes , hot cars and even hotter women , ' Boyfriend ' ... is the stuff of every newly minted heterosexual adult 's dreams ... only on overdrive " and added that " It 's a cool , confident clip , and , given where he 's at right now , it 's also an important one . " Bruna Nessif of E ! Online shortly commented that Bieber " is not a little boy anymore " in the music video for the song . Upon release , the video broke the VEVO record for having the most views in a 24 @-@ hour period with 8 @.@ 00 million . The previous records were held by Nicki Minaj 's " Stupid Hoe " ( 4 @.@ 8 million ) and Rihanna 's " Where Have You Been " ( 4 @.@ 9 million ) . Released on 20 September 2012 , the video for One Direction 's " Live While We 're Young " garnered 8 @.@ 24 million views in a 24 @-@ hour period , thus besting Bieber 's record ( 8 @.@ 00 million ) . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 As part of promotion for the song , Bieber performed " Boyfriend " at the second season finale of The Voice , concluding with a choreographed routine reminiscent of Janet Jackson 's " Rhythm Nation . " It was also performed at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards and on Germany 's Next Top Model . Bieber performed " Boyfriend " at the Capital FM Summertime Ball 2012 . For the performance , he sported fingerless gloves , a Union Jack tank with matching vest , and jeans . The singer also performed the track during a promotional concert in Europe on June 4 , 2012 , along with " All Around the World " and " Die in Your Arms " . Bieber performed the song for the first time after a year at the 2015 Wango Tango . 
 = = Cover versions and remixes = = 
 In 2012 , the song was also covered by metalcore band Issues on Punk Goes Pop 5 . 
 In May 2012 , <unk> covered this song for a contest called " The Bieber @-@ off " and <unk> won the contest after May 21 , 2012 . 
 In 2012 , actor Jaden Smith , who is also a friend of Bieber , has made a remix to the song entitled " Flame ( Just Cuz ) " . 
 Another remix featuring Mac Miller , Asher Roth and 2 Chainz was released on May 24 , 2012 . 
 On April 18 , 2012 , Marina and the Diamonds covered the song during a performance at BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . During the performance , she changed the lyrics of the song and according to Jeff Benjamin of Billboard magazine , " have put a completely different spin on his track , turning The Bieb 's latest into a dark , acoustic lament " . 
 In 2012 , Kevin McHale and Darren Criss ( as their characters Artie Abrams and Blaine Anderson ) performed the song in a mash @-@ up with Britney Spears ' song " Boys " in episode " Britney 2 @.@ 0 " of musical TV series Glee . 
 The rapping duo Ying Yang Twins remixed " Boyfriend " on the week of May 10 , 2012 . D @-@ Roc , one of the members , explained that after his friends compared Bieber 's song to their song " Wait ( The Whisper Song ) " ( 2005 ) , " I was so amped up to hear the song too . When I actually did , I listened to it and I was like , it sounded like us . He complimented us , " he said . " So I wanted to compliment him by getting on it . " 
 A mashup of " Boyfriend " and ' N Sync 's 2002 single " Girlfriend " was uploaded on YouTube by mashup artist Raheem on July 13 , 2012 and quickly became a viral video . 
 In 2013 , a cappella group SIX covered " Boyfriend " , with Bass Vocalist Jak Knudsen singing the lead vocals , for their recent album " Life Is A Highway " . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Digital download / CD single 
 " Boyfriend " – 3 : 31 
 Digital download – Remixes 
 " Boyfriend " ( Oliver Twizt Radio ) – 3 : 44 
 " Boyfriend " ( Oliver Twizt Club ) – 4 : 27 
 " Boyfriend " ( Oliver Twizt Instrumental ) – 4 : 27 
 " Boyfriend " ( Vice Radio ) – 3 : 08 
 " Boyfriend " ( Vice Club ) - 4 : 46 
 " Boyfriend " ( Vice Instrumental ) – 4 : 46 
 " Boyfriend " ( Joe <unk> & Peter Barona Full Vocal Club ) – 6 : 58 
 " Boyfriend " ( Joe <unk> Dark Dub ) – 7 : 46 
 Digital download – Boyfriend ( Dada Life Remix ) - Single 
 " Boyfriend " ( Dada Life Remix ) – 5 : 32 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Chalice Recording Studios , Hollywood , Los Angeles and in London , England 
 Mixed at Larrabee Studios , Burbank , California 
 Personnel 
 Mike Posner – songwriter , producer , keyboards 
 Justin Bieber – songwriter , vocals 
 Mason " MdL " Levy – songwriter , producer 
 Matthew <unk> – songwriter , guitar production 
 Kuk Harrell – vocal producer 
 Josh Gudwin – engineer 
 Chris " TEK " O 'Ryan – engineer 
 Thomas <unk> – assistant engineer 
 Manny Marroquin – mixer 
 Chris Galland – assistant mixer 
 Del Bowers – assistant mixer 
 Benny Steele – guitar recording 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Bad Boys ( Alexandra Burke song ) = 
 " Bad Boys " is a song by British recording artist Alexandra Burke . The song is her second single after winning the fifth series of The X Factor , and the lead single from her debut album , Overcome . The song features American rapper Flo Rida . It was written by Mark Fowler , Laura Senior , Flo Rida , Melvin K. Watson Jr , Larry Summerville Jr . , <unk> , Lauren Evans , Alex James , and was produced by The Phantom Boyz . It was first released for digital download on 12 October 2009 . The song is an uptempo electrohop song , lyrically about becoming attracted to dangerous men . 
 " Bad Boys " received positive reviews from critics , commending its production and composition as well as Burke 's vocals . The song topped the charts in the United Kingdom and Ireland , the top ten of Sweden , the Netherlands , Hungary , Norway , Slovakia , the Czech Republic and Belgium ( Wallonia ) and the top twenty of several other countries . The song 's accompanying music video takes place in an alleyway and a warehouse , and follows Burke 's adventure when her convertible breaks down . The song has been performed a number of times , including on the sixth series of The X Factor . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Burke premiered the song on 25 August 2009 , on The Chris Moyles Show . Before its release , The Sun had leaked lyrics from the song online . In an interview with Popjustice when asked about the song , Burke said , " I 've got a passion against liars , but I do like myself a bad boy . All young girls my age go for them , we just don 't like to admit it , because we always go for them " . The song is described as having a " stomping electro @-@ R & B tune " . The intro has been described as " a demented <unk> siren effect bouncing from speaker to speaker " , which has been called a hybrid of Girls Aloud 's " Biology " , and Britney Spears ' " Womanizer " , but with a more " euphoric disco feel " . According to Popjustice , the song is lyrically about " fancying dangerous men " . Flo Rida appears in the intro and during the middle eight . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mostly positive reviews commending Burke 's vocals and the mainstream R & B / pop feel and production of the song . Matthew Chisling of Allmusic called the track " the most brilliant , perfect mainstream pop single of 2009 " , commending the song 's synthesized beat and larger @-@ than @-@ life chorus , and Flo Rida 's rap , stating that it made Burke " the prime UK import for the North American market " . Popjustice called the song " brilliant " and " phenomenal " , commending the song 's " Womanizer " -like intro and the chorus ’ s strong melodic topline . The review praised Burke 's vocals , calling them " <unk> in parts " and compared them to Donna Summer . Although the review noted the song was not built for Burke 's extreme vocals , it said , " that there 's something quite exciting about an incredible singer being forced to follow a very strong and melodic topline instead of going all over the show . " Bill Lamb of About.com also said the song was reminiscent of Donna Summer , and said , " Big international success seems a real possibility as Burke steps into the battle for R & B @-@ pop diva crown . " Nick Levine of Digital Spy said the song complimented Burke 's " sass and all @-@ around performance skill " rather than a ballad would , and called the song " fun " , pulling off a " minor pop <unk> turning a cameo by Flo Rida into a good thing " . Alexis <unk> of The Guardian noted although some may see the single as " generic " , and " currently pop 's factory @-@ default setting " , he ascertained the song was " a superior example of the type , furnished with an effortlessly unshakeable chorus " . Although Harry Guerin of RTÉ noted the production and formula of the music was a flaw of the album , he noted that that technique worked in " Bad Boys " . Simon Price of The Independent was more critical of the song , calling it a " pale imitation " of Britney Spears ' " Womanizer " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Bad Boys " debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart , replacing Chipmunk 's " <unk> Daisy " , and becoming Burke 's second consecutive chart @-@ topper , selling over 187 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , a total of 860 @,@ 000 copies to date . The song also debuted on the Irish Singles Chart at number one . The song fell off the top spot in the second week , ceding the throne to Cheryl Cole 's " Fight for This Love " . It was certified platinum in the United Kingdom , and spent 25 consecutive weeks in the top seventy @-@ five on the UK Singles Chart . The song also charted within the top ten of Sweden , the Netherlands , Hungary , Norway , Slovakia , the Czech Republic and Belgium ( Wallonia ) . It charted within the top twenty of Finland , Belgium ( Flanders ) , and Germany , twenty @-@ two in Austria , and thirty @-@ nine in Denmark . While the track failed to chart in Australia on the Singles Chart , it peaked at # 11 on the Physical Singles Chart In the UK , ' Bad Boys ' is the 18th biggest download of all time . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video was filmed from 31 August to 1 September 2009 in various locations in Los Angeles , directed by Bryan Barber . The clip starts with Alexandra dressed in a one @-@ piece black leather suit , as her car has broken down in a bad part of town . It then cuts to Flo Rida who sings the opening lines of the song . Next , Burke performs various dance moves in deserted streets while being followed by several men . The video then shows Alexandra entering a bar in a mirrored silver dress , which has been compared to Janet Jackson around the janet. era , where she is mobbed by more of these men . She then performs more dance routines , before a fight ensues between the men in the bar over Alexandra and Flo Rida performs his part in the song . During his rap , there are scenes where Alexandra backflips off a bar table , and pushes two men powerfully over a bar and through a door . The video then shows Alexandra dancing with more men in a deserted parking lot . 
 David Whitehouse of Wonderland Magazine declared the " Bad Boys " video as " the birth of a pop star " . After commenting that America generates better , glossier pop than the British , such as the " holy trinity of 21st century pop music " , Christina Aguilera , Britney Spears , and Justin Timberlake , Whitehouse said that the video looked and sounded American , " dripping " with " dollar signs and expensive lenses " . The review commending Burke 's look in the video calling her , " the gutsier , sassier alternative to the anaemic , high school warbling of , say , Kelly Clarkson or the pre @-@ pubescent offal piped into our children by Miley Cyrus . " Whitehouse stated , " It has pomposity , big dance routines , cars built like tanks , moody street hunks ( also built like tanks ) , stunts , jewellery and a rapper , Flo Rida , who in honesty , could have been anyone " . He went on to say , " If we want to make a megastar , let the Americans do it for us . They make <unk> . If Alexandra Burke is going to be the pop star we want her to be , she ’ s going the right way about it " . 
 = = Live performances and promotion = = 
 Burke performed Bad Boys on the sixth series of The X Factor ' s first week results show on 11 October 2009 . Flo Rida joined Burke on stage . She then performed the on GMTV on 13 October 2009 at London 's G @-@ A @-@ Y and at Wembley Arena on 17 October 2009 . She also performed it on Ireland 's <unk> concert in Dublin . Burke also performed the song , as well as others from her while presenting the launch of the Viva Network in the UK and Ireland . She returned for the finale of the sixth series of The X Factor , where she and past runner @-@ up JLS performed a melody of the song and their hit , " Everybody in Love " . Burke also performed the song at The O2 Arena in London for the Jingle Bell Ball , while also appearing on Cheryl Cole 's Night In to perform the solo version . " Bad Boys " was also the background music in Dancing On Ice during the first week when introducing the male celebrities . In week seven of the fifth season of Dancing on Ice , actress Emily Atack danced to the song and achieved her highest score at the time in the show . In the UK , Burke also performed it on Ant and Dec 's Push The Button on 13 March 2010 , and is set to perform it on T4 on the Beach on 4 July 2010 . Burke also performed the song while promoting Overcome on her European Promo Tour . She performed " Bad Boys " live on the 20th Concert in Poland , on <unk> in the Netherlands at the Radio 538 <unk> , and on the Dutch The X Factor . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = Chart succession = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cabaret ( Justin Timberlake song ) = 
 " Cabaret " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Justin Timberlake for his fourth studio album , The 20 / 20 Experience – 2 of 2 ( 2013 ) . Featuring a rap verse by Canadian rapper Drake , the song was written and produced by Timberlake , Timothy " Timbaland " Mosley , Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon and Daniel Jones , with additional writing from James Fauntleroy and Drake . " Cabaret " is a pop and soul song which features beatboxing , handclapping , guitars and keyboards in its composition . Music critics noted its similarity to Timbaland 's earlier works with singer Aaliyah and Timberlake 's 2006 single " My Love " . Lyrically , it finds the singer comparing his love to a burlesque and features sexually oriented lyrics . 
 " Cabaret " received generally positive reviews from contemporary critics who praised Timbaland 's production as well as Drake 's rap verse on the song . As a result of the strong digital downloads following the release of the album , the track debuted on the charts in South Korea and the United States . It peaked at number 18 on the US R & B Songs chart and number 50 on the South Korean Gaon Chart , selling over 3 @,@ 800 digital copies for the week in the latter country . Timberlake included " Cabaret " on the set list of his fourth worldwide concert tour entitled The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour ( 2013 @-@ 2014 ) . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 " Cabaret " was written by Timberlake , Timothy " Timbaland " Mosley , Aubrey Graham , Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon , James Fauntleroy and Daniel Jones . The song was produced by Timbaland , Timberlake and Harmon while Jones provided additional production . Elliot Ives recorded the song at the Jungle City Studios in New York City . Timberlake arranged and produced his vocals . Harmon provided keyboards for the song , while Ives played the guitar . The track was engineered by Chris Godbey and mixed by Jimmy Douglass , Godbey and Timberlake ; for the process they were assisted by Matt Webber . The keyboards were provided by Harmon and Jones . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Cabaret " is a pop and soul song with a length of four minutes and thirty @-@ three seconds ( the shortest song on The 20 / 20 Experience - 2 of 2 ) that features " stuttering beatboxing " . Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly noted that the song builds a symphony of mouth noises and compared it to Aaliyah 's 1998 single " Are You That Somebody ? " Brad Stern of MTV Buzzworthy agreed with Anderson , however , labeled " Cabaret " " as a much more ' dirty @-@ minded ' " version of the former . ABC News ' Allan Raible noticed the song 's beat has a classic sounding Timbaland beat , which — according to him — " the kind of beat Aaliyah used to turn into gold " . <unk> Graham of HipHopDX stated that " Cabaret " sounds like a 2013 answer to Timberlake 's 2006 single " My Love " . 
 Mikael Wood of Los Angeles Times stated that " Cabaret " is a " percolating bedroom jam that depicts sex as a form of at @-@ home theater " . Boston Globe 's Sarah Rodman called the song a " sexed @-@ up jam " . HitFix 's Melinda Newman described the song as a " loop @-@ driven to getting down with your lady , who ’ s taking off her clothes as quickly as she can " . According to Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine , in " Cabaret " , Timberlake compares the love to a burlesque and noted that the song resembles producer Timbaland 's earlier work . Andy Kellman of Allmusic wrote that the song features Timbaland 's signature sound and finds Timberlake proclaiming more " clever / nauseating " lyrics : " If sex is a contest , then you 're coming first " ; " ' Cause I got you saying Jesus so much , it 's like we 're laying in a manger . " The chorus is consisted of Timberlake singing " It 's a cabaret " while being accompanied by Timbaland , who repeats " Put on a show , get on the floor " . According to Stern , in his part with a duration about two minutes , Drake raps raunchy and fast @-@ talking lines , " I ’ <unk> fuck you like we ’ re having an affair " . Nick Krewen of Toronto Star wrote that Drake raps lines " about a sexual tête @-@ à @-@ tête amidst a melee of scattershot rhythms " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Cabaret " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Even though giving mixed review to the album , Kellman of Allmusic called the song a " standout " . Anderson of Entertainment Weekly chose " Cabaret " as the best song on the album , labeling it a " slick drum orgy with a ferocious Drake cameo " . Similarly , Julia Leconte of Now selected the song as a top track on the album and stated that it has catchy hook and cheesy lyrics which only Timberlake can pull off . Mesfin Fekadu of The Huffington Post wrote that " the song is smooth and has an addictive hook " . John Meagher of Irish Independent labelled the song " highly potent " and noted that it features Timberlake 's " typical heavy @-@ hitting approach " . 
 Los Angeles Times 's Wood praised Drake 's verse and wrote that he " takes the sex talk to a level that Timberlake the boy @-@ band veteran still can 't " . HitFix 's Newman graded the song with a " B- " mark , and wrote that " Drake comes in for a rap that works perfectly with the song in their first collaboration " . Dave Hanratty of Drowned in Sound stated that " Cabaret " feels " navel @-@ gazing " as a result of Drake 's braggadocios appearance and the mechanical input given by Timbaland . Entertainmentwise 's Amy Gravelle stated that Drake is featured on the track to add substance and style and proves that he was the " hottest " rapper at the moment . A reviewer of Capital FM stated that the song proves why Drake was the rapper on everyone 's lips and further described " Cabaret " as a smart team @-@ up between the artists backed by Timbaland 's classic beats . On the negative side , Lanre Bakare of The Guardian criticized the rapper 's verse calling it " predictably self @-@ indulgent " . Vibe 's Stacy @-@ Ann Ellis noted that although Drake gives some " lover @-@ boy swag " to the song , Jay @-@ Z outperformed him with his verse on " Murder " . 
 In a review of The 20 / 20 Experience - 2 of 2 , Craig Manning of website AbsolutePunk wrote that even thought the song features " a <unk> " rap verse by Drake , both " Cabaret " and the lead single , " Take Back the Night " , " feel somehow less impressive than a lot of the songs Timberlake was slinging last time around , if only because they don ’ t add up to an ' experience ' greater than the sum of their parts . " According to Brice Ezell of PopMatters , " for whatever reason [ the song ] never gets off of the ground . " Lydia Jenkin of New Zealand Herald opined that the song would be a lot of sexier without the overpowering bass pulses in its production and " some odd lyrics " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Timberlake included " Cabaret " on the set list of his 2013 @-@ 14 worldwide tour entitled The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour . In a review of the concert that took place at the United Center in Chicago on February 16 , Claudia Perry of the Chicago Tribune wrote " the whole apparatus returned to the A position ( hey , Timberlake likes golf ) while he performed ' Cabaret ' and ' Take Back the Night ' . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The 20 / 20 Experience – 2 of 2 . 
 Locations 
 Vocals recorded and mixed at Jungle City Studios , New York City 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 Following the release of The 20 / 20 Experience – 2 of 2 , " Cabaret " debuted on charts in South Korea and the US . The song debuted at number 50 in South Korea , with sales of 3 @,@ 800 copies for that week ending October 5 , 2013 . Additionally , it debuted and peaked at number 18 on the US R & B Songs chart . 
 = Saltwell Park = 
 Saltwell Park is a Victorian park in Gateshead , Tyne and Wear , England . Opened in 1876 , the park was designed by Edward Kemp and incorporates the mansion and associated grounds of the Saltwellgate estate owner , William Wailes , who sold his estate to Gateshead Council for £ 35 @,@ 000 . Upon opening , it became known as " The People 's Park " . The park was expanded in 1920 when the council purchased the adjacent gardens to the Saltwell Grove estate and added these to the park . This extended the park 's total size to 55 acres ( 22 ha ) . Towards the end of the 20th century , the park had fallen into disrepair , but between 1999 and 2005 , it was subject to a £ 9 @.@ 6 million restoration project , funded collaboratively by the Heritage Lottery Fund and Gateshead Council and is now host to around 2 million visitors per year . 
 The park is split broadly into three sections . Saltwell Grove , the southern section , is an area of grassed open space with a bandstand to the western corner . The central area contains the centrepiece of the park – Wailes 's former home , the Grade II listed Saltwell Towers and its surrounding belvedere walls . These have been fully restored and are now a visitor centre . There are also three war memorials , a yew @-@ tree maze , a dene and an area containing several species of caged animals known as Pet 's Corner . The largest section of the park is the Northern Fields section which contains a four @-@ acre boating lake with a wooded island at its centre , as well as three bowling greens and two pavilions . 
 Saltwell Park has been presented with numerous awards in recent years , including being named " Britain 's Best Park " in 2005 and Civic Trust Park of the Year in 2006 . It has won a Green Flag award every year since 2006 and in was 2013 re @-@ listed as one of fifty @-@ five Green Heritage sites in the UK . The park has been a social hub for over a century ; an annual public bonfire night display was first held in 1883 , a circus in 1886 and the park hosted the Holidays at Home programme during World War II . Today the bonfire display has grown into one of the largest in Tyne and Wear and is attended by thousands of people every year . In October 2012 , Saltwell Park was the site of the first British Legion Field of Remembrance in North East England . It also plays a role in local sport and recreation ; it has hosted a fundraising day in support of Sport Relief , a Race for Life for a number of years and in November 2012 a " green gym " was installed at the park – one of only two in Gateshead . 
 = = Conception and opening = = 
 At the turn of the 19th century , Gateshead was beginning to expand but , save a smattering of industrial elements mainly at Sheriff Hill and at the south shore of the River Tyne , the town and its surrounds were mostly agricultural and most of the town was covered by large , private estates . The largest of these was the Saltwell estate , which consisted of around 500 acres ( 200 ha ) of land in a broad quadrangle between the Team Valley and the villages of Bensham and Low Fell . In 1805 this estate was broken up into a number of smaller properties including Saltwell Cottage . By 1856 Saltwell Cottage had become the Saltwellside estate and was in the hands of William Wailes , a native of Newcastle upon Tyne who had become one of the leading exponents of stained glass in England . In 1856 Wailes commissioned the design of a grand Victorian mansion for his family to live at Saltwellside . Work began in 1859 and continued until 1871 when Wailes ' Saltwell Towers was finally completed . Saltwell Towers was a large , eclectic mansion in red brick with Gothic turrets and mock battlements . 
 While Wailes was building Saltwell Towers , Gateshead was expanding and industrialising . The resultant air pollution , poor social conditions and general shortage of clean drinking water in the town led to concern about public health and gave rise to calls for the creation of public parks . One such call was made in 1857 when the editorial of the local newspaper , the Gateshead Observer , demanded that a park be built at Windmill Hills . In 1861 , the owners of ten acres of land at Windmill Hills approached the town council and offered the land free of charge so long as it was used as a place of recreation for the people of Gateshead . The land was formally conveyed on 18 November 1861 and the opening of the first public park in Gateshead was celebrated by the closing of workplaces and a day of holiday in the town . 
 Gateshead Council subsequently considered other sites for a second park , but it was discouraged by the high prices being asked by the estate owners at Redheugh and Shipcote . The Shipcote estate was owned by Sir Walter James , who was approached by a council park committee in 1874 and asked how much would be required to purchase at least part of his estate . Whilst negotiations were ongoing , James ' offer to sell part of his estate at £ 650 per acre was met by fierce criticism from members of the public and the council began to seek an alternative to the Shipcote proposal . The town clerk wrote to William Wailes to ask if he would be willing to sell his 37 acres ( 15 ha ) Saltwellside estate . On 11 November 1874 , Wailes replied that the council could have his entire estate for £ 32 @,@ 000 , and in March 1875 James told the park committee that he did not wish to compete with Wailes but that he would offer a subscription if the council went ahead at Saltwellgate . Later that month the park committee formally opened talks with Wailes and , after various proposals were considered and rejected , in September 1875 the council decided to buy the entire Saltwellgate estate for an increased total price of £ 35 @,@ 000 after securing a loan for the full amount from the Local Government Board . The agreement was formalised two months later and included a provision to lease Saltwell Towers back to Wailes for the remainder of his life . 
 Having obtained the Saltwellgate estate , the council contacted local ornithologist and landscaper John Hancock and asked him to submit designs for the new park . When Hancock refused , citing the pressure of his existing work , the park committee retained Edward Kemp at four guineas a day until his plans were submitted and approved in February 1876 . Kemp 's plans were implemented over a period of years by borough surveyor James Bowyer at a cost of around £ 11 @,@ 000 . Original plans to officially open the park on Whit Monday 1876 were not realised , and the park was never officially opened , but nonetheless , public usage began in late 1876 . 
 = = Design and layout = = 
 Saltwell Park is located within a residential area around 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) south of Gateshead town centre on land which slopes towards the Team Valley in the west . It is a broad rectangle with boundaries at East and West Park Roads , Saltwell View and Saltwell Road South . The original site purchased from Wailes was joined by the gardens of a late 19th century villa at East Park Road known as Saltwell Grove ( or " The Grove " ) after these were purchased by Gateshead Council in 1920 . The park today constitutes around 55 acres ( 22 ha ) of land in total . 
 The park is split into three sections – southern , central and northern areas – and the entire park is bordered by perimeter shrubs , plants and trees . The southern Saltwell Grove area is demarcated from the central section by an old stone wall running in a west @-@ east direction which formed the park 's original southern boundary and is , according to a Gateshead Council document , an " important feature in the history and development of the park " . This section consists largely of open space , meandering pathways skirting the perimeter , a bandstand and some flowerbeds . Entrances to this section of the park are to the west at Saltwell Road and to the extreme south @-@ east corner . 
 The central section comprises Saltwell Towers and its grounds and is some 17 acres ( 6 @.@ 9 ha ) in total area . Saltwell Towers is located in the middle of the central section of the park and it is surrounded to the south by its accompanying walls , walkways and ha @-@ ha . An enclosed rose garden lies to the east of the building and to the west there is a maze and a dene through which a stream runs into a lily @-@ pond at an entrance to the park at Saltwell Road South . The approach from the southern section is a large grassed area replete with paths which wind towards a footbridge to the Towers , which is used for general leisure activities and picnicking and is home to a stone @-@ built war memorial . The entrance to the footbridge is the site of a bronze war memorial which sits in the centre of a roundabout surrounded by bedding flowers . The footbridge was built in 2003 and is also a war memorial . 
 The northern section of the park constitutes 19 acres ( 7 @.@ 7 ha ) of land and can be accessed either by external entrances at the north @-@ eastern corner of the park and West Park Road or internally from the central section through the dene or from Pets Corner . The north @-@ eastern entrance consists of a pair of imposing gateposts and the view from this access point sweeps across the entire northern section of the park . The eastern perimeter of this section is a terraced walkway known as the Broadwalk with adjacent , banked bedded planting . A central path from the Broadwalk splits a large grassed area almost neatly in half and leads to a lake and two child 's play areas . A path circles the perimeter of the lake and seating is placed at the fringe of the lake at various points . To the south of the lake are three bowling greens and to the north are tennis courts . These cannot be seen from the lake due to a screen of plants . The plants within the screen are typical of those bedded throughout the park , which include French marigolds , roses , tulips , <unk> , <unk> and silver dust . 
 = = Principal attractions = = 
 There are eleven listed buildings in Saltwell Park . Saltwell Towers , former home of William Wailes and later to lawyer Joseph Shipley ( founder of the nearby Shipley Art Gallery ) , was the seat of the former Saltwellgate estate and has been described by a BBC report as a " fairytale mansion " . The building is a dark red and yellow brick construction with asymmetrical towers , tall chimney stacks and corner turrets . It has been used for a number of purposes , including as a hospital during the First World War and as a museum from 1933 to 1969 , but was then abandoned and fell into considerable disrepair . However , after a £ 3 million , five @-@ year refurbishment programme was completed in 2004 , the building was officially reopened as a visitors centre in the presence of Wailes ' great @-@ great @-@ grandson . Saltwell Towers today includes a cafe , some pieces of local art , an exhibition on the history of the park and also a stained glass centrepiece commissioned from a local artist . A Gateshead Blue Plaque in commemoration of Wailes was installed in 2005 . The mansion was protected in 1973 as a Grade II listed building , along with the two storey , sandstone belvedere walls which surround the west and south of the mansion . These are replete with stairs and corner battlements and the entire walls are conjoined by a walkway which is open to the public . 
 A stable block is at the north @-@ west of Saltwell Towers , built in 1871 in the same style as the mansion in red brick and with a slate roof . This is a Grade II listed building and is now an educational area for schools and local community groups . Also to the north @-@ west of Saltwell Towers is the Charlton Memorial Drinking Fountain , a stone and granite fountain inscribed in memory of George Charlton , the mayor of Gateshead between 1874 – 75 . This is Grade II listed , as is the ' <unk> Well ' at the west entrance to the central section of the park . The latter is dated 1872 and is a sandstone construction with a basin in the central alcove . Midway along the Broadwalk in the north section of the park is a Grade II listed bronze statue of Alderman John Lucas , mounted on a sandstone plinth and granite base . Built in 1902 , it was paid for by public subscription . The wrought iron gates and accompanying stone piers which greet visitors at the north @-@ eastern entrance to the park are also Grade II listed . 
 There are three war memorials in the park . There is a Boer War memorial in the central section of the park around 100 metres south of Saltwell Towers . This consists of a bronze angel perched on a granite plinth and is dated 1905 . A modern Durham Light Infantry memorial was unveiled on 12 July 1981 by the mayor of Newcastle . This takes the form of a sandstone wall with adjoining flanking walls which create a small ornamental garden . There are three plaques and a description commemorating men of the battalion who died in battle between 1900 – 45 . The third war memorial is the bridge adjoining the <unk> , central gardens to the belvedere walls of Saltwell Towers . This timber footbridge , 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) long and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide , is named the Primosole Bridge and is a copy of the original Edwardian bridge which once crossed the ha @-@ ha . The name is carved onto a low stone wall which runs alongside and an inscription commemorates the men of the Durham Light Infantry who died whilst crossing the original Primosole Bridge during Operation Fustian in the Second World War . 
 The principal feature of the northern section of the park is a boating lake . This has been in situ since a tender to install a 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) lake with an island in the centre was accepted in August 1880 . An approach to Joseph Swan to illuminate the lake received no response , but a further approach to John Hancock to design the lake edge was more successful ; the lake edge today still follows Hancock 's original design . Model boating has been a fixture of the lake since 1886 and the Saltwell Park Model Boat Club is the latest organisation to use the lake for this purpose . The island in the centre of the lake was in 1909 home to a bandstand , and visiting performers were required to travel by boat to the island , but the bandstand was moved to the Saltwell Grove section of the park in 1921 . During the summer months , visitors can hire rowing boats and <unk> for use on the lake . The lake has long been inhabited by mallards and tufted ducks and it is also home to several other species of wildfowl , including swans , Canada and barnacle geese , coots and moorhens . Common pochard and grebe also inhabit the lake in winter after migrating from Russia and central Europe . Kingfisher are also reported to have returned to the lake after a lengthy absence . 
 There have been animals kept in Saltwell Park since June 1877 – initially , these included monkeys , deer and a raccoon . Caged animals are still kept in the north @-@ east of the park in an area called " Pets Corner " , where there are a peacock and peahen , pheasants , rabbits and guinea pigs kept in a pair of aviaries built in 1880 and paid for by John Elliot , then chief constable of Gateshead . The aviaries are stone and wrought iron , octagonal constructions which were listed at Grade II by English Heritage in 1973 . A bandstand was erected in 1876 and was subsequently replaced in May 1895 by an octagonal , red @-@ brick , cast @-@ iron and wood structure which was first sited in the northern fields . This was then moved to the island in the lake and moved again to Saltwell Grove . It was taken down and rebuilt at Beamish Museum in 1978 , where it remains in use and has been designated a Grade II listed building . The present bandstand is in the Saltwell Grove area and is used every Sunday during the summer months by brass bands . 
 In the western shadow of Saltwell Towers there is a maze , built in 1877 by Wailes for his family 's use . The maze was replanted with yew trees as part of the 2005 regeneration project to the original plans laid by Wailes . Also renovated was Saltwell Dene , a picturesque wooded area with a stream , bridges , cascades and a lily pond which inspired local artist Thomas Miles Richardson to paint a watercolour of it in the 19th century . Saltwell Dene was the final part of the 21st century restoration project to be completed , reopening to the public in March 2005 . At either end of the Broadwalk there are two wooden shelters whilst the centre of the Broadwalk is marked by the Almond Pavilion . The pavilion was opened in 1881 and was a refreshment pavilion for decades before it fell into disrepair ; by the 1980s it was derelict and it was then completely destroyed by fire . It has been fully reconstructed , including a replica of the original clock tower , and is once more a refreshment kiosk with new toilet facilities . It offers panoramic views into the northern fields and across the boating lake . An oriental garden was opened in 2011 to mark the twenty @-@ year anniversary of the twinning arrangement between Gateshead and Komatsu . This includes a gravel pond , waterfalls and stone lanterns . The park is also host to three well @-@ used bowling greens , replete with their own pavilion ( the Avenue Green Pavilion ) and a rose garden . 
 Various other attractions have been installed and subsequently removed from the park , including a paddling pool , a museum and , from 1982 to 1993 , a retired and modified Vickers Viscount 701 airplane . The aircraft had its wings cut short and was marked " Saltwell Airways " . 
 = = Awards and usage = = 
 Upon opening , Saltwell Park was also called The People 's Park and the name is still used locally today . Today , the park is a green lung in the centre of the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead which attracts over two million visitors a year . In 2005 it was named " Britain 's Best Park " . In 2006 the park was chosen as Civic Trust Park of the Year and received a Gold Laurel Award from the Institute of Maintenance and Building Management . The park has won a Green Flag award every year since 2006 and was in 2013 re @-@ listed as one of fifty @-@ five Green Heritage sites in the UK . 
 The park has long been a hub of local social activities and events . A public firework display was first held in 1883 , the first circus was hosted in 1886 and the Holidays at Home programme was conducted there during World War II – from September 1942 to the end of the war , families and American G.I.s could enjoy donkey rides , dancing , brass bands and gymnastic events . A bonfire night fireworks display has been held at the park for many years , one of three public displays in Gateshead ( the other two are at <unk> in Ryton and Oliver Henderson Park in Leam Lane ) . This event has grown into one of the largest displays in Tyne and Wear and is attended by thousands of people . In October 2012 , Saltwell Park was the site of the first British Legion Field of Remembrance in North East England . Around ten thousand crosses were planted in Saltwell Grove . An Enchanted Parks event was hosted for the seventh consecutive year in December 2012 . This is a collection of winter @-@ themed visual arts , sculpture and interactive features which attracts around 14 @,@ 000 visitors every year . An annual sculpture day has been held at the park for twenty @-@ seven years and members of the public are invited to build themed sculptures under the supervision of local professionals . The 2012 renewal , themed " Wonders of the World " , was held in Saltwell Grove and attracted hundreds of families . 
 Saltwell Park has hosted a Race for Life – a national fundraising event for women only , organised by Cancer Research UK – for a number of years . The 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) course has been attempted by over 8 @,@ 000 competitors in the last three years , with the latest renewal held in May 2012 . On 21 March 2010 the park hosted a fundraising day in support of Sport Relief , a bi @-@ annual charity event organised by the BBC . Three fun runs around the boating lake attracted over 4 @,@ 000 participants in total , including Jayne <unk> , Andrew Hayden Smith and Futureheads guitarist David Craig . Local athletics club Saltwell Harriers have hosted an annual 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) race in and around Saltwell Park since 1911 . Named the Ronnie Walker Saltwell Road Race since 2010 in honour of the long @-@ standing club president , it is the oldest road race in England . 1984 Olympic silver medallist Mike McLeod won the race for 16 consecutive years between 1974 – 1990 and the 2012 renewal saw Coventry Godiva Harrier Matthew Armstrong beat almost 400 competitors to win the race for a second time . In November 2012 a " green gym " was opened at the park . Fitness equipment was installed near the tennis courts in the Northern Fields section of the park and is available for use by the public free of charge . This is one of only two such outdoor public gyms in Gateshead , the other being opened simultaneously at Windy Nook Nature Reserve . 
 = The Boat Race 1880 = 
 The 37th Boat Race , an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames , took place on 22 March 1880 following a postponement two days earlier as a result of thick fog . It is the only time in the history of the event that the race has been rescheduled . Oxford won by a margin of three @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 21 minutes 23 seconds . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is an annual rowing eight competition between the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge . First held in 1829 , the competition is a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) race along The Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race by three lengths . However , Oxford held the overall lead , with 18 victories to Cambridge 's 17 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were George Drinkwater Bourne ( who rowed in the 1842 race ) and Tom Cottingham Edwards @-@ Moss ( who rowed four times for Oxford between the 1875 and 1878 race ) . There is no record of Cambridge 's coaches . The race was umpired , for the final time , by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . The race was originally scheduled for the preceding Saturday , 20 March , but was postponed until the Monday by the umpire as a result of thick fog . It is the only time the history of the event that such a course of action has been taken . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 13 lb ( 75 @.@ 6 kg ) , 3 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 6 kg ) more than their opponents . The Cambridge crew contained three rowers with previous Boat Race experience , including the Cambridge University Boat Club president Edward Henry Prest who was participating in his third race . Similarly Oxford saw three former Blues return , including H. B. Southwell rowing for a third time . 
 For the first time in the history of the event , two of the competitors were <unk> as non @-@ British , both rowing for Cambridge . Their number three , William Barton , was born in Wellington , New Zealand , while the number five , C. N. L. Armytage ( whose brother George had rowed in the 1874 race ) , was recorded as being Australian . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . At the time of the race , which commenced at <unk> , there was a strong easterly wind . With a higher stroke rate than their opponents , the Light Blues took the lead from the start and by Craven Steps were almost clear . At the Mile Post , Oxford had cut the lead to half a length , but were forced to take evasive action to avoid a collision with river traffic . 
 By Hammersmith Bridge , Cambridge were nearly clear again , but at The Doves pub , Oxford 's stroke L. R. West increased the rate and reduced the deficit . Despite catching a " crab " , the Dark Blues continued to overhaul Cambridge and were level by the bottom of Chiswick Eyot . They took the lead along Chiswick Reach , held a two length advantage at Barnes Bridge and passed the finishing post " fairly comfortably " . They won by three @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 21 minutes 23 seconds , securing their second victory in three years and taking the overall record to 19 – 17 in their favour . 
 = Polyozellus = 
 Polyozellus is a fungal genus in the family Thelephoraceae , a grouping of mushrooms known collectively as the leathery <unk> . A monotypic genus , it contains the single species Polyozellus multiplex , first described in 1899 , and commonly known as the blue chanterelle , the clustered blue chanterelle , or , in Alaska , the black chanterelle . The distinctive fruit body of this species comprises blue- to purple @-@ colored clusters of vase- or spoon @-@ shaped caps with <unk> wrinkles on the undersurface that run down the length of the stem . 
 Polyozellus has had a varied taxonomic history and has been reclassified several times at both the family and genus level . The range of Polyozellus includes North America and eastern Asia , where P. multiplex may be found growing on the ground in coniferous forests , usually under spruce and fir trees . It is an edible species , and has been harvested for commercial purposes . Polyozellus multiplex contains the bioactive compound polyozellin , shown to have various physiological properties , including suppressive effects on stomach cancer . 
 = = History and taxonomy = = 
 The first published description of the species was written by botanist Lucien M. Underwood in 1899 , based on a specimen found the previous year in the woods of Mount Desert , Maine . Although he called the new species a Cantharellus , he noted that " the plant is a remarkable one and from its habit might well form a distinct genus since it has little in common with Cantharellus except its fold @-@ like gills . " In 1910 , William Murrill transferred it to the new genus Polyozellus ; Murrill thought the compound structure of the stem to be a sufficiently unique characteristic to warrant it being separated from Cantharellus species , which have simpler stem structures . In 1920 , specimens from a Japanese collection compiled by A. Yasuda were sent to mycologist Curtis Gates Lloyd , who believed the fungus to be a new species and named it <unk> <unk> . 
 No further collections of the fungus were reported until 1937 , when it was found in Quebec , Canada . The next year , Paul Shope considered the genus Polyozellus to be superfluous , pointed out that the compound fruit bodies and the wrinkled hymenium were instead consistent with the genus Craterellus . In 1939 , American mycologist Lee Oras Overholts , in a letter to the journal Mycologia , opined that both of these authors had overlooked a 1925 publication by Calvin Henry Kauffman , who made notes and photos of the species collected in the Rocky Mountains of Wyoming and Colorado , and in the Cascade Mountains of Washington and Oregon . Kauffman believed the species to be merely " a very extreme growth condition " of Cantharellus clavatus ( now known as Gomphus clavatus ) and suggested there was no reason for transferring the species to the genus Craterellus . Mycologists Alexander H. Smith and Elizabeth Morse , in their 1947 publication on Cantharellus species in the United States , placed the species in a new section Polyozellus , but did not separate it from the genus Cantharellus ; they defined the distinguishing characteristics of Polyozellus as the small , roughened , hyaline spores and the color change of the flesh in potassium hydroxide solution , adding that " the spores are unusual for the genus but in our estimation do not warrant excluding the species . " 
 In 1953 , <unk> Imazeki took into consideration differences in spore characteristics : species in the genus Cantharellus were not known to have spores that were subglobose ( roughly spherical ) and tuberculate ( covered with wart @-@ like projections ) like Polyozellus ; however , these spore characteristics were common in species in the Thelephoraceae family ( Cantharellus belongs in a different family , the <unk> ) . Other characteristics linking the blue chanterelle with the Thelephoraceae included the dark color , the strong odor ( especially in dried specimens ) , and the presence of thelephoric acid , a mushroom pigment common in the family . Taken together , these factors led Imazeki to propose the new family <unk> . The suggested family @-@ level taxonomical change was not accepted by other authors ; for example , in 1954 , Seiichi Kawamura renamed it Thelephora multiplex . As of 2009 , both Index Fungorum and MycoBank list Polyozellus as being within the Thelephoraceae family , a grouping of mushrooms commonly known as the leathery <unk> . The genus name is derived from the Greek poly meaning many , and oz , meaning branch . The specific epithet multiplex means " in many pieces " , referring to the compound nature of the fruit body . Common names for this species include the blue chanterelle and the clustered blue chanterelle . In Alaska , where specimens typically have very dark @-@ colored fruit bodies , it is called the black chanterelle , although this name is shared with some Craterellus species . 
 = = Description = = 
 Polyozellus multiplex is part of the group of fungi collectively known as <unk> mushrooms ( which includes the genera Cantharellus , Craterellus , Gomphus , and Polyozellus ) because of the similarity of their fruit body structures and the morphology of the spore @-@ producing region ( the hymenophore ) on the underside of the caps . The fan- or funnel @-@ shaped fruit bodies of the black chanterelle grow clustered together on the ground , often in large masses that may reach aggregate diameters of up to 1 meter ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) , although they are usually up to 30 centimeters ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) . 
 The individual caps , 3 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) wide and almost as long , are violet @-@ black , with edges that are initially whitish , and with a glaucous surface — a white powdery accumulation of spore deposit . The upper surface may be zonate — lined with what appear to be multiple concentric zones of texture caused by areas of fine hairs ( a tomentum ) ; and the edges of the caps have a layer of very fine hairs and are lobed and wavy . The underside of the caps bears the fertile , spore @-@ making tissue called the hymenium , which typically has shallow , crowded wrinkles or veins that are roughly the same color or paler than the top surface . Some variation in color has been observed depending on the collection location . For example , specimens found in Alaska are more likely to be jet @-@ black in color with a dark gray underside . 
 Fruit bodies may be up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) high ( including the stem ) and 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide . Occasionally , much larger clusters of fused mushrooms are found , up to a meter in diameter . The stem is dark purplish @-@ black with a smooth ( glabrous ) and dry surface ; the stems are often fused at the base . It is typically 1 @.@ 5 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide and up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) long . The flesh is dark violet , soft but breaking easily . The spore deposit is white . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are roughly spherical to broadly ellipsoid in shape , covered with small wart @-@ like projections ( <unk> ) , and have dimensions of 6 – 8 @.@ 5 by 5 @.@ 5 – 8 µm . Viewed microscopically , they are hyaline , meaning they appear translucent or colorless . Chemical tests may also be used to help distinguish the spores : in the presence of potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) , the spores turn slightly green ; the spores are not amyloid , meaning they do not take iodine when treated with Melzer 's reagent ; the spores are acyanophilous , meaning they do not readily absorb methyl blue stain . The cystidia that comprise the hymenium are filamentous and 3 – 4 µm wide by 28 – 40 µm long . The outer tissue layer of the cap — the cuticle , or pileipellis — is made of interwoven hyphae , and stains olive @-@ green in KOH . Clamp connections are present , but not at all the cell partitions . The basidia , the spore @-@ bearing cells , are 32 – 38 by 5 – 6 µm and four @-@ spored . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The horn @-@ of @-@ plenty mushroom ( Craterellus <unk> ) also has a blackish fruit body and a smooth hymenium , but is distinguished from P. multiplex by its thin flesh , a trumpet- or tubular @-@ shaped fruit body ( rather than fan- or spoon @-@ shaped ) , and grey to black colors . A closely related species , the fragrant chanterelle ( Cantharellus odoratus ) , also tends to grow in dense clusters , but it is orange rather than blue . Craterellus <unk> does not form compound clusters , and is not restricted to coniferous forests . The pig 's ear Gomphus , species Gomphus clavatus , is similar in shape and form but fleshier , and light violet to pink . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Polyozellus multiplex is an ectomycorrhizal species , meaning that the hyphae of the fungus grow in a mutualistic association with the roots of plants , but the fungal hyphae generally do not penetrate the cells of the plant 's roots . The species grows in coniferous woods under spruce and fir , and more frequently at higher elevations . It is most often encountered in summer and fall . 
 This species is northern and alpine in distribution , and rarely encountered . Collections have been made in the United States ( including Maine , Oregon , Colorado , New Mexico , and Alaska ) , Canada ( Quebec and British Columbia ) , China , Japan , and Korea . The disjunct distribution of this species in North America and East Asia has been noted to occur in a number of other fungal species as well . Polyozellus multiplex is also found in the Queen Charlotte Islands , where it is commercially harvested . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Polyozellus multiplex is edible , and is collected for sale in Asian countries such as Korea , Japan , and China . In North America , it is sometimes collected recreationally , and commercially . The taste is described as mild , and the odor as mild or aromatic . Mycologist David Arora claims the flavor to be inferior to Craterellus . Fruit bodies may be preserved by drying . 
 = = = Bioactive compounds = = = 
 The compound polyozellin — a chemical which can be isolated and purified from P. multiplex — inhibits prolyl endopeptidase ( PEP ) , an enzyme that has a role in processing proteins ( specifically , amyloid precursor protein ) in Alzheimer 's disease . Chemicals that inhibit PEP have attracted research interest due to their potential therapeutic effects . Further analyses of extracts from P. multiplex revealed similar <unk> derivatives of polyozellin , each with different chemical properties , including kynapcin @-@ 12 , kynapcin @-@ 13 and -28 , and <unk> . A total synthesis of kynapcin @-@ 24 was achieved in 2009 . 
 = = = <unk> properties = = = 
 Research conducted in 2003 suggests that extracts from Polyozellus multiplex may have suppressive effects on stomach cancer . The study showed that feeding a low concentration ( 0 @.@ 5 % or 1 % ) of the mushroom extract enhanced the activities of the enzymes glutathione S @-@ transferase and superoxide dismutase , and increased the abundance of the molecule glutathione . The extract also augmented the expression of the protein p53 . All of these substances protect the human organism against cancer . Additional studies reported in 2004 and 2006 attribute anti @-@ tumor properties to polyozellin . 
 = = Cited literature = = 
 Pilz D , Norvell L , <unk> E , Molina R ( 2003 ) . Ecology and management of commercially harvested chanterelle mushrooms . General Technical Report PNW @-@ GTR @-@ 576 ( PDF ) . Portland , OR : Department of Agriculture , Forest Service , Pacific Northwest Research Station . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 09 @-@ 23 . 
 = Klaus Fuchs = 
 Emil Julius Klaus Fuchs ( 29 December 1911 – 28 January 1988 ) was a German theoretical physicist and atomic spy who , in 1950 , was convicted of supplying information from the American , British , and Canadian Manhattan Project to the Soviet Union during and shortly after the Second World War . While at the Los Alamos National Laboratory , Fuchs was responsible for many significant theoretical calculations relating to the first nuclear weapons , and later , early models of the hydrogen bomb . 
 The son of a Lutheran pastor , Fuchs attended the University of Leipzig , where his father was a professor of theology , and became involved in student politics , joining the student branch of the Social Democratic Party of Germany ( SPD ) , and the Reichsbanner Schwarz @-@ Rot @-@ Gold , the SPD 's paramilitary organisation . He was expelled from the SPD in 1932 , and joined the Communist Party of Germany ( KPD ) . He went into hiding after the 1933 Reichstag fire , and fled to the United Kingdom , where he received his PhD from the University of Bristol under the supervision of Nevill Mott , and his DSc from the University of Edinburgh , where he worked as an assistant to Max Born . 
 After the Second World War broke out in Europe , he was interned on the Isle of Man , and later in Canada . After he returned to Britain in 1941 , he became an assistant to Rudolf Peierls , working on " Tube Alloys " — the British atomic bomb project . He began passing information on the project to the Soviet Union through Ruth Kuczynski , codenamed " Sonia " , a German communist and a major in Soviet Military Intelligence who had worked with Richard Sorge 's spy ring in the Far East . In 1943 , Fuchs and Peierls went to Columbia University , in New York City , to work on the Manhattan Project . In August 1944 Fuchs joined the Theoretical Physics Division at the Los Alamos Laboratory , working under Hans Bethe . His chief area of expertise was the problem of implosion , necessary for the development of the plutonium bomb . After the war he returned to the UK and worked at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell as head of the Theoretical Physics Division . 
 In January 1950 , Fuchs confessed that he was a spy . He was sentenced to fourteen years ' imprisonment and stripped of his British citizenship . He was released in 1959 , after serving nine years , and emigrated to the German Democratic Republic ( East Germany ) , where he was elected to the Academy of Sciences and the Socialist Unity Party of Germany ( SED ) central committee . He was later appointed deputy director of the Institute for Nuclear Research in <unk> , where he served until he retired in 1979 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Emil Julius Klaus Fuchs was born in Rüsselsheim , Grand Duchy of Hesse , on 29 December 1911 , the third of four children of a Lutheran pastor , Emil Fuchs , and his wife Else Wagner . Fuchs was always known by his last given name , Klaus . He had an older brother Gerhard , an older sister Elisabeth , and a younger sister , Kristel . The family moved to Eisenach , where he attended the gymnasium , and took his Abitur . At school , Fuchs and his siblings were taunted over his father 's unpopular political views , which they came to share . They became known as the " red foxes " , Fuchs being the German word for fox . 
 Fuchs entered the University of Leipzig in 1930 , where his father was a professor of theology . He became involved in student politics , joining the student branch of the Social Democratic Party of Germany ( SPD ) , a party that his father had joined in 1912 , and the Reichsbanner Schwarz @-@ Rot @-@ Gold , the party 's paramilitary organisation . His father took up a new position as professor of religion at the Pedagogical Academy in Kiel , and in the autumn Fuchs transferred to the University of Kiel , which his brother Gerhard and sister Elisabeth also attended , and continued his studies in mathematics and physics . In October 1931 , his mother committed suicide by drinking hydrochloric acid . The family later discovered that his maternal grandmother had also taken her own life . 
 In the March 1932 German presidential election , the SPD supported Paul von Hindenburg for president , fearing that a split vote would hand the job to the National Socialist German Workers ' Party ( NSDAP ) candidate , Adolf Hitler . However , when the Communist Party of Germany ( KPD ) ran its own candidate , Ernst <unk> , Fuchs offered to speak for him , and was expelled from the SPD . That year Fuchs and all three of his siblings joined the KPD . Fuchs and his brother Gerhard were active speakers at public meetings , and occasionally attempted to disrupt NSDAP gatherings . At one such gathering , Fuchs was beaten up and thrown into the river . 
 When Hitler became Chancellor of Germany in January 1933 , Fuchs decided to leave Kiel , where the NSDAP was particularly strong , and he was a well @-@ known KPD member , and he enrolled at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics in Berlin . On 28 February , he took an early train to Berlin for a KPD meeting there . On the train , he read about the Reichstag fire in a newspaper . Fuchs correctly assumed that opposition parties would be blamed for the fire , and quietly removed his hammer and sickle lapel pin . 
 The KPD meeting in Berlin was held in secret . Fellow party members urged him to continue his studies in another country . He went into hiding for five months in the apartment of a fellow party member . In August 1933 , he attended an anti @-@ fascist conference in Paris chaired by Henri <unk> , where he met an English couple , Ronald and Jessie Gunn , who invited Fuchs to stay with them in Clapton , Somerset . He was eventually expelled from the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in October 1933 . 
 = = Refugee in Britain = = 
 Fuchs arrived in England on 24 September 1933 . Jessie Gunn was a member of the Wills family , the heirs to Imperial Tobacco and benefactors of the University of Bristol . She arranged for Fuchs to meet Nevill Mott , Bristol 's professor of physics , and he agreed to take Fuchs on as a research assistant . Fuchs earned his Ph.D. in physics there in 1937 . A paper on " A Quantum Mechanical Calculation of the Elastic Constants of <unk> Metals " was published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society in 1936 . By this time Mott had a number of German refugees working for him , and lacked positions for them all . He did not think that Fuchs would make much of a teacher , so he arranged a research post for Fuchs , at the University of Edinburgh working under Max Born , who was himself a German refugee . Fuchs published papers with Born on " The Statistical Mechanics of Condensing Systems " and " On Fluctuations in Electromagnetic radiation " in the Proceedings of the Royal Society . He also received a Doctorate in Science degree from Edinburgh . Fuchs proudly mailed copies back to his father in Germany . 
 In Germany , Emil had been dismissed from his academic post , and , disillusioned with the Lutheran Church 's support of the NSDAP , had become a Quaker in 1933 . He was arrested for speaking out against the government , but was only held for one month . Elisabeth married a fellow communist , Gustav Kittowski , with whom she had a child they named Klaus . Elisabeth and Kittowski were arrested in 1933 , and sentenced to 18 months imprisonment , but were freed at Christmas . Gerhard and his wife Karin were arrested in 1934 , and spent the next two years in prison . Gerhard , Karin , Elisabeth and Kittowski established a car rental agency in Berlin , which they used to smuggle Jews and opponents of the government out of Germany . 
 After Emil was arrested in 1933 , Kristel fled to Zurich , where she studied education and psychology at the University of Zurich . She returned to Berlin in 1934 , where she too worked at the car rental agency . In 1936 , Emil arranged with Quaker friends in the United States for Kristel to attend Swarthmore College there . She visited Fuchs in England en route to America , where she eventually married an American communist , Robert Heineman , and settled in Cambridge , Massachusetts . She became a permanent resident in the United States in May 1938 . In 1936 , Kittowski and Elisabeth were arrested again , and the rental cars were impounded . Gerhard and Karin fled to Czechoslovakia . Elisabeth was released and went to live with Emil , while Kittowski , sentenced to six years , later escaped from prison and also made his way to Czechoslovakia . In August 1939 , Elisabeth committed suicide by throwing herself from a train , leaving Emil to raise young Klaus . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Fuchs applied to become a British citizen in August 1939 , but his application had not been processed before the Second World War broke out in Europe in September 1939 . There was a classification system for enemy aliens , but Born provided Fuchs with a reference that said that he had been a member of the SPD from 1930 to 1932 , and an anti @-@ Nazi . There , matters stood until June 1940 , when the police arrived and took Fuchs into internment on the Isle of Man . In July , he was sent to an internment camp in Sherbrooke , Quebec , Canada , where he joined a communist discussion group led by Hans Kahle . Kahle was a KPD member who had fought in the Spanish Civil War . After fleeing to Britain with his family , Kahle had helped Jurgen Kuczynski organise the KPD in Britain . Kristel arranged for Israel Halperin , the brother @-@ in @-@ law of a friend of hers , Wendell Furry , to bring Fuchs some magazines . Max Born lobbied for his release . On Christmas Day 1940 , Fuchs and Kahle were among the first group of internees to board a ship to return to Britain . 
 Fuchs returned to Edinburgh in January , and resumed working for Born . During 1940 , he published four more papers with Born on The Mass Centre in Relativity , Reciprocity , Part II : <unk> Wave Functions , Reciprocity , Part III : Reciprocal Wave Functions and Reciprocity , Part IV : <unk> Wave Functions , and one by himself , On the Statistical Method in Nuclear Theory . On May 1941 , he was approached by Rudolf Peierls of the University of Birmingham to work on the " Tube Alloys " program – the British atomic bomb research project . Despite wartime restrictions , he was granted British citizenship on 7 August 1942 and signed an Official Secrets Act declaration form . As accommodation was scarce in wartime Birmingham , he stayed with Rudolf and Genia Peierls . Fuchs and Peierls did some important work together , which included a fundamental paper about isotope separation . 
 Soon after , Fuchs contacted Jurgen Kuczynski , who was now teaching at the London School of Economics . Kuczynski put him in contact with Simon <unk> Kremer ( codename : " Alexander " ) the secretary to the military attaché at the Soviet Union 's embassy , who worked for the GRU ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , the Red Army 's foreign military intelligence directorate . After three meetings , Fuchs was teamed up with a courier so he would not have to find excuses to travel to London . She was Ruth Kuczynski ( codename : " Sonia " ) the sister of Jurgen Kuczynski . She was a German communist , a major in Soviet Military Intelligence and an experienced agent who had worked with Richard Sorge 's spy ring in the Far East . 
 In late 1943 , Fuchs ( codename : " Rest " ; he became " Charles " in May 1944 ) transferred along with Peierls to Columbia University , in New York City , to work on gaseous diffusion as a means of uranium enrichment for the Manhattan Project . Although Fuchs was " an asset " of GRU in Britain , his " control " was transferred to the NKGB ( Russian : Народный <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , the Soviet Union 's civilian intelligence organisation , when he moved to New York . He spent Christmas 1943 with Kristel and her family in Cambridge . He was contacted by Harry Gold ( codename : " Raymond " ) , an NKGB agent in early 1944 . 
 From August 1944 Fuchs worked in the Theoretical Physics Division at the Los Alamos Laboratory , under Hans Bethe . His chief area of expertise was the problem of imploding the fissionable core of the plutonium bomb . At one point , Fuchs did calculation work that Edward Teller had refused to do because of lack of interest . He was the author of techniques ( such as the still @-@ used Fuchs @-@ Nordheim method ) for calculating the energy of a fissile assembly that goes highly prompt critical , and his report on blast waves is still considered a classic . Later , he also filed a patent with John von Neumann , describing a method to initiate fusion in a thermonuclear weapon with an implosion trigger . Fuchs was one of the many Los Alamos scientists present at the Trinity test . Bethe considered Fuchs " one of the most valuable men in my division " and " one of the best theoretical physicists we had . " 
 Fuchs , who was known as " Karl " rather than " Klaus " at Los Alamos , dated grade school teachers Evelyn Kline and Jean Parker . He befriended Richard Feynman . Fuchs and Peierls were the only members of the British Mission to Los Alamos who owned cars , and Fuchs lent his Buick to Feynman so Feynman could visit his dying wife in hospital in Albuquerque . 
 Klaus Fuchs 's main courier was Harry Gold . Allen Weinstein , the author of The Haunted Wood : Soviet Espionage in America ( 1999 ) , has pointed out : " The NKVD had chosen Gold , an experienced group handler , as Fuchs ' contact on the grounds that it was safer than having him meet directly with a Russian operative , but Semyon <unk> was ultimately responsible for the Fuchs relationship . " 
 Gold reported after his first meeting with Klaus Fuchs : 
 He ( Fuchs ) obviously worked with our people before and he is fully aware of what he is doing . … He is a mathematical physicist … most likely a very brilliant man to have such a position at his age ( he looks about 30 ) . We took a long walk after dinner . … He is a member of a British mission to the U.S. working under the direct control of the U.S. Army . … The work involves mainly separating the isotopes ... and is being done thusly : The electronic method has been developed at Berkeley , California , and is being carried out at a place known only as Camp Y. … Simultaneously , the diffusion method is being tried here in the East . … Should the diffusion method prove successful , it will be used as a preliminary step in the separation , with the final work being done by the electronic method . They hope to have the electronic method ready early in 1945 and the diffusion method in July 1945 , but ( Fuchs ) says the latter estimate is optimistic . ( Fuchs ) says there is much being withheld from the British . Even Niels Bohr , who is now in the country incognito as Nicholas Baker , has not been told everything . 
 = = Post war = = 
 At the request of Norris Bradbury , who had replaced Robert Oppenheimer as director of the Los Alamos Laboratory in October 1945 , Fuchs stayed on at the laboratory into 1946 to help with preparations for the Operation Crossroads weapons tests . The US Atomic Energy Act of 1946 ( McMahon Act ) prohibited the transfer of information on nuclear research to any foreign country , including Britain , without explicit official authority , and Fuchs supplied highly classified US information to nuclear scientists in Britain as well as to his Soviet contacts . As of 2014 British official files on Fuchs were still being withheld . 
 He was highly regarded as a scientist by the British , who wanted him to return to the United Kingdom to work on Britain 's post @-@ war nuclear weapons program ; he returned in August 1946 and became the head of the Theoretical Physics Division at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell . From late 1947 to May 1949 he gave Alexander Feklisov , his Soviet case officer , the principal theoretical outline for creating a hydrogen bomb and the initial drafts for its development as the work progressed in England and America . Meeting with Feklisov six times , he provided the results of the test at Eniwetok Atoll of uranium and plutonium bombs and the key data on production of uranium @-@ 235 . 
 Fuchs later testified that he passed detailed information on the project to the Soviet Union through courier Harry Gold in 1945 , and further information about Edward Teller 's unworkable " Super " design for a hydrogen bomb in 1946 and 1947 . Fuchs attended a conference of the Combined Policy Committee ( CPC ) in 1947 , a committee created to facilitate exchange of atomic secrets at the highest levels of governments of the United States , Great Britain and Canada ; Donald Maclean , another Soviet spy , was also in attendance as British co @-@ secretary of CPC . 
 By September 1949 , information from the Venona project indicated to GCHQ that Fuchs was a spy , but the British intelligence services were wary of indicating the source of their information . The Soviets had broken off contact with him in February . Fuchs may have been subsequently tipped off by Kim Philby . In October 1949 , Fuchs approached Henry Arnold , the head of security at Harwell , with the news that his father had been given a chair at the University of Leipzig in East Germany . 
 Under interrogation by MI5 officer William Skardon at an informal meeting in December 1949 , Fuchs initially denied being a spy and was not detained . In January 1950 , Fuchs arranged another interview with Skardon and voluntarily confessed that he was a spy . Three days later , he also directed a statement more technical in content to Michael Perrin , the deputy controller of atomic energy within the Ministry of Supply . Fuchs told interrogators that the NKGB had acquired an agent in Berkeley , California , who had informed the Soviet Union about electromagnetic separation research of uranium @-@ 235 in 1942 or earlier . Fuchs 's statements to British and American intelligence agencies were used to implicate Harry Gold , a key witness in the trials of David Greenglass and Julius and Ethel Rosenberg in the United States . 
 = = Value of Fuchs 's data to the Soviet project = = 
 Hans Bethe once said that Klaus Fuchs was the only physicist he knew who truly changed history . Because the head of the Soviet project , <unk> Beria , used foreign intelligence as a third @-@ party check , rather than giving it directly to the scientists , as he did not trust the information by default , it is unknown whether Fuchs 's fission information had a substantial effect . Considering that the pace of the Soviet program was set primarily by the amount of uranium they could procure , it is hard for scholars to accurately judge how much time this saved . 
 According to On a Field of Red , a history of the Comintern ( Communist International ) by Anthony Cave Brown and Charles B. MacDonald , Fuchs 's greatest contribution to the Soviets may have been disclosing how uranium could be processed for use in a bomb . Fuchs gave Gold technical information in January 1945 that was acquired only after two years of experimentation at a cost of $ 400 million . Fuchs also disclosed the amount of uranium or plutonium the Americans planned to use in each atomic bomb . 
 Whether the information Fuchs passed relating to the hydrogen bomb would have been useful is still debated . Most scholars agree with Hans Bethe 's 1952 assessment , which concluded that by the time Fuchs left the thermonuclear program — the summer of 1946 — too little was known about the mechanism of the hydrogen bomb for his information to be useful to the Soviet Union . The successful Teller @-@ Ulam design was not devised until 1951 . Soviet physicists later noted that they could see as well as the Americans eventually did that the early designs by Fuchs and Edward Teller were useless . 
 Later archival work by Soviet physicist German Goncharov suggested that while Fuchs 's early work did not help Soviet efforts towards the hydrogen bomb , it was closer to the final correct solution than anyone recognized at the time — and indeed spurred Soviet research into useful problems that eventually provided the correct answer . Since most of Fuchs 's work on the bomb , including a 1946 patent on a particular model for the weapon , are still classified in the United States , it has been difficult for scholars to fully assess these conclusions . In any case , it seems clear that Fuchs could not have just given the Soviets the " secret " to the hydrogen bomb , since he did not himself actually know it . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Fuchs 's espionage likely led the U.S. to cancel a 1950 Anglo @-@ American plan to give Britain American @-@ made atomic bombs . He was prosecuted by Sir Hartley Shawcross , and was convicted on 1 March 1950 of four counts of breaking the Official Secrets Act by " ... communicating information to a potential enemy . " After a trial lasting less than 90 minutes , Lord Goddard sentenced him to fourteen years ' imprisonment , the maximum for espionage , because the Soviet Union was classed as an ally at the time . In December 1950 he was stripped of his British citizenship . The head of the British H @-@ bomb project , Sir William Penney , visited Fuchs in prison in 1952 . 
 Fuchs was released on 23 June 1959 , after serving nine years and four months of his sentence ( as then required in England where long @-@ term prisoners were entitled by law to one @-@ third off for good behaviour in prison ) at Wakefield Prison and promptly emigrated to the German Democratic Republic ( East Germany ) . A tutorial he gave to Qian <unk> and other Chinese physicists helped them to develop the first Chinese atomic bomb , the 596 , which was tested five years later — according to Thomas Reed and Daniel Stillman , the authors of The Nuclear Express : A Political History of the Bomb and Its Proliferation ( 2009 ) . Three historians of nuclear weapons history , Robert S. Norris , Jeremy Bernstein , and Peter D. Zimmerman , challenged this particular assertion as " unsubstantiated conjecture " and asserted that The Nuclear Express is " an ambitious but deeply flawed book " . 
 In 1959 , Fuchs married a friend from his years as a student communist , Grete ( Margarete ) <unk> . He continued his scientific career and achieved considerable prominence . He was elected to the Academy of Sciences and the SED central committee and was later appointed deputy director of the Institute for Nuclear Research in <unk> , where he served until he retired in 1979 . He received the Patriotic Order of Merit , the Order of Karl Marx and the National Prize of East Germany . He died in Berlin on 28 January 1988 . He was cremated and his ashes buried in the " <unk> " of the Socialists ' Memorial in Berlin 's Friedrichsfelde Cemetery . 
 = Howard Kippenberger = 
 Major General Sir Howard Karl Kippenberger KBE , CB , DSO & Bar , ED ( 28 January 1897 – 5 May 1957 ) , known as " Kip " , was an officer of the New Zealand Military Forces who served in the First and Second World Wars . 
 Born in the Canterbury Region of New Zealand , Kippenberger joined the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) in late 1915 . He saw action in France on the Western Front , participating in the Battle of Flers @-@ Courcelette . A serious wound in November 1916 saw him repatriated to New Zealand and discharged from the NZEF . He qualified as a solicitor in 1920 and worked in a legal practice in Rangiora . In 1924 , he joined the Territorial Force and by 1936 had advanced in rank to lieutenant colonel . 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Kippenberger was appointed to command the 20th Battalion . He led the battalion for two years , through the Battles of Greece and Crete as well as part of the North African Campaign before being promoted to brigadier and taking command of the 5th Infantry Brigade . The pinnacle of his military career was as commander of the 2nd New Zealand Division during the Italian Campaign . He was wounded on 3 March 1944 during the Battle of Monte Cassino when he stepped on a land mine . As a result of his wounds , he lost both of his feet . After recovery in England , during which he was fitted with artificial limbs , he helped prepare for and assisted in the repatriation of newly released New Zealand prisoners of war . In 1946 , he was appointed Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief of New Zealand 's largest @-@ ever publishing project , the Official History of New Zealand in the Second World War 1939 – 45 . He was still working on the project when he died on 5 May 1957 in Wellington . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Howard Kippenberger was born on 28 January 1897 in <unk> , in the Canterbury Region of New Zealand , to Karl and Annie Kippenberger . His unusual surname came from his paternal great @-@ grandparents , who emigrated to New Zealand from Germany in 1862 . The oldest of five children , he received his early education at local schools in <unk> and nearby <unk> ( Kippenberger 's father was the headmaster at <unk> School ) . When he was 14 , his father became a farmer and moved the family to Oxford . Kippenberger continued his schooling at Christchurch Boys ' High School as a boarder . Intellectually advanced for his age , he was not academically challenged at school and misbehaved in class . This , together with a low attendance rate , led to the school authorities asking him to leave high school . Returning home to Oxford , he worked on the family farm . 
 Always interested in military history , Kippenberger joined the local unit of the New Zealand Cadet Corps and found that he enjoyed soldiering . His father did not approve of his interest but regardless , Kippenberger enlisted in the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) in late 1915 at the age of 18 . Because only men between the ages of 19 and 45 were required to register for service , he falsified his age to ensure that he would be eligible for duty overseas . 
 = = First World War = = 
 From January to April 1916 , Kippenberger underwent basic training at Trentham Military Camp as part of the 12th Reinforcement of the NZEF . On 1 May , he embarked for Europe to join the New Zealand Division . However , during transit his transport ship was unexpectedly diverted to Egypt . For two months , his contingent was based at the training camp of the Australian Imperial Force at Tel @-@ el @-@ Kebir but had very little to do with only a few hours of training each day . The 12th Reinforcement left in July for Sling Camp in England , where it underwent more intense training . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 Kippenberger finally arrived on the Western Front in September 1916 , as a private in the 1st Canterbury Regiment . His arrival at the front coincided with the Somme Offensive . He took part in the Battle of Flers @-@ Courcelette which began on 15 September and remained in the front lines for over three weeks before the regiment was withdrawn . His unit suffered heavy casualties during this time ; Kippenberger was one of just five soldiers left in his platoon after the battle ended . 
 After rest and recovery , the regiment moved to the Fromelles sector of the front in mid @-@ October . Here Kippenberger volunteered for sniper duty despite not being known for his accuracy as a marksman . He served in this capacity until he was badly wounded in the arm by shrapnel on 10 November 1916 . Although he eventually recovered from his wound , at the time it was serious enough that he was repatriated to New Zealand and discharged from the NZEF in April 1917 . 
 = = Civilian life = = 
 Kippenberger appreciated the need to establish a career for himself and to this end , decided on a profession in law . In early 1918 he enrolled at Canterbury College to study law and later in the year found a job as a law clerk in a legal practice in Christchurch . Here he met Ruth Isobel Flynn , a secretary , whom he married in 1922 . The couple had three children , two sons and a daughter . Working by day , and studying in the evenings , he qualified as a solicitor in 1920 . He moved to Rangiora , becoming the manager and then a partner of the Rangiora branch of a Christchurch legal firm . 
 Kippenberger became immersed in the Rangiora community , serving on the local council and becoming involved in various committees . He also retained an interest in the military and in 1924 , joined the Territorial Force . He firmly believed that a large scale conflict would once again occur in Europe , and he wanted to be prepared for this eventuality . Therefore , he built up an extensive military library and studied the theory of warfare and analysed past campaigns to ascertain strategy and tactics for a given situation . He noted the influence of landscape on the outcomes of battles and the qualities of a successful military commander . He even set up a large sand table in his office at his law practice for war gaming . What he would learn from his studies , he put into practice in his training with the Territorials . By 1936 , he was a lieutenant @-@ colonel , commanding the 1st Battalion of the Canterbury Regiment . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 , Kippenberger was given command of the 20th Battalion . Formed at Burnham Military Camp in early October , the battalion was to be part of the 2nd New Zealand Division . After a period of training , it departed for the Middle East on 5 January 1940 . The battalion arrived at its base in Maadi , Egypt , on 14 February , and was involved in training and garrison duty at Baggush for most of the next 12 months . 
 = = = Greece and Crete = = = 
 Anticipating an invasion of Greece by the Germans in 1941 , the British Government decided to send troops to support the Greeks . The 2nd New Zealand Division , under the command of Major General Bernard Freyberg , was amongst the various Allied units dispatched to Greece in early March . As part of the 4th Infantry Brigade , the 20th Battalion prepared and manned the western edge of the Aliakmon Line , a position Kippenberger was not particularly happy with . He felt the defensive line allocated to his battalion was too wide to meaningfully defend , and he took care to reconnoiter avenues of retreat from his positions . On 6 April , the expected German invasion began and they advanced so rapidly a threat to Florina Gap became apparent . The 4th Infantry Brigade , in danger of being outflanked , was withdrawn to the Servia Pass where it manned defensive positions much superior to its previous positions . 
 The German attack commenced on 14 April and the brigade defended its position for three days before being withdrawn . Kippenberger 's battalion was chosen to be the rearguard and he personally intervened in the demolition of bridges and culverts through Servia Pass to ensure that as many stragglers as possible were collected . He and some of his demolition party later came under artillery and tank fire as they attempted to catch up with the main body of the brigade , and were forced to abandon their vehicles and rejoin the battalion on foot . After conducting further delaying actions on the road leading into Athens , Kippenberger and his command were evacuated to Crete on 28 April . 
 On Crete , Kippenberger was promoted to temporary colonel and given command of the 10th Brigade , an ad @-@ hoc formation , which included a 750 @-@ man composite battalion consisting mainly of artillery and Army Service Corps men ( sans most of their heavy equipment and trucks ) , New Zealand Divisional Cavalry , some machine gunners and two Greek regiments ( although Kippenberger assessed the Greek units to be of limited use ) . His 20th Battalion was also part of the brigade but strict controls were in place around its deployment and use . 
 When the Germans launched the invasion of Crete on 20 May , Kippenberger , like most of the defenders of the island , was surprised at the sight of hundreds of Fallschirmjäger ( paratroopers ) descending under parachutes . He quickly recovered and was making his way to his headquarters , when a burst of gunfire from a paratrooper was directed his way . After twisting his ankle in avoiding the gunfire , he stalked and killed the paratrooper with a shot to the head . His brigade was positioned east of Maleme airfield , on the Galatas plains . It was well positioned to counterattack scattered paratroopers who were beginning to consolidate into a good starting position from which an attack on the airfield could be launched . His request to do so was denied by the acting divisional commander , Brigadier Edward Puttick . An attack launched later without Kippenberger 's knowledge failed although he believed the outcome could have been different if his troops had been involved . 
 For most of the remaining days of the battle , a series of attacks and counterattacks were launched . The 10th Brigade had been made subordinate to the 4th Infantry Brigade , although Kippenberger remained in command of the forward troops of the brigade around the town of Galatas . For the next few days , he was instrumental in maintaining defensive discipline of the forward troops , most of whom were not trained infantry . When Galatas fell to the Germans on 25 May , he quickly planned , led and executed a successful counterattack to recapture the town . Despite this notable success , it was short @-@ lived as the brigade had to withdraw to a shorter defensive line and the town was abandoned . Kippenberger joined up with the 20th Battalion as it gradually retreated to Sphakia , on the south coast of the island , from where it was to be evacuated to Egypt . On arrival at Sphakia he had to select a number of his men to remain as a rearguard while the rest of the battalion was evacuated on 30 May . Much to his pleasure , the rearguard that he thought he had had to abandon on Crete was able to follow the next day . 
 As a result of his actions in Greece and Crete , Kippenberger had forged a reputation for himself as one of the leading officers of the 2nd Division . His brigade commander , Puttick , recommended him for leadership of an infantry brigade although for the time being he would remain commander of the 20th Battalion . Later in the year , he would be awarded a Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) for his leadership during the Battle of Crete . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 Back in Egypt , and after a short period of rest , Kippenberger set about rebuilding the battalion , which had lost over half its original complement . Nearly 400 replacements joined the battalion and stragglers continued to arrive for several weeks as they made their way across the Mediterranean in small sailboats . By mid @-@ June , it was back up to strength . Several weeks were spent at the battalion 's previous positions at Baggush , engaged in intensive desert training . 
 = = = = Operation Crusader = = = = 
 In November 1941 , the 2nd Division participated in Operation Crusader and conducted offensive operations towards the Sidi Azeiz area . Kippenberger enjoyed early successes in this campaign , with his battalion engaged in several battles . At one stage , he responded to an attack in the battalion 's rear with a frontal assault resulting in the capture of 300 prisoners . Later on the night of 25 November , along with the 18th Battalion , he was tasked with the night @-@ time capture of Belhamed , a hill adjacent to Sidi Rezegh . As the units moved to its positions , he made a navigational error which resulted in his headquarters company becoming separated from the other companies of the battalion . It took him until daylight for him to re @-@ establish contact with the remainder of the battalion which , when he located it , was in its expected position having taken the hill with few losses . He was wounded by machine gun fire when he carelessly exposed himself while assessing the battalion 's situation . Evacuated to a dressing station , he was captured by elements of the 15th Panzer Division three days later . Still on Belhamed , the 20th Battalion was destroyed in a counterattack , an action observed by a distressed Kippenberger through field glasses . 
 The dressing station was now under the guard of Italians , the Germans having moved on . The Italians began to send the captive senior officers to prisoner of war camps in Italy , a fate Kippenberger wanted to avoid . On 4 December , he , with a party of 20 others , was able to discreetly abscond from the station by stealing a truck . Making his way back to Baggush , he ran into a group of armoured cars which forced the truck to a stop . To his relief , the armoured cars proved to be those of a South African unit . On reaching Baggush , he met up with Freyberg , who was extremely pleased to see him and promptly promoted Kippenberger to brigadier and command of the 5th Infantry Brigade on the spot ; the brigade 's previous commander , Brigadier James Hargest , had been captured during a German counteroffensive . While in Baggush , Kippenberger also convinced his superiors to send a unit back to the dressing station to rescue the remaining prisoners . For his work during the campaign , Kippenberger was mentioned in despatches . 
 The 5th Brigade consisted of the 21st , 22nd and 23rd Battalions . With the Maori Battalion frequently attached to his command , the brigade numbered 5 @,@ 000 personnel . It was regarded as a substandard formation by the other brigades of the division , and Kippenberger set about rectifying this . While the rest of the 2nd Division moved to Syria , he and his brigade remained in Baggush , and worked on defensive fortifications for several months . In April , the brigade moved to Syria to complete the 2nd Division . 
 = = = = El Alamein = = = = 
 Two months after Kippenberger 's brigade arrived in Syria , Panzer Army Afrika attacked into Libya . This prompted the recall of the 2nd New Zealand Division . The Eighth Army was defeated at the Battle of Gazala and retreated into Egypt . The recalled New Zealanders manned a defensive position at Minqar Qaim , and rebuffed several attacks . However , it was not long before the division was cut off . It successfully forced a breakout with minimal losses on 27 June and withdrew to new positions at El Alamein . On 14 July 1942 , during the First Battle of El Alamein , Kippenberger led the 5th Brigade in what would be known as the Battle of Ruweisat Ridge . Ruweisat Ridge was held by the enemy and was in the centre of the El Alamein line , dominating the surrounding area . The 5th Brigade was tasked with the capture of the centre of the ridge . The 4th Brigade was to take the western end of the ridge and the 5th Indian Brigade the eastern end . British armour , in the form of two armoured brigades , was to protect the flanks and be in support to deal with the expected counterattack . However , little thought was given to communication and liaison between the infantry and armoured brigades , nor was a clear chain of command established . This would have implications for the outcome of the battle . 
 Kippenberger 's attack required a night @-@ time advance of six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) across a front of 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) . He decided to have two battalions , the 21st and 23rd Battalions , attack across this front , with the 22nd Battalion in reserve . Artillery and anti @-@ tank units would follow at daybreak . However , he not only decided to use unreliable short @-@ range radios but also failed to make it clear to the inexperienced commander of the 21st Battalion , Lieutenant Colonel Sam Allen , that it was not expected to cover the whole frontal advance . During the advance , the elements of the battalion were spread so far apart that they lost cohesion and bypassed numerous strong points , leaving the German line in front of the ridge largely intact . 
 In the morning , the supporting British armour was nowhere to be seen and the artillery and anti @-@ tank units were unable to break through , leaving the two New Zealand brigades in position on the exposed ridge . Kippenberger inspected the brigade 's position and found his battalions under fire from German tanks . Unable to contact nearby units by radio and realising the degree to which his men were exposed , he raced off under fire in a Bren carrier to locate the British armour . Coming across an armoured brigade four miles away , he implored its commander to bring his unit forward but was refused meaningful support until the intervention of Major General Herbert Lumsden , commander of the British 1st Armoured Division . By the time the tanks had arrived , the men of the 22nd Battalion had been largely killed or captured . The headquarters element of the 23rd Battalion were also prisoners of war . By nightfall , the 4th Brigade had been overrun . Kippenberger asked for and received permission to withdraw his brigade from the ridge . Although awarded a Bar to his DSO for his dash for help from the British , Kippenberger was bitter about the poor planning of the operation and admitted his own errors of judgement . 
 On the opening day of the Second Battle of El Alamein , Kippenberger led his brigade , which had spent much of the previous weeks in defensive lines , in an attack on Miteirya Ridge during which it achieved all of its objectives . In contrast to three months earlier at Ruweisat Ridge , he took care to establish his headquarters as far forward as possible prior to the commencement of the battle to minimise communication difficulties with the units of the brigade . Despite this , he still lost contact with the leading 23rd Battalion which quickly overwhelmed its opposition . In fact , the battalion had advanced so quickly that it arrived at its final objective so far ahead of schedule that it believed it had only reached its first objective and so advanced even further . The battalion 's commander blamed his unit 's eagerness for a rapid advance on Kippenberger 's inspirational pre @-@ battle speech which particularly enthused his men . 
 = = = = Tunisia and home leave = = = = 
 As the Afrika Korps retreated into Libya and Tunisia , the 2nd Division , as part of X Corps , was in pursuit . A series of engagements with the enemy followed , occupying Kippenberger and his men . After the battle at Takrouna , the 5th Brigade was withdrawn from the frontlines , having lost 38 % of its strength . He remained a highly regarded officer , deputising as commander of the 2nd Division in Freyberg 's occasional absence from the field in higher commands . 
 By July 1943 , it was decided to send a group of 6 @,@ 000 long serving veterans of the NZEF to New Zealand for three months leave . Kippenberger was the ranking officer of the group , and with a high public profile due to his exploits in Crete and North Africa , he spent much of his leave in extensive speaking engagements . He became very rundown and was seriously ill in September , when he was originally expected to return to Egypt . He did not return to command the 5th Brigade until November . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 At this stage of the war , the 2nd New Zealand Division was fighting in Italy as part of the British Eighth Army with the 5th Brigade poised to attack across the Sangro River in central Italy . On his arrival , Kippenberger conducted a survey of the terrain and recommended to Freyberg that the attack plan be modified to include an additional brigade , a recommendation Freyberg concurred with . The reorganised attack was successfully executed on the evening of 28 November with light casualties . The 2nd Division then attempted three times to capture the town of Orsogna . The second attack on the town of 7 December was the first to involve the 5th Brigade . Despite Kippenberger 's brigade achieving all its objectives on the flank of the town , the attack was not successful . The failure of another brigade , tasked with capture of Orsogna itself , to achieve its goals left elements of the 5th Brigade exposed , and it had to partially withdraw . 
 A further attack involving the 5th Brigade was mounted on 14 December , and this also failed , despite armoured support . Kippenberger found the close fighting in the mountainous terrain in Italy to be in marked contrast to the open campaign of the deserts of North Africa . Despite this , he remained the best of the brigadiers of the division and was not afraid to voice his concerns when given difficult orders by his superiors . When the commander of British XIII Corps , Lieutenant General Miles C. Dempsey , ordered what Kippenberger regarded to be wasteful attacks on ground in front of the 5th Brigade , he was not pleased and twice voiced his concerns . 
 In early 1944 , Freyberg was made commander of the New Zealand Corps , newly formed for the Battle of Monte Cassino , while Kippenberger was promoted to temporary major @-@ general and made commander of the 2nd Division . This was the pinnacle of his military career . The division had moved into the line around Cassino , replacing the U.S. 36th Infantry Division , which had been attacking the strongly defended German positions . The first attack by the New Zealanders on 17 February was unsuccessful despite the bombing of the Monte Cassino abbey , which Kippenberger supported . A second attack was planned for 20 February , but it was delayed by bad weather . On 2 March , Kippenberger climbed the slopes of nearby Mount <unk> to gain an overview of the Cassino battlefield . Near the top of the mountain , he triggered a land mine which exploded and injured both legs to the extent that one foot was severed in the blast . He was evacuated to a medical centre , and the other foot and the lower portions of both legs were amputated . When the news of his injuries spread to the men of the 2nd New Zealand Division , it was met with some disbelief and shock , greatly affecting morale . 
 = = = England = = = 
 In April , Kippenberger was transferred to Queen Mary 's Hospital in London to be fitted with artificial limbs . He was discharged from hospital in early September after a four @-@ month period of convalescence . His wartime services were recognised that same month by being made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire and in December he was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath . 
 Graded by a medical board as only being fit for administrative duties , Kippenberger still harboured hopes of returning to the 2nd Division . However , he was named to replace Brigadier James Hargest , who had been killed in France in August , as commander of the New Zealand Reception Group . This organisation had been formed to arrange accommodation as well as social and medical services for New Zealand military personnel who were expected to be released from prisoner of war camps in Germany when the war ended . These personnel were to be evacuated to England to await repatriation to New Zealand . It was recognised that transition from the harsh life as a captive to normal life may be difficult for some , and the Reception Group provided much needed support for these individuals . He threw himself into his new role , setting up facilities and accommodation centres around Dover . The first former prisoners of war began arriving in late March 1945 , and Kippenberger made it a point to personally meet with each group of arrivals . By the following October , the overwhelming majority of released personnel had been returned to New Zealand , negating the need for the Reception Group . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1945 , Kippenberger was offered the position of Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief of New Zealand 's largest @-@ ever publishing project , the Official History of New Zealand in the Second World War 1939 – 45 . The New Zealand government had made initial plans for a published record of New Zealand 's involvement in the war as early as 1943 . Kippenberger , well respected across all branches of New Zealand 's services , was championed by New Zealand 's prime minister , Peter Fraser , as the person to coordinate the project . The resulting series of books , covering campaign and unit histories as well as volumes on the New Zealand people at war , was to be published by the War History Branch at the Department of Internal Affairs . By 1946 , his work with the Reception Group was largely complete and he returned to New Zealand to take up his new position . Initially contracted for seven years from 1 July 1946 , he would be involved with the project for the rest of his life . In his capacity as Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief , he guided the planning and production of volumes dedicated to specific campaigns , units and the war effort in general . 
 Kippenberger set a high standard for the official histories . He disavowed any censorship and diligently read every draft of every volume produced under his editorship , providing extensive , but constructive , feedback to the authors . He took special interest in the unit history of his former command , the 20th Battalion . He stressed the need for objectivity but struggled with his own views on battles in which he had been personally involved . The volume on the Battle of Crete proved to be particularly difficult to produce , requiring critical analysis of the leadership of some of his personal friends during the battle . Leslie Andrew , former commander of the 22nd Battalion , was one who took offence at the account of his handling of the battle . 
 The official histories had on occasion been threatened with political interference , particularly with the change in government in 1949 . Kippenberger , a person of high standing with both the government and the ordinary New Zealander , was a strong advocate for the project , and was able to convince the new government of the merits of the official histories . Kippenberger encouraged a positive atmosphere at the War History Branch , despite a tight budget and at times crowded work conditions . He was proud of its rate of output , which exceeded the efforts of the better resourced official histories of Australia and Great Britain . By 1963 , the War History Branch he had presided over for much of its life had produced nearly 50 major volumes . 
 Kippenberger also found the time to write his own book , Infantry Brigadier , an account of his wartime service . It was a work that began in 1944 , as he worked with the Reception Group and it was largely complete by late 1946 . Published in 1949 by Oxford University Press , it proved to be a critical and commercial success and was translated into seven languages . When first appointed Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief of the official histories , he had intended to write one or two volumes . He still had hopes of doing so in 1955 when negotiating an extension to his contract with the War History Branch but this never eventuated . 
 In 1948 , Kippenberger was knighted as a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire . He was also elected Dominion President of the Royal New Zealand Returned and Services ' Association ( RSA ) , a position he would hold until 1955 . While serving as RSA president , he courted controversy by his outspoken opposition to the All Black tour of South Africa in 1949 , on the basis of the exclusion of Maori players from the team . While forced to apologise for his remarks , he received much support from Maori veterans . 
 In April 1957 , his wife 's health deteriorated and she was hospitalised . Although seriously ill , she recovered sufficiently to be moved home . On 4 May 1957 , while preparing for his wife 's homecoming , Kippenberger complained of a headache and then collapsed . Taken to hospital in a coma , he died the next day of a cerebral haemorrhage . He was buried on 7 May at Karori Cemetery in Wellington with full military honours . Ruth Kippenberger watched the funeral procession of her husband from her hospital window ; she died ten years later . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After his death , Kippenberger 's extensive library was purchased by the New Zealand Army . He was a keen reader of military studies , annotating many of the books in the margins as he read them . His notes give an insight into his thinking on warfare and strategy . His collection is housed in the Kippenberger Research Library , in the QEII Army Memorial Museum , Waiouru , together with other books covering a wide range of military subjects , with an emphasis on all major wars involving New Zealanders . 
 In 2006 the Victoria University of Wellington announced the creation of the Sir Howard Kippenberger Chair in Strategic Studies . It receives support from the Garfield Weston Foundation and provides support for the holder of the chair to teach undergraduates and conduct research into strategic studies . The New Zealand Army operates what is known as the Kippenberger Scheme . It allows officer cadets based at Linton Military Camp , near Palmerston North , the chance to study at Massey University before becoming commissioned . 
 = The Million Second Quiz = 
 The Million Second Quiz is an American game show hosted by Ryan Seacrest and broadcast by NBC . The series aired from September 9 to September 19 , 2013 . For a titular million seconds ( 11 days , 13 hours , 46 minutes , and 40 seconds ) , contestants attempted to maintain control of a " money chair " by winning trivia matches against other contestants , earning money for every second they occupied the chair . The top four scoring contestants were sequestered together until either they dropped from the top four and were replaced by another contestant or the million seconds were up at which point they were awarded the money they had accumulated and then had to compete in a stepladder playoff for the top prize of $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 Executive produced by Stephen Lambert , Eli Holzman , and David Hurwitz , The Million Second Quiz was positioned as a live , multi @-@ platform television event , which Lambert dubbed " the Olympics of quiz " , that would help to promote NBC 's lineup for the 2013 – 14 television season . The series was cross @-@ promoted through a number of NBCUniversal properties , and NBC broadcast a live prime time show for each night of the competition ( except for September 15 , due to Sunday Night Football ) and a two @-@ hour finale . Additionally , through a mobile app , viewers could play the game against others and potentially earn a chance to appear as a contestant during the prime time episodes . Outside of the prime time episodes , the program was also webcast throughout the competition by means of the Million Second Quiz app and NBC.com. 
 Critics argued that the confusing format of The Million Second Quiz along with its lack of drama and technical issues with the show 's app during the first days of the series , caused viewers to lose interest in watching it on air . Although peaking at 6 @.@ 52 million viewers for its premiere , ratings steadily dropped during the show 's run before rising again near the finale . 
 = = Development = = 
 The concept of The Million Second Quiz was intended to make the show a " national event " ; while pitching the format to NBC , creator Stephen Lambert compared the game to a tennis match and called it " the Olympics of quiz . " To promote the series , NBC relied on a cross @-@ platform promotional strategy similar to what it had used in the past for The Voice ; including appearances by host Ryan Seacrest on other NBC programs , such as the network 's NFL pre @-@ game show , Football Night in America. to support the show , and tie @-@ in advertisements for programs airing across other NBCUniversal properties ( such as USA Network ) . The program itself also served as a vehicle for promoting NBC 's then @-@ upcoming lineup for the 2013 @-@ 14 television season . 
 NBC wanted the game 's prime time portions aired live from an outdoor location in Manhattan with the city skyline for background . Production designer Anton Goss , who also designed the set for NBC 's The Voice , came up with a three @-@ story bent @-@ steel structure in the shape of a giant hourglass laced with lights and containing the custom @-@ made Money Chair - " ... on a rooftop with the city behind us ... we have to do something significant ... It 's like we 're building our own little skyscraper . " Because of the 18 @,@ 000 lb weight of the hourglass structure in addition to bleachers full of audience members during show times , the building 's rooftop required shoring so that the second floor could help carry the large loads . Geiger Engineers provided the structural engineering for the hourglass and other rooftop structures as well as the required rooftop shoring . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The quiz was set in an hourglass @-@ shaped structure located on a roof in midtown Manhattan . An indoor set in the same building was also constructed for use during the non @-@ prime time portions of the game and for any inclement weather situations , as occurred on Day 4 . Contestants played in a quiz competition that ran 24 hours a day for 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 seconds , or about eleven and a half days . 
 At any given time , one contestant sat in the " Money Chair " and accumulated money while at the same time defending his / her position against a series of challengers in head @-@ to @-@ head quiz bouts . These bouts lasted a set number of seconds with both contestants using <unk> to lock in their still @-@ secret answers within five seconds of hearing each question . <unk> were accumulated at a constant rate of $ 10 per second spent in the chair , even when bouts were not being played and during the prime time commercial breaks . Contestants in the chair earned money until they were defeated by a challenger , who replaced the occupant on the chair . Only the four contestants with the highest total winnings got to keep their money once the countdown clock ran out of time . 
 = = = Prime time bouts = = = 
 During prime time , there are three bouts : the " Challenger " bout , the " Line Jumper " bout , and the " Winner 's Defense " bout . Questions start at one point each , with the value increasing by one every 100 seconds . At any time , either contestant may choose to " double " instead of answering ; doing so doubles that question 's value and forces the opponent to act . A doubled opponent may either answer or " double back , " quadrupling the point value and forcing the original contestant to answer . If a doubled or doubled @-@ back contestant answers incorrectly or fails to act within five seconds , the points are awarded to his / her opponent . Contestants may double as often as they wish during a bout . 
 At the end of the bout , the contestant with the higher score wins and either retains the Money Chair or replaces its current occupant . If the bout ends in a tie score , a tiebreaker question is asked ; the contestant who locks in the correct answer first is the winner . If both of them miss , the contestant who has accumulated more money wins the bout . If a question is in play when the clock runs out , it is completed under the normal rules . 
 The " Challenger " bout features a person who has successfully completed an on @-@ site tryout process . The " Line Jumper " bout of each episode features a contestant who has achieved a sufficiently high score on the official Million Second Quiz app , allowing him / her to skip the tryouts and advance directly onto the show . 
 At any given time , the four contestants who have accumulated the most money in their bouts live in " Winners ' Row , " an area of living quarters set up next to the hourglass . They are at risk of being displaced if someone else out @-@ scores them . During a " Winner 's Defense " bout , the current " Power Player " chooses one of the four Winners ' Row occupants ( including himself / herself ) to face off against the current Money Chair occupant . The winner claims the loser 's entire winnings in addition to his / her own and takes / keeps the Money Chair , while the loser is eliminated . In episode 1 , the Power Player was the contestant with the most winnings ; starting with episode 2 , it was the contestant who had the highest number of correct answers from playing along in Winners ' Row that day . Contestants who are defeated in the Winner 's Defense bouts lose all winnings they have accumulated . All other defeated contestants , including those displaced from Winners ' Row by being out @-@ scored , may try out again for a chance to win their way back into the Money Chair . 
 = = = Non @-@ prime time bouts = = = 
 Outside of the one @-@ hour television segments , bouts last 500 seconds . Every question is worth one point ; no doubling is allowed . Four bouts are played per hour , with a five @-@ minute pause after each of the first three . The fourth bout is followed by an 11 @-@ minute break , in which the contestant may eat , drink , or use the restroom as necessary . Money continues to accumulate during the five @-@ minute pauses , but not during the 11 @-@ minute break . 
 However , in the only international version ( the Chinese version ) , the prize money only accumulate during the bouts . Once the contestant is eliminated in any moment , they can walk away with a tenth of their prize money that accumulated so far . 
 = = = Finals = = = 
 Once the countdown clock reaches zero , the four contestants with the highest totals throughout the game keep all of their credited winnings and compete in a series of three elimination bouts ; the fourth and third @-@ place winners face off in a 400 @-@ second bout , the victor of bout # 1 faces the second @-@ place winner ( 400 seconds ) , and the victor of bout # 2 faces the first @-@ place winner ( 500 seconds ) . The victor of bout # 3 receives an additional $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( in Chinese version , ¥ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) . 
 In the season finale , Andrew Kravis defeated Brandon Saunders to win the grand prize , for an overall total of $ 2 @,@ 326 @,@ 346 . Seacrest then announced that Kravis 's winnings would be increased to $ 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 ; this made him the all @-@ time biggest regular @-@ season winner on a single American game show , surpassing Ken Jennings 's $ 2 @,@ 522 @,@ 700 run on Jeopardy ! in 2004 . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 The Million Second Quiz premiered on September 9 , 2013 ; however , the non @-@ primetime quiz began a day earlier at 7 : 17 AM EDT . The first episode started with 867 @,@ 826 seconds remaining . The show ran for ten episodes before it concluded on September 19 , 2013 . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Million Second Quiz generally received negative reviews from television critics and the public alike , and ratings went down over time : its premiere and finale were seen by 6 @.@ 5 and 4 @.@ 95 million viewers respectively , but fell lower in between . 
 The New York Times ' Mike Hale believed that the general failure of the series was a result of its unclear format , the " banal " subject matter of many of its questions ( citing examples which ranged from American history , to the name of Kim Kardashian 's cat ) , the fact that second screen interactions with game shows were not a new concept , and that the show and its interactive components were not " convergent " enough — beyond the small chance users received to appear on the show , arguing that " the one authentic way for the public to engage with Million Second Quiz was resolutely old school : coming to Times Square and standing on the sidewalk . " 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Sonia Saraiya felt that The Million Second Quiz , in contrast to other major reality shows such as Big Brother , was a " hyped show about hype " that lacked substance , and was designed primarily to be a vehicle for social media interaction , product placement , and self @-@ promotion for NBC 's programming and personalities . Saraiya wrote that " there might be more to say about the show , but it almost doesn 't matter . Inane as it is , it 's not mean @-@ spirited , just bizarre . And the show is so deeply flawed and so universally unpopular that it is not going to remain in anyone 's memory for long . But the real story here isn 't about the show , it 's about the network . In this wildly expensive failure , it ’ s possible to see so many of NBC 's flaws , all in the same package . " However , she did praise the show 's production for featuring contestants who were " friendly " and " relatable , " rather than " chosen for their <unk> . " 
 = = International version = = 
 China 's Hunan TV adapted this show , which was entitled " <unk> " , presented by Kevin Tsai . The show premiered on September 30 , 2015 , and ran for eight days constantly as the special transmission for the National Day holiday . <unk> and four other local female presenters would co @-@ present the show live along with Kevin at non @-@ primetime . The winner of the first season was Shen <unk> , with the grand total of RMB 1 @,@ 135 @,@ 000 ( US $ 178 @,@ 574 or € 158 @,@ 648 ) pre @-@ tax . 
 = Man singet mit Freuden vom Sieg , BWV 149 = 
 Man singet mit Freuden vom Sieg ( There are joyful songs of victory ) , BWV 149 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed the work in Leipzig for the Feast of Saint Michael and first performed it on 29 September 1728 or 1729 . It is his third and last of his extant cantatas for the feast . The topic is derived from the prescribed readings for the Sunday from the Book of Revelation , Michael fighting the dragon . The libretto was written by Picander and published in a 1728 / 29 volume of cantata texts . He included as the first movement two verses from Psalm 118 and as the closing chorale the third stanza of Martin Schalling 's hymn " Herzlich lieb hab ich dich , o Herr " . The text focuses on the guardian angels , which the chorale mentions specifically for the situation of death . 
 Bach structured the work in seven movements and scored it festively with four vocal parts and a Baroque orchestra of three trumpets , timpani , three oboes , bassoon , strings and continuo . He derived the opening chorus from his Hunting Cantata , composed already in 1713 . 
 = = History and text = = 
 Bach composed the cantata in Leipzig for the feast of St. Michael ( Michaelmas ) ; it is his third and last of his extant cantatas for the feast , a feast celebrating the archangel and all angels . The prescribed readings for that Sunday were from the Book of Revelation , Michael fighting the dragon ( Revelation 12 : 7 – 12 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , heaven belongs to the children and the angels see the face of God ( Matthew 18 : 1 – 11 ) . St. Michael , the archangel , has a prominent position in Lutheranism , as in Judaism . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted all of Bach 's church cantatas in 2000 on the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage , notes that the Sanctus , composed for Christmas 1724 in close relation to the text by Isaiah , and much later integrated to Bach 's Mass in B minor , shows the relevance of angels for Bach 's Lutheranism . 
 The libretto was written by Christian Friedrich Henrici , better known as Picander , Bach began to work with him in 1725 , and they collaborated notably on the major St Matthew Passion . Picander wrote his cantata texts , including this one , with Bach as the composer in mind . The poet included as the first movement two verses from a psalm ( Psalms 118 : 15 – 16 ) and as the closing chorale the third stanza of Martin Schalling 's hymn " Herzlich lieb hab ich dich , o Herr " . The Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann notes that battle scenes were often depicted in art and music . In the opening lines taken from a psalm , the battle of Michael against Satan is already won . Satan is mentioned only in the first movement . A focus of the later sequence of alternating arias and recitatives is on guardian angels seen as " holy watchmen " . The libretto was published in the 1728 / 29 year of his collection <unk> und <unk> Gedichte / <unk> auf die <unk> und Fest @-@ Tage . They appeared in quarterly volumes to help the congregation following the text . 
 Bach led the Thomanerchor in the first performance of the cantata in Leipzig on 29 September , either in 1728 or 1729 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in seven movements and scored it for four vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ) ( B ) , a four @-@ part choir , and a Baroque orchestra of three trumpets ( Tr ) , timpani ( Ti ) , three oboes ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , violas ( Va ) , bassoon ( Fg ) , violone ( Vo ) , and basso continuo ( Bc ) . The title of the autograph score reads simply : " <unk> Festo Michaelis . / Man singet mit Freuden etc. di <unk> " 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring and keys follow the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The time signature is provided using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 Bach based the music of the opening chorus , " Man singet mit Freuden vom Sieg " ( There are joyful songs of victory ) , on the final movement of his secular Hunting Cantata , which had been his first cantata using " modern " recitatives and arias in 1713 . The polyphonic movement is described by Simon Crouch as being a " high @-@ octane start " . Gardiner notes that in comparison to earlier works for the same occasion , this movement is " festive rather than combative " . Bach reworked the earlier movement considerably to adjust from the court music context to joyful songs of victory : he replaced two horns with three trumpets and timpani , transposed the music from F major to D major , and expanded it " on every level " , as Hofmann notes . The beginning of a different setting of the text hints at the fact that the idea to use the early music as a base was not planned from the start . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The bass aria , " Kraft und <unk> sei <unk> " ( Power and strength be sung ) , is accompanied by two low instrumental melodies . It examines the conflict between God and Satan , and includes a very active continuo to represent " the fury of the battle " . The imagery of a " great voice " , as mentioned in the Book of Revelation , is used , announcing the Lamb " that has defeated and banished Satan " . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 A short alto recitative , " Ich <unk> mich " ( I am afraid ) , was described as " tonally unstable " . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The soprano aria , " Gottes Engel <unk> nie " ( God 's angels never yield ) , is lyrical and dancing . The string accompaniment uses parallel thirds and sixths . It is stylistically similar to a minuet , and is formally an adapted ternary structure . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
