 Research in the field of addiction medicine has also recently turned its focus to LTP , owing to the hypothesis that drug addiction represents a powerful form of learning and memory . Addiction is a complex <unk> phenomenon involving various parts of the brain , such as the ventral tegmental area ( VTA ) and nucleus accumbens ( <unk> ) . Studies have demonstrated that VTA and <unk> synapses are capable of undergoing LTP and that this LTP may be responsible for the behaviors that characterize addiction . 
 = The War for Late Night = 
 The War for Late Night : When Leno Went Early and Television Went Crazy is a 2010 non @-@ fiction book written by The New York Times media reporter Bill Carter . It chronicles the 2010 conflict surrounding the American late @-@ night talk show The Tonight Show involving Conan O 'Brien and Jay Leno . It is a sequel to Carter 's 1994 book The Late Shift , which detailed the struggle for the hosting spot on The Tonight Show between David Letterman and Jay Leno in the early 1990s following the retirement of Johnny Carson . It was first published on November 4 , 2010 , by Viking Press . 
 The book received a generally favorable reception from reviewers including the Associated Press , BusinessWeek , The Buffalo News , New York Magazine , Star Tribune , The Hollywood Reporter , The Washington Post , Entertainment Weekly , the New York Post , the Los Angeles Times , Time magazine , and ABC News . The Las Vegas Review @-@ Journal said , " The War for Late Night ... offers an exhaustive , eye @-@ opening , how @-@ could @-@ he @-@ possibly @-@ know @-@ that look at the late @-@ night feud that ultimately was a muddled victory for Leno : He won back ' The Tonight Show , ' but his ratings have fallen below O 'Brien 's . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Author Bill Carter previously wrote The Late Shift , a book about the 1992 conflict between Jay Leno and David Letterman to decide who would succeed Johnny Carson as host of The Tonight Show . The book was well received by critics from publications including The New York Times Book Review , and The Christian Science Monitor . A film adaptation of the book , which won several industry awards , was produced in 1996 by HBO . 
 = = Research = = 
 Carter researched for the book during 2010 . He had secured a publishing deal for the book by January of that year . Carter confirmed to Gillian Reagan of Business Insider that in his research , he tried to gather information from multiple viewpoints . He said , " I 'm reaching out to everyone I possibly can to get every side of the story . " Carter said that he was remaining neutral about the 2010 Tonight Show conflict . " I obviously have to reach out to all sides " , he said . " For the longest time , I personally tried to watch as many episodes of all the shows as I could to get sense of each show , and what each guy does . I don 't just pick one and stick with that guy . " Carter researched the impact of financial decision @-@ making on the controversy . He said he had known Leno for a long time , and O 'Brien since he began working for NBC , and that these connections gave him the benefit of familiarity . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The War for Late Night chronicles the 2010 conflict surrounding the American late @-@ night talk show The Tonight Show involving Conan O 'Brien and Jay Leno . Carter gives biographical description of other late @-@ night television personalities , including David Letterman , Jimmy Fallon , Jimmy Kimmel , Craig Ferguson , Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert . As host of Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , O 'Brien decided to remain with NBC after attempts by ABC and Fox to attract him to their networks — as NBC executives had told O 'Brien that he would become host of The Tonight Show after Leno 's retirement . While hosting The Tonight Show and analyzing ratings results , O 'Brien told his manager Gavin Polone that he feared that Leno might be moved back to the program . Carter 's book contains details of O 'Brien 's and Leno 's contracts , and describes O 'Brien 's emotional state during the 2010 conflict . According to Carter , Leno had an advantage during negotiations because of a stronger contract agreement with NBC , which gave Leno the option to sue NBC if his program was canceled . 
 NBC executives tried to solve the problem so that both Leno and O 'Brien would keep their jobs . Jeff Gaspin , the chairman of NBC Universal Television , instructed both parties that he did not wish to make a difficult decision but that the most appropriate solution was to move Leno back to his previous timeslot and push O 'Brien to 12 : 05 . Carter details a heated exchange between NBC executive Jeff Zucker and O 'Brien 's agent Rick Rosen during which Zucker told O 'Brien 's representatives he could enforce O 'Brien 's contract and " ice him for two years " , after details of the conflict were leaked to the media . The author cites O 'Brien 's disappointment with the perceived unfairness of the situation , and quotes O 'Brien 's comments at a meeting with NBC Entertainment and Universal Media Studios chairman Marc <unk> and Jeff Gaspin , " I know how hard I worked for this . It was promised to me . I had a shitty lead @-@ in . " Carter recounts how affiliates of NBC complained to the network about the poor ratings performance of Leno 's program The Jay Leno Show . O 'Brien asked the two NBC executives , " What does Jay have on you ? What does this guy have on you people ? What the hell is it about Jay ? " 
 Carter writes about how the " Team Coco " movement and fans impacted O 'Brien following the controversy , " The outpouring of support made Conan feel as if he was starring in his own version of the movie It 's a Wonderful Life , both because he was allowed to see a ' Tonight Show ' where he never existed and because the support made him realize he really was ' the richest man in town . ' " O 'Brien was hurt by the fact that Leno did not communicate directly with him during the fiasco . Carter also says that compared to the eventual payout to O 'Brien of $ 45 million , NBC would have suffered a financial loss of $ 235 million if O 'Brien had left the company in 2004 to host a talk show for another network . O 'Brien moved from NBC to host his own late night program on TBS . Carter 's work concludes with an interview from comic Jerry Seinfeld , who favored Leno ; Seinfeld argues that O 'Brien should have remained at NBC . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Writing for the New York Post , Larry <unk> wrote , " Veteran journalist Bill Carter details the vicious recent battle over ' The Tonight Show , ' showing how Leno was hardly the devious schemer he was made out to be , and how O ’ Brien was not always the angelic innocent the media portrayed , as he and his team aggressively pursued the show at every opportunity . " Jon Bershad of Mediaite commented , " It ’ s as tense and exciting as expected . " Writing for TV Squad , Joel Keller analyzed Carter 's comparison of Leno 's legal contract with O 'Brien 's , and wrote that the author " paints a picture of Leno and his producer , Debbie Vickers , as pragmatists and Conan as a <unk> idealist " . Joe Flint of the Los Angeles Times commented about changes in the media industry since Carter 's prior book The Late Shift , " The only difference is that the media world has changed a lot then , and while " The Late Shift " had a lot of inside dirt and drama that was news to everyone but the most hardcore industry insiders , this time around the soap opera played out on TV and in the media . " James Poniewozik of Time magazine wrote , " There are lots of juicy bits , but the big takeaway : the guy with the best contract , wins " , and called the book , " Bill Carter 's <unk> dirt @-@ <unk> " . Writing for ABC News , journalist Sheila <unk> commented , " Bill Carter 's new book , ' The War for Late Night , ' reveals what happened behind the scenes , the expletives that were hurled during closed @-@ door discussions , the roller coaster that O 'Brien , Leno , and their cohorts rode during that tumultuous time . " 
 Frazier Moore of Associated Press wrote , " He plays this latest late @-@ night conflagration right down the middle . He keeps the story moving almost cinematically , crosscutting from one personality to another , deftly and revealingly presenting different points of view . " Writing for BusinessWeek , Jim Windolf gave the book a rating of three stars out of a possible five , and commented , " Bill Carter has become the Bob Woodward of the 11 : 35 time slot . " Paula Duffy of <unk> News described the book as " a juicy tell @-@ all " . Dylan Stableford of TheWrap called the book " a must @-@ read " for fans of Conan O 'Brien . Jeff Simon of The Buffalo News called the book a " definitive history " of the 2010 Tonight Show conflict . Willa Paskin wrote for New York Magazine that Carter , " spoke with enough people involved in the situation to provide an account so detailed , it even includes re @-@ created conversations and dialogue " . Neal Justin of Star Tribune commented on the author 's neutrality in his writing style , " The next time network TV executives stumble into an ugly behind @-@ the @-@ scenes battle , they should consider hiring Bill Carter to negotiate . The veteran New York Times media reporter has a way of sharing juicy stories without painting anyone as a complete saint or sinner , a feat he pulls off again in his latest book , ' The War for Late Night : When Leno Went Early and Television Went Crazy ' " . 
 Nate Jones wrote for Time magazine , " There are no landmark surprises — Jay Leno comes off as <unk> opportunistic , Conan O 'Brien as a tragic self @-@ dramatist with a little bit of a martyrdom complex — but it 's a worthwhile look at the procedural negotiations that led to last winter 's messy divorce . " The Hollywood Reporter said , " Bill Carter 's book reveals explosive new details about the Jay Leno @-@ O 'Brien debacle . " Kyle Anderson of MTV.com wrote , " the story takes an amazingly candid look at the conversations and arguments that went on behind the scenes . It even takes you to the moment when O 'Brien decides that he has to walk away from ' The Tonight Show . ' " Paul Schwartzman of The Washington Post wrote that it " is a great read and an example of narrative journalism 's power when practiced by a reporter steeped in his subject matter . " Lynette Rice of Entertainment Weekly gave Carter 's book a rating of B- , and wrote , " In the end , Carter presents a pretty compelling argument that while the fourth @-@ place network lost the public relations war , it probably won the late @-@ night battle . " Speaking on his program The Howard Stern Show , host Howard Stern said of Carter 's writing style , " It is just endlessly fascinating the way he paints this picture . " 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 On January 19 , 2010 , during O 'Brien 's last week of shows , guest Quentin Tarantino jokingly suggested that he direct a sequel to The Late Shift , cast O 'Brien as himself and make it a revenge movie in the style of his film Kill Bill with the title Late Shift 2 : The Rolling Thunder of Revenge . The Toronto Star reported in February 2010 that a sequel to The Late Shift film was in planning stages . In the final episode of The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien , O 'Brien said he wished that actress Tilda Swinton could portray him in a film version about The Tonight Show conflict . Swinton subsequently expressed interest in being cast as O 'Brien in a sequel to The Late Shift . 
 When asked in a June 2010 interview with Movieline whether there would be film adaptation of the book , Carter said that plans were not serious at that point , and , " Not really . Nothing serious . Let 's put it this way : There have always been people kicking it around because they think it 's funny ... Letterman made a ... joke saying that Max von Sydow should play him . So , you know , people are just kicking it around like that . " Actor Bob Balaban , who portrayed NBC executive Warren Littlefield in The Late Shift said he would like to portray Jeff Zucker , and said Jason Alexander would also be a good choice to play Zucker . Andy Richter jokingly told Movieline that he would want Justin Bieber to portray him in a film adaptation of the book . 
 = Jack Russell Terrier = 
 The Jack Russell Terrier is a small terrier that has its origins in fox hunting . It is principally white @-@ bodied and smooth , rough or broken @-@ coated . 
 The Jack Russell is frequently confused with the Parson Russell terrier ( see the American Kennel Club ) and the Russell terrier , which is a shorter @-@ legged , stockier variety . ( Within the Fédération Cynologique Internationale , the " Russell terrier " is also known as " Jack Russell terrier " . ) The term " Jack Russell " is also commonly misapplied to other small white terriers . The Jack Russell is a broad type , with a size range of 10 – 15 inches ( 25 – 38 cm ) . The Parson Russell is limited only to a middle range with a standard size of 12 – 14 inches ( 30 – 36 cm ) , while the Russell terrier is smaller at 8 – 12 inches ( 20 – 30 cm ) . Each breed has different physical proportions according to the standards of their breed clubs . 
 Jack Russells are an energetic breed that rely on a high level of exercise and stimulation , and are relatively free from serious health complaints . Originating from dogs bred and used by Reverend John Russell in the early 19th century , from whom the breed takes its name , the Jack Russell has similar origins to the modern Fox terrier . It has gone through several changes over the years , corresponding to different use and breed standards set by kennel clubs . Recognition by kennel clubs for the Jack Russell breed has been opposed by the breed 's parent societies – which resulted in the breeding and recognition of the Parson Russell terrier . Jack Russells have appeared many times in film , television and print - with several historical dogs of note . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Sporting parson = = = 
 The small white @-@ fox working terriers we know today were first bred by the Reverend Jack Russell , a parson and hunting enthusiast born in 1795 , and they can trace their origin to the now extinct English White terrier . Difficulty in differentiating the dog from the creature it was pursuing brought about the need for a mostly white dog , and so in 1819 during his last year of university at Exeter College , Oxford , he purchased a small white and tan terrier female named Trump from a local milkman in the nearby small hamlet of <unk> or Marston ) . Trump epitomised his ideal Fox terrier , which , at the time , was a term used for any terrier which was used to bolt foxes out of their burrows . Her colouring was described as " ... white , with just a patch of dark tan over each eye and ear ; whilst a similar dot , not larger than a penny piece , marks the root of the tail . " Davies , a friend of Russell 's , wrote " Trump was such an animal as Russell had only seen in his dreams " . She was the basis for a breeding program to develop a terrier with high stamina for the hunt as well as the courage and formation to chase out foxes that had gone to ground . By the 1850s , these dogs were recognised as a distinct breed . 
 An important attribute in this dog was a tempered aggressiveness that would provide the necessary drive to pursue and bolt the fox , without resulting in physical harm to the quarry and effectively ending the chase , which was considered unsporting . Russell was said to have prided himself that his terriers never tasted blood . This line of terriers developed by John Russell was well respected for those qualities , and his dogs were often taken on by hunt enthusiasts . It is unlikely , however , that any dogs alive today can be proven to be descendants from Trump , as Russell was forced to sell all his dogs on more than one occasion because of financial difficulty , and had only four aged ( and non @-@ breeding ) terriers left when he died in 1883 . 
 The Fox terrier and Jack Russell terrier type dogs of today are all descended from dogs of that period , although documented pedigrees earlier than 1862 have not been found , although several records remain of documented breeding by John Russell between the 1860s and 1880s . The Fox Terrier Club was formed in 1875 with Russell as one of the founder members ; its breed standard was aspiration , and not a description of how the breed appeared then . By the start of the 20th century , the Fox terrier had altered more towards the modern breed , but in some parts of the country the old style of John Russell 's terriers remained , and it is from those dogs that the modern Jack Russell type has descended . 
 Many breeds can claim heritage to the early Fox terrier of this period , including the Brazilian terrier , Japanese terrier , Miniature Fox terrier , <unk> <unk> Andaluz , Rat terrier , and Tenterfield terrier . 
 = = = After John Russell = = = 
 Following Russell 's death , the only people who made serious efforts to continue those strains were two men , one in Chislehurst with the surname of East , and another in Cornwall named Archer . East , at one point , had several couples , all of which were descended from one of Russell 's dogs . The type aimed for were not as big as the show Fox terrier and were usually less than 15 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 kg ) . 
 Arthur Blake Heinemann created the first breed standard and , in 1894 , he founded the Devon and Somerset Badger Club , the aims of which were to promote badger digging rather than fox hunting , and the breeding of terriers suitable for this purpose . Terriers were acquired from Nicholas Snow of Oare , and they were likely descended from Russell 's original dogs , as Russell would probably have hunted at some point with Snow 's hunting club and is likely to have provided at least some of their original terriers . By the turn of the 20th century , Russell 's name had become associated with this breed of dog . 
 The club was later renamed the Parson Jack Russell Terrier Club . Badger digging required a different type of dog than fox hunting , and it is likely that Bull terrier stock was introduced to strengthen the breed , which may have caused the creation of a shorter legged variety of Jack Russell terrier that started to appear around this period . At the same time that a split was appearing between show and working Fox terriers , a further split was occurring between two different types of white terrier , both carrying Jack Russell 's name . Heinemann was invited to judge classes for working terriers at Crufts with an aim to bring working terriers back into the show ring and influence those that disregard working qualities in dogs . These classes were continued for several years by various judges , but Charles Cruft dropped the attempt as the classes were never heavily competed . Following Heinemann 's death in 1930 , the kennel and leadership of the club passed to Annie Harris , but the club itself folded shortly before World War II . 
 = = = Post World War II = = = 
 Following World War II , the requirement for hunting dogs drastically declined , and with it the numbers of Jack Russell terriers . The dogs were increasingly used as family and companion dogs . Further cross breeding occurred , with Welsh corgis , Chihuahuas , and other smaller breeds of terrier . The offspring of these crosses became known as " Puddin ' Dogs " , " <unk> Jacks " , or " Russell Terriers " . 
 The Jack Russell Terrier Club of America was formed in 1976 by Ailsa Crawford , one of the first Jack Russell terrier breeders in the United States . Size ranges for dogs were kept broad , with the ability of working dogs awarded higher than those in conformation shows . An open registry was maintained , with restricted line breeding . Registration for the club is made at adulthood for Jack Russells , rather than at birth , to ensure the breed 's qualities remain , given the open registry . 
 Several breed clubs appeared in the United Kingdom during the 1970s to promote the breed , including the Jack Russell Club of Great Britain ( JRTCGB ) and the South East Jack Russell Terrier Club ( SEJRTC ) . The JRTCGB promoted the range of sizes that remain in its standards today , whereas the SEJRTC set a minimum height for dogs at 13 inches ( 33 cm ) . While the JRTCGB sought to ensure that the breed 's working ability remained through non @-@ recognition with other breed registries , the SEJRTC activity sought recognition with the UK Kennel Club . In 1983 , the Parson Jack Russell Club of Great Britain ( <unk> ) was resurrected to seek Kennel Club recognition for the breed . Although the application was initially rejected , a new standard was created for the <unk> based on the standard of the SEJRTC , and under that standard the breed was recognised by the Kennel Club in 1990 as the Parson Jack Russell terrier . Jack was dropped from the official name in 1999 , and the recognised name of the breed became the Parson Russell terrier . 
 In the late 1990s , the American Kennel Club explored the possibility of recognising the Jack Russell terrier . This move was opposed by the Jack Russell Terrier Club of America as they did not want the breed to lose its essential working characteristics . The Jack Russell Terrier Breeders Association was formed , and petitioned the AKC with the breed 's admission granted in 2001 . Under the AKC recognised standard , the size of the breed was narrowed from the previous club 's standard , and the name of the AKC recognised Jack Russell terrier was changed to Parson Russell terrier , with the Jack Russell Terrier Breeders Association renamed to the Parson Russell Terrier Association of America . 
 The Australian National Kennel Council ( ANKC ) and the New Zealand Kennel Club ( <unk> ) are the some of national kennel associations which registers both the Jack Russell terrier and the Parson Russell terrier , however the size requirements for the Jack Russell terrier under both those standards would classify a dog as a Russell terrier in the United States . In 2009 , there were 1073 Jack Russells registered with the ANKC , compared to 18 for the Parson Russell terrier . Other modern breeds are often mistaken for modern Jack Russell terriers , including their cousin the Parson Russell terrier , the Tenterfield terrier , and the Rat Terrier . Several other modern breeds exist that descended from the early Fox Terrier breed , including the Brazilian Terrier , Japanese Terrier , Miniature Fox Terrier , <unk> <unk> Andaluz , Rat Terrier and Tenterfield Terrier . 
 = = Description = = 
 Due to their working nature , Jack Russell terriers remain much as they were some 200 years ago . They are sturdy , tough , and tenacious , measuring between 10 – 15 inches ( 25 – 38 cm ) at the withers , and weigh 14 – 18 pounds ( 6 @.@ 4 – 8 @.@ 2 kg ) . The body length must be in proportion to the height , and the dog should present a compact , balanced image . Predominantly white in coloration ( more than 51 % ) with black and / or tan markings , they exhibit either a smooth , rough or a combination of both which is known as a broken coat . A broken @-@ coated dog may have longer hair on the tail or face than that which is seen on a smooth @-@ coated dog . The skin can sometimes show a pattern of small black or brown spots , referred to as " ticking " that do not carry through to the outer coat . All coat types should be dense double coats that are neither silky ( in the case of smooth coats ) nor woolly ( in the case of rough coats ) . 
 The head should be of moderate width at the ears , narrowing to the eyes , and slightly flat between the ears . There should be a defined but not <unk> stop at the end of the muzzle where it meets the head , and a black nose . The jaw should be powerful and well boned with a scissor bite and straight teeth . The eyes are almond shaped and dark coloured , and should be full of life and intelligence . Small V @-@ shaped ears of moderate thickness are carried forward on the head . When the dog is alert , the tip of the V should not extend past the outer corner of the eyes . The tail is set high and in the past was docked to approximately five inches in order to provide a sufficient hand @-@ hold for gripping the terrier . 
 The Jack Russell should always appear balanced and alert . As it is primarily a working terrier , its most important physical characteristic is its chest size , which must not be so large that it prevents the dog from entering and working in burrows . The red fox is the traditional quarry of the Jack Russell terrier , so the working Jack Russell must be small enough to pursue it . Red foxes vary in size , but across the world they average from 13 – 17 pounds ( 5 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 7 kg ) in weight and have an average chest size of 12 – 14 inches ( 30 – 36 cm ) at the widest part . 
 = = = Differences with related breeds = = = 
 The Jack Russell terrier and Parson Russell terrier breeds are similar , sharing a common origin , but have several marked differences — the most notable being the range of acceptable heights . Other differences in the Parson can include a longer head and larger chest as well as overall a larger body size . The height of a Parson Russell at the withers according to the breed standard is 12 – 14 inches ( 30 – 36 cm ) which places it within the range of the Jack Russell Terrier Club of America 's standard size for a Jack Russell of 10 – 15 inches ( 25 – 38 cm ) . However the Parson Russell is a conformation show standard whereas the Jack Russell standard is a more general working standard . 
 The Russell terrier , which is also sometimes called the English Jack Russell terrier or the Short Jack Russell terrier is a generally smaller related breed . Both the breed standards of the American Russell Terrier Club and the English Jack Russell Terrier Club Alliance states that at the withers it should be an ideal height of 8 – 12 inches ( 20 – 30 cm ) . Although sometimes called the English or Irish Jack Russell terrier , this is not the recognised height of Jack Russells in the United Kingdom . According to the Jack Russell Club of Great Britain 's breed standard , it is the same size as the standard for Jack Russells in the United States , 10 – 15 inches ( 25 – 38 cm ) . Compared to the Parson , the Russell terrier should always be longer than tall at the withers , whereas the Parson 's points should be of equal distance . The Fédération Cynologique Internationale standard for the Jack Russell terrier has this smaller size listed as a requirement . <unk> Eddie Chapman , who has hunted in Devon for more than 30 years , the same area that John Russell himself hunted , notes that , " I can state categorically that if given the choice , ninety @-@ nine percent of hunt terrier men would buy an under 12 " worker , if it was available , over a 14 " one . " 
 = = Temperament = = 
 Jack Russells are first and foremost a working terrier . Originally bred to bolt fox from their dens during hunts , they are used on numerous ground @-@ dwelling quarry such as groundhog , badger , and red and grey fox . The working JRT is required to locate quarry in the earth , and then either bolt it or hold it in place until they are dug to . To accomplish this , the dog will not bark but will expect attention to the quarry continuously . Because the preservation of this working ability is of highest importance to most registered <unk> / JRTCGB breeders , Jack Russells tend to be extremely intelligent , athletic , fearless , and vocal dogs . It is not uncommon for these dogs to become moody or destructive if not properly stimulated and exercised , as they have a tendency to bore easily and will often create their own fun when left alone to entertain themselves . 
 Their high energy and drive make these dogs ideally suited to a number of different dog sports such as flyball or agility . Obedience classes are also recommended to potential owners , as Jack Russells can be stubborn at times and aggressive towards other animals and humans if not properly socialized . Despite their small size , these dogs are not recommended for the condominium or apartment dweller unless the owner is ready to take on the daunting task of providing the dog with the necessary amount of exercise and stimulation . They have a tremendous amount of energy for their size , a fact which can sometimes lead to trouble involving larger animals . They may seem never to tire and will still be energetic after their owner has called it a day . While socialised members of the breed are friendly towards children , they will not tolerate abuse even if it is unintentional . 
 = = Health = = 
 The breed has a reputation for being healthy with a long lifespan . Breeders have protected the gene pool , and direct in @-@ line breeding has been prevented . Jack Russells can live from 13 to 16 years given proper care . However certain lines have been noted for having specific health concerns , and therefore could occur in any line or generation because of recessive genes . These issues can include hereditary cataracts , ectopia lentis , congenital deafness , patellar luxation , ataxia , myasthenia gravis , Legg – Calvé – Perthes syndrome and von Willebrand disease . 
 Being a hunt @-@ driven dog , the Jack Russell will usually pursue most creatures that it encounters . This includes the skunk , and the breed is prone to skunk toxic shock syndrome . The chemical in the skunk spray is absorbed by the dog and causes the red blood cells to undergo haemolysis , which can occasionally lead to fatal anaemia and kidney failure . If sprayed underground , it can also cause chemical burning of the cornea . Treatments are available to flush the toxin out of the dog 's system . 
 = = = Eye disorders = = = 
 Lens luxation , also known as ectopia lentis is the most common hereditary disorder in Jack Russell terriers . Even so , this condition is not a common occurrence in the breed . Most frequently appearing in dogs between the ages of 3 and 8 years old , it is where the lens in one or both eyes becomes displaced . There are two types , posterior luxation ( where the lens slips to the back of the eye ) and anterior luxation ( where the lens slips forward ) . Posterior luxation is the less severe of the two types , as the eye can appear normal although the dog 's eyesight will be affected . In anterior luxation , the lens can slip forward and rub against the cornea , damaging it . Anterior luxation also has a high probability of causing glaucoma which can lead to partial or complete blindness . Treatment is available and may include both medical and surgical options . Secondary lens luxation is caused by trauma to the eye , and is not hereditary . The condition appears in a number of terrier breeds as well as the Border collie , Brittany and Cardigan Welsh corgi . 
 Cataracts can affect any breed of dog , and is the same condition as seen in humans . Here the lens of the eye hardens and is characterised by cloudiness in the eye . Cataracts will blur the dog 's vision and can lead to permanent blindness if left untreated . While considered mainly a hereditary disease , it can also be caused by diabetes , old age , radiation , eye injury or exposure to high temperatures . 
 = = = Musculoskeletal conditions = = = 
 <unk> luxation , also known as luxating patella , is a hereditary disorder affecting the knees . It is where the kneecap slips off the groove on which it normally sits . The effects can be temporary with the dog running while holding its hind leg in the air before running on it again once the kneecap slipped back into place as if nothing has happened . Dogs can have a problem with both rear knees , and complications can include arthritis or torn knee ligaments . Severe cases can require surgery . Some are prone to dislocation of the kneecaps , inherited eye diseases , deafness and Legg Perthes — a disease of the hip joints of small dog breeds . Prone to mast cell tumors . Legg – Calvé – Perthes syndrome , also called <unk> Necrosis of the <unk> Head , is where the ball section of the femur in the hip joint deteriorates following interruption of the blood flow and is the same condition as in humans . In dogs , this causes lameness of the hind @-@ legs , the thigh muscles to atrophy and pain in the joint . It usually occurs between 6 – 12 months of age and has been documented in a variety of other terrier breeds including the Border terrier , Lakeland terrier and Wheaten terrier . 
 = = Well @-@ known Jack Russell terriers = = 
 Nipper was a dog born in 1884 who was thought to be a dog of the Jack Russell terrier type . He was the inspiration for the painting Dog looking at and listening to a Phonograph , later renamed to His Master 's Voice . The painting was used by a variety of music related companies including The Gramophone Company , EMI , and RCA . Today it remains in use incorporated into the logo for HMV in UK and Europe . 
 A Jack Russell named Bothy made history in 1982 as part of the <unk> Expedition . Owned by explorers Ranulph and Ginny Fiennes , he became the first dog to travel to both the north and south poles . This feat is unlikely to be repeated , as all dogs have been banned from Antarctica by the Antarctic Treaty nations since 1994 , due to fears that they could transmit diseases to the native seal population . Ranulph Fiennes and Charles Burton actually made the trip to the north pole by powered sledges before signalling to the base camp that they had arrived . To celebrate their achievement , a plane was sent out to take the two men champagne , along with Bothy . 
 On 29 April 2007 , a Jack Russell named George saved five children at a carnival in New Zealand from an attack by two pit bulls . He was reported to have charged at them and held them at bay long enough for the children to get away . Killed by the pit bulls , he was posthumously awarded the PDSA Gold Medal in 2009 , the animal equivalent of the George Cross . A statue has been erected in <unk> , New Zealand in his memory . A former US Marine also donated to George 's owner a Purple Heart award he had received for service in Vietnam . 
 = = = On screen and in literature = = = 
 In the UK , one of the more recognisable canine stars was restaurateur and chef Rick Stein 's irrepressible terrier Chalky , who frequently upstaged his owner on his various cookery series . He was unique in having his own line of merchandise , including plushes , tea towels , art prints , art paw prints and two real ales – Chalky 's Bite and Chalky 's Bark , which won gold in the Quality Drink Awards 2009 . Chalky was given a BBC obituary when he died in 2007 . 
 Father Moose and son Enzo played the role of Eddie on the long @-@ running TV sitcom Frasier . Eddie belonged to lead character Frasier 's father Martin Crane , and constantly " stole the show " with his deadpan antics , receiving more fan mail than any other Frasier character . Moose and Enzo also starred as Skip in the 2000 film My Dog Skip . 
 Wishbone , from the television show of the same name which aired from 1995 to 2001 in the United States , was a Jack Russell terrier . Wishbone 's real name was <unk> Soccer , and was chosen from over a hundred other dogs vying for the part . 
 Actor Gene Hackman 's pet in the 1995 movie Crimson Tide was a smooth @-@ coated Jack Russell terrier named " Bear " . Max , a Jack Russell terrier , played the role of Milo who is one of Stanley <unk> 's only friends in the 1994 U.S film The Mask starring Jim Carrey . Max also played the female dog Audrey in the 2000 film Mr. Accident . In the 2009 movie Hotel for Dogs , Friday , one of the main characters is a Jack Russell , played by the dog actor Cosmo . Cosmo went on to appear in the films Paul Blart : Mall Cop and Beginners . 
 Jack Russell : Dog Detective is a series of children 's books by authors Darrell and Sally Odgers , and published by Scholastic . It is about the adventures of a Jack Russell terrier named Jack Russell and his gang of friends including Jill Russell , Lord " Red " Setter and <unk> Terrier . 
 Uggie ( 2002 @-@ 2015 ) was an animal actor , appearing in commercials starting in 2005 and most notably cast in Water for Elephants and The Artist , both in 2011 . In the same year , based on interest following The Artist , the " Consider Uggie " campaign was launched , which attempted to gain the dog a nomination for an Academy Award . In 2012 Uggie was named Nintendo 's first @-@ ever <unk> . 
 Patrick McDonnell 's comic strip Mutts features a Jack Russell terrier named Earl who is a main character in the comic strip . 
 = = = Clubs and associations = = = 
 American Working Terrier Association 
 Jack Russell Terrier Club of America 
 = Fracture ( Fringe ) = 
 " Fracture " is the third episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode followed the Fringe team 's investigation into a man who mysteriously hardens and then explodes , killing those around him . The case leads them to a secret government project and an AWOL colonel . 
 The episode was written by David Wilcox , and was directed by Bryan Spicer . " Fracture " was the third of a four episode plot arc called the " gun arc " , which focused on Olivia 's physical and mental recovery from the season premiere . It featured guest actors Kevin Corrigan and Stephen McHattie . " Fracture " first broadcast in the United States on October 1 , 2009 on the Fox network to an estimated 6 @.@ 21 million viewers . It received generally mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Philadelphia , an on @-@ duty cop gets a call from a man he calls " Colonel " to pick up a briefcase at Suburban Station . As he does so , a nearby pulse causes electronics to gain static , and his body becomes hardened . He explodes , killing eleven people and injuring others with his hardened body parts . Initially thinking the explosion was caused by a bomb , the Fringe team arrives to investigate , and discover that instead of a bomb , the cop 's body parts killed the others . A further autopsy reveals needle marks between the cop 's toes , and they realize he was injecting some type of drug every day for at least a year . 
 While Peter and Olivia interview his wife , Olivia gets sick with flashes of crossing to the parallel universe , and accidentally discovers the drugs the cop was injecting . The cop had served in Iraq a year previously , and was involved in a secret military experiment called " Project Tin Man " . Peter tells them they can find the project 's doctors , and he and Olivia travel to Iraq . Peter learns from an old acquaintance the identity of one of the Iraqi doctors ; he tells them the project was meant to cure soldiers exposed to a fatal chemical , but it failed to work , instead turning remaining survivors into human bombs . An AWOL colonel , Raymond Gordon , was opposed to ending the project ; Peter and Olivia suspect he is behind the cop 's explosion , and caused the deaths by emitting a radio signal . They find a list of names from the experiment , the victim in the train station being one of them . They return to find the surviving members , and are able to prevent the next subject , Diane Burgess , from exploding after she is contacted by Gordon to take a briefcase at a train station . Peter and Olivia find Gordon ( Stephen McHattie ) at the station , and bring him into custody ; the man suggests the bombs were intended to eliminate agents working for the Observer . 
 In a side plot , Olivia and Sam Weiss continue to meet at the bowling alley , where he subjects her to seemingly menial tasks like tying her shoes and keeping score during games . Although initially finding their conversations useless , he cures Olivia 's inability to walk without a cane by the end of the episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 Co @-@ executive producer David Wilcox wrote the episode , and filmmaker Bryan Spicer directed it . According to producers Ashley Edward Miller and Zack Stentz , " Fracture " was the third episode in the " gun arc " , which involved Olivia gradually recovering from the wounds sustained in the premiere enough to be able to wield a gun and fight the shapeshifters . 
 Sound editor Bruce Tanis explained the production of sound that went into the episode in an interview with Designing Sound : 
 " In ' Fracture ' , the villain has created a serum which several characters inject because of a type of post @-@ hypnotic suggestion . He has invented a frequency generator which causes these people to crystallize and then explode . In one of the best scenes all season , Walter and Astrid are in the lab and , using a watermelon for their experiments , are able to determine the exact frequency that the villain ’ s generator operates on . It was something like 68 @.@ 7 megacycles ( I don ’ t recall exactly ) , so I used the signal generator plugin and created some tones that started out as 68 @.@ 7 megacycles . They were simply low @-@ frequency tones on their own so I processed them so that they warbled and chorused and were a bit more mysterious than the straight tone . It ended up being pretty subtle for television , but when Walter identifies the tone as a certain frequency , that ’ s what ’ s actually playing . " 
 Actor John Noble noted that in the episode , " We see [ Olivia ] broken down . And it 's kind of frightening to see our heroine who 's carried the series basically ... Suddenly she can 't move , she can 't even load her gun " . " Fracture " marked the first and only guest appearance by actor Stephen McHattie as Colonel Raymond Gordon , as well as another appearance by previous guest actor Kevin Corrigan as Sam Weiss . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode featured the song " The Air That I Breathe " by The Hollies , as well as music from Roy Orbison , Les Paul , and The Marshall Tucker Band . Olivia makes a reference to Star Wars when she says , " Cut the Yoda crap and tell me what 's happening to me " . Peter mentions that his father taught him human reproduction using a jigsaw puzzle of " Ms. July " , a reference to a glamour photography shot of an unknown Playboy model used in calendars to differentiate each month of the year . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The episode was initially watched by an estimated 6 @.@ 21 million viewers in the United States , and scored a 2 @.@ 3 / 6 rating share among viewers 18 – 49 and 3 @.@ 7 / 6 for all households . After time shifted viewing was taken into account , Fringe was among the shows with the biggest increase , as its 18 – 49 rating rose 30 percent to score 3 @.@ 9 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Reviews of the episode tended to be mixed . Noel Murray from The Onion 's A.V. Club graded the episode with a D + , writing that " Unlike the previous two weeks ’ episodes , which juggled a number of storylines and locations and generated a real sense of Fringe ’ s expanding milieu , ' Fracture ' is so curtailed that it almost feels like it was made for the Fox accountants . The cast is small , the sets are few , and not much happens . The plot ’ s practically twist @-@ free , until the very end . Large chunks of the episode are given over to Peter talking to Walter about finding a new place for them to live , and Walter trying to learn more about Astrid — and really not discovering much , except that she doesn ’ t like it when he experiments on fruit . So Astrid ’ s underused yet again , even in an episode where she gets a lot of lines ... The story 's too simple and the acting too broad , and yet the episode still felt choppy , as though the Fringe creative team had to scramble to fix ' Fracture ' in post . " 
 Conversely , IGN 's Ramsey Isler viewed the episode more positively , and rated it 7 @.@ 9 / 10 . He explained it " deserves praise for doing a lot of things well , " and lauded the actors ' performances , the props , the direction , and cinematography . Despite however finding Walter less entertaining than the previous season , and believing the first half of the episode moved too slowly and resembled " an ordinary procedural crime show , " Isler enjoyed the ending for " [ bringing ] it all together and [ making ] the previous 90 % worthwhile " . After watching the episode , MTV columnist Josh Wigler " declared [ his ] fondness " for Joshua Jackson , stating the actor had " won [ him ] over thanks to Peter 's central role in these first few episodes of Fringe 's " second season " . Wigler continued that it was " an excellent mystery @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week episode to be sure , though I 'm really itching for more details on the alternate reality . Luckily , that 's supposed to come next week with the return of Nimoy 's William Bell , which makes tonight 's less mythology @-@ oriented outing easier to swallow . Plus , the end reveal with the Observer was pretty spicy , to say the least . " 
 = William George Malone = 
 Lieutenant Colonel William George Malone ( 24 January 1859 – 8 August 1915 ) was an officer in the New Zealand Military Forces who served in the First World War . He commanded the Wellington Infantry Battalion during the Gallipoli Campaign , and was killed in action during the Battle of Chunuk Bair . 
 Born in England , Malone emigrated to New Zealand in 1880 and joined the New Zealand Armed Constabulary . After two years service in the Taranaki region , he worked at Opunake and later took up farming on land he bought with his brother near Stratford . He studied to become a lawyer and worked in New Plymouth in partnership with other lawyers but later set up his own practice in Stratford . 
 A volunteer in New Zealand 's militia , he helped raised the Stratford Rifle Volunteers . When the militia was abolished and replaced with the Territorial Force , he was made commander of 11th Regiment ( Taranaki Rifles ) . Following the outbreak of the First World War , he volunteered for service with the New Zealand Expeditionary Force and was appointed commander of the Wellington Infantry Battalion . He led the battalion through training in Egypt and during the Gallipoli Campaign until his death at Chunuk Bair in Gallipoli . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William George Malone was born in Lewisham , a village in Kent , England , the second of five children of Louisa and Thomas Malone . His father was a chemist who worked in London for the photography pioneer Henry Fox Talbot . Thomas Malone died in 1867 at the age of 44 , which placed his family in reduced financial circumstances . 
 William Malone was initially educated at St. Joseph 's College in Clapham , London before receiving further schooling at Marist boarding schools in both England and France , and becoming fluent in French . After completing his education in 1876 , he became an office worker in London . His military career began with his enlistment with the City of Westminster Rifle Volunteers , and he also served for a time in the Royal Artillery Volunteers . 
 = = Life in New Zealand = = 
 Malone immigrated to New Zealand in January 1880 . His older brother , Austin , had previously moved to New Zealand and was serving in the New Zealand Armed Constabulary . A month after his arrival , Malone joined his brother in service with the Armed Constabulary . Both brothers were based at Opunake , in the Taranaki region . Malone took part in the storming of the village of <unk> on 5 November 1881 . 
 Malone left the Armed Constabulary after two years service and became involved in <unk> which unloaded cargo at Opunake . With his brother , who had left the Armed Constabulary in November 1880 , he eventually bought a large block of bush country near Stratford and took up farming . Within a few years , his land had been converted into productive farmland . By this time , his mother and two sisters had also immigrated to New Zealand to join them in Stratford . He was also involved in the local militia , the Stratford Rifles . 
 In 1886 , Malone married Elinor Lucy ( née Penn ) . The couple would eventually have five children , a daughter and four sons . As well as supporting his young family he found time to take an active role in the Stratford community . He was a member of the <unk> County Council as well as the Taranaki Hospital and Charitable Aid Board . From 1890 , in addition to his farming , Malone also worked as a land agent . Later , he helped found the Stratford County Council and served as its first clerk and treasurer from 1891 to 1900 . 
 Malone took up the study of law , becoming a solicitor in 1894 and a barrister five years later . In 1903 , the same year that he and his family moved to New Plymouth , he formed a partnership dealing mostly with land transactions with James McVeagh and W. D. Anderson . The partners would open several law offices around the Taranaki region . 
 On 18 June 1904 , Malone suffered the loss of his wife Elinor in childbirth . Their baby son also died . The following year , Malone married Ida Katharine Withers , and would go on to have three more children . Ida had been a friend of Elinor 's and had also tutored the Malone children . 
 Malone became politically active and unsuccessfully stood as an Independent Liberal in a by @-@ election for the Taranaki electorate in 1907 ; of the three candidates , he came last . The following year , Joseph Ward , the leader of the Liberal Party , invited Malone to be the party 's candidate in the 1908 general election . He declined ; Malone had views that in some respects were incompatible with those of the Liberal Party , and he instead stood as an independent . Although unsuccessful , he gained nearly 30 % of the electorate vote . In both 1907 and 1908 , he was defeated by the conservative politician Henry Okey , who was to hold the Taranaki electorate until his death in 1918 . 
 In 1911 , after selling his share of the law practice , Malone returned to Stratford . He started his own law firm in partnership with another practitioner . With a reduced work load , he began focus on his other interests , which included the military . Malone participated in New Zealand 's militia , the Volunteer Force . In 1900 , he helped raise the Stratford Rifle Volunteers , one of many units formed in the enthusiasm for the military during the Second Boer War , with himself as its captain . When he moved to New Plymouth in 1903 , he relinquished his command . As a result of a request by his Volunteer Force battalion commander , Malone was made adjutant of the 4th Battalion of the Wellington ( Taranaki ) Rifle Volunteers . In 1905 he was second @-@ in @-@ command and by 1910 , and now a lieutenant @-@ colonel , he was the commander of the battalion . 
 The following year , the Volunteer Force was abolished and replaced with the Territorial Force . Malone was placed in command of a new Territorial unit , the 11th Regiment ( Taranaki Rifles ) . It was during this time that he introduced the use of the " lemon <unk> " hat to the Territorial Force . By having his troops push out its crown and <unk> its sides , the hat mirrored the outline of Mount Taranaki , thereby providing a link for the regiment to its parent region , and , more practically , allowed rain to easily run off the hat . In later years , the lemon <unk> hat was formally adopted by the New Zealand Military Forces . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Malone had been convinced for some time that war was on the horizon and prepared himself accordingly . He studied military history and practices intensively , and underwent a physical fitness and conditioning programme in preparation for military service . This reputedly included his sleeping on a military camp bed . Upon the outbreak of the First World War , he volunteered for service either in New Zealand or overseas . Well regarded by his superiors in the Territorial Force , he was made commander of the Wellington Infantry Battalion of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) . 
 The battalion embarked from Wellington in October 1914 for Egypt , and upon arrival , was primarily engaged in training before it was deployed along the Suez Canal late in January 1915 to support Indian troops stationed to guard against a rumoured Turkish attack . Three weeks of sentry duty ensued for the battalion before it returned to Cairo . 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 By this time , the New Zealand and Australian Division , under the command of Major General Alexander Godley , was being formed for operations in the Dardanelles , and the battalion was attached to the New Zealand Infantry Brigade , one of the two infantry brigades ( the other was the Australian 4th brigade ) that formed the bulk of the division . In April , the division , now part of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) embarked for Gallipoli . The Wellington Battalion was landed at Anzac Cove on the afternoon of 25 April , and made its way up to Plugge 's Plateau . 
 On 27 April , the battalion was called upon to reinforce positions held by the Australian 2nd Battalion along a feature that would later be known as Walker 's Ridge . A Turkish counterattack had been launched , threatening the flank of the ANZAC position . By nightfall , Malone had established a new defensive line along the ridge although he was frustrated by the poor decisions by the commander of 2nd Battalion , Colonel George Braund . Malone believed Braund 's actions had wasted the lives of his men . He consequently made a request to the acting commander of the New Zealand Infantry Brigade , Brigadier General Harold Walker that the Wellington Battalion take sole charge of the position , a request which was approved . In the following days , Malone worked his men hard to improve the defensive positions and ensure the stability of the Walker 's Ridge positions . 
 In early May , the ANZAC positions had sufficiently stabilised such that the New Zealand Infantry Brigade was transferred to Cape Helles for operations there . Malone led his battalion during the Second Battle of Krithia , during which he came into conflict with his brigade commander , Colonel Francis Johnston , who had taken over command of the brigade from Walker . Johnston ordered a bayonet charge by the Wellington Battalion although Malone pointed out to Johnston the lack of flanking support for such a charge . Johnston was a British Army officer seconded to the NZEF , and in his private correspondence , Malone was beginning to express frustration at the inflexibility of such officers in the face of a fluid battlefield situation . Malone was later mentioned in dispatches for his work at Cape Helles . 
 By late May , the brigade was back at ANZAC Cove and in reserve . On 1 June , the Wellington Battalion moved into the front lines , taking over Courtney 's Post , previously held by the Australian 4th Brigade . Malone was post commander , and it was planned that he would stay in command at Courtney 's Post while his battalion rotated with the Otago Infantry Battalion in eight @-@ day spells . He immediately set about improving the position , which overlooked the Turkish lines . As well as rectifying the position 's neglected field works , he established a squad of snipers and this proved instrumental in gaining ascendency over the Turks in no @-@ man 's land . 
 Malone had impressed his senior commanders with his efforts at Courtney 's Post and on 9 June the Wellington Battalion was tasked with holding Quinn 's Post , previously held by the Auckland and Canterbury Infantry Battalions , both of which were exhausted from offensive operations . Quinn 's was a more exposed position than Courtney 's and had been neglected defensively . With the Turkish trenches often only 10 metres ( 33 ft ) away , Quinn 's Post was a weak spot in the ANZAC lines . Malone immediately set about rectifying this . Terraces and dugouts were built and extensive sandbagging protecting the previously exposed areas of the position were erected . He implemented measures to dominate the no @-@ man 's land between the opposing forces at Quinn 's , ordering construction of machine gun posts and loops to try and increase his men 's ability to direct firepower onto the enemy . Although he placed high demands on his men , he was well respected for he also showed concern and interest in their welfare . His efforts at Quinn 's Post did not go unrecognised . The commander of the ANZAC Corps , General William Birdwood complimented Malone on his work . 
 = = = Battle of Chunuk Bair = = = 
 In August , plans were in place for the Allied forces to break out of the ANZAC foothold . Key to this was seizing the Sari Bair Range . On 7 August , the New Zealand Infantry Brigade commenced its assault on Chunuk Bair , the crest of the range , along what was known as Rhododendron Ridge . However , delays in getting the infantry battalions to their starting positions meant that the attack was launched in daylight rather than in the planned night time attack . As a result , heavy losses were incurred amongst the Auckland Infantry Battalion . Johnston , still in command of the brigade despite being clearly unfit for it , ordered Malone to take his battalion forward . Malone refused , arguing that his battalion could take Chunuk Bair that night . His refusal to advance in daylight meant that by the end of the day , his battalion was the only intact battalion in the brigade . 
 In the early hours of 8 August , supported by the 7th Battalion of the <unk> and by extensive artillery and naval fire , the Wellington Battalion succeeded in capturing Chunuk Bair with relatively little resistance . Malone set about securing the crest of Chunuk Bair , but it proved difficult to deepen the relatively shallow Turkish trenches that had been captured by his men , and the work was made even more difficult as the sun rose , allowing the Turks on neighbouring Hill Q to focus their gunfire on the positions occupied by the Wellingtons . The <unk> , also on the crest , were forced to retreat to the reverse slope . The Turkish gunfire caused heavy casualties amongst the infantry holding Chunuk Bair , but crucially also prevented substantive reinforcements from reaching the crest in daylight . Instead , those soldiers that made it up Chunuk Bair tended to be positioned on its rearward slopes and thus had difficulty observing any approaches made by the Turks . Malone continued to co @-@ ordinate the defences but a portion of the crest was lost . He remained in constant action , and led bayonet charges to counter numerous Turkish attacks . The trenches on the crest became filled with the bodies of dead , further reducing what little cover was available . 
 In the early evening , at around 5 pm , Malone was killed in his headquarters trench by friendly fire , either from supporting artillery or possibly naval gunfire . Reinforcements , in the form of the Otago Battalion and two squadrons of the Wellington Mounted Rifles arrived later that evening , and the remnants of Malone 's battalion withdrew , having suffered 690 men killed or wounded of its original complement of 760 . Malone , along with 300 of his men , has no known grave . Two days later , Chunuk Bair , now held by British units , was lost to the Turks . With the battalion out of the line , a memorial service for Malone was held on 21 August . The service was attended by nearly all of the surviving men of the battalion . Malone was also mentioned in despatches for his leadership during the August offensive . 
 Malone was survived by his wife Ida and his eight children . Although initially well provided with income from his farming estate , the depression of the 1920s impacted on the earnings of the farmland and Ida struggled financially . She eventually moved to England with her three children and a daughter from Malone 's previous marriage and died there in 1946 . His four oldest sons all served in the NZEF , and one , Maurice , was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign . Another son , Edmond , received the Military Cross while serving with the Wellington Regiment on the Western Front . He died on 6 April 1918 , a few days after being wounded . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the Battle of Chunuk Bair , while his bravery was not questioned , Malone initially came in for criticism of his handling of the defences , particularly the placement of his defence trenches . In the planning for the battle , and earlier in the Gallipoli Campaign , he had clashed with Major Arthur Temperley , Johnston 's brigade major . Temperley , a British Army officer like Johnston , was one of the foremost critics of Malone 's defensive arrangements and may have unduly influenced the subsequent official reports on the battle . However , recent studies have demonstrated that this criticism was misplaced and there were a number of crucial failures higher up in the chain of command . In particular , Johnston 's delay in getting reinforcements to Chunuk Bair once it was captured likely led to the failure to hold the gains made by Malone 's battalion . 
 In New Zealand , Malone 's death was widely reported and keenly felt , particularly in the Taranaki region . The soldiers of the Wellington Regiment held their former commander in high regard and paid for the construction of the Malone Memorial Gate , white marble gates at the entrance to King Edward Park in Stratford . The gate , one of New Zealand 's largest war memorials that commemorates an individual soldier , was officially opened on 8 August 1923 in front of a large crowd . The gate is the scene of an annual ceremony held on 8 August to commemorate the memory of Malone . A fictionalised colonel based on Malone was a major character in a 1982 play written by Maurice Shadbolt , Once on Chunuk Bair , which told the story of the Wellington Battalion 's battle of 8 August . In 1992 , the play was filmed as Chunuk Bair . A plaque in his honour was unveiled in the New Zealand Parliament 's Grand Hall in 2005 . 
 = Trans Polar = 
 Trans Polar A / S was a Norwegian charter airline which operated between June 1970 and May 1971 . The airline operated a fleet of three Boeing 720s and had a close cooperation with Aer Lingus for maintenance . Trans Polar was established by Thor Tjøntveit , although he never held any management positions . The airline was headquartered in Oslo , although most of the flights operated out of Copenhagen , Denmark , which was the base of Spies Rejser , Trans Polar 's largest customer . The airline held operating permission from Norway and Denmark , but not Sweden ; nevertheless , they operated several illegal flights out of Stockholm . 
 Trans Polar ceased operations on 16 May 1971 when Boeing Commercial Airplanes seized one of their aircraft for failing to pay installments . After the company 's bankruptcy on 23 June , the police undertook a seven @-@ year investigation of the company . The airline had operated eight months with insolvency ; with a debt of 33 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) it was at the time the largest bankruptcy case in Norwegian history . Tjøntveit was acquitted of charges of deceit in 1978 . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 Trans Polar was a continuation of Tjøntveit 's United States @-@ based Trans Polar International , a retailer of general aviation aircraft . Born in Grimstad , <unk> emigrated to the US in 1961 after receiving his pilot 's license and became an American citizen in 1965 . Trans Polar International agreed on 25 November 1969 to purchase two Boeing aircraft from Eastern Air Lines . The original plans called for transporting new general aviation aircraft to customers around the world . Tjøntveit stated that the first aircraft would be delivered in May 1970 and followed by a second in December , and that Erik Sandberg would start working as vice president in May . The airline planned to hire ten pilots and had signed an agreement with Pan Am for ground handling services . Trans Polar International stated they had made agreements to operate the aircraft transport flights for at least five years . 
 The plans changed dramatically and Trans Polar was instead incorporated in Norway . It took delivery of the Boeing 720s from Eastern Air Lines with registration on 4 June 1970 . The airline received an operating license on 11 June to fly both cargo and passenger charter services from Norway . The original plans called for passenger flights in and around the weekends to the Mediterranean and freight and maintenance the other days , including transporting strawberries from Belgium to Norway . A maintenance contract was signed with Aer Lingus of Ireland . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 The airline operated a fleet of three Boeing 720s . The first aircraft was registered on 16 June 1970 and the last two on 16 October . They were named for famous aviators ; the first aircraft was named Richard Evelyn Byrd and the last two Roald Amundsen and Hjalmar Riiser @-@ Larsen . The aircraft had a seating capacity of 156 or 149 . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Securing contracts = = = 
 Trans Polar made a demonstration trip to Stockholm on 13 June 1970 — legal because it was without paying customers . The airline applied for permission to operate out of Sweden , but this was rejected by the Swedish Civil Aviation Administration ( CAA ) and appeals were rejected by the Ministry of Enterprise , Energy and Communications . The reason was that it lacked a permanent organization , did not have sufficient experience in large @-@ scale charter operations and could not document that its charter operations would be based on their own resources . Despite the lack of permission , Trans Polar sub @-@ chartered a round trip from Stockholm to London on 28 June . It then operated four flights from Stockholm to Rhodes , Palma de Mallorca and London between 4 and 6 July . Trans Polar claimed that they were flying courtesy trips and that the passengers had agreed to be compensated the part of the package trip which would have been paid to Trans Polar . The arguments were rejected by the CAA , who stated that this was a typical post @-@ excuse and that in case of a courtesy trip the airline should not be collecting the fare in the first place . The incident was investigated by both Norwegian and Swedish police . 
 The airline started negotiating a charter contract agreement with the Danish tour operator Spies Rejser in July 1970 . Trans Polar offered the operator the use of two Boeing 720s for 55 million Danish krone ( DKK ) , 10 million lower than the incumbent Scanair was bidding , which would allow Spies to transport 140 @,@ 000 of their annual 250 @,@ 000 passengers . As the first aircraft was bound to existing operations , Trans Polar would have to procure two additional aircraft for the contract , as well as receive operating permission in Denmark . Trans Polar and Spies signed a contract in mid @-@ August for one weekly service from Copenhagen to Gran Canaria , while another weekly contract was awarded to Maersk Air . Negotiations for the main contract started on 5 September ; Scanair had stated a minimum price it could accept , largely based on the fact that Spies did not have an alternative operator . The successful negotiations with Trans Polar also included an agreement with <unk> , who each could offer Spies 70 @,@ 000 seats for the season . The contract brought annual revenue of DKK 25 million to Trans Polar . To fly the operations , two ex @-@ Aer Lingus Boeing 720s were registered on 16 October . The company later signed agreements with the Danish tour operators Karavan @-@ <unk> and Danmarks <unk> <unk> ( DIS ) . 
 Trans Polar issued new shares worth NOK 825 @,@ 000 on 25 November 1970 . At the same time , the airline 's shareholders issued guarantees to the bank for NOK 1 @.@ 2 million . This was increased by NOK 300 @,@ 000 in December . The company was insolvent at this time , but the creditors chose to instate a lawyer as chairman and continue operations . The airline met with its largest creditors on 25 February in an unsuccessful attempt to refinance the company 's debt . 
 = = = Demise = = = 
 Simon Spies , owner of Spies Rejser , speculated in February 1971 that he might merge his airline Conair of Scandinavia with Trans Polar , although he also stated that once his airline received new aircraft it would no longer necessarily need to charter aircraft from other airlines . Trans Polar was subject to a lawsuit by a laid @-@ off pilot which the airline owed NOK 26 @,@ 600 in pay and compensation for him paying his own connection flights to reach Trans Polar charters . The company had issued several cheques and bills of exchange that had bounced and the pilot threatened to bankrupt the airline unless he was paid . The company responded that he would have a very difficult time bankrupting them and the press should instead write about the airline 's future , which they regarded as very bright . 
 The airline also owed NOK 15 million in installments to Boeing Commercial Airplanes for the first Boeing 720 aircraft . Representatives from Boeing met up at Copenhagen Airport on the evening of 17 May 1971 and removed the altimeter from the aircraft and informed the airport police that they had seized the aircraft by making it not airworthy . The 170 passengers who had bought trips through Spies were only marginally delayed because Conair was able to ready one of their own aircraft in three hours . The preparedness was due to Spies ' concern of the Norwegian airline 's inability to perform . Trans Polar 's managing director Knut Borgen called Boeing 's seizure " a misunderstanding , " but nevertheless Boeing took over formal ownership of the aircraft two days later , and the aircraft was re @-@ registered on 24 May . The other two aircraft were at the time stationed at Dublin Airport where they were undergoing maintenance and could not be used as reserves . 
 Spies canceled their contract with Trans Polar on 21 May 1971 . Simon Spies stated that they had been " endlessly generous " towards the Norwegian airline , and that they had suffered numerous delays ultimately caused by the airline 's financial shortcomings . Conair had taken delivery of five equivalent aircraft and the company was therefore able to operate its own flights . Trans Polar had plans to quickly return to operations : the two remaining aircraft would be returned to Aer Lingus and three new aircraft would be purchased . This would be financed through conversion of debt to share capital and new investments from various shipping companies . Borgen emphasized that the market price for leasing aircraft had fallen and that the airline therefore could operate at a lower cost with new leasing contract . Once the airline was back on its feet , he believed Spies would return as a customer . Trans Polar informed its remaining customers on 22 May that it would terminate its flights . 
 The airline unsuccessfully scrambled to continue operations . A contract with Drammen @-@ based Hercules and its Hamburg , West Germany @-@ based subsidiary secured Trans Polar new operations , this time flying guest workers between West Germany and Turkey four times per week . Tjøntveit claimed on 2 June 1971 that he had secured new financing from British investors , who along with Norwegian shipping companies would purchase newly issued shares in the company . He also confirmed that the two Boeing 720s would return to Aer Lingus and plans for two new Boeing 707 aircraft to be purchased in time for planned operations to commence on 2 July . 
 = = Bankruptcy = = 
 Boeing issued a petition for bankruptcy 22 June 1971 , which was carried out by Oslo District Court the following day . The two remaining Boeing aircraft were re @-@ registered with Aer Lingus on 10 June . By late August the debt in the company had been assessed to NOK 30 million , making it the largest bankruptcy till then in Norwegian history . The largest creditor was Boeing , which was owed NOK 7 million . The creditors and shareholders lost all of their investments in the company because the airline 's limited assets were used to pay outstanding wages . Tjøntveit stated on 8 September that he intended to sue Boeing for damages from the seizure of the aircraft , but by October no writ of summons had been received by the manufacturer . 
 A police investigation was initiated in October 1971 to uncover any criminal action taken by the company . Tjøntveit announced in December 1971 that he had established a new airline — Norwegian Overseas Airways ( NOA ) — which intended to operate freight routes using the Lockheed L @-@ 100 Hercules . The police investigation quickly established that there were shortcomings in Trans Polar 's bookkeeping and that there were several violations of aviation regulations . However , they police had difficulty establishing who was responsible in the company . As Tjøntveit was no longer a Norwegian citizen , he was prohibited from holding management and board positions in the airline . Still , it was obvious that he had been calling the shots . Because NOA could not obtain Scandinavian operating permits , it moved its operations to Bangladesh — hindering the police from interviewing Tjøntveit and other central managers in Trans Polar who had joined the new airline . The police also stated that the investigation took too long because they had too few investigators with expertise in financial crime . 
 The long investigation time span was causing problems for the prosecutors as an increasing number of the counts were meeting their statutes of limitations . The police announced in September 1973 that they were working on indictments towards Tjøntveit and two of the creditors who placed their representatives on the board after the company was insolvent . The police investigation was concluded in May 1975 . By then , the statutes of limitations for the accounting issues had passed , and the police focused on the more serious charge of debt manipulation . Tjøntveit and two board members were indicted in 1976 . The managing committee for the winding @-@ up released its report in November 1977 ; the report concluded that although the company 's books showed assets of NOK 8 @.@ 6 million , in reality it only had fifty Norwegian krone . The committee further criticized the company for having too low a share capital , lack of qualified management and insufficient competence in operation and management of large aircraft . 
 The indictment against the two board members was dropped in 1977 , and only a single issue , regarding the disappearance of NOK 1 @.@ 8 million from the books though a cheque swindle , was retained against Tjøntveit . The long waiting time caused Verdens Gang to describe the case as a " justice scandal . " The court case started at Oslo District Court on 13 November 1978 . Only two of the seven counts were related to Trans Polar ; the others regarded other business transaction undertaken by Tjøntveit , such as selling aircraft he did not own . During the court proceedings , the prosecutor withdrew all counts related to Trans Polar . Tjøntveit was acquitted on 30 November , but the court stated that the police had good reason to investigate the airline and had understanding of the long time frame , pointing to the fact that there were practically no accounts and difficulties interviewing the involved parties . The court also took into consideration that Tjøntveit was an aviator and had no education in management . Tjøntveit followed up by suing the state for NOK 2 @.@ 8 million in damages , but the case was dismissed by Oslo District Court in September 1979 . 
 = Sinclair C5 = 
 The Sinclair C5 is a small one @-@ person battery electric vehicle , technically an " electrically assisted pedal cycle " . ( Although widely described as an " electric car " , Sinclair characterised it as a " vehicle , not a car " . ) It was the culmination of Sir Clive Sinclair 's long @-@ running interest in electric vehicles . Sinclair had become one of the UK 's best @-@ known millionaires and earned a knighthood on the back of the highly successful Sinclair Research range of home computers in the early 1980s . He now hoped to repeat his success in the electric vehicle market , which he saw as ripe for a new approach . The C5 emerged from an earlier project to produce a Renault Twizy @-@ style electric car called the C1 . After a change in the law prompted by lobbying from bicycle manufacturers , Sinclair developed the C5 as an electrically powered tricycle with a polypropylene body and a chassis designed by Lotus Cars . It was intended to be the first in a series of increasingly ambitious electric vehicles , but in the event the planned development of the followup C10 and C15 electric cars never got further than the drawing board . 
 On 10 January 1985 , the C5 was unveiled at a glitzy launch event but it received a less than enthusiastic reception from the British media . Its sales prospects were blighted by poor reviews and safety concerns expressed by consumer and motoring organisations . The vehicle 's limitations – a short range , a maximum speed of only 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) , a battery that ran down quickly and a lack of weatherproofing – made it impractical for most people 's needs . It was marketed as an alternative to cars and bicycles , but ended up appealing to neither group of owners , and it was not available in shops until several months after its launch . Within three months of the launch , production had been slashed by 90 % . Sales never picked up despite Sinclair 's optimistic forecasts and production ceased entirely by August 1985 . Out of 14 @,@ 000 C5s made , only 5 @,@ 000 were sold before its manufacturer , Sinclair Vehicles , went into receivership . 
 The C5 became known as " one of the great marketing bombs of postwar British industry " and a " notorious ... example of failure " . Despite its commercial failure , the C5 went on to become a cult item for collectors . Thousands of unsold C5s were purchased by investors and sold for hugely inflated prices – as much as £ 5 @,@ 000 , compared to the original retail value of £ 399 . Enthusiasts have established owners ' clubs and some have modified their vehicles substantially , adding monster wheels , jet engines , and high @-@ powered electric motors to propel their C5s at speeds of up to 150 miles per hour ( 240 km / h ) . 
 = = Design = = 
 The C5 is made predominately of polypropylene , measuring 174 @.@ 4 cm ( 68 @.@ 7 in ) long , 74 @.@ 4 cm ( 29 @.@ 3 in ) wide , and 79 @.@ 5 cm ( 31 @.@ 3 in ) high . It weighs approximately 30 kg ( 66 lb ) without a battery and 45 kg ( 99 lb ) with one . The chassis consists of a single Y @-@ shaped steel component with a cross @-@ section of about 5 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) by 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) The vehicle has three wheels , one of 317 mm ( 12 @.@ 5 in ) diameter at the front and two of 406 mm ( 16 @.@ 0 in ) at the rear . 
 The driver sits in a recumbent position in an open cockpit , steering via a handlebar that is located under the knees . A power switch and front and rear brake levers are positioned on the handlebar . As a supplement to or replacement for electric power , the C5 can also be propelled via bicycle @-@ style pedals located at the front of the cockpit . The maximum speed of an unmodified C5 is 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) . At the rear of the vehicle is a small luggage compartment with a capacity of 28 litres ( 1 cu ft ) . As the C5 does not have a reverse gear , reversing direction is done by getting out , picking up the front end and turning it around by hand . 
 The C5 is powered by a 12 @-@ volt lead @-@ acid electric battery which drives a motor with a continuous rating of 250 watts and a maximum speed of 4 @,@ 100 revolutions per minute . It is coupled with a two @-@ stage gear @-@ drive that increases torque by a factor of 13 , without which the motor would not be able to move the vehicle when a person is on board . However , the motor is vulnerable to overheating . The torque increases as the load on the vehicle increases , for instance by going up too steep a gradient . Sinclair 's tests showed that it could cope under power with a maximum slope of 1 in 12 ( 8 % ) and could manage a 1 in 7 ( 14 % ) slope using the pedals . As the speed of the motor reduces , the current flow through its windings increases , drawing up to 140 amps at stall speed . This would very quickly burn the motor out if sustained , so the motor 's load is constantly monitored by the C5 's electronics . If it stalls under full load the electronics disable the motor after 4 seconds , while if it is under heavy load ( around 80 or 90 amps ) it trips after two or three minutes . A heat @-@ sensitive resistor inside the motor warns the driver if the vehicle is beginning to overheat and disconnects the motor after a short time , and a third line of defence is provided by a metallic strip mounted on the motor . If an excessive temperature is reached the strip distorts and the power is disconnected . 
 Although it was usually billed as an electric vehicle , the C5 also depends significantly on pedal power . The vehicle 's battery is designed to provide 35 amps per hour when fully charged or half that for two hours , giving the C5 a claimed range of 20 miles ( 32 km ) . A display in the cockpit uses green , amber , and red LEDs to display the state of the battery charge . The segments are extinguished one after the other to indicate how much driving time is left . The last light indicates that only ten minutes of power are left , after which the motor is switched off and the driver is left to rely on the pedals . Another display indicates via green , amber , and red LEDs how much current is being used . The C5 is in its most economical running mode when a low amount of current , indicated by the green LEDs , is being used . When the lights are red , the motor is under a high load and the driver needs to use pedal power to avoid overheating and shutdown . 
 The C5 was initially sold at a cost of £ 399 , but to keep the cost under the £ 400 mark a number of components were sold as optional accessories . These included indicator lights , mirrors , mud flaps , a horn , and a " High @-@ Vis Mast " consisting of a reflective strip on a pole , designed to make the C5 more visible in traffic . Sinclair 's C5 accessories brochure noted that " the British climate isn 't always ideal for wind @-@ in @-@ the @-@ hair driving " and offered a range of waterproofs to keep C5 drivers dry in the vehicle 's open cockpit . Other accessories included seat cushions and spare batteries . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Sir Clive Sinclair 's interest in the possibilities of electric vehicles originated in the late 1950s during a holiday job for the electronics company <unk> . Fifteen years later , in the early 1970s , he was the head of his own successful electronics company , Sinclair Radionics , based in St Ives in Cambridgeshire . He tasked one of his employees , Chris Curry – later a co @-@ founder of Acorn Computers – to carry out some preliminary research into electric vehicle design . 
 Sinclair took the view that an electric vehicle needed to be designed from the ground up , completely rethinking the principles of automotive design rather than simply dropping electric components into an established model . He believed that the motor was the key to the design . Sinclair and Curry developed a wafer @-@ thin motor that was mounted on a child 's scooter , with a button on the handlebars to activate it . The research got no further , however , as Sinclair 's development of the first " slimline " pocket calculator – the Sinclair Executive and its successors – took precedence . No further work on electric vehicles took place for most of the rest of the 1970s . 
 = = = Early development : the C1 = = = 
 It was not until late 1979 that Sinclair returned to electric vehicle development . Around Christmas that year , he approached Tony Wood Rogers , an ex @-@ Radionics employee , to carry out consultancy work on " a preliminary investigation into a personal electric vehicle . " The brief was to assess the options for producing a one @-@ person vehicle which would be a replacement for a moped and would have a maximum speed of 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) . Although Wood Rogers was initially reluctant , he was intrigued by the idea of an electric vehicle and agreed to help Sinclair . The vehicle was dubbed the C1 ( the C standing for Clive ) . He built a number of prototypes to demonstrate various design principles and clarify the final specifications . 
 A specification of the C1 emerged by the end of the year . It would address short @-@ distance transportation needs , with a minimum range of 30 miles ( 48 km ) on a fully charged battery . This reflected official figures showing that the average daily car journey was only 13 miles ( 21 km ) , while the average moped or pedal cycle journey was just 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) . The users were envisaged as being housewives , urban commuters , and young people , who might otherwise use cycles or mopeds to travel . The electric vehicle would be safer , more weather @-@ proof , and would offer space to carry items . It would be easy to drive and park and for the driver to enter or exit , and it would require minimum maintenance . The vehicle would be engineered for simplicity using injection @-@ moulded plastic components and a polypropylene body . It would also be much cheaper than a car , costing £ 500 ( now £ 1400 ) at the most . 
 One area of development that Sinclair purposefully avoided was battery technology . Electric vehicles powered by lead @-@ acid batteries had once actually outnumbered internal combustion engine vehicles ; in 1912 nearly 34 @,@ 000 electric cars were registered in the U.S. However , the efficiency of internal combustion engines greatly improved while battery technology advanced much more slowly , leading to petrol and diesel @-@ driven vehicles dominating the market . By 1978 , out of 17 @.@ 6 million registered vehicles on Britain 's roads , only 45 @,@ 000 were electric vehicles in day @-@ to @-@ day use and of those , 90 % were <unk> . Sinclair chose to rely on existing lead @-@ acid battery technology , avoiding the great expense of developing a more efficient type . His rationale was that if the electric vehicle market took off , battery manufacturers would step up to develop better batteries . Wood Rogers recalls : 
 We were stuck with the standard technology of the time . A car battery was out of the question because it couldn 't stand constant charge / discharge cycles , a traction battery , similar to the kind used in milk floats , could be recharged from flat and a semi @-@ traction battery , often used by <unk> , offered a good compromise . Sadly , though , we had very little freedom of choice . 
 The development programme moved to the University of Exeter in 1982 , where the C1 chassis was fitted with fibreglass shells and tested in a wind tunnel . It was recognised at an early stage that the vehicle would have to be aerodynamic ; although it was only ever intended to be small and relatively slow , reducing wind resistance was seen as essential for the vehicle 's efficiency . By March 1982 the basic design of the C1 had been established . Sinclair then turned to an established motor design company , Ogle Design of Letchworth , to provide professional styling assistance and production engineering . However , Ogle 's approach was not to Sinclair 's liking ; they tackled the project as one of car design and focused more ( and expensively ) on the aerodynamics rather than the cycle technology around which the C1 was based . The weight of the vehicle increased to over 150 kilograms ( 330 lb ) , far more than Sinclair 's desired specification . By March 1983 , Sinclair and Wood Rogers had decided to stop the C1 programme . Wood Rogers comments that Ogle were convinced that the C1 would be a flop , telling Sinclair that it would not be fast enough , that its drivers would get wet when it rained and that the battery was not good enough . 
 To meet the steadily escalating development costs of the vehicle , Sinclair decided to raise capital by selling some of his own shares in Sinclair Research to fund a separate company that would focus on electric vehicles . A £ 12 million deal was reached in March 1983 , of which £ 8 @.@ 3 million was used to fund the establishment of the new Sinclair Vehicles company . Sinclair recruited Barrie Wills , a veteran former employee of the DeLorean Motor Company , to lead Sinclair Vehicles as its managing director . Although Wills initially expressed scepticism about the viability of an electric vehicle – his twenty @-@ five years in the motor industry had convinced him that an electric car was never going to happen – Sinclair managed to convince him that the project would work . In 1984 , Sinclair Vehicles ' new head office was established in Warwick in the West Midlands , an area with a long @-@ established link with the motor industry . 
 The project 's prospects were boosted by changes in the British government 's approach to electric vehicles . In March 1980 , it had abolished Vehicle Excise Duty for electric vehicles and by the start of 1983 , the Department of Transport was working on legislation that would introduce a new category of vehicle – the " electrically assisted pedal cycle " . This had a number of significant advantages from Sinclair 's point of view . Such a vehicle would be exempt from insurance and vehicle tax , and the user would not need a driving licence or a helmet , all of which were required for mopeds . The legislation , which was passed in August 1983 , was prompted by a lobbying campaign by manufacturers such as Raleigh who wanted to sell electric bicycles . 
 Sinclair realised that his electric vehicle design could easily be adapted to meet the new legislation . As the " electrically assisted pedal cycle " category was so new , there were no existing vehicles on the market that would meet the standards prescribed by the new legislation . However , it imposed a number of restrictions that limited the performance of any vehicle that would qualify under the new standards . The maximum legal speed of the vehicle would be limited to only 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) ; it could not weigh any more than 60 kilograms ( 130 lb ) , including the battery ; and its motor could not be rated at any more than 250 watts . 
 Despite these limitations , the vehicle was seen as only the first step in a series of increasingly ambitious electrical cars . Sinclair intended it to prove the viability of electric personal transport ; the hope was that , just as Sinclair had found with home computers like the hugely successful ZX81 and ZX Spectrum , an affordable electric vehicle could unleash pent @-@ up demand for a market that did not previously exist . However , Sinclair performed no market research to ascertain whether there was actually a market for his electric vehicle ; as the director of the Primary Contact advertising agency commented in January 1985 , the project continued all the way to the prototype stage " purely on the convictions of Sir Clive . " 
 = = = Development and design of the C5 = = = 
 With Sinclair 's new specifications in hand , Ogle worked on a three @-@ wheeled design dubbed the C5 , which bore similarities with the earlier three @-@ wheeled Bond Bug – another Ogle design . The vehicle 's handlebar steering was the brainchild of Wood Rogers , who decided at the outset that a steering wheel would not be practicable as it would make it impossible for a driver to get in and out easily – a serious safety disadvantage . He comments that " putting the bars at the driver 's sides made it easy to steer and felt very natural . " A prototype was presented to 63 families in the A , B , C1 and C2 demographic groups in suburban and town environments to determine that the controls were correctly positioned ; this was the only external research carried out on the C5 . In the autumn of 1983 , Wills brought in Lotus Cars to finish the vehicle 's detailing , build prototypes and test rigs , carry out testing and take forward the programme to production . The development of the C5 took place over 19 months in conditions of great secrecy , with testing carried out at the Motor Industry Research Association 's proving ground in Leicestershire . 
 Further aerodynamic refinements were carried out in Exeter with the development of new body shells which produced further reductions in the vehicle 's drag . However , it was felt that something was lacking in the design and a 23 @-@ year @-@ old industrial designer , Gus Desbarats , was brought in to refine the shell 's appearance . He had won a Sinclair @-@ sponsored electric vehicle design competition at the Royal College of Art and was hired on his graduation to set up an in @-@ house car design studio at Sinclair 's <unk> in Cambridge , of which he became the first employee . It was not only Desbarats ' first project but , as he later said , " day one of my working life " , when he turned up at Sinclair 's premises . He was taken aback when he saw the C5 for the first time , as he had been expecting a " proper " electric car . He said later that he thought " the concept looked futuristic but was short on practicality . There were no instruments , nowhere to put anything and no security features . " Desbarats told Sinclair that the design would have to be redone from scratch , " asking what we were doing about visibility , rear view mirrors , range indications ... " . It was far too late for this , however ; all the key design decisions had already been made . Desbarats told Sinclair that he would need four months to revisit the design and was given eight weeks instead . He created the styling that was used for the final production model of the C5 , with wheel trims and a small luggage compartment being added subsequently . Desbarats was also responsible for the creation of the High @-@ Vis Mast accessory , as he felt uncomfortable being so close to the ground with other drivers potentially not being able to see him . He later described his contribution as " convert [ ing ] an ugly pointless device into a prettier , safer , and more usable pointless device . " 
 The chassis of the C5 consists of two identical metal pressings which are joined at top and bottom with a closing plate at the rear . It lacks a separate suspension system , instead relying on the chassis structure having enough torsional flex . Its motor was produced in Italy by <unk> , a subsidiary of the Dutch company Philips . Although it was later famously said that the C5 was powered by a washing machine motor , the motor was in fact developed from a design produced to drive a truck cooling fan . Lotus provided the gearbox and a rear axle based on a design for car steering columns . The C5 's electronics were produced by <unk> , a Sinclair spin @-@ off . The wheels were assembled from tyres made in Taiwan and wheels from Italy . Oldham Batteries provided a lead @-@ acid battery developed for Sinclair that could manage more than the 300 charge @-@ discharge cycles that had originally been specified . 
 The bodywork was made from two injection @-@ moulded polypropylene shells supplied by three manufacturers ; J.J. Harvey of Manchester made the moulds , <unk> provided the shells , and ICI supplied the raw material . According to Rodney Dale , the upper shell mould was " one of the largest – if not the largest – injection mouldings of its type in the UK : possibly even in the world . " The manufacturing process reflected Sinclair 's ambition for the C5 production line . A single mould set was capable of producing up to 4 @,@ 000 parts every week . The two parts of the shell were joined together by wrapping a tape around the joint , aligning them on a jig , pressing them together and passing an electric current through the tape to heat and melt it . The same process was used to make the front and rear bumper assemblies of the Austin Maestro and only took about 70 seconds to complete . Although Sinclair had considered producing the C5 at the DeLorean plant at <unk> in Northern Ireland , which had one of Europe 's most advanced automated plastic body manufacturing facilities , this was not to be , as the DeLorean Motor Company failed in a controversial bankruptcy which resulted in the plant 's closure . 
 Instead , the work of assembling the C5 was given to The Hoover Company in the spring of 1983 . The Welsh Development Agency ( <unk> ) approached Hoover to ask them if they would be interested becoming the principal subcontractor for Sinclair , " who are working on an electric car , and as a by @-@ product of the research have designed an electrically assisted bicycle . They are looking for a subcontractor to whom they can entrust the assembly . " The proposal suited all sides . The <unk> was keen to support the Hoover washing machine factory at Merthyr Tydfil , situated in the economically depressed South Wales Valleys . Hoover was enticed by Sinclair 's projections of sales of 200 @,@ 000 units a year , increasing to 500 @,@ 000 . Sinclair saw Hoover 's plant and expertise as a good match for their fabrication techniques . A contract was signed within a few months . 
 = = = Production , distribution and support = = = 
 The C5 was produced in great secrecy in a separate part of the Hoover factory with its own duplicate facilities . At first the work was carried out by a small team of people in a sealed room , but as production ramped up Hoover installed two production lines in building <unk> , connected to the main factory by an underground tunnel . A rolling testing stand was located at the end of the production line to test each completed C5 for faults . A mechanical arm simulated the weight of a person weighing 12 stone ( 170 lb ; 76 kg ) and the vehicle 's brakes were tested under load . At the end of the process the C5s which had passed testing were rolled into cardboard boxes and loaded straight onto distribution lorries in stacks . Around £ 100 @,@ 000 was spent to set up the factory . 
 Distribution centres were set up in Hayes in Middlesex , Preston in Lancashire and Oxford to handle the C5s . Hoover arranged for 19 of its service offices around the UK – responsible for maintaining customers ' vacuum cleaners and washing machines – to also maintain C5s and provide spare parts . The C5 's major consumable item , the battery , was to be supported by 300 branches of Comet and Woolworths . 
 Hoover trained its engineers to produce C5s and tested its manufacturing processes by assembling , dismantling and re @-@ assembling 100 C5s . Full production began in November 1984 and by early January 1985 over 2 @,@ 500 C5s had been manufactured . Each production line could produce 50 vehicles an hour and Hoover had the capability of producing up to 8 @,@ 000 C5s per week . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 The news of Sinclair 's C5 project came as a surprise when it became public and attracted considerable interest , as well as scepticism . The Economist reported in June 1983 that carmakers were " startled " but cautious about Sinclair 's prospects ; as one competitor put it , " If it were anyone but Sinclair , we 'd say he was bonkers " . The Economist asked , " Can a man who has made a fortune out of calculators and computers , and could double it on flatscreen televisions , be that crazy ? " and wondered whether he was " making a ghastly mistake " , a prediction that industry insiders thought was likely . 
 The C5 was launched on 10 January 1985 at Alexandra Palace in North London . The event was staged in Sinclair 's usual glitzy style , with girls handing out press packs and a variety of promotional giveaways : magazines , hats , pullovers , T @-@ shirts , key rings , sun visors , badges , mugs , bags , and even a C5 video game . The vehicle was given a dramatic unveiling ; six C5s driven by girls dressed in grey and yellow burst out of six cardboard boxes , drove around the arena , and lined up side by side . Sinclair announced the launch of a £ 3 million , three @-@ month @-@ long advertising print and television advertising campaign . The C5 would be available initially by mail order at a cost of £ 399 and would subsequently be sold via high street stores . 
 Sinclair issued a glossy sales brochure which characterised the vehicle as a part of an ongoing exercise in " cutting giants down to size , turning impersonal tyrants into personal servants . " The brochure highlighted Sinclair 's achievements in producing affordable pocket calculators , home computers , and pocket televisions and declared , " with the C5 , Sinclair Vehicles puts personal , private transport back where it belongs – in the hands of the individual . " The photographs accompanying the text showed housewives and teenagers driving the C5 to shops , railway stations , and sports fields – in the words of technology writers Ian Adamson and Richard Kennedy , " a blue @-@ sky suburbia exclusively populated by electric <unk> and their drivers . " 
 The press was given an opportunity to try out the C5 but this proved to be , as Adamson and Kennedy put it , " an unqualified disaster " . A large number of the demonstration machines did not work , as the assembled journalists soon discovered . The Sunday Times called the C5 a " Formula One bath @-@ chair " ; its reporter " had travelled five yards outdoors when everything when <unk> and this motorised , plastic , lozenge rolled to a halt with all the stationary decisiveness of a mule . " The Guardian 's reporter had a flat battery after only seven minutes , while Your Computer found that the C5 could not cope with the slopes at Alexandra Palace : " The 250 watt electric motor which drives one of the back wheels proved incapable of powering the C5 up even the gentlest slopes without using pedal power . The tricycle was soon making a plaintive " peep , peep " noise signalling that the engine had overheated . " Even the distinguished former racing driver Stirling Moss ran into problems when he tried out the C5 on the roads around Alexandra Palace . The Canadian newspaper The Globe and Mail reported that while he had started out well , " a jaunty smile on [ his ] face as he braved some of the worst exhaust fumes in the world <unk> almost directly into his face from trucks he could almost drive underneath " , he ran into problems when he reached a hill : " It was at this point that he realised the battery had gone dead . On a cold and foggy London day , the great man was visibly sweating . " 
 The timing and location of the launch event – in the middle of winter , on the top of a snow- and ice @-@ covered hill – later prompted criticism even from Sinclair executives , who admitted off the record that spring conditions might have been better for a vehicle with so little protection from the British climate . The Financial Times called it " the worst possible timing to launch what was proclaimed to be a serious , road @-@ going vehicle " . Sinclair 's biographer Rodney Dale describes it as " a calculated ( or miscalculated ) risk " , pointing out that production was already underway , details were beginning to leak out to the press and " the launch could hardly have been held up until the possibility of a bright spring day . " He justified the choice of January as being necessitated by a need to release the C5 " as soon as possible lest the erroneous speculation should have done more harm than good . " Rob Gray offers an alternative explanation , that the launch date had been brought forward because Sinclair 's development funds were running low . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 It soon became apparent that the C5 faced more serious problems with public perception than merely a botched launch event . Media reactions to the C5 were generally negative when the first reviews appeared over the following days . As the Financial Times observed , " the few hardy journalists who ventured out on the roads returned shivering and dubious about the C5 's abilities in such harsh conditions . " 
 A common concern was that it was simply too vulnerable in traffic . Your Computer commented that " a periscope would be handy if you intended driving the C5 on busy roads since your head is only at bonnet level . " The Guardian 's motoring correspondent wrote of her " grave misgivings about its use in congested traffic ... On a sharp turn it too easily lifts a rear wheel , is <unk> silent , and low down . It disappears below a car driver 's sight @-@ line when pulling up alongside . The prospect of these vehicles merging into heavy traffic , dwarfed by heavy lorries , buses , and cars , is worrying . Their low speed risks turning them into mobile chicanes for other traffic . " Another Guardian writer wrote that he " would not want to drive [ the ] C5 in any traffic at all . My head was on a level with the top of a juggernaut 's tyres , the exhaust fumes blasted into my face . Even with the minuscule front and rear lights on , I could not feel confident that a lorry driver so high above the ground would see me . " Sinclair issued a publicity photograph showing the C5 's industrial designer , Gus Desbarats , in a C5 alongside a cardboard cutout of an Austin Mini to illustrate that the C5 driver 's seated position was actually higher than that of a Mini driver . 
 As teenagers were among the target audiences for the C5 , some commentators also raised the prospect of ( in Adamson and Kennedy 's words ) " packs of 14 @-@ year @-@ olds terrorising the neighbourhood in their customised C5s " . The secretary of the Cyclists Touring Club raised the prospect of " kids us [ ing ] them in a pretty wild way . They may run them over paths and pavements and knock people down . " Sinclair dismissed such concerns – " I have qualms about seven @-@ year @-@ olds riding bicycles on the open road , but I have far fewer qualms about a 14 @-@ year @-@ old driving one of these " . Teenagers interviewed by The Guardian were doubtful about whether they would want a C5 , commenting that while it was fun to drive they felt insecure in it and preferred their bicycles . 
 Sinclair 's claims to have revolutionised the electric vehicle were dismissed by many reviewers ; Your Computer called the C5 " more of a toy than the ' ideal solution for all types of local journey ' which the brochure claims . " The Guardian 's motoring correspondent also characterised it as " a delightful toy " The Daily Telegraph described it as " a cleverly @-@ designed ' fun ' machine that can hardly be regarded as serious , everyday all @-@ weather transport " , while The Engineer viewed it as " a smashing big boy 's toy , tough enough to take teenage thrashing and possibly a serious vehicle for fit adults to nip out in for the Sunday papers . " 
 On the plus side , the C5 's handling characteristics were praised by reviewers . The Guardian called it " very easy to master once you have become familiar with the under @-@ thigh handlebar steering and the semi @-@ recumbent driving position with feet on bicycle @-@ type pedals . " The Daily Mirror described the arrangement as " surprisingly easy " to master , although it cautioned that " on full speed and on full lock it 's very easy to tip it onto two wheels . " The Daily Express motoring correspondent wrote that he found the C5 " stable , comfortable and easy to handle . " 
 The verdict from motoring organisations , road safety groups , and consumer watchdogs was decidedly negative and probably sealed the C5 's fate . The British Safety Council ( BSC ) tested the C5 at Sinclair Vehicles ' headquarters in Warwick and issued a highly critical report to its 32 @,@ 000 members . Sinclair was furious and announced that he would sue the BSC and its chairman , James Tye , for defamation after Tye told the press : " I am shattered that within a few days 14 @-@ year @-@ old children will be allowed to drive on the road in this Doodle Bug without a licence ... without insurance and without any form of training . " Several years later , Tye was happy to take responsibility for the C5 's failure , describing himself as " the man entirely to blame for the failure of the Sinclair C5 . " 
 = = = Sales history = = = 
 Despite the problems of the press launch day , a more positive response was expected from the 20 @,@ 000 members of the public who attended the remaining two days of the launch event to try out the C5 on the Alexandra Palace test track . Sinclair reported the day after the event that its switchboard had been overwhelmed by enquirers , and it expected that all 2 @,@ 700 units from the first production run would be sold by the following Monday . Setting a pattern that would be repeated throughout the C5 's short commercial life , this prediction was wildly optimistic ; less than 200 were sold during the Alexandra Palace event . However , sales picked up as mail order forms – which had been sent to all of Sinclair 's computer customers – were returned with fresh orders . Within four weeks of launch , 5 @,@ 000 C5s had been sold . 
 The C5 's users were an eclectic group . They included holiday camps who wanted C5s to rent to campers ; the British Royal Family – Princes William and Harry each had one to drive around Kensington Palace before they were old enough to drive ; Sir Elton John , who had two ; the magician Paul Daniels , who bought a demonstration model he saw being driven around the BBC Television Centre car park ; Sir Arthur C. Clarke , who had two shipped out to his home at Colombo in Sri Lanka ; and the Mayor of Scarborough , Michael Pitts , who swapped his official Daimler for a C5 . However , as The Times reported , some of the early buyers were disappointed by the vehicle 's limitations , citing its slowness , its limited range and its inability to cope with steep hills , which led some people to return their C5s and ask for a refund . 
 Although the C5 reached retail stores at the start of March 1985 , sales had tailed off . Sinclair resorted to hiring teams of teenagers to drive around London in C5s to promote the vehicle , at a cost to the company of £ 20 a day . Similar teams were established in Manchester , Birmingham , and Leeds . The company denied that it was a marketing campaign ; a spokesman told The Times that " we haven 't done ... tests on inner city roads . That is what the team is doing . Marketing is not the prime function but will undoubtedly be a spin @-@ off . " Sinclair was reported to be surprised at the lack of demand and blamed the press for " a lack of foresight and pessimistic reporting . " Matters did not improve . The retail chain Comet acquired 1 @,@ 600 C5s but nine months later most were still unsold . 
 Adding to Sinclair 's problems , production of the C5 had to be halted for three weeks after numerous customers reported that the plastic moulding attached to the gearbox was impairing the performance of their vehicles . 100 Hoover workers were shifted from the C5 production line to work on replacing the faulty mouldings on returned vehicles . Barrie Wills admitted that Sinclair was also taking the opportunity to " adjust stocks " in the light of the C5 's poor sales . When production resumed a month later it was at only 10 % of the previous level , with 90 of the workers being transferred back to the washing machine production lines . Only 100 C5s were now being produced a week , down from the original 1 @,@ 000 . Over 3 @,@ 000 unsold C5s were piled up in storage at the Hoover factory , with additional unsold stock in 500 retail outlets nationwide . 
 Sinclair tried to put a brave face on it , admitting that " sales have not been entirely up to expectations " but claiming to be " confident of a high level of demand for the vehicle . " A spokesman told the media that " we expect a rapid rise in sales now that the weather is improving " . Possible sales opportunities were explored in mainland Europe , Asia , and the United States , with Sinclair claiming that he had found " very big " levels of interest . Hoover were sufficiently persuaded to allow Sinclair to divert 10 of their employees to modify C5s for overseas export . The bid to sell the C5 abroad failed ; the Dutch National Transport Service told Sinclair that the C5 was not suitable for Dutch roads without improvements to its braking system , the addition of more reflectors , and the inclusion of the High @-@ Vis Mast as part of the basic package . Most of the other ten countries that Sinclair inquired of demanded similar changes . 
 The C5 's reputation received a further battering when major consumer organisations published sceptical evaluations . The Automobile Association questioned many of Sinclair 's claims in a report published at the start of May . It found that the range of the vehicle was typically only about 10 miles ( 16 km ) rather than the 20 miles ( 32 km ) promised by Sinclair , and reported that the C5 's battery ran flat after only 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) on a cold day . The C5 's running speed was more usually around 12 @.@ 5 miles per hour ( 20 @.@ 1 km / h ) than the claimed 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) , while its running costs compared unfavourably to that of a petrol @-@ driven Honda <unk> moped . The stability , general <unk> , and especially the safety of the C5 were questioned , and the AA suggested that the High @-@ Vis Mast should be included as part of the standard package . It concluded : 
 The C5 looks more comfortable and convenient than it really is – older cyclists looking for less pedal effort will be disappointed by the agility its layout demands . Although it is delightfully quiet , performance , range , and comfort do not compare with the better mopeds and costs are much closer than one might think when one allows for the inevitable battery replacement . 
 The Consumers ' Association published a critical report on the C5 in the June issue of its magazine Which , concluding that the vehicle was of only limited use and represented poor value for money . All three of the C5s that it tested broke down with a " major gearbox fault " and their High @-@ Vis Masts snapped . The longest run between battery charges was only 14 @.@ 2 miles ( 22 @.@ 9 km ) , and a more realistic achievable range was 5 – 10 miles ( 8 – 16 km ) . It also echoed the AA 's concerns about the C5 's safety and the omission of the High @-@ Vis Mast from the standard package . The magazine also called the C5 " too easy to steal " , hardly surprising considering that while a security lock could be used to prevent it being driven away , the C5 was light enough that a would @-@ be thief could simply pick it up and carry it off . 
 As the summer of 1985 continued , sales of the C5 remained far below Sinclair 's predictions ; only 8 @,@ 000 had been sold by July . In the middle of that month , the Advertising Standards Authority ordered Sinclair to amend or withdraw its advertisements for the C5 after finding that the company 's claims about the safety and speed of the C5 either could not be proved or were not justified . Retailers attempted to deal with unsold stocks of C5s by drastically cutting the vehicle 's price . Comet first reduced the price to £ 259 @.@ 90 but by the end of the year was selling C5s with a complete set of accessories for only £ 139 @.@ 99 , 65 % less than the launch price . 
 Production was terminated in August 1985 , by which time 14 @,@ 000 C5s had been assembled . <unk> problems caused by the paucity of sales caused relations to break down between Sinclair Vehicles and Hoover . In June 1985 Hoover obtained a writ against Sinclair for unpaid debts of over £ 1 @.@ 5 million , relating to work carried out over the previous eight months . It did not actually serve the writ but entered negotiations with Sinclair . In mid @-@ August , it publicly announced that it was ceasing production of the C5 . A Sinclair spokesman told the media that the halt in production was " due to a shortage of certain components which are unable to be re @-@ ordered while a financial settlement is pending . Once this has been concluded production is envisaged to recommence . " 
 = = = Demise of Sinclair Vehicles = = = 
 Production did not recommence and the Hoover production line remained closed permanently . On 19 September , Sinclair Vehicles changed its name to TPD Limited , with a direct subsidiary named Sinclair Vehicles Sales Limited continuing to sell C5s . TPD only lasted until 15 October , when it was placed into receivership . The receivers announced that 4 @,@ 500 C5s had been sold by Sinclair Vehicles , with another 4 @,@ 500 remaining in the company 's hands . £ 7 @.@ 75 million was reportedly owed to creditors , of which £ 7 million was owed to Sir Clive Sinclair himself in reflection of his personal investment in the project . Hoover was not among the creditors , as Sinclair had managed to settle the dispute on terms that neither company would reveal . 
 On 5 November , TPD was formally liquidated at a creditors ' meeting . It was revealed , to the anger of the creditors , that Sinclair had taken out a £ 5 million debenture to cover the money that he had put into the company . Ordinary creditors faced little prospect of recovering the £ 1 million left outstanding . Primary Contact , the marketing agency used by Sinclair to promote the C5 , was left with the biggest unpaid bill , of nearly £ 500 @,@ 000 . The last of the unsold C5s were bought for £ 75 each by Ellar ( Surplus Goods ) Ltd of Liverpool , which planned to sell 1 @,@ 000 of them to an Egyptian businessman for use on a university campus while another 1 @,@ 500 were intended to be sold in the UK . 
 Many reasons have been suggested for the failure of Sinclair Vehicles and what Dale calls " the jigsaw of the C5 's disappointment " . One of the receivers of Sinclair Vehicles , John <unk> , suggested that Sinclair had taken the wrong tack with its marketing of the C5 : " It was presented as a serious transport , when perhaps it should have been presented as a luxury product , an up @-@ market plaything . " Ellar 's director Maurice <unk> took exactly this tack when he purchased Sinclair Vehicles ' remaining stock , saying that his company would market them as " a sophisticated toy " : " If you were a little boy , wouldn 't you want your parents to get you one this Christmas ? " His strategy was notably successful ; Ellar sold nearly 7 @,@ 000 C5s at up to £ 700 each , far more ( and at a higher price ) than Sinclair had ever managed . 
 Some commentators attributed the C5 's failure to problems with Sinclair 's marketing strategy ; only a year after the demise of Sinclair Vehicles , the Globe and Mail newspaper called it " one of the great marketing bombs of postwar British industry " . Andrew P. Marks of Paisley College of Technology criticises Sinclair 's marketing strategy as confused ; the C5 promotional brochure depicts it as a leisure vehicle , showing boys in C5s at a football pitch , women in C5s on a suburban road , and so on , while the text suggests that the C5 is a serious substitute for a car . He concludes that the C5 was poorly defined , appearing to be " trying to grasp at two different markets " but was unable to appeal to either , and so failed to take off . The fact that it was initially only available via mail order was also a mistake , in Marks ' view , as it meant that no physical inspection of the product could be made before purchasing it . This was a serious deterrent to consumers as it made the C5 a much more risky purchase . 
 The design researcher and academic Nigel Cross calls the C5 a " notorious ... example of failure " and describes its basic concept as " wrong " . He points out that the marketing research for the C5 was carried out after the vehicle 's concept had already been decided ; he notes that it appears to have been intended " mainly to aid promotion " rather than to guide development . Gus Desbarats , the C5 's industrial designer , attributes the vehicle 's flawed concept to Sinclair operating in a " bubble " and believes that Sinclair " failed to understand the difference between a new market , computing , and a mature one , transport , where there were more benchmarks to compare against . " He comments that the experience of working on the C5 convinced him of the need for industrial designers such as himself to get " involved early in the innovation process , shaping basic configurations , never again [ being ] satisfied to simply decorate a fundamentally bad idea " . 
 Sinclair himself said in 2005 that the C5 " was early for what it was . People reacted negatively and the press didn 't help . It was too low down and people felt insecure , hence it got bad press . " Sam Dawson of Classic and Sport Car Magazine described the C5 as " incredibly fun to drive " , suggesting that the safety concerns could have been addressed if it wasn 't for the fact that it was already doomed as a national joke . " He noted the disconnect between the media 's expectations of a serious electric car and the reality of the C5 , which he called " just a fun way of getting around . " Professor Stuart Cole of the University of South Wales comments that the C5 suffered from the design of the roads and the attitudes of the time , which were not geared towards pedal or electric vehicles : " In the days before unleaded petrol , your face would have been at the height of every exhaust pipe , and drivers weren 't used to having to consider slower @-@ moving cyclists . But with more cycle lanes , better education , and workplaces providing showers , etc . , the world now is much more geared up for people looking for alternatives to the car , and hopefully will become even more so in the future . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Sinclair 's other electric vehicles = = = 
 Sinclair envisaged producing follow @-@ up vehicles such as the C10 , a two @-@ seater city car , and the C15 , a four @-@ seater capable of travelling at 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) . As Wills put it at the launch event , " We 're developing a family of traffic @-@ compatible , quiet , economic and pollution @-@ free vehicles for the end of the ' 80s . " The C5 was described as " the baby of the family " . The C10 was intended to be a city car , capable of carrying two passengers at up to 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) in a roofed but open @-@ sided compartment with two wheels at the front and one at the back . Wood Rogers intended it to effectively be an updated version of the <unk> , a 1960s Italian <unk> . Sinclair built a full @-@ scale mock @-@ up of it ; according to Wood Rogers , " it looked great . I specified open sides to keep the cost down and having no doors meant it escaped a lot of regulations too . " The design is strikingly similar to the modern Renault Twizy electric vehicle ; Wood Rogers comments that " you could put the C10 into production today and it would still look contemporary . " 
 Sinclair described the C15 as having " a futuristic design with an elongated ' tear @-@ drop ' shape , a lightweight body made of self @-@ coloured polypropylene and a single , possibly ' roller ' type rear wheel . " It would have been launched at the 1988 International Motor Show in Birmingham following a development programme costed at £ 2 million . Unlike the relatively conventional technology used in the C5 , Sinclair intended to use sodium sulphur batteries with four times the power @-@ to @-@ weight ratio of lead @-@ acid batteries to give the C15 much greater speed and range – over 180 miles ( 290 km ) on a single charge . It would have had approximately the same dimensions as a conventional small car , measuring 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) long , 1 @.@ 35 metres ( 4 ft 5 in ) high , and 1 @.@ 35 metres ( 4 ft 5 in ) wide . However , it could only have worked if sodium sulphur batteries had realised their promise . In the event they did not , due to thermal problems . Neither the C10 nor the C15 ever left the drawing board . 
 Although Sinclair went on to produce more ( but much smaller ) electric vehicles , the C5 debacle did lasting damage to the reputation of subsequent EVs in the UK , which the media routinely compared to the C5 . It was not until a highly regarded manufacturer , Toyota , launched a serious and well @-@ received vehicle in the 1990s , the Prius , that the C5 " jinx " was finally laid to rest . 
 = = = From flop to cult = = = 
 Despite its lack of commercial success when it was first released , the C5 gained an unexpected degree of cult status in the later years . Collectors began purchasing them as investment items , reselling them for considerably more than their original retail price . One such investor , Adam Harper , bought 600 C5s from a film company as a speculative investment in 1987 . He sold all but four within two years , selling them to customers who wanted a novel or more environmentally friendly form of transportation . He also found willing customers among drivers who had been banned from the road , as the C5 did not need a driving licence or vehicle tax . According to Harper , C5s could be resold for as much as £ 2 @,@ 500 – more than six times the original retail price . By 1996 , a Special Edition C5 in its original box was reported to be worth more than £ 5 @,@ 000 to collectors . 
 C5 owners began modifying their vehicles to achieve levels of performance far beyond anything envisaged by Sinclair . Adam Harper used one C5 as a stunt vehicle , driving it through a 70 ft ( 21 m ) tunnel of fire , and adapted another to run at 150 miles per hour ( 240 km / h ) , aiming to break a world land speed record for a three @-@ wheeled electric vehicle and the British record for any type of electric vehicle . He said later : " Up to 100 mph it 's like you 're running on rails , it 's really stable . Then at about 110 to 120 mph it starts getting tricky . At that point if a tyre blew up or something happened you would be surely dead . " 
 As quoted in the 1987 Guinness Book of Records under battery powered vehicle ; ' John W. Owen and Roy Harvey travelled 919 miles 1479 km from John O <unk> to Land 's End in a Sinclair C5 in 103 hr 15 min on 30 Apr @-@ 4 May 1985 . ' ( 8 @.@ 9 mph avg . ) 
 Chris Crosskey , an engineer from Abingdon , set a record for the longest journey completed on a C5 on a trip to Glastonbury – 103 miles ( 166 km ) miles away ( " I nearly died of exhaustion " ) – and tried three times to drive one from Land 's End to John o ' Groats , a distance of 874 miles ( 1 @,@ 407 km ) . Another engineer , Adrian Bennett , fitted a jet engine to his C5 , while plumber Colin Furze turned one into a 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) -high " monster trike " with 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) wheels and a petrol engine capable of propelling it at 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) . 
 = = = Videos = = = 
 " Sir Clive Sinclair on the C5 " – BBC News report from the January 1985 launch of the C5 
 " Sinclair C5 electric car ' ahead of its time ' " – BBC News report from January 1985 showing reporter Elfyn Thomas driving a C5 in Cardiff city centre 
 = = = Owners ' clubs = = = 
 C5 Alive – includes info about the C5 , spare parts shop and forum 
 C5 Owners – includes C5 history , documentation and forum 
 = Hart Lake ( Oregon ) = 
 Hart Lake is a shallow lake in the Warner Valley of eastern Lake County , Oregon , United States . The lake covers 7 @,@ 324 acres ( 29 @.@ 64 km2 ) and has the most stable water level within the valley 's Warner Lakes chain . The lake is named for the heart @-@ shaped brand used by the pioneer Wilson and Alexander cattle ranch established near the lake . Much of the land around Hart Lake is administered by the Bureau of Land Management ( BLM ) and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) . The lake and the surrounding wetlands support a wide variety of birds and other wildlife . Recreational opportunities on and near Hart Lake include hunting , fishing , bird watching , and boating . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Hart Lake is located in the Warner Valley in south @-@ central Oregon . It is a natural lake that covers 7 @,@ 324 acres ( 29 @.@ 64 km2 ) and is approximately 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) long and 2 miles ( 3 km ) wide . Annual precipitation in the Hart Lake basin averages from 15 to 25 inches ( 380 to 640 mm ) . The valley is approximately 60 miles ( 97 km ) long and 8 miles ( 13 km ) wide . Most of the valley is in Lake County ; however , the north end extends about 10 miles ( 16 km ) into Harney County . It is an alluvial basin containing numerous lakes , remnants of a single lake that covered the valley floor up to 200 feet ( 61 m ) deep during the Pleistocene epoch . Today , steep cliffs rise above a chain of endorheic lakes , such as Hart Lake , known collectively as the Warner Lakes . The valley has two regions commonly referred to as the South Warner Valley and the North Warner Valley . The two areas transition between Crump Lake and Hart Lake at a point where the valley narrows to about 5 miles ( 8 km ) in width . 
 = = = Hydrology = = = 
 The entire lake has an average depth of 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and a maximum depth of 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) at a normal water level . The deepest part of the lake is at its north end , while the south half is comparatively shallow . Hart Lake not only gets the overflow from Crump Lake , but also receives a steady flow of fresh water from Honey Creek . As a result , Hart Lake has the most stable water level within the Warner Lakes chain . Any outflow during high water drains into Anderson Lake , just north of Hart Lake . 
 The water in Hart Lake is quite murky due to suspended particles stirred up from the shallow bottom by wave action . However , water clarity is not a good indicator of the lake 's trophic state . The amount of nutrients in the lake is very high ; nitrate and phosphorus levels indicate a <unk> condition . This is counterbalanced by the chlorophyll level and related phytoplankton growth , which are typical of a mesotrophic lake . This is due to the reduced light level in the lake 's cloudy waters , so overall , the lake is classified as eutrophic , with very high turbidity . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 In addition to the lake 's fish population , Hart Lake provides a unique habitat for plants and animals along the shore . The west @-@ facing slope of Hart Mountain runs along the eastern shore of the lake . This area is typical high desert scrubland dominated by big sagebrush and desert grasses . The areas to the north , south , and west of the lake are mostly meadows and marshland , where marsh grasses are common along lake shores . In addition , willow , cottonwood , choke cherry , and wild roses are found near the lake . Local wildlife includes common high desert mammals , resident birds , and migrant waterfowl . 
 Hart Lake 's native fish species include the Warner sucker , tui chub , and Great Basin redband trout . The redband trout and small populations of the other species are also found in Honey Creek . These stream @-@ dwelling populations have likely been the source for re @-@ colonizing Hart Lake after extended drought killed the lake populations . In addition to the native fish , rainbow trout , crappie , smallmouth bass , and bullhead catfish have been introduced into the lake . These non @-@ native species have put significant pressure on some of the native fish , which is why the Warner sucker is classified as threatened species . A 1996 fish survey estimated the total population of adult Warner suckers resident in Hart Lake at only 493 individuals . To help preserve and restore the lake 's threatened fish populations , the Fish and Wildlife Service developed a species recovery plan in 1998 . 
 There are 42 mammal species that live in the areas around Hart Lake . Mammals common in the Hart Lake shoreline and marshes include raccoons , striped skunks , and muskrats . 
 There are 264 species of birds that inhabit the area around Hart Lake or stop at the lake during migration . Species that nest near the lake include sandhill cranes , American white pelicans , double @-@ crested cormorants , <unk> , Wilson 's phalaropes , gadwalls , northern <unk> , American coots , western grebes , Clark 's grebes , black @-@ crowned night herons , Canada geese , mallards , and numerous other varieties of ducks and terns . In addition , white @-@ faced ibis , great white egrets , great blue herons , and American avocets are found in the marshes and along the lake shores . Just north of Hart Lake , at the Warner Wetlands Interpretive Site , there are bird observation blinds maintained by the Bureau of Land Management where American bitterns , black @-@ necked stilts , cinnamon teal , tundra swans , Brewer 's blackbirds , western meadowlarks , nighthawks , and several swallow varieties are commonly observed . 
 In the meadows and marshes around Hart Lake , dusky flycatchers , yellow warblers , orange @-@ crowned warblers , house wrens , and spotted towhees are common in the summer months . The larger birds common to the Hart Lake area include great horned owls , long @-@ eared owls , turkey vultures , prairie falcons , red @-@ tailed hawks , marsh hawks , golden eagles , and bald eagles . 
 = = History = = 
 Native Americans used the Warner Valley 's lakes and wetlands for thousands of years before the first white explorers arrived . The natives made petroglyphs along the eastern shore of Hart Lake , some of which are dated to 12 @,@ 000 years ago . The Greaser Petroglyph Site , approximately 3 miles ( 5 km ) southeast of Hart Lake , is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 In December 1843 , Captain John C. Fremont led a party of explorers through the Warner Valley . Fremont and his party spent Christmas Day camped near Hart Lake . In honor of the date , Fremont named it " Christmas Valley " and the lake " Christmas Lake " . However , early mapmakers mistakenly plotted Christmas Valley 60 miles ( 97 km ) northwest of its actual location , leaving the valley and its lakes unnamed on early maps . 
 In 1867 , General George Crook decided to build a fort in the Warner Valley to prevent Indian raiding parties from passing through the area . To get his wagons across the wetlands , he had a bridge built across a narrow , marshy channel between Hart Lake and Crump Lake . Known as the Stone Bridge , the structure is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 Hart Lake is named for the heart @-@ shaped brand used by the pioneer Wilson and Alexander cattle ranch . The ranch was established in the Warner Valley near Hart Lake prior to 1878 by Henry C. Wilson and his son @-@ in @-@ law C.G. Alexander . Later in the 19th century , much of the private land near Hart Lake was acquired by physician Bernard Daly and became part of his " <unk> Ranch " . By 1916 , the <unk> Ranch encompassed more than 7 @,@ 000 acres ( 28 km2 ) north and west of Hart Lake . 
 Beginning with the earliest pioneer ranchers , water from Honey Creek was diverted for irrigation . By the 1930s , irrigation canals had significantly reduced the flow of water into Hart Lake . In most years , the diversions did not stop the flow into the lake . However , during periods of drought , the entire flow of fresh water was diverted , visibly lowering the water level in Hart Lake . The canal structures also impeded fish migration between the lake and Honey Creek 's habitat . In 1950 , a dike was constructed at the north end of the lake to increase its water holding capacity . 
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s , the Warner Valley experienced an extended drought , reducing the water in Hart Lake to a dangerously low level . In 1992 , the lake dried up completely . Before the lake water had disappeared , the Fish and Wildlife Service captured a number of Warner suckers for temporary relocation . Upon the end of the drought , the fish were reintroduced in the lake . In 1998 , the FWS published a recovery plan for threatened fish species in the Warner Lakes system . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Most of the land to the south and east of Hart Lake is privately owned . However , the Bureau of Land Management administers the 52 @,@ 033 @-@ acre ( 210 @.@ 57 km2 ) Warner Wetlands north of the lake . In addition , the land along the east shore is part of the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge , which is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service . These public lands offer numerous recreational opportunities such as hunting , fishing , bird watching , boating , and camping . However , some of these activities are dependent on the water levels of the Warner Lakes , which can fluctuate dramatically . 
 Due to Hart Lake 's stable water level , it is usually available for fishing and boating . There are no developed campgrounds near Hart Lake , although dispersed camping is allowed on BLM @-@ administered lands adjacent to the lake . There is a day @-@ use recreation site at the north end of Hart Lake at Hart Bar . There are also public restrooms , sheltered picnic tables , and hiking trails at the Warner Wetlands Interpretive Site , north of Hart Lake . 
 = Bill Johnston with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Bill Johnston was a key member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team , which toured England in 1948 . The Australians went undefeated in their 34 matches during the English summer ; this unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned them the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 Johnston was a left @-@ arm bowler who engaged in fast bowling when the ball was new and conducive to pacemen , before reverting to orthodox spin when the ball became old . He was Australia 's third fast bowler in the Tests , reinforcing the new ball attack of Keith Miller and Ray Lindwall , who were regarded as one of the finest pace pairings of all time . Bradman typically used Miller and Lindwall in short bursts against the English batsmen with the new ball . The hosts had agreed to make a new ball available every 55 overs , more frequently than usual . This allowed the Australian pacemen more frequent use of a shiny ball that swung at high pace . Johnston typically delivered pace after the Lindwall and Miller had first use of the new ball , before resorting to spin later in the innings . In order to keep Lindwall and Miller fresh , Bradman had Johnston deliver the most overs by any bowler . 
 Johnston was the equal @-@ leading wicket @-@ taker in the Tests ( 27 along with Lindwall ) and Australia 's most prolific wicket @-@ taker in the first @-@ class matches with 102 . The latter feat made him the last Australian to take a century of wickets on an Ashes tour . In recognition of his achievements , Johnston was chosen as one of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year . Wisden said " no Australian made a greater personal contribution to the playing success of the 1948 side " . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Australian summer of 1947 – 48 , Johnston played in four of the five Tests against the touring Indian cricket team . He was a major part in Australia 's 4 – 0 series win ; the second highest wicket @-@ taker with 16 scalps , Johnston had the best bowling average of 11 @.@ 37 . Ray Lindwall led the wicket @-@ takers with 18 . As a result , Johnston was selected for the 1948 tour of England . During the trip , Johnston roomed with Doug Ring who was a team @-@ mate in the Richmond and Victorian cricket teams . As Ring was a leg spinner , he and Johnston were in direct competition for a place in the playing XI . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Australia traditionally fielded its first @-@ choice team in the tour opener , which was customarily against Worcestershire . When Johnston was omitted for the opening match , it appeared he would not be in Bradman 's Test plans . Australia went on to win by an innings , setting the tone for their tour . 
 Bradman brought Johnston into the team for the second tour match against Leicestershire . He made 12 runs and was the last man out as Australia ended on 448 . After a lower order collapse of 5 / 38 against the local spin attack , Johnston came in and put on 37 in partnership with Keith Miller , allowing his colleague to reach his double century . Johnston bowled six wicketless overs for 15 as the hosts fell for 130 . Made to follow on , Leicestershire made 147 to lose by an innings . Johnston took his first wicket of the tour , trapping Jack Walsh leg before wicket ( lbw ) to end with 1 / 42 from 27 overs . Johnston played a leading role in Australia 's victory in the next match , against Yorkshire , on a damp pitch favourable to slower bowling . In this match , Johnston resorted to bowling left arm orthodox spin . The hosts elected to bat and he bowled almost unchanged , sending down 26 of the 54 @.@ 3 overs , 14 of which were maidens . He took 4 / 18 as Yorkshire were bowled out in difficult batting conditions for 71 . His wickets included batsmen Alec Coxon and Willie Watson , who went on to become England Test cricketers . The match remained finely balanced after Australia made 101 , with Johnston unbeaten on five . He was again miserly in the second innings , bowling 15 @.@ 2 overs with seven maidens and taking 6 / 18 . His victims included leading English batsman Len Hutton , and Coxon and Watson for the second time as the hosts were bowled out for 89 . Johnston had ended the match with 10 / 40 . After collapsing to 6 / 31 — effectively seven wickets down as Sam Loxton was injured and unable to bat — Australia scraped home by four wickets . It was the closest Australia would come to defeat for the whole tour . 
 The tourists travelled to London to play Surrey at The Oval , and they amassed 632 after batting first . Johnston bowled without success in the first innings . In the second innings he claimed both openers to reduce the hosts to 2 / 11 after Bradman had forced them to follow on . He returned later in the innings to remove Alec Bedser and Jim Laker , ending with 4 / 40 as Surrey were defeated by an innings . Johnston was rested for the following match against Cambridge University , which Australia won by an innings . 
 Johnston returned as Australia crushed Essex by an innings and 451 runs , their largest winning margin for the summer . After setting a world record for the most number of first @-@ class runs in one day ’ s play ( 721 ) , of which Johnston contributed nine , Bradman ’ s men bowled Essex out for 83 and 187 after enforcing the follow on . Johnston managed a match total of only 1 / 36 . This was followed by another innings victory , this time over Oxford University . After scoring 13 in Australia 's 431 , Johnston bowled the most overs by an Australian in the match , taking 2 / 40 and 2 / 44 across a total of 42 overs . 
 Johnston was the left out for the next fixture , which was against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , and were basically a full strength Test team , while Australia fielded their first @-@ choice team , with Johnston omitted . It was a chance for the Australian bowlers to gain a psychological advantage , with Len Hutton , Denis Compton and Bill Edrich — three of England 's first four batsmen — all playing . Australia won by an innings to give an indication of their strength . 
 Four county matches remained before the Tests , giving the players more chances to press their claims for selection . Johnston was recalled for Australia 'a first non @-@ victory of the tour , which was against Lancashire . After the first day was washed out , Johnston made 24 in a 25 @-@ run ninth @-@ wicket partnership with wicket @-@ keeper Ron Saggers , which took Australia from 8 / 170 to 9 / 195 . The tourists were eventually bowled out for 204 . During his innings , Johnston swung lustily and hit three sixes . In reply , Lancashire reached 4 / 144 before Johnston took five of the last six wickets to help dismiss the home side for 182 , securing a slender lead for the tourists . Johnston ended with 5 / 49 from 29 overs , the most by any of the Australians , and was not required to bat in the second innings . 
 Johnston was rested for the subsequent match against Nottinghamshire at Trent Bridge , which was drawn . He returned against Hampshire and played a major role in Australia 's eight @-@ wicket win . The home team were put into bat on a drying pitch by vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett — Bradman had rested himself for the match . Johnston bowled for almost the whole innings , sending down 38 @.@ 4 of 85 @.@ 4 overs . He took wickets at regular intervals to end with 6 / 74 as Hampshire were bowled out for 195 . Johnston was unbeaten on two as Australia lost 8 / 47 and collapsed to 117 all out , trailing by 78 runs . It was the first time that the tourists had conceded a first innings lead for the season . In the second innings , Johnston bowled unchanged at his end for the entire innings , providing steady breakthroughs to end with 5 / 43 as Hampshire were bowled out for 103 . This left Australia a target of 182 , and they batted fluently in their second innings to win by eight wickets . Johnston ended with match figures of 11 / 117 . He was rested in the innings win over Sussex , in the last fixture before the First Test . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Johnston was not in Bradman 's planned Test team . However , the Australian skipper changed his mind on the morning of the First Test in Trent Bridge when rain was forecast . Johnston was played in the hope of exploiting a wet wicket . Johnston had taken 10 / 40 against Yorkshire and 11 / 117 against Hampshire on similar surfaces . He showed his credentials by taking a match total of 9 / 183 from 84 overs to help Australia to grind out a victory by eight wickets . England elected to bat first and after strike bowler Ray Lindwall broke down on the first day , the burden on Johnston grew . 
 England had reached 2 / 46 when Johnston was brought into the attack for his first over . He bowled Bill Edrich , knocking out the off stump while the batsman was on the front foot . Two balls later , Johnston removed Joe Hardstaff junior without scoring , caught by Miller in slips after attempting a cut shot ; the catch was described by Wisden as " dazzling " . Miller dived and balanced himself on his spine before catching the ball to leave England at 4 / 46 . Journalist and former Australian Test leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly said : " Johnston had trimmed and embroidered the efforts of his opening bowlers and had swung the fortunes of the game completely in Australia 's favour " . 
 Johnston then knocked over Charlie Barnett 's stumps as the batsman leaned onto the front foot and inside edged the ball into his stumps for eight ; this brought Godfrey Evans — who was given two lives — to the crease at 6 / 60 . Evans hit Johnston hard in the air to cover , where the ball went through Bradman for a boundary . The second catching opportunity went in the same direction before traveling through Bradman 's hand and striking him in the abdomen . However , Johnston eventually snared Evans , who hit a ball strongly , but straight to short leg where Arthur Morris took the catch close in , as England reached 8 / 74 . 
 However , a rearguard action took England to a total of 165 , before Johnston removed Alec Bedser to end the innings . Johnston finished with 5 / 36 , in a display characterised by his accuracy and variations in pace and swing . When Australia batted , Johnston and Ernie Toshack wagged a last @-@ wicket partnership of 33 runs in only 18 minutes . They played in a free @-@ wheeling manner before Bedser trapped Toshack lbw to end the home team ’ s innings on 509 , leaving the tourists with a 344 @-@ run lead and Johnston unbeaten on 17 . 
 Johnston took the new ball with Miller and delivered 59 overs in the second innings to take 4 / 147 in Lindwall 's absence . Johnston bowled without success in the first half of the innings ; the closest he came to a wicket on the third afternoon when Len Hutton and Denis Compton were putting on a century partnership was when Compton aimed an uppish square drive from Johnston that flew in the air wide of cover point . On the fourth day , England continued to make steady progress and Johnston was unsuccessful although he was able to make the ball move sideways in the morning under cloudy conditions . He was then attacked by Hardstaff , who drove several fours through the off side and forced Bradman to remove Johnston . He returned to remove Barnett and English captain Norman Yardley late on the fourth day as the hosts ’ neared 300 . Barnett was caught by Miller in the slips and Johnston took a return catch to remove the English skipper . Johnston bowled 30 overs , the most of any bowler for the day , as England reached the penultimate evening on 345 / 6 , a lead of one run . The next morning , Johnston removed Evans and bowled Jack Young to end England 's innings at 441 on the final day . Johnston bowled the most overs of any player and was the leading wicket @-@ taker for the match as Australia took a 1 – 0 lead — the Australian batsmen reached the target of 98 with eight wickets in hand . 
 After the First Test , Johnston was the leading wicket @-@ taker as Australia completed an innings victory over Northamptonshire . He took 3 / 25 in the first innings , before dismissing the home side 's top four batsmen in the second innings to reduce them to 4 / 108 ; they were eventually bowled out for 169 . Johnston ended with 4 / 49 . This was followed by a drawn match against Yorkshire , in which Johnston scored an unbeaten 15 , before bowling almost unchanged in the home side 's first innings . Johnston bowled 41 @.@ 1 out of 90 @.@ 1 overs and ended with 3 / 101 , including the wickets of Test players Alec Coxon and Watson . The match ended in a draw . Johnston bowled three overs for 15 in the second innings ; Bradman chose not to push for a win and declared late in the second innings so that his bowlers would not have to exert themselves to any significant extent before the next Test . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 In the Second Test at Lord 's , Australia batted first and Johnston scored his Test career best of 29 in another tail @-@ wagging performance in the first innings . After coming to the crease with the score at 8 / 275 on the second morning , Johnston added 45 runs with wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon before the latter fell to Bedser . He was joined by last man Toshack and they put on 30 before Johnston was stumped — having overbalanced while leaning onto the front foot and trying to hit a ball for six — from the bowling of Doug Wright to end Australia 's innings at 350 . Both Johnston and Toshack threw the bat at the ball , which often went in vastly different directions compared to where they had aimed their shots . Both men — not known for their batting ability — played without inhibitions , joyfully revelling in their luck . One sequence of two overs from Edrich was taken for 28 runs , with many balls being unintentionally spooned over the slips or the covers . 
 With Keith Miller injured and playing purely as a batsman , Johnston took the new ball , sharing it with Lindwall . He was unable to take a wicket initially , but the English openers were uncomfortable when he and Lindwall were taking the new ball . Following the tea break , he returned with the second new ball after Compton and Yardley had put on an 87 @-@ run partnership to stabilise the middle @-@ order . Johnston took Compton 's outside edge and Miller completed the catch in slips . The left armer then claimed Evans , caught by a diving Miller after the Englishman had taken a swing of the bat wide outside off stump ; this left the hosts at 7 / 145 . Johnston ended with 2 / 43 from 22 overs as England were bowled for at 215 early on the third morning . After Australia declared at 7 / 460 on the fourth afternoon to leave the home side a target of 596 , Johnston troubled the English openers with the new ball , but did not take a wicket . 
 Lindwall and Johnston extracted steep bounce with the new ball , troubling the English batsmen . Fielding in the slips , Lindwall dropped Hutton from Johnston 's bowling before the English batsman had scored . Johnston usually moved the ball into the right @-@ handed batsmen , but on this occasion the ball went straight on and took the outside of the edge of Hutton 's bat . Hutton had trouble with both Australian pacemen , and played and missed multiple times in the deteriorating light . In a fidgety display , he played loosely outside the off stump and missed four times in one Johnston over , before Lindwall dismissed him . 
 Yardley ’ s men resumed at 3 / 106 on the final day . On the second ball of the final morning , bowled by Johnston , Compton aimed a square drive , but the delivery was Johnston 's variation ball , which went away instead of into the batsman . The ball flew off the outside edge to a diving Miller , who knocked the ball up before falling on his back and completing the catch as the ball came down . Compton stood his ground and waited for the umpire to confirm whether Miller had caught the ball cleanly , and was duly given out by the unhesitating official . O 'Reilly described Miller 's effort as " perhaps the very best slips catch of the whole series and … a real match @-@ winner . " Johnston then removed Bedser for nine to end with 2 / 62 as Australia won by 409 runs and took a 2 – 0 series lead . 
 After 16 days of cricket in 20 days , from the First to the Second Test , Johnston was rested from the next two matches against Surrey and Gloucestershire , which Australia won by ten wickets and an innings respectively . 
 = = Third Test = = 
 Johnston returned for the Third Test at Old Trafford , where the home team elected to bat first . In an effective containing performance , Johnston took 3 / 67 from 45 @.@ 5 overs in the first innings . England had looked assured in the first hour , before Johnston — again taking the new ball with Lindwall — bowled Cyril Washbrook with a yorker to leave England at 1 / 22 . Johnston had been bowling from over the wicket , and his left @-@ arm deliveries had generally been swinging back into the right @-@ handed Washbrook . However , the opening batsman did not detect Johnston ’ s variation ball , which was released from wide of the crease and angled across more sharply without curling back in . Washbrook played inside the line of the ball , which hit his stumps . Australia nearly had two wickets in the same over as the new batsman Edrich struggled . He played loosely outside the off stump to the first ball from Johnston but did not get an edge , and on the third delivery , Edrich survived again . Receiving a ball on middle and leg stump , he tried to defend it straight back down the pitch , rather than the conventional stroke to the leg side , and managed to edge the ball past the slips for four . Johnston repeatedly hurried Edrich with his pace , forcing the batsman to make many last @-@ moment movements to either hit the ball or withdraw from a shot during the formative stage of his innings . 
 Johnston returned with the second new ball after lunch to remove Tom Dollery with another yorker , leaving England at 4 / 97 . This dismissal mirrored that of Washbrook ’ s in that Dollery failed to detect Johnston ’ s variation ball , and thus played for swing when there was none . Late in the day , Johnston took the catch as Lindwall removed Evans , who had taken a wild slash to leave England at 7 / 216 . In the final minutes of play , Johnston extracted an edge from Compton on 64 , but Tallon dropped the catch . On the second morning , Tallon dropped Compton — then on 73 — for the third time , off the bowling of Johnston , who eventually ended the England innings on 363 by removing Young . Compton had added a further 81 after being dropped from Johnston 's bowling to end unbeaten on 145 . Johnston had bowled the most overs of the Australians and been the most economical . 
 In reply , Australia were in trouble at 7 / 208 when Johnston came to the crease to join Lindwall , with five more runs needed to avoid the follow on . As Sid Barnes was unable to bat due to injury , Australia were effectively eight wickets down . Johnston helped Lindwall advance Australia beyond the follow @-@ on before Bedser removed both . Johnston was reprieved in his brief innings when he edged a delivery from Dick Pollard in the direction of Edrich at first slip , but Evans dived across , trying to catch the ball at full stretch in his right hand . The wicket @-@ keeper could not hold onto the ball , and the resulting deflection further to the right wrong @-@ footed Edrich , who was moving the other way , and it went past him . From second slip , Jack Crapp dived left behind Edrich but the ball landed a few centimetres beyond his fingers . However , in the next over Bedser , Johnston edged the ball in the same manner and Crapp caught the ball easily . Johnston was out for three as Australia ended with 221 to narrowly avoid the follow on by eight runs . He was wicketless in the second innings , taking 0 / 34 as England declared at 3 / 174 and set Australia 317 for victory on the last day after the fourth day was completely washed out by rain . The match ended in a draw with Australia at 1 / 92 , after many rain interruptions . 
 Johnston played in Australia 's only match before the Fourth Test , which was against Middlesex . He dismissed Jack Robertson , Edrich and John Dewes to leave the hosts at 4 / 92 and ended with 3 / 43 as they were bowled out for 203 . In the second innings , he took two early wicket — including Compton — to reduce the hosts to 3 / 27 before ending with 2 / 28 as Australia bowled Middlesex out for 135 . Bradman ’ s men went on to win by ten wickets . 
 = = Fourth Test = = 
 In the Fourth Test at Headingley , England batted first on a pitch regarded as being ideal for strokeplay , and Australia 's bowlers had little success on the first day . Early in the day , Johnston appeared to be having back problems . He had bowled the most overs of any bowler on the tour and his loss would have meant a heavy workload for his remaining colleagues . His apparent discomfort led onlookers to opine that he should have been given more rest in the county matches . After an opening partnership of 143 , England consolidated to reach 1 / 268 in the last over of the day before Johnston removed Washbrook for 143 . Johnston did not taste further success in the first innings and ended with 1 / 86 from 38 overs as the home team ended on 496 , their highest score of the series . 
 In reply , Australia were still more than 100 runs behind when Johnston joined Lindwall with the score at 8 / 355 , late on the third day . Lindwall hit out , scoring 77 in an innings marked by powerful driving and pulling , dominating the stand of 48 with Johnston , who made only 13 . Johnston accompanied Lindwall for 80 minutes , before the injured Ernie Toshack survived the last 50 minutes until stumps , with Johnston running for him . Despite Toshack and Johnston ’ s lack of familiarity with having and acting as a runner respectively , and the resulting disorders in running between the wickets , Lindwall was able to manipulate the strike so he faced most of the balls . Johnston able to survive against the English pacemen with relative ease when he was batting , leading O ’ Reilly to lament the absence of leg spinner Doug Wright , whose guile and flight was held in high regard by the Australians . Lindwall was the last man out on the fourth morning with the total on 458 , leaving Australia 38 runs in arrears on the first innings . 
 Australia lost the services of Toshack after he broke down with a knee injury in the first innings , increasing the burden on the remaining bowlers as England sought to extend their lead on the fourth day . For the second time in the match , Washbrook and Hutton put on a century opening partnership . After reaching 50 , Washbrook hooked a short ball from Johnston and top edged it , but Bradman failed to take the catch . However , Washbrook soon repeated the shot from the bowling of Johnston with fatal results . The ball again went in the air , and Neil Harvey quickly ran across the ground and bent over to catch it at feet height while on the run , removing the opener for 65 . Fingleton said that Harvey ’ s effort " was the catch of the season — or , indeed , would have been had Harvey not turned on several magnificent aerial performances down at The Oval [ in the match against Surrey ] " . O ’ Reilly doubted " whether any other player on either side could have made the distance to get to the ball , let alone make a neat catch of it " . He further said the " hook was a beauty and the catch was a classic " . 
 England moved to 4 / 277 when a mini @-@ collapse occurred . Yardley made seven before he was removed by Johnston , caught by a leaping Harvey while attempting a big shot . Johnston then removed Ken Cranston , caught behind for a duck to leave England at 6 / 278 . When Johnston removed Compton for 66 , caught by Miller at cover , the hosts were 7 / 293 with no recognised batsmen remaining , having lost 4 / 33 . England recovered to reach 8 / 362 at the close of the fourth day . The next day , Yardley declared at 8 / 365 , leaving Johnston with the pick of the bowling figures , 4 / 95 from 29 overs . This left the tourists a target of 404 from 345 minutes . Australia went on to break the world record Test run @-@ chase record by scoring 3 / 404 to take a 3 – 0 lead with 15 minutes to spare . 
 Johnston went on to play in the match against Derbyshire immediately after the Headingley Test , taking 3 / 41 and 1 / 35 as Australia enforced the follow on and won by an innings . He was rested for the next game against Glamorgan , which ended in a rain @-@ affected draw without reaching the second innings . Johnston returned and took 2 / 41 in the first innings against Warwickshire , before taking 4 / 32 in the second innings , including three of the last five wickets , as the hosts fell from 5 / 118 to 155 all out . The left armer bowled almost unchanged during the second innings , sending down 39 of the 85 @.@ 5 overs , including 16 maidens . His wickets included New Zealand Test batsman Martin Donnelly and Indian and Pakistani dual international Abdul Hafeez Kardar , as Australia went on to win by nine wickets . Johnston was then rested from two consecutive matches , against Lancashire and Durham , both of which were rain @-@ affected draws . 
 = = Fifth Test = = 
 Johnston rounded off his Ashes series with the Fifth Test at The Oval . English skipper Norman Yardley elected to bat on a rain @-@ affected pitch , a decision many regarded as surprising . Precipitation in the past week rendered play before midday impossible . Former Australian Test batsman and leading commentator Jack Fingleton speculated that the tourists would have bowled if they had won the toss . 
 The damp conditions meant required a large amount of sawdust to be laid down to help the players keep their grip . Along with the rain , the humid conditions assisted the Australian bowlers , who were able to make the ball bounce at variable heights . 
 After Miller removed John Dewes with the score at 1 / 2 , Bradman made an early bowling change and introduced Johnston . Edrich joined Hutton and they played cautiously until the former attempted to hook a short ball from Johnston . He failed to get the ball in the middle of the bat and it looped up and travelled around 10 metres ( 33 ft ) . Lindsay Hassett caught the ball just behind square leg , after diving sideways and getting both hands to the ball . This left England at 2 / 10 . After the lunch break , Johnston dismissed debutant Allan Watkins without scoring after the batsman played across the line to be trapped lbw , leaving England at 6 / 42 . Johnston ended with 2 / 20 from 16 overs as England were skittled for 52 . After being unbeaten without scoring in Australia 's innings of 389 , Johnston was again among the wickets when England 's second innings late on the second day . 
 England started their second innings with a deficit of 337 runs and reached 1 / 54 by the premature end of the second day due to bad light . The following morning , they made slow and steady progress as Johnston bowled his finger spin from around the wicket with a well @-@ protected off side . The four men in the off side ring had much work to do as Hutton hit the ball there repeatedly . The English batsmen progressed and Johnston had one confident appeal for lbw against Compton , but there were few scares . 
 They reached 2 / 125 after lunch , when Compton — who was on 39 — aimed a hard cut shot from Johnston 's bowling , which flew off the edge into Lindwall 's left hand at second slip for a " freak slip catch " . This triggered a collapse late in the afternoon , which saw the hosts lose 4 / 25 to end the third day at 7 / 178 . England resumed on the fourth morning with only three wickets in hand , still needing 159 runs to make Bradman ’ s men bat again . Johnston quickly removed the last three wickets , Alec Bedser , Yardley and Eric Hollies to seal an Australian victory by an innings and 149 runs . Only ten runs were added in the brief morning session ; Hollies fell for a golden duck after skying a ball to Morris , immediately after Yardley became the ninth man to fall . Johnston ended with 4 / 40 from 27 @.@ 3 overs and he was the most economical of the bowlers . Given the time lost to inclement weather on the first day , Australia had won the match in less than three days of playing time . Overall , Johnston finished with 27 Test wickets at an average of 23 @.@ 33 , equal to Lindwall but at a higher average . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman 's quest to go through a tour of England without defeat . Australia batted first against Kent and made 361 . Johnston then took three wickets with the new ball to help reduce the hosts to 5 / 16 , before ending with 3 / 10 from six overs . Forced to follow on after being bowled out for 51 in 23 overs , Kent were reduced to 4 / 37 by three early Lindwall wickets . Johnston ended with 1 / 28 as the home team capitulated for 124 and lost by an innings . The victory over Kent was followed by a match against the Gentlemen of England . Johnston was rested as Australia completed another innings victory . He returned for the match against Somerset , which resulted in a third consecutive innings win . After Australia had declared at 5 / 560 , Johnston took the opening wicket of Harold Gimblett before returning to take the last two scalps of the first innings from consecutive balls , bowling his finger spin . He ended with 3 / 34 as Somerset fell for 115 and were forced to follow on . Johnston bowled the second over of the second innings . As Johnston had taken wickets with his last two balls in the first innings , his first delivery was the hat @-@ trick ball . Gimblett negotiated the first ball safely , before being trapped lbw for a duck on the next . Johnston had thus taken three wickets in four balls . He bowled unchanged throughout the innings to end with 5 / 34 from 17 @.@ 4 overs as Somerset were bowled out for 71 . Johnston took the final wicket to fall — Horace Hazell — trapped for a duck , which brought up his 100th first @-@ class wicket for the tour . 
 In the match against the South of England , Johnston took 1 / 63 — Edrich being his only wicket — after Australia declared at 7 / 522 . Bradman ’ s men dismissed the hosts for 298 and rain ended the match before the second innings could start . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was against the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI . During the last tour in 1938 , this team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit , but this time Bradman insisted that only six current England Test players be allowed to represent the hosts . After his opponents had finalised their players , Bradman named a full @-@ strength team . In a rain @-@ interrupted match , Johnston bowled Edrich for 15 . He ended with 1 / 20 as the hosts folded for 177 . Johnston made an unbeaten 26 in a partnership of 30 with Lindsay Hassett as Australia replied with 8 / 489 declared . Time ran out with the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI at 0 / 75 in the second innings . 
 The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland . In the first , Australia scored 236 before Johnston took 6 / 15 from 12 @.@ 5 overs . He took the last four wickets as the home team fell from 6 / 81 to be all out for 85 . Johnston bowled four wicketless overs in the second innings as Australia completed victory without needing to bat for a second time . In the second match , he signed off on his tour in a low key manner , taking a wicket in each innings to end with a match total of 2 / 48 as Australia completed another innings triumph . 
 = = Role = = 
 Johnston played as a left @-@ arm fast bowler when the ball was new and conducive to pace bowling , before reverting to finger spin when it became old and lost its shine . He was Australia 's third fast bowler in the Tests , reinforcing the new ball pairing of Keith Miller and Ray Lindwall , who were regarded as one of the finest pace duos of all time . Bradman typically used Miller and Lindwall in short and sharp new ball bursts against the local batsmen . England had agreed that a new ball would be available every 55 overs , a milestone that usually came more frequently than the old regulation of 200 runs for every ball . This allowed Australia — who had the superior pace attack — more frequent use of a shiny ball , which swung at high pace . Johnston typically bowled pace after the first @-@ choice pair had finished their new ball spell , before reverting to spin when the ball was worn . He took 27 wickets at 23 @.@ 33 in the Tests , making him the equal @-@ leading wicket @-@ taker along with Lindwall , who averaged 19 @.@ 62 . The Australian pacemen ’ s tally was substantially more than the next best , recorded by England 's Alec Bedser , who took 18 wickets at 38 @.@ 22 . 
 In both the Test and county matches during the 1948 tour , Johnston carried the heaviest workload , bowling nearly 200 overs more than any other squad member . He was the leading wicket @-@ taker in all first @-@ class matches with 102 wickets at 16 @.@ 42 , and the last Australian to take a century of wickets on a tour of England . His average was only slightly inferior to that of Lindwall , who took 86 wickets at 15 @.@ 68 . The roles Johnston fulfilled are borne out in his economy rate and strike rate . He was more economical than Miller and Lindwall , who took wickets more frequently . 
 Johnston 's performances prompted Bradman to call him " Australia 's greatest left @-@ hand bowler " . As a result of his ability to bowl spin and pace , teammate Neil Harvey thought the team effectively had 13 players , saying " we reckoned Bradman was worth two [ batsmen ] and Bill Johnston was worth two [ bowlers ] " . Harvey rated Johnston the best team man in the squad , and Bill Brown praised Johnston 's work ethic in bowling for long periods after Lindwall and Miller had been given the best opportunities with the new ball . Spin bowling teammate Ian Johnson described him as " the finest team man and tourist " in cricket and valued his personality , while Miller described him as " the most popular man in cricket " . Johnston sometimes amused his colleagues by demonstrating his double <unk> , wrapping his feet around the back of his neck . He was reputed to have nearly drowned when he attempted this in the communal bath at Lord 's . 
 After carrying a heavy workload in the early stages of the tour , Johnston was used more sparingly in the latter stages . As the tour progressed , Johnston improved his control and restrained England 's batsmen between the new ball bursts of Lindwall and Miller . Johnston was chosen as one of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year . Wisden said " no Australian made a greater personal contribution to the playing success of the 1948 side " . Fingleton wrote that Australia had never sent a greater left @-@ hander to England . 
 During the tour , Johnston had few opportunities with the bat , invariably batting at either No. 10 and No. 11 alongside Toshack , another tail @-@ ender with little batting <unk> Neither player ever passed 30 in their first @-@ class career , and they were the only two Australians who failed to pass 50 during the tour . As Australia 's other frontline bowlers were Miller , Lindwall , Colin McCool , Ian Johnson and Doug Ring , all of whom scored centuries and more than 20 fifties each during their first @-@ class career , Toshack and Johnston were rooted at the bottom of the batting order . As Australia often won by an innings , and declared in the first innings many time due to their batting strength , Johnston only had 18 innings in his 21 first @-@ class fixtures and scored 188 runs at 18 @.@ 80 , the third lowest average and aggregate . He scored 62 runs in the Tests at 20 @.@ 66 , including his highest first @-@ class score of 29 in the Second Test at Lord ’ s . 
 = = = Statistical note = = = 
 = = = General notes = = = 
 = George M. Stratton = 
 George Malcolm Stratton ( September 26 , 1865 – October 8 , 1957 ) was a psychologist who pioneered the study of perception in vision by wearing special glasses which inverted images up and down and left and right . He studied under one of the founders of modern psychology , Wilhelm Wundt , and started one of the first experimental psychology labs in America , at the University of California , Berkeley . Stratton 's studies on binocular vision inspired many later studies on the subject . He was one of the initial members of the philosophy department at Berkeley , and the first chair of its psychology department . He also worked on sociology , focusing on international relations and peace . Stratton presided over the American Psychological Association in 1908 , and was a member of the National Academy of Sciences . He wrote a book on experimental psychology and its methods and scope ; published articles on the studies at his labs on perception , and on reviews of studies in the field ; served on several psychological committees during and after World War I ; and served as advisor to doctoral students who would go on to head psychology departments . 
 Stratton was born and brought up in the Oakland area of California , in a family with deep roots in America , and spent much of his career at Berkeley . He received his undergraduate degree from the University of California , an M.A. from Yale University , and a PhD from the University of Leipzig . He returned to the philosophy department at Berkeley , teaching psychology , and was promoted to associate professor . Stratton left for Johns Hopkins University in the early 1900s and spent a few years as faculty at the psychology department before returning to Berkeley . During this period , he focused on studies on sensation and perception and the psychological effects of inverting sensory stimuli in different ways . He was involved in establishing some of the early regional associations devoted to the field of psychology . 
 Stratton served in the Army during World War I , developing psychological tests to select airmen for Army aviation . Exposure to the war effort prompted his interest in international relations and causes of wars . He was an anti @-@ war believer who held psychology should aim to assist humanity 's quest to avert future wars . He was optimistic that people and ethnicities , making up nations , could be taught to live in peace , though the races were not equal in inborn mental capacity , a belief he held as scientific . In the later part of his career he wrote books looking at international relations , war , and the differences between races on emotions . He was also a scholar of the classics and translated Greek philosophers . 
 Of Stratton 's many contributions , his studies on perception and visual illusions would continue to influence the field of psychology well after his death . Of the nine books he wrote , the first was a scholarly look at the methodology and scope of experimental psychology . The remaining , including one unfinished at his death , were on sociology , international relations and the issues of war and how findings from psychology could be used to eradicate conflict between nations . Stratton considered these issues more salient to the application of psychology in the real world , though his ideas on this front did not produce a lasting impact in the field because of their subjective and non @-@ experimental nature . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 George Stratton was born on September 26 , 1865 to James Thompson Stratton , originally from Ossining , New York , and Cornelia A. Smith . His parents had met and married in New York in 1854 , and settled back in Clinton , now East Oakland , California . James Stratton had been to California once before during the gold rush of 1850 , sailing around North America and crossing by land the Panama stretch , but finding little gold . The senior Stratton traced his ancestry to the early settlers of the British settlements of America , and Cornelia Smith had Dutch and English forebears . James Stratton would live the rest of his life in California , pursuing a civil engineering career as County Surveyor for Alameda County in 1858 – 59 and later as the U.S. Surveyor @-@ General of the state , and finally as Chief Deputy State Surveyor . An expert on the big Mexican land grants , he split up several of the Spanish deeds . One of his sons , Frederick , went to the University of California , today 's Berkeley , and became a lawyer , state senator , and Collector of the Port of San Francisco , before killing himself on November 30 , 1915 . Another , Robert Thomas , became a doctor in Oakland and died after a long illness on May 6 , 1924 . The couple also had a daughter , Jeanne , the later Mrs. Walter Good . George was their youngest child who lived past <unk> . 
 Stratton 's early education was at the Oakland public schools and undergraduate education at the University of California . At the university he was a member of the Beta Theta Pi fraternity . He was also the editor of the student news publication , The <unk> in 1886 . Stratton graduated in 1888 with an A.B. degree from the University of California , in a total graduating class of 34 students . He learned Latin and English and taught in Buenaventura High School in 1888 – 89 , and was its principal in 1889 – 90 . At the school he met and courted San Francisco @-@ born Alice Elenore Miller . 
 Stratton then obtained an A.M. degree from Yale in 1890 . He was a fellow in the philosophy department at Berkeley from 1891 to 1893 . The chair of the philosophy department , George Holmes Howison , whom he met as an undergraduate , would become a significant influence on his life . He taught two philosophy courses , both with Howison . On March 14 , 1893 he was appointed an instructor in the department of philosophy . As an instructor , he began teaching psychology and logic courses , in addition to a philosophy course . 
 Howison obtained a fellowship from the University of California for his protege to study at the University of Leipzig . On May 17 , 1894 , Stratton married Alice Miller at the Methodist Episcopal Church in Berkeley , while being an instructor in the philosophy department . Immediately after , the couple left for the East on their way to Europe , with Stratton taking a leave of absence from Berkeley . He then spent two years at Wundt 's Institute for Experimental Psychology at Leipzig , from where he received an M.A. and a PhD in 1896 . He received his degree summa cum laude , with a thesis submitted to Wundt 's publication , Philosophische Studien . 
 = = Work years = = 
 Stratton spent his working years primarily at Berkeley . He founded the department of psychology at the university . He left once for Johns Hopkins and once to join the Army during World War I , serving in San Francisco , San Diego and New York . 
 = = = Early Berkeley = = = 
 Returning to America in 1896 , Stratton rejoined the University of California as an instructor . In 1897 he was promoted to assistant professor . By 1898 he no longer taught philosophy but several psychology courses . Two years later , he would influence the Philosophical Union into dedicating a year to investigating contemporary psychology . He himself presented a well @-@ attended lecture series at the Union , with lively debates at the end , on psychological experiments . Over this time he also published three papers on his study with inverting lenses and how people adapt over time to such a view of the world : " Upright vision and the retinal image " , " Vision without inversion of the retinal image " , and " A mirror <unk> and the limit of visible depth " , all in Psychological Review . He also presented a report of experiments with inverted vision to the Science Association of the university . 
 Stratton also became a member of the APA . One of Stratton 's psychology students in the Philosophy department was Knight Dunlap , a later chair at Johns Hopkins and University of California , Los Angeles . Stratton became a director of the newly established psychology lab , in the philosophy department , in 1899 . By 1900 he was an associate professor in the philosophy department , then headed by Howison . He contributed a paper to the Festschrift honoring Wundt 's seventieth birthday in 1902 : " Eye movements and the aesthetics of the visual form " . He also taught a series of twenty lectures on philosophy and psychology at the Pacific Theological Seminary in Berkeley . His first daughter , Elenore , was born in 1900 , and son James Malcolm around 1903 . 
 = = = Johns Hopkins and return to Berkeley = = = 
 Stratton left Berkeley at end of June , 1904 , and moved east to Johns Hopkins University as a professor of experimental psychology in October . At this time , philosophers and psychologists at Baltimore formed the Southern Society for Philosophy and Psychology ( <unk> ) and Stratton was one of the first 36 charter members . At its first meeting , he presented results of an experiment on fidelity of the senses . 
 While Stratton was at Johns Hopkins , the San Francisco Earthquake of 1906 struck destroying large swaths of the city . He had specific suggestions on how to rebuild the city to resist earthquakes and fires even with the water supply cut off . He urged the city be split into districts with avenues or <unk> as firebreaks between the divisions . 
 Stratton 's second daughter , Florence , was born in Baltimore on May 24 , 1907 . He left Johns Hopkins in October 1909 , and was replaced there as professor of experimental psychology by John Broadus Watson . 
 = = = The army = = = 
 During World War I , Stratton served in army aviation developing psychological recruitment tests for aviators . He worked at San Francisco , Rockwell Field , San Diego , and at Hazelhurst Field , Mineola , New York . Joining as a captain , he was promoted to major in 1918 along with a transfer to Mineola . Stratton presided over the Army Aviation Examining Board in San Francisco in 1917 , chaired the subcommittee of the National Research Council of the APA : " Psychological Problems of Aviation , including Examination of Aviation Recruits " in the summer of 1917 , and headed the psychological section of the Medical Research Lab of the Army Medical Research Board at Hazelhurst Field , a wing of the Army 's Sanitary Corps , in 1918 . As a member of the psychological division , his research focused on developing psychological recruiting tests for would @-@ be aviators . The tests he designed tested for reaction times , ability to imagine completions of curves presented visually , and the ability to sense a gradual tilting of one 's own body . Edward L. Thorndike pooled Stratton 's results with other studies to statistically analyze and correlate weak performance to a poor flying record . Part of this research was carried out in the spring of 1918 with Captain <unk> at Kelly Field , and the army thought enough of the results to allow the tests for checking recruits in four new units . 
 = = = Berkeley again = = = 
 After the war , Stratton returned to Berkeley in January 1919 . Stratton also taught at Berkeley 's extension school , lecturing on " Psychology and health " in San Francisco to people from the medical profession in 1918 – 19 , and in Oakland in 1919 – 20 . By this time the introductory course on psychology was so in demand among the students , it was split into two , with Stratton and Warner Brown teaching it concurrently . His wife was the editor of the <unk> of the University of California , a volume issued by the University Press at Berkeley in 1920 . 
 In 1921 his daughter , Elenore Stratton , graduated from Berkeley . That August she married Harvard graduate Edward Russell Dewey of New York at her father 's house , and moved to the city , where she had done social settlement work following graduation . The same year his son attended Berkeley . The Berkeley department of psychology officially split from the department of philosophy , with Stratton as its first chair , on July 1 , 1922 . His second daughter , Florence , graduated from Berkeley with a B.A. in 1929 . 
 = = = Retirement and death = = = 
 Stratton retired in 1935 , but remained at the university , and died on October 8 , 1957 at the age of 92 , a year after his wife 's death . He kept coming to the university till just before the end . When he died he was working on a book , The <unk> and Unifying Forces of the Community of Nations though his eyesight was by then poor . During his retirement , he had lectured at universities across America , Europe and Asia . He was survived by his son , Malcolm Stratton , a physician at Berkeley ; two daughters : Elenore , divorced and then married to Robert <unk> of New York , and Florence , married to Albert R. <unk> of Berkeley ; nine grandchildren and one great @-@ grandchild . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stratton had several hobbies , brick @-@ laying the most important one . He built the brick walls and paths in the garden of his house , a house he himself helped design . His daughter , Elenore , would recall decades later living in the house , with a view of the San Francisco bay and the Golden Gate on one side and the Marin county hills beyond . Annual camping in summer in the Sierras was another pastime , and he carried his love of books over there as well , writing in the shade of a tree in the mornings . Elenore also recalled his night @-@ time reading of Homer to his children , mixing with fascinating guests for weekend suppers prepared by her mother , and the family camping out with Latin professor " Uncle " Leon Richardson . 
 = = Work = = 
 Stratton began his career working in a philosophy department , teaching philosophy courses , but branched into experimentation soon after . He tackled problems of sociology and international relations later in his career . 
 = = = Wundt 's lab and the inverted @-@ glasses experiments = = = 
 Stratton went on to become a first @-@ generation experimentalist in psychology . Wundt 's lab in Leipzig , with experimental programs bringing together the fields of evolutionary biology , sensory physiology and nervous @-@ system studies , was a part of the career of most of the first generation . It was the exposure there , added to the graduate work at Yale , that influenced Stratton into becoming a psychologist . It was there that he started his binocular vision experiments as well . In these experiments , he found himself adapting to the new perception of the environment over a few days , after inverting the images his eyes saw on a regular basis . For this , he wore a set of glasses inverting images both upside @-@ down and left @-@ right . Stratton wore these glasses over his right eye and covered the left with a patch during the day , and slept blindfolded at night . Initial movement was clumsy , but adjusting to the new environment took only a few days . 
 Stratton tried variations of the experiment over the next few years . First he wore the glasses for eight days , back at Berkeley . The first day he was nauseated and the inverted landscape felt unreal , but by the second day just his own body position seemed strange , and by day seven , things felt normal . A sense of strangeness returned when the glasses were taken out though the world looked straight side up , and he found himself reaching out with the right hand when he should have used the left , and the other way around . Then he tried the experiment outdoors . He also tried another experiment disrupting the mental link between touch and sight . There he wore a set of mirrors attached to a harness as shown in the figure allowing , and forcing , him to see his body from above . He found the senses adapted in a similar way over three days . His interpretation was that we build up an association between sight and touch by associational learning over a period of time . During certain periods , the disconnect between vision and touch made him feel as if his body was not where his touch and proprioceptive feeling told him it was . This out @-@ of @-@ body experience , caused by an altered but normal sensory perception , vanished when he attended to the issue critically , focusing on the disconnect . 
 = = = Berkeley psychology department = = = 
 Back at Berkeley from Johns Hopkins , Stratton stayed in the philosophy department as its second faculty member and first psychology specialist until the psychology department broke off in 1922 . The new department started with four people : Stratton as chair ; Edward Chace Tolman , with a Harvard degree , and an initiator of rodent experiments soiling the rooms of the philosophy department and hastening the split of the psychology division ; Brown , Stratton 's earlier student and Berkeley faculty member from 1908 onward ; and Olga Bridgman , the first Berkeley psychology PhD awardee , albeit from the philosophy department . Before the split Stratton had set up Berkeley 's first psychology lab in the philosophy department and taught psychology courses with Brown . The courses included sensation , perception , emotion , memory , and applications of psychology to professions such as law , medicine , schooling and clerical work by priests . 
 Stratton continued his experiments on perception , branching into studies on <unk> vision , stereoscopic acuity , eye movements , symmetry and visual illusions , how people perceive depth seeing surroundings either one @-@ eyed or two @-@ eyed , acuity and limits of peripheral vision , apparent motion , <unk> impressed on the eye when a person stares at an object for long and then looks away , and problems with sight in half the visual field ( hemianopsia ) . He both reviewed earlier studies on motion and conducted two of his own , concluding perceiving movement was more than the sum of seeing successive sequential images . He also surveyed and reported in reviews in the Psychological Bulletin experiments at various labs , including those in Europe , on matters related to sensation and perception . 
 = = = = List of special lectures = = = = 
 = = = Philosophical and educational psychology and sociology = = = 
 Stratton was exposed to multiple influences through his life . As an undergraduate student of Howison , he learned about philosophy and religion . At Yale and later at Wundt 's lab , he switched to experimental psychology and studied perception , memory and emotion . His exposure to World War I , serving in the Army then , focused his mind on issues of war and peace and international relations . Stratton 's later work reflected these elements of his experience . He was also a scholar of the classics and translated some Greek philosophers . 
 Stratton saw humans not as machines to be analyzed mechanistically , but also as seating will , emotion and drives , all of which had to analyzed as scientifically as the traditional psychological concepts of sensation , perception and memory . He also believed in a supreme actuality behind the world registered by our senses . This was the theme of his last published book , Man @-@ Creator or Destroyer , completed in 1952 when he was eighty @-@ seven years old . His book Developing Mental Power was a foray into educational psychology , addressing the question of general versus specific training in terms teachers could understand and use . Stratton aimed at this goal via a simple and generally applicable look at the basic workings of mental life . John F. Dashiell , writing in the Journal of Abnormal Psychology , found this a failure . Dashiell saw the path from the psychological concepts — emotion , intelligence , and will — to teaching methodology , not clearly described in the book . Stratton also applied psychological concepts to figure out how to avert war . He was optimistic it was possible to harness the creative and destructive facets of individuals to get nations to coexist peacefully . He saw nations as consisting of ethnicities and races which had to coexist in harmony . In line with the prevailing view in his field , he did not see the races as inherently equally intelligent . 
 = = = Psychology of religion and emotions = = = 
 Stratton also contributed to the psychological study of religion . Along with other founders of the psychology of religion , he saw religion as including both personal faith and historical traditions . He used religious texts as supporting data . In The Psychology of the Religious Life he explored the epics and sacred texts of a large set of ethnicities to understand the traditions and rituals symbolizing the concrete parts of faiths to understand the goals and concept of religion as a whole . His psychology sought to explain how our need to grasp , accept and live with conceptual opposites such as the sublime and the devilish , the humble and the proud , and the docile and the energetic , led us in the direction of religion . He also tied human emotions , especially anger and pugnacity , to religious faith . To understand the linkage , Stratton collected data on religious writings and the rites and traditions of civilizations then considered not as advanced . In Anger : Its Religious and Moral Significance he listed exhaustively and studied the major religions of the world and classified them into three categories . The combative religions , such as Islam , per him , glorified anger , while those such as Buddhism were " <unk> " . Christianity he saw as an example of an anger @-@ supported @-@ love based religion . He concluded Western civilization was trending toward denying rage as good and accepting love and goodwill as desirable , but cautioned anger was at times needed to fight evil . 
 As a professor at Berkeley , Stratton visited Philippines , China , Japan , and Hawaii , coordinating with the University of the Philippines to study the psychology of both races and oriental religions . He also explored anger and emotions in animals . He was one of the scientists who were invited to attend , and confirmed attendance , at a conference to discuss human emotions and feelings . The conference , scheduled for October 21 – 23 , 1927 at Wittenberg College , Springfield , Ohio also was to focus on the experimental psychology of religion . 
 Stratton articulated his own beliefs about religion as well . He did not subscribe to the view religious feeling was primarily a social need , believing it to be a need for seeing a cause and logic to the world along with a harmony to things . A believer in dualism , he held the theory of a separate biological psyche and something beyond it . To him the most important aspects of the psyche lay beyond objective science , at least in his time . He sought to explore those boundaries where the methods of science had to stop and declare what was beyond as unknown , limited by the tools of the times . In The Psychology of the Religious Life he laid out his definition of religion as an appreciative feeling toward an unseen entity marked the best or the greatest . 
 Stratton suggested music had healing powers . In an address on the " Nature and training of the emotions " delivered to a group of nurses at the Baltimore hospitals , he predicted music would be used to treat the sick in the future , and held that nurses had to know how to sing to patients under their care . 
 = = Books = = 
 Stratton wrote eight books , and contributed to collections honoring his mentors , writing an obituary on Wundt and a biography of Howison . His PhD thesis , Uber die <unk> von <unk> bei <unk> <unk> , was in German and published in Leipzig in Wundt 's Philosophische Studien , XII Band , IV Heft . His first book . Experimental Psychology and its Bearing upon Culture covered the scope and practice of experimental psychology , and later books turned more toward sociology and international relations . 
 = = = Experimental Psychology and its Bearing upon Culture = = = 
 Stratton wrote Experimental Psychology and its Bearing upon Culture to explain both typical psychological experiment methodology and how the results obtained answered philosophical problems . The book covered experimental results in psychology and how they influenced overall social behavior and the everyday cultural life of people . It did so by looking at the history of experimental psychology , and then surveying experimental methods covering both their applications and limits . Stratton pointed out how psychological experiments differed from the ones in physiology . The survey of experiments also included studies on mental perception , including among the blind . Stratton noted that the blind did have a sense of space . He also described how measurements of mental phenomena were both possible and being done in practice , though he did believe the results had to be interpreted on a psychic scale different from the usual physical ones used for measures such as lengths and weights . He rejected the argument the mind was unitary and could not be studied by splitting it into parts , by drawing on the analogy of studying a tree by looking at its constituent parts , themselves not functionally trees . He presumed sensations were akin to trees in how they could be split up into parts . 
 The book had chapters on memory , imitation and suggestion , perceptual illusions , and esthetics . In these he refuted the idea that experience was just the external environment acting on and molding a mind working as a passive recipient . Stratton saw the sensation of time as being multidimensional , in analogy with perception of space . That we could simultaneously hear separately , without synthesizing , multiple mixed tones meant our experiences did not necessarily come in single file temporally . To Stratton this meant time had multiple dimensions , since simultaneous events could not be distinguished on the one past @-@ present @-@ future dimension of time alone . He did not address how the other dimensions could be in temporal @-@ space if the events were indistinguishable temporally to begin with . He also analyzed poetic measure as mathematically connected to the waxing and waning span of attention , tying the arts to psychology . This last was rebutted by Charles Samuel Myers , writing in Nature , who saw poetry and its rhythm as too complex a subject to be reduced to the arithmetic of attention spans . 
 In later chapters , Stratton covered the topics of the unconscious mind , the mind – body connection , and spiritual aspects of psychology . He attacked the standard dualist view of a separate <unk> entity driving the biology of mental processes . Still he concluded , from observations that people were not always aware of how their own perception differed from sensory reality , that a diluted form of the dualist theory was tenable . In his final chapter , the author posited experimental psychology neither needed nor ruled out the idea of a soul . Myers critiqued the book 's treatment of illusions , memory , and relationship of psychology to body and soul , as not addressing the broader aspect of " culture " . Myers saw the work as appealing more to the educated reader than the specialist , the many deviations from experimental topics into subjective arenas a distraction . 
 = = = Social Psychology for International Conduct = = = 
 Stratton wrote Social Psychology for International Conduct for social science teachers who wanted to use psychology to analyze international affairs . The book 's first part evaluated races . Stratton concluded the Caucasoid and Mongoloid races were innately more intelligent enabling them to build strong cultures . He also stated the prejudice of other people was from the social and political advantages it brought . Stratton saw nations as made up of individuals and possessing a national character similar to what individuals had . Reviewing the book in the American Journal of Sociology , Ellsworth Faris objected to the author concluding the Northern and Central Europeans were more intelligent than Southern and Eastern Europeans , noting intelligence measures correlated also with length of stay in America . 
 In the chapter on " Taking national profits out of war " the author hypothesized nations often went to war because it paid , bringing both national rewards and helping achieve policy goals . He suggested nations be blocked from enjoying any fruits of war , and instead be penalized for waging it . In a review in the Political Science Quarterly , Walter <unk> concluded enforcing such a position meant an international enforcement force with judicial and police powers , the formation of which would need an appeal to both reason and desire on the part of the international community . <unk> also saw Stratton as pushing more for re @-@ educating the mind rather than training people to control emotions and passions in the efforts to avert war . 
 = = = What Starts Wars : Intentional Delusions = = = 
 In What Starts Wars : Intentional Delusions Stratton presented nations , themselves collections of people , as triggering war from several delusions . Three of those delusions held by citizens were that their own country was a paragon of peace , that its arms were only to defend the land , and that when it fought , it fought only for what was right . Blaming the enemy rounded out this list justifying war . Stratton believed and stated people could be freed of these delusions and that there was no will to war integral to human nature . He saw both the need for and the ways to eliminate war in individuals and in their ways , and not in abstract or innate traits . Florence Finch Kelly , reviewing the book for the New York Times , saw Stratton 's placing of both the blame and the responsibility on persons , of identifying the roots of war in the psyches of the men and women his readers , as an action likely to <unk> those readers . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stratton became a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1928 , president of the American Psychological Association in 1908 , chair of its division on anthropology and psychology in <unk> – 1926 , was a member of its National Research Council , an honorary member of the National Institute of Psychology , and a corresponding member of the American Institute of Czechoslovakia . He published eight full @-@ length books , and 125 papers . He was an honorary lecturer at Yale , delivering the Nathaniel W. Taylor Lectures at the Yale School of Religion beginning April 19 , 1920 . 
 Stratton 's earlier work on sensation and perception and the book based on them stayed influential among researchers in psychology . Many of his other books and articles which dealt with philosophical and sociological issues either beyond , or treated via perspectives beyond , exact and objective investigation had lost appeal to psychology researchers by the time of his death . 
 Of the various fields Stratton studied , it is his experimentation in binocular vision and perception that has had the most impact . Whether during the inversion experiment people really see an upside @-@ down world as being normal , or whether they adapt to it only behaviorally , has been debated for a long time . Neuroimaging studies done a century after the original experiment have shown no difference in early levels of visual processing , which indicates the perceptual world stays inverted at that level of cognition . The research has been put to use in both practical and esthetic ways . The mirror @-@ experiment experience of disconnect between vision and feeling has parallels in , and applications for researching , phantom limb syndrome . The art exhibit Upside @-@ down Mushroom Room by Belgian artist Carsten <unk> , a tunnel installation with an inverted environment , builds on Stratton 's work . 
 Stratton provided encouragement to both his students and his children . Early at Berkeley , he encouraged young students to pursue graduate study in psychology , writing personal letters to students who scored an A grade in his introductory psychology course . The stamp of Stratton 's legacy can be seen in his doctoral students . Knight Dunlap was one of his earliest students at Berkeley and he became the twenty @-@ second president of the American Psychological Association . Dunlap was one of those who saw Stratton as a guide and mentor . Another of his early students , Warner Brown , would be the chair of the psychology department at Berkeley for sixteen years . A third , Olga Bridgman , would serve on the faculty at University of California — Berkeley and San Francisco — for over forty years . 
 = = Committees = = 
 Standing Committees of the Academic Council for Scholarships , University of California , 1902 – 1903 
 Standing Committees of the Graduate Council : University of California , 1902 – 1903 
 One of the first group of members of the Southern Society for Philosophy and Psychology ( <unk> ) , 1904 
 President of the American Psychological Association , 1908 
 Committee of Arrangements for Administering the Beale Prizes instituted by Regent Truxtun Beale , 1911 
 Chair of Board of Research , University of California , 1920 – 1921 
 Chair of the University of California Meeting , October 7 , 1921 
 Standing Committee of the Academic Senate , Administrative Committee on International Relations , 1921 – 1922 
 Elected member of the National Academy of Sciences , 1928 . Stratton served in various capacities with the NAS : 
 Member of the National Research Council , 1925 – 1926 
 Chair of Division of Anthropology and Psychology , National Research Council , 1926 
 Member of the Board for administering the Rockefeller Foundation fellowships in the biological sciences , <unk> – 1926 
 Representative on Editorial board of <unk> , 1926 
 Advisory board of the Bureau of Public Personnel Administration of the Institute for Government Research , 1926 
 Committee on <unk> Interpretation of Oral Speech and Vocal control by the Deaf , 1926 
 Committee on National fellowships in Child Development , 1927 
 = = List of books = = 
 Experimental Psychology and its Bearing upon Culture . New York , NY : MacMillan . 1903 @.@ p . 331 . 
 Psychology of the Religious Life . New York , New York : Macmillan . 1911 @.@ p . 376 . 
 Double Standard with Regard to Fighting . New York , New York : American Association for International Conciliation . 1912 @.@ p . 14 . 
 Control of the Fighting Instinct . New York , New York : American Association for International Conciliation . 1913 @.@ p . 13 . 
 Theophrastus and the Greek Physiological Psychology before Aristotle . New York , New York : Macmillan ; London , Allen and Unwin . 1917 @.@ p . 227 . 
 Developing Mental Power . Boston , MA : Houghton . 1922 @.@ p . 77 . 
 Anger : Its Religious and Moral Significance . New York , New York : Macmillan . 1923 @.@ p . 277 . 
 Social Psychology of International Conduct . New York , New York : D. Appleton and Company . 1929 @.@ p . 387 . 
 What Starts Wars : International Delusions . New York , New York : Houghton Mifflin company . 1936 @.@ p . 221 . 
 Man , Creator or Destroyer . London : Allen and Unwin . 1952 @.@ p . 170 . 
 = Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather plc = 
 Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather plc [ 1994 ] 1 All ER 53 is a case in English tort law that established the principle that claims under nuisance and Rylands v Fletcher must include a requirement that the damage be foreseeable ; it also suggested that Rylands was a sub @-@ set of nuisance rather than an independent tort , a debate eventually laid to rest in Transco plc v Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council . 
 The Cambridge Water Company were a company responsible for providing potable water to the inhabitants of Cambridge and the surrounding areas . In 1976 , they purchased a borehole outside Sawston to deal with rising demand . In 1980 , a European Directive was issued requiring nations of the European Community to establish standards on the presence of <unk> ( PCE ) in water , which the United Kingdom did in 1982 . It was found that the Sawston borehole was contaminated with PCE that had originated in a tannery owned by Eastern Counties Leather . Prior to 1980 , there was no knowledge that PCE should be avoided or that it could cause harm , but the Cambridge Water Company brought a case against Eastern Counties Leather anyway . 
 The case first went to the High Court of Justice , where Kennedy J dismissed claims under nuisance , negligence and Rylands v Fletcher because the harm was not foreseeable . His decision was reversed by the Court of Appeal of England and Wales , who cited an " obscure decision " to justify doing so . The case then went to the House of Lords , where a decision was read by Lord Goff on 9 December 1993 . Goff first countered the Court of Appeal decision , restoring Kennedy 's dismissal of the case , before moving on to the deeper legal points . Based on the original decision in Rylands , Goff argued that it had always been intended for foreseeability of harm to be a factor , something not previously put into law by the English judiciary . He then stated that Rylands was arguably a sub @-@ set of nuisance , not an independent tort , and as such the factors which led him to including a test of foreseeability of harm in Rylands cases also imposed such a test on all nuisance cases . 
 The decision in Cambridge Water Co made an immediate change to the law , for the first time requiring foreseeability of harm to be considered in cases brought under Rylands v Fletcher and the general tort of nuisance . It was also significant in implying that Rylands was not an independent tort , something later concluded in the Transco case . Goff 's judgment has been criticised on several points by academics , who highlight flaws in wording which leave parts of the judgment ambiguous and a selective assessment of Rylands that ignores outside influences . 
 = = Facts = = 
 The Cambridge Water Company Ltd was established by a private Act of Parliament in 1853 to provide water to the residents of Cambridge and the surrounding area ; by 1976 , the population served had risen to approximately 275 @,@ 000 . With the rising demand , the company purchased a borehole outside Sawston , constructing pumping equipment and integrating the water from that borehole into their system in 1979 . Tests undertaken both before the purchase , and in 1979 , had demonstrated that the water was safe for public consumption . During the late 1970s , concerns were expressed about the presence of <unk> ( PCE ) in water , and as a result a European Directive was issued in 1980 requiring nations of the European Community to establish maximum acceptable levels of PCE in water ; the United Kingdom did this in 1982 . PCE was discovered in the borehole ; it was not tested for earlier because there was no need to regulate the levels . As a result , the Cambridge Water Company was forced to cease pumping the water , and instead find a new borehole elsewhere . 
 An investigation immediately ensued . The investigators concluded that the PCE had come from Eastern Counties Leather plc , a leather tannery in Sawston . The tannery used PCE as a degreasing agent , beginning in the 1960s ; by 1976 , 100 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 380 @,@ 000 L ) of this chemical were used by the tannery each year , with up to 25 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 95 @,@ 000 L ) on the premises at any one time . PCE was leaking out of the drums it was carried in , first by being spilt when it was tipped into the degreasing machines and second by leaking from near @-@ empty drums . Although these spills were individually small , it was estimated around 3 @,@ 200 US gallons ( 12 @,@ 000 L ) of PCE were spilled each year . These spills collected in the chalk underlying Sawston until groundwater swept them into the Cambridge Water Company 's borehole . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 = = = High Court and Court of Appeal = = = 
 The Cambridge Water Company brought a case against Eastern Counties Leather in the High Court of Justice , wanting £ 1 million in damages for the cost of finding a new borehole and an unsuccessful attempt to decontaminate the original one , and an injunction to prevent any more use of PCE . They argued that Eastern Counties Leather were liable in three ways ; first , in negligence , second , in nuisance , and third , under the rule developed in Rylands v Fletcher . The case came before Kennedy J , who dismissed all three of the Company 's claims . On the matter of negligence , he held that the damage had to be reasonably foreseeable , as was required under Overseas Tankship ( UK ) Ltd v Morts Dock and Engineering Co Ltd ; he applied this same test to the claim under nuisance . Applying the case of Hughes v Lord Advocate , Kennedy found that the harm was not reasonably foreseeable , and both actions under nuisance and negligence must fail . 
 Rylands v Fletcher contained the principle that " the person who for his own purposes brings on his lands and collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it escapes , must keep it at his peril , and , if he does not do so , is prima facie answerable for all the damage which is the natural consequence of its escape " , with a requirement that this use of land be " non @-@ natural " . On the Cambridge Water Company 's third claim , Kennedy was forced to consider the meaning of " non @-@ natural " in this setting . He held that the use of industrial chemicals was not " non @-@ natural " , given that it was on an industrial site , and that for a claim to succeed under Rylands the use must be " some special use bringing increased danger to others , and must not merely be the ordinary use of the land or such a use as is proper for the general benefit of the community " ; Eastern Counties Leather created jobs in Sawston , and was thus providing a benefit for the community . As such , the Company 's claim under Rylands was not valid . Kennedy also chose to consider foreseeability of harm a factor in cases brought under Rylands , and stated the fact that harm was not foreseeable was a factor in his decision . 
 The Cambridge Water Company then appealed to the Court of Appeal of England and Wales , but only on the claim under Rylands v Fletcher . The court , composed of Nolan LJ , Mann LJ and Sir Stephen Brown , reversed Kennedy 's decision . Despite a lack of comment by the appellants on the claim under nuisance , the court addressed this ground , relying on the " obscure decision " found in Ballard v Tomlinson , concluding that " where the nuisance is an interference with a natural right incident to ownership then the liability is a strict one " . As such , Kennedy should have applied Ballard , and it was unnecessary to consider Rylands because the claim under nuisance was valid . 
 = = = House of Lords = = = 
 The case was again appealed , this time to the House of Lords , where it was heard by Lord Templeman , Lord Goff , Lord <unk> , Lord Lowry and Lord Woolf . The judgment was given by Lord Goff on 9 December 1993 , and reinstated the decision of Kennedy J in the High Court of Justice ; unlike the Court of Appeal decision , it directly addressed the issue of Rylands v Fletcher . Goff first addressed the Court of Appeal 's use of Ballard v Tomlinson , stating that the decision there as based on the facts of the case , and did not establish either a rule that there was a right to clear water , nor that there was strict liability attached to that right . 
 Goff looked at the relationship between nuisance and Rylands v Fletcher , particularly how they treat strict liability . In nuisance , liability is strict in that the defendant can be liable even if he has taken reasonable care , but this is kept " under control " by the principle that a defendant is not liable for actions a reasonable user takes on his land . He took into consideration an article published by F.H. Newark in 1949 , in which Newark called the decision in Rylands " a simple case of nuisance " rather than a revolutionary doctrine that established strict liability outside nuisance . Goff also found similarities between the principle of " non @-@ natural use " under Rylands and that of the " reasonable user " requirement in nuisance , concluding that " [ I ] t would lead to a more coherent body of common law principles if the rule [ in Rylands ] were to be regarded essentially as an extension of the law of nuisance " . 
 Lord Goff 's judgment was primarily based on whether or not foreseeability of damage should be a factor in Rylands cases , and was that the matter was " open for consideration " , saying that the need for foreseeability of damage to be a criterion was " a matter of principle " . He considered the case of Overseas Tankship ( UK ) Ltd v The Miller Steamship Co , in which the Privy Council concluded that foreseeability of damage was an essential part of determining liability in nuisance . The Council stated that " It could not be right to discriminate between different cases of nuisance so as to make foreseeability a necessary element in determining damages in those cases where it is a necessary element in determining liability , but not in others " . If , as Goff was stating , Rylands was an element of nuisance , this decision should apply to it . In the original judgment in Rylands , the judge had stated that it covered " anything likely to do mischief if it escapes " , and that liability should be to " answer for the natural and anticipated consequences " ; this wording implies that he intended for " knowledge to be a prerequisite for liability " . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Goff 's judgment made several significant and immediate changes to the law . First , it was the first decision which imposed a requirement of foreseeability of harm to cases brought under Rylands v Fletcher ; " it must be shown that the defendant has done something which he recognised , or judged by the standards appropriate at the relevant place or time , or ought reasonably to have recognised , as giving rise to an exceptionally high risk of danger or mischief if there should be an escape , however unlikely an escape may have been thought to be " . Secondly , it was the first decision to state that Rylands may be a sub @-@ set of nuisance , and as such applied the same requirement of foreseeability of harm to nuisance , where previously such a requirement had not existed . 
 Academic Tom Clearwater criticises some of the language Lord Goff picked out of Rylands v Fletcher for his judgment . In particular , Goff 's use of " anything likely to do mischief if it escapes " and " answer for the natural and anticipated consequences " to justify his argument that Rylands had always intended foreseeability to be a factor suggests Goff " [ overstepped ] an appropriate reach of interpretation in drawing his conclusion ... most cases gloss silently over the [ wording ] ... three cases imply that foreseeability of damage is not a relevant consideration at all " . The reliance on Newark 's article was also criticised , since " Neither he nor Goff attempted to justify their opinion with reference to anything external to [ the Rylands ] judgment " . Clearwater points out that the original judgment in Rylands required modification " the price paid for which was legal uncertainty " to make it socially acceptable , which he sees as evidence that Rylands was , despite what Newark says , a significant change to the law . 
 Peter Kutner , a professor of law at the University of Oklahoma , argues that there is a significant ambiguity in Goff 's judgment . Cases brought under Rylands v Fletcher now have a requirement that the harm was foreseeable , but it was not defined whether or not it was sufficient that it be foreseeable that harm could occur , or that it be foreseeable that the use of land is " non @-@ natural " , that the substance be capable of doing " mischief " , and all the other requirements of Rylands . He also states that the decision did not explain precisely whether Rylands should be treated as a development within the law of nuisance , or something which sprung from nuisance and retains a separate existence . He interpreted the Cambridge Water Company decision as not being sufficient to completely write out Rylands as a distinct doctrine ; this was later done by the House of Lords in Transco plc v Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council . 
 = United Abominations = 
 United Abominations is the eleventh studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth . Released on May 8 , 2007 , United Abominations is the first Megadeth release distributed through Roadrunner Records , and with the exception of the band 's frontman Dave Mustaine , was recorded with an all @-@ new line @-@ up . While touring to promote the album , guitarist Glen Drover left the band for personal reasons and was replaced by Chris Broderick , leaving this as the only Megadeth studio album to which he contributed . 
 United Abominations was well received by critics and debuted at number eight on the Billboard 200 , the highest chart position for the band since 1994 's Youthanasia until it was succeeded by 2013 's Super Collider . Greg Prato of AllMusic stated Megadeth " sound reborn " on United Abominations . The lyrics of the album deal with politics and the state the world is in , with Ed Thompson of IGN stating the album is the band 's most politically charged . The album was named the number one metal album of 2007 by Guitar World . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the release of United Abominations , Megadeth signed a recording contract with Roadrunner Records . The band had troubles with music rights involving two former labels that carried Megadeth , Capitol and Sanctuary Records . This is the first Megadeth album since the 2004 album The System Has Failed , which was released through Sanctuary . While on tour to support The System Has Failed , Megadeth frontman , guitarist , and vocalist Dave Mustaine contemplated breaking up Megadeth to record as a solo artist . At a sold @-@ out concert in Buenos Aires , Mustaine stated the band would stay together . The show in Buenos Aires , at which this information was announced , was recorded and released on CD and DVD as That One Night : Live in Buenos Aires . 
 Megadeth had a new band lineup , aside from Mustaine , comprising Glen Drover ( guitar ) , James LoMenzo ( bass guitar ) , and Shawn Drover ( drums ) . Mustaine chose these people for full @-@ time members rather than session musicians . He stated that he liked the Drovers ' " sibling chemistry " and that LoMenzo was a " legend " . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Mustaine stated he did not " go into making this record with any pre @-@ conceived notions " . He said some of the lyrics on United Abominations were written about his frustration with his past record labels , stating " a lot of that translated into the intensity on the record . " Mustaine wrote the songs for the album in an attempt to " stir something in the minds of the listener " . The lyrics of the album were mostly about choices the American government were making at the time , which Mustaine found to be foolish . Mustaine stated recording the new songs was " super fun " , despite having troubles with some of the complex music and vocal arrangements . All of the lyrics and music , with the exception of one song , were written by Mustaine . " Never Walk Alone ... A Call to Arms " was co @-@ written by Mustaine and guitarist Glen Drover . When bassist James LoMenzo was asked about the lyrics of the album , he said to " talk to Dave about that " . Although most of the band had no writing credits on the album , they stated that they were excited about recording the music . 
 United Abominations was recorded in 2006 at SARM Hook End Studios , London , England ; the Steakhouse , Studio City , California ; Big Fish Encinitas , California and Backstage Productions . Additional overdubs were recorded at <unk> rehearsal studio , Hollywood , California and Mustaine Music , Fallbrook , California . Most of the record was tracked in England because Mustaine admired the fact that his favorite band , Led Zeppelin , previously recorded there many times . Mustaine produced the album , with additional production handled by Jeff Balding and Andy Sneap . 
 " À Tout le Monde ( Set Me Free ) " , is a remake of " A Tout le Monde " which originally appeared on the 1994 album Youthanasia . The song is a more uptempo version of the original song , and features Lacuna Coil vocalist Cristina Scabbia singing backing vocals . Scabbia stated she was " really surprised about it because ' A Tout le Monde ' is a song that I 've always loved . It was a big surprise for me to get this invitation — I was really honored to be part of it . " Mustaine chose Scabbia over three other choices because of her " reign in the heavy metal business " . Mustaine later stated that he originally intended for the song to be a B @-@ side for Japan , but the president of Roadrunner Records ( Megadeth 's label for this release ) wanted " À Tout le Monde ( Set Me Free ) " released as the album 's first single . 
 The song " Gears of War " is featured on the soundtrack to the video game of the same name . Initially , the song had no lyrics ; however , Microsoft approached Megadeth , asking to use the song in Gears of War . The band accepted the offer and wrote lyrics for the song , but it was too late to use the lyrics in the version for the video game , as the game was near completion . 
 = = = Album artwork = = = 
 All artwork for the album was selected from a contest held by DeviantArt . The contestants were asked to design a new version of Vic Rattlehead , the band mascot which appears on nearly every Megadeth album cover . Mustaine chose from the top 11 finalists to be included in the CD booklet . The cover was unveiled in August 2006 , of which the image depicts the United Nations headquarters in flames and being destroyed by flying oil barrels . Vic Rattlehead ( the Megadeth mascot ) and the ' Angel of Deth ' are pictured in the foreground . Although the cover of the CD was not the winner of the contest , Mustaine chose it as his favorite picture , and wanted it for the cover . No photographs of the band were taken for the CD booklet , leaving the entire design as fan @-@ made artwork . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 United Abominations was originally set for an October 2006 release , but with the scheduled release date rapidly approaching , Mustaine told Billboard magazine in August 2006 , " We 're putting the finishing touches on it . We 've got a little more work before it 's finished , but it should be out some time next year . " The completed album was leaked on to the internet in April 2007 and the first official pressing of the album was released exclusively in Japan on May 8 and contained a cover of the 1970 Led Zeppelin song " Out on the Tiles " . The album was released internationally on May 15 , and a day later in the United States . The album had sold nearly 60 @,@ 000 copies in the US in its first week and debuted at number eight on the Billboard 200 , 10 places higher than the band 's previous album , <unk> The System Has Failed . The album debuted at number two in Finland , five in Canada , and the top 30 in seven other countries . As of August 19 , 2007 , the album had managed to sell about 122 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 Megadeth started touring in March 2007 in support of the album in Canada opening for Heaven & Hell and Down , followed by a North American tour opening for Heaven and Hell and touring with Machine Head . On this tour , which lasted until May , the band debuted the songs " Gears Of War " , " Washington Is Next ! " and " Sleepwalker " . After the Heaven and Hell tour , Megadeth started the worldwide Tour of Duty , which lasted until March 2008 . Megadeth also toured in Australia on Gigantour with Static @-@ X , DevilDriver , Lacuna Coil , and Bring Me the Horizon as supporting acts . At one concert in Australia and in Italy ( Milan ) , Cristina Scabbia performed on stage with Megadeth for " À Tout le Monde ( Set Me Free ) " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 United Abominations received generally positive reviews , and was thought of as a return to form for Megadeth by critics . Don Kaye of Blabbermouth.net said the album " is an unabashedly guitar @-@ driven album , stuffed with riffs and leads coming from all directions . The sense of explosive instrumentation under precise control that was a hallmark of early Megadeth efforts is back , which means that Megadeth , in many ways , is back too . " About.com reviewer Chad Bowar stated the album " is the best Megadeth album in at least a decade . " Greg Prato of AllMusic praised the album , stating " Megadeth 's crunchy , venomous thrash has remained intact . Megadeth were never afraid to show off their prog @-@ worthy chops , and the 2007 lineup appears custom @-@ made for tackling ' tricky bits ' . Mustaine and company certainly sound reborn . " Rolling Stone reviewer Evan Serpick noted a downside to the album , stating it sounded too much like all of the band 's previous albums . Ed Thompson of IGN praised the album and its political lyrics , saying it " cranks out so much attitude , so much opinion , and so much <unk> speech that the album could be mistaken for a political rally . " Commenting on the Megadeth 's new lineup , Jon Weiderhorn from MTV said " Once again , the system is fully operational . " In a less enthusiastic review , BBC Music 's Eamonn Stack wrote that even though the thrash musicianship is evident , the edge has been " sacrificed for the sake of speed and technical playing " . United Abominations was voted the best metal album of 2007 by the reader 's poll in the June 2008 issue of Guitar World and the Brave Pick of 2007 by Brave Words & Bloody Knuckles . 
 On July 10 , 2007 , a rebuttal was posted by Mark Leon Goldberg on the United Nations affairs blog against the accusations made in the title track of the album , " United Abominations " . Goldberg reviewed the song verse @-@ by @-@ verse , pointing out what he believed were false accusations . The blog stated that " we at UN Dispatch refuse to let Megadeth 's witless screed go unchallenged . We listened [ to the song ] so you don 't have to " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Huginn and Muninn = 
 In Norse mythology , Huginn ( from Old Norse " thought " ) and Muninn ( Old Norse " memory " or " mind " ) are a pair of ravens that fly all over the world , Midgard , and bring information to the god Odin . Huginn and Muninn are attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources : the Prose Edda and Heimskringla , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson ; in the Third Grammatical Treatise , compiled in the 13th century by Óláfr Þórðarson ; and in the poetry of skalds . The names of the ravens are sometimes modernly anglicized as Hugin and Munin . 
 In the Poetic Edda , a disguised Odin expresses that he fears that they may not return from their daily flights . The Prose Edda explains that Odin is referred to as " raven @-@ god " due to his association with Huginn and Muninn . In the Prose Edda and the Third Grammatical Treatise , the two ravens are described as perching on Odin 's shoulders . Heimskringla details that Odin gave Huginn and Muninn the ability to speak . 
 Migration Period golden bracteates , Vendel era helmet plates , a pair of identical Germanic Iron Age bird @-@ shaped brooches , Viking Age objects depicting a moustached man wearing a helmet , and a portion of the 10th or 11th century Thorwald 's Cross may depict Odin with one of the ravens . Huginn and Muninn 's role as Odin 's messengers has been linked to shamanic practices , the Norse raven banner , general raven symbolism among the Germanic peoples , and the Norse concepts of the <unk> and the hamingja . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Grímnismál , the god Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) provides the young Agnarr with information about Odin 's companions . He tells the prince about Odin 's wolves Geri and Freki , and , in the next stanza of the poem , states that Huginn and Muninn fly daily across the entire world , Midgard . Grímnir says that he worries Huginn may not come back , yet more does he fear for Muninn : 
 In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning ( chapter 38 ) , the enthroned figure of High tells Gangleri ( king Gylfi in disguise ) that two ravens named Huginn and Muninn sit on Odin 's shoulders . The ravens tell Odin everything they see and hear . Odin sends Huginn and Muninn out at dawn , and the birds fly all over the world before returning at dinner @-@ time . As a result , Odin is kept informed of many events . High adds that it is from this association that Odin is referred to as " raven @-@ god " . The above @-@ mentioned stanza from Grímnismál is then quoted . 
 In the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál ( chapter 60 ) , Huginn and Muninn appear in a list of poetic names for ravens . In the same chapter , excerpts from a work by the skald Einarr Skúlason are provided . In these excerpts Muninn is referenced in a common noun for ' raven ' and Huginn is referenced in a kenning for ' carrion ' . 
 In the Heimskringla book Ynglinga saga , an euhemerized account of the life of Odin is provided . Chapter 7 describes that Odin had two ravens , and upon these ravens he bestowed the gift of speech . These ravens flew all over the land and brought him information , causing Odin to become " very wise in his lore . " 
 In the Third Grammatical Treatise an anonymous verse is recorded that mentions the ravens flying from Odin 's shoulders ; Huginn seeking hanged men , and Muninn slain bodies . The verse reads : 
 Two ravens flew from <unk> ’ s [ Óðinn ’ s ] 
 shoulders ; Huginn to the hanged and 
 Muninn to the slain [ lit. corpses ] . 
 = = Archaeological record = = 
 Migration Period ( 5th and 6th centuries AD ) gold bracteates ( types A , B , and C ) feature a depiction of a human figure above a horse , holding a spear and flanked by one or more often two birds . The presence of the birds has led to the iconographic identification of the human figure as the god Odin , flanked by Huginn and Muninn . Like Snorri 's Prose Edda description of the ravens , a bird is sometimes depicted at the ear of the human , or at the ear of the horse . <unk> have been found in Denmark , Sweden , Norway and , in smaller numbers , England and areas south of Denmark . Austrian Germanist Rudolf Simek states that these bracteates may depict Odin and his ravens healing a horse and may indicate that the birds were originally not simply his battlefield companions but also " Odin 's helpers in his veterinary function . " 
 Vendel era helmet plates ( from the 6th or 7th century ) found in grave in Sweden depict a helmeted figure holding a spear and a shield while riding a horse , flanked by two birds . The plate has been interpreted as Odin accompanied by two birds : his ravens . 
 A pair of identical Germanic Iron Age bird @-@ shaped brooches from <unk> in northern Denmark may be depictions of Huginn and Muninn . The back of each bird features a mask motif , and the feet of the birds are shaped like the heads of animals . The feathers of the birds are also composed of animal heads . Together , the animal heads on the feathers form a mask on the back of the bird . The birds have powerful beaks and fan @-@ shaped tails , indicating that they are ravens . The brooches were intended to be worn on each shoulder , after Germanic Iron Age fashion . Archaeologist Peter Vang Petersen comments that while the symbolism of the brooches is open to debate , the shape of the beaks and tail feathers confirm that the brooch depictions are ravens . Petersen notes that " raven @-@ shaped ornaments worn as a pair , after the fashion of the day , one on each shoulder , makes one 's thoughts turn towards Odin 's ravens and the cult of Odin in the Germanic Iron Age . " Petersen says that Odin is associated with disguise and that the masks on the ravens may be portraits of Odin . 
 The Oseberg tapestry fragments , discovered within the Viking Age Oseberg ship burial in Norway , feature a scene containing two black birds hovering over a horse , possibly originally leading a wagon ( as a part of a procession of horse @-@ led wagons on the tapestry ) . In her examination of the tapestry , scholar Anne Stine <unk> interprets these birds as Huginn and Muninn flying over a covered cart containing an image of Odin , drawing comparison with the images of Nerthus attested by Tacitus in 1 CE . 
 Excavations in Ribe in Denmark have recovered a Viking Age lead metal @-@ caster 's mould and 11 identical casting @-@ moulds . These objects depict a moustached man wearing a helmet that features two head @-@ ornaments . Archaeologist Stig Jensen proposes that these ornaments should be interpreted as Huginn and Muninn , and the wearer as Odin . He notes that " similar depictions occur everywhere the Vikings went — from eastern England to Russia and naturally also in the rest of Scandinavia . " 
 A portion of Thorwald 's Cross ( a partly surviving runestone erected at Kirk Andreas on the Isle of Man ) depicts a bearded human holding a spear downward at a wolf , his right foot in its mouth , and a large bird on his shoulder . Andy Orchard comments that this bird may be either Huginn or Muninn . Rundata dates the cross to 940 , while Pluskowski dates it to the 11th century . This depiction has been interpreted as Odin , with a raven or eagle at his shoulder , being consumed by the monstrous wolf Fenrir during the events of Ragnarök . 
 In November 2009 , the Roskilde Museum announced the discovery and subsequent display of a niello @-@ inlaid silver figurine found in Lejre , Denmark , which they dubbed " Odin from Lejre " . The silver object depicts a person sitting on a throne . The throne features the heads of animals and is flanked by two birds . The Roskilde Museum identifies the figure as Odin sitting on his throne <unk> , flanked by the ravens Huginn and Muninn . 
 = = Theories = = 
 The Heliand , an Old Saxon adaptation of the New Testament from the 9th century , differs from the New Testament in that an explicit reference is made to a dove sitting on the shoulder of Christ . Regarding this , G. Ronald Murphy says " In placing the powerful white dove not just above Christ , but right on his shoulder , the Heliand author has portrayed Christ , not only as the Son of the All @-@ Ruler , but also as a new Woden . This deliberate image of Christ triumphantly astride the land with the magnificent bird on his shoulders ( the author is perhaps a bit embarrassed that the bird is an unwarlike dove ! ) is an image intended to calm the fears and longings of those who mourn the loss of Woden and who want to return to the old religion 's symbols and ways . With this image , Christ becomes a Germanic god , one into whose ears the Spirit of the Almighty whispers " . 
 Scholars have linked Odin 's relation to Huginn and Muninn to shamanic practice . John Lindow relates Odin 's ability to send his " thought " ( Huginn ) and " mind " ( Muninn ) to the trance @-@ state journey of shamans . Lindow says the Grímnismál stanza where Odin worries about the return of Huginn and Muninn " would be consistent with the danger that the shaman faces on the trance @-@ state journey . " 
 Rudolf Simek is critical of the approach , stating that " attempts have been made to interpret Odin 's ravens as a personification of the god 's intellectual powers , but this can only be assumed from the names Huginn and Muninn themselves which were unlikely to have been invented much before the 9th or 10th centuries " yet that the two ravens , as Odin 's companions , appear to derive from much earlier times . Instead , Simek connects Huginn and Muninn with wider raven symbolism in the Germanic world , including the raven banner ( described in English chronicles and Scandinavian sagas ) , a banner which was woven in a method that allowed it , when fluttering in the wind , to appear as if the raven depicted upon it was beating its wings . 
 Anthony Winterbourne connects Huginn and Muninn to the Norse concepts of the <unk> — a concept with three characteristics ; shape @-@ shifting abilities , good fortune , and the guardian spirit — and the hamingja — the ghostly double of a person that may appear in the form of an animal . Winterbourne states that " The shaman 's journey through the different parts of the cosmos is symbolized by the hamingja concept of the shape @-@ shifting soul , and gains another symbolic dimension for the Norse soul in the account of <unk> 's ravens , Huginn and Muninn . " In response to Simek 's criticism of attempts to interpret the ravens " philosophically " , Winterbourne says that " such speculations [ ... ] simply strengthen the conceptual significance made plausible by other features of the mythology " and that the names Huginn and Muninn " demand more explanation than is usually provided . " 
 Bernd Heinrich theorizes that Huginn and Muninn , along with Odin and his wolves Geri and Freki , reflect a symbiosis observed in the natural world among ravens , wolves , and humans on the hunt : 
 In a biological symbiosis one organism typically shores up some weakness or deficiency of the other ( s ) . As in such a symbiosis , Odin the father of all humans and gods , though in human form was imperfect by himself . As a separate entity he lacked depth perception ( being one @-@ eyed ) and he was apparently also uninformed and forgetful . But his weaknesses were compensated by his ravens , Hugin ( mind ) and Munin ( memory ) who were part of him . They perched on his shoulders and reconnoitered to the ends of the earth each day to return in the evening and tell him the news . He also had two wolves at his side , and the man / god @-@ raven @-@ wolf association was like one single organism in which the ravens were the eyes , mind , and memory , and the wolves the providers of meat and nourishment . As god , Odin was the ethereal part — he only drank wine and spoke only in poetry . I wondered if the Odin myth was a metaphor that playfully and poetically encapsulates ancient knowledge of our prehistoric past as hunters in association with two allies to produce a powerful hunting alliance . It would reflect a past that we have long forgotten and whose meaning has been obscured and badly frayed as we abandoned our hunting cultures to become herders and agriculturists , to whom ravens act as competitors . 
 = Military service of Ian Smith = 
 The future Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith served in the British Royal Air Force ( RAF ) during the Second World War , interrupting his studies at Rhodes University in South Africa to join up in 1941 . Following a year 's pilot instruction in Rhodesia under the Empire Air Training Scheme , he was posted to No. 237 ( Rhodesia ) Squadron , then stationed in the Middle East , in late 1942 . Smith received six weeks ' operational training in the Levant , then entered active service as a pilot officer in Iran and Iraq . No. 237 Squadron , which had operated in the Western Desert from 1941 to early 1942 , returned to that front in March 1943 . Smith flew in the Western Desert until October that year , when a crash during a night takeoff resulted in a number of serious injuries , including facial disfigurements and a broken jaw . Following reconstructive plastic surgery to his face , other operations and five months ' convalescence , Smith rejoined No. 237 Squadron in Corsica in May 1944 . While there , he attained his highest rank , flight lieutenant . 
 In late June 1944 , during a strafing attack on a railway yard in the Po Valley in northern Italy , Smith was shot down by flak . Parachuting from his aircraft , he landed without serious injury in the Ligurian Alps , in an area that was behind German lines , but largely under the control of anti @-@ German Italian partisans . Smith spent three months working with the local resistance movement before trekking westwards , across the Maritime Alps , with three other Allied personnel , hoping to join up with the Allied forces that had just invaded southern France . After 23 days ' hiking , he and his companions were recovered by American troops and repatriated . 
 Smith was briefly stationed in Britain before he was posted to No. 130 ( Punjab ) Squadron in western Germany in April 1945 . He flew combat missions there until Germany surrendered in May . He remained with No. 130 Squadron for the rest of his service , and returned home at the end of 1945 . After completing his studies at Rhodes , he was elected Member of Parliament for his birthplace , Selukwe , in 1948 . Becoming Prime Minister in 1964 amid his country 's dispute with Britain regarding the terms for independence , he was influenced as a politician by his wartime experiences . Rhodesia 's military record on the mother country 's behalf became central to his sense of betrayal by post @-@ war British governments , which partly motivated his administration 's Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 1965 . His status as a Second World War RAF veteran thereafter helped him win support , both domestically and internationally . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ian Smith was born in 1919 , the son of British settlers in Selukwe , Southern Rhodesia . He attended Chaplin School in Gwelo , where he was head prefect , recipient of the Victor Ludorum in athletics , captain of the school teams in cricket , rugby and tennis , and successful academically . After graduating in 1937 , he attended Rhodes University College , in Grahamstown , South Africa , which was often attended by Rhodesian students , partly because Rhodesia then had no university of its own . <unk> at the start of 1938 , Smith read for a Bachelor of Commerce degree . He was about halfway through his course when the Second World War broke out in September 1939 . 
 = = Enlisting and training in Rhodesia = = 
 Smith was fascinated by the idea of being a fighter pilot , and particularly excited by the prospect of flying a Spitfire . He wanted to leave Rhodes immediately to join the Southern Rhodesian Air Force , but did not because military recruiters in the colony had been told not to accept university students until after they graduated . As in the First World War , white Rhodesians in general were very keen to enlist ; because it was feared that the absence of these men might adversely affect the strategically important mines , manpower controls were introduced to keep certain whites out of the military and in their civilian occupations . One of Southern Rhodesia 's main contributions to the Allied war effort proved to be its participation , from 1940 , in the Empire Air Training Scheme . The Southern Rhodesian Air Force was absorbed into the British Royal Air Force ( RAF ) in April 1940 , becoming No. 237 ( Rhodesia ) Squadron RAF . Two more RAF squadrons , No. 44 and No. 266 , were subsequently also designated " Rhodesian " formations . 
 Remaining at Rhodes during the 1940 academic year , Smith secretly made plans to leave for military service in spite of his instructions to finish studying . In June 1940 , during the mid @-@ year break from studies , he quietly travelled to the Southern Rhodesian capital , Salisbury , to tell the colony 's director of manpower , William Addison , that he wanted to join the air force ; to avoid being barred from enlistment , Smith did not mention his university attendance , and gave his Selukwe address . During his Christmas vacation at the end of 1940 , Smith went to Salisbury again , and was successful in a second interview with an air force official and a physical examination . Early in 1941 , having received his pilot course call @-@ up papers , Smith underwent a final interview , during which it emerged that he was a university student ; the interviewer briefly demurred , but accepted Smith when he insisted that he wanted to sign up . 
 In September 1941 Smith formally enlisted in the Royal Air Force . He began his instruction with Initial Training Wing in Bulawayo , Southern Rhodesia 's second city , and after six weeks there transferred to Elementary Flying Training School at Guinea Fowl , just outside Gwelo . The majority of the men he trained alongside were Australians , and many others were British . Smith was glad to find himself in a course that would ultimately lead to flying fighters as opposed to bombers — at Guinea Fowl , he learned to pilot Tiger Moths , then <unk> — and was also pleased to have been posted only a half @-@ hour car ride from Selukwe . Late in the course he was picked out to undergo instruction as an officer cadet , which meant he was transferred to Thornhill , another Gwelo airbase . He passed out in September 1942 with the rank of pilot officer ; his training in Southern Rhodesia had taken a year in all . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Middle East and North Africa = = = 
 Smith hoped to be posted to Britain at the end of his training , and was initially told that this was going to happen , but he was ultimately sent to the Middle East . He was despatched to <unk> , a small RAF base near Cairo , in late 1942 , from where he was posted to an operational training unit based at Baalbek , in Lebanon . He spent six weeks there , flying over much of the Levant in a Hawker Hurricane fighter , before being posted to No. 237 ( Rhodesia ) Squadron to begin active service , again piloting Hurricanes . The squadron was stationed near the Iranian capital of Tehran when Smith joined it , but it almost immediately transferred to Kirkuk , in Iraq , to help guard the oil wells and pipelines there . In March 1943 , it was again committed to the Western Desert Campaign in North Africa , having previously served there during 1941 – 1942 , and Smith proceeded to serve on this front as a Hurricane pilot . He was promoted to flying officer on 25 March 1943 . 
 On 4 October 1943 , Smith took off from <unk> at dawn in a Hurricane Mk IIC to escort a shipping convoy . Light was extremely poor , and Smith 's throttle malfunctioned ; he failed to take off quickly enough to clear a blast wall at the end of the runway . The undercarriage of the aircraft scraped against some sandbags on the wall , causing Smith to lose control of the plane and crash . The shoulder straps on his harness , built to withstand stress of up to 1 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) , snapped , and his face was smashed against the Hurricane 's <unk> . Smith suffered serious facial injuries , and broke his jaw , a leg and a shoulder . Doctors thought at first that his back had also been broken , but it had actually only been buckled . 
 A team of doctors and surgeons at the Fifteenth Scottish Hospital in Cairo worked extensively on Smith , putting his jaw back together with a complicated assembly of bandage , plaster , nuts , bolts and wire , and rebuilt his face through skin grafts and other plastic surgery . In March 1944 , after about five months ' convalescence , he was passed fit for flying . He turned down the offer of a posting home to Southern Rhodesia as an instructor and , after a refresher course in Egypt , travelled to Corsica to rejoin No. 237 Squadron , which was by now flying Spitfire Mk IXs . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 Smith reported for duty with No. 237 Squadron in Corsica on 10 May 1944 , and resumed operational flying two days later . Soon after , he was promoted in the field to flight lieutenant . At this time the unit was attached to an American bomber group , and assigned to cover it during attacks on northern Italian cities such as Genoa . The fighters also embarked on strafing raids into the Po Valley , attacking railway traffic and heavy vehicles . Smith flew ten sorties with the squadron over the next month , and during the last of these , on 22 June , led a strafing raid against a large railway yard . Having destroyed a number of engines and fuel tanks , Smith went back for a second run , and his aircraft was hit by flak . He shouted over the radio to the other pilots , telling them not to attempt a second pass on the railway yard , and turned towards the coast , hoping to ditch in the sea . Smith 's wingman , Alan Douglas , then told him by radio first that black smoke was emanating from the aircraft , then that the engine was ablaze . Realising his fighter would explode if the fire reached the fuel tanks , Smith decided to bail out . He had never parachuted before , but had been often been through relevant drills . He turned his Spitfire upside down , thrust the stick forward , released the cockpit 's canopy , fell out of the plane and opened his parachute . He landed without serious injuries on the side of a mountain . 
 According to Smith 's account , he initially hid in a large bush , but soon decided this was too obvious , and so moved to a smaller piece of foliage . A German patrol came to the area after about an hour , examined the bush in which Smith had originally hidden , and attacked it with bursts of automatic gunfire before leaving . " Somebody was keeping an eye on me when I thought I 'd better get out of that bush ... " he later told biographer Phillippa Berlyn . Luckily for Smith , the area in which he had landed was predominantly anti @-@ German , and largely under the control of pro @-@ Allied Italian partisans ; one of these saw the Rhodesian 's descent and retrieved his parachute to stop the Germans from finding it . Smith hid for a while longer before coming out to greet a boy of about 12 who had passed by his hiding place with some livestock . The boy , whose name was Leo , knew no English ; using sign language , he told Smith to sit and wait , then went off and shortly returned with his elder brother , Lorenzo . Again using sign language , Lorenzo proposed that Smith come to their home to eat . The Rhodesian gratefully accepted . The boys ' parents , peasant farmers named Zunino , happily took Smith in , but decided it was too risky to keep him at the house so soon after the crash , and so hid him in a cave on the mountain . The next day , the Germans came to the Zunino house , looking for Smith . After about a week , the danger had subsided , and the <unk> gave Smith a room in the house . 
 Smith worked on the <unk> ' farm and began rigorously studying the Italian language , which he realised he would need to learn if he was to travel through enemy territory to the Allied lines . After a month , the local partisan commander , Antonio <unk> ( nicknamed " Barbetta " because of his beard ) , came to the house to meet him , and asked him to join his ranks . Smith said he would more than happy to , and went with Barbetta to his headquarters , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) away in a village called <unk> . When Barbetta asked the Rhodesian his rank , Smith , deciding it would be too complicated to explain the air force ranks , said he was a captain . " Oh well , " Barbetta replied , tapping the Rhodesian on the shoulder ; " you are now a major . I make you a major . " It quickly became clear to Smith that Barbetta had given him this " promotion " in the hope of elevating his own reputation in the resistance movement — " none of the other regiments in the area could boast an <unk> <unk> and a <unk> to boot " , he explained in his memoirs . The pilot got on well with Barbetta , and took part in his partisans ' sabotage operations for about three months during late 1944 . Meanwhile , he became proficient in Italian . After the Germans pulled out of their local garrison at Sassello in October 1944 , Smith told Barbetta that he was going to attempt to return to the Allied lines . The partisans tried to talk him out of it , telling him it was too risky , but when Smith insisted , they gave him letters to take with him , endorsing him to other Italian partisan groups he might encounter on his way . A British Army corporal known to Smith as " Bill " , who had been hiding in a nearby village , asked if he could come as well , and the Rhodesian agreed . 
 Smith resolved to head west , across the Ligurian Alps , towards southern France , which he knew had just been invaded by Allied troops , principally Americans , Free French and British . He and Bill were assisted along the way by Italian partisan groups and other friendly locals . After ten days on the road , three other Allied personnel — a Frenchman , an Austrian and a Pole — joined the trek , having met Smith and Bill at a partisan camp . The lingua franca of the group having changed to Italian , the five men hiked to the border , where they were taken in by an old farmer , Jean Batiste Chambrin , who gave them instructions on how to pass the German sentries guarding the border with France . The soldiers decided that because it would be too risky to try to cross all together , Smith and Bill would go first , with the Frenchman , Austrian and Pole following the next day . 
 Chambrin did not speak English , and so summoned his brother , an anglophone hotelier from across the border , to ascertain that Smith and Bill were really British , and not Germans testing his sympathies . At Bill 's suggestion , Smith produced his RAF rank insignia as proof of his identity . Smith and Bill duly made their way to the border crossing , guided by Chambrin , who told them that his brother would meet them on the other side of the border . There was only one way over : a bridge , manned by German sentries , who occasionally stopped people for interrogation . The pilot observed the checkpoint for a while from behind cover , and noticed that pedestrians crossing alone or in pairs were rarely stopped , while larger groups generally were . Smith decided that it might be possible for them to simply walk across , and told Bill to " just look straight ahead and walk quietly on " . Fortunately for them , they were not challenged , and they met up with Chambrin 's brother a few miles away . The Austrian and Frenchman joined them the next day ; the Polish soldier , who had appeared to Smith to be underage , had lost his nerve on seeing the Germans and had gone back . 
 They had now crossed the border into France , but there was still the matter of finding friendly troops . They decided that to do so without being discovered they would have to bypass the German positions by crossing the Maritime Alps . They found a local guide , and crossed the mountains , doing so over the course of two days . They were without the proper equipment and clothing for mountaineering . Shivering in the snow during the night , Smith took off his shoes , and found in the morning that they had frozen and that he could not put them on . He continued in his socks , which soon wore through , forcing him to finish the journey walking barefoot on the ice and snow . As they made their way downhill , they saw a group of soldiers in American uniforms . It had been 23 days since Smith and Bill set off from <unk> . They called to the soldiers and , once the Americans had been satisfied that they were who they claimed , Smith and his comrades were taken to a local base camp , where they were split up and sent back to their respective forces . The Americans took Smith to Marseille , from where he was flown to the RAF transit camp at Naples . On arriving in late November 1944 , Smith sent a brief telegram home to Selukwe : " Alive and well . Love to you all — Ian . " 
 = = = Late war and demobilisation = = = 
 It was well known to British servicemen that spending three months or more missing behind enemy lines resulted in an automatic posting back home , which Smith did not want ; he was therefore wary as he entered his interview at the Naples transit base . When passage back to Rhodesia via Egypt was offered , Smith successfully requested permission to go to Britain instead , saying that he had many relatives there and considered it a second home . He thereupon travelled to England , where he was posted to a six @-@ week refresher course in Shropshire , flying Spitfires . Smith performed very strongly in the exercises and , at his own request , was posted back to active service after only three weeks in the course . He was attached to No. 130 ( Punjab ) Squadron , part of No. 125 Wing , which was commanded by Group Captain ( later Air Vice Marshal ) Johnnie Johnson , one of the most successful RAF flying aces of the war . Reporting for duty with No. 130 Squadron at Celle , in western Germany , on 23 April 1945 , he flew combat missions there , " [ having ] a little bit of fun shooting up odd things " , he recalled , until the European war ended on 7 May with Germany 's surrender . 
 Smith remained with No. 130 Squadron for the rest of his service , flying with it to Copenhagen , and then , via Britain , to Norway . The Rhodesian spent around five months in Norway as part of the post @-@ war occupation forces , but did not learn Norwegian , later telling Berlyn that it seemed much harder to him than Italian , " and they all spoke English , you see " . After No. 130 Squadron returned to Britain in November 1945 , Smith was demobilised and sent home . He was met at RAF <unk> in Bulawayo by his family , with whom he drove back to Selukwe . 
 = = War wounds = = 
 The plastic surgery used to reconstruct Smith 's face following his crash in the Western Desert in 1943 left his face somewhat lopsided , with partial paralysis . In her 1978 biography of Smith , Berlyn writes that the grafted skin on his face " almost hides the injuries even today , though it has left him with a slightly blank expression " . This was often commented on by observers , and when Smith died in 2007 , it was prominent in many of his obituaries . " It was Ian Smith 's war @-@ damaged left eye that drew people 's attention first , " began the report printed in the London Times : " wide open , heavy @-@ lidded and impassive from experimental plastic surgery , it hinted at a dull , characterless nature . The other was narrow , slanting and slightly hooded . Being watched by it was an uncomfortable experience . Each eye could have belonged to a different person . " The Daily Telegraph took a similar line , reporting that the operation to reconstruct Smith 's face had " left him with a somewhat menacing stare " . 
 Smith 's injuries also made him permanently unable to sit for long periods without pain , so when he attended conferences as a politician , he would briefly rise from his seat from time to time . During his talks with British Prime Minister Harold Wilson aboard HMS Tiger in 1966 , Smith regularly got up and looked out of a porthole ; the British incorrectly interpreted this as Smith feeling intimidated by Wilson , or seasick . 
 = = Influence on political career = = 
 Smith completed his studies at Rhodes during 1946 , and entered politics in 1948 , when he successfully contested the Selukwe seat on behalf of the Liberal Party , becoming his home town 's Member of Parliament at the age of 29 . He rose through the political ranks with the United Federal Party during the 1950s , and in 1962 helped to form the Rhodesian Front , a right @-@ wing party whose avowed goal was full independence from Britain without an immediate transfer to black majority rule . He became Deputy Prime Minister in December that year when the new party , led by Winston Field , surprised most observers by winning that month 's election . After the Cabinet forced Field to resign in April 1964 , following his failure to gain independence from Britain , they chose Smith as the new Prime Minister . 
 Smith , Southern Rhodesia 's first native @-@ born head of government , was strongly influenced as premier by his wartime experiences . Southern Rhodesia 's military contributions during the two World Wars , the Malayan Emergency and other conflicts , combined with memories of his own travails for Britain with the Royal Air Force — " undoubtedly the central experience of his life " , R W Johnson wrote — caused Smith to feel profoundly betrayed when the British government proved one of his main adversaries as Prime Minister . The UK government 's objection to continued white minority rule , based on moral and geopolitical factors , clashed with Smith 's refusal to establish a set timetable for the progressive introduction of majority rule in Southern Rhodesia . After talks repeatedly broke down , Smith 's government unilaterally declared independence on 11 November 1965 . In 1970 , following the results of a referendum , he declared Rhodesia a republic . He argued that Britain was to blame for all of this — " Rhodesia did not want to seize independence from Britain . It was forced upon us , " he said . 
 For many in Britain during this time , attitudes towards the breakaway colony were complicated by the fact that " Plucky Little Rhodesia " , often described as " more British than the British " , had given so much for the mother country in its fight against Nazi Germany . Smith 's own military service and reputation for bravery gave rise to similar sentiments regarding him personally . White Rhodesians widely hailed him a war hero , as did many overseas commentators . In 1966 , Smith supporters in Britain sent him a painting " on behalf of many British people who remained true despite the misguidance of government " , depicting two Spitfires taking off for a dawn raid . Smith retained his affection for the Spitfire for the rest of his life ; in his memoirs he described the fighter as " the most beautiful aircraft ever made . " He also remained some proficiency in the Italian language , though according to one Italian visitor his accent was " atrocious " . 
 Smith 's years as an RAF pilot were often alluded to in political rhetoric and popular culture . In the phrase of Martin Francis , " no white Rhodesian kitchen in the 1960s and 1970s was complete without an illustrated <unk> featuring ' Good Old Smithy ' and his trusty Spitfire " . The Rhodesian Front 's election strategy of emphasising Smith 's reputation as a war hero was criticised by the journalist Peter Niesewand , who was deported from Rhodesia in 1973 ; according to Niesewand , Smith 's contribution to the Allied war effort had been " to crash two perfectly good Hurricane planes [ sic ] for the loss of no Germans " . Smith won decisive election victories in 1970 , 1974 and 1977 , and remained in office until the country was reconstituted under majority rule as Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979 . He continued to wear his RAF Spitfire pilot 's tie well into old age , including on the final day before Zimbabwe Rhodesia 's formal establishment on 1 June 1979 — " a final gesture of defiance " , Bill Schwarz writes , " symbolising an entire lost world . " 
 = Jiggs Parrott = 
 Walter Edward " Jiggs " Parrott ( July 14 , 1871 – April 14 , 1898 ) was a professional baseball player whose career spanned eight seasons , four of which were spent with the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) Chicago Colts ( 1892 – 95 ) . Parrott , an infielder , compiled a career batting average of .235 with 174 runs scored , 309 hits , 35 doubles , 23 triples , six home runs and 152 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 317 games played . Although the majority of his career was spent in the major leagues , Parrott also played in minor league baseball . He got his start playing amateur baseball with the East Portland Willamettes . His professional baseball debut came in 1890 as a member of the Portland <unk> . Parrott was the first MLB player from Oregon . He stood at 5 feet 11 inches ( 180 cm ) and weighed 160 pounds ( 73 kg ) . His brother , Tom Parrott , was also an MLB player and a teammate of his on the Chicago Colts . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Walter Edward " Jiggs " Parrott was born on the east side of Portland , Oregon on July 14 , 1871 to Thomas H. Parrott and the former Eliza Ann Rhodes . Thomas H. Parrott was born in England , but moved outside of Sherwood , Oregon in 1857 which used to be a part of Yamhill County , Oregon . Although he was training to be a shoemaker in England , when Thomas H. Parrott moved to Portland , he opened a music business . He organized the East Portland Brass Band . Jiggs Parrott had seven siblings : six brothers and one sister . Several of his siblings went on to play professional baseball and worked in music . Parrott played sandlot ball in Portland during his youth . He would also play with his classmates while attending Portland Public Schools . Eventually , Parrott and his brothers , Dode and Tom , signed with the East Portland Willamettes , an amateur baseball team . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Early minor league career ( 1890 – 92 ) = = = 
 In 1890 , Parrott began his professional baseball career with the Portland <unk> of the Pacific Northwest League . His brother , Tom Parrott , was his teammate on the Portland club . On the season , Jiggs Parrott batted .268 with 71 runs scored , 104 hits , 24 doubles , six triples , five home runs , and 26 stolen bases in 94 games played . He was second in the league in home runs , third in hits and fourth in doubles . Defensively that season , he played third base . Parrott continued to play with the Portland club in 1891 , who were now renamed the Gladiators . During the season , the Spokane Daily Chronicle stated that , " ' Jiggs ' [ Parrott ] was as much at home at third [ base ] as ever , and his throws to first [ base ] continue to excite the admiration of all the bleachers . " At the start of the 1892 season , Parrott joined the Minneapolis <unk> of the Class @-@ A Western League . Before the start of the season , The Sporting News said that Parrott " has the build of a successful third baseman . He is tall and spare in flesh . He has been in a gymnasium all winter . " With Minneapolis that season , he batted .317 with 31 runs scored , 53 hits , 13 doubles , and six home runs in 41 games played . He was tied for second in the league with James Graham , Joseph Katz and Billy O 'Brien in home runs . 
 = = = Chicago Colts ( 1892 – 95 ) = = = 
 During the 1892 season , Cap Anson , the manager of the Chicago Colts , offered Parrott a Major League Baseball ( MLB ) contract to play with his club . Parrott made his MLB debut on July 11 , 1892 . During that game , he stuck out twice and made two errors . He was the first player from the State of Oregon to appear in an MLB game . Parrott hit second in the Colts ' batting order for most of the season . In his first MLB season , Parrott batted .201 with 38 runs scored , 67 hits , eight doubles , five triples , two home runs , 22 runs batted in ( RBIs ) , and seven stolen bases in 78 games played . He finished the season third in fielding percentage amongst National League third basemen ( .891 ) , behind Billy Nash and George Davis . Before the start of the 1893 season , The Sporting Life wrote that Parrott " is somewhat of an erratic player . There are times when he plays good ball , but just when good steady play is necessary , he is very liable to get a case of ' rattles . ' " However , in June , The Sporting Life changed its tune and called Parrott 's work at third base a " little less than brilliant " . It was reported that Anson was impressed by Parrott as a person , calling him a " well @-@ behaved young man " despite some criticism he was getting from the media and fans . During the 1893 season , the Colts signed pitcher Tom Parrott , Jiggs Parrott 's brother . The Washington Post reported that Tom Parrott bought out his contract with his former team so he could play with his brother in Chicago . The two Parrott brothers were the only two players from Oregon to play in the MLB during the 19th century . Jiggs Parrott was moved to seventh in Chicago 's batting order during the year . In his second season , Parrott batted .244 with 54 runs scored , 111 hits , 10 doubles , nine triples , one home run , 65 RBIs , and 25 stolen bases in 110 games played . His fielding percentage at third base was the fifth highest in the National League ( .904 ) , behind Jack Crooks , Denny Lyons , George Pinkney and Billy Nash . 
 At the start of the 1894 season , Parrott was converted to a second baseman , making way for Charlie Irwin at third base . Manager Cap Anson was criticized by The Sporting Life for continuing to play Parrott . The publication stated , " It is true that [ Anson ] holds Parrot in high esteem and insists that ' Jiggs ' is a great infielder , hence a suffering public may confidently expect to witness still further attempts of ' Jiggs ' to hold down the second base bag . " On the season , Parrott batted .248 with 82 runs scored , 130 hits , 17 doubles , nine triples , three home runs , 65 RBIs , and 30 stolen bases in 126 games played . In 1895 , Anson signed a new second baseman , Ace Stewart from Sioux City , Iowa , which demoted Parrott to the role of utility player . Anson responded to the criticism he had been taking for keeping Parrott by stating , " I realize that ' Jiggs ' is not popular with the Chicago crowds , so we will play him in games abroad only . " However , The Sporting Life responded by saying , " The local scribes and fans thought we had buried the lanky ' <unk> , ' so far as Chicago was concerned , but he bobs up serenely . " Parrott 's final MLB game came on June 6 , 1895 . He played just three games with Chicago that season . In those games , he batted .250 with one hit in four at @-@ bats . He was released early in the season . 
 = = = Later career ( 1895 – 97 ) = = = 
 After being released by the MLB Chicago Colts , Parrott returned to the minor leagues with the Class @-@ B Rockford Forest Citys / Reds of the Western Association . On the season with Rockford , he batted .351 with 18 runs scored , 40 hits , five doubles and two triples in 26 games played . In 1896 , he started the season with the Grand Rapids Rippers / Gold Bugs of the Class @-@ A Western League as their starting third baseman . On June 22 , he was released by the Grand Rapids club . Parrott then signed with the Columbus Buckeyes / Senators , also of the Western League . Combined between the two clubs that year , he batted .306 in 86 games played . In 1897 , he re @-@ signed with the Columbus Senators . As a member of the Columbus club , The Milwaukee Journal noted in September that Parrott had " been playing a great fielding game " . However , he appeared in just one game with the Senators , getting one hit in four at @-@ bats . He then signed with the Dubuque , Iowa club of the Class @-@ B Western Association . In 15 games , he batted <unk> with six runs scored and 13 hits . 
 = = Death = = 
 After the 1897 baseball season , he returned to his home in Portland , Oregon with his health deteriorating . In December , Parrott traveled to New Mexico in hopes of re @-@ gaining his health . When in New Mexico , he reported that the weather was too cold and that he was planning to move to Arizona where the climate is more mild . On April 14 , 1898 , while in a hospital in Phoenix , Arizona , Parrott died of tuberculosis . Earlier that day , Parrott had telegraphed his father , Thomas H. Parrott , back in Portland alerting him that it was not likely he would live two more days . Upon receiving the telegram , Thomas H. Parrott sent his son , Archie Parrott , on a train to Arizona to be with the dying Jiggs Parrott . However , after the train left the station in Portland , the Parrott family got word that Jiggs Parrott had died . Archie Parrott continued to Arizona to retrieve his brother 's remains . His remains were returned on April 23 . Parrott 's funeral was held on April 25 , at his home in East Portland . His pall @-@ bearers were several former teammates from the Portland Willamettes : Joseph Beveridge , Charles Neale , Frank Buchtel , William Kern , Fred Bailey , and John Rankin . According to The Oregonian hundreds attended his funeral and 500 people attended his burial at Lone Fir Cemetery in Portland . 
 = 1964 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1964 Atlantic hurricane season featured the highest number of <unk> hurricanes since 1933 . The season officially began on June 15 , and lasted until November 30 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The season was slightly above average , with twelve total storms and six hurricanes . All of the hurricanes strengthened into major hurricanes , an event that had not occurred since 1930 . The first system , an unnamed tropical storm , developed on June 2 , almost two weeks before the official start of the season . Striking Florida on June 6 , the storm brought localized flooding to portions of Cuba and the Southeastern United States , leaving about $ 1 million in damage . The next storm , also unnamed , developed near the end of July ; it did not impact land . 
 The effects of Hurricanes Cleo , Dora , and Isbell combined were devastating to Florida . Cleo also brought destruction to portions of the Caribbean , especially Guadeloupe and Haiti . After moving inland , Cleo brought flooding to states such as Virginia . Overall , the storm caused 219 deaths and about $ 187 @.@ 5 million in damage . Dora lashed much of North Florida and southeastern Georgia with hurricane @-@ force winds , leaving five fatalities and around $ 280 million in damage . In October , Isbell brought strong winds and several tornadoes to Florida , as well as flooding to Cuba and The Carolinas . Isbell killed seven people and left approximately $ 30 million in damage . 
 The strongest tropical cyclone of the season was Hurricane Hilda , a powerful Category 4 hurricane that devastated portions of the Gulf Coast of the United States , especially Mississippi and Louisiana . Upon striking the latter as a Category 3 , Hilda brought heavy rainfall , strong winds , tornadoes , and coastal flooding . Many other areas of the Southern United States experienced flooding from Hilda and its remnants . Overall , Hilda caused 38 deaths and about $ 126 million in damage . The names Cleo , Dora , and Hilda were retired following the season . Collectively , the tropical cyclones resulted in 270 fatalities and approximately $ 609 @.@ 5 million in damage . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 15 , 1964 . It was a slightly above average season in which twelve tropical storms formed , compared with the 1950 – 2000 average of 9 @.@ 6 named storms . Six of these reached hurricane status , which is near the 1950 – 2000 average of 5 @.@ 9 . All six of the hurricanes reached major hurricane status – well above the 1950 – 2000 mean of 2 @.@ 3 per season . Prior to the season , National Hurricane Center Director Gordon Dunn noted that the probability of a hurricane striking the United States was " astronomical . " Four hurricanes and three tropical storms made landfall during the season , causing at least 270 deaths and $ 609 @.@ 5 million in damage . Tropical Storm Brenda and Hurricane Gladys also caused damage and fatalities , but neither struck land . The season officially ended on November 30 , 1964 . 
 The first system , an unnamed tropical storm , developed on June 2 , 13 days before the start of the season . It struck Florida as a tropical depression and then strengthened into a tropical storm while out at sea . The storm ceased to exist on June 11 . Thereafter , the season went dormant for nearly seven weeks , as the next cyclone , another unnamed storm , did not form until July 28 . Tropical cyclogenesis increased in August , which had four tropical cyclones , Abby , Brenda , Cleo , and Dora . Four additional storms originated in September , including Ethel , Florence , Gladys , and Hilda . The strongest storm of the season , Hilda , peaked with maximum sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 941 mbar ( 27 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Hurricane Isbell was the sole tropical cyclone to form in the month of October . The final system , another unnamed storm , existed developed on November 5 and dissipated on November 10 , about 20 days before the end of the season . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 170 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 A disturbance that moved out of the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) developed into a tropical depression to the east of British Honduras ( modern day Belize ) on June 2 . Moving slowly northward to north @-@ northeastward across the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico , the depression failed to intensify significantly . Between 12 : 00 UTC and 18 : 00 UTC on June 6 , it made landfall near Cedar Key , Florida , with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Early the following day , the depression emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Jacksonville and began to strengthen and move northeastward . While located offshore South Carolina on June 7 , the system became a tropical storm . Further deepening occurred slowly , with the storm peaking with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on June 9 . By June 11 , it was absorbed by an extratropical low while located about 365 mi ( 585 km ) south @-@ southeast of Sable Island in Nova Scotia . 
 The storm brought local flooding to portions of western Cuba and the Southeastern United States . Some areas in North Florida experienced considerable damage from strong winds and hail associated with thunderstorm , particularly in Cross City . Damage in the Jacksonville area alone was over $ 300 @,@ 000 . A few gale warnings were issued between Myrtle Beach , South Carolina , and Nags Head , North Carolina . More than 8 in ( 200 mm ) of rain in the former resulted in inundated streets and overflowing streams . Additionally , about 20 in ( 510 mm ) of water covered streets in downtown Conway , South Carolina . Overall , the storm caused about $ 1 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 Television Infrared Observation Satellite ( TIROS ) indicated an area of disturbed weather with a weak surface circulation in the vicinity of Cape Verde on July 25 . Reports from a reconnaissance aircraft indicate that a tropical depression developed at 06 : 00 UTC on July 28 , while located about halfway between the Leeward Islands and the northernmost islands of Cape Verde . Initially the depression moved rapidly west @-@ northwestward , which likely caused the minimal intensification . By July 30 , a north @-@ northwest to south @-@ southeast oriented trough forced the depression to re @-@ curve north @-@ northwestward . 
 While situated about 300 mi ( 480 km ) east of Bermuda on July 31 , it began heading northeastward . Later that day , the depression finally organized further and developed a well @-@ defined rainband . The Atlantic hurricane database indicates that the depression strengthened into a tropical storm at 18 : 00 UTC on July 31 , due to ships reports of winds reaching 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) . Around that time , maximum sustained winds peaked at 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . The storm continued moving rapidly northeastward and began to interact with a cold front . It transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on August 2 , while located about 525 mi ( 845 km ) east of Cape Race , Newfoundland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Abby = = = 
 A weak trough developed into a tropical depression on August 5 while located about 225 mi ( 360 km ) south of Dauphin Island , Alabama . The depression moved westward and initially remained disorganized . At 12 : 00 UTC on August 7 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Abby . It was a small tropical cyclone , spanning a diameter of less than 100 mi ( 160 km ) . The storm quickly intensified further to peak with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) late on August 7 . A few hours later , Abby made landfall near Matagorda , Texas at the same intensity . It weakened to a tropical depression early on August 8 , before dissipating later that day . 
 Overall , impact from this system was minor . In Texas , precipitation peaked at 6 @.@ 14 in ( 156 mm ) at the Victoria Regional Airport . However , only localized flooding occurred and rainfall was mostly beneficial . In the city of Victoria , several streets were temporarily inundated with water . A fishing company in Matagorda lost a portion of its roof . Abby resulted in an estimated $ 750 @,@ 000 in losses , with $ 150 @,@ 000 in damage to property and $ 600 @,@ 000 to crops . The impacts from the storm were most severe in Jackson and Victoria counties , where damage to crops were estimated at $ 275 @,@ 000 and $ 250 @,@ 000 , respectively . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Brenda = = = 
 A minor trough of low pressure was situated west of Bermuda in early August . An airline crew member observed a low @-@ level circular cloud forming at 32 @.@ 0 ° N , 69 @.@ 0 ° W at 18 : 00 UTC on August 7 . Around that time , a tropical depression developed about 245 mi ( 395 km ) west of Bermuda . It moved just north of due east and strengthened into Tropical Storm Brenda on August 8 . Shortly thereafter , the storm struck Bermuda . Sustained winds on the island reached 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , while gusts up to 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) were reported . A tornado damaged several aircraft , most of which were privately owned . Losses reached approximately $ 275 @,@ 000 . 
 Shortly after moving across Bermuda on August 8 , spiral bands appeared on the island 's radar . Advisories on Brenda were not initiated until 18 : 00 UTC on August 8 , due to sparsity of data , making it difficult to confirm a tropical cyclone . A cold front caused the storm to re @-@ curve northeastward on August 9 . Later that day , Brenda attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . Brenda then began weakening and dissipated late on the following day , while located about 585 mi ( 940 km ) east @-@ northeast of Bermuda . 
 = = = Hurricane Cleo = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression while located about 890 mi ( 1 @,@ 430 km ) east of Barbados late on August 20 . Early the following day , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Cleo . It continued west @-@ northwestward , quickly deepening into a hurricane later on August 21 . Cleo rapidly deepened and reached Category 3 early on August 22 . Several hours later , Cleo struck Guadeloupe with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . The storm then intensified into a Category 4 hurricane and entered the Caribbean Sea . While located south of Dominican Republic around 18 : 00 UTC on August 23 , Cleo attained its peak intensity with of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) . Cleo weakened slightly before making landfall near Les Cayes , Haiti , on August 25 , with winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . The storm re @-@ emerged into the Caribbean hours later , but rapidly weakened , falling to Category 3 hurricane at 12 : 00 UTC and to Category 1 hurricane only six hours later . Around 12 : 00 UTC on August 25 , the hurricane briefly moved ashore near Cape Cruz , Cuba , while winds were at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . 
 Cleo emerged into the Gulf of Guacanayabo , before striking Sancti Spíritus Province as a minimal hurricane early on August 26 . Several hours later , the hurricane emerged into the Atlantic Ocean and began re @-@ strengthening while moving northward , becoming a Category 2 hurricane early the next day . Around 06 : 00 UTC on August 27 , Cleo made landfall on Key Biscayne , Florida , with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . The system quickly weakened inland , falling to tropical storm intensity early the following day . However , Cleo did not deteriorate to a tropical depression until on August 29 . Thereafter , the cyclone meandered slowly across The Carolinas and Virginia , but did not dissipate . Cleo instead re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm while re @-@ entering the Atlantic near Norfolk , Virginia , on September 1 . It moved east @-@ northeastward and became a hurricane again about 24 hours later . By early on September 4 , the cyclone accelerated and curved north @-@ northeastward . Cleo weakened to a tropical storm on September 5 and soon became extratropical while located about 370 mi ( 600 km ) east @-@ northeast of Cartwright , Newfoundland and Labrador . 
 In Guadeloupe , the storm destroyed 1 @,@ 000 homes and caused extensive damage to roofs , roads , and power lines . Additionally , the banana crop was ruined . Overall , there were 14 deaths and about $ 50 million in damage . Cleo caused seven fatalities and at least $ 2 million in damage in Dominican Republic . Strong winds in Haiti caused severe damage . On Île @-@ à @-@ <unk> , 50 houses either had the roof caved in or the walls knocked over . In Les Cayes , 70 % of houses were destroyed , as was the sugar mill . In rural areas outside of the city , 90 % to 95 % of dwellings were demolished . About half of the houses in Camp @-@ Perrin were leveled . Near Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Sud , many sugarcane crops , particularly on the west side of the city , were ruined . The storm left 192 fatalities and $ 5 million in damage in Haiti . Impact in Cuba was minor , with one death and $ 2 million in damage . In Florida , Cleo left damage along much of the east coast . Winds left about 620 @,@ 000 people without electricity in South Florida alone . Throughout the state , the storm damaged almost 19 @,@ 000 homes and destroyed 4 others , while 2 @,@ 187 mobile homes were flattened or suffered severe impact . Additionally , 605 small businesses were damaged or destroyed . There were three deaths and about $ 125 million in damage , including agriculture . Cleo brought flooding to a few other states , especially Virginia . In the Hampton Roads area , many streets were inundated and blocked . Hundreds of dwellings were flooded , forcing several areas to evacuate . Two deaths and about $ 3 million in damage occurred in Virginia . Overall , the storm caused 219 fatalities and about $ 187 @.@ 5 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Dora = = = 
 A tropical depression developed from a low pressure on August 28 , shortly after moving offshore the west coast of Africa near Dakar , Senegal . The depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Dora on September 1 . It then curved northeastward and continued to strengthen , reaching hurricane status by early on September 3 . Intensification slowed somewhat , though Dora became a Category 3 major hurricane on September 5 . <unk> further , the peaked as a Category 4 with maximum sustained winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 942 mbar ( 27 @.@ 8 inHg ) early the following day . At 18 : 00 UTC on September 16 , Dora weakened to a Category 3 hurricane , then a Category 2 hurricane while curving westward early the following day . However , later on September 17 , the system re @-@ strengthened into a Category 3 hurricane . 
 Approaching the east coast of Florida , Dora 's motion became erratic , making a few cyclonic loops . Around 04 : 00 UTC on September 10 , the hurricane made landfall near St. Augustine , Florida , with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Two hours later , Dora weakened to a Category 2 hurricane . However , deterioration then slowed , with the hurricane falling to tropical storm intensity on September 11 . Dora then briefly drifted over southwestern Georgia , until turned east @-@ northeastward late the next day . Early on September 14 , the storm re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Cape Hatteras , North Carolina , and became extratropical several hours later . The remnants of Dora moved rapidly northeastward and dissipated offshore Newfoundland early on September 16 . 
 Hurricane Dora was the only hurricane in the twentieth century to make landfall in the First Coast region of Florida . Along the coast , tides reached up to 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above mean sea level . Strong winds lashed North Florida , with sustained wind of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) observed in St. Augustine . In Jacksonville , approximately 156 @,@ 000 customers were left without electricity , while about 19 % of phones in Duval County were out of service . Much of the damage in the Jacksonville area occurred to older buildings and those located in coastal areas . Additionally , sections of the city experienced wind @-@ induced river flooding in the vicinity of the St. Johns River . Three homes were destroyed and 3 @,@ 992 suffered damage , while 5 mobile homes were demolished and 25 experienced impact , overall in Duval County . Heavy rainfall damaged many unharvested crops and inundated numerous of roads and bridges , isolated some communities for several days . Throughout Florida , 74 dwellings were flattened and 9 @,@ 374 received damage , while 14 mobile homes were destroyed and 218 others suffered severe impact . About 50 farm buildings and 423 small businesses were severely damaged or demolished . Three deaths and at least $ 230 million in damage occurred . In Georgia , the storm damaged about 1 @,@ 135 homes and obliterated five others . Additionally , 18 trailers suffered major impact , while 43 small businesses were destroyed or experienced severe damage . There was one death in the state and at least $ 9 million in damage . A few other states were affected by the storm , though impact there was much lesser . One death occurred in Virginia . Overall , Dora caused $ 280 million in damage and five deaths . 
 = = = Hurricane Ethel = = = 
 TIROS observed a large cloud mass near 18 ° N , 37 ° W on September 4 . Later that day , it developed into a tropical depression while located about 665 mi ( 1 @,@ 070 km ) east of Cape Verde . The depression moved west @-@ northwestward and intensified into Tropical Storm Ethel at 12 : 00 UTC on September 4 . Initially , it was suggested that Hurricane Dora could absorb Ethel , as the storms were located 690 mi ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) apart . On September 7 , Ethel strengthened into a hurricane . By early on the following day , it curved westward and continued to slowly deepen . Late on September 9 , the storm peaked as a Category 3 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . 
 Thereafter , the storm weakened back to a Category 2 hurricane early on September 10 . It further deteriorated to a Category 1 on the following day . Early on September 12 , Ethel re @-@ strengthened to a Category 2 hurricane . Later that day , the storm passed to the northwest of Bermuda on September 12 , bringing 4 @.@ 05 in ( 103 mm ) of and wind gusts up to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Throughout the island , low @-@ lying areas were flooded and trees were felled . At St. George 's Island , residents were briefly left without electricity and telephones and the causeway linking St. George 's Island to the main island was inundated . Next , it resumed weakened and was downgraded to a Category 1 late on September 13 . Ethel accelerated northeastward and became extratropical late on September 15 , while located about 540 mi ( 870 km ) northwest of Corvo Island in the Azores . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Florence = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on September 5 . The wave quickly developed into a tropical depression at 1800 UTC on September 5 , while located about 180 mi ( 290 km ) northwest of Dakar , Senegal . Shortly later , the depression produced squally weather in Cape Verde . Despite having sustained winds of only 25 mph ( 35 km / h ) , the system 's minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 002 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) was recorded early on September 6 . The depression then re @-@ curved northwestward and began to intensify . Early on September 8 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Florence . Six hours later , the storm attained its maximum sustained wind speed of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Florence curved north @-@ northeastward on September 8 and slowly weakened . A reconnaissance aircraft reported that Florence degenerated into an area of squalls to the south of the Azores at 0600 UTC on September 10 . 
 = = = Hurricane Gladys = = = 
 A emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 8 . Tracking westward , it developed into a tropical depression while centered about midway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde on September 13 . Shortly thereafter , it strengthened Tropical Storm Gladys . On September 14 , Gladys abruptly strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane , with winds increasing from 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) to 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) in just six hours . However , early on the following day , Gladys weakened slightly to a Category 1 hurricane . Between late on September 16 and late on September 17 , the storm rapidly intensified and peaked as a 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane later that day . Gladys began weakening on the following day and re @-@ curved northward on September 19 . 
 The storm turned northwestward on September 22 and briefly threatened the East Coast of the United States . However , it veered northeastward on September 23 and moved rapidly toward Atlantic Canada . By 00 : 00 UTC on September 25 , Gladys became extratropical while centered between Sable Island and the Nova Scotia mainland . Along the East Coast of the United States , Gladys produced light rainfall , gusty winds , and storm surge . Coastal flooding was reported in North Carolina and Virginia . In the former , high tides inundated homes and buildings with 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water in two small villages on the Outer Banks and flooded a highway to Manteo . In the state of Virginia , one death occurred when a man was fatally struck in the throat by debris . Abnormally high tides also affected the Mid @-@ Atlantic , New England , and Atlantic Canada , with tides ranging from 2 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 8 m ) higher than average in Virginia . 
 = = = Hurricane Hilda = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression at 12 : 00 UTC on September 28 , while located about 40 mi ( 65 km ) south of Trinidad , Cuba . The depression tracked west @-@ northwestward and struck Isla de la Juventud , Cuba early on September 29 . After briefly re @-@ emerging into the northwestern Caribbean Sea later that day , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Hilda at 1200 UTC on September 29 . Around that time , Hilda made landfall near Sandino , Cuba with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . By late on September 29 , it emerged into the Gulf of Mexico near Cape San Antonio . The storm continued to intensify , reaching hurricane status on September 30 . During the following 30 hours , Hilda strengthened significantly and peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) late on October 1 . It re @-@ curved northward and began weakening due to unfavorable conditions . Around 00 : 00 UTC on October 4 , the storm made landfall near Franklin , Louisiana with winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . It rapidly weakened inland and became extratropical over southern Mississippi by 1200 UTC that day . 
 In Cuba , the storm caused minor impact , with damage totaling about $ 1 million . Offshore the United States in the Gulf of Mexico , 13 oil platforms were destroyed and 5 others were damaged beyond repair . Losses to the oil industry reached $ 100 million . In Louisiana , sustained winds of 100 to 120 mph to ( 155 to 195 km / h ) lashed the Abbeville @-@ Morgan City @-@ New Iberia area . Additionally , several tornadoes in the New Orleans area resulted in significant damage . There were 37 fatalities and an estimated 5 @,@ 000 injuries . Approximately 19 @,@ 000 homes were damaged in the state , 2 @,@ 600 of which were severely impacted . Outside of Louisiana , damage was primarily caused by flooding in the Southeastern United States . <unk> worst by flooding was North Carolina , where 2000 homes and buildings suffered water damage and one death was reported . Throughout the United States , the storm caused 38 fatalities and $ 125 million in losses . 
 = = = Hurricane Isbell = = = 
 A diffused frontal trough developed into a tropical depression in the southwestern Caribbean on October 8 . The depression initially remained disorganized as it track northwestward , but strengthened into Tropical Storm Isbell on October 13 . Re @-@ curving northeastward , Isbell quickly strengthened further and reached hurricane status by later that day . Late on October 13 , Isbell made landfall in the Pinar del Río Province of Cuba . Despite land interaction , the storm continued strengthening and peaked as a Category 3 hurricane winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) on the following day . Isbell moved northeastward and made landfall near Everglades , Florida , at the same intensity late on October 14 . After reaching the Atlantic on the following day , the storm began to weaken and fell Category 1 hurricane . Isbell turned northward and continued weakening , before transitioning to an extratropical cyclone while located just offshore of eastern North Carolina on October 16 . 
 The storm produced strong winds throughout western Cuba . Hundreds of homes were destroyed , as were several tobacco warehouses . There were four deaths in Cuba , three of them caused by collapsing houses in the Guane area . Several tornadoes in Florida caused significant damage overall . Throughout the state , 1 house was destroyed , 33 severely damage , and 631 suffered minor impact . Additionally , 66 trailers were destroyed and 88 were inflicted with major damage . Three deaths occurred in the state , one due to a heart attack and two from drowning in Florida Keys when their shrimp boat sank . Because the storm weakened considerably , impact in North Carolina was generally minor . The storm also spawned at least six tornadoes in the state , which demolished trailers and unroofed homes and other buildings in several communities . Damage throughout the United States totaled $ 10 million . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Twelve = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather within the ITCZ developed into a tropical depression early on November 5 , while located about 135 mi ( 220 km ) north @-@ northwest of Colón , Panama . The depression strengthened slowly , reaching tropical storm status on November 6 . Thereafter , it curved westward and headed for Central America . Early on November 7 , the storm made landfall near Puerto Cabezas , Nicaragua , with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Several hours later , it weakened to a tropical depression , shortly before re @-@ emerging into the Caribbean Sea . The storm failed to re @-@ intensify and made landfall in Belize on November 9 . It dissipated early on the following day . 
 In Nicaragua , winds and heavy rainfall caused significant crop damage , especially to bananas . Many residents living near the <unk> Lagoon evacuated . The entire town of <unk> was flooded , with five small houses completely destroyed . Tides were as high as 18 ft ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) above @-@ normal . In Puerto Castilla , large amounts of precipitation caused flooding and destroyed a bridge , leaving part of the population out of communication . Another bridge collapsed in the town of Rus @-@ Rus . Strong winds and heavy rainfall also resulted in " considerable damage " on the Bay Islands . Overall , the storm resulted in about $ 5 million in damage . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the twelve tropical storms , there were three depressions monitored throughout the season . On July 25 , a tropical depression developed east of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . Winds of 35 – 45 mph ( 55 – 75 km / h ) occurred in squalls associated with the system as it moved northeast . It was last noted on July 27 as it moved over Nova Scotia . TIROS VII depicted two tropical depressions , one on July 15 and the other on September 19 at 20 ° N 25 ° W ﻿ / 20 ; <unk> and 15 ° N 27 ° W ﻿ / 15 ; <unk> , respectively . Due to the sparsity of data in the region and lack of complete satellite coverage , no further information on these systems is available . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the North Atlantic in 1964 . This is the same list used in the 1960 season with the exception of Dora , which replaced Donna . A storm was named Isbell for the first time in 1964 . The names Cleo , Dora , and Hilda were later retired and replaced with Candy , Dolly , and Hannah , respectively , in the 1968 season . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = Flicker ( song ) = 
 " Flicker " is a song recorded by American electronic music producer Porter Robinson . It was released on July 28 , 2014 as the fourth single from his debut studio album Worlds ( 2014 ) . Robinson wrote , produced , and performed the track . Musically , the song contains elements of disco and hip @-@ hop , as well as sampling of soul music . Vocally , the song contains a text @-@ to @-@ speech voice incorrectly translating " never seen " Japanese song titles that have been chopped and screwed in a rap @-@ like style . 
 An official music video for the single premiered on August 14 , 2014 , and involves footage of Japan filtered with effects including those of 8 @-@ bit video games . The song was well @-@ received from critics , and was a hit on the American Dance / Electronic Songs chart . 
 = = Composition = = 
 With " Flicker " , one of Porter Robinson 's favorite songs of his debut studio album Worlds ( 2014 ) , he wanted to experiment with samples of soul music , which he became a fan of ever since he listened to his favorite album , Daft Punk 's second studio record Discovery ( 2001 ) . The result was a hip @-@ hop @-@ style instrumental that he felt was " incomplete " with only drums and the phased samples . He didn 't initially plan " Flicker " to be a track on Worlds until some time later when he was using a translation website to translate " song titles that would never be seen " incorrectly into Japanese , and then put the Japanese text into a text @-@ to @-@ speech program for it to be converted into a WAV file for him to " cut it into a rap " which he called a " charming little thing " . Finally , he composed the lead melody and chord progression . 
 Robinson described " Flicker " as more of a " journey " than a pop song , saying that it goes " to a lot of different places " structure @-@ wise . The text @-@ to @-@ speech speaker on the song <unk> " Watashi wa <unk> nani ga <unk> ka <unk> <unk> iru , ” translating to “ I ’ m just trying to find what is important to me , ” which Robinson said was " nice , because it could have come out as something completely random . " The song also contains influences of disco , opening with a " summer @-@ y disco guitar " before moving into " hands @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air synth blasts " as a critic for Vice magazine <unk> and that the pitch shifting of the samples was influenced by the works of Jay Dilla . The song 's composition and arrangement was compared by Spin magazine 's Garrett Kamps to the works of Boards of Canada , while other listeners compared the track 's use of soul samples to that of " The Glory , " a track from Kanye West 's third album Graduation ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 " Flicker " premiered on July 28 , 2014 by Vogue magazine for streaming as World ' ' s fourth and final single . The song was initially planned to be the album 's second single after " Sea of Voices , " but Robinson replaced it with " Sad Machine " three days before its release . Robinson wanted Flicker to be the LP 's last single , given that it presented the record 's " cuter " aspect . Upon its release , it debuted at number 37 on the Billboard Dance / Electronic Songs chart in the United States on the issue week of August 16 , 2014 , later re @-@ appearing at its peak of number 34 on the week of August 30 . 
 A remix by Robinson 's friend Mat Zo , which he said was “ One of the best remixes I 've ever gotten in my life ” , was first heard at his performance at the <unk> label showcase , and was released on September 9 , 2015 as a single off the official remix album for Worlds . The re @-@ cut was ranked number seven on Billboard 's " The 15 Best Dance / Electronic Remixes of 2015 , " Matt Medved writing that " What Mat Zo 's meandering revision of the Worlds fan @-@ favorite lacks in cohesion , it more than makes up in imagination . " An official animated music video for " Flicker " premiered on August 14 , 2014 . Lucas Villa described the video as " like seeing Japan on a train ride , " where " scenes of the area fly by with an abounding amount of digital alterations . " Footage of Japan in the video is filtered with " stunning visuals " and 8 @-@ bit video game effects . The video was well received , with Villa calling it " as awe @-@ inspiring as the track itself . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Flicker " was very well @-@ received by critics . Elissa <unk> praised Robinson on the track for not being " overwhelmed by his influences , which seem to extend farther back into history than most producers in his field " , while joking that " it 's just a bit of a shame that disco is one of them . " In his mixed review of Worlds , Derek Staples of Consequence of Sound praised “ Flicker ” and “ Goodbye to a World ” for highlighting " Robinson ’ s more intricate big room capabilities " in an album where " Robinson hides his former bass @-@ fueled self behind the album ’ s sheen . " Allmusic journalist Andy Kellman said in his review of the album that " Flicker " , along with " <unk> " and " Years of War " " have sections muscular and bold enough to move large crowds " , while Las Vegas Weekly critic Mike <unk> described the track 's hook as having an " emotional payoff . " 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Philosophy of science = 
 Philosophy of science is a branch of philosophy concerned with the foundations , methods , and implications of science . The central questions of this study concern what qualifies as science , the reliability of scientific theories , and the ultimate purpose of science . This discipline overlaps with metaphysics , ontology , and epistemology , for example , when it explores the relationship between science and truth . 
 There is no consensus among philosophers about many of the central problems concerned with the philosophy of science , including whether science can reveal the truth about unobservable things and whether scientific reasoning can be justified at all . In addition to these general questions about science as a whole , philosophers of science consider problems that apply to particular sciences ( such as biology or physics ) . Some philosophers of science also use contemporary results in science to reach conclusions about philosophy itself . 
 While philosophical thought pertaining to science dates back at least to the time of Aristotle , philosophy of science emerged as a distinct discipline only in the middle of the 20th century in the wake of the logical positivism movement , which aimed to formulate criteria for ensuring all philosophical statements ' meaningfulness and objectively assessing them . Thomas Kuhn 's landmark 1962 book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions was also formative , challenging the view of scientific progress as steady , cumulative acquisition of knowledge based on a fixed method of systematic experimentation and instead arguing that any progress is relative to a " paradigm , " the set of questions , concepts , and practices that define a scientific discipline in a particular historical period . 
 Subsequently , the <unk> approach to science , in which a theory is validated if it makes sense of observations as part of a coherent whole , became prominent due to W. V. Quine and others . Some thinkers such as Stephen Jay Gould seek to ground science in axiomatic assumptions , such as the uniformity of nature . A vocal minority of philosophers , and Paul Feyerabend ( 1924 – 1994 ) in particular , argue that there is no such thing as the " scientific method " , so all approaches to science should be allowed , including explicitly supernatural ones . Another approach to thinking about science involves studying how knowledge is created from a sociological perspective , an approach represented by scholars like David Bloor and Barry Barnes . Finally , a tradition in continental philosophy approaches science from the perspective of a rigorous analysis of human experience . 
 <unk> of the particular sciences range from questions about the nature of time raised by Einstein 's general relativity , to the implications of economics for public policy . A central theme is whether one scientific discipline can be reduced to the terms of another . That is , can chemistry be reduced to physics , or can sociology be reduced to individual psychology ? The general questions of philosophy of science also arise with greater specificity in some particular sciences . For instance , the question of the validity of scientific reasoning is seen in a different guise in the foundations of statistics . The question of what counts as science and what should be excluded arises as a life @-@ or @-@ death matter in the philosophy of medicine . Additionally , the philosophies of biology , of psychology , and of the social sciences explore whether the scientific studies of human nature can achieve objectivity or are inevitably shaped by values and by social relations . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 = = = Defining science = = = 
 Distinguishing between science and non @-@ science is referred to as the demarcation problem . For example , should psychoanalysis be considered science ? How about so @-@ called creation science , the inflationary multiverse hypothesis , or macroeconomics ? Karl Popper called this the central question in the philosophy of science . However , no unified account of the problem has won acceptance among philosophers , and some regard the problem as unsolvable or uninteresting . Martin Gardner has argued for the use of a Potter Stewart standard ( " I know it when I see it " ) for recognizing pseudoscience . 
 Early attempts by the logical positivists grounded science in observation while non @-@ science was non @-@ observational and hence meaningless . Popper argued that the central property of science is falsifiability . That is , every genuinely scientific claim is capable of being proven false , at least in principle . 
 An area of study or speculation that masquerades as science in an attempt to claim a legitimacy that it would not otherwise be able to achieve is referred to as pseudoscience , fringe science , or junk science . Physicist Richard Feynman coined the term " cargo cult science " for cases in which researchers believe they are doing science because their activities have the outward appearance of it but actually lack the " kind of utter honesty " that allows their results to be rigorously evaluated . 
 = = = Scientific explanation = = = 
 A closely related question is what counts as a good scientific explanation . In addition to providing predictions about future events , society often takes scientific theories to provide explanations for events that occur regularly or have already occurred . Philosophers have investigated the criteria by which a scientific theory can be said to have successfully explained a phenomenon , as well as what it means to say a scientific theory has explanatory power . 
 One early and influential theory of scientific explanation is the deductive @-@ <unk> model . It says that a successful scientific explanation must deduce the occurrence of the phenomena in question from a scientific law . This view has been subjected to substantial criticism , resulting in several widely acknowledged counterexamples to the theory . It is especially challenging to characterize what is meant by an explanation when the thing to be explained cannot be deduced from any law because it is a matter of chance , or otherwise cannot be perfectly predicted from what is known . Wesley Salmon developed a model in which a good scientific explanation must be statistically relevant to the outcome to be explained . Others have argued that the key to a good explanation is unifying disparate phenomena or providing a causal mechanism . 
 = = = Justifying science = = = 
 Although it is often taken for granted , it is not at all clear how one can infer the validity of a general statement from a number of specific instances or infer the truth of a theory from a series of successful tests . For example , a chicken observes that each morning the farmer comes and gives it food , for hundreds of days in a row . The chicken may therefore use inductive reasoning to infer that the farmer will bring food every morning . However , one morning , the farmer comes and kills the chicken . How is scientific reasoning more trustworthy than the chicken 's reasoning ? 
 One approach is to acknowledge that induction cannot achieve certainty , but observing more instances of a general statement can at least make the general statement more probable . So the chicken would be right to conclude from all those mornings that it is likely the farmer will come with food again the next morning , even if it cannot be certain . However , there remain difficult questions about what precise probability any given evidence justifies putting on the general statement . One way out of these particular difficulties is to declare that all beliefs about scientific theories are subjective , or personal , and correct reasoning is merely about how evidence should change one 's subjective beliefs over time . 
 Some argue that what scientists do is not inductive reasoning at all but rather abductive reasoning , or inference to the best explanation . In this account , science is not about generalizing specific instances but rather about hypothesizing explanations for what is observed . As discussed in the previous section , it is not always clear what is meant by the " best explanation . " Ockham 's razor , which counsels choosing the simplest available explanation , thus plays an important role in some versions of this approach . To return to the example of the chicken , would it be simpler to suppose that the farmer cares about it and will continue taking care of it indefinitely or that the farmer is fattening it up for slaughter ? Philosophers have tried to make this heuristic principle more precise in terms of theoretical parsimony or other measures . Yet , although various measures of simplicity have been brought forward as potential candidates , it is generally accepted that there is no such thing as a theory @-@ independent measure of simplicity . In other words , there appear to be as many different measures of simplicity as there are theories themselves , and the task of choosing between measures of simplicity appears to be every bit as problematic as the job of choosing between theories . 
 = = = Observation inseparable from theory = = = 
 When making observations , scientists look through telescopes , study images on electronic screens , record meter readings , and so on . Generally , on a basic level , they can agree on what they see , e.g. , the thermometer shows 37 @.@ 9 degrees C. But , if these scientists have different ideas about the theories that have been developed to explain these basic observations , they may disagree about what they are observing . For example , before Albert Einstein 's general theory of relativity , observers would have likely interpreted the image at left as five different objects in space . In light of that theory , however , astronomers will tell you that is actually only two objects , one in the center and four different images of the same object around the sides . Alternatively , if other scientists suspect that something is wrong with the telescope and only one object is actually being observed , they are operating under yet another theory . Observations that cannot be separated from theoretical interpretation are said to be theory @-@ laden . 
 All observation involves both perception and cognition . That is , one does not make an observation passively , but rather is actively engaged in distinguishing the phenomenon being observed from surrounding sensory data . Therefore , observations are affected by one 's underlying understanding of the way in which the world functions , and that understanding may influence what is perceived , noticed , or deemed worthy of consideration . In this sense , it can be argued that all observation is theory @-@ laden . 
 = = = The purpose of science = = = 
 Should science aim to determine ultimate truth , or are there questions that science cannot answer ? Scientific realists claim that science aims at truth and that one ought to regard scientific theories as true , approximately true , or likely true . Conversely , scientific anti @-@ realists argue that science does not aim ( or at least does not succeed ) at truth , especially truth about <unk> like electrons or other universes . Instrumentalists argue that scientific theories should only be evaluated on whether they are useful . In their view , whether theories are true or not is beside the point , because the purpose of science is to make predictions and enable effective technology . 
 <unk> often point to the success of recent scientific theories as evidence for the truth ( or near truth ) of current theories . <unk> point to either the many false theories in the history of science , epistemic morals , the success of false modeling assumptions , or widely termed postmodern criticisms of objectivity as evidence against scientific realism . <unk> attempt to explain the success of scientific theories without reference to truth . Some <unk> claim that scientific theories aim at being accurate only about observable objects and argue that their success is primarily judged by that criterion . 
 = = = Values and science = = = 
 Values intersect with science in different ways . There are epistemic values that mainly guide the scientific research . The scientific enterprise is embedded in particular culture and values through individual practitioners . Values emerge from science , both as product and process and can be distributed among several cultures in the society . 
 If it is unclear what counts as science , how the process of confirming theories works , and what the purpose of science is , there is considerable scope for values and other social influences to shape science . Indeed , values can play a role ranging from determining which research gets funded to influencing which theories achieve scientific consensus . For example , in the 19th century , cultural values held by scientists about race shaped research on evolution , and values concerning social class influenced debates on phrenology ( considered scientific at the time ) . Feminist philosophers of science , sociologists of science , and others explore how social values affect science . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ modern = = = 
 The origins of philosophy of science trace back to Plato and Aristotle who distinguished the forms of approximate and exact reasoning , set out the threefold scheme of abductive , deductive , and inductive inference , and also analyzed reasoning by analogy . The eleventh century Arab polymath Ibn al @-@ Haytham ( known in Latin as Alhazen ) conducted his research in optics by way of controlled experimental testing and applied geometry , especially in his investigations into the images resulting from the reflection and refraction of light . Roger Bacon ( 1214 – 1294 ) , an English thinker and experimenter heavily influenced by al @-@ Haytham , is recognized by many to be the father of modern scientific method . His view that mathematics was essential to a correct understanding of natural philosophy was considered to be 400 years ahead of its time . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Francis Bacon ( no direct relation to Roger , who lived 300 years earlier ) was a seminal figure in philosophy of science at the time of the Scientific Revolution . In his work Novum Organum ( 1620 ) – a reference to Aristotle 's <unk> – Bacon outlined a new system of logic to improve upon the old philosophical process of syllogism . Bacon 's method relied on experimental histories to eliminate alternative theories . In 1637 , René Descartes established a new framework for grounding scientific knowledge in his treatise , Discourse on Method , advocating the central role of reason as opposed to sensory experience . By contrast , in 1713 , the 2nd edition of Isaac Newton 's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica argued that " ... hypotheses ... have no place in experimental philosophy . In this philosophy [ , ] propositions are deduced from the phenomena and rendered general by induction . " This passage influenced a " later generation of philosophically @-@ inclined readers to pronounce a ban on causal hypotheses in natural philosophy . " In particular , later in the 18th century , David Hume would famously articulate skepticism about the ability of science to determine causality and gave a definitive formulation of the problem of induction . The 19th century writings of John Stuart Mill are also considered important in the formation of current conceptions of the scientific method , as well as anticipating later accounts of scientific explanation . 
 = = = Logical positivism = = = 
 <unk> became popular among physicists around the turn of the 20th century , after which logical positivism defined the field for several decades . Logical positivism accepts only testable statements as meaningful , rejects metaphysical interpretations , and embraces verificationism ( a set of theories of knowledge that combines logicism , empiricism , and linguistics to ground philosophy on a basis consistent with examples from the empirical sciences ) . Seeking to overhaul all of philosophy and convert it to a new scientific philosophy , the Berlin Circle and the Vienna Circle propounded logical positivism in the late 1920s . 
 Interpreting Ludwig Wittgenstein 's early philosophy of language , logical positivists identified a verifiability principle or criterion of cognitive meaningfulness . From Bertrand Russell 's logicism they sought reduction of mathematics to logic . They also embraced Russell 's logical atomism , Ernst Mach 's phenomenalism — whereby the mind knows only actual or potential sensory experience , which is the content of all sciences , whether physics or psychology — and Percy Bridgman 's <unk> . Thereby , only the verifiable was scientific and cognitively meaningful , whereas the unverifiable was unscientific , cognitively meaningless " <unk> " — metaphysical , emotive , or such — not worthy of further review by philosophers , who were newly tasked to organize knowledge rather than develop new knowledge . 
 Logical positivism is commonly portrayed as taking the extreme position that scientific language should never refer to anything unobservable — even the seemingly core notions of causality , mechanism , and principles — but that is an exaggeration . Talk of such <unk> could be allowed as metaphorical — direct observations viewed in the abstract — or at worst metaphysical or emotional . Theoretical laws would be reduced to empirical laws , while theoretical terms would garner meaning from observational terms via correspondence rules . Mathematics in physics would reduce to symbolic logic via logicism , while rational reconstruction would convert ordinary language into standardized equivalents , all networked and united by a logical syntax . A scientific theory would be stated with its method of verification , whereby a logical calculus or empirical operation could verify its falsity or truth . 
 In the late 1930s , logical positivists fled Germany and Austria for Britain and America . By then , many had replaced Mach 's phenomenalism with Otto Neurath 's physicalism , and Rudolf <unk> had sought to replace verification with simply confirmation . With World War II 's close in 1945 , logical positivism became milder , logical empiricism , led largely by Carl Hempel , in America , who expounded the covering law model of scientific explanation as a way of identifying the logical form of explanations without any reference to the suspect notion of " causation " . The logical positivist movement became a major underpinning of analytic philosophy , and dominated Anglosphere philosophy , including philosophy of science , while influencing sciences , into the 1960s . Yet the movement failed to resolve its central problems , and its doctrines were increasingly assaulted . Nevertheless , it brought about the establishment of philosophy of science as a distinct subdiscipline of philosophy , with Carl Hempel playing a key role . 
 = = = Thomas Kuhn = = = 
 In his landmark 1962 book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , Thomas Kuhn crystallized the reaction against logical positivism . He argued that the process of observation and evaluation takes place within a paradigm . By paradigm he meant a logically consistent " portrait " of the world that is consistent with observations made from its point of view . A paradigm also encompasses the set of questions and practices that define a scientific discipline . He characterized normal science as the process of observation and " puzzle solving " which takes place within a paradigm , whereas revolutionary science occurs when one paradigm overtakes another in a paradigm shift . 
 Kuhn denied that it is ever possible to isolate the hypothesis being tested from the influence of the theory in which the observations are grounded , and he argued that it is not possible to evaluate competing paradigms independently . More than one logically consistent construct can paint a usable likeness of the world , but there is no common ground from which to pit two against each other , theory against theory . Each paradigm has its own distinct questions , aims , and interpretations . Neither provides a standard by which the other can be judged , so there is no clear way to measure scientific progress across paradigms . 
 For Kuhn , the choice of paradigm was sustained by rational processes , but not ultimately determined by them . The choice between paradigms involves setting two or more " portraits " against the world and deciding which likeness is most promising . For Kuhn , acceptance or rejection of a paradigm is a social process as much as a logical process . Kuhn 's position , however , is not one of relativism . According to Kuhn , a paradigm shift occurs when a significant number of observational anomalies arise in the old paradigm and a new paradigm makes sense of them . That is , the choice of a new paradigm is based on observations , even though those observations are made against the background of the old paradigm . 
 = = Current approaches = = 
 = = = Axiomatic assumptions = = = 
 Some thinkers seek to articulate axiomatic assumptions on which science may be based , a form of <unk> . This is typically the implicit philosophy of working scientists , that the following basic assumptions that are needed to justify the scientific method : ( 1 ) that there is an objective reality shared by all rational observers ; ( 2 ) that this objective reality is governed by natural laws ; ( 3 ) that these laws can be discovered by means of systematic observation and experimentation . Proponents argue that these assumptions are reasonable and necessary for practicing science . For instance , Hugh <unk> argues that science presupposes that " the physical world is orderly and comprehensible . " Likewise , biologist Stephen Jay Gould cites the constancy of nature 's laws as an assumption which a scientist should assume before proceeding to do geology . In this view , the uniformity of scientific laws is an unprovable postulate which enables scientists to extrapolate into the unobservable past . In other words , the constancy of natural laws must be assumed in order to meaningfully study the past . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In contrast to the view that science rests on foundational assumptions , <unk> asserts that statements are justified by being a part of a coherent system . Or , rather , individual statements cannot be validated on their own : only coherent systems can be justified . A prediction of a transit of Venus is justified by its being coherent with broader beliefs about celestial mechanics and earlier observations . As explained above , observation is a cognitive act . That is , it relies on a pre @-@ existing understanding , a systematic set of beliefs . An observation of a transit of Venus requires a huge range of auxiliary beliefs , such as those that describe the optics of telescopes , the mechanics of the telescope mount , and an understanding of celestial mechanics . If the prediction fails and a transit is not observed , that is likely to occasion an adjustment in the system , a change in some auxiliary assumption , rather than a rejection of the theoretical system . 
 In fact , according to the Duhem – Quine thesis , after Pierre Duhem and W. V. Quine , it is impossible to test a theory in isolation . One must always add auxiliary hypotheses in order to make testable predictions . For example , to test Newton 's Law of Gravitation in the solar system , one needs information about the masses and positions of the Sun and all the planets . Famously , the failure to predict the orbit of Uranus in the 19th century led not to the rejection of Newton 's Law but rather to the rejection of the hypothesis that the solar system comprises only seven planets . The investigations that followed led to the discovery of an eighth planet , Neptune . If a test fails , something is wrong . But there is a problem in figuring out what that something is : a missing planet , badly calibrated test equipment , an unsuspected curvature of space , or something else . 
 One consequence of the Duhem – Quine thesis is that one can make any theory compatible with any empirical observation by the addition of a sufficient number of suitable ad hoc hypotheses . Karl Popper accepted this thesis , leading him to reject naïve falsification . Instead , he favored a " survival of the fittest " view in which the most falsifiable scientific theories are to be preferred . 
 = = = Anything goes = = = 
 Austrian philosopher of science Paul Feyerabend ( 1924 – 1994 ) argued that no description of scientific method could possibly be broad enough to encompass all the approaches and methods used by scientists . He claimed there are no useful and exception @-@ free methodological rules governing the progress of science . Feyerabend objected to prescriptive scientific method on the grounds that any such method would stifle and cramp scientific progress . Feyerabend claimed that " the only principle that does not inhibit progress is : anything goes " . 
 Feyerabend felt that science started as a liberating movement , but that over time it had become increasingly dogmatic and rigid , and therefore had become increasingly an ideology , and , despite its successes , science had started to attain some oppressive features . He argued it was not possible to come up with an unambiguous way to distinguish science from religion , magic , or mythology . He saw the exclusive dominance of science as a means of directing society as authoritarian and ungrounded . Promulgation of this epistemological anarchism earned Feyerabend the title of " the worst enemy of science " from his detractors . 
 = = = Sociology of scientific knowledge = = = 
 According to Kuhn , science is an inherently communal activity which can only be done as part of a community . For him , the fundamental difference between science and other disciplines is the way in which the communities function . Others , especially Feyerabend and some post @-@ modernist thinkers , have argued that there is insufficient difference between social practices in science and other disciplines to maintain this distinction . For them , social factors play an important and direct role in scientific method , but they do not serve to differentiate science from other disciplines . On this account , science is socially constructed , though this does not necessarily imply the more radical notion that reality itself is a social construct . 
 However , some such as Quine do maintain that scientific reality is a social construct : 
 Physical objects are conceptually imported into the situation as convenient intermediaries not by definition in terms of experience , but simply as irreducible posits comparable , <unk> , to the gods of Homer ... For my part I do , qua lay physicist , believe in physical objects and not in Homer 's gods ; and I consider it a scientific error to believe otherwise . But in point of epistemological footing , the physical objects and the gods differ only in degree and not in kind . Both sorts of entities enter our conceptions only as cultural posits . 
 The public backlash of scientists against such views , particularly in the 1990s , came to be known as the science wars . 
 A major development in recent decades has been the study of the formation , structure , and evolution of scientific communities by sociologists and anthropologists including David Bloor , Harry Collins , Bruno Latour , and Anselm Strauss . Concepts and methods ( such as rational choice , social choice or game theory ) from economics have also been applied for understanding the efficiency of scientific communities in the production of knowledge . This interdisciplinary field has come to be known as science and technology studies . Here the approach to the philosophy of science is to study how scientific communities actually operate . 
