 = V. S. Srinivasa Sastri = 
 Valangaiman <unk> Srinivasa Sastri CH PC ( 22 September 1869 – 17 April 1946 ) was an Indian politician , administrator , educator , orator and Indian independence activist . He was acclaimed for his oratory and command over the English language . Srinivasa Sastri was born to a poor temple priest in the village of Valangaiman near Kumbakonam , India . He completed his education at Kumbakonam and worked as a school teacher and later , headmaster in Triplicane , Madras . He entered politics in 1905 when he joined the Servants of India Society . Sastri served as a member of the Indian National Congress from 1908 to 1922 , but later resigned in protest against the Non @-@ Cooperation movement . Sastri was one of the founding members of the Indian Liberal Party . In his later days , he was strongly opposed to the partition of India . 
 Srinivasa Sastri served as a member of the Madras Legislative Council from 1913 to 1916 , Imperial Legislative Council of India from 1916 to 1919 and the Council of State from 1920 to 1925 . Sastri also functioned as India 's delegate to the League of Nations , as member of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom and agent to the Union of South Africa . 
 Sastri gained worldwide fame for his prowess in the English language . He was a close follower of Gopal Krishna Gokhale . He was also a close friend and associate of Mahatma Gandhi , who addressed Sastri as his " elder brother " in writings . Sastri was made a Companion of Honour in 1930 . In 1921 , the Freedom of the City of London was conferred on him , and in 1931 he received the Freedom of the City of Edinburgh . 
 = = Early life and educational career = = 
 Srinivasa Sastri was born in the town of Valangaiman , Madras Presidency , India on 22 September 1869 . His father , <unk> <unk> Sastri , was a poor Hindu priest . He was educated at the Native High School in Kumbakonam and in 1887 , graduated from Government Arts College , Kumbakonam with a first class degree in English and Sanskrit . On graduation , he found employment as a teacher at Municipal College , Salem . 
 Srinivasa Sastri married Parvathi in 1885 . His granddaughters are , <unk> , married to <unk> ( <unk> of <unk> ) and Kausalya , married to the renowned Indian scientist and nephew of Sir C. V. Raman , S. <unk> . 
 In 1894 , Srinivasa Sastri was appointed headmaster of Hindu High School , Triplicane and served for a period of eight years , until 1902 . During this period , he achieved fame for his proficiency in English and his good administrative skills . In his late years , he also served as Vice @-@ Chancellor of the Annamalai University . During his tenure as Vice @-@ Chancellor , he demonstrated his scholarship in Sanskrit and Oriental Literature . He persuaded <unk> R. Raghava Iyengar , then Head of the Tamil Research Department , to translate <unk> 's epic poem <unk> <unk> in Tamil . The poem was translated in the <unk> Metre and published in 1938 . He delivered the Kamala lectures in Calcutta University which are widely cherished and remembered . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Srinivasa Sastri established the Madras Teachers Guild during his term as headmaster of Triplicane High School . He was one of the pioneers of the Co @-@ operative movement and started India 's first co @-@ operative society , the Triplicane Urban Co @-@ operative Society ( <unk> ) in 1904 . 
 Srinivasa Sastri met Indian independence activist Gopal Krishna Gokhale for the first time in 1906 . He was drawn towards Gokhale 's Servants of India Society and joined the organization becoming its President in 1915 . He joined the Indian National Congress in 1908 and became the Secretary of the Madras District Congress Committee in 1911 . As a member of the Congress , he was instrumental in bringing about a pact between the Congress and the Muslim League . 
 Srinivasa Sastri was nominated to the Madras Legislative Council in 1913 and to the Imperial Legislative Council of India in 1916 . He opposed the Rowlatt Act which empowered the Government of India to imprison anyone without trial and delivered a well @-@ appreciated speech in the Imperial Legislative Council denouncing the bill . In 1919 , he was appointed a member of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom . 
 In 1922 , Sastri resigned his membership of the Indian National Congress after disagreeing with its leadership on the issue of non @-@ cooperation and established the Indian Liberal Party along with Tej Bahadur Sapru . He consequently served as a President of the Indian Liberal Federation . In 1924 , he accompanied Annie Besant on a visit to England demanding Home Rule for India . He also participated in the first and second round table conferences . 
 = = International delegations = = 
 Srinivasa Sastri was a part of the delegation of Indian moderates who visited England in 1919 . He was also a part of the Indian delegation to the Imperial Conference ( 1921 ) and the Second session of the League of Nations in 1921 . As a member of the Viceregal council , Srinivasa Sastri was also a part of the British delegation which participated in the Washington Council of Limitation of Disarmament . During one of his speeches on " The Political Situation in India " , he was accused of being a British agent and attacked by a mob and had to be hastily escorted away by mounted police . 
 In 1922 , the Government of India sent Sastri on delegations to Australia , New Zealand and Canada in order to investigate the conditions of Indians living in those countries . Due to his efforts , the Government of Australia passed the Commonwealth Electoral Act enlarging the franchise to include " natives of British India " . 
 In 1919 , Srinivasa Sastri visited the Union of South Africa along with Sir Benjamin Robertson as a part of the delegation which signed the Cape Town Agreement with the Government of South Africa . As a result of this agreement , South Africa gave up its Class Area Bill intended to segregate Indians in South Africa . Initially , Jan Smuts , the Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa , refused to treat Srinivasa Sastri on par with the European delegate . However , on Srinivasa Sastri 's departure from South Africa as India 's Agent in 1928 , Smuts recognized Sastri as the " most respected man in South Africa " . 
 Srinivasa Sastri was sent to the Federated Malay States in 1937 , to report on the conditions of the Indian labourers in the country . The delegation submitted a controversial report titled Conditions of Indian labour in Malaya which was published in Madras and Kuala Lumpur , the very same year . Srinivasa Sastri , being the author of the report , was criticized by Indian nationalists for " his reluctance to comment at length on the political and social status of Indians in Malaya " . 
 = = Agent to South Africa = = 
 On 27 May 1927 , at the behest of Mahatma Gandhi , Lord Irwin , the Viceroy of India , appointed Srinivasa Sastri as India 's first Agent to the Union of South Africa . Srinivasa Sastri arrived in South Africa in June 1927 and served as Agent till January 1929 . 
 Soon after taking over , Srinivasa Sastri successfully pressurized the South African government to withdraw Section 5 of the Immigration and Indian Relief ( Further Provision ) Bill which empowered South African immigration officers and boards to cancel registration certificates . Through his efforts , the Natal Commission for Indian Education was appointed on 17 November 1927 . With Sastri 's support and encouragement , dissidents of the Transvaal British Indian Association ( <unk> ) founded the Transvaal Indian Congress ( TIC ) on 18 December 1927 . The <unk> later merged with the South African Indian Congress . Section 104 of the Liquor Bill prohibiting Indians from entering licensed premises was withdrawn . The Thornton Committee was established in 1928 to investigate the sanitary conditions of Indians in and around Durban . 
 During the early part of Sastri 's tenure , a number of <unk> laws were passed targeting Indians and Indian immigrants in South Africa . The period also witnessed the establishment of a number of trade unions . Sastri campaigned against racial segregation of Indians and got the Class Area Bill segregating Indians withdrawn . 
 Sastri returned to India in January 1929 and was succeeded by Kurma Venkata Reddy Naidu . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 In 1930 , Sastri was appointed a member of the Royal Commission on Labour in India . During 1930 – 31 , he participated in the Round Table Conferences in London to discuss India 's future and was instrumental in bringing about the Gandhi @-@ Irwin Pact . In 1935 , Sastri was appointed Vice @-@ Chancellor of Annamalai University , in Tamil Nadu , and served from 1935 to 1940 . At the peak of the Second World War , he participated in a 15 @-@ member Indian delegation which appealed to the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill to provide dominion status to India . He strongly opposed Muslim League demands for the partition of India . 
 In June 1940 , the Government of Madras appointed a committee headed by Srinivasa Sastri to frame a set of general principles for coining words for scientific and technical terms in vernacular languages . The constitution of the committee was strongly condemned by the Madras Presidency Tamil Sangam and its Secretary E. M. Subramania Pillai who felt that Srinivasa Sastri was biased in favour of Sanskrit and hence , Anti @-@ Tamil . The committee submitted its report after three months recommending the retention of the existing Sanskrit loanwords in Tamil and rejecting the need for them to be replaced . The deliberations of the Sastri Committee provoked widespread agitations in Madras Presidency . The committee was eventually reshuffled by Provincial Education Minister T. S. <unk> Chettiar soon after the demise of Srinivasa Sastri and balanced with the introduction of more members supporting the replacement of Sanskrit loan words . 
 Srinivasa Sastri 's health began to deteriorate in early 1946 . In January , Srinivasa Sastri was admitted to the General Hospital , Madras . He died on 17 April 1946 at the age of 76 . 
 = = Silver @-@ Tongued Orator of the British Empire = = 
 Srinivasa Sastri was known for his mastery over the English language and his oratory . As a student , he once corrected a few passages in J. C. Nesfield 's English Grammar . Whenever he was on visit to the United Kingdom , Sastri was often consulted over spellings and pronunciations . His mastery over the English language was recognized by King George V , Winston Churchill , Lady Lytton and Lord Balfour who rated him amongst the five best English @-@ language orators of the century . The Master of Balliol , Arthur Lionel Smith swore that he had never realized the beauty of the English language until he heard <unk> while Lord Balfour remarked that listening to Srinivasa Sastri made him realise the heights to which the English language could rise . Thomas Smart conferred upon Sastri the appellation " Silver Tongued Orator of the British Empire " and he was so called all over the United Kingdom . Srinivasa Sastri 's inspirations were William Shakespeare , Sir Walter Scott , George Eliot , John Stuart Mill , Thomas Harvey , Victor Hugo and Valmiki - Indian sage and the author of the Hindu epic Ramayana . 
 = = Relation with Mahatma Gandhi = = 
 During his tenure in the Servants of India Society , Sastri developed a close attachment with Mahatma Gandhi . Gandhi often addressed Srinivasa Sastri as his " elder brother " in all their correspondences . However , despite their friendship , during his tenure as President , Srinivasa Sastri opposed Gandhi 's presence in the Servants of India Society . When Gandhi sought Sastri 's advice before launching his non @-@ cooperation movement , he counselled him against it . In his later years , Sastri sternly advised Mahatma Gandhi against accepting the Muslim League demand for partition . 
 Srinivasa Sastri corrected mistakes in the manuscript of The Story of My Experiments with Truth , the English translation of Gandhi 's autobiography and also successive issues of the magazine Harijan that was edited by Mahatma Gandhi . 
 On Sastri 's death , Gandhi paid a tribute to Sastri in a condolence message in the Harijan . 
 Death has removed not only from us but from the world one of India 's best sons . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Sastri was made a member of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom in 1921 . On 1 January 1930 , he was made a Companion of Honour . The then Viceroy offered to make Sastri Knight Commander of the Order of the Star of India in 1928 , but he declined the offer . 
 In 1937 , the then Governor of Madras offered to make Sastri the Acting Chief Minister of Madras Presidency but Sastri declined the offer . He also declined an offer of membership in the council of the Secretary of State for India . In 1921 , the Freedom of the City of London was conferred on Srinivasa Sastri . This was followed by the Freedom of the City of Edinburgh on 9 January 1931 . 
 = = Works = = 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1916 ) . Self @-@ government for India under the British flag . Servants of India Society . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1917 ) . The Congress @-@ League scheme : An Exposition . Servants of India Society . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1921 ) . A conscience clause : for Indians in Indian education codes . Servants of India Society . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1923 ) . The Kenya Question . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1923 ) . Report by the Hon <unk> V. S. Srinivasa Sastri regarding his deputation to the Dominions of Canada , Australia and New Zealand . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1931 ) . The results of the Round Table Conference address at a meeting of the Committee of the Empire Parliamentary Association specially studying Indian affairs . London : Empire Parliamentary Association . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ; <unk> Turnbull , H. G. D. Turnbull ( 1934 ) . Gopal Krishna Gokhale : A Brief Biography . V. <unk> Iyer . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1935 ) . The rights and duties of the Indian citizen – The Kamala lectures . University of Calcutta . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1935 ) . Valmiki Ramayana : condensed in the poet 's own words . G. A. <unk> . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1937 ) . Report on the conditions of Indian labour in Malaya . Government of India . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1937 ) . Life of Gopala Krishna Gokhale . Bangalore Print and Pub . Co . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1939 ) . Birthright . Kumbakonam Parliament . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1941 ) . <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் கள ் ( in Tamil ) . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1945 ) . Life and times of Sir Pherozeshah Mehta . Madras Law Journal Press . 
 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1946 ) . My master Gokhale . Model Publications . 
 = = Other biographies = = 
 T. N. <unk> ( 1969 ) . Builders of modern India : V. S. Srinivasa Sastri . Government of India . 
 <unk> <unk> Rao ( 1963 ) . The Right Honourable V. S. Srinivasa Sastri , P.C. , C.H. , LL . D. , D. <unk> . : a political biography . Asia Publishing House . 
 The Rt. Hon. V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1869 – 1946 ) centenary souvenir ( 22 @-@ 9 @-@ 1969 ) . Servants of India Society . 1969 . 
 S. Muthiah ( 26 January 2009 ) . " Sastri of South Africa " . The Hindu . 
 S. R. Bakshi ( 1993 ) . V. S. Srinivasa Sastri : Volume 40 of Indian freedom fighters : struggle for independence . Anmol Publishers Pvt Ltd . ISBN <unk> , ISBN 978 @-@ 81 @-@ <unk> @-@ 604 @-@ 3 . 
 = Russian Corps = 
 The Russian Corps ( German : <unk> <unk> Serbien , Russian : <unk> <unk> , Serbian : <unk> <unk> ) was an armed force composed of anti @-@ Communist Russian émigrés in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia during World War II . Commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General Boris Shteifon , it served primarily as a guard force from the autumn of 1941 until the spring of 1944 . It was incorporated into the Wehrmacht on 1 December 1942 and later clashed with both the Yugoslav Partisans and the Chetniks . In late 1944 it fought against the Red Army during the Belgrade Offensive , later withdrawing to Bosnia and Slovenia when the Germans withdrew from the Balkans . Shteifon was killed in April 1945 and was replaced by Colonel Anatoly Rogozhin , who subsequently managed to evade the Communists by surrendering to the British instead . He and his men were eventually set free and were allowed to resettle in the West . 
 = = Background and formation = = 
 In the Balkans before World War II there were approximately 15 @,@ 000 White Russian émigrés who had fled there in the aftermath of the 1917 Russian Revolution . On 6 April 1941 , Axis forces invaded the Kingdom of Yugoslavia . Poorly equipped and poorly trained , the Royal Yugoslav Army was quickly defeated . The country was then dismembered , with Serbia being reduced to its pre @-@ 1912 borders and placed under a government of German military occupation . Milan Nedić , a pre @-@ war politician who was known to have pro @-@ Axis leanings , was then selected by the Germans to lead the collaborationist Government of National Salvation in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia . 
 The Russian Corps was formed by émigré White Russians and officers of the Russian Imperial Army , which had been defeated by the Communists in the Russian Civil War twenty years earlier . Over the course of the Uprising in Serbia in the summer of 1941 , the Communist @-@ backed Yugoslav Partisans killed approximately 300 Russian emigrants and injured many more , sometimes in acts of vengeance . In response , local Russians began to organize themselves into self @-@ defense units . At the time , there were an estimated 10 @,@ 000 Russian men within the borders of Yugoslavia , the majority of whom lived in Serbia . 
 The Russian Corps was founded in Belgrade by General Mikhail Skorodumov on 12 September 1941 and took shape under the supervision of the occupying German authorities , with the cooperation of Nedić 's regime . At first , the group was an independent force reporting to the plenipotentiary for economic affairs , Franz Neuhausen . It was composed of White Russians who sided with the Germans because of their opposition to Communism and because they believed that their only hope of a non @-@ Communist Russia lay in a German victory in World War II . Russian émigrés from Bulgaria , Croatia and Hungary subsequently came to Belgrade to join the unit . 
 Due to illness , Skorodumov was replaced after only a month by his chief of staff , Lieutenant @-@ General Boris Shteifon , who was said to have had " warm and friendly relations with [ Milan ] Nedić . " The Russian Corps was initially designated the " Independent Russian Corps " before being renamed the " Russian Defense Corps " on 2 October . It was envisaged by the Germans as a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong unit organized into three regiments . By late 1941 , it had 1 @,@ 500 members . Recruitment was carried out by Major General <unk> , a White Russian émigré in German service who was the head of the Russian Intelligence Office ( German : <unk> ) in Serbia . The Corps initially consisted of a single regiment , organized into four battalions . Major General <unk> commanded the 1st Battalion , Colonel <unk> the second , Colonel <unk> the third and Colonel <unk> the fourth , respectively . A second regiment was set up on 18 October , commanded by Colonel Zhukov . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Early actions = = = 
 Although its aim was to fight Communist forces in the Soviet Union , the Russian Corps , when engaged in combat , was used almost exclusively to fight the Yugoslav Partisans in areas of occupied Yugoslavia . Composed of one cavalry regiment and four infantry regiments , it was reinforced with younger émigrés and former Soviet prisoners of war and was armed by the Germans with weapons captured from the Royal Yugoslav Army . Its command language was Russian . 
 Between the autumn of 1941 and the spring of 1944 , members of the Corps were responsible primarily for protecting weapons factories , mines , roads , and railroads throughout occupied Serbia in accordance with priorities established by the German High Command . During this time , the Corps was referred to as the " Russian Factory Protection Group " ( German : <unk> <unk> ) . It was initially used during anti @-@ Partisan operations to guard mines in Krupanj , and later in Bor and <unk> . In November 1941 it began actively collaborating with the Chetniks . By this time the Corps was composed of five regiments of about 7 @,@ 500 men , all of whom were Russian . An attempt was then made to expand it further by recruiting Soviet prisoners . However , this proved unsuccessful and the Corps never operated as a unified fighting force , the regiments being its largest operational units . These were later assigned to act as auxiliaries to German or Bulgarian occupying forces . On 8 December 1941 , the Corps defended the Stolice mine against the Yugoslav Partisans . The Corps grew in numbers throughout 1942 , following an influx of volunteers from Bulgaria , Croatia , Romania and Greece . During this time , it maintained good relations with the Nedić administration . While guarding facilities , members of the Corps were largely assigned to manning brick bunkers , protecting the railway in the Ibar River valley , the Bor , <unk> , <unk> , and Krupanj mines , as well as Serbian borders along the Danube and Drina rivers while deployed together with various Serbian collaborationist factions such as the Serbian State Guard ( SDS ) and the Serbian Volunteer Corps ( SDK ) , with whom they were most closely allied . The Corps also closely cooperated with the Croatian Ustaše and during this period its members often plundered Serbian villages . 
 Initially , the 1st Regiment was deployed in Loznica , Ljubovija and other towns along the Drina . On the other hand , the 2nd Regiment operated in towns such as <unk> , Bor , and <unk> . The two regiments were operationally subordinated to the <unk> German Division . The 3rd Regiment was established in Banjica on 8 January 1942 , placed under the command of Colonel <unk> and deployed to Kosovska Mitrovica , where it was operationally subordinated to the 1st Bulgarian occupational corps . The 4th Regiment was established on 29 April with General <unk> as commander and was deployed to the area around Kraljevo . In May , the Corps was divided into two brigades . The 1st Brigade was placed under the command of Major General <unk> and its headquarters was established in the town of <unk> on 22 May . On 30 November , the 4th Regiment was disbanded , its 1st Battalion assigned to the 1st Regiment and the rest of its manpower assigned to the 2nd Regiment . On 1 December 1942 , the Russian Corps was incorporated into the Wehrmacht and all its members were required to swear an oath to German leader Adolf Hitler . On 9 December 1942 , the 1st Regiment started to be transformed with the arrival of Kuban Cossacks led by Major General <unk> . By January 1943 , it was fully composed of Cossacks . On 17 March 1943 , Major General <unk> replaced <unk> as commander of the 3rd Regiment . The 1st Regiment fought in Loznica in April and participated in a large operation in <unk> on 11 – 15 May , where it engaged in heavy combat with Communist forces . From 1 – 8 July , the regiment was again stationed in Loznica and Ljubovija , participating in the defence of the Drina Bridge at Zvornik against the Partisans . During this time the regiment allowed the passage of 379 wounded Croatian soldiers and civilians , 1 @,@ 000 healthy soldiers and as many refugees , sustaining casualties of two killed and seventeen wounded . It clashed with the Partisans over the village of <unk> on 19 July . Meanwhile , the 2nd Regiment clashed with the Partisans around the town of <unk> . The 4th Regiment was re @-@ established on 15 December , and was based in <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Its regimental headquarters were moved to Aleksinac on 30 April and to Čačak on 15 October . 
 = = = Retreat and surrender = = = 
 Despite numerous clashes with the Chetniks , the Corps focused increasingly on fighting the Partisans penetrating Serbia from Bosnia and the Sandžak . On 5 January , combat with the Partisans in <unk> resulted in the deaths of three Cossacks of the 1st Regiment . On 18 January , the 5th Regiment was formed in Obrenovac . The 3rd Regiment outfought a 2 @,@ 400 @-@ strong Partisan force advancing towards Jošanička Banja on 31 March . On 28 April , the 1st Regiment prepared defences along the Drina in Zvornik , <unk> <unk> and Loznica areas expecting the 16th and 17th Partisan Divisions to attempt a crossing there . On 1 – 2 May , the 5th Regiment fought the Partisans in the village of <unk> , sustaining casualties of 11 killed and 25 wounded . That summer , the Corps mediated an agreement between the Chetniks and the Germans in which the two parties agreed to fight the Partisans in Serbia . On 18 July , the 5th Regiment fought in Jošanička Banja and its regimental headquarters was moved there from Obrenovac , with battalion headquarters being established in <unk> , Jošanička Banja , <unk> and <unk> . Elements of the 3rd and 5th regiments fought the Partisans on 4 – 5 August near the village of Rudnik . The Partisans attacked the positions of the 5th Regiment in <unk> on 24 August . 
 In September , the Corps reached its peak of 11 @,@ 197 members . Several skirmishes occurred between the 1st Regiment and the Partisans in the Zvornik and Valjevo areas that month . On 7 / 8 September , the 2nd Regiment fought Partisans at the Ibar River , trying to deny them crossing . On 9 September , elements of the 3rd Regiment moved to Požega and on 11 September to Čačak . On 20 September , the 1st Regiment fought a group of Partisans south of Loznica . Major combat between the 1st Regiment and Partisans erupted in Loznica itself on 23 September , causing the regiment to fall back to Šabac with losses of 7 killed and 23 wounded . Combat continued daily throughout September with the 1st Regiment suffering up to 53 casualties per day . On 8 October , the 2nd Regiment headquarters in Požarevac were evacuated as Soviet armour approached the town . As parts of the regiment moved towards Belgrade and <unk> , the force came into contact with Soviet troops and armour in the <unk> area south of Belgrade , sustaining heavy casualties . On 10 October the Russian Corps was renamed the " Russian Corps in Serbia " . Elements of the 2nd Regiment arrived in Šabac on 22 October , then moved to Sremska Mitrovica on 23 October , Vukovar on 25 October , Osijek on 26 October and then to Vinkovci and Stari Jankovci on 28 October . Further parts of the regiment moved to Zemun on 13 October , Ruma on 14 October , Vinkovci on 16 October , and Stari Jankovci on 24 October . On 19 – 22 October , the 4th Regiment fought advancing Soviet troops and Partisans and defended the Čačak @-@ Kraljevo road . On 23 October , the 1st Regiment abandoned Šabac and <unk> and moved to <unk> , and then to Tovarnik on 24 October where they were ordered to hold their ground . The 4th Regiment fought in the Čačak area from 27 October to 2 November . It faced the Red Army and the Chetnik 2nd Ravna Gora Corps before being overpowered and forced to abandon the city . The Chetniks captured 339 of its soldiers and turned them over to the Soviets . On 12 November , the 1st Regiment moved via railway through Vinkovci to Brčko , with elements deployed in Gunja . On 8 December it regrouped north of the Sava and on 11 – 13 December it fought the Partisans in and near the village of Vrbanja , killing forty @-@ three . The 4th Regiment arrived in Sarajevo on 13 – 18 December . Elements subsequently moved to Kiseljak on 18 December , fighting Partisans in the Kiseljak @-@ <unk> area on 26 – 27 December . During this time , the 1st Regiment and a battalion of the 2nd Regiment guarded a bridgehead north of Brčko in order to allow German forces that were stationed in Greece to withdraw through the town . 
 In January 1945 , elements of the Corps participated in the German capture of Travnik , part of Operation <unk> . Afterwards , they withdrew to Slovenia . On 30 April , Shteifon was killed while passing through Zagreb . Colonel Anatoly Rogozhin then took over as commander . On 12 May , Rogozhin surrendered to British forces near Klagenfurt . Members of the Corps were then allowed to resettle in the West after hostilities ceased . At the time of surrender , the Corps consisted of 3 @,@ 500 to 5 @,@ 584 men . It had suffered 6 @,@ 709 members killed , wounded or missing from 1941 to 1945 . Overall , 17 @,@ 090 men served in its ranks over the course of the war . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Throughout its existence , the Russians Corps was composed of : 
 1st Cossack Regiment <unk> <unk> 
 Infantry Regiments II , III , IV , V 
 In May 1942 , the Corps was divided into two brigades . The 4th Regiment was disbanded on 30 November 1942 , and re @-@ established on 15 December 1943 . The 5th Regiment was created on 18 January 1944 . 
 = = Commanders = = 
 The Russian Corps had three commanders during its existence : 
 General Mikhail Skorodumov ( September 1941 ) 
 Lieutenant @-@ General Boris Shteifon ( October 1941 – April 1945 ) 
 Colonel Anatoly Rogozhin ( April – May 1945 ) 
 = = Uniform = = 
 Members of the Corps wore the uniform of the Russian Imperial Army from 12 September 1941 to 30 November 1942 . The uniform was sometimes worn with pips of the Royal Yugoslav Army , alongside special rank insignia on the collar . Wehrmacht uniforms and insignia were adopted on 1 December 1942 , but the old uniforms continued to be worn for some time . 
 = Louise Bryant = 
 Louise Bryant ( December 5 , 1885 – January 6 , 1936 ) was an American journalist known for her sympathetic coverage of Russia and the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution . Bryant , a feminist , married in 1916 to the more famous writer John Reed , wrote about leading Russian women such as Katherine <unk> and Maria <unk> as well as men including Alexander Kerensky , Vladimir Lenin , and Leon Trotsky . Her news stories , distributed by Hearst during and after her trips to Petrograd and Moscow , appeared in newspapers across the U.S. and Canada in the years immediately following World War I. A collection of articles from her first trip was published in book form as Six Red Months in Russia in 1918 . In 1919 , she defended the revolution in testimony before the Overman Committee , a Senate subcommittee established to investigate Bolshevik influence in the United States . Later that year , she undertook a nationwide speaking tour to encourage public support of the Bolsheviks and to discourage armed U.S. intervention in Russia . 
 Bryant grew up in rural Nevada and attended the University of Nevada in Reno and the University of Oregon , graduating with a degree in history in 1909 . Pursuing a career in journalism , she became society editor of the Portland , Oregon , Spectator and freelanced for The Oregonian . During her years in Portland ( 1909 – 15 ) , she became active in the women 's suffrage movement . Leaving her first husband in 1915 to follow Reed to Greenwich Village , she formed friendships with leading feminists of the day , some of whom she met through Reed 's associates at publications such as The Masses , or at meetings of a women 's group , <unk> , or through work with the Provincetown Players . During a National Woman 's Party suffrage rally in Washington , D.C. , in 1919 , she was arrested and spent three days in jail . Like Reed , she had lovers outside of marriage ; during her Greenwich Village years ( 1916 – 20 ) these included playwright Eugene O 'Neill and painter Andrew Dasburg . 
 The 1981 film , Reds , tells the story of Bryant 's time with Reed . After his death from typhus in 1920 , Bryant continued to write for Hearst about Russia as well as Turkey , Hungary , Greece , Italy , and other countries in Europe and the Middle East . Some of these articles were republished in book form in Mirrors of Moscow in 1923 . Later that year she married William Christian Bullitt , Jr . , with whom she had her only child , Anne , born in 1924 . Suffering from a rare and painful disorder , Bryant wrote and published little in her last 10 years and drank heavily . Bullitt , winning sole custody of Anne , divorced her in 1930 . Bryant died in Paris in 1936 and was buried in Versailles . A group from Portland visited her neglected grave in 1998 and worked to restore it . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bryant was born Anna Louise Mohan in San Francisco , California , in 1885 . Her father , Hugh Mohan , born in Pennsylvania , became a journalist and stump speaker involved in labor issues and Democratic Party politics . Moving to San Francisco , he continued to write for newspapers , and in 1880 he married Louisa Flick , who grew up on the ranch of her stepfather , James Say , near Humboldt Lake in Nevada . The <unk> had two children , Barbara ( 1880 ) and Louis ( 1882 ) , before the birth of Anna Louise . Later in 1885 , the family moved to Reno , where Mohan continued his journalistic career but also drank heavily . One day he went away and never returned . Louise 's mother divorced him in 1889 and married Sheridan Bryant , a freight conductor on the Southern Pacific railway . The family , which eventually added two more children , Floyd ( 1894 ) and William ( 1896 ) lived in Wadsworth . However , Louise soon accepted an invitation from her stepgrandfather , James Say , to live at his ranch . She remained there for three or four years , returning to Wadsworth only at her mother 's insistence at the age of 12 . 
 Attending high school in Wadsworth and Reno , then Nevada State University ( which became the University of Nevada , Reno ) , Bryant developed interests in journalism , debate , illustration , social life , dancing , and basketball . She edited the " Young Ladies Edition " of the Student Record in 1905 , wrote a short story , " The Way of a Flirt " , for a literary magazine , <unk> , and contributed sketches to it and another publication , Artemisia . Depressed after the death of Say in 1906 , Bryant left school for a job in <unk> , California , where for a few months she boarded at a cattle ranch and taught children , mostly young Mexicans . That summer she moved , this time to Eugene , Oregon , where her brother Louis worked for the Southern Pacific . 
 After learning that she could transfer her college credits from Nevada , she enrolled at the University of Oregon , in Eugene . Socially popular at the school , which then had a total student enrollment of less than 500 , she helped start a small sorority , Zeta Iota Phi ( a chapter of Chi Omega ) , of which she was the first president . During her time in Eugene , she produced poems and pen @-@ and @-@ ink sketches for publication in the Oregon Monthly . In a small city steeped in " puritan moralism " , she was the first to wear rouge on campus ; she acquired boyfriends and wore clothes considered by some to be " flashy " . Taking off the spring semester of 1908 to teach in a one @-@ room schoolhouse on Stuart Island , one of the San Juan Islands near the U.S. border with Canada , she returned to Eugene to finish her bachelor 's degree in history , graduating in early 1909 . Her senior thesis was on the Modoc Indian Wars . 
 = = Portland = = 
 That spring , Bryant moved to Portland , first sharing a downtown apartment with one of her college friends , Clara Wold , then renting her own apartment in the same building . Seeking employment , she landed a temporary job designing a stained @-@ glass window for the Povey Brothers , did some freelance reporting for The Oregonian , and found work as an illustrator and society editor for the Portland Spectator . Meanwhile , she formed friendships with people such as Cas Baer , drama editor for The Oregonian , who were interested in journalism and the arts . In late 1909 , she met and married Paul Trullinger , a handsome dentist who lived on a houseboat on the Willamette River , collected art , and enjoyed uninhibited parties . 
 Bryant , who retained her maiden name and her downtown apartment after her marriage to Trullinger , bridled at doing housework and yearned for professional advancement . Drawn toward politics by a new friend , Sara Bard Field , she became involved in the women 's suffrage movement . In 1912 , she joined the Oregon branch of the College Equal Suffrage League . She and Field gave pro @-@ suffrage speeches in smaller Oregon cities , and Bryant rode on the suffrage float in Portland 's annual Flag Day parade . Led by Abigail Scott <unk> , women achieved suffrage in Oregon later that year . 
 Bryant became familiar with the socialist journal The Masses through Portland resident and lawyer C. E. S. Wood , who eventually married Field and who often contributed to the magazine . Enthusiastic about its contents , particularly articles by Portland native John Reed , Bryant began raising subscriptions for it . Emma Goldman , a well @-@ known anarchist whom Wood had defended in court , gave a speech in Reed 's honor at the Industrial Workers of the World ( IWW ) hall in Portland . She and other political activists , such as Alexander Berkman , were among guests entertained by Bryant and her husband . In 1914 , Reed , a Harvard graduate and established writer who by then lived in Greenwich Village , came home for a visit , during which he spoke at the University Club of Portland against the class system . Exactly how or when or how often Bryant and Reed met is uncertain , but near Christmas 1915 when Reed again came home to visit his widowed mother , the young couple announced their love at a dinner party . Reed returned to Greenwich Village on December 28 , and Bryant , abandoning her marriage , followed him three days later . Trullinger filed for divorce , which was granted in July 1916 , on grounds of desertion . 
 = = Greenwich Village and Cape Cod = = 
 Reed had rented a room for Bryant near his apartment at 43 Washington Square , but instead she moved in with him as part of what Max Eastman , editor of The Masses , called a " gypsy compact " . Their unmarried co @-@ habitation caused little curiosity among Reed 's friends in the Village , many of whom rejected marriage and other middle @-@ class norms out of principle . Unified by an " air of intellectual freedom , moral laissez @-@ faire and <unk> " , most were involved in literary , artistic , or political pursuits in a bohemian neighborhood that in some ways resembled the Left Bank of Paris . While visiting New York , Field took Bryant to a meeting of <unk> , a women 's group that included feminist Charlotte Perkins Gilman , journalist Mary Heaton <unk> , political activist Crystal Eastman ( Max 's sister ) , actress Ida Rauh , writers Zona Gale and Mary Austin , and many others . Among Bryant 's new friends were feminists Inez Milholland , Inez Gillmore , and Doris Stevens . Other notables circulating in the Village included Goldman , playwright Eugene O 'Neill , and one of Reed 's former lovers , arts patron Mabel Dodge . 
 At Number 43 , Bryant and Reed pursued their journalistic endeavors in separate work rooms . Four months after leaving Oregon , Bryant broke into print in New York with an article about two Portland judges , one of whom had dismissed a case brought against Goldman for distributing birth @-@ control information . It was published as " Two Judges " in the April 1916 issue of The Masses . Meanwhile , Reed , who had reported on the 1913 Paterson silk strike , Pancho Villa , and the ongoing war ( World War I ) in Europe , went on assignment for Collier 's to interview William Jennings Bryant in Florida . 
 Later that spring Bryant and Reed heeded <unk> 's call to spend the warm season in Provincetown , Massachusetts , at the tip of Cape Cod , and to take part in the communal theater productions of the Provincetown Players . Others from the Village went as well and joined the group , organized in 1915 by George Cram Cook and his wife , Susan <unk> , who hoped to produce plays that were both political and artistic . Among the works the group staged in 1916 were Bryant 's " The Game " , in which characters named Life and Death play dice for the lives of Youth ( a poet ) and Girl ( a dancer ) . It appeared on the same bill as " Not Smart " by Wilbur Steele and " Bound East for Cardiff " by Eugene O 'Neill . 
 During the summer , Reed left Cape Cod to cover the Progressive Party convention in Chicago , and at other times he retreated from the players to work on articles for Collier 's and Metropolitan Magazine . During these absences , Bryant and O 'Neill became lovers , not surprising in a group that professed and practiced free love . Reed , made aware of this new development , responded by inviting O 'Neill to begin taking his meals with them . In a note to Field , Bryant said that her relationship with Reed was " so beautiful and so free ! ... We don 't interfere with each other at all ... we feel like children who will never grow up . " 
 = = Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson = = 
 After spending the month of September in a cottage they bought in Truro , Bryant and Reed returned to Greenwich Village , where the Provincetown Players planned to establish an alternative to Broadway theater . On weekends , they sojourned to Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson , upriver from New York City , where Villagers including Eastman , Dodge , and illustrator Boardman Robinson and his wife had cottages . In October , Bryant and Reed bought their own place in Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson . Meanwhile , Reed , who had suffered from kidney ailments since childhood , was told by his doctors that he would need to have a kidney removed . The surgery , considered " gravely serious " , was scheduled for mid @-@ November . To protect Bryant by making her his legal heir , Reed married her before leaving for surgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital , in Baltimore . 
 Compounding their difficulties were Bryant 's ongoing relationship with O 'Neill and gynecological problems she was treated for while Reed was in the hospital . When he returned from Baltimore in mid @-@ December , the couple retreated full @-@ time to Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson to recuperate and to focus on writing . They made plans to travel to China in 1917 to cover events for American publications , but in January the plans fell through when U.S. entry into the war against Germany became highly likely . ( The U.S. entered the war on April 6 . ) To boost their finances , they sold the cottage in Truro to Margaret Sanger , and Reed pawned his father 's gold watch . At the same time , his strong anti @-@ war positions , enunciated in The Masses and elsewhere , alienated most of his employers , further reducing his income . Adding to these stresses was Reed 's confession to Bryant that he had had multiple love affairs that he had not told her about , and the subsequent unhappiness between Bryant and Reed led to a temporary separation . After securing press credentials for Bryant , Reed moved to the Harvard Club , and Bryant , setting sail in June , went to France to cover the war for the Bell Syndicate . Regrets quickly followed : 
 No sooner had they parted on board the ship than both Reed and Bryant were assailed by misgivings . An outpouring of letters from either side of the Atlantic followed . Both were suffering , both were confused , lonely , and miserable ... [ The letters were ] proof of the basically strong bond that held the two , the poet @-@ reporter and social critic and the erratic , appealing woman he had rescued from the banality of middle @-@ class existence in Portland . 
 = = Petrograd = = 
 In mid @-@ August , when Bryant returned from France , Reed met her at the dock and told her to prepare to go to Petrograd ( the historic names of which also include Saint Petersburg and Leningrad ) four days later to cover the Russian Revolution . Eastman of The Masses had raised funds to pay Reed 's travel expenses , and the Bell Syndicate assigned Bryant to report on the war " from a woman 's point of view " . Leaving New York on August 17 , they arrived in the Russian capital city ( then Petrograd , later Moscow ) about six months after the forced abdication of the last Russian czar , Nicholas II . Headed by Alexander Kerensky , the provisional government that had succeeded the czar had already survived an attempted putsch by General Kornilov . Bryant and Reed entered the city after the Kornilov Affair and before the Bolsheviks overthrew the Kerensky government in the October Revolution . 
 Reconciled as a couple , and working from their room at the Angleterre Hotel , Bryant and Reed attended gatherings at the Smolny Institute and elsewhere in Petrograd and interviewed many leading political figures , including Lenin , Trotsky , and Kerensky , and both eventually compiled books — Six Red Months in Russia by Bryant and Reed 's Ten Days That Shook the World — from their articles . Bryant circulated widely , covering Duma meetings , dining in public mess halls with soldiers and workers , and interviewing women revolutionaries . Among those were Katherine <unk> , known as the " grandmother of the revolution " , Maria <unk> , whom Bryant considered the most powerful woman in Russia , and Aleksandra Kollontai , who became People 's Commissar of Social Welfare and the only woman in the Bolshevik cabinet . In the process , Bryant , who had often been overshadowed by her more famous husband , gained confidence in her professional reporting skills . By the time she returned to New York , her work was being read across North America : 
 [ The ] springtime of 1918 in the United States was a time of heightened contradictions . <unk> about the new Russian experiment in cities and the hinterland coexisted with the intensified patriotism of wartime ... No matter what appeared in their editorial pages , newspaper editors knew that feature stories with first @-@ hand knowledge of the Revolution sold papers . The conservative and Republican Philadelphia Public Ledger syndicate bought Bryant 's thirty @-@ two stories and sold them to Hearst 's New York American and to more than one hundred newspapers over the United States and Canada . 
 = = New York = = 
 Leaving Russia before Reed , who wanted to report on the Bolshevik debate about Russian participation in the war with Germany , Bryant returned to New York , arriving on February 18 , 1918 . She found Greenwich Village much changed by the war ; old friends had moved , rents had gone up , and tourists were replacing bohemians . Under government pressure , The Masses had shut down . Working out of a room at the Brevoort Hotel , Bryant wrote articles about the October Revolution and speeches or cables urging support of the workers ' government in Russia . 
 Meanwhile , Reed , who was trying to get home , was unable to get State Department clearance for a visa and was detained in Oslo ( then called Christiana ) , Norway , for more than a month . His letters were censored , and Bryant did not hear from him directly until April . On orders from Edgar Sisson of the U.S. Commission on Public Information , all of Reed 's papers were confiscated when he arrived in New York on April 28 . Unable to write about the October Revolution without his notes , Reed instead gave speeches advocating U.S. recognition of the new Russian government . That summer , the couple retreated to Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson . 
 In August , Bryant spent a long weekend in the arts colony at Woodstock , where she and painter Andrew Dasburg , with whom Bryant had been close for a couple of years , began a long @-@ term , intermittent love affair . Returning to the Village in September , Bryant and Reed rented a small house at 1 <unk> Place and settled in . Later in the month , Reed was arrested for giving a speech in which he denounced the use of Allied troops in Russia . In a separate case , Reed stood trial with Eastman , Floyd Dell , and others from the former staff of The Masses for conspiracy to obstruct the draft . Bryant was questioned but not charged . Both this and an earlier trial against The Masses ended in hung juries , and the defendants were set free . Also in October 1918 , Bryant 's first book , Six Red Months in Russia , was published to " mostly favorable reviews , " and Reed resumed work on Ten Days That Shook the World after the government returned his notes . It would not be published until April 1919 . 
 In February 1919 , while still based in New York , Bryant went to Washington , D.C. , to speak , along with Albert Rhys Williams , about the situation in Russia . She stayed in Washington long enough to participate in a National Woman 's Party suffrage rally , during which she was arrested and spent three days in jail . Upon her release , she insisted on testifying as an unfriendly witness before the Overman Committee , which had been set up to investigate Bolshevik activity in the United States . <unk> questions about her religious beliefs , marriages , and other personal matters during her two days of testimony , she tried to convince the subcommittee , led by Senator Lee S. Overman , that Russia had a right to self @-@ determination . Soon thereafter , she began a cross @-@ country speaking tour , " The Truth About Russia " , arranged by Anna Louise Strong , during which she addressed large audiences in Detroit , Chicago , Spokane , Seattle , San Francisco , Los Angeles , and other American cities . According to biographer Virginia Gardner , Bryant was " ... the first woman to go among the <unk> to defend Lenin and Trotsky . Her message was simple : ' Hands off Russia ! ' ' Bring the boys home ! ' " 
 After Bryant returned from her lecture tour in May , she and Reed spent the next few months mainly in Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson writing , gardening , and in Reed 's case , recuperating from influenza . In late August , Reed , who had joined the Socialist Party of America , was chosen by one of its factions , the Communist Labor Party of America ( CLP ) , to visit Moscow to seek recognition for the CLP as the sole representative of the Communist International ( Comintern ) in the U.S. The U.S. government quickly outlawed the CLP and its competitor , the American Communist Party , headed by Louis <unk> . In danger of being arrested and unable to get a passport to go to Russia , Reed , disguised as a stoker , left the U.S. in late September 1919 on a Scandinavian ship headed for Europe . During the Palmer Raids and Red Scare days beginning in November 1919 , he would be charged with conspiring to overthrow the government by force . Succeeding in reaching Moscow , he was arrested and incarcerated in Finland in March 1920 on his way home . Three months later , he was returned to Moscow in a prisoner exchange between the White ( anti @-@ Bolshevik ) Finns of the Finnish Civil War and the Bolsheviks . From Reval ( Tallinn ) , Estonia , he cabled Bryant , " Passport home refused . Temporarily returning headquarters . Come if possible . " Traveling without passport , Bryant , disguised as the wife of a Swedish businessman , arrived in Petrograd in late August 1920 . 
 = = Reed 's death = = 
 When Bryant reached Petrograd , Reed was in Baku , attending the " first congress of peoples of the east " ( Oriental Congress ) with the Comintern executive committee . He had left a letter for her with several possibilities for lodging , one of which was a room he had arranged for her at the <unk> Hotel in Moscow . This is where , on September 15 , they finally reconnected , spending the next few days together and visiting Lenin , Trotsky , Hungarian revolutionary Béla Kun , and Enver Pasha , a former minister of war in the Ottoman Empire . Bryant began filing Moscow news stories with the International News Service , which had hired her before she left New York . 
 A week after Reed 's return from Baku , he began to experience dizziness and headaches , thought at first to be symptoms of influenza . Five days later , when he became delirious , doctors diagnosed typhus and sent him to the hospital . There , with Bryant by his side , he died on October 17 , 1920 , a few days shy of his 33rd birthday . On the day of Reed 's funeral , in keeping with Russian custom , Bryant walked alone behind the hearse , at the head of the funeral procession . Fainting during the burial , she awoke in her hotel room . Among those at her bedside were Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman , who had been arrested in the U.S. and deported to Russia in late 1919 . 
 = = Further reporting = = 
 After Reed 's death , Bryant obtained Lenin 's approval for a trip to the southern Russian border and neighboring countries . She went by train over the Kazakh Steppe , through areas hard hit by famine , to Tashkent and Bukhara and to the borders of Iran and Afghanistan , interviewing and taking notes . 
 She returned to the U.S. in mid @-@ summer 1921 , and stayed for about a year . In August , the New York American , a Hearst newspaper , began publishing a series of 16 of her articles describing famine in Russia , Lenin 's New Economic Policy , the end of the Russian civil war , and related topics . In general , the tone of these articles was " sober and at times unsparing , in contrast to her often rapturous reporting in her 1918 stories . " 
 In October , she was the main speaker at a memorial for Reed in New York City , and she spent some of her time collecting Reed 's papers together for possible publication . In addition , she arranged with King Features Syndicate , another Hearst agency , to return to Russia to write portraits of Russians . The first of these appeared in print in June 1922 and led to her second book , Mirrors of Moscow , in 1923 . Bryant 's travels in Europe this time included Moscow , Berlin , London , Paris , and other cities . By late October , she was in Rome , accompanied by William Christian Bullitt , Jr . , who would become her third husband . Here in late 1922 , she wrote about Benito Mussolini , the Fascist leader who had just come to power and with whom she obtained an interview . Gathering material from a variety of sources , including Madame Mussolini , Bryant wrote a feature article , " Mussolini <unk> Upon Efficiency to Restore Italy " , published in the New York American in early 1923 . She described the future dictator this way : 
 I will always think of Mussolini as one of the oddest characters in history , and I will remember him as I last saw him in the great white and gold foyer of the Grand Hotel , under a huge crystal candelabra slouching wearily into a graceful Louis XV ivory and enameled chair . 
 His pale , heavy @-@ boned face showed signs of sleeplessness . His strong body was bulging over the sides of the seat ; his legs were spread wide over the pale , rose @-@ colored velvet carpet . There was a little cup of black coffee , absurdly delicate , beside his gnarled work @-@ warped hand . ( As quoted from the New York American , January 28 , 1923 , section 52 , p . 1 ) 
 Leaving Rome to cover the Turkish War of Independence for the International News Service , Bryant lived with Bullitt in a villa in Constantinople in early 1923 . Bullitt was a wealthy Philadelphian who would later become the first U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union . While he worked on a novel , It 's Not Done , published in 1926 and dedicated to Bryant , she covered events related to the rise of Turkish strongman Mustafa Kemal Atatürk . From her base in Turkey , she ventured to Palermo to interview the deposed king of Greece , Constantine I , and to Athens to interview his son , George II . Shortly thereafter , Bryant suspended her journalistic career to focus on family matters . 
 = = Paris = = 
 Later in 1923 , Bryant and Bullitt moved to Paris , where they married in December . Bryant gave birth to her only child , Anne , in February 1924 , and in 1925 she and Bullitt added to their family an 8 @-@ year @-@ old boy , <unk> Ismaili Bey , whom they had met in Turkey . As the wife of a rich man , Bryant had duties related to the running of an upper @-@ class household : " ... the management of servants , the ordering of food and planning of menus , house decoration , flower arrangement , keeping a social calendar . " She told one visitor to her home that she considered her new life " useless " , and the Bryant – Bullitt marriage began to unravel . In " Louise Bryant Grows Old " , historian Christine <unk> examines the great changes in Bryant 's life after her marriage to Bullitt : 
 The entrance of William Bullitt into Louise Bryant 's life confounds the intertwined stories of the grief @-@ stricken war widow , the radical heroine , and the champion of the oppressed . The marriage is a puzzle , both <unk> and historically . <unk> , it proved to be a disaster , in contrast to Bryant 's earlier romantic choices , which had been smart and fulfilling . 
 Although Bryant continued to write , little of her work toward the end of her life was published . Her last piece of journalism , " A Turkish Divorce " , about Atatürk 's treatment of women , appeared in The Nation in August 1925 . 
 By 1926 , Bryant , who had generally abstained from alcohol earlier in life , was suffering from painful and incurable <unk> <unk> ( <unk> 's disease ) and had begun drinking heavily . In 1930 , Bullitt , citing his wife 's drinking and alleging that she was involved in a lesbian relationship with Gwen Le Gallienne , a daughter of writer Richard Le Gallienne , divorced Bryant and won sole custody of Anne . Bryant continued to live in Paris , occasionally advising writer Claude McKay , and briefly assisting researchers from Harvard University in preserving John Reed 's papers . 
 = = Death = = 
 Bryant died on January 6 , 1936 , of a brain hemorrhage in Sèvres , in the suburbs of Paris , and is buried in Cimetière des <unk> in Versailles . In 1998 , three volunteers from the Oregon Cultural Heritage Commission went to Paris to find the grave , which they discovered was crumbling , undated , and scheduled for removal . Through the commission 's efforts as well as donations , including some from relatives of Bryant and Bullitt , the grave was restored . 
 = = Papers = = 
 Bryant 's personal papers were transferred to Bullitt , where they remained until their daughter , Anne , donated the collection to Yale University in 2004 . They exist as separate collections , the Louise Bryant Papers ( MS 1840 ) and the William C. Bullitt Papers ( MS 112 ) in the Sterling Memorial Library at Yale . The Bryant collection consists , linearly , of 19 @.@ 43 feet ( 5 @.@ 92 m ) of " correspondence , writings , books , visual artwork , photographs , printed matter , and other material created and collected by Bryant during the last twenty years of her life from 1916 to 1936 . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Bryant – Reed story is told in the 1981 film Reds , starring Diane Keaton as Bryant and Warren Beatty as Reed . Supporting actors include Jack Nicholson as Eugene O 'Neill , Maureen Stapleton as Emma Goldman ; Jerzy Kosiński as Grigory Zinoviev ( one of the Bolshevik leaders ) , and Edward Herrmann as Max Eastman . 
 = = Works = = 
 Bryant 's early journalistic work appeared in college publications and in newspapers — The Spectator , where Bryant was society editor , and The Oregonian , for whom she freelanced — in Portland . Much of her later work appeared in newspapers such as the Philadelphia Public Ledger and in the New York American and other Hearst publications , and were syndicated to newspapers across North America . Some of these articles also appeared as collections in book form in 1918 and 1923 . Her work also appeared in independent magazines , including The Masses , The Liberator , and The Nation . Below is a partial list of her published work . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Mirrors of Moscow . New York : Thomas Seltzer . 1923 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Six Red Months in Russia : An Observer 's Account of Russia Before and During the Proletarian Dictatorship . New York : George H. Doran Company . 1918 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = Plays = = = 
 The Game : A Morality Play in One Act . The Provincetown Plays ( New York : Frank Shay ) . 1916 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved January 22 , 2014 – via One @-@ Act @-@ <unk> 
 = = = Other = = = 
 " Fables for Proletarian Children " . The Revolutionary Age . January 25 , 1919 . Retrieved January 22 , 2014 – via Marxists Internet Archive . 
 " The Last Days With John Reed : A Letter from Louise Bryant " . The Liberator . February 1921 . Retrieved January 22 , 2014 – via Marxists Internet Archive . 
 " Two Judges " . The Masses ( New York : The Masses Publishing Company ) 8 ( 6 ) : 18 . April 1916 . Retrieved January 24 , 2013 – via New York University . 
 = Eddy Merckx = 
 Édouard Louis Joseph , Baron Merckx ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) ( born 17 June 1945 ) , better known as Eddy Merckx , is a Belgian former professional road and track bicycle racer . He was born in Meensel @-@ Kiezegem , Brabant , Belgium . He grew up in Woluwe @-@ Saint @-@ Pierre where his parents ran a grocery store . He played several sports , but found his true passion in cycling . Merckx got his first bicycle at the age of three or four and competed in his first race in 1961 . His first victory came at Petit @-@ Enghien in October 1961 . 
 After winning eighty races as an amateur racer , he turned professional on 29 April 1965 when he signed with Solo @-@ Superia . His first major victory came in the Milan – San Remo a year later , after switching to Peugeot @-@ BP @-@ Michelin . After the 1967 season , Merckx moved to Faema , and won the Giro d 'Italia , his first of eleven Grand Tour victories – a record that still stands today . Four times between 1970 and 1974 , Merckx completed a Grand Tour double . His final double also coincided with winning the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships to make him the first rider to accomplish cycling 's Triple Crown . Merckx broke the hour record in October 1972 , extending the record by almost 800 meters . 
 He acquired the nickname " The Cannibal " after a teammate told his daughter of how Merckx would not let anyone else win , and the daughter referred to him as a cannibal . Merckx achieved 525 victories over his eighteen @-@ year career . He is one of only three riders to have won all five ' Monuments of Cycling ' ( Milan – San Remo , Tour of Flanders , Paris – Roubaix , Liège – Bastogne – Liège , and the Giro di Lombardia ) . The other two are fellow Belgians Roger De Vlaeminck and Rik Van Looy . He won the Tour de France in 1969 , 1970 , 1971 , 1972 and <unk> only major one @-@ day race he did not win was Paris – Tours : his best performance was sixth in 1973 . Merckx was successful on the road and also on the track , as well as in the large stage races and one @-@ day races . He is widely thought to be the greatest and most successful rider in the history of cycling . However , Merckx was caught in three separate doping incidents during his career . 
 Since Merckx 's retirement from the sport on 18 May 1978 , he has remained active in the cycling world . He began his own bicycle chain , Eddy Merckx Cycles , in 1980 and its bicycles were used by several professional teams in the 1980s and 1990s . Merckx coached the Belgian national cycling team for eleven years , stopping in 1996 . In 2001 , he played a large role in getting the Tour of Qatar organized to start in 2002 . He co @-@ owns the tour and also the Tour of Oman , both of which he still organizes . 
 = = Early life and amateur career = = 
 Edouard Louis Joseph Merckx was born in Meensel @-@ Kiezegem , Brabant , Belgium on 17 June 1945 to Jules Merckx and Jenny <unk> . Merckx was the first @-@ born of the family . In September 1946 , the family moved to Sint @-@ Pieters @-@ Woluwe , in Brussels , Belgium in order to take over a grocery store that had been up for lease . In May 1948 , Jenny gave birth to twins : a boy , Michel , and a girl , Micheline . As a child Eddy was hyperactive and was always playing outside . 
 Eddy was a competitive child and played several sports , including basketball , boxing , football , and table tennis . He even played lawn tennis for the local junior team . However , Merckx claimed he knew he wanted to be a cyclist at the age of four and that his first memory was a crash on his bike when he was the same age . Merckx began riding a bike at the age of three or four and would ride to school every day , beginning at age eight . Merckx would imitate his cycling idol Stan <unk> with his friends when they rode bikes together . 
 In summer 1961 , Merckx bought his first racing license and competed in his first official race a month after he turned sixteen , coming in sixth place . He rode in twelve more races before winning his first , at Petit @-@ Enghien , on 1 October 1961 . In the winter following his first victory , he trained with former racer Félicien Vervaecke at the local velodrome . Merckx won his second victory on 11 March 1962 in a kermis race . Merckx competed in 55 races during the 1962 calendar year ; as he devoted more time to cycling , his grades at school began to decline . After winning the Belgian amateur road race title , Merckx declined an offer from his school 's headmaster to have his exams postponed , and dropped out of school . He finished the season with 23 victories to his name . 
 Merckx was selected for the men 's road race at the 1964 Summer Olympics , where he finished in twelfth position . Later in the season , he won the amateur road race at the UCI Road World Championships in Sallanches , France . Merckx remained an amateur until April 1965 , and finished his amateur career with eighty wins to his credit . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 1965 – 1967 : Solo @-@ Superia & Peugeot @-@ BP @-@ Michelin = = = 
 = = = = 1965 : First professional season = = = = 
 Merckx turned professional on 29 April 1965 when he signed with Rik van Looy 's Belgian team , Solo @-@ Superia . He won his first race in <unk> , beating Emile <unk> . On August 1 , Merckx finished second in the Belgian national championships , which qualified him for the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships . Raphaël Géminiani , the manager of the Bic cycling team , approached Merckx at the event and offered him 2 @,@ 500 francs a month to join the team the following season . Merckx chose to sign ; however , since he was a minor the contract was invalid . 
 After finishing the road race in 29th position , Merckx returned to Belgium and discussed his plans for the next season with his manager Jean Van <unk> . Van <unk> helped orchestrate a move that sent Merckx to the French @-@ based Peugeot @-@ BP @-@ Michelin for 20 @,@ 000 francs a month . Merckx elected to leave Solo @-@ Superia due to the way he was treated by his teammates , in particular Van Looy . Van Looy and other teammates mocked Merckx for his various habits such as his eating , or called him names . In addition , Merckx later stated that during his time with Van Looy 's team he had not been taught anything . While with Solo @-@ Superia , he won nine races out of the nearly 70 races he entered . 
 = = = = 1966 : First Monument victory = = = = 
 In March 1966 , Merckx entered his first major stage race as a professional rider , the Paris – Nice . He took the race lead for a single stage before losing it to Jacques Anquetil and eventually coming in fourth overall . Milan – San Remo , his first participation in one of cycling 's Monuments , was the next event on the calendar for Merckx . There , he succeeded in staying with the main field as the race entered the final climb of the Poggio . He attacked on the climb and reduced the field to a group of eleven , himself included . Merckx was advised by his manager to hold off on sprinting full @-@ out to the finish line until as late as possible . Three other riders reached the line with him ; Merckx , however , beat them in the sprint . In the following weeks , he raced the Tour of Flanders and Paris – Roubaix , the most important cobbled classics ; in the former he crashed and in the latter he had a punctured tire . At the 1966 UCI Road World Championships he finished twelfth in the road race after suffering a cramp in the closing kilometers . He finished 1966 season with a total of 20 wins , including his first stage race win at the Tour of Morbihan . 
 = = = = 1967 : Second straight Milan – San Remo and world champion = = = = 
 Merckx opened the 1967 campaign with two stage victories at the Tour of Sardinia . He followed these successes by entering Paris – Nice where he won the second stage and took the race lead . Two stages later , a teammate , Tom Simpson , attacked with several other riders on a climb and was nearly 20 minutes ahead of Merckx , who remained in a group behind . Merckx attacked two days later on a climb 70 km into the stage . He was able to establish a firm advantage , but obeyed orders from his manager to wait for the chasing Simpson . Merckx won the stage , while Simpson secured his overall victory . 
 On 18 March , Merckx started the Milan – San Remo and was seen as a 120 – 1 favorite to win the race . He attacked on the Capo Berta and again on the Poggio , leaving only Gianni Motta with him . The two slowed their pace and were joined by two more riders . Merckx won the four @-@ man sprint to the finish . His next victory came in La Flèche Wallonne after he missed out on an early break , caught up to it , and attacked from it to win the race . On 20 May , he started the Giro d 'Italia , his first Grand Tour . He won the twelfth and fourteenth stages en route to finishing ninth in the general classification . 
 He signed with Faema on 2 September for ten years worth 400 @,@ 000 Belgian francs . He chose to switch over in order to be in complete control over the team he was racing for . In addition , he would not have to pay for various expenses that came with racing such as wheels and tires . The next day , Merckx started the men 's road race at the 1967 UCI Road World Championships in Heerlen , Netherlands . The course consisted of ten laps of a circuit . Motta attacked on the first lap and was joined by Merckx and five other riders . The group thinned to five as they reached the finish line where Merckx was able to out @-@ sprint Jan Janssen for first place . In doing so , he became the third rider to win the world road race amateur and professional titles . By winning the race he earned the right to wear the rainbow jersey as world champion . 
 = = = 1968 – 1970 : Faema = = = 
 = = = = 1968 : First Grand Tour victory = = = = 
 Merckx 's first victory with his new team came in a stage win at the Tour of Sardinia . At Paris – Nice , he was forced to quit the race due to a knee injury he sustained during the event . He failed to win his third consecutive Milan – San Remo and missed out at the Tour of Flanders the following weekend . His next victory came at Paris – Roubaix when he bested Herman Van Springel in a race that was plagued by poor weather and several punctures to the competing riders . 
 At the behest of his team , Merckx raced the Giro d 'Italia instead of the Tour de France . He won the race 's second stage after he attacked with one kilometer to go . The twelfth stage was marred by rainy weather and featured the climbs of the Tre Cime di Lavaredo for the stage finish . By the time Merckx had reached the penultimate climb , there was a six @-@ man group at the front of the race with a nine @-@ minute advantage . Merckx attacked and was able to get a sizable distance between himself and the group he left before he stopped to change his wheel in order to slow down due to orders from his team manager . Merckx got back on his bike and caught the leading breakaway and rode past it to the finish , where he won the stage and took the race lead . Merckx went on to win the race , along with the points classification and mountains classification . In the Volta a Catalunya , Merckx took the race lead from Gimondi in the race 's time trial stage and won the event as a whole . He finished the season with 32 wins in the 129 races he entered . 
 = = = = 1969 : A Victory in Paris and injury in Blois = = = = 
 Merckx opened the 1969 season with victories at the Vuelta a Levante and the Paris – Nice overall , as well as stages in each of the races . On 30 March 1969 Merckx earned his first major victory of the 1969 calendar with his win at the Tour of Flanders . On a rainy day that featured strong winds , he attacked first on the Oude Kwaremont , but a puncture nullified any gains he was able to establish . He made a move on the <unk> and was followed by a few riders . As the wind shifted from a crosswind to a headwind with close to seventy kilometers left to go , Merckx increased the pace and rode solo to victory . The seventeen days after the Tour of Flanders saw Merckx win nine times . He won Milan @-@ San Remo by descending the Poggio at high speeds . Merckx saw victory again in mid @-@ April at the Liège – Bastogne – Liège when he attacked with seventy kilometers remaining in the pouring rain . 
 He began the Giro d 'Italia on 16 May , stating that he wished to ride less aggressively than the year before in order to save energy for the Tour de France . Merckx had won four of the race 's stages and held the race lead going into the sixteenth day of racing . However , before the start of the stage race director Vincenzo Torriani , along with a television camera and two writers , entered Merckx 's hotel room and informed him that he had failed a doping control and was disqualified from the race , in addition to being suspended for a month . On 14 June , the cycling governing body , the <unk> , overturned the month long suspension and cleared him due to the " benefit of the doubt . " 
 Before starting the Tour , Merckx had spent a large amount of his time resting and training , racing only five times . Merckx won the race 's sixth stage through attacking before the leg 's final major climb , the Ballon d 'Alsace , and then outlasting his competitors who were able to follow him initially . During the seventeenth stage , Merckx was riding at the head of the race with several general classification contenders on the Col du Tourmalet . Merckx shifted into a large gear , attacked , and went on to cross the summit with a 45 @-@ second advantage . Despite orders to wait for the chasing riders , Merckx increased his efforts . He rode over the Col du <unk> and Col d 'Aubisque , increasing the gap to eight minutes . With close to fifty kilometers to go , Merckx began to suffer hypoglycemia and rode the rest of the stage in severe pain . At the end of the stage , Merckx told the journalists " I hope I have done enough now for you to consider me a worthy winner . " Merckx finished the race with six stage victories to his credit , along with the general , points , mountains , and combination classifications , and the award for most aggressive rider . 
 His next major race was the two @-@ day race , Paris @-@ Luxembourg . Merckx was down fifty @-@ four seconds going into the second day and attacked eight kilometers from the finish , on the slopes of the <unk> . Merckx rode solo to catch the leading rider Jacques Anquetil , whom he dropped with a kilometer remaining . Merckx won the stage and gained enough time on the race leader Gimondi to win the race . 
 On 9 September , Merckx participated in a three @-@ round omnium event at the cement velodrome in Blois where each rider was to be paced by a derny . Fernand Wambst was Merckx 's pacer for the contest . After winning the first intermediate sprint of the first round , Wambst chose to slow their pace and move to the back of the race despite Merckx wanting to stay out in front for fear of an accident . Wambst wanted to pass everyone to provide a show for the crowd . The duo then increased their pace and began to pass each other contestant ; however , as they passed the riders in first position , the leading derny lost control and crashed into the wall . Wambst chose to avoid the derny by going below it , but the leader 's derny came back down and collided with Wambst , while Merckx 's pedal caught one of the <unk> . The two riders landed head first onto the track . 
 Wambst died of a fractured skull as he was being transported to a hospital . Merckx remained unconscious for 45 minutes and awoke in the operating room . He sustained a concussion , whiplash , trapped nerves in his back , a displaced pelvis , and several other cuts and bruises . He remained at the hospital for a week before returning to Belgium . He spent six weeks in bed before beginning to race again in October . Merckx later stated that he " was never the same again " after the crash . He would constantly adjust his seat during races to help ease the pain . Merckx stopped racing on 26 October to recuperate . 
 = = = = 1970 : A Giro – Tour double = = = = 
 Merckx entered the 1970 campaign nursing a case of mild tendonitis in his knee . His first major victory came in the Paris – Nice where he won the general classification , along with three stages . On 1 April , Merckx won the Gent – Wevelgem , followed by the Tour of Belgium – where he braved a snowy stage and followed the day up with a victory in the final time trial to secure the title – and the Paris – Roubaix . In the Paris – Roubaix , Merckx was battling a cold as the race began in heavy rain . He attacked thirty @-@ one kilometers from the finish and went on to win by five minutes and twenty @-@ one seconds , the largest margin of victory in the history of the race . The next weekend , Merckx attempted to race for teammate Joseph Bruyère in the La Flèche Wallonne ; however , Bruyère was unable to keep pace with the leading riders , leaving Merckx to take the victory . 
 After the scandal at the previous year 's Giro d 'Italia , Merckx was unwilling to returning to the race in 1970 . His entry to the race was contingent upon all doping controls be sent to a lab in Rome to be tested , rather than being tested at the finish like the year before . He started the race and won the second leg , but four days later showed signs of weakness with his knee as he was dropped twice while in the mountains . However the next day , Merckx attacked on the final climb into the city of <unk> to win the stage and take the lead . He won the stage nine individual time trial by almost two minutes over the second @-@ place finisher , expanding his lead significantly . Merckx didn 't win another stage , but managed to expand his lead a little more before the race 's conclusion . 
 Before beginning the Tour , Merckx won the men 's road race at the Belgian National Road Race Championships . Merckx won the Tour 's opening prologue to take the race 's first race leader 's yellow jersey . After losing the lead following the second stage , he won the sixth stage after forming a breakaway with Lucien Van Impe and regained the lead . After expanding his lead in the stage nine individual time trial , Merckx won the race 's first true mountain stage , stage 10 , and expanded his lead to five minutes in the general classification . Merckx won three of the five stages contested within the next four days , including a summit finish to Mont Ventoux , where upon finishing he was given oxygen . Merckx won two more stages , both individual time trials , and won the Tour by over twelve minutes . He finished the Tour with eight stage victories and won the mountains and combination classifications . The eight stage wins equaled the previous record for stage wins in a single Tour de France . Merckx also became the third to accomplish the feat of winning the Giro and Tour in the same calendar year . 
 = = = 1971 – 1976 : Molteni = = = 
 = = = = 1971 : A Third Consecutive Tour and Second World Championship = = = = 
 Faema folded at the end of the 1970 season causing Merckx and several of his teammates to move to another Italian team , Molteni . The first major victory for Merckx came in the Giro di Sardegna , which he secured after attacking on his own and riding solo through the rain to win the race 's final stage . He followed that with his third consecutive Paris – Nice victory , a race he led from start to finish . In the Milan @-@ San Remo , Merckx worked with his teammates in a seven @-@ man breakaway to set up a final attack on the Poggio . Merckx 's attack succeeded and he won his fourth edition of the race . Six days later , he won the Omloop Het Volk . 
 After winning the Tour of Belgium again , Merckx headed into the major spring classics . During the Tour of Flanders , Merckx 's rivals worked against him to prevent him from winning . A week later , he suffered five flat tires during the Paris – Roubaix . The Liège – Bastogne – Liège was held in cold and rain conditions . After attacking ninety kilometers from the finish , Merckx caught the leaders on the road and passed them . He rode solo until around three kilometers to go when Georges <unk> caught him . Merckx and <unk> rode to the finish together , where Merckx won the two @-@ man sprint . Instead of racing the Giro d 'Italia , Merckx elected to enter two shorter stages races in France , the Grand Prix du Midi Libre and the Critérium du Dauphiné , both of which he won . 
 The Tour de France began with a team time trial that Merckx 's team won , giving him the lead . The next day 's racing was split into three parts . Merckx lost the lead after stage 1b , but regained it after stage 1c due to a time bonus that he earned from winning an intermediate sprint . During the second stage , a major break with the major race contenders , including Merckx , formed with over a hundred kilometers to go . The group finished nine minutes ahead of the peloton as Merckx came around Roger De Vlaeminck during the sprint to win the day . After a week of racing , Merckx held a lead of around a minute over the main contenders . The eighth stage saw a mountain top finish to Puy de Dome . Bernard Thévenet attacked on the lower slopes and Merckx was unable to counter . Joop Zoetemelk and Luis Ocaña went with Thévenet and wound up gaining fifteen seconds on Merckx . 
 On the descent of the Col du Cucheron during the race 's ninth leg , Merckx 's tire punctured , prompting Ocaña to attack with Zoetemelk , Thévenet , and Gösta Pettersson . The group of four finished a minute and a half ahead of Merckx , giving Zoetemelk the lead . The following day Merckx lost eight minutes to Ocaña after a poor showing due to stomach pains and indigestion . At the start of the eleventh stage , Merckx , three teammates , and couple others formed a breakaway . Merckx 's group finished two minutes in front of the peloton that was led by Ocaña 's Bic team . After winning the ensuing time trial , Merckx took back eleven more seconds on Ocaña . The race entered the Pyrenees with the first stage , into Luchon , being plagued by heavy thunderstorms that severely handicapped vision . On the descent of the Col de Menté , Merckx crashed on a left bend . Ocaña , who was trailing , crashed into the same bend and Zoetemelk collided with him . Merckx fell again on the descent and took the race lead as Ocaña was forced to retire from the race due to injuries from the crash . Merckx declined to wear the yellow jersey the following day out of respect for Ocaña . He won two more stages and the general , points , and combination classifications when the race finished in Paris . 
 Seven weeks following the Tour , Merckx entered the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships that were held in Mendrisio , Switzerland . The route for the day was rather hilly and consisted of several circuits . Merckx managed to be a part of a five @-@ man breakaway as the race reached five laps to go . After attacking on the second to last stage , Merckx and Gimondi reached the finish , where Merckx managed to win the race by four bike lengths . This earned him his second rainbow jersey . He closed out the 1971 calendar with his first victory in the Giro di Lombardia . This victory meant that Merckx had won all of cycling 's Monuments . Merckx made the winning move when he attacked on the descent of the <unk> Pass . During the off @-@ season , Merckx had his displaced pelvis tended to by a doctor . 
 = = = = 1972 : Breaking the hour record alongside a Giro – Tour double = = = = 
 Due to his non @-@ participation in track racing over the winter , Merckx entered the 1972 campaign in poorer form than in previous years . In the Paris – Nice , Merckx broke a vertebra in a crash that occurred as the peloton was in the midst of a bunch sprint . Against the advice of a physician , he started the next day being barely able to ride out of the saddle , leading Ocaña to attack him several times throughout the stage . In the race 's fifth leg , Merckx sprinted away from Ocaña with 150 meters to go to win the day . Merckx lost the race lead in the final stage to Raymond Poulidor and finished in second place overall . Two days removed from Paris – Nice , Merckx was victorious for the fifth time at the Milan – San Remo after he managed to establish a gap on the descent of the Poggio . 
 In Paris – Roubaix , he crashed again , further aggravating the injury he sustained from Paris – Nice . He won Liège – Bastogne – Liège by making a solo move forty @-@ six kilometers from the finish . Three days later , in La Flèche Wallonne , Merckx was a part of a six @-@ man leading group as the race neared its conclusion . Merckx won the uphill sprint to the finish despite his derailleur shifting him to the wrong gear , forcing him to ride in a larger gear than anticipated . He became the third rider to win La Flèche Wallonne and Liège – Bastogne – Liège in the same weekend . Despite a monetary offer from race organizers for Merckx to participate in the Vuelta a España , he chose to take part in the Giro d 'Italia . 
 Merckx lost four minutes over two and a half minutes to Spanish climber José Manuel Fuente after the Giro 's fourth stage that contained a summit finish to Blockhaus . In the seventh stage , Fuente had attacked on the first climb of the day , the Valico di Monte <unk> . However , Fuente cracked near the top of the climb , allowing for Merckx and Pettersson to catch and pass him . Merckx gained over four minutes on Fuente and became the new race leader . He expanded his lead by two minutes through the stage <unk> and <unk> time trials , winning the former . Fuente managed to get Merckx on his own as the two climbed together during the fourteenth stage . He and teammate Francisco <unk> attacked , leaving Merckx behind . Merckx eventually reconnected with the two on the stage 's final climb . He proceeded to attack and went on to win the stage by forty @-@ seven seconds . He lost two minutes to Fuente due to stomach trouble during the seventeenth leg that finished atop the Passo dello Stelvio , but went on to win one more stage en route to his third victory at the Giro d 'Italia . 
 Merckx entered the Tour de France in July where a battle between him and Ocaña was expected by many . He took the opening prologue and expanded his advantage over all the other general classification contenders , except Ocaña , by at least three minutes . Going into the Pyrenees , Merckx led Ocaña by fifty @-@ one seconds . The general classification favorites were riding together as the race hit the Col d 'Aubisque in the seventh leg . Ocaña punctured on the climb , allowing for the other riders to attack . Ocaña chased after the group but crashed into a wall on the descent and went on to lose almost two minutes to Merckx . Merckx was criticized for attacking while Ocaña had a flat , but Merckx responded that the year before Ocaña had done the same thing while the race was in the Alps . Merckx won the following stage , regaining the lead which he had lost after the fourth leg . During the next two major mountain stages , one to Mont Ventoux and the other to <unk> , he merely followed Ocaña 's wheel . He won three more stages before crossing the finish line in Paris as the race 's winner , thus completing his second Giro @-@ Tour double in the process . 
 After initially planning to attempt to break the hour record in August , Merckx decided to make the attempt in October after taking a ten @-@ day hiatus from criterium racing to heal and prepare . The attempt took place on 25 October in Mexico City , Mexico at the outdoor track Agustin <unk> . Mexico was chosen due to the higher altitude as this led to less air resistance . He arrived in Mexico on the 21st to prepare for his attempt , but two days were lost due to rain . His attempt started at 8 : 46 am local time and saw him finish the first ten kilometers twenty @-@ eight seconds faster than the record pace . However , Merckx started off too fast and began to fade as the attempt wore on . He eventually was able to recover and managed to post a distance of 49 @.@ 431 km ( 31 mi ) , breaking the world record . After finishing he was carried off and was quoted saying the pain was " very , very , very significant . " 
 = = = = 1973 : A Giro – Vuelta double = = = = 
 An illness prevented Merckx from taking part in the Milan – San Remo at the start of the 1973 calendar . During a span of nineteen days , Merckx won four classics including Omloop Het Volk , Liège – Bastogne – Liège , and Paris – Roubaix . He decided to race the Vuelta a España and the Giro d 'Italia , instead of racing the Tour de France . He won the opening prologue of the Vuelta to take an early lead . Despite Ocaña 's best efforts , Merckx won a total of six stages on his way to his only Vuelta a España title . In addition to the general classification , Merckx won the race 's points classification and combination classifications . 
 Four days after the conclusion of the Vuelta , Merckx lined up to start the Giro d 'Italia . He won the opening two @-@ man time trial with Roger <unk> and the next day 's leg as well . Merckx 's primary competitor , Fuente , lost a significant amount of time during the second stage . He won eighth stage that featured a summit finish to Monte <unk> despite Fuente attacking several times on the ascent . Fuente tried attacking throughout the race of the race , but was only able to make time gains on the race 's penultimate stage . Merckx won the race after leading from start to finish , a feat only previously done by Alfredo Binda and <unk> <unk> . He also became the first rider to win the Giro and Vuelta in the same calendar year . 
 The UCI Road World Championships were held in Barcelona , Spain in 1973 and contested on the <unk> circuit . During the road race , Merckx attacked with around one hundred kilometers left . His move was marked by Freddy Maertens , Gimondi , and Ocaña . Merckx attacked on the final lap , but was reeled in by the three riders . It came down to a sprint between the four , of which Merckx came in last and Gimondi in first . Following the road race , Merckx won his first Paris – Brussels and Grand Prix des Nations . He won both legs of À travers Lausanne , as well as the Giro di Lombardia , but a doping positive disqualified him . He closed the season with over fifty victories to his credit . 
 = = = = 1974 : Completion of cycling 's Triple Crown = = = = 
 The 1974 season saw Merckx fail to win a spring classic for the first time in his career , in part due to him suffering from various illnesses during the early months . Pneumonia forced him to quit racing for a month and forced him to enter the Giro d 'Italia in poor form . He lost time early in the race to Fuente , who managed to the race 's first mountainous stage . Merckx gained time on Fuente in the race 's only time trial . Merckx attacked from two hundred kilometers out two days later in a stage that was plagued by horrendous weather . Fuente lost ten minutes to Merckx , who became the race leader . The twentieth stage had a summit finish to Tre Cime di Lavaredo . Fuente and Gianbattista Baronchelli attacked on the climb , while Merckx was unable to match their accelerations . He managed to finish the stage only to see his lead shrink to twelve seconds over Baronchelli . He held on to that lead until the race 's conclusion , winning his fifth Giro d 'Italia . 
 Three days following his victory at the Giro , Merckx started the Tour de Suisse . He won the race 's prologue and rode conservatively for the rest of the race . He took the final leg , an individual time trial , to seal his overall victory . After finishing the race , Merckx had a sebaceous cyst removed on 22 June . Five days following the surgery , he was scheduled to begin the Tour de France . The wound was still slightly open when he began the Grand Tour and it bled throughout the race . 
 At the Tour , Merckx won the race 's prologue , giving him the first race leader 's maillot jaune ( English : yellow jersey ) , which he lost the next day to teammate Joseph Bruyère . He won the seventh stage of the race , and regained the lead , through attacking in the closing kilometers and holding off the chasing peloton . He put five minutes into Poulidor , his main rival , after dropping him on the Col du Galibier . The next day , on the slopes of Mont Ventoux , Merckx rode to limit his losses after suffering several attacks from other general classification riders , including Poulidor , Vicente López Carril and Gonzalo Aja . He managed to expand his lead through several stage victories afterwards , including one where he attacked with ten kilometers to go in a flat stage and held off the peloton to reach the finish in Orléans almost a minute and a half before the chasing group . Merckx finished the Tour with eight stage wins and his fifth Tour de France victory , equaling the record of Anquetil . 
 Going into the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships , Merckx anchored a squad that included Van Springel , Maertens , and De Vlaeminck . The route featured twenty @-@ one laps of a circuit that contained two climbs . Merckx and Poulidor attacked with around seven kilometers to go , after catching the leading breakaway . The two rode to the finish together where Merckx won the sprint to the line , establishing a two @-@ second gap between himself and Poulidor . By winning the road race , Merckx became the first rider to win the Triple Crown of Cycling , which consists of winning the Tour de France , Giro d 'Italia , and men 's road race at the World Championships in one calendar year . It was also his third world title , becoming the third rider to ever be world champion three times , after Binda and Rik Van Steenbergen . 
 = = = = 1975 : Second place at the Tour = = = = 
 With victories at Milan – San Remo and Amstel Gold Race , Merckx opened the 1975 season in good form , also winning the Setmana Catalana de <unk> . In the Catalan Week , Merckx lost his super domestique Bruyère , who had helped Merckx to victory in years past many times , to a broken leg . Two days following the Catalan Week , Merckx participated in the Tour of Flanders . He launched an attacked with eighty kilometers to go , with only Frans <unk> being able to match his acceleration . <unk> was dropped as the race reached five kilometers remaining , allowing Merckx to take his third Tour of Flanders victory . In Paris – Roubaix , Merckx suffered a flat tire with around eighty kilometers left when a part of a leading group of four . After chasing for three kilometers , he managed to catch the three other riders and the group rode into the finish together ; De Vlaeminck won the day . Merckx won his fifth Liège – Bastogne – Liège by attacking several times in the closing portions of the race . 
 Merckx 's attitude while racing had changed : riders expected him to chase down attacks , which angered him . Notably , in the Tour de Romandie he was riding with race leader Zoetemelk as an attack occurred . Merckx refused to chase the break down , and the two lost fourteen minutes . Merckx contracted a cold and , later , tonsilitis while racing in the spring campaign . This caused him to be in poor form , forcing him to not participate in the Giro d 'Italia . He then rode in the Dauphiné Libéré and was not on par with Thevenet , who won the race . At the Tour de Suisse , De Vlaeminck won the race as a whole , while Merckx finished second . 
 He placed second in the Tour de France 's prologue . The following morning 's split stage saw Merckx put time on Thevenet by attacking with Francesco Moser , Van Impe , and Zoetemelk . In day 's second leg , Merckx managed to gain time on Zoetemelk . He won the stage six individual time trial and gaining more time on Thevenet and Zoetemelk . He won the next time trial into Auch as well . During the race 's eleventh stage , Merckx sent his team to set the pace early on in the stage . Reaching the final climb of the day , Merckx was on his own as his team had been used to set the pace throughout the day . On the day 's final climb to Pla d <unk> , he matched an acceleration by Zoetemelk . Thevenet then launched an attack , to which Merckx could not follow and saw him lose over two minutes . After the stage Merckx switched decided to mark Thevenet for the rest of the race and make an attack on the Puy de Dome . 
 While climbing the Puy de Dome , Thevenet and Van Impe attacked . Merckx followed at his own pace and kept the two riders within a hundred meters . With about 150 m remaining , Merckx was prepared to sprint to the line , but was punched in the back by a spectator , <unk> Breton . He crossed the line thirty @-@ four seconds behind Thevenet and proceeded to vomit after catching his breath . The punch left him with a large bruise . During the rest day he was found to have an inflamed liver for which he was prescribed blood <unk> . 
 The stage following the rest day featured five climbs , Merckx felt a pain on the third climb in the area of the punch and had a teammate get him an analgesic . Thevenet attacked several times on the climb of the Col des Champs , all of which Merckx countered . Merckx retaliated by speeding away on the descent . On the start of the next climb , Merckx had his Molteni teammates set the pace and he distanced himself from his competitors before the start of the final climb . However , as Merckx began the final climb he cracked . Thevenet caught and passed him with four kilometers left . Gimondi , Van Impe , and Zoetemelk passed Merckx , who finished fifth and one minute and twenty @-@ six seconds down . The following day , Merckx caught up with the leading breakaway and wanted to push ahead , but the riders chose not to participate in the pace making , leading Merckx to sit up and get caught . He lost two more minutes to Thevenet , who attacked on the Col du <unk> . He crashed in the next leg , breaking a cheekbone , and managed to gain some time on Thevenet before the finish in Paris . He finished in second place , the first time he had lost a Tour in his six starts . 
 = = = = 1976 : A record seventh Milan – San Remo = = = = 
 He opened his 1976 season with his record seventh victory in Milan – San Remo . He followed with a victory in the Catalan Week , but suffered a crash in the final stage when a spectator 's bag caught his handlebars , injuring his elbow . This injury plagued his performance throughout the spring classic season . He entered the Giro d 'Italia but failed to win a stage for the first time in his career . He finished the race in eighth overall while battling a saddle boil throughout the race . Following the Giro 's conclusion Merckx announced that he and his team Molteni would not take part in the Tour de France . He took part in the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships and finished in fifth position . He ended his season in October after racing for most of August . He failed to win the Super Prestige Pernod International , a competition where riders were awarded points for their placements in certain professional races , for the first time since 1968 . In the first two months of his off @-@ season , Merckx spent the majority of his time lying down . Molteni ended their sponsorship at the end of the season . 
 = = = 1977 – 1978 : FIAT & C & A = = = 
 FIAT became the new sponsor for Merckx 's team and Raphaël Géminiani the new manager . He got his season 's first victories in the Grand Prix d 'Aix and Tour Méditerranéen . Merckx agreed to ride a light spring season in order to save himself for a chance at a sixth Tour victory . He took one stage at the Paris – Nice but had to withdraw from the race 's final stage due to sinusitis . In the spring classics , Merckx did not win any races , with his best finish being a sixth place in the Liège – Bastogne – Liège . Before the Tour , Merckx raced both the Dauphiné Libéré and Tour de Suisse , winning one stage of the latter . 
 He admitted his poor form and anxiety about aggravating previous injuries going into the Tour de France . He managed to hold on to second place overall for two weeks . As the race entered the Alps , Merckx began to lose more time ; he lost thirteen minutes on the stage to Alpe d 'Huez alone . On the stage into Saint @-@ Étienne , Merckx attacked and managed to gain enough time to move into sixth overall ; he finished the Tour in same position . In the time following the Tour , Merckx raced twenty @-@ two races in a span of forty days before coming in thirty @-@ third at the UCI Road World Championships 's men 's road race . Merckx earned his final victory on the road on 17 September in a kermis race . In late December , FIAT chose to end their sponsorship of Merckx in favor of building a more French centered squad . 
 In January , the department store C & A announced that they would sponsor Merckx after their owner met Merckx at a football game . His plan for the season was to race one last Tour de France and then ride several smaller races for appearances . He raced a total of five races in the 1978 calendar . His last victory was in a track event , an omnium in Zürich , on 10 February 1978 with Patrick <unk> . His first road race came in the Grand Prix de <unk> on 19 February . Merckx came to the front of the race and put in a large effort before swinging off and quitting the race . His best finish came in the Tour de Haut , where he managed fifth . He dropped out of Omloop Het Volt due to colitis and completed his final race on 19 March , a kermis in <unk> . Following the race , Merckx went on a vacation to go skiing . He returned from travel to train more , but by this point the team sponsor knew he was going to quit . Merckx announced his retirement from the sport on 18 May . He stated that the doctors advised him against racing . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Following his exit from racing , Merckx opened up Eddy Merckx Cycles on 28 March 1980 in Brussels , Belgium . The initial workers that were hired for the factory were trained by Ugo De Rosa , a notable bike maker , before starting . The company almost went bankrupt at one point and was also caught up in a tax repayment controversy . Merckx would spend time giving input on the models as they were being produced . Despite the financial problems the brand became highly regarded and successful , being used by several top @-@ level cycling teams in the 1980s and 1990s . Merckx stepped down as CEO in 2008 and sold most of his shares , but still tests the bikes that are created and has some input . Cycling journalist Sam <unk> believed that the fact that Eddy Merckx Cycles has maintained a presence as an elite bicycle due to its adoption of new methods over time . As of January 2015 , the business is still based in Belgium and distributes to over twenty @-@ five countries . 
 Merckx managed the Belgian national team world championships for eleven years , between 1986 and 1996 . He acted as the race director for the Tour of Flanders for a brief period of time . He temporarily sponsored a youth developmental team with <unk> Bank , a team that featured his son Axel . He helped organize the Grand Prix Eddy Merckx , which started out as an invitation only individual time trial event , later becoming a two @-@ man time trial event . The event folded after 2004 due to riders ' lack of interest . 
 He played a pivotal role in getting the Tour of Qatar started in 2002 . In 2001 Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani , the former Emir of Qatar , reached out to Merckx and told him of his interest in starting a bicycle race to show off his country . Merckx then contacted then Union Cycliste Internationale president Hein Verbruggen , who checked out Qatar 's roads . Following a successful inspection , Merckx contacted the Amaury Sport Organisation about working with him planning the race ; they agreed in 2001 . Merckx officially co @-@ owns the race with Dirk De Pauw and still helps to organize the race . In addition , Merckx also helped Qatar secure the right to host the 2016 UCI Road World Championships , as well as designing the race route for the road race . Merckx also co @-@ owns and helps organize the Tour of Oman . In 2015 , Merckx said later that although he wasn 't racing , he knew would still be involved with the sport as " as a bike builder , first in the factory and now as an ambassador . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Merckx officially began dating Claudine Acou in April 1965 . Acou was a 21 @-@ year @-@ old teacher and daughter of the trainer of the national amateur team . Merckx asked her father for permission to marry her between track races . On December 5 , 1967 Merckx married Acou after four years of courtship . She would often handle the press over her husband , who was a shy person by nature . Claudine gave birth to their first child , Sabrina , on 14 February 1970 . Merckx skipped a team training camp to be with Claudine for Sabrina 's birth . Claudine later gave birth to a son , Axel , who also became a professional cyclist . Merckx was brought up speaking in Flemish , but was taught French in school . 
 In 1996 Albert II of Belgium King of the Belgians , gave him the title of baron . In Italy , Merckx was given the title of Cavaliere . In 2011 , he was named Commandeur de la Légion d 'honneur by then French President Nicolas Sarkozy in Paris . Merckx has become an ambassador for the Damien The Leper Society , a foundation named after a Catholic priest , which battles leprosy and other diseases in developing countries . He was blessed by Pope John Paul II in Brussels in the 1990s . Merckx is an art lover and stated that his favorite artist is Rene Magritte , a surrealist . Salvador Dali is another of his favorites . 
 Before starting the third stage of the 1968 Giro d 'Italia , Merckx was found to have a heart condition . A cardiologist , Giancarlo <unk> , found that Merckx had non @-@ obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy , a disease that has killed several young athletes . In 2013 , Merckx was given a pacemaker to help correct a heart rhythm issue . The surgery was performed in Genk on 21 March and done as a preventative procedure . Merckx stated that he never had any heart issues while racing , despite the fact that several males in his family died young of heart related problems . In May 2004 , he had an esophagus operation to cure stomach ache suffered since he was young . In August he reported that he lost nearly 30 kg after the procedure . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Merckx has been regarded by many as the greatest and most successful cyclist of all @-@ time . He rode well in the Grand Tours and in the one @-@ day classics . He was a very good time trialist and climber . In addition , Merckx showed great ability to race on the track . He was known for racing style that consisted of attacking constantly , which came to be known as " la course en tête " . Attacking for Merckx was the best form of defence . He would spend a day in a breakaway and then make another significant attack the following day . Despite his constant attacking , he would occasionally ride in a defensive mindset , particularly when racing the Giro and facing Fuente . Merckx entered over 1 @,@ 800 races during his career and won a total of 525 . Due to his dominance in the sport some cycling historians refer to the period in which he raced as the " Merckx Era . " During his professional career , he won 445 of the 1585 races he entered . Between the years of 1967 and 1977 Merckx raced between 111 and 151 races each season . In 1971 he raced 120 times and won 54 of the events , the most races any cyclist has won in a season . Merckx admits that he was the best of his generation , but insists it 's not practical to compare across generations . 
 He is one of the three riders to win all five ' Monuments of Cycling ' ( i.e. , Milan – San Remo , Tour of Flanders , Paris – Roubaix , Liège – Bastogne – Liège , and the Giro di Lombardia ) , the other two being Rik Van Looy and Roger De Vlaeminck . He finished his career with nineteen victories across the monuments , more than any other rider and eight more than the rider with the second most . He won twenty @-@ eight classic races , with Paris – Tours being the only race he did not win . The closest he came to victory in the race was sixth in the 1973 race . A lesser Belgian rider , Noël van <unk> , won Paris – Tours in 1972 and said : " Between us , I and Eddy Merckx have won every classic that can be won . I won Paris – Tours , Merckx won all the rest . " 
 While racing , he became the third rider to win all three Grand Tours in his career , a feat that has since been accomplished by more riders . He holds the record for most Grand Tour victories with 11 , along with the record for most stage wins across all three Grand Tours with 64 . He has completed the most Giro @-@ Tour doubles in history with three . He was the first rider to win cycling 's Triple Crown which has only been accomplished one other time , by Stephen Roche in 1987 . He was also the first rider to win all three major classifications – the general , points , and mountains classifications – in one Grand Tour at the 1968 Giro d 'Italia , and again at the 1969 Tour de France . This has only been done twice since by Tony Rominger and Laurent Jalabert . He shares the record for most victories at both the Giro d 'Italia and Tour de France , with five wins at each . In those races he also holds the records for days spent in the race leader 's jersey at 78 and 96 respectively . For his career successes in the Giro d 'Italia , Merckx became the first rider inducted into the race 's Hall of Fame in 2012 . When being inducted , Merckx was given the modern @-@ day trophy with the winners engraved until 1974 , the last year he won the race . At the Tour , he holds the record for most stage wins in its history , with thirty @-@ four . 
 He was given the nickname " The Cannibal " by the daughter of Christian Raymond , a teammate of Merckx 's . Raymond had commented on Merckx not allowing anyone else to win , to which his daughter referred to Merckx as a cannibal . Raymond liked the nickname and then mentioned it to the press . In Italy , he was known as " il <unk> " ( English : the monster ) . 
 Dutch cycling great Joop Zoetemelk said " First there was Merckx , and then another classification began behind him . " Cycling journalist and commentator Phil Liggett wrote that if Merckx started a race , many riders acknowledged that they likely would be competing for second place . Ted Costantino wrote that Merckx was undoubtedly the number one cyclist of all time , whereas in other sports there are debates that go on about who is actually the greatest of all time . Gianni Motta told of how Merckx would ride without a racing cape when it was snowing or raining in order to go faster than other riders . Even after his retirement , many subsequent stars still feel overshadowed by his fame and race results . Merckx befriended Fiorenzo Magni when he began racing for an Italian team . He was criticized by opposing riders for his relentless pursuit of victory that prevented even lesser known riders from collecting a few victories . When told that he won too much , Merckx stated that " The day when I start a race without intending to win it , I won 't be able to look at myself in the mirror . " 
 = = Doping = = 
 Merckx was leading the 1969 Giro d 'Italia upon the conclusion of the sixteenth stage in Savona . After the stage , Merckx traveled to the mobile lab that traveled with the race and conducted the drug tests . Merckx ’ s first test came up positive for <unk> , an amphetamine . A second test was conducted and also came up positive . The word spread about Merckx 's positive test while Merckx himself was still asleep . The positive test meant Merckx was to be suspended for a month . Race director Vincenzo Torriani delayed the start of the seventeenth stage in an attempt to persuade the president of the Italian Cycling Federation to allow Merckx to begin the stage . However , the president was not in his office and Torriani was forced to start the stage , disqualifying Merckx in the process . In the succeeding days , the Union Cycliste Internationale removed the suspension put in place . 
 From the start , Merckx claimed his innocence saying that " I am a clean rider , I do not need to take anything to win . " He maintains that his samples were mishandled . After the incident , several conspiracy theories emerged including : the urine that tested positive wasn 't Merckx 's , a move to give Italian Felice Gimondi a better chance at victory , and Merckx had been given a water bottle with the stimulant in it . 
 On 8 November 1973 , it was announced that Merckx had tested positive for norephedrine after winning the Giro di Lombardia a month earlier . Upon learning of the first test being positive in later October , he had a counter @-@ analysis performed which also turned up positive . The drug was present in a cough medicine that the Molteni doctor , Dr. Cavalli , prescribed to him . Merckx was disqualified from the race and the victory was awarded to second @-@ place finisher Gimondi . In addition , Merckx was given a month suspension and fined 150 @,@ 000 lira . Merckx admitted his fault in taking the medicine but said that the name norephedrine was not on the bottle of cough syrup he used . 
 On 8 May 1977 , Merckx , along with several other riders , tested positive for pemoline , a stimulant in <unk> , at La Flèche Wallonne . The group of riders was charged by the Belgian cycling federation , and the riders were each given a 24 @,@ 000 <unk> fine and a one @-@ month suspension . Initially Merckx , announced his intention to appeal the penalty , saying he only took substances that were not on the banned list . Merckx 's eighth @-@ place finish in the race was voided . Years later , Merckx admitted he did take a banned substance , citing that he was wrong to have trusted a doctor . 
 Due to Merckx 's positive tests during his career , he was asked by the event organizers to stay away from the 2007 UCI Road World Championships in Stuttgart , Germany . The organizers stated that " [ they ] had to be role models " , while Merckx wrote them off claiming them to be crazy . Merckx was not alone , as several other riders were asked to keep their distance from the event . 
 = Steve Zakuani = 
 Steve Zakuani ( born February 9 , 1988 ) is a Congolese former association football player . He was born in Zaire — now the Democratic Republic of the Congo — and grew up in London . He had a successful college career before playing for Seattle Sounders FC and the Portland Timbers . 
 Zakuani played for the Arsenal youth academy but as a teenager he struggled finding a team . He attended the University of Akron on a soccer scholarship and excelled as a forward . In 2009 , Seattle selected Zakuani first overall in the MLS SuperDraft . He quickly became a fan favorite as a winger who had the speed and ability to take on opposing defenders . He had success in 2010 , scoring ten goals and debuting for the Congo DR national football team in a friendly . However , in 2011 , he suffered a leg injury that almost ended his career . He returned in 2012 but failed to recapture his early success , and retired after playing the 2014 MLS season with the Portland Timbers . After soccer , Zakuani has pursued helping young athletes through charity . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Youth and college = = = 
 Zakuani was born in Kinshasa , Zaire — now the Democratic Republic of the Congo . When he was four , his father , Mao Zakuani , moved his family to London for political and professional reasons after receiving a job offer as a translator . The family switched homes often and lived with extended family for long periods . They later settled in a north London neighborhood with other African families , where Zakuani attended White Hart Lane School . 
 At the age of nine , Zakuani attracted interest from West Ham United 's youth program . He later tried out for the youth team of Queens Park Rangers , and in 1997 , he joined the Arsenal Academy . Zakuani became cocky and brash while not focusing on schoolwork and was released . His off @-@ the @-@ field issues culminated in serious injuries when he was involved in a crash while riding on a moped that one of his friends had stolen . Zakuani was unable to play for 18 months . After losing interest in soccer and renewing his efforts in school , his teacher and mentor Paul Goodison took him to watch motivational speaker and evangelist Myles Munroe . This inspired Zakuani to renew his commitment to becoming a professional player and , although unsuccessful , he tried out for the senior teams of Queens Park Rangers , Wigan Athletic , AZ Alkmaar , and Real Valladolid . 
 Zakuani attended the University of Akron after he was noticed while playing at north London 's Independent Football Academy . In his freshman season , he scored six goals with the Zips and received a professional offer from Preston North End . He was already committed to the university and declined the opportunity . In 2008 , Zakuani scored 20 goals and 7 assists over 23 games to become a finalist for the Hermann Trophy ; an award given yearly by the Missouri Athletic Club to the country 's top college soccer player . He also became the second sophomore to be named Soccer America 's men 's collegiate player of the year . He played a portion of the 2008 USL Premier Development League season with the Cleveland Internationals , with whom he scored nine goals and made four assists in 11 matches . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 = = = = Seattle Sounders FC = = = = 
 Zakuani was selected by expansion side Seattle Sounders FC as the number @-@ one pick in the 2009 MLS SuperDraft on a Generation Adidas program contract . He declined offers from two English clubs so he could sign with Major League Soccer ; the deal allowed him to set money aside for future college tuition . He started 24 of 30 regular season games in 2009 and played in the Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup final , when the Sounders became the second MLS team to win the tournament in their inaugural season . Zakuani provided a much @-@ needed attacking presence from the wing ; he was the third @-@ best scorer with four goals throughout the regular season . The press considered him a candidate for Rookie of the Year because he had the highest number of goals and assists of all new players . The award eventually went to Omar Gonzalez . A local reporter praised him for improving his assistance to the defence and making better offensive runs as the season progressed . Although Zakuani was already known as a top young player , coach Sigi Schmid wanted him to improve his on @-@ field decision making and increase his fitness before the next year . 
 In 2009 , a shoulder injury that had limited Zakuani 's ability to play the full 90 minutes per game forced him to undergo surgery during the off @-@ season . In his second professional year , Zakuani scored ten goals , equalling the score of striker Fredy Montero for the team lead . He also made six assists . Zakuani was named MLS Player of the Week twice ; the first was after recording both goals in a 2 – 1 win over Colorado , and the second was awarded for both a goal and an assist in a 2 – 1 victory over Chivas USA . Fans around the league voted the strike against Chivas as the Goal of the Week . Zakuani also won the award for his perfectly timed break past the defensive back line for a one @-@ on @-@ one situation with the goalkeeper while scoring a goal against Toronto FC . He also recorded the fastest @-@ scored goal in club history with a fourth @-@ minute tally against Columbus Crew , beating the previous record he had set the season before . Zakuani was again in the starting line @-@ up for the 2010 U.S. Open Cup final , which Seattle won to become the first team since 1983 to repeat as Open Cup champions . On November 7 , 2010 , he scored the Sounders ' first ever playoff goal in a 2 – 1 loss to the Los Angeles Galaxy . He received his green card after the season ; this helped the team because MLS limits the number of international players available to each team and receiving permanent resident status exempted him from the cap . 
 Zakuani scored two goals and had two assists in his first six appearances of the 2011 season . On April 22 , 2011 , a harsh challenge by Brian Mullan led to Zakuani fracturing his tibia and fibula three minutes into a game against the Colorado Rapids . He was airlifted to hospital and underwent surgery the same day . During recovery , doctors feared that his leg would require amputation because of compartment syndrome . The concern was caused by a lack of blood flow that hurt the nerves connecting the area to his foot . Mullan initially defended the tackle , saying he would make the challenge again . He later apologized in the face of increasing scrutiny and received a 10 @-@ game suspension and a $ 5 @,@ 000 fine . Zakuani missed the remainder of the season . Zakuani 's injury was one of several to key players throughout the league that year , leading to criticism that MLS play was aggressive to the point of " thuggery " . 
 On July 7 , 2012 , after 15 months away , Zakuani returned in a match against Mullan and the Rapids . His return as a substitute with five minutes left in the game met provoked emotional cheers from the fans . Having already publicly forgiven Mullan , the two hugged and exchanged shirts after the whistle . Within two months , he appeared to further his recovery with an assist against FC Dallas and then scored a goal against San Jose Earthquakes . He finished the 2012 season with one goal in 320 minutes over eight matches and went on to play in three playoff games before the team was eliminated . 
 During the 2013 season , Zakuani made only nine appearances across all competitions before being sidelined with a sports hernia . In that time , he recorded one assist in league play , and assisting in the game @-@ winning goal against Mexico 's Tigres <unk> in the CONCACAF Champions League quarterfinals . He was later placed on injured reserve and twice underwent surgery on each side of his groin . Zakuani 's contract was allowed to expire , effectively ending his five @-@ year career with the Sounders , during which he started in 67 of 78 appearances in league play . At the time , he was the club ’ s third @-@ leading scorer with 17 goals . 
 = = = = Portland Timbers = = = = 
 On December 12 , 2013 , Zakuani was selected by Portland Timbers as the number two pick in the MLS Re @-@ Entry Draft ; a yearly draft that allows teams to select players who are out @-@ of @-@ contract or have had their options declined by their current teams . The Timbers traded up for the opportunity . Zakuani was reunited with Porter , his former Akron coach , who had become the Portland manager . His pay was cut by $ 60 @,@ 000 to $ 120 @,@ 000 a year . Zakuani was expected to receive additional minutes immediately because first @-@ choice winger Rodney Wallace was recovering from injury . Zakuani appeared in the Timbers ' opening match of 2014 against Philadelphia Union as a substitute in the 85th minute . The Sounders and Timbers are fierce rivals ; when the teams met in the 2014 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup . Zakuani assisted former college team @-@ mate Darlington <unk> in the Timbers ' only goal during the 3 – 1 loss to his previous club . Zakuani scored his first goal for Timbers on August 19 , 2014 , scoring the opening goal in a 4 – 1 win over Alpha United in the 2014 – 15 CONCACAF Champions League . After the match , Porter spoke to the media about the need to bench Zakuani because of his persistent muscle strains . 
 2014 was disappointing for Zakuani ; he scored no goals and only three assists . On October 29 , 2014 , Zakuani announced his retirement in a blog post . Having scored only one goal and five assists in the previous three seasons , he cited his difficulty recovering from numerous injuries . He had lost much of his precision , pace , and confidence since being hurt . He retired at the relatively early age of 26 ; his retirement after his initial promise led Sports Illustrated to describe his career as a " roller coaster " . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Zakuani was eligible to play for both Congo and England . He considers London his hometown but still sees himself as Congolese . Of his five siblings , as of April 2015 , his older brother Gabriel Zakuani plays for English club Peterborough United and is a member of the Congolese national team . He might have been able to play for the United States if granted citizenship . He expressed interest in representing the Congolese national team early in his professional career , but considered his chances of playing for England " a long shot " . Later in his career , he expressed interest in playing for the United States , saying , " of the three , I prefer the States as this is where I made my name as a player " . 
 In 2010 , Zakuani accepted a call up from Congo for a friendly match against Mali . In a press release , Zakuani called it the highest honor of his young career . It was a challenging decision for him but the wait to become eligible to play for the United States was too long . The game was played in Dieppe , France , in November 2010 . Zakuani started the match and came off at half @-@ time with Congo in the lead . Mali rallied in the second half , beating Congo in a 3 – 1 loss . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Zakuani was a right @-@ footed player who preferred being on the left of the field . He played on the left wing in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation with Arsenal ; later he was a forward in college before converting to a winger professionally . Zakuani said he played with a style he learned at Arsenal 's youth academy and that he tried to emulate the style of former winger Robert Pirès . Zakuani often sought advice from former Arsenal star Fredrik Ljungberg when they played together in Seattle . Zakuani was a quick , agile player who liked to take defenders one @-@ on @-@ one . While coaching him at Akron , Porter said many of Zakuani 's goals came after long runs that beat multiple players . 
 = = Kingdom Hope = = 
 As a teenager in London , Zakuani began " mixing with the wrong crowd " . He was distracted from soccer by girls and parties . He said in an interview , " A lot of the people I grew up with ended up in prison , taking drugs , and never made it to university " . He has strong feelings about the increase of knife crime in London since one of his friends was killed . In 2010 , he founded the non @-@ profit organization Kingdom Hope to run youth soccer camps in the greater Seattle area . He remembers being focused on soccer instead of education in Europe ; the organization is focused on providing collegiate scholarships to young athletes . Zakuani has said his ultimate goal is to open an academy to teach life @-@ coaching and soccer to teenagers to provide a " bridge between talent and actually making it " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of November 3 , 2014 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Seattle Sounders FC 
 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup ( 2 ) : 2009 , 2010 
 = 1890 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1890 Atlantic hurricane season is tied for the third least active hurricane season on record , behind 1914 and 1930 . The first system was initially observed on May 27 and the last storm , Hurricane Four , dissipated over Central America on November 1 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . The first storm moved slowly north @-@ northwestward , bringing heavy rains and extensive flooding to Cuba , which caused at least three fatalities and at least $ 1 million ( 1890 USD ) in damage . It dissipated in the Gulf of Mexico on May 29 . Tropical cyclogenesis went dormant for nearly two and a half months , until another system was observed near the Windward Islands on August 18 . It traversed the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico , grazing the Yucatan Peninsula and making landfall in Louisiana before dissipating on August 28 . Impact from the storm was minimal . 
 Of the season 's four tropical cyclones , two reached hurricane status . One of these two strengthened into a major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The strongest cyclone of the season , the third hurricane , peaked at Category 3 strength , with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . Rough seas produced by this storm sunk a ship in the vicinity of the Lesser Antilles , drowning 10 people . The final tropical cyclone was first observed in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on October 31 . Peaking as a strong Category 1 hurricane , it headed westward and made landfall in Nicaragua , before being last noted over Central America on November 1 . The storm produced only minor damage in Nicaragua . Collectively , the tropical cyclones of this season resulted in at least $ 1 million in damage and 14 confirmed fatalities . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 According to HURDAT – North Atlantic hurricane database – a tropical depression developed on May 27 , while located about 65 miles ( 105 km ) south of Isla de la Juventud , Cuba . The depression moved north @-@ northwestward and did not strengthen before making landfall near Pinar del Río , Cuba , early the following day . It crossed Cuba without weakening and emerged into the southeastern Gulf of Mexico on May 28 . Later that day , the depression intensified into a tropical storm . The cyclone continued to strengthen and peaked with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) early on May 29 . It was last noted about 125 miles ( 200 km ) west @-@ northwest of Dry Tortugas , Florida at around 1800 UTC . 
 The storm brought heavy rains to Cuba , with 13 @.@ 58 inches ( 345 mm ) observed in Havana in a 36 @-@ hour period . Flooding and mudslides caused extensive damage to several cities , including <unk> , <unk> , Havana , <unk> Grandes , San Antonio de los Baños , and Rincon . Several people had to be rescued . Nearly all telegraphic and railroad services were interrupted by flooding . With damage estimates in the millions of dollars , the event was described as " the most disastrous rains that had ever visited Cuba . " At least 4 fatalities were confirmed after a ship capsized , while a " good number " of other persons drowned . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 After no activity for over two months , the barque <unk> encountered " very heavy weather " associated with a tropical storm in the eastern Caribbean Sea on August 18 . The system moved west @-@ northwestward across the Caribbean Sea and strengthened slowly . Early on August 24 , the storm attained its maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , while situated about 80 miles ( 130 km ) south @-@ southwest of Grand Cayman . Re @-@ curving northwestward , it brushed the Yucatan Peninsula on August 25 , shortly before entering the Gulf of Mexico . The storm again re @-@ curved northward while located in the central Gulf of Mexico . At 1600 UTC , it made landfall near Dulac , Louisiana with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The system quickly weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated over northern Mississippi on August 28 . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 The steamship <unk> encountered a storm equivalent in intensity to a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , while located about 470 miles ( 760 km ) east @-@ northeast of Dominica on August 26 . The cyclone headed northwestward and strengthened into a Category 3 hurricane early on the following day , becoming the only major hurricane of the season . Later on August 27 , the storm attained its maximum sustained wind speed of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . The ship <unk> recorded a minimum barometric pressure of 965 mbar ( 28 @.@ 5 inHg ) at 0700 UTC on August 28 . However , the ship sunk in the rough seas later that day while situated about 250 miles ( 400 km ) northeast of Anegada , British Virgin Islands , drowning ten people , including the ship 's captain and nine crew members . 
 After peak intensity , the storm began to weaken and fell to Category 2 strength on August 29 . Later that day , the hurricane began re @-@ curving northward and then accelerated northeastward on August 30 . Although the storm passed well offshore the East Coast of the United States , rough seas caused " great damage " at beaches in New Jersey . While approaching Newfoundland on September 1 , the system weakened to a Category 1 hurricane . Late on September 1 , it weakened to a tropical storm , shortly before becoming extratropical about 465 miles ( 750 km ) east @-@ northeast of St. Lunaire @-@ <unk> , Newfoundland and Labrador . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 The steamship Gussie first encountered a hurricane with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) early on October 31 , while located about 95 miles ( 153 km ) northeast of Providencia Island , Colombia . The cyclone tracked westward and maintained its intensity as a strong Category 1 hurricane . Late on October 31 , it made landfall in Nicaragua just south of Cabo Gracias a Dios . At 0000 UTC on November 1 , the system weakened to a tropical storm . Six hours later , it was last noted over the Olancho Department of Honduras . Impact from this system in Central America is unknown . 
 = Pedro I of Brazil = 
 Dom Pedro I ( English : Peter I ; 12 October 1798 – 24 September 1834 ) , nicknamed " the Liberator " , was the founder and first ruler of the Empire of Brazil . As King Dom Pedro IV , he reigned briefly over Portugal , where he also became known as " the Liberator " as well as " the Soldier King " . Born in Lisbon , Pedro I was the fourth child of King Dom João VI of Portugal and Queen Carlota Joaquina , and thus a member of the House of Braganza . When their country was invaded by French troops in 1807 , he and his family fled to Portugal 's largest and wealthiest colony , Brazil . 
 The outbreak of the Liberal Revolution of 1820 in Lisbon compelled Pedro I 's father to return to Portugal in April 1821 , leaving him to rule Brazil as regent . He had to deal with threats from revolutionaries and insubordination by Portuguese troops , all of which he subdued . The Portuguese government 's threat to revoke the political autonomy that Brazil had enjoyed since 1808 was met with widespread discontent in Brazil . Pedro I chose the Brazilian side and declared Brazil 's independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822 . On 12 October , he was acclaimed Brazilian emperor and by March 1824 had defeated all armies loyal to Portugal . A few months later , Pedro I crushed the short @-@ lived Confederation of the Equator , a failed secession attempt by provincial rebels in Brazil 's northeast . 
 A secessionist rebellion in the southern province of Cisplatina in early 1825 , and the subsequent attempt by the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata to annex it , led the Empire into the Cisplatine War . In March 1826 , Pedro I briefly became king of Portugal before abdicating in favor of his eldest daughter , Dona Maria II . The situation worsened in 1828 when the war in the south resulted in Brazil 's loss of Cisplatina . During the same year in Lisbon , Maria II 's throne was usurped by Prince Dom Miguel , Pedro I 's younger brother . The Emperor 's concurrent and scandalous sexual affair with a female courtier tarnished his reputation . Other difficulties arose in the Brazilian parliament , where a struggle over whether the government would be chosen by the monarch or by the legislature dominated political debates from 1826 to 1831 . Unable to deal with problems in both Brazil and Portugal simultaneously , on 7 April 1831 Pedro I abdicated in favor of his son Dom Pedro II , and sailed for Europe . 
 Pedro I invaded Portugal at the head of an army in July 1832 . Faced at first with what seemed a national civil war , he soon became involved in a wider conflict that enveloped the Iberian Peninsula in a struggle between proponents of Liberalism and those seeking a return to Absolutism . Pedro I died of tuberculosis on 24 September 1834 , just a few months after he and the liberals had emerged victorious . He was hailed by both contemporaries and posterity as a key figure who helped spread the liberal ideals that allowed Brazil and Portugal to move from Absolutist regimes to representative forms of government . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Pedro was born at 08 : 00 on 12 October 1798 in the Queluz Royal Palace near Lisbon , Portugal . He was named after St. Peter of Alcantara , and his full name was Pedro de Alcântara Francisco António João Carlos Xavier de Paula Miguel Rafael Joaquim José Gonzaga <unk> Cipriano <unk> . He was referred to using the honorific " Dom " ( Lord ) from birth . 
 Through his father , Prince Dom João ( later King Dom João VI ) , Pedro was a member of the House of Braganza ( Portuguese : Bragança ) and a grandson of King Dom Pedro III and Queen Dona ( Lady ) Maria I of Portugal , who were uncle and niece as well as husband and wife . His mother , Doña Carlota Joaquina , was the daughter of King Don Carlos IV of Spain . Pedro 's parents had an unhappy marriage . Carlota Joaquina was an ambitious woman , who always sought to advance Spain 's interests , even to the detriment of Portugal 's . Reputedly unfaithful to her husband , she went as far as to plot his overthrow in league with dissatisfied Portuguese nobles . 
 As the second eldest son ( though the fourth child ) , Pedro became his father 's heir apparent and Prince of Beira upon the death of his elder brother Francisco António in 1801 . Prince Dom João had been acting as regent on behalf of his mother , Queen Maria I , after she was declared incurably insane in 1792 . By 1802 , Pedro 's parents were estranged ; João lived in the Mafra National Palace and Carlota Joaquina in <unk> Palace . Pedro and his siblings resided in the Queluz Palace with their grandmother Maria I , far from their parents , whom they saw only during state occasions at Queluz . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 In late November 1807 , when Pedro was nine , the royal family escaped from Portugal as an invading French army sent by Napoleon approached Lisbon . Pedro and his family arrived in Rio de Janeiro , capital of Brazil , then Portugal 's largest and wealthiest colony , in March 1808 . During the voyage , Pedro read Virgil 's Aeneid and conversed with the ship 's crew , picking up navigational skills . In Brazil , after a brief stay in the City Palace , Pedro settled with his younger brother Miguel and their father in the Palace of São Cristóvão ( Saint Christopher ) . Although never on intimate terms with his father , Pedro loved him and resented the constant humiliation his father suffered at the hands of Carlota Joaquina due to her extramarital affairs . As an adult , Pedro would openly call his mother , for whom he held only feelings of contempt , a " bitch " . The early experiences of betrayal , coldness and neglect had a great impact on the formation of Pedro 's character . 
 A modicum of stability during his childhood was provided by his aia ( governess ) , Maria <unk> do Rêgo e Matos , whom he loved as a mother , and by his <unk> ( supervisor ) friar António de Arrábida , who became his mentor . Both were in charge of Pedro 's upbringing and attempted to furnish him with a suitable education . His instruction encompassed a broad array of subjects that included mathematics , political economy , logic , history and geography . He learned to speak and write not only in Portuguese , but also Latin and French . He could translate from English and understood German . Even later on , as an emperor , Pedro would devote at least two hours of each day to study and reading . 
 Despite the breadth of Pedro 's instruction , his education proved lacking . Historian Otávio Tarquínio de Sousa said that Pedro " was without a shadow of doubt intelligent , quick @-@ witted , [ and ] perspicacious . " However , historian Roderick J. Barman relates that he was by nature " too ebullient , too erratic , and too emotional " . He remained impulsive and never learned to exercise self @-@ control or to assess the consequences of his decisions and adapt his outlook to changes in situations . His father never allowed anyone to discipline him . While Pedro 's schedule dictated two hours of study each day , he sometimes circumvented the routine by dismissing his instructors in favor of activities that he found more interesting . 
 = = = First marriage = = = 
 The prince found fulfillment in activities that required physical skills , rather than in the classroom . At his father 's Santa Cruz farm , Pedro trained unbroken horses , and became a fine horseman and an excellent farrier . He and his brother Miguel enjoyed mounted hunts over unfamiliar ground , through forests , and even at night or in inclement weather . He displayed a talent for drawing and handicrafts , applying himself to wood carving and furniture making . In addition , he had a taste for music , and under the guidance of Marcos Portugal the prince became an able composer . He had a good singing voice , and was proficient with several musical instruments ( including piano , flute and guitar ) , playing popular songs and dances . Pedro was a simple man , both in habits and in dealing with others . Except on solemn occasions when he donned court dress , his daily attire consisted of white cotton trousers , striped cotton jacket and a broad @-@ brimmed straw hat , or a frock coat and a top hat in more formal situations . He would frequently take time to engage in conversation with people on the street , noting their concerns . 
 Pedro 's character was marked by an energetic drive that bordered on hyperactivity . He was impetuous with a tendency to be domineering and short @-@ tempered . Easily bored or distracted , in his personal life he entertained himself with dalliances with women in addition to his hunting and equestrian activities . His restless spirit compelled him to search for adventure , and , sometimes in disguise as a traveler , he frequented taverns in Rio de Janeiro 's disreputable districts . He rarely drank alcohol , but was an incorrigible womanizer . His earliest known lasting affair was with a French dancer called Noémi Thierry , who had a stillborn child by him . Pedro 's father , who had ascended the throne as João VI , sent Thierry away to avoid jeopardizing the prince 's betrothal to Archduchess Maria Leopoldina , daughter of Emperor Franz I of Austria ( formerly Franz II , Holy Roman Emperor ) . 
 On 13 May 1817 , Pedro was married by proxy to Maria Leopoldina . When she arrived in Rio de Janeiro on 5 November , she immediately fell in love with Pedro , who was far more charming and attractive than she had been led to expect . After " years under a tropical sun , his complexion was still light , his cheeks rosy . " The 19 @-@ year @-@ old prince was handsome and a little above average in height , with bright dark eyes and dark brown hair . " His good appearance " , said historian Neill Macaulay , " owed much to his bearing , proud and erect even at an awkward age , and his grooming , which was impeccable . <unk> neat and clean , he had taken to the Brazilian custom of bathing often . " The Nuptial Mass , with the ratification of the vows previously taken by proxy , occurred the following day . Seven children resulted from this marriage : Maria ( later Queen Dona Maria II of Portugal ) , Miguel , João , Januária , Paula , Francisca and Pedro ( later Emperor Dom Pedro II of Brazil ) . 
 = = Independence of Brazil = = 
 = = = Liberal Revolution of 1820 = = = 
 On 17 October 1820 , news arrived that the military garrisons in Portugal had mutinied , leading to what became known as the Liberal Revolution of 1820 . The military formed a provisional government , supplanting the regency appointed by João VI , and summoned the Cortes — the centuries @-@ old Portuguese parliament , this time democratically elected with the aim of creating a national Constitution . Pedro was surprised when his father not only asked for his advice , but also decided to send him to Portugal to rule as regent on his behalf and to placate the revolutionaries . The prince was never educated to rule and had previously been allowed no participation in state affairs . The role that was his by birthright was instead filled by his elder sister Dona Maria Teresa : João VI had relied on her for advice , and it was she who had been given membership in the Council of State . 
 Pedro was regarded with suspicion by his father and by the king 's close advisers , all of whom clung to the principles of absolute monarchy . By contrast , the prince was a well @-@ known , staunch supporter of liberalism and of constitutional representative monarchy . He had read the works of Voltaire , Benjamin Constant , Gaetano <unk> and Edmund Burke . Even his wife Maria Leopoldina remarked , " My husband , God help us , loves the new ideas . " João VI postponed Pedro 's departure for as long as possible , fearing that once he was in Portugal , he would be acclaimed king by the revolutionaries . 
 On 26 February 1821 , Portuguese troops stationed in Rio de Janeiro mutinied . Neither João VI nor his government made any move against the mutinous units . Pedro decided to act on his own and rode to meet the rebels . He negotiated with them and convinced his father to accept their demands , which included naming a new cabinet and making an oath of obedience to the forthcoming Portuguese Constitution . On 21 April , the parish electors of Rio de Janeiro met at the Merchants ' Exchange to elect their representatives to the Cortes . A small group of agitators seized the meeting and formed a revolutionary government . Again , João VI and his ministers remained passive , and the monarch was about to accept the revolutionaries ' demands when Pedro took the initiative and sent army troops to re @-@ establish order . Under pressure from the Cortes , João VI and his family departed for Portugal on 26 April , leaving behind Pedro and Maria Leopoldina . Two days before he embarked , the King warned his son : " Pedro , if Brazil breaks away , let it rather do so for you , who will respect me , than for one of those adventurers . " 
 = = = Independence or Death = = = 
 At the outset of his regency , Pedro promulgated decrees that guaranteed personal and property rights . He also reduced government expenditure and taxes . Even the revolutionaries arrested in the Merchants ' Exchange incident were set free . On 5 June 1821 , army troops under Portuguese lieutenant general Jorge Avilez ( later Count of Avilez ) mutinied , demanding that Pedro should take an oath to uphold the Portuguese Constitution after it was enacted . The prince rode out alone to intervene with the mutineers . He calmly and <unk> negotiated , winning the respect of the troops and succeeding in reducing the impact of their more unacceptable demands . The mutiny was a thinly veiled military coup d 'état that sought to turn Pedro into a mere figurehead and transfer power to Avilez . The prince accepted the unsatisfactory outcome , but he also warned that it was the last time he would yield under pressure . 
 The continuing crisis reached a point of no return when the Cortes dissolved the central government in Rio de Janeiro and ordered Pedro 's return . This was perceived by Brazilians as an attempt to subordinate their country again to Portugal — Brazil had not been a colony since 1815 and had the status of a kingdom . On 9 January 1822 , Pedro was presented with a petition containing 8 @,@ 000 signatures that begged him not to leave . He replied , " Since it is for the good of all and the general happiness of the Nation , I am willing . Tell the people that I am staying . " Avilez again mutinied and tried to force Pedro 's return to Portugal . This time the prince fought back , rallying the Brazilian troops ( which had not joined the Portuguese in previous mutinies ) , militia units and armed civilians . Outnumbered , Avilez surrendered and was expelled from Brazil along with his troops . 
 During the next few months , Pedro attempted to maintain a semblance of unity with Portugal , but the final rupture was impending . Aided by an able minister , José Bonifácio de Andrada , he searched for support outside Rio de Janeiro . The prince traveled to Minas Gerais in April and on to São Paulo in August . He was welcomed warmly in both Brazilian provinces , and the visits reinforced his authority . While returning from São Paulo , he received news sent on 7 September that the Cortes would not accept self @-@ governance in Brazil and would punish all who disobeyed its orders . " Never one to eschew the most dramatic action on the immediate impulse " , said Barman about the prince , he " required no more time for decision than the reading of the letters demanded . " Pedro mounted his bay mare and , in front of his entourage and his Guard of Honor , said : " Friends , the Portuguese Cortes wished to enslave and persecute us . As of today our bonds are ended . By my blood , by my honor , by my God , I swear to bring about the independence of Brazil . Brazilians , let our watchword from this day forth be ' Independence or Death ! ' " 
 = = = Constitutional Emperor = = = 
 The prince was acclaimed Emperor Dom Pedro I on his 24th birthday , which coincided with the inauguration of the Empire of Brazil on 12 October . He was crowned on 1 December . His ascendancy did not immediately extend throughout Brazil 's territories . He had to force the submission of several provinces in the northern , northeastern and southern regions , and the last Portuguese holdout units only surrendered in early 1824 . Meanwhile , Pedro I 's relationship with Bonifácio deteriorated . The situation came to a head when Pedro I , on the grounds of inappropriate conduct , dismissed Bonifácio . Bonifácio had used his position to harass , prosecute , arrest and even exile his political enemies . For months Bonifácio 's enemies had worked to win over the Emperor . While Pedro I was still Prince Regent , they had given him the title " Perpetual Defender of Brazil " on 13 May 1822 . They also inducted him into Freemasonry on 2 August and later made him grand master on 7 October , replacing Bonifácio in that position . 
 The crisis between the monarch and his former minister was felt immediately within the Constituent and Legislative General Assembly , which had been elected for the purpose of drafting a Constitution . A member of the Constituent Assembly , Bonifácio resorted to demagoguery , alleging the existence of a major Portuguese conspiracy against Brazilian interests — insinuating that Pedro I , who had been born in Portugal , was implicated . The Emperor became outraged by the invective directed at the loyalty of citizens who were of Portuguese birth and the hints that he was himself conflicted in his allegiance to Brazil . On 12 November 1823 , Pedro I ordered the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly and called for new elections . On the following day , he placed a newly established native Council of State in charge of composing a constitutional draft . Copies of the draft were sent to all town councils , and the vast majority voted in favor of its instant adoption as the Constitution of the Empire . 
 As a result of the highly centralized State created by the Constitution , rebellious elements in Ceará , Paraíba and Pernambuco attempted to secede from Brazil and unite in what became known as the Confederation of the Equator . Pedro I unsuccessfully sought to avoid bloodshed by offering to placate the rebels . Angry , he said : " What did the insults from Pernambuco require ? Surely a punishment , and such a punishment that it will serve as an example for the future . " The rebels were never able to secure control over their provinces , and were easily suppressed . By late 1824 , the rebellion was over . Sixteen rebels were tried and executed , while all others were pardoned by the Emperor . 
 = = Crises within and without = = 
 = = = Portuguese dynastic affair = = = 
 After long negotiations , Portugal signed a treaty with Brazil on 29 August 1825 in which it recognized Brazilian independence . Except for the recognition of independence , the treaty provisions were at Brazil 's expense , including a demand for reparations to be paid to Portugal , with no other requirements of Portugal . Compensation was to be paid to all Portuguese citizens residing in Brazil for the losses they had experienced , such as properties which had been confiscated . João VI was also given the right to style himself emperor of Brazil . More humiliating was that the treaty implied that independence had been granted as a beneficent act of João VI , rather than having been compelled by the Brazilians through force of arms . Even worse , Great Britain was rewarded for its role in advancing the negotiations by the signing of a separate treaty in which its favorable commercial rights were renewed and by the signing of a convention in which Brazil agreed to abolish slave trade with Africa within four years . Both accords were severely harmful to Brazilian economic interests . 
 A few months later , the Emperor received word that his father had died on 10 March 1826 , and that he had succeeded his father on the Portuguese throne as King Dom Pedro IV . Aware that a reunion of Brazil and Portugal would be unacceptable to the people of both nations , he hastily abdicated the crown of Portugal on 2 May in favor of his eldest daughter , who became Queen Dona Maria II . His abdication was conditional : Portugal was required to accept the Constitution which he had drafted and Maria II was to marry his brother Miguel . Regardless of the abdication , Pedro I continued to act as an absentee king of Portugal and interceded in its diplomatic matters , as well as in internal affairs , such as making appointments . He found it difficult , at the very least , to keep his position as Brazilian emperor separate from his obligations to protect his daughter 's interests in Portugal . 
 Miguel feigned compliance with Pedro I 's plans . As soon as he was declared regent in early 1828 , and backed by Carlota Joaquina , he abrogated the Constitution and , supported by those Portuguese in favor of absolutism , was acclaimed King Dom Miguel I. As painful as was his beloved brother 's betrayal , Pedro I also endured the defection of his surviving sisters , Maria Teresa , Maria Francisca , Isabel Maria and Maria da <unk> , to Miguel I 's faction . Only his youngest sister , Ana de Jesus , remained faithful to him , and she later traveled to Rio de Janeiro to be close to him . Consumed by hatred and beginning to believe rumors that Miguel I had murdered their father , Pedro I turned his focus on Portugal and tried in vain to garner international support for Maria II 's rights . 
 = = = War and widowhood = = = 
 Backed by the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata ( present @-@ day Argentina ) , a small band declared Brazil 's southernmost province of Cisplatina to be independent in April 1825 . The Brazilian government at first perceived the secession attempt as a minor uprising . It took months before a greater threat posed by the involvement of the United Provinces , which expected to annex Cisplatina , caused serious concern . In retaliation , the Empire declared war in December , triggering the Cisplatine War . The Emperor traveled to Bahia province ( located in northeastern Brazil ) in February 1826 , taking along his wife and daughter Maria . The Emperor was warmly welcomed by the inhabitants of Bahia . The trip was planned to generate support for the war @-@ effort . 
 The imperial entourage included Domitila de Castro ( then @-@ Viscountess and later Marchioness of Santos ) , who had been Pedro I 's mistress since their first meeting in 1822 . Although he had never been faithful to Maria Leopoldina , he had previously been careful to conceal his sexual escapades with other women . However , his infatuation for his new lover " had become both blatant and limitless " , while his wife endured slights and became the object of gossip . Pedro I was increasingly rude and mean toward Maria Leopoldina , left her short of funds , prohibited her from leaving the palace and forced her to endure Domitila 's presence as her lady @-@ in @-@ waiting . In the meantime , his lover took advantage by advancing her interests , as well as those of her family and friends . Those seeking favors or to promote projects increasingly sought her help , bypassing the normal , legal channels . 
 On 24 November 1826 , Pedro I sailed from Rio de Janeiro to São José in the province of Santa Catarina . From there he rode to Porto Alegre , capital of the province of Rio Grande do Sul , where the main army was stationed . Upon his arrival on 7 December , the Emperor found the military conditions to be much worse than previous reports had led him to expect . He " reacted with his customary energy : he passed a flurry of orders , fired reputed <unk> and incompetents , fraternized with the troops , and generally shook up military and civilian administration . " He was already on his way back to Rio de Janeiro when he was told that Maria Leopoldina had died following a miscarriage . <unk> rumors soon spread that purported that she had died after being physically assaulted by Pedro I. Meanwhile , the war continued on with no conclusion in sight . Pedro I relinquished Cisplatina in August 1828 , and the province became the independent nation of Uruguay . 
 = = = Second marriage = = = 
 After his wife 's death , Pedro I realized how miserably he had treated her , and his relationship with Domitila began to crumble . Maria Leopoldina , unlike his mistress , was popular , honest and loved him without expecting anything in return . The Emperor greatly missed her , and even his obsession with Domitila failed to overcome his sense of loss and regret . One day Domitila found him weeping on the floor and embracing a portrait of his deceased wife , whose sad @-@ looking ghost Pedro I claimed to have seen . Later on , the Emperor left the bed he shared with Domitila and shouted : " Get off of me ! I know I live an unworthy life of a sovereign . The thought of the Empress does not leave me . " He did not forget his children , orphaned of their mother , and was observed on more than one occasion holding his son , the young Pedro , in his arms and saying : " Poor boy , you are the most unhappy prince in the world . " 
 At the insistence of Pedro I , Domitila departed from Rio de Janeiro on 27 June 1828 . He had resolved to marry again and to become a better person . He even tried to persuade his father @-@ in @-@ law of his sincerity , by claiming in a letter " that all my wickedness is over , that I shall not again fall into those errors into which I have fallen , which I regret and have asked God for forgiveness " . Franz I was less than convinced . The Austrian emperor , deeply offended by the conduct his daughter endured , withdrew his support for Brazilian concerns and frustrated Pedro I 's Portuguese interests . Because of Pedro I 's bad reputation in Europe , owing to his past behavior , princesses from several nations declined his proposals of marriage one after another . His pride thus wounded , he allowed his mistress to return , which she did on 29 April 1829 after having been away nearly a year . 
 However , once he learned that a betrothal had finally been arranged , the Emperor ended his relationship to Domitila . She returned to her native province of São Paulo on 27 August , where she remained . Days earlier , on 2 August , the Emperor had been married by proxy to Amélie of Leuchtenberg . He was stunned by her beauty after meeting her in person . The vows previously made by proxy were ratified in a Nuptial Mass on 17 October . Amélie was kind and loving to his children and provided a much needed sense of normalcy to both his family and the general public . After Domitila 's banishment from court , the vow the Emperor made to alter his behavior proved to be sincere . He had no more affairs and remained faithful to his spouse . In an attempt to mitigate and move beyond other past misdeeds , he made peace with José Bonifácio , his former minister and mentor . 
 = = Between Portugal and Brazil = = 
 = = = Endless crises = = = 
 Since the days of the Constituent Assembly in 1823 , and with renewed vigor in 1826 with the opening of the General Assembly ( the Brazilian parliament ) , there had been an ideological struggle over the balance of powers wielded by the emperor and legislature in governance . On one side were those who shared Pedro I 's views , politicians who believed that the monarch should be free to choose ministers , national policies and the direction of government . In opposition were those , then known as the Liberal Party , who believed that cabinets should have the power to set the government 's course and should consist of deputies drawn from the majority party who were accountable to the parliament . Strictly speaking , both the party that supported Pedro I 's government and the Liberal Party advocated Liberalism , and thus constitutional monarchy . 
 Regardless of Pedro I 's failures as a ruler , he respected the Constitution : he did not tamper with elections or countenance vote rigging , refuse to sign acts ratified by the government , or impose any restrictions on freedom of speech . Although within his prerogative , he did not dissolve the Chamber of Deputies and call for new elections when it disagreed with his aims or postpone seating the legislature . Liberal newspapers and pamphlets seized on Pedro I 's Portuguese birth in support of both valid accusations ( e.g. , that much of his energy was directed toward affairs concerning Portugal ) and false charges ( e.g. , that he was involved in plots to suppress the Constitution and to reunite Brazil and Portugal ) . To the Liberals , the Emperor 's Portuguese @-@ born friends who were part of the Imperial court , including Francisco Gomes da Silva who was nicknamed " the <unk> " , were part of these conspiracies and formed a " secret cabinet " . None of these figures exhibited interest in such issues , and whatever interests they may have shared , there was no palace cabal plotting to abrogate the Constitution or to bring Brazil back under Portugal 's control . 
 Another source of criticism by the Liberals involved Pedro I 's abolitionist views . The Emperor had indeed conceived a gradual process for eliminating slavery . However , the constitutional power to enact legislation was in the hands of the Assembly , which was dominated by slave @-@ owning landholders who could thus thwart any attempt at abolition . The Emperor opted to try persuasion by moral example , setting up his estate at Santa Cruz as a model by granting land to his freed slaves there . Pedro I also professed other advanced ideas . When he declared his intention to remain in Brazil on 9 January 1822 and the populace sought to accord him the honor of <unk> the horses and pulling his carriage themselves , the then @-@ Prince Regent refused . His reply was a simultaneous denunciation of the divine right of kings , of nobility 's supposedly superior blood and of racism : " It grieves me to see my fellow humans giving a man tributes appropriate for the divinity , I know that my blood is the same color as that of the Negroes . " 
 = = = Abdication = = = 
 The Emperor 's efforts to appease the Liberal Party resulted in very important changes . He supported an 1827 law that established ministerial responsibility . On 19 March 1831 , he named a cabinet formed by politicians drawn from the opposition , allowing a greater role for the parliament in the government . Lastly , he offered positions in Europe to Francisco Gomes and another Portuguese @-@ born friend to extinguish rumors of a " secret cabinet " . To his dismay , his palliative measures did not stop the continuous attacks from the Liberal side upon his government and his foreign birth . Frustrated by their intransigence , he became unwilling to deal with his deteriorating political situation . 
 Meanwhile , Portuguese exiles campaigned to convince him to give up on Brazil and instead devote his energies to the fight for his daughter 's claim to Portugal 's crown . According to Roderick J. Barman , " [ in ] an emergency the Emperor 's abilities shone forth — he became cool in nerve , resourceful and steadfast in action . Life as a constitutional monarch , full of tedium , caution , and conciliation , ran against the essence of his character . " On the other hand , the historian remarked , he " found in his daughter 's case everything that appealed most to his character . By going to Portugal he could champion the oppressed , display his chivalry and self @-@ denial , uphold constitutional rule , and enjoy the freedom of action he craved . " 
 The idea of abdicating and returning to Portugal took root in his mind , and , beginning in early 1829 , he talked about it frequently . An opportunity soon appeared to act upon the notion . Radicals within the Liberal Party rallied street gangs to harass the Portuguese community in Rio de Janeiro . On 11 March 1831 , in what became known as the " <unk> das <unk> " ( night of the broken bottles ) , the Portuguese retaliated and turmoil gripped the streets of the national capital . On 5 April , Pedro I fired the Liberal cabinet , which had only been in power since 19 March , for its incompetence in restoring order . A large crowd , incited by the radicals , gathered in Rio de Janeiro downtown on the afternoon of 6 April and demanded the immediate restoration of the fallen cabinet . The Emperor 's reply was : " I will do everything for the people and nothing [ compelled ] by the people . " Sometime after nightfall , army troops , including his guard , deserted him and joined the protests . Only then did he realize how isolated and detached from Brazilian affairs he had become , and to everyone 's surprise , he abdicated at approximately 03 : 00 on 7 April . Upon delivering the abdication document to a messenger , he said : " Here you have my act of abdication , I 'm returning to Europe and leaving a country that I loved very much , and still love . " 
 = = Return to Europe = = 
 = = = War of restoration = = = 
 At dawn on the morning of 7 April , Pedro , his wife , and others , including his daughter Maria II and his sister Ana de Jesus , were taken on board the British warship HMS Warspite . The vessel remained at anchor off Rio de Janeiro , and , on 13 April , the former emperor transferred to and departed for Europe aboard HMS Volage . He arrived in Cherbourg @-@ <unk> , France , on 10 June . During the next few months , he shuttled between France and Great Britain . He was warmly welcomed by , but received no actual support from , either government . Finding himself in an awkward situation because he held no official status in either the Brazilian Imperial House or in the Portuguese Royal House , Pedro assumed the title of Duke of Braganza on 15 June , a position that once had been his as heir to Portugal 's crown . Although the title should have belonged to Maria II 's heir , which he certainly was not , his claim was met with general recognition . On 1 December , his only daughter by Amélie , Maria Amélia , was born in Paris . 
 He did not forget his children left in Brazil . He wrote poignant letters to each of them , conveying how greatly he missed them and repeatedly asking them to seriously attend to their educations . Shortly before his abdication , Pedro had told his son and successor : " I intend that my brother Miguel and I will be the last badly educated of the Braganza family " . Charles Napier , a naval commander who fought under Pedro 's banner in the 1830s , remarked that " his good qualities were his own ; his bad owing to want of education ; and no man was more sensible of that defect than himself . " His letters to Pedro II were often couched in language beyond the boy 's reading level , and historians have assumed such passages were chiefly intended as advice that the young monarch might eventually consult upon reaching adulthood . 
 While in Paris , the Duke of Braganza met and befriended Gilbert du Motier , Marquis of Lafayette , a veteran of the American Revolutionary War who became one of his staunchest supporters . Pedro bade farewell to his family , Lafayette and around two hundred well @-@ wishers on 25 January 1832 . He knelt before Maria II and said : " My lady , here is a Portuguese general who will uphold your rights and restore your crown . " In tears , his daughter embraced him . Pedro sailed to the Atlantic archipelago of the Azores , the only Portuguese territory that had remained loyal to his daughter . After a few months of final preparations he embarked for mainland Portugal , entering the city of Porto unopposed on 9 July . He came at the head of a small army composed of Portuguese liberals , such as Almeida Garrett and Alexandre Herculano , as well as foreign mercenaries and volunteers such as Lafayette 's grandson , Adrien Jules de <unk> . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Severely outnumbered , Pedro 's army of liberals was besieged in Porto for more than a year . There , in early 1833 , he received news from Brazil of his daughter Paula 's impending death . Months later , in September , he met with Antônio Carlos de Andrada , a brother of Bonifácio who had come from Brazil . As a representative of the Restorationist Party , Antônio Carlos asked the Duke of Braganza to return to Brazil and rule his former empire as regent during his son 's minority . Pedro realized that the Restorationists wanted to use him as a tool to facilitate their own rise to power , and frustrated Antônio Carlos by making almost impossible demands , to ascertain whether the Brazilian people , and not merely a faction , truly wanted him back . He insisted that any request to return as regent be constitutionally valid . The people 's will would have to be conveyed through their local representatives and his appointment approved by the General Assembly . Only then , and " upon the presentation of a petition to him in Portugal by an official delegation of the Brazilian parliament " would he consider accepting . 
 During the war , the Duke of Braganza mounted cannons , dug trenches , tended the wounded , ate among the rank and file and fought under heavy fire as men next to him were shot or blown to pieces . His cause was nearly lost until he took the risky step of dividing his forces and sending a portion to launch an amphibious attack on southern Portugal . The Algarve region fell to the expedition , which then marched north straight for Lisbon , which capitulated on 24 July . Pedro proceeded to subdue the remainder of the country , but just when the conflict looked to be winding down to a conclusion , his Spanish uncle Don Carlos , who was attempting to seize the crown of his niece Doña Isabel II , intervened . In this wider conflict that engulfed the entire Iberian Peninsula , the First Carlist War , the Duke of Braganza allied with liberal Spanish armies loyal to Isabel II and defeated both Miguel I and Carlos . A peace accord was reached on 26 May 1834 . 
 Except for bouts of epilepsy that manifested in seizures every few years , Pedro had always enjoyed robust health . The war , however , undermined his constitution and by 1834 he was dying of tuberculosis . He was confined to his bed in Queluz Royal Palace from 10 September . Pedro dictated an open letter to the Brazilians , in which he begged that a gradual abolition of slavery be adopted . He warned them : " Slavery is an evil , and an attack against the rights and dignity of the human species , but its consequences are less harmful to those who suffer in captivity than to the Nation whose laws allow slavery . It is a cancer that devours its morality . " After a long and painful illness , Pedro died at 14 : 30 on 24 September 1834 . As he had requested , his heart was placed in Porto 's Lapa Church and his body was interred in the Royal Pantheon of the House of Braganza . The news of his death arrived in Rio de Janeiro on 20 November , but his children were informed only after 2 December . Bonifácio , who had been removed from his position as their guardian , wrote to Pedro II and his sisters : " Dom Pedro did not die . Only ordinary men die , not heroes . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Upon the death of Pedro I , the then @-@ powerful Restorationist Party vanished overnight . A fair assessment of the former monarch became possible once the threat of his return to power was removed . Evaristo da Veiga , one of his worst critics as well as a leader in the Liberal Party , left a statement which , according to historian Otávio Tarquínio de Sousa , became the prevailing view thereafter : " the former emperor of Brazil was not a prince of ordinary measure ... and Providence has made him a powerful instrument of liberation , both in Brazil and in Portugal . If we [ Brazilians ] exist as a body in a free Nation , if our land was not ripped apart into small enemy republics , where only anarchy and military spirit predominated , we owe much to the resolution he took in remaining among us , in making the first shout for our Independence . " He continued : " Portugal , if it was freed from the darkest and demeaning tyranny ... if it enjoys the benefits brought by representative government to learned peoples , it owes it to D [ om ] . Pedro de Alcântara , whose fatigues , sufferings and sacrifices for the Portuguese cause has earned him in high degree the tribute of national gratitude . " 
 John Armitage , who lived in Brazil during the latter half of Pedro I 's reign , remarked that " even the errors of the Monarch have been attended with great benefit through their influence on the affairs of the mother country . Had he governed with more wisdom it would have been well for the land of his adoption , yet , perhaps , unfortunate for humanity . " Armitage added that like " the late Emperor of the French , he was also a child of destiny , or rather , an instrument in the hands of an all @-@ seeing and beneficent Providence for the furtherance of great and inscrutable ends . In the old as in the new world he was henceforth fated to become the instrument of further revolutions , and ere the close of his brilliant but ephemeral career in the land of his fathers , to atone amply for the errors and follies of his former life , by his chivalrous and heroic devotion in the cause of civil and religious freedom . " 
 In 1972 , on the 150th anniversary of Brazilian independence , Pedro I 's remains ( though not his heart ) were brought to Brazil — as he had requested in his will — accompanied by much fanfare and with honors due to a head of state . His remains were reinterred in the Monument to the Independence of Brazil , along with those of Maria Leopoldina and Amélie , in the city of São Paulo . Years later , Neill Macaulay said that " [ c ] <unk> of Dom Pedro was freely expressed and often vehement ; it prompted him to abdicate two thrones . His tolerance of public criticism and his willingness to relinquish power set Dom Pedro apart from his absolutist predecessors and from the rulers of today 's coercive states , whose lifetime tenure is as secure as that of the kings of old . " Macaulay affirmed that " [ s ] <unk> liberal leaders like Dom Pedro may be honored with an occasional stone or bronze monument , but their portraits , four stories high , do not shape public buildings ; their pictures are not borne in parades of hundreds of thousands of uniformed marchers ; no ' <unk> ' attach to their names . " 
 = = Titles and honors = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 12 October 1798 – 11 June 1801 : His Highness The Most Serene Infante Dom Pedro , Grand Prior of Crato 
 11 June 1801 – 20 March 1816 : His Royal Highness The Prince of Beira 
 20 March 1816 – 9 January 1817 : His Royal Highness The Prince of Brazil 
 9 January 1817 – 10 March 1826 : His Royal Highness The Prince Royal 
 12 October 1822 – 7 April 1831 : His Imperial Majesty The Emperor 
 10 March 1826 – 2 May 1826 : His Most Faithful Majesty The King 
 15 June 1831 – 24 September 1834 : His Imperial Majesty The Duke of Braganza 
 As Brazilian emperor his full style and title were : " His Imperial Majesty Dom Pedro I , Constitutional Emperor and Perpetual Defender of Brazil " . 
 As Portuguese king his full style and title were : " His Most Faithful Majesty Dom Pedro IV , King of Portugal and the Algarves , of either side of the sea in Africa , Lord of Guinea and of Conquest , Navigation and Commerce of Ethiopia , Arabia , Persia and India , etc . " 
 = = = Nobility = = = 
 As heir to the Portuguese crown : 
 Duke of Braganza 
 Duke of Barcelos 
 Duke of Guimarães 
 Marquis of Vila Viçosa 
 Count of <unk> 
 Count of Barcelos 
 Count of Faria and <unk> 
 Count of <unk> 
 Count of Guimarães 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Emperor Pedro I was Grand Master of the following Brazilian Orders : 
 Order of Christ 
 Order of Aviz 
 Order of Saint James of the Sword 
 Order of the Southern Cross 
 Order of Pedro I 
 Order of the Rose 
 As King Pedro IV , he was Grand Master of the following Portuguese Orders : 
 Order of Christ 
 Order of Saint Benedict of Aviz 
 Order of Saint James of the Sword 
 Order of the Tower and Sword 
 Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa 
 After having abdicated the Portuguese crown : 
 Grand Cross of the Portuguese Order of the Tower and of the Sword , of Valor , Loyalty and Merit on 20 September 1834 
 He was a recipient of the following foreign honors : 
 Knight of the Spanish Order of the Golden Fleece 
 Grand Cross of the Spanish Order of Charles III 
 Grand Cross of the Spanish Order of Isabella the Catholic 
 Grand Cross of the French Order of Saint Louis 
 Knight of the French Order of the Holy Spirit 
 Knight of the French Order of Saint Michael 
 Grand Cross of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Order of Saint Stephen 
 = = Genealogy = = 
 = = = Ancestry = = = 
 The ancestry of Emperor Pedro I : 
 = = = Issue = = = 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Parasite Eve ( video game ) = 
 Parasite Eve is a 1998 survival horror action role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square . The game is a sequel to the novel Parasite Eve written by Hideaki Sena ; it is also the first game in the Parasite Eve video game series . The story follows New York City police officer Aya Brea over a six @-@ day span in 1997 as she attempts to stop the monster that is sparking the creation of a creature that will destroy the human race through spontaneous human combustion . Players are allowed to move freely around several open environments while utilizing a pausable real @-@ time combat system along with several role @-@ playing game elements . 
 Parasite Eve was Square Enix 's first M @-@ rated game , and the first major American and Japanese game development collaboration for the company . It was produced by Hironobu Sakaguchi and directed by Takashi Tokita . Music for the title was composed by Yoko Shimomura who was widely acclaimed for her work to create an " inorganic " and " emotionless " soundtrack that saw two album releases . Parasite Eve received positive reviews ; critics praised the graphics and gameplay , but found the overall game too linear and with little replay potential . 
 The video game adaptation was part of a resurgence of popularity in Japanese horror sparked by the original book , and was released alongside a film adaptation and two manga comics ; one based on the book , the other on the video game . The original title was also followed by two video game sequels : Parasite Eve II in 1999 and The 3rd Birthday in 2010 , and was re @-@ released on the PlayStation Network in 2010 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Parasite Eve is an action role @-@ playing video game . Movement in the " world map " ( which is a map of Manhattan ) is limited to specific destinations . " Upon the player walking over a " hot spot " , there 's a chance of a random encounter . Enemies materialize and attack players on the same screen that they move Aya around on , with no battle mode or screen being used . In battle , the game uses a pausable real @-@ time combat system with an Active Time Bar ( ATB ) that sets the time that must be waited till the player can take their next action . While waiting for her turn , the player character Aya can be moved around to dodge enemy attacks . Upon each turn , the player may choose between attacking with their equipped weapon by pressing the attack button , using PE ( Parasite Energy ) for defense , assistance , or attack , using items , changing weapon or armor , or escaping the battle . If the player chooses to attack , the battle briefly pauses and a dome / sphere symbolizing the range of the weapon appears , allowing the player to target an enemy within range . Parasite Energy recharges during battle but the more players use it , the slower it refills . 
 When not in battle , the player has the option of altering the weapon and armor attributes and effects with tools and super @-@ tools . The player selects the " tune @-@ up " option , choosing the weapon that will be altered and the weapon from which the attributes or effect will be taken . Weapons have many different properties , including special effects like " acid " , which causes enemies to continuously take damage . One of the principal RPG elements of the game is that experience @-@ based levels are present . Each time the player 's level increases , his / her attributes go up and BP ( Bonus Points ) are given . These points can be distributed to the ATB , item capacity , or attributes of a weapon or armor . 
 Once the game is completed , a new game plus mode is available called " EX game " . It is different from the normal game in various aspects ; the player has access to every item stored in the police station , the game begins with the final weapon and armor the player chose before ending the first game but returns to level one experience , and the bonus points ( BP ) given to the player at the end of the game are now available to use . The items , weapons , power @-@ ups and enemies are of more powerful , and so are the enemies players encounter . However , the biggest difference from the normal game is the new Chrysler Building location with 77 floors , mostly randomized , leading to a final boss battle with Aya 's older sister Maya . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins with Aya Brea , an NYPD rookie , attending an opera at Carnegie Hall with an unnamed date in New York City on Christmas Eve 1997 . During the opera , everyone in the building spontaneously combusts , except for Aya , and an actress on stage named Melissa Pearce . Aya confronts Melissa onstage , and Melissa says that Aya ’ s mitochondria need more time to develop . She flees backstage , with Aya giving chase . Backstage , Melissa then mutates into a beast and flees into the sewers , declaring that her name is now Eve . 
 The next day , on Christmas , Aya and her partner , Daniel , go to see a scientist at the Museum of Natural History named Dr. Klamp . He teaches the protagonists about mitochondria , but they do not find his information useful since it does not explain the previous night 's events . Later that day , they hear that Eve is in Central Park , and to make matters worse , an audience has gathered at the park 's theater intending to see a performance that Melissa Pearce was to give . Aya enters Central Park alone as Daniel is unable to pass through the entrance without spontaneously combusting . She makes it to the theater , but is too late to stop Eve , who causes the theater audience 's mitochondria to rebel against their hosts and turns the crowd into a slimy orange mass . Aya chases after Eve and is knocked unconscious after a fight with her aboard a horse @-@ drawn carriage . Daniel discovers that his son , Ben , was at the park , but had left the audience at the Central Park theater when he began to feel ill and when his mother began to act strange . He also learns that Manhattan is being evacuated due to the threat that Eve poses . 
 While Manhattan is being evacuated , a Japanese man named Kunihiko Maeda manages to sneak into the city , witnessing a police officer combust into flames in the process . Aya awakens in an apartment in SoHo , with Daniel and Maeda at her side . Maeda reveals the origins of Eve : A scientist tried to culture the cells of his wife after she was involved in a car accident , and the mitochondria in her cells took over her body . Maeda believes that Eve may be trying to give birth to an “ Ultimate Being ” . The next day , the three go to see Dr. Klamp again . After examining cell samples from that of Eve and Aya 's , Maeda concludes that based on selfish gene theory , Aya and Eve 's mitochondria are in an evolutionary race for survival . Dr. Klamp suddenly appears and asks a few questions of Aya in a hostile manner . The three leave and head for the St. Francis Hospital , where Maeda thinks Eve may try to get sperm for the Ultimate Being . When they arrive , they find that Eve is already there . Eve takes the sperm and escapes . 
 The next day , Aya sees the orange mass of people from the park enter the city water supply . She goes to Dr. Klamp one more time , and discovers that Dr. Klamp has engineered special sperm for Eve so that she can create the Ultimate Being . He then spontaneously combusts . Aya finds Eve in another part of the museum , where the orange mass has surrounded her , forming an impermeable shield to protect her while the Ultimate Being gestates within her . After several failed attempts to attack Eve , the military asks Aya to attack her from a chopper , as she is the only one who can get close without combusting . The plan works , but Aya has to personally finish the fight on a now @-@ wrecked Statue of Liberty , where Eve finally succumbs to necrosis due to her unstable cells . As Aya rests on a naval vessel , the Ultimate Being is born and attacks the surrounding ships . Aya does battle with the Ultimate Being , but its mitochondria causes it to evolve at an alarming rate . Aya sets the vessel 's boiler pressure dangerously high , so as to destroy it with the Ultimate Being on board . 
 After completing the game once , the player can access the Chrysler Building and have access to the final boss , who takes the form of Aya 's sister , Maya . She explains to Aya that Klamp cultivated the liver cells of the original Eve to analyze . When Melissa was giving birth to the Ultimate Being , she created a nest there . In case Melissa and the Ultimate Being failed , the purebred would remain . Aya speaks with her sister , and they engage in battle against the purebred . After the purebred is defeated , the mitochondria inside Aya 's body begin to rebel against her . It is explained that Aya 's mitochondria have now reached a higher evolutionary stage than Maya ’ s , but Maya 's personality has suddenly become dominant and begun to fight off the Eve persona . Maya eventually wins , purging the Eve persona from herself . Somehow , Maya protects Aya by preventing the original Eve from taking over her . Aya leaves the building by herself , although she apparently has gained some sort of connection with her dead sister . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The video game Parasite Eve is based on the acclaimed Japanese novel Parasite Eve released in 1991 . Plot @-@ wise , the video game serves as a sequel to the book . The game was produced by Hironobu Sakaguchi and directed by Takashi Tokita of Square . During development of the game , Square decided to use New York City as the setting after having been previously considered for use in Final Fantasy VII . The game is notable for being Square 's first game to be rated Mature by the ESRB . In contrast to previous Square titles , the development team for Parasite Eve consisted of both Japanese and American staff members , with a large part of the production taking place in the United States . Different concepts for the games opening were considered , including different designs for Aya and Melissa transforming into Eve on stage during the opera . Book author Hideaki Sena did not know the titles ' plot until it was completed , since the game was a collaboration between Square and his publisher . 
 Aya Brea was created by Hironobu Sakaguchi and designed by Tetsuya Nomura . Aya was originally being designed by someone else , but the original sketches did not satisfy Sakaguchi , who had wanted a long @-@ haired character like Aerith Gainsborough , a central character from Final Fantasy VII . At the time , he was creating another unspecified character for a different project who sported short hair : he got confused while designing them and accidentally combined the two designs , creating the then @-@ current Aya . The original concept for her was to have her as strong , sexy and " bewitching " . 
 Television ads featuring the full motion video present in the game were aired in the United States in the run up to the games 1998 release . In a shipping mixup , over two hundred copies of the game were shipped to Best Buy retailers a week before the official release . 
 Before The 3rd Birthday 's release in 2010 , both Yoshinori Kitase and Tetsuya Nomura discussed the re @-@ release of Parasite Eve and Parasite Eve II . The release was being held up partly due to the series rights being co @-@ owned with Hideaki Sena . 
 = = Music = = 
 Yoko Shimomura composed the game 's soundtrack including the main theme , " Primal Eyes " . The ending vocal song , " Somnia Memorias " , is performed by Shani Rigsbee . The score met with great critical acclaim , using influences from both opera and electronica . Shimomura stated that she tried to compose " inorganic " music for the game , what she described as " something unique " for the game . A separate Parasite Eve Remixes album was also released , containing 10 tracks remixed from the original game by various artists . The idea for the work came from a simple suggestion to Shimomura that the game 's music be remixed rather than rearranged . " Somnia Memorias " was also included on the Square Vocal Collection in 2001 . 
 Yoko Shimomura would later become a well @-@ established video game composer through her work on the Kingdom Hearts series . Additional arrangements were done by Shigeo Tamaru . Despite her previous work as lead composer on Super Mario RPG , Parasite Eve became her breakout project and garnered her international fame . During her work on Parasite Eve , Shimomura spent time in America , which was where much of the game 's staff came from . Because of this , Shimomura remembered the game as her most challenging project . She wanted the music to be experimental , not falling into ambient or techno classifications . One of her main goals was to create something " inorganic " and recognizable as a product of Square . Until Parasite Eve , Shimomura had written music in a straightforward manner that reflected her then @-@ current state of mind , but this time she restrained herself and took a more " emotionless " approach . She felt that this would best represent the game 's atmosphere and Aya 's stoic attitude . Ultimately , she felt that Parasite Eve was an experimental work in many ways . Due to its prevalence in the story , Shimomura used opera music , but as typical opera music did not translate well into battle themes , Shimomura added different rhythms : these rhythms were inspired when some of the game 's American staff took her to a nightclub and she heard the background music there . The music recording took place at the Andora Studios in Los Angeles . 
 Parasite Eve was the first of her projects to include a vocal theme , the ending theme " Somnia Memorias " . This was because the PlayStation system was the first to have sufficient processing power for this to be possible . For the vocalist , Shimomura avoided using someone well known . " Somnia Memorias " was sung by Shani Rigsbee , while the vocals for the orchestrated versions of " Influence of Deep " and " Se il Mio Amore Sta Vincino " were provided by Judith <unk> . " Somnia Memorias " was translated and adapted from Japanese into Latin by Raul Ferrando , while " Se il Mio Amore Sta Vincino " was translated by Daniella Spagnolo . The lyrics for all vocal pieces were written by Shimomura . The track " I Hear a Voice Asking Me to Awaken " was an arrangement of Wachet auf , ruft uns die Stimme , BWV 140 by Johann Sebastian Bach . 
 The two @-@ disc album Parasite Eve Original Soundtrack was released through DigiCube on May 21 , 1998 under the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> . Later , due to popular demand from fans , a reprint was issued through the Square Enix label on January 26 , 2011 under the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> / 3 . The music received generally positive reviews from music critics , and helped establish Shimomura as a popular composer with western video game fans . 
 Parasite Eve Remixes is a ten @-@ track album , featuring remixed versions of themes from Parasite Eve . The remixes were done by Shimomura , Tamaru , Hidenori Iwasaki and Keichi Takahashi . Multiple DJs also contributed , including Tomo , <unk> , Dan K , Tribal Masters , Kay Nakayama , and Dummy Run . According to Shimomura , the album came about when someone suggested to her creating full remixes of themes rather than making simple rearrangements . Shimomura was in charge of extending and remixing " Aya 's Theme " , which was the main theme for Parasite Eve . The album was released through DigiCube on July 30 , 1998 under the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> . Reviews of the album were mixed , with critics saying that it would not appeal to many and finding some of the remixes odd , repetitive or overly chaotic . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Parasite Eve received positive reviews from critics . IGN praised the game for its beautiful graphics and cinematic sequences , as well as its mature tone , but noted , along with other reviewers , the games linear plot structure . Game Informer cited the games " exquisite " backdrops but bemoaned its long load times each time players enter a new environment or engage an enemy . GameSpot said the game had a cinematic look , and had an " astounding " level of detail for real life locations in New York City . The lack of any voice acting or singing , however , hindered dramatic scenes such as the opera and subsequent mass combustion of the entire audience at the games start . 
 The game was sometimes compared to the Resident Evil series , though GamePro said that Parasite Eve had deeper gameplay with multiple weapon upgrades and hidden areas to discover . Reviewers also cited that though the game broke many RPG gaming conventions , it suffered from having little replay value and being a relatively short game . The combat was compared unfavorably to Final Fantasy VII by Game Revolution , which featured a dynamic camera instead of fixed one . The novel 's original author Hideaki Sena approved of the game , stating that he was " actually impressed how well the game makers translated the novel . " 
 The game has sold over 1 @.@ 9 million copies as of February 2004 , with 1 @.@ 05 million sold in Japan and 0 @.@ 89 million sold in North America . In Japan , it was the number 6 top @-@ selling game of 1998 with 994 @,@ 000 copies sold . The game was re @-@ released in North America under Sony 's Greatest Hits label . 
 In 2000 , the game was ranked number 16 by the readers of Famitsu magazine in its top 100 PlayStation games of all time . In 2010 , GamesRadar chose it as one of the " Top 7 ... ' 90s games that need HD remakes " . In February 2011 , Parasite Eve was announced to arrive on the North American PlayStation Network . It was released on March 15 , 2011 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The Parasite Eve video game that was inspired by the original book was popular in Japan , and was a part of the " J @-@ horror " phenomena along with other fiction such as " The Ring " , and lead to two video game sequels and a manga adaptation based upon the video game universe called Parasite Eve DIVA . 
 = Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s = 
 Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s ( titled Guitar Hero : Rocks the 80s in Europe ) is a music rhythm game and the third installment in the popular Guitar Hero series . It was released in July 2007 in North America and Europe , and in August 2007 in Australia . 
 Players use a guitar @-@ shaped controller ( purchased separately ) to simulate playing rock music by hitting notes as they scroll towards the player . Rocks the 80s is an incremental title in the Guitar Hero series , rather than a full sequel . No changes in gameplay from Guitar Hero II have been introduced to this game . As implied by the game 's title , the game features a 1980s theme , consisting of songs from the decade and playable characters , fashions , and artwork that reflect the time period . 
 The game was not as well @-@ received as the prior two Guitar Hero games , due to the lack of new gameplay features and reduced soundtrack . Rocks the 80s is the third and final title in the Guitar Hero series to be developed by Harmonix before they moved on to create Rock Band . The next major installment of the series , Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , was developed by Activision 's Neversoft division . 
 = = History = = 
 After the successful release of Guitar Hero II , RedOctane announced they were looking into genre @-@ specific expansions to the series . Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s is the first of these genre @-@ specific titles ; Guitar Hero : Aerosmith , Guitar Hero : Metallica , Guitar Hero : Van Halen and Guitar Hero Smash Hits have since been released . 
 Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s was initially announced by EGM in January 2007 as Guitar Hero : 1980s Edition . Orange Lounge Radio claimed that the game would be released in June 2007 , based on an Activision announcement , though no other source has cited this announcement . Activision officially revealed the first details of the game May 11 , 2007 , in addition to changing the game 's title to Guitar Hero : Rocks the 80s . Only a few weeks later , the game name was revised again as Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s , as official artwork for the game was first released . Nevertheless , the word ' Encore ' has been dropped from the title of the European releases . 
 = = Gameplay and design = = 
 The mechanics of the game are nearly identical to that of its predecessor , Guitar Hero II ; an early preview of the game described it as " more like an expansion pack for Guitar Hero II than a new game in its own right " . Major differences to Guitar Hero II are mostly aesthetic . Six characters from previous Guitar Hero games ( Johnny Napalm , Judy Nails , Izzy Sparks , Pandora , Axel Steel , and Grim Ripper ) return with character designs influenced by styles of the 1980s . Venues from Guitar Hero II ( with the exception of RedOctane Club and Stonehenge , which do not appear , and the Vans Warped Tour , which has been rebranded as the Rock For Safety Tour ) have been redesigned with an 80s influence , and the interface mimics Guitar Hero II 's , only with color changes ( no " new " graphics were developed as far as the interface ) . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 All of the tracks , excluding " Because , It 's Midnite " , were released during the 1980s , as the game 's title suggests ; " Because , It 's Midnite " is performed by the fictional " 80s hair metal " band <unk> from the Internet cartoon Homestar Runner ( Harmonix co @-@ founder / CEO Alex Rigopulos is a professed fan of Homestar Runner ) . Two songs were originally written in the 1970s , but were covered by bands in the 1980s . These songs are " Radar Love " by Golden Earring , but covered by White Lion and " Ballroom Blitz " by Sweet and covered by Krokus . The song list includes tracks such as " Round and Round " by Ratt , " Metal Health " by Quiet Riot , " Holy Diver " by Dio , " Heat of the Moment " by Asia and " Nothin ' But a Good Time " by Poison . Five of the songs are master tracks : " Because It 's Midnite " , " I Ran ( So Far Away ) " by A Flock of Seagulls , Scandal 's " The Warrior " , Twisted Sister 's " I Wanna Rock " , and Judas Priest 's " Electric Eye " , while the rest are covers . 
 The final setlist was revealed by GameSpy on June 28 , 2007 as listed here . Unlike previous Guitar Hero games , there are no bonus tracks in Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s . Bow Wow Wow 's " I Want Candy " was originally announced for the game and appeared in many preview builds . However , RedOctane announced that it would no longer appear in the final version . No official comment in regards to the song 's removal has been given . 
 ^ a <unk> is a fictional 80s glam metal band featured in the Homestar Runner series of web cartoons ; while the song was created in 2003 , it parodies the style of these bands . 
 ^ b Judas Priest 's " Electric Eye " includes " The Hellion " , the preceding track on the Screaming for Vengeance album that segues right into " Electric Eye " . 
 ^ c Poison 's " Nothin ' But a Good Time " is labeled in game as " Ain 't Nothin ' But a Good Time " . 
 ^ d Twisted Sister 's " I Wanna Rock " is featured as a re @-@ recorded master track of the song , not the original album version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s was released to generally lukewarm reviews and has received overall less praise than the first two games in the series . Most critics agreed that the game 's $ 49 @.@ 99 price point was too high , considering the reduced soundtrack . GameSpot criticized the amount of songs with regard to the game 's price . The reviewer commented that " thirty songs for $ 50 is a lousy value any way you slice it " and the game " feels like a quick and dirty cash @-@ in . " The reviewer also commented that the soundtrack was " eclectic , " but " solid . " Other reviewers , including 1UP.com , IGN , and Electronic Gaming Monthly criticized the game for its musical selection . GameSetWatch compared the game to Lou Reed 's Metal Machine Music , saying that the game is " totally Harmonix 's contractual obligation game " due to the bare minimum of changes made from Guitar Hero II . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 On November 21 , 2007 , the rock group The Romantics filed a lawsuit against Activision , RedOctane , Harmonix , and <unk> Sound over the cover of the song " What I Like About You " used in Rocks the 80s . While the game developers did secure appropriate rights to cover the song in the game , The Romantics claim that the cover is " virtually indistinguishable from the authentic version " and thus would " [ confuse ] consumers into believing that the band actually recorded the music and endorsed the product " . The lawsuit requested the cessation of sales of the game and monetary damage . On December 20 , 2007 , Activision was awarded a preliminary injunction to prevent blockage of sales of the game . A summary judgment hearing was held on July 9 , 2008 , and the case was dismissed the next month , with a U.S. District Court judge stating that Activision had obtained the proper licensing for the works and that the band itself no longer held the copyright on the work . 
 = James Brudenell , 7th Earl of Cardigan = 
 Lieutenant General James Thomas Brudenell , 7th Earl of Cardigan KCB ( 16 October 1797 – 28 March 1868 ) was an officer in the British Army who commanded the Light Brigade during the Crimean War . He led the Charge of the Light Brigade at the Battle of Balaclava . 
 Throughout his life in politics and his long military career he characterised the arrogant and extravagant aristocrat of the period . His progression through the Army was marked by many episodes of extraordinary incompetence , but this can be measured against his generosity to the men under his command and genuine bravery . As a member of the landed aristocracy he had actively and steadfastly opposed any political reform in Britain , but in the last year of his life he relented and came to acknowledge that such reform would bring benefit to all classes of society . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Brudenell was born in a modest , by the standards of the Brudenell family , manor house at Hambleden , Buckinghamshire . In February 1811 his father inherited the Cardigan earldom , along with the immense estates and revenues that went with it , and the family seat of Deene Park , Northamptonshire . James accordingly became " Lord Brudenell " , and took up residence in the most grand of households , at the age of fourteen . 
 He was educated at Harrow where , notwithstanding the fears of his family that a childhood head injury caused by a dangerous fall from a horse had seriously damaged his intellect , he showed aptitude in Greek and Latin . He made good academic progress , but after he had settled a quarrel with another pupil by an organised fist @-@ fight , his father removed him from the school . ( Fist fights were tolerated at Harrow : it was the fact of Brudenell 's receiving punishment for unauthorised absence while having a broken bone in his hand attended to by a London surgeon that had annoyed the earl . ) He was subsequently educated at home . Here , as the only son among seven sisters , he developed into something of a spoilt child , accustomed to getting his own way . This is seen as a cause of his arrogance and stubbornness in later life . 
 Brudenell was a fine rider and , inspired by the decisive role of cavalry at the battle of Waterloo , his wish was to purchase a commission in a fashionable regiment and serve as an army officer . His father , however , mindful of preserving the family pedigree from risk of battle , would not allow this . Instead in November 1815 he was sent up to Christ Church , Oxford ; as an aristocrat he was automatically granted admission without examination . He left in his third year — aristocrats with no academic bent were released after only two years — but notwithstanding his showing some aptitude , he did not take a degree . 
 = = Parliament = = 
 In February 1818 , during his last term at Oxford , and again following his father 's wishes , he became Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Marlborough , a pocket borough owned by his cousin Charles , Earl of Ailesbury . The intention was to give Brudenell a grounding in parliamentary affairs before , eventually , he would take his place in the House of Lords . 
 Brudenell 's first action on leaving Oxford was not to take his parliamentary seat but , as was traditional for wealthy young men of the time , to take the Grand Tour . His itinerary , with Russia and Sweden included , was more extensive than the traditional destinations of France and Italy . The trip allowed Brudenell to enjoy the full pleasures of both cultural and social opportunities afforded by the countries he visited . 
 On his return Brudenell took his seat in the House of Commons , naturally on the ruling , Tory , side of the House . His contribution to government was minimal : he served with parliamentarians , such as Canning , Peel and Castlereagh , of great commitment and intellect and he could offer nothing to compete . On one issue , however , he made a stand . In 1829 his party introduced a bill allowing limited Catholic emancipation but his patron , cousin Charles , instructed him to oppose it . In three crucial votes Brudenell abstained , because of his admiration for Wellington , the bill 's sponsor , and in consequence he was thrown out of his seat . His return to parliament in 1830 cost him dearly . After his earlier disobedience he could not expect to be handed a pocket borough so , instead , he had to buy his own . He was elected member for Fowey , Cornwall , at a cost of at least £ 5 @,@ 000 ( about £ 400 @,@ 000 in today 's money ) . 
 This sum , however , was not well spent : in 1832 , the seat was one of those identified in the Reform Act for correction of such malpractices and he was thrown out again . He fought the family 's local constituency of Northamptonshire North , newly created in the reforms , in 1832 but despite holding the advantage that many of the electors were dependent on family 's patronage and goodwill , the campaign did not go smoothly . On 12 September in Wellingborough he was beaten up and " <unk> [ y ] " injured while campaigning . As a precaution he distributed about £ 20 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to some £ 1 @,@ 680 @,@ 000 today ) among the electorate and the seat was won , albeit as " junior member " to his Whig rival . In 1837 he inherited the earldom from his father . 
 = = Marriages = = 
 Early in the 1820s Brudenell met Mrs. Elizabeth Tollemache Johnstone ( 8 December 1797 – 15 July 1858 ) . Her husband , Lt.-Col. Christian Johnstone , had been a friend of Brudenell 's since childhood but , according to the account of Johnstone 's mother , the wooing of his friend 's new wife started soon after the wedding . Johnstone started divorce proceedings in June 1824 and the suit was finalised early in 1826 . Johnstone , who had received damages of £ 1 @,@ 000 from Brudenell , was apparently happy to be rid of her , calling her " the most damned bad @-@ tempered and extravagant bitch in the kingdom " . She and Brudenell married on 19 June 1826 . It was not a happy marriage ; by 1837 they had separated , and they had no children . 
 After leaving his first wife , Elizabeth , he married for the second time , on 20 September 1858 , to Adeline de Horsey , achieving still greater notoriety as he had been conducting an affair with her as his wife was dying . This , however , was a happy union , notwithstanding the disparity in their ages and Cardigan 's disappointment that there were , again , no children . Adeline , excluded from fashionable society for the rest of her days , accustomed herself to life in the country , happily forsaking her previous interests of books , painting and music , while Brudenell spent large sums of money making their home together comfortable . Adeline even remained on good terms with Brudenell 's principal mistress , Maria Marchioness of Ailesbury , and tolerated his other affairs . 
 = = Military = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Beyond all other interests , which included politics and the preservation of the ancient privileges of the aristocracy against the reformist climate of the period , Brudenell committed himself to a career in the army . At the age of 22 he formed his own troop of horse , armed from official stocks , to guard against possible reformist demonstrations in Northamptonshire . On 6 May 1824 , at the age of 27 , he joined the 8th King 's Royal Irish Hussars . Making extensive use of the purchase of commissions system then in use he became a Lieutenant in January 1825 , a Captain in June 1826 , a Major in August 1830 and a Lieutenant @-@ Colonel , albeit on half @-@ pay , only three months later , on 3 December 1830 . He obtained command of the 15th The King 's Hussars — at a reported premium of £ 35 @,@ 000 — on 16 March 1832 . 
 Parliamentary business , in the form of the hotly contested Reform Bill campaign , delayed his taking command until May . His youth and inexperience , compared with that of the battle @-@ tested officers whom he led ( some were veterans of the battle of Waterloo ) drew his naturally punctilious nature to manifest itself in petty @-@ minded bullying . In 1833 he was publicly censured for " reprehensible ... conduct " in a court martial held to determine charges he had laid against Captain Augustus Wathen , a subordinate . Brudenell was dismissed , by order of King William , early in 1834 . However he had influence at court and he asked his sister Harriet , married to Queen Adelaide 's chamberlain , Lord Howe , to get the decision reversed . He pestered senior officers and politicians until in March 1836 he was allowed command of the 11th Light Dragoons ( later restyled the 11th Hussars ) , notwithstanding the view of his commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Lord Hill , that he was " constitutionally unfit for command " . After a leisurely passage with his wife , he joined his new command in India in October of the following year , just in time to enjoy some tiger @-@ shooting before seeing the regiment off for Britain at the end of its long posting . He travelled separately in a hired vessel , disdaining to share the discomforts of the warship carrying his troops . Of the two years following his appointment , only four weeks were spent with his regiment . 
 In a genuine desire to lead a smart and efficient unit , Brudenell set about using his own fortune to improve his regiment 's reputation and performance . In purchasing brilliant new uniforms for his men Brudenell also caused resentment among his professional officers ; they had to match the men 's attire with even more costly uniforms , and they had to buy their own . ( It was in this role that he was portrayed in the historical fiction novels Flashman and Flashman at the Charge by George MacDonald Fraser . ) He wished his officers to be as aristocratic , flamboyant and stylish as he was himself and as a consequence he had no time for those men — " Indian officers " — who had learnt their profession over many years of service with the 11th during its long posting to India . This attitude was particularly in evidence in the mess : Brudenell had forbidden the serving of porter , the beverage of choice among the professional officers , and when at a formal mess dinner a visitor had requested <unk> wine , which was served in a " black bottle " similar to that of porter , he decided that the " Indian " Captain John Reynolds , who had ordered it for the guest , was defying him . Reynolds was arrested and in due course received a strongly worded reprimand from Lord Hill , who although privately believing that his misgivings about Brudenell had been well founded , felt that in the interests of good order and discipline a public demonstration of support was necessary . Reynolds 's guardian sent the details of the case to all the London papers and for many months thereafter Brudenell , his regiment and the commander @-@ in @-@ chief were subject to ridicule , hissing and cat @-@ calls of " black bottle " whenever they appeared in public . A more serious punishment was administered to Richard Reynolds , cousin to John Reynolds and another long @-@ serving captain , who was court @-@ martialled for sending Cardigan an " insubordinate " letter in response to being barred from his commanding officer 's quarters . Hill drafted a strong memorandum urging Cardigan to employ " temper and discretion " in dealings with his officers , but Reynolds was cashiered . 
 Not all of the " Indian " officers of the 11th found themselves the object of Brudenell 's disfavour : when in October 1840 Major Jenkins , a long @-@ serving veteran , fell seriously ill Brudenell attended his bedside for two nights and , when he died , made a substantial payment to the family and secured a suitable position for his younger son . George Ryan , a writer highly critical of Brudenell , acknowledged his generosity towards his officers and men when in hardship and noted him to be a regular , anonymous subscriber to many civic charities . 
 Brudenell was prosecuted in 1841 for a duel with one of his former officers , another long @-@ serving professional . He was acquitted on a legal technicality , notwithstanding his boast on arrest that " I have hit my man " . The prosecution had demonstrated that Cardigan ( using a duelling pistol with concealed rifling and a hair trigger , which was thought unsporting according to the usages of duelling ) had fired upon Captain Harvey Tuckett . The indictment , however , was that the victim had been " Harvey Garnet Phipps Tuckett " . The discrepancy in the name allowed the jury of his peers , 120 in number , unanimously to acquit him ; as a nobleman the law of the time allowed him to be tried for a capital crime before the House of Lords sitting as a jury , with the Lord High Steward as judge . This added to his unpopularity , with The Times alleging that there was deliberate , high level complicity to leave the loop @-@ hole in the prosecution case and reporting the view that " in England there is one law for the rich and another for the poor " and The Examiner describing the verdict as " a defeat of justice " . Even his obituary described this evasion of justice as " an absurd technical deficiency " . 
 = = = Crimean War = = = 
 His most notorious exploit took place during the Crimean War on 25 October 1854 when , in command of the Light Cavalry Brigade at the battle of Balaclava , he led the charge of the Light Brigade , reaching the Russian guns before returning , personally unscathed , in a manoeuvre that cost the lives of about 107 out of the 674 men under his command who took part in the charge ( although others may have died of wounds later on ) . The extent to which Lord Cardigan was to blame is unproven , since he attacked only after expressing his doubts and receiving a direct order in front of the troops from his immediate superior Lord Lucan , Commander of the Cavalry Division . The two men were barely on speaking terms as Lucan was married to one of Cardigan 's sisters and , as Cardigan believed , did not treat her well . The order had been conveyed by Captain Louis Nolan , who died in the charge , and both Lucan and Cardigan blamed him for passing on the order incorrectly . Cardigan 's first action on his return from the charge was to report the undisciplined behaviour of Captain Nolan ( whom he did not know to be dead ) in riding ahead of him at the start of the attack . 
 A staff officer to army commander Lord Raglan , Colonel the Hon. Somerset John Gough Calthorpe , alleged in his book Letters from a Staff Officer in the Crimea that Cardigan had only survived because he had fled the scene before the charge made contact with the enemy . In his first edition , Calthorpe allowed that Cardigan 's horse may have bolted , but later editions pointedly stated the earl was too fine a horseman for this to be a satisfactory explanation . The horse , " Ronald " , a famous charger bred on Cardigan 's Deene Park estate , survived the war and returned safely to England . After some preliminary legal skirmishing , Cardigan sought an indictment for criminal libel in 1863 , but his action failed , although the bench made plain that it was only his competence , and not his courage , that was in doubt . They found that he had led his men onto the enemy 's guns with " valour ... conspicuously displayed " but thereafter " his conduct as a General was open to criticism " . This conclusion is shared by historian Alexander Kinglake , who concludes that although Cardigan displayed a " want ... of competence " after the charge , he had only lost contact with his men through his brave persistence in galloping too far ahead of them . 
 There is no doubt that Cardigan had reached and overrun the enemy battery : he was recognised beyond the guns by Prince Radziwill , an enemy officer with whom he was acquainted before the war . Considering his duty then done and disdaining , as he later explained , to " fight the enemy among private soldiers " Cardigan turned about and made his way steadily — he himself said that his return was at the walk to avoid any unseemly appearance of haste — for his own lines . Lucan recalled things differently , later giving evidence that Cardigan had been galloping back , only slowing to walk when he realised he was being watched . This hurried retreat was also noticed by General Liprandi , Russian commander , who made enquiries to identify the English officer whom he saw galloping away after the attack . Officers and men of the second and third lines — men for whom as brigade commander Cardigan remained responsible — were still advancing at the charge when they saw their commander riding in retreat . Other officers too had noticed his absence and when Lord George Paget of the 4th Hussars , one of the last to return after some intense , hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting , encountered a " composed " Cardigan , he challenged him to account for himself . Unsatisfied with the response , Paget wrote an official complaint to the new Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , the Duke of Cambridge . Cambridge forwarded the letter to Cardigan for comment and Cardigan 's reply in turn complained that Paget had not in fact taken his regiments into the attack that day . <unk> claim and counter @-@ claim followed , until Cardigan 's attentions were diverted to the allegations made public when Calthorpe 's book Letters went on sale . 
 In the week following the battle of Balaclava , the remnants of the Light Brigade were posted inland , to high ground overseeing the British lines surrounding <unk> . Cardigan , who had spent most nights of the campaign aboard his luxury yacht Dryad in Balaclava harbour , found this move a great inconvenience and his leadership of the brigade suffered as a result . He missed the Battle of <unk> ( 4 and 5 November 1854 ) , casually asking journalist William Russell ( who was returning from the conflict ) " What are they doing , what was the firing for ... ? " as he rode up from the harbour at noon on the first day . The decisive stages of the battle were on the second day and again Cardigan was absent , although he managed to arrive at a more creditable 10 @.@ 15 am . The part played by the brigade was not great and , to avoid embarrassing the earl , it was not mentioned in the official account of the battle forwarded to London . 
 Whatever Cardigan 's faults , he had always tried to ensure that the troops under his command were well equipped . However , as the Crimean winter fell over the Light Brigade 's exposed position , food , fodder , clothing and shelter were all in short supply . Beyond writing letters pointing out the deficiencies , Cardigan did nothing . Food and fodder were available at the coast , but he refused to release any men and horses to carry up stores , as his officers pleaded , in case of a surprise attack by the enemy and because " I had no orders to do so " . Colonel Alexander Tulloch , who gave evidence to a board of enquiry into the failure , noted that in fact Cardigan had more horses than he had needed : indeed more horses than men to ride them , and wrote privately after his evidence was excluded from the final report : " Because Lord Cardigan might have had some difficulty in carrying up all the barley to which his corps was entitled he [ resolved himself ] therefore justified in bringing up none . " There was great hardship and many horses died . 
 On 5 December 1854 , citing ill @-@ health , Cardigan set off for England . In these circumstances the word of an officer regarding his fitness to serve would normally be accepted , but Raglan permitted his departure only after a medical board had confirmed his claimed disability . 
 = = = The Hero of Balaclava = = = 
 Newspaper accounts of the gallant charge had been given wide circulation in England by the time Cardigan 's ship berthed at the port of Folkestone on 13 January 1855 and the town offered him a rapturous welcome . In London he was mobbed by an enthusiastic crowd and on 16 January at Queen Victoria 's invitation he was received at Windsor to explain to her and Prince Albert the details of the battle . Victoria noted how " modestly " he presented his story , but this reticence was absent in his public appearances : on 5 February , he gave a highly exaggerated account of his participation in the charge at a banquet held in his honour at the Mansion House , London . On 8 February , at a speech in his home town of Northampton , he went even further , describing how he had shared the privations of his men by living the " whole time in a common tent " and how , after the charge , he had rallied his troops and pursued the fleeing enemy artillerymen as far as the Tchernaya river . As his biographer Saul David points out , " a more misleading account of his own exploits could hardly have been given " . 
 Cardigan was able to enjoy many months of adulation before doubts about his conduct emerged : He was made Inspector @-@ General of Cavalry , the government recommended him for the Order of the Garter , although the Queen denied him this honour because of the previous unseemly incidents in his private life ; he was instead invested as a knight in the Order of the Bath . Merchants , eager to profit from his fame , sold pictures depicting his role in the charge and written chronicles , based on his own accounts , were rushed into print . The " cardigan " , a knitted waistcoat supposedly as worn by the earl on campaign , became fashionable and many were sold . 
 Cardigan 's commanding officer and brother @-@ in @-@ law , Lord Lucan , had been recalled in disgrace — largely brought about by the determination of the commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Lord Raglan , to displace blame from himself — and arrived in England only two weeks after his subordinate but , as the officer who had " looked on " ( a pun on his name much exploited by Cardigan ) while the charge had taken place , little regard was given to his version of events . ( Lucan had earned the unfortunate nickname of " Lord Look @-@ on " while held in reserve during an action before the earlier Battle of Alma . ) In July 1855 The Times hinted that the public had been misled over " the real nature of [ Cardigan 's ] services in the East " but , in the absence of anything definitive , his popularity remained . However , officers who had taken command in the aftermath of the charge , the role that Cardigan was claiming for himself , had heard of his reception in England and were anxious to put the record straight . The writer George Ryan , who had rushed out a hasty pamphlet praising Cardigan , retracted his words , and was the first to report Cardigan 's fellow officers ' reservations about the earl 's conduct on the day . As the soldiers themselves began to return to England , the doubts hardened . It was not until the following year , however , with the official enquiries of Colonel Tulloch and the publication of Calthorpe 's Letters , was there proof that Cardigan had not been telling the truth . Nonetheless he continued , with characteristic arrogance and self @-@ delusion , as if nothing was amiss and he remained in his cavalry post for the next five years . Eight months on active service , or , A diary of a general officer of cavalry , in 1854 , published in 1855 , was Cardigan 's own account of his time in the Crimea . 
 Cardigan 's overwhelming enthusiasm for the army remained and the meticulous standards of dress and parade that he had required of his earlier commands he now applied to the whole cavalry . He was made Colonel of the Regiment of the 5th Dragoon Guards in 1859 , but he derived more satisfaction when , after his formal retirement in 1860 , and its accompanying promotion to Lieutenant @-@ General , he became colonel of his favourite regiment , the 11th Hussars , which he had first commanded in 1836 . He remained in royal favour and early in 1861 he was selected to accompany the Prince of Wales , heir to the throne , to inspect Prussian cavalry manoeuvres . He was possibly an unwise choice as his arrogant behaviour towards his hosts , themselves no strangers to high self @-@ esteem among military officers , resulted in numerous challenges to duel ; he was quickly sent home . The Queen , however , blocked his colonelcy of one of the Household regiments because of his dalliance with Adeline while still married to Elizabeth . His last military function was a mounted review of the 11th Hussars before their embarkation for India in May 1866 . He was joined by Colonel John Reynolds , who had been Cardigan 's adversary in the " black bottle affair " , but the men had at last settled their differences in the previous year . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 After his retirement in 1866 he lived happily at Deene , passing his time with horse @-@ racing , hunting and shooting . He remained a member of the Royal Yacht Squadron and was Commodore of the Royal Southern Yacht Club . 
 His parliamentary life continued , with the occasional foray to London to speak in the House of Lords on military matters and to continue to press for further official recognition of his glorious career . He surprised some commentators when , in 1867 , he spoke in favour of the second Reform Bill . In acknowledging his change of heart he said that the time for trying to stem the tide of reform , an endeavour in which he had long strived , had passed and given " good luck " the extension of the vote would " confer ... a great benefit upon every class of the community " . In 1868 he presented to the House a petition calling for additional recognition of the late General Henry Shrapnel , inventor of the explosive artillery shell , in recognition of its effectiveness at Waterloo . 
 He died from injuries caused by a fall from his horse on 28 March 1868 , possibly following a stroke , and was buried in the family vaults at St Peter 's Church , Deene . 
 = = Modern assessments = = 
 The historian Cecil Woodham @-@ Smith 's The Reason Why ( 1953 ) did serious harm to the Earl 's posthumous reputation . Another critical assessment of Cardigan and his career is The Homicidal Earl , by Saul David , a military historian . Colonel Calthorpe 's Letters from a Staff Officer in the Crimea has a modern reprint as Cadogan 's Crimea , ISBN 0 @-@ 689 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . Donald Thomas 's 1975 biography Cardigan : The Hero of Balaclava provides a more sympathetic portrayal . Terry Brighton in Hell Riders : the Truth about the Charge of the Light Brigade ( London : Penguin 2004 ) gives a critical account of Cardigan as Brigade Commander , but finds him in no way to blame for the Charge . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 The Charge of the Light Brigade , a 1968 film based on Woodham @-@ Smith 's research , made Cardigan ( played by Trevor Howard ) its primary antagonist . The movie depicts Cardigan as a harsh disciplinarian , womaniser and military incompetent . It shows the " black bottle " affair , though it incorrectly makes Louis Nolan Cardigan 's antagonist , and heavily features his rivalry with Lord Lucan . It also fictitiously shows Cardigan pursuing an affair with Fanny <unk> . 
 George Macdonald Fraser 's The Flashman Papers novels feature Cardigan as a recurring villain . In the first instalment , he commands Flashman in the 11th Hussars and transfers him to India after he marries Elspeth on the grounds that she is the daughter of a tradesman . Cardigan reappears in Flashman at the Charge , where Flashman catches Cardigan trying to seduce Elspeth . Flashman later reluctantly joins Cardigan for the Charge of the Light Brigade . He appears briefly in Flashman in the Great Game , where Cardigan demands Flashman defend Cardigan 's reputation against hostile journalists . Flashman not only refuses but pointedly insults Cardigan . His last mention comes in Flashman and the Angel of the Lord , where Flashman observes Cardigan 's liaison with Fanny Paget . 
 Cardigan appears as an antagonist in the 2015 video game Assassin 's Creed Syndicate by Ubisoft , set in 1868 . In the game , Cardigan is a member of the Templar Order who headed a plot to assassinate the Prime @-@ Minister Benjamin Disraeli . The lead character Jacob Frye discovers the plot , prevents Disraeli 's death and finally tracks down and kills Cardigan . 
 = Eddie Illingworth = 
 Edward " Eddie " Philip Illingworth ( born 27 November 1938 ) is a former Australian cricketer who played five first @-@ class matches for Victoria between 1962 and 1964 . A right @-@ arm medium pace bowler , Illingworth was best remembered for being no @-@ balled for throwing in a Sheffield Shield match against South Australia in November 1964 by umpires Col Egar and Jack Ryan . His selection for Victoria was made more controversial by the fact that he had been called at district level for throwing prior to his first @-@ class debut . Away from first @-@ class cricket , Illingworth had a successful career for Fitzroy in Victorian Premier Cricket , where he remains the eighth highest wicket @-@ taker of all time , with 599 . He was named the club champion three times , and later served for seven years as a board member of the Victorian Cricket Association . 
 = = Early career = = 
 During his career in local cricket , Illingworth played for Fitzroy in Victorian Premier Cricket . He made his debut in the first @-@ grade team in the 1957 – 58 season . He was to represent them for 20 years , playing a total of 233 matches . In December 1959 , Illingworth was selected for the Victoria Colts , a youth team , to play against the New South Wales Colts . Illingworth scored a pair and opened the bowling , taking 1 / 51 as New South Wales made 278 in their only innings of a drawn match . 
 Two years later , in November 1961 , Illingworth was selected for Jack Potter 's XI in an invitational one @-@ day single innings match against Bill Lawry 's XI at Junction Oval . Both sides featured current Test players , including Lawry , Ian Meckiff and Lindsay Kline . Illingworth made 17 as Potter 's men were bowled out for 125 , before bowling nine wicketless overs for 34 runs as Lawry 's side made 9 / 279 , having reached the target with eight wickets intact . 
 = = First @-@ class debut = = 
 Illingworth was selected to make his first @-@ class début for Victoria against Tasmania at <unk> Park in Geelong in February 1962 . His selection had generated controversy since he had twice been no @-@ balled for throwing by two different umpires in Melbourne district cricket in the two seasons prior to his selection . One of the occasions in district cricket , he had been no @-@ balled three times in one over . At the time , Tasmania were not in the Sheffield Shield competition , so it was a one @-@ off match . 
 Victoria won the toss and elected to bat . Illingworth came to the crease at 7 / 109 and scored 22 before being dismissed at 8 / 154 his team were bowled out for 214 . He then took 3 / 43 , all of his victims being top seven batsmen , as the hosts bowled Tasmania out for 119 to take a 95 @-@ run lead . He then made four as Victoria made 8 / 286 declared , leaving Tasmania with a target of 392 . Illingworth took his career best figures of 4 / 28 , removing Tasmania 's first four batsmen , as his team took a 190 @-@ run win . 
 Despite this performance , Illingworth was overlooked for further state selection for over two years . Returning to play for Fitzroy in district cricket , he took 63 wickets at 13 @.@ 76 in the 1963 – 64 season , making him the leading wicket @-@ taker for the season across the entire competition . He finally returned to the state team in late @-@ 1964 , during the 1964 – 65 season . In a trial match at the start of the season against Sunraysia Cricket Association in the regional town of Mildura , Illingworth opened the bowling and took 1 / 15 from eight overs as Victoria took a 117 @-@ run win in the one @-@ day match . 
 He was then selected to make his Sheffield Shield debut a week later , against Western Australia at the WACA Ground in Perth . Illingworth came in at 6 / 168 and made 25 before being run out in his team 's 208 . Bowling first change , he dismissed both openers to leave the hosts at 2 / 60 , before they recovered to take a 183 @-@ run lead . Illingworth ended with 2 / 53 . He then scored 14 as Victoria set a target of 180 . Illingworth then took 0 / 20 from ten overs before time ran out with Western Australia on 1 / 50 . 
 = = No ball for throwing = = 
 Illingworth 's best performance in a Sheffield Shield match was against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval in the following week of November 1964 , which was the same match in which he was called . The home side won the toss and elected to bat first . 
 Illingworth took 4 / 92 in South Australia 's first innings but was no @-@ balled a total of three times by Egar and Ryan . Illingworth was called on each of the occasions by the umpire standing at square leg . He was called twice by Egar on the second and fourth deliveries of his eleventh over , and once by Ryan on the sixth ball of his fourteenth over . In the same fourteenth over , Illingworth had dismissed former Pakistani Test batsman Duncan Sharpe and Australian Test wicket @-@ keeper Barry Jarman from the first and fourth deliveries respectively . This broke a 97 @-@ run stand between Sharpe and Ian Chappell , before Jarman was removed for a duck . After 17 more runs were added , Illingworth had Chappell caught behind for 127 . South Australia eventually finished at 392 . 
 Victoria then batted . Illingworth made 22 of his team 's 144 after they fell to 6 / 100 . They were forced to follow on , having conceded a 248 @-@ run lead in their first innings . Victoria had to try to stave off defeat and they were in trouble when Illingworth came in to bat , partnering captain Bill Lawry after wicket @-@ keeper Ray Jordon was out with the score at 6 / 193 . Illingworth scored his highest first @-@ class score of 47 , putting on a partnership of 87 runs with Lawry before he was dismissed with the score at 7 / 280 . Victoria were 8 / 286 at the end of play , just 38 runs ahead , as the match ended in a draw . 
 = = Career end = = 
 Illingworth played in two further matches , but only took two wickets . In the following match against Western Australia at the Melbourne Cricket Ground , he took 1 / 56 , taking the wicket of Test player Keith Slater as Western Australia made 455 . He made 10 as <unk> responded with 318 , before bowling two overs for the concession of two runs as Western Australia reached 3 / 72 when time ran out . 
 Illingworth 's final match was against Queensland in December 1964 . He took 0 / 34 as Queensland batted first and made 270 . After scoring seven of his team 's 341 , he took 1 / 86 as Queensland declared at 5 / 332 . Chasing 261 for victory , Illingworth made four as his team lost by 40 runs . Illingworth ended his career with 15 wickets at an average of 27 @.@ 60 , and 155 runs at 17 @.@ 22 . The state selectors were reluctant to pick him for Victoria because of the throwing allegations that surrounded him . 
 Illingworth returned to district cricket and played another 13 seasons with Fitzroy until finishing his career after the 1977 – 78 season , having played 233 matches . He took 599 wickets at 18 @.@ 60 for Fitzroy , placing him eighth on the all @-@ time wicket @-@ takers list in Victorian Premier Cricket . His best bowling figures in an innings was 8 / 18 and he took five wickets in an innings 26 times , and ten wickets in a match three times . He also amassed <unk> runs at 14 @.@ 03 and took 91 catches . He was part of two premierships in his career , with Fitzroy winning in 1960 – 61 and 1966 – 67 . Illingworth was voted the club champion three times , winning the Arthur Liddicut Medal in 1972 – 73 , 1973 – 74 and 1976 – 77 . He is an honorary life member of the club . 
 From 1970 – 71 to 1977 – 78 , Illingworth served as Fitzroy 's delegate on the Victorian Cricket Association 's board of directors . 
 = Runaway Daydreamer = 
 " Runaway Daydreamer " is a song by the English recording artist Sophie Ellis @-@ Bextor for her fifth studio album Wanderlust ( 2014 ) . The song was released on 31 March 2014 as the second single of the album . Composed by Ed Harcourt with additional writing by Ellis @-@ Bextor , it is a chamber pop track which features percussion and string instruments . Its lyrics , written in a way resemblant of nursery rhymes , expound on escapism and " self discovery " . 
 " Runaway Daydreamer " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who praised Ellis @-@ Bextor 's vocals and its sound ; some denoted it as a highlight of Wanderlust . The song was promoted with a music video directed by Sophie Muller , which largely shows Ellis @-@ Bextor in a lounge room and walking through an abandoned pier . It was also performed on programmes including ITV 's Loose Women , and peaked at number 29 on the UK Indie chart . The song was featured on the regular and OW Version of the Theme Park Playlist . 
 = = Composition and reception = = 
 " Runaway Daydreamer " , as with the rest of Wanderlust , was co @-@ written by its producer Ed Harcourt along with Ellis @-@ Bextor . It was recorded at the State of the Ark studios , mixed and engineered by Richard <unk> , and mastered by Miles Showell . It is a chamber pop track which includes string arrangements and " shuffled percussion " . Clare Considine of Time Out compared its sonority to that of a Humphrey Bogart movie soundtrack . AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine described the track as a " girl group homage " . <unk> Farrell of PopMatters opined that the song and " Until the Stars Collide " set a " soaring , dreamy " atmosphere for Wanderlust . According to the sheet music published by Music Sales Group , the song contains 116 beats per minute in <unk> . Its introduction follows a chord progression of C — F / C — C — F / C — C — F / C — C — F , and transitions into the verse section in which the notes C – F – C are followed . The track is composed in the traditional verse – chorus form . Ellis @-@ Bextor 's vocals during the song incorporate the melisma technique and span from G3 to E5 . 
 The song 's lyrics , which discuss escapism , are constructed in a way resemblant of nursery rhymes . During the chorus , Ellis @-@ Bextor sings " It 's just my imagination / Running away / Girl 's gotta have a little daydream / It 's a secret escape / It 's just my imagination / Running away / Don 't worry baby , I 'm here to stay " . Considine highlighted " I could tie up the bed sheets and slide down the house / Be gone before the morning comes " as lyrics <unk> of Ellis @-@ Bextor 's " artistic freedom " in Wanderlust . Reviewing the song for Loud and Quiet , Stuart Stubbs wrote that it " sees our protagonist pull herself out of squalor and onto a road of self discovery . " The song concludes with a short outro where Ellis @-@ Bextor repeats the line " Don 't worry baby , I 'm here to stay " twice . 
 On behalf of Virgin Media , Matthew Horton opined that " Runaway Daydreamer " was the standout of Wanderlust , describing Ellis @-@ Bextor 's vocals in it as " prim and gorgeous " . James Fyfe of The 405 echoed his view , praising Ellis @-@ Bextor 's vocal performance , as well as highlighting its sonority , despite observing it was not " musically adventurous " . Writing for Digital Spy , Robert Copsey billed the song as beautiful and " shimmering " . Thomas Erlewine highlighted the song as a standout , commenting that the album was " at its best when it 's slightly dexterous " , citing the song as an example . The Irish Times ' Louise Bruton wrote that the song explores " twee danger zones " and called it a " blunder " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 A promotional CD single including " Runaway Daydreamer " ' s radio edit , with a length of 3 minutes and 27 seconds , was sent to radio stations in March 2014 . The song was released in the United Kingdom on 23 March 2014 . The music video for " Runaway Daydreamer " was directed by Sophie Muller , and released on 8 March 2014 ; it was mostly filmed during the taping of the video for " Young Blood " — Wanderlust 's previous single . Ellis @-@ Bextor lip @-@ synchs the song 's lyrics inside a lounge room , wearing a white lace dress , with her hair gathered into a ponytail ; she is also seen walking through an abandoned pier , dining at a restaurant and posing in front of a small white house . The visual 's aspect ratio is changed throughout , ranging from <unk> to letterbox . Ellis @-@ Bextor performed the song in an acoustic setting , on the morning programme ZDF <unk> , aired on 23 January 2014 on German channel ZDF . On 17 March of that year , she sang it on ITV 's Loose Women . The song charted on the UK Indie Singles at number 29 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Promotional CD single 
 Details adapted from the credits of the CD single of " Runaway <unk> " . 
 " Runaway Daydreamer " ( Radio edit ) – 3 : 27 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Wanderlust . 
 Sophie Ellis @-@ Bextor – lead vocals , songwriting 
 Ed Harcourt – songwriting , production , background vocals , samples , synth , keyboards , piano 
 Gita Langley – violin 
 Richard Woodcraft – engineering , mixing 
 Miles Showell – mastering 
 = = Weekly charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Bog turtle = 
 The bog turtle ( Glyptemys muhlenbergii ) is a semiaquatic turtle endemic to the eastern United States . It was first scientifically described in 1801 after an 18th @-@ century survey of Pennsylvania . The smallest North American turtle , it measures about 10 centimeters ( 4 in ) long when fully grown . Although the bog turtle is similar in appearance to the painted or spotted turtles , its closest relative is actually the somewhat larger wood turtle . The bog turtle can be found from Vermont in the north , south to Georgia , and west to Ohio . Diurnal and secretive , it spends most of its time buried in mud and – during the winter months – in hibernation . The bog turtle is omnivorous , feeding mainly on small invertebrates . 
 Adult bog turtles weigh 110 grams ( 3 @.@ 9 oz ) on average . Their skins and shells are typically dark brown , with a distinctive orange spot on each side of the neck . Considered threatened at the federal level , the bog turtle is protected under the United States ' Endangered Species Act . Invasive plants and urban development have eradicated much of the bog turtle 's habitat , substantially reducing its numbers . Demand for the bog turtle is high in the black market pet trade , partly because of its small size and unique characteristics . Various private projects have been undertaken in an attempt to reverse the decline in the turtle 's population . 
 The turtle has a low reproduction rate ; females lay one clutch per year , with an average of three eggs each . The young tend to grow rapidly , reaching sexual maturity between the ages of 4 and 10 years old . Bog turtles live for an average of 20 to 30 years in the wild . Since 1973 , the Bronx Zoo has successfully bred bog turtles in captivity . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The bog turtle was noted in the 18th century by Gotthilf Heinrich Ernst Muhlenberg , a self @-@ taught botanist and clergyman . Muhlenberg , who named more than 150 North American plant species , was conducting a survey of the flora of Lancaster County , Pennsylvania , when he discovered the small turtle . In 1801 , Johann David <unk> named Muhlenberg 's discovery as Testudo muhlenbergii in Muhlenberg 's honor . 
 In 1829 , Richard Harlan renamed the turtle <unk> muhlenbergii . The species was subsequently renamed to <unk> muhlenbergii by Louis Agassiz in 1857 , and to Clemmys muhlenbergii by Henry Watson Fowler in 1906 . Synonyms include <unk> <unk> , named in 1824 by Thomas Say on the basis of a turtle from the vicinity of Philadelphia , and Clemmys <unk> , described by Dunn in 1917 from near Linville , North Carolina . Today , there are various names for the bog turtle , including mud turtle , marsh turtle , <unk> , and snapper . 
 The genus name was changed to Glyptemys in 2001 . The bog turtle and the wood turtle , Glyptemys insculpta , had until then been included in the genus Clemmys , which also included spotted turtles ( C. guttata ) and western pond turtles ( C. marmorata ) . Nucleotide sequencing and ribosomal DNA analyses suggested that bog turtles and wood turtles are closely related , but neither is directly related to spotted turtles , hence the separation of the genus Glyptemys . 
 = = Description = = 
 The bog turtle is the smallest species of turtle in North America . The adults weigh approximately 110 grams ( 3 @.@ 9 oz ) when fully grown . It does not have a prominent snout . Its head is dark brown to black ; however , it has a bright yellow , orange , or red spot on each side of its neck . The spot is often forked , facing posteriorly . The bog turtle has a dark skin color with an orange @-@ red wash on the inside of the legs of some individuals . The carapace is domed and rectangular in shape , and it tends to be narrower toward the head and wider toward the tail . The carapace often has easily identifiable rings on the rough scales or scutes . The scutes may also have a radiating arrangement of lines . In some older individuals , and those that burrow frequently in coarse substrates , the shell may be smooth . Although generally black , a chestnut sunburst pattern in each scute is sometimes present on the carapace . The belly of the shell , the plastron , is also a dark brown to black color with light marks present . 
 The spotted turtle and painted turtle are similar in appearance to the bog turtle . The bog turtle is distinguishable from any other species of turtle by the distinctively colored blotch on its neck . A major difference between it and the spotted turtle is that the bog turtle has no coloration on the upper shell , unlike the latter species . 
 Mature male bog turtles have an average length of 9 @.@ 4 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) while the average female length is 8 @.@ 9 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) ( straight carapace measurement ) . The males have a larger average body size than females , likely to facilitate males during male – male interactions during mate selection . The female has a wider and higher shell than the male , but the male 's head is squared and larger than a female 's of the same age . The plastron of the male looks slightly concave while the female 's is flat . The male 's tail is longer and thicker than the female 's . The cloaca is further towards the end of the tail of the male bog turtle , while the female 's cloaca is positioned inside the plastron . Juveniles are very difficult to sex . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The bog turtle is native only to the eastern United States , congregating in colonies that often consist of fewer than 20 individuals . They prefer calcareous wetlands ( areas containing lime ) , including meadows , bogs , marshes , and spring seeps , that have both wet and dry regions . Their habitat is often on the edge of woods . Bog turtles have sometimes been seen in cow pastures and near beaver dams . 
 The bog turtle 's preferred habitat , sometimes called a fen , is slightly acidic with a high water table year @-@ round . The constant saturation leads to the depletion of oxygen , subsequently resulting in anaerobic conditions . The bog turtle uses soft , deep mud to shelter from predators and the weather . Spring seeps and groundwater springs provide optimum locations for hibernation during winter . Home range size is gender dependent , averaging about 0 @.@ 17 to 1 @.@ 33 hectares ( 0 @.@ 42 to 3 @.@ 29 acres ) for males and 0 @.@ 065 to 1 @.@ 26 hectares ( 0 @.@ 16 to 3 @.@ 11 acres ) for females . However , research has shown that densities can range from 5 to 125 individuals per 0 @.@ 81 hectares ( 2 @.@ 0 acres ) . The range of the bog turtle extensively overlaps that of its relative , the wood turtle . 
 Rushes , tussock sedge , cattails , jewelweed , sphagnum , and various native true grasses are found in the bog turtle 's habitat , as well as some shrubs and trees such as willows , red maples , and alders . It is important for their habitat to have an open canopy , because bog turtles spend a considerable amount of time basking in the sunlight . An open canopy allows sufficient sunlight to reach the ground so that the bog turtles can manage their metabolic processes through thermoregulation . The incubation of eggs also requires levels of sunlight and humidity that shaded areas typically lack . The ideal bog turtle habitat is early successional . Late successional habitats contain taller trees that block the necessary sunlight . Erosion and runoff of nutrients into the wetlands accelerate succession . Changes caused by humans have begun to eliminate bog turtles from areas where they would normally survive . 
 = = = Northern and southern populations = = = 
 The northern and southern bog turtle populations are separated by a 400 @-@ kilometer ( 250 mi ) gap over much of Virginia , which lacks bog turtle colonies . In both areas , the bog turtle colonies tend to occupy widely scattered ranges . 
 The northern population is the larger of the two . These individuals make their home in states as far north as Connecticut and Massachusetts , and as far south as Maryland . These turtles are known to have fewer than 200 habitable sites left , a number that is decreasing . 
 The southern population is much smaller in number ( only about 96 colonies have been located ) , living in the states of North Carolina , South Carolina , Georgia , Virginia , and Tennessee . This area in particular has seen about 90 percent of its mountainous wetlands dry up . The turtles in this population are even more scattered than in the northern population and live at higher elevations , up to 1 @,@ 373 meters ( 4 @,@ 505 ft ) . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 There have been only two recorded discoveries of bog turtle fossils . The late J. Alan Holman , a paleontologist and herpetologist , first identified bog turtle <unk> remains in Cumberland Cave , Maryland ( near Corriganville ) , which are of Irvingtonian age ( from 1 @.@ 8 million to 300 @,@ 000 years ago ) . The second discovery was of Rancholabrean ( between 300 @,@ 000 and 11 @,@ 000 years ago ) shell pieces in the Giant Cement Quarry in South Carolina ( near <unk> ) , by <unk> and Knight in 1998 . 
 The bog turtle 's karyotype is composed of 50 chromosomes . Studies of variations in mitochondrial DNA indicate low levels of genetic divergence among bog turtle colonies . This is unusual in species such as the bog turtle , which have fragmented distributions and exist in small isolated groups ( fewer than 50 individuals in bog turtle colonies ) . These conditions limit gene flow , typically leading to divergence between isolated groups . Data indicate that the bog turtle suffered dramatic reductions in numbers – a population bottleneck – as colonies were forced south in the face of glaciation . Receding glaciers led to the relatively recent post @-@ Pleistocene expansion , as the bog turtles moved back into their former northern range . This recent colonization from a relatively limited southern population may account for the reduction of genetic diversity . The northern and southern populations are at present genetically isolated , likely as a consequence of farming and habitat destruction in Virginia 's Shenandoah Valley during the American Civil War . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 = = = Behavior = = = 
 The bog turtle is primarily diurnal , active during the day and sleeping at night . It wakes in the early morning , basks until fully warm , then begins its search for food . It is a seclusive species , making it challenging to observe in its natural habitat . During colder days , the bog turtle will spend much of its time in dense underbrush , underwater , or buried in mud . Such behavior is indicative of the bog turtle 's ability to survive without oxygen . On warmer days , the bog turtle 's activities include scavenging , mating ( during early spring ) , and basking in sunlight , the last of which it spends a great deal of the day doing . However , the bog turtle usually takes shelter from the sun during the hottest part of the day . Occasionally , during times of extreme heat , the turtle will either estivate , or become subterranean , sometimes occupying networks of tunnels filled with water . At night , the bog turtle buries itself in soft tunnels . 
 Late September to March or April is usually spent in hibernation , either alone or in small groups in spring seeps . These groups can contain up to 12 individuals , and sometimes can include other species of turtles . Bog turtles try to find an area of dense soil , such as a strong root system , for protection during the dormant period . However , they may hibernate in other places such as the bottom of a tree , animal burrows , or empty spaces in mud . The bog turtle emerges from hibernation when the air temperature is between 16 and 31 ° C ( 61 and 88 ° F ) . 
 The male bog turtle is territorial and will attack other males if they venture within 15 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) of his position . An aggressive male will crawl toward an intruder with his neck extended . As he approaches his foe , he tilts his carapace by withdrawing his head and raising his hind limbs . If the other male does not retreat , a fight of pushing and biting can follow . The bouts typically last just a few minutes , with the larger and older male usually winning . The female is also aggressive when threatened . She will defend the area around her nest , usually up to a radius of 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) , from encroaching females , but when a juvenile approaches , she ignores it , and when a male appears she surrenders her area ( except during mating season ) . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Bog turtles are omnivorous and eat aquatic plants ( such as duckweed ) , seeds , berries , earthworms , snails , slugs , insects , other invertebrates , frogs , and other small vertebrates . They also occasionally eat carrion . Invertebrates such as insects are generally the most important food item . In captivity , a bog turtle can be fed a variety of fruits and vegetables , as well as meat such as liver , chicken hearts , and tinned dog food . Bog turtles feed only during the day , but rarely during the hottest hours , consuming their food on land or in the water . 
 = = = Predators , parasites , and diseases = = = 
 A host of different animals , including snapping turtles , snake species such as Nerodia <unk> and Thamnophis sirtalis , muskrats , striped skunks , foxes , dogs , and raccoons prey upon the bog turtle . In addition , leeches ( <unk> <unk> and P. parasitica ) and parasitic flies ( <unk> <unk> ) plague some individuals , causing blood loss and weakness . Their shells offer little protection from predators . The bog turtle 's main defense when threatened by an animal is to bury itself in soft mud . It rarely defends its territory or bites when approached . 
 Bog turtles may suffer from bacterial infections . Aeromonas and Pseudomonas are two genera of bacteria that cause pneumonia in individuals . Bacterial aggregates ( sometimes known as biofilms ) have also been found in the lungs of two deceased specimens discovered in 1982 and 1995 from colonies in the southern population . 
 = = = Movement = = = 
 Day @-@ to @-@ day , the bog turtle moves very little , typically basking in the sun and waiting for prey . Though it is not especially lively on sunny days , the bog turtle is usually active after rainfall . Various studies have found different rates of daily movement in bog turtles , varying from 2 @.@ 1 to 23 meters ( 6 @.@ 9 to 75 @.@ 5 ft ) in males and 1 @.@ 1 to 18 meters ( 3 @.@ 6 to 59 @.@ 1 ft ) in females . Both sexes are capable of homing when released at distances up to 0 @.@ 8 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ) from their site of capture . The bog turtle will travel long distances to find a new habitat if its home becomes unsuitable . The species is most active during the spring , and males generally exhibit greater migration distance and seasonal activity than females as they defend their territory . Home @-@ range migration distances have been recorded at 87 meters ( 285 ft ) for males and 260 meters ( 850 ft ) for females . Home @-@ range sizes in Maryland vary from 0 @.@ 0030 hectares ( 0 @.@ <unk> acres ) to 3 @.@ 1 hectares ( 7 @.@ 7 acres ) with considerable amounts of variation between sites and years . 
 The bog turtle is semiaquatic and can move both on land and in the water . The distance and frequency of movements on land help herpetologists understand the behavior , ecology , gene flow , and the level of success of different bog turtle colonies . The vast majority of bog turtle movements are less than 21 meters ( 69 ft ) , and only 2 percent are of distances over 100 meters ( 330 ft ) ; large , expansive trips ( i.e. , between neighboring wetlands ) , are rare . 
 The movement of bog turtles between colonies facilitates genetic diversity . If this movement were to be prevented , or limited in any significant way , the species would have a higher likelihood of becoming extinct because genetic diversity would fall . Some aspects of a bog turtle 's movement that remain unresolved include : phenomena that motivate bog turtles to move outside their natural habitat ; the distances an individual can be expected to travel each day , week , and year ; and how separation of small groups affects the genetics of the species . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Bog turtles are sexually mature when they reach between 8 and 11 years of age ( both sexes ) . They mate in the spring after emerging from hibernation , in a copulation session that usually lasts for 5 – 20 minutes , typically during the afternoon , and may occur on land or in the water . It begins with the male recognizing the female 's sex . During the courtship ritual , the male gently bites and nudges the female 's head . Younger males tend to be more aggressive during copulation , and females sometimes try to avoid an over @-@ aggressive male . However , as the female ages , she is more likely to accept the aggressiveness of a male , and may even take the role of initiator . If the female yields , she may withdraw her front limbs and head . After the entire process is over , which usually takes about 35 minutes , male and female go separate ways . In a single season , females may mate once , twice , or not at all , and males try to mate as many times as possible . It has been suggested that it is possible for the bog turtle to hybridize with Clemmys guttata during the mating season . However , it has not been genetically verified in wild populations . 
 Nesting takes place between April and July . The female digs a cavity in a dry , sunny area of a bog , and lays her eggs in a grass tussock or on sphagnum moss . The nest is typically 3 @.@ 8 to 5 @.@ 1 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) deep and 5 centimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) around . Like most species of turtle , the bog turtle constructs its nest using its hind feet and claws . Most bog turtle eggs are laid in June . Pregnant females lay one to six eggs per clutch ( mean of 3 ) , and produce one clutch per year . A healthy female bog turtle can lay between 30 and 45 eggs in her lifetime , but many of the offspring do not survive to reach sexual maturity . Typically , older females lay more eggs than younger ones . The eggs are white , elliptical , and on average 3 @.@ 4 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) wide . After the eggs are laid , they are left to undergo an incubation period that lasts for 42 to 80 days . In colder climates , the eggs are incubated through the winter and hatch in the spring . The eggs are vulnerable during the incubation period , and often fall prey to mammals and birds . In addition , eggs may be jeopardized by flooding , frost , or various developmental problems . It is unknown how gender is determined in bog turtles . 
 Baby bog turtles are about 2 @.@ 5 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) long when they emerge from their eggs , usually in late August or September . Females are slightly smaller at birth , and tend to grow more slowly than males . Both genders grow rapidly until they reach maturity . Juveniles almost double in size in their first four years , but do not become fully grown until five or six years old . 
 The bog turtle spends its life almost exclusively in the wetland where it hatched . In its natural environment , it has a maximum lifespan of perhaps 50 years or more , and the average lifespan is 20 – 30 years . The Bronx Zoo houses several turtles 35 years old or more , the oldest known bog turtles . The zoo 's collection has successfully sustained itself for more than 35 years . The age of a bog turtle is determined by counting the number of rings in a scute , minus the first one ( which develops before birth ) . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Protected under the United States Federal Endangered Species Act , the bog turtle is considered threatened in Connecticut , Delaware , Maryland , Massachusetts , New Jersey , New York and Pennsylvania as of November 4 , 1997 . Due to a " similarity of appearance " to the northern population , the bog turtle is also threatened in Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina , Tennessee and Virginia ( considered to be the southern population ) . In addition to the federal listing of threatened , states in the southern range list the bog turtle as either endangered or threatened . Changes to the bog turtle 's habitat have resulted in the disappearance of 80 percent of the colonies that existed 30 years ago . Because of the turtle 's rarity , it is also in danger of illegal collection , often for the worldwide pet trade . Despite regulations prohibiting their collection , barter , or export , bog turtles are commonly taken by poachers . Road traffic has also led to declines . The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has a plan for the recovery of the northern population . The bog turtle was listed as critically endangered in the 2011 IUCN Red List . 
 The invasion of non @-@ native plants into its habitat is a large threat to the bog turtles ' survival . Although several plants disrupt its ecosystem , the three primary culprits are purple loosestrife , reed canary grass , and reeds , which grow thick and tall and are believed to hinder the movement of the turtles . Such plants also out @-@ compete the native species in the bog turtle 's habitat , thus reducing the amount of food and protection available to the turtles . 
 The development of new neighborhoods and roadways obstructs the bog turtle 's movement between wetlands , thus inhibiting the establishment of new bog turtle colonies . Pesticides , runoff , and industrial discharge are all harmful to the bog turtles ' habitat and food supply . The bog turtle has been designated as a threatened species to " conserve the northern population of the bog turtle , which has seriously declined in the northeast United States . " 
 Today , the rebounding of bog turtle colonies depends on private intervention . Population monitoring involves meticulous land surveys over vast countrysides . In addition to surveying land visually , remote sensing has been used to biologically classify a wetland as either suitable or unsuitable for a bog turtle colony . This allows for comparisons to be made between known areas of bog turtle success and potential areas of future habitation . 
 To help the existing colonies rebound , several private projects have been initiated in an attempt to limit the encroachment of overshadowing trees and bushes , the construction of new highways and neighborhoods , and other natural and man @-@ made threats . 
 Methods used to recreate the bog turtle 's habitat include : controlled burns to limit the growth of overshadowing trees and underbrush ( thus bringing the habitat back to early successional ) ; grazing livestock such as cows and goats in the desired habitat area ( creating pockets of water and freshly churned mud ) ; and promoting beaver activity , including dam construction in and around wetlands . 
 Captive breeding is another method of stabilizing the bog turtles ' numbers . The technique involves mating bog turtles indoors in controlled environments , where nutrition and mates are provided . Fred <unk> and Richard J. Holub were the first to do this independently , during the 1960s and 1970s . They were interested in educating others about the bog turtle and in increasing its population , and over several years they released many healthy bog turtles into the wild . Various organizations , such as the Association of Zoos and Aquariums , have been permitted to breed bog turtles in captivity . 
 The study of bog turtles in the wild is a significant aid to the development of a conservation strategy . Radio telemetry has been used to track the turtles ' movements in their natural habitat . Blood samples , fecal samples , and cloacal swabs are also commonly collected from wild populations and tested for signs of disease . 
 = Wellington , Somerset = 
 Wellington is a small industrial town in rural Somerset , England , situated 7 miles ( 11 km ) south west of Taunton in the Taunton Deane district , near the border with Devon , which runs along the Blackdown Hills to the south of the town . The town has a population of 14 @,@ 549 , which includes the residents of the parish of Wellington Without , and the villages of Tone and Tonedale . 
 Known as <unk> in the Anglo @-@ Saxon period , its name had changed to <unk> by the time of the Domesday Book of 1086 . Wellington became a town under a royal charter of 1215 and during the Middle Ages it grew as a centre for trade on the road from Bristol to Exeter . Major rebuilding took place following a fire in the town in 1731 , after which it became a centre for cloth @-@ making . Wellington gave its name to the first Duke of Wellington , Arthur Wellesley , who is commemorated by the nearby Wellington Monument . The Grand Western Canal reached the town in 1835 and then the Bristol and Exeter Railway in 1843 . The town 's own railway station survived until 1964 . Wellington was home of Fox , Fowler and Company , which was the last commercial bank permitted to print their own sterling banknotes in England and Wales . In the 20th century closer links with Taunton meant that many of the residents of Wellington commuted there for work , and the M5 motorway enabled car journeys to be made more easily . 
 Local industries , which now include an aerosol factory and bed manufacturers , are celebrated at the Wellington Museum in Fore street . Wellington is home to the independent Wellington School , and state @-@ funded Court Fields School . It is also home to a range of cultural , sporting and religious sites including the 15th century Church of St John the Baptist . The capital city of New Zealand is named after Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington , thus his title comes from the town of Wellington , Somerset , England . 
 = = History = = 
 In a grant of between 899 and 909 , Edward the Elder , gave the land then known as <unk> , which means " from the wealthy estate " , along with West Buckland and Bishops Lydeard to Bishop Asser . This was in exchange for the monastery of Plympton in Devon . An alternative explanation for the origin of the name is “ the settlement in the temple clearing ” . By the time of the Domesday Book of 1086 , the name had changed to <unk> , and the estate was owned by <unk> ( Bishop of Wells ) . The parish of Wellington was part of the Kilmersdon Hundred , 
 A site at <unk> Farm near Tonedale has been identified as having Bronze Age occupation and , during excavations prior to the building of new homes , found to have been occupied by a 12th @-@ 14th century building with decorated floor tiles covering 0 @.@ 4 hectares ( 0 @.@ 99 acres ) . 
 A royal charter of 1215 gave Wellington its status as a town , and during the medieval period it grew as a centre for trade on the road from Bristol to Exeter , being laid out , with the church at the east end of town , in a similar manner to other towns of this era . In 1548 , the manor was sold to Edward Seymour , 1st Duke of Somerset , but reverted to the control of the bishops after his execution . By the end of the 16th century it had come under the protection of John Popham ( Lord Chief Justice ) and his descendants who built a manor house which was destroyed during the English Civil War . 
 Major rebuilding took place in the town following a fire in 1731 . After this the town 's importance grew as it became a centre for <unk> across Somerset and Devon , its importance as trade centre enhanced by fires in Taunton and Tiverton . By the 1831 census , 258 people were recorded as cloth workers in Wellington . 
 Wellington gave its name to the first Duke of Wellington , Arthur Wellesley . Nearby Wellington Hill boasts a large , spotlit obelisk to his honour , the Wellington Monument . The Wellington Monument is a floodlit 175 feet ( 53 m ) high triangular tower designated by English Heritage as a grade II * listed building . It was erected to celebrate the Duke of Wellington 's victory at the Battle of Waterloo . The foundation stone was laid in 1817 , on land belonging to the Duke , but the monument was not completed until 1854 . It is now owned by the National Trust , who announced plans to reclad the monument at a cost of £ 4 million in 2009 . 
 In the 18th century turnpikes arrived in the area and then in the 19th communications improved with the building of the Grand Western Canal , which reached the town in 1835 , and then the Bristol and Exeter Railway . Wellington station was opened when the line reached the town on 1 May 1843 . It was a typical Brunel design but was rebuilt in 1932 when two loop lines were put in . This entailed the platforms being moved back to accommodate the widened lines . These platforms are clearly visible and a goods shed still stands on the east side of the line at the Taunton end of the station , although the station closed on 5 October 1964 . Wellington was an important station as it stood at the foot of a steep incline . Banking locomotives were kept here , ready to assist heavy westbound trains up to <unk> Tunnel . 
 In the 20th century closer links with Taunton meant that many of the residents of Wellington commuted there for work , and the M5 motorway , which opened in sections in the 1960s and 1970s , enabled car journeys to be made more easily . 
 = = Fox Fowler & Co . Bank = = 
 Thomas Fox started the Fox , Fowler and Company bank in Wellington which rapidly expanded and ran successfully , until it merged with Lloyds Bank in 1927 . It was the last private bank in England to issue its own notes and they were legal tender until 1964 . There are nine notes left in circulation . The British Museum have another example on display . The bank established its Head Office at the old family house in Fore Street , Wellington ( today the Lloyds Bank branch ) - they opened branches at Taunton , Bridgwater , Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , Torrington , Bideford , Barnstaple , Ilfracombe and South Molton . 
 The original £ 5 Note is on display at Tone Dale House - one of the last nine and possible the only one left <unk> . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Wellington has three tiers of local government at parish , district and county level . The present system dates from 1 April 1974 when the Local Government Act 1972 came into effect . 
 The lowest tier is Wellington Town Council , formed as a successor parish to Wellington Urban District Council in 1974 . The town council has 15 councillors , and is headed by a town mayor . For elections of town councillors , the town is divided into four wards : Wellington East ( returning 4 councillors ) , Wellington North ( 4 ) , Rockwell Green ( 3 ) and Wellington West ( 4 ) . The political composition of the council in November 2009 was Liberal Democrats 7 , Conservative Party 5 and Labour Party 3 . The town council provides purely local services . An area to the south of the town falls within the civil parish of Wellington Without . 
 The middle , or district , tier of administration is the borough of Taunton Deane . The borough council is based in Taunton , and consists of 56 councillors . Seven borough councillors are elected from wards in Wellington : 5 are Liberal Democrats and one each belong to the Conservative and Labour parties . 
 There are three electoral wards in Wellington ( North , South and West ) . 
 The upper tier is Somerset County Council . Also based in Taunton , the council has 58 councillors , each elected for a single @-@ member electoral division . Most of the town comprises the Wellington electoral division , with part falling in the mainly rural division of Blackdown & Wellington East . They are represented by one Labour and one Liberal Democrat councillor . Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education , social services , the library , roads , public transport , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning , although fire , police and ambulance services are provided jointly with other authorities through the Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service , Avon and Somerset Constabulary and the South Western Ambulance Service . 
 For elections to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , Wellington forms part of the Taunton Deane constituency . The constituency elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . Following the review of parliamentary representation in Somerset , the Boundary Commission for England has created a modified Taunton constituency with the name change Taunton Deane , to reflect the district name For European Parliament elections , the town is included in the South West England constituency which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The town has many dependent villages including West Buckland , Langford <unk> , Nynehead , Sampford Arundel and Sampford Moor . The formerly independent village of Rockwell Green , to the west of the town , has been incorporated into the town however there is still a green wedge of land in between them . Wellington Park was a gift from the Quaker Fox family to the town in 1903 as a memorial to the coronation of King Edward VII . The 4 @.@ 9 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) gardens were laid out by F.W. Meyer , who included a rock garden which used 80 tons of limestone from Westleigh quarry near Burlescombe . It is Grade II listed on the English Heritage Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England . It was restored at a cost of £ 412 @,@ 827 which included a grant of £ 296 @,@ 500 from the Heritage Lottery Fund Public Parks Initiative . 
 There are Local Nature Reserves at Wellington Basins on the western fringe of the town . It includes a small pond and boardwalk with a variety of wildlife habitats . The grassland , hedges and woodland are home to a varied flora and fauna including birds such as the grey wagtail , dipper and reed bunting . Five separate bat species have been recorded at the site . Swains Pond in the south of Wellington is another Local Nature Reserve , which used to be the site of orchards . It now includes a pond which provides a home for amphibians including the great crested newt , palmate newt and toads . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Wellington has an oceanic climate ( Köppen climate classification Cfb ) . 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Wellington has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 ° C ( 33 @.@ 8 ° F ) or 2 ° C ( 35 @.@ 6 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , however convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The town has a population of 13 @,@ 696 . Large growth occurred during the 1970s when housing developments were built on the south side of the town . These were largely prompted by Wellington 's proximity to Junction 26 of the M5 motorway . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Wellington 's main industry was wool @-@ making and in November 2009 , Deborah Meaden , best known from Dragons ' Den a BBC television programme , invested in the Fox Brothers ' Mill which produces wool cloth for Savile Row , designers and clients around the world . The Fox family established the mill in 1772 . The Tonedale mill complex includes two listed buildings , some of which were still being used until 2000 . The Prince 's Regeneration Trust have been supporting the Tone Mill Regeneration Partnership in attempting to preserve and regenerate the area with a mixed development for commercial and residential use . It is included in the Heritage at Risk Register produced by English Heritage . 
 The last Fox family house in Wellington Tone Dale House is still owned by Ben and Victoria Fox , Ben is the Great @-@ Great @-@ Great @-@ Great @-@ Grandson of Thomas Fox . Tone Dale House ( since 1996 ) is also now run as a thriving events and hire venue , for house parties , anniversaries , weddings and corporate events , through their company The Big House Co . 
 Local industries are celebrated at the Wellington Museum in Fore Street . Wellington was home of Fox , Fowler and Company , which was the last commercial bank permitted to print their own sterling banknotes in England and Wales . 
 The town is still largely dependent on industry , notably its aerosol factory . Swallowfield plc benefited from the growth of own @-@ brand products during the 1970s and now produces aerosol , cosmetic and toiletry products . It was founded in 1876 as Walter Gregory & Co Ltd who manufactured animal husbandry products . The company diversified and in 1950 produced the first commercial aerosols in the UK which were basically farm products , air fresheners and insecticides . 
 Bed manufacturers <unk> employ some 400 people . The company started in 1858 as a wool merchant , Price Brothers and Co . , but the business soon moved into manufacturing beds and in 1935 changed its name to <unk> Ltd . In 2001 it was acquired by Steinhoff International Holdings Ltd . , a quoted South African group . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The town was served by Wellington railway station on the Bristol and Exeter Railway from 1 May 1843 until 5 October 1964 . It was here that extra locomotives were attached to heavy trains to help them up the incline to <unk> Tunnel on their way south . The railway from Penzance to London , and also to Bristol and the North , continue to pass through the town , but no trains stop . The nearest railway stations are Taunton and Tiverton Parkway . A campaign was started to reopen the railway station in 2009 . 
 The town is close to junction 26 of the M5 motorway , which spent a year in the 1970s as a temporary terminal junction , whilst the motorway between junctions 26 and 27 was finished . The A38 is also still a very important link to Taunton . 
 = = Education = = 
 Wellington is home to a public school , Wellington School . It was founded in 1837 as an all @-@ boys school . A solitary day girl was allowed to join the Sixth Form in 1972 and the following year Wellington became co @-@ educational . The school opened a new junior school in 2000 , having previously only catered for pupils aged 10 and over . In December 2007 , the school commissioned its new multi @-@ purpose examination hall and English Department adjacent to its Sports Centre . Notable alumni of Wellington School include actor David Suchet , chef Keith Floyd and peer Lord Archer . 
 The main secondary school in the town is Court Fields School . The 11 – 16 school includes a sports complex , completed in early 2008 . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 Despite its small size , Wellington has historically been notable for its profusion of churches of many different denominations , including a Quaker meeting house , the Grade I listed , 15th century Church of St John the Baptist , which includes a monument to John Popham , and the Roman Catholic Church of St John Fisher which was built in 1606 as Popham 's Almshouses and converted into a Roman Catholic church 1936 . Also there was a Presbyterian Independent Church . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Wellington has its own amateur dramatic group , formed in the 1960s , called Wellington Arts Association , which holds productions both at Wellington Arts Centre and at the Wellesley Theatre . It includes the Genesis Youth Theatre Group , Operatic Society , Pantomime Group , Civic Players , Arcadians and the Spectrum Arts And Crafts . The Wellesley Cinema was built in 1937 , in the traditional Art Deco style of that period . The auditorium seats 400 people on two levels and is run as an independent cinema . 
 Wellington and District Camera Club meets in the New Science Block , Wellington School . The club is affiliated to the Western Counties Photographic Federation ( <unk> ) and also to Wellington Arts Association , ( <unk> ) . 
 The town also has its own weekly newspaper , the Wellington Weekly News , which was first published in 1860 . There is also a community website providing news and views about the town , Around Wellington . Wellington is twinned to the town of <unk> in Germany , the town of Lillebonne in France and Torres Vedras in Portugal . 
 The town is home to Wellington Silver Band , a fourth section brass band . The band can trace its origins to 1887 , when it was formed from the volunteer band of the 2nd Battalion , Prince Albert 's Somersetshire Light Infantry . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Wellington Cricket Club have a ground off Courtland Road , and have two teams in the Somerset Cricket League . Wellington A.F.C. football Club was formed in 1892 and now play in the Western Football League . 
 Wellington Bowmen is an archery club formed in 2001 . It uses facilities at the rugby club and at Court Fields Community School . The Rugby club itself was founded in 1874 . The first team plays in the Cornwall and Devon League . 
 The Grand National winning horse , <unk> was prepared for his victory in the 1994 race by Martin Pipe at his Pond House Stables in the town . 
 = Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2014 = 
 The Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2014 was the 12th annual Junior Eurovision Song Contest , and took place , for the first time , in Malta . This was the third time that the contest was hosted by the previous year 's winning country . Maltese national broadcaster PBS was the host broadcaster for the event . The final took place on 15 November 2014 and was in the Malta Shipbuilding in Marsa , near Valletta . Moira Delia , a Maltese television personality , hosted the show , marking the first time in Junior Eurovision history that there was only one presenter of the show . 
 A total of sixteen countries participated , with Italy , Montenegro and Slovenia making their débuts . The winner of the contest was Vincenzo Cantiello , who represented Italy with the song " Tu primo grande amore " . Bulgaria and Armenia finished in second and third place , respectively . This was Italy 's first victory in a Eurovision competition since the last edition of Jeux Sans Frontières in 1999 , and also marked the first time since the inaugural 2003 contest that a country had won in its débutante year . 
 = = Location = = 
 On 18 December 2013 , the Maltese national broadcaster Public Broadcasting Services ( PBS ) and the European Broadcasting Union ( EBU ) announced that the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2014 would take place in Malta . During the winner 's press conference , representatives of the Maltese broadcaster showed their desire to host the event , following the Maltese victory at the 2013 contest . Vladislav Yakovlev , the executive supervisor for the Junior Eurovision Song Contest , announced that there would be no host city for the contest , but that the island of Malta would be a host island instead . This was the first time Malta had hosted any of the Eurovision @-@ related events . 
