 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club graded the episode with a C. He criticized Gilmore 's performance in " That Still Small Voice " and earlier episodes , writing that " Gilmore struggles to make a connection with his character , so it always looks like he ’ s reading lines , " which might have a negative effect on the Henry 's character development . Sava felt that Espenson , based on her previous work , was good at balancing large casts and wrote " this episode juggles the expansive character roster of this series better than its predecessors . " Conversely , IGN 's Amy Ratcliffe said she has " never liked Henry as much as I did in this episode , " especially his explanation to Archie on why he is Jiminy Cricket . Ratcliffe added that Jiminy had the " most touching backstory " of the season up to that point , opining that " the transformation of Dr. Hopper was moving , and this episode maybe felt the most like a fairytale of the stories we 've seen so far . " She graded " That Still Small Voice " with 8 out of 10 , an indication of a " great " episode . 
 = The Clash of Triton = 
 " The Clash of Triton " , also known as " Neptune 's Party " , is the 26th episode of the sixth season and the 126th overall episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on July 5 , 2010 . 
 The series follows the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In this episode , King Neptune wants to celebrate his 5,000th birthday at the Krusty Krab , but he is depressed about his long @-@ disowned son , Triton . Determined to make this the king 's happiest birthday ever and save the day , SpongeBob sets out to find Triton and bring him back to the party . 
 The episode was written by Casey Alexander , Zeus Cervas , Aaron Springer , Steven Banks , and Paul Tibbitt , and was directed by Andrew Overtoom and Alan Smart . Alexander , Cervas , and Springer also served as storyboard directors on the episode . It features guest appearances by John O 'Hurley , Victoria Beckham , and Sebastian Bach . Upon release , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 2 million viewers , and met positive reviews . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 King Neptune wants to celebrate his 5,000th birthday at the Krusty Krab . SpongeBob and the crew spare no expense for the gala , rolling out the red carpet to welcome the royal family . Despite the party itself , the king 's spirits are brought down by the absence of his son , Triton , spoiling the festivities for everyone , especially his wife , Queen Amphitrite . Triton was banished to a cage on the deserted Island in the Sky , until he is ready to be a proper god , having displeased his father with his growing interests in the mortal world . 
 Determined to make this the king 's happiest birthday ever and save the day , SpongeBob sets out to find Triton and bring him to the party . Once found , Triton initially ignores SpongeBob , but after smelling SpongeBob 's terribly smelly breath , he tells him to undo the lock . Unable to figure it out , SpongeBob calls his best friend , Patrick , to help out . Patrick unlocks Triton 's cell , and the Prince escapes the island . No one anticipates Triton 's wrath , Triton destroys Bikini Bottom . Noticing that something is wrong at the Krusty Krab , SpongeBob and Patrick enter the building from the back , discovering the guests and staff locked in a cage . When Patrick unlocks the cell , Triton attempts to escape his father , who catches up to him . King Neptune can 't tolerate his son 's wrongdoings , but on seeing how Triton destroyed Bikini Bottom , is pleased that he 's finally using powers , becoming a worthy successor . The family leaves for home , with King Neptune crediting SpongeBob for this development ; the townsfolk of Bikini Bottom see differently , chasing him and Patrick in an angry mob . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Clash of Triton " was written by Casey Alexander , Zeus Cervas , Aaron Springer , Steven Banks , and Paul Tibbitt , with Andrew Overtoom and Alan Smart serving as animation directors . Alexander , Cervas , and Springer also served as storyboard directors . Writer Banks said that the writing crew " liked the idea of gods and of Triton as an angry teenager dealing with his father . It all goes back to Greek tragedy . " The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on July 5 , 2010 . 
 In addition to the regular cast , English singer Victoria Beckham guest starred in the episode as the wife of King Neptune , Queen Amphitrite . The writers created the role of a Queen Amphitrite especially for Beckham . The former Spice Girl accepted the role because her sons , Brooklyn , Romeo , and Cruz , love the show , were excited when their mother told them of the role , and looked forward to watching the episode with her . 
 Beckham recorded the voice @-@ over in late @-@ 2008 in a day , and claimed that she was " thrilled " to provide the vocal cameo . Other guests including Seinfeld actor John O 'Hurley also made a vocal cameo in the episode as King Neptune , and Skid Row heavy metal vocalist Sebastian Bach as the voice of Triton . 
 Ideas for casting guest voices often come from the writers and executive producer , said Sarah Noonan , vice president of talent and casting for Nickelodeon . Steven Banks told " But the harder part was for Sebastian . I was so pleased that he really could sound like a pimple @-@ faced , snotty teenager . " Nickelodeon animation president Brown Johnson said " We 're happy to have such a talented and eclectic group of celebrities lend their voices to this SpongeBob special [ ... ] Victoria [ Beckham ] , John [ O 'Hurley ] and Sebastian [ Bach ] truly brought Bikini Bottom 's royal family to life . " 
 On July 13 , 2010 , the episode became available on DVD titled Triton 's Revenge as Paramount Home Entertainment and Nickelodeon announced its release . The DVD features six other episodes including " Sand Castles in the Sand " , " Shell Shocked " , " Chum Bucket Supreme " , " Single Cell Anniversary " , " Tentacle @-@ Vision " , and " I Heart Dancing " , and special features such as shorts of the episode and Fanboy and Chum Chum episodes . It was also included series ' season six DVD compilation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The premiere of " The Clash of Triton " drew 2 @.@ 8 million kids 2 @-@ 11 , 2 @.@ 0 million kids 6 @-@ 11 , 1 @.@ 5 million teens 9 @-@ 14 and 5 @.@ 2 million total viewers age 2 + for Nickelodeon . <unk> had its most trafficked week in 2010 with 1 @.@ 4 million unique visitors , 15 @.@ 1 million page views , and 5 @.@ 7 million total game sessions . Additionally , the new Nick Game of the Week based on the special generated 1 @.@ 2 million game sessions . 
 " The Clash of Triton " received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Steve Earhart called the episode " a hilarious special that runs perfect with the six other quirky and crazy @-@ funny episode . " Shannon Gosney of The Mommy @-@ Files said that " you 'll love this special [ ... ] " Nancy Basile of the About.com said " it was funny enough and endearing enough to make it well worth watching . " Gord Lacey of TV Shows on DVD claimed " I enjoyed ' Clash of the Triton ' , and the bonus episode of Fanboy and Chum Chum was neat . " Ken Tucker of the Entertainment Weekly said " The values of SpongeBob remain intact . The script ’ s rapid @-@ fire gags , the show 's wildly bright color palette , and the series ' resolute avoidance of heavy @-@ handed messages combine to give Stephen Hillenburg 's SpongeBob its adventurous energy . " He added " [ SpongeBob ] SquarePants just doesn 't seem to get old , does it ? " 
 Maxie Zeus of Toon Zone said " the plot isn 't even well structured , being slack and inefficient about getting from one situation to the next . " He added " the whole special is like this : plot points clumsily rolled out to ' motivate ' other plot points , which are themselves there only to motivate yet more plot points . But somehow , while they were distracted by all this wheezing machinery , they forgot to put any actual humor in . " Paul Mavis of DVD Talk said " ' The Clash of Triton ' spends way too much time on exposition , setting up the short 's premise , while <unk> on what should have been a priority : the jokes . " In his review for the DVD Verdict , Roy Hrab gave the episode 's DVD a negative review and said " loud noises and frantic action fill the screen to little or no purpose . It 's all punch lines and no jokes or clever set @-@ ups . " 
 = Pelvicachromis pulcher = 
 Pelvicachromis pulcher is a freshwater fish of the cichlid family , endemic to Nigeria and Cameroon . The species is popular amongst aquarium hobbyists , and is most commonly sold under the name kribensis , although the species has other common names , including various derivatives and color morphs of the kribensis : krib , common krib , red krib , super @-@ red krib and rainbow krib , along with rainbow cichlid and purple cichlid . The species is a popular cichlid for the aquarium . 
 = = Description = = 
 In the wild , male P. pulcher grow to a maximum length of approximately 12 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) and a maximum weight of 9 @.@ 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 34 oz ) . Females are smaller and deeper bodied , growing to a maximum length of 8 @.@ 1 cm ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) and a maximum weight of 9 @.@ 4 g ( 0 @.@ 33 oz ) . Both sexes have a dark longitudinal stripe that runs from the caudal fin to the mouth and pink to red abdomens , the intensity of which changes during courtship and breeding . The dorsal and caudal fins also may bear gold @-@ ringed eye spots or ocelli . Males show colour polymorphisms in some populations collected at single localities . Juveniles are monomorphic until approximately six months of age . 
 = = Distribution , habitat and predators = = 
 Pelvicachromis pulcher is native to southern Nigeria and to coastal areas of Cameroon , where it occurs in warm ( 24 – 26 ° C or 75 – 79 ° F ) , acidic to neutral ( pH 5 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 2 ) , soft water ( 12 – 22 mg L − 1 CaCO3 ) . Populations of P. pulcher also occur outside its natural range in Hawaii , USA as a by @-@ product of the ornamental fish trade . 
 The species inhabits both slow and fast @-@ moving water , though it is only found where patches of dense vegetation are available . Other fish that share the habitat of P. pulcher include other Pelvicachromis species ( Pelvicachromis taeniatus ) , other cichlid species ( <unk> guntheri , <unk> cristatus and H. fasciatus , Tilapia mariae and T. <unk> ) along with <unk> <unk> and <unk> species . The species is prey for a number of <unk> predators including <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Lates niloticus ( Nile perch ) . In the natural habitat , P. pulcher have been observed excavating , defending , and sheltering in caves dug underneath plants , and these holes are also used for breeding . Not all P. pulcher , however , claim territories and many live in large , non @-@ reproductive aggregates . 
 = = Diet = = 
 Despite the suggestion in some aquarium literature that the species feeds on worms , crustaceans , and insects , analysis of the stomach contents of wild P. pulcher suggests this is incorrect . A study by <unk> ( 1985 ) of 161 individuals showed that the main food items were diatoms , green algae , pieces of higher plants , along with blue @-@ green algae . Invertebrates , though consumed , were found to be relatively uncommon food items for wild fish . 
 = = Sexual dimorphism and reproduction = = 
 Like other Pelvicachromis species , P. pulcher is sexually dimorphic . Males have pointed pelvic , dorsal , and anal fins , while the female 's pelvic , dorsal , and anal fins are more rounded in appearance . In addition , males are larger , lack the gold sheen to the dorsal fin and have a more elongated , spade @-@ shaped caudal fin . Despite the suggestion in the aquarium literature that the species forms monogamous pairs , the formation of polygynous harems is not uncommon in the natural habitat . The species are secretive cave spawners ( <unk> ) although detailed information on their reproductive biology in the wild is limited . In the wild , the species is known to breed in holes excavated beneath aquatic and semi @-@ aquatic plants . In captivity , artificial caves are readily accepted as breeding sites , however , these too are excavated prior to egg @-@ laying . The eggs are adhesive and are frequently laid in rows of ca . 10 on the upper surface of the cave and produce a clutch that ranges in size from 40 to 100 . Both the male and female provide active brood care , typically lasting 21 – 28 days , which includes guarding , herding , and feeding . It is noteworthy , however , that the female is predominantly responsible for fry care , while the male is primarily involved in territorial defence . As in all Pelvicachromis species , the gender ratio of female to male fry increases with pH . This ratio is also known to vary at different locales in the wild . Breeding pairs of P. pulcher have been known to adopt similarly aged fry from conspecifics in aquarium trials , and it has been suggested this may be an adaption to reduce predation on their own fry . Male colour polymorphism may be indicative of behavioural differences . For example , red males obtained from a single site were found to be more aggressive and more polygamous than yellow males obtained from the same site . In addition , the species has been demonstrated to engage in cooperative territorial defence where multiple males defend a single territory . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Pelvicachromis pulcher was originally described as Pelmatochromis pulcher by George Boulenger in 1901 . Subsequently a number of junior synonyms ( Pelmatochromis <unk> , Pelmatochromis <unk> ) and misidentifications ( Pelmatochromis kribensis , Pelmatochromis <unk> var. kribensis and Pelmatochromis pulcher var. kribensis ) were brought into use . Some of these synonyms are still in use by aquarium hobbyists which complicates identification of this species . Many of the common and trade names used for this species , such as kribensis , krib , rainbow krib are derived from the erroneous binomial , Pelmatochromis kribensis . 
 The genus Pelmatochromis was revised by Thys van den <unk> in 1968 when the genus Pelvicachromis was erected with P. pulcher designated as the type species . 
 The etymology of this species is as follows : 
 Pelvicachromis : Latin , <unk> 
 = pelvic or belly + Greek , <unk> = 
 a fish , perhaps a perch 
 Pulcher : Latin , pretty or beautiful 
 = = In the aquarium = = 
 Pelvicachromis pulcher is a popular cichlid for the aquarium . 
 = = = Selective breeding = = = 
 An albino form of the species has been developed for the aquarium trade . Unlike normal albinism , the trait is not recessively inherited in P. pulcher . The trait is incompletely dominant . Like many albino animals red and yellow pigments are retained , however , albino P. pulcher also show patches of melanin in the dorsal and caudal fin around the ocelli . <unk> ( 1982 ) reports that matings from these albino forms with red and yellow pigments produce 25 % wild coloured offspring and 75 % albino fry . The albino fry were themselves divided into completely <unk> forms , and forms which retained colouration of their parents . 
 = Ontario Highway 400 = 
 King 's Highway 400 , commonly referred to as Highway 400 , historically as the Toronto – Barrie Highway , and colloquially as the 400 , is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario linking the city of Toronto in the urban and agricultural south of the province with the scenic and sparsely populated central and northern regions . The portion of the highway between Toronto and Lake Simcoe roughly traces the route of a historic trail between the Lower and Upper Great Lakes . Highway 400 is part of the highest @-@ capacity route from southern Ontario to the Canadian West , via a connection with the Trans @-@ Canada Highway in Sudbury . The highway also serves as the primary route from Toronto to southern Georgian Bay and Muskoka , areas collectively known as cottage country . The highway is patrolled by the Ontario Provincial Police and has a speed limit of 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) , except for the section south of the 401 , where the speed limit is 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . 
 Highway 400 is the second longest freeway in the province , the trans @-@ provincial Highway 401 being the longest . It was the first fully controlled @-@ access highway in Ontario when it was opened between North York and Barrie on July 1 , 1952 . On that date , it was also the first highway to be designated as a 400 @-@ series . The freeway was extended in both directions ; north of Barrie to Coldwater in 1958 , and south of Highway 401 to Jane Street in 1966 . It was widened between North York and Barrie in the 1970s . Since 1977 , construction on the freeway has been snaking north along Highway 69 towards Parry Sound and now Sudbury . 
 As of 2011 , a four lane freeway is opened as far north as Carling . At the north end of Highway 69 , a segment of freeway is in operation between Murdock River and Sudbury ; while this section will be part of the completed Highway 400 route , at present it remains signed as Highway 69 . The remaining gap between Carling and Murdock River will be opened in stages and is expected to be completed by 2021 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 While Highway 400 was originally known as the Toronto – Barrie Highway , the route has been extended well beyond Barrie to north of Parry Sound , and is projected to reach its eventual terminus in Sudbury by 2021 . As of 2009 , the length of the highway is 209 @.@ 0 km ( 129 @.@ 9 mi ) with an additional 152 km ( 94 mi ) planned . 
 Highway 400 begins at the Maple Leaf Drive overpass in Toronto , south of Highway 401 . South of that , it is known as Black Creek Drive , a high speed commuter road once planned as a southern extension of the 400 . Highway 400 had been completed to Jane Street in 1966 ( alongside the expansion of Highway 401 ) but plans to extend Highway 400 further south to the Gardiner Expressway were cancelled after several citizens groups protested the proposal in the 1970s . Black Creek Drive was built along the empty right @-@ of @-@ way and transferred to Metro Toronto in 1982 . 
 North of Maple Leaf Drive , the highway shifts northwestward , but then turns approximately northward at Highway 401 . At the interchange with the 401 , Highway 400 widens to twelve lanes . It continues north through Toronto , shedding two lanes at Finch Avenue . The congested section between Highway 407 and Langstaff Road in suburban Vaughan features a short collector @-@ express system . The 400 / 407 junction is the only four @-@ level stack interchange in Canada . 
 From Highway 401 to the Holland Marsh the freeway largely parallels the arterial / concession roads Weston Road and Jane Street , passing over the height of land at the Oak Ridges Moraine . The highway passes through protected rural areas in northern York Region and encounters rolling countryside in Simcoe County south of Barrie . The section near Barrie is subject to snowsqualls as it lies near the edge of Georgian Bay 's snowbelt . 
 Within Barrie , Highway 400 passes through a trench which places it below grade for most of its length , the route curving around downtown Barrie towards the north @-@ east . On the outskirts of Barrie , the through right @-@ of @-@ way continues as Highway 11 towards Orillia and North Bay , while Highway 400 exits and veers 90 degrees to the north @-@ west towards Georgian Bay , travelling alongside the former Highway 93 to Craighurst . At Craighurst the highway again turns north @-@ east , skirting the Copeland Forest and the ski hills of the Oro Moraine , to meet Highway 12 in Coldwater . From here , the highway takes on the Trans @-@ Canada Highway designation , and follows a predominantly north @-@ western heading along what was the route of Highway 69 , toward the planned terminus of Sudbury . In Muskoka and Parry Sound Districts , Highway 400 is in most sections a twinned four @-@ lane highway , but several bypasses have and are being built to circumvent the communities along the way . At Port Severn , the highway meets the rugged Canadian Shield , and winds its way north through the granite , often flanked by towering slabs of rock . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Initial construction = = = 
 Highway 400 , along with Highway 401 and Highway 402 , was one of the first modern freeways in Ontario . Planning for the Toronto – Barrie Highway , which would become Highway 400 , began in 1944 . The two routes connecting Barrie with Toronto at the time , Highway 11 and Highway 27 , were becoming congested . Grading on a new alignment between Weston Road and Jane Street was completed from Wilson Avenue to Highway 27 ( Essa Road ) by 1947 . The onset of the Korean War slowed construction on the highway considerably , and it wasn 't until December 1 , 1951 that two lanes ( one in each direction ) would be opened to traffic . All four lanes were opened to traffic on July 1 , 1952 , at which point the highway was designated Highway 400 . The name was the scorn of one newspaper editor , who published his distaste for using numbers to name a highway . The freeway featured a 9 @.@ 1 m ( 30 ft ) grass median . 
 Shortly after its completion , Hurricane Hazel struck on October 15 , 1954 . The torrential downpours caused catastrophic damage to southern Ontario , amongst which was the flooding of Holland Marsh to a depth of 3 @.@ 3 m ( 11 ft ) . Several bridges and sections of road were washed away by Hazel . The damaged highway and bridges were completely reconstructed after the water was pumped away . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 By 1958 Highway 400 was extended north parallel with Highway 93 as a super two with at @-@ grade intersections to Craighurst and construction had begun to extend it further to Highway 12 and Highway 103 at Coldwater . Both sections opened to traffic on December 24 , 1959 . For many years afterwards , and still today to older drivers , this portion of the 400 north of Barrie is referred to as the " 400 Extension " . 
 Plans were also conceived to extend the freeway south from Highway 401 to Eglinton Avenue , where it would join two new expressways : the Richview and the Crosstown Expressways . These plans would never reach fruition , as public opposition to urban expressways cancelled most highway construction in Toronto by 1971 . Highway 400 would still open as far south as Jane Street on October 28 , 1966 before the rest of the plans were shelved following the cancellation of the Spadina Expressway . The province used the right @-@ of @-@ way in the Black Creek valley to construct a four @-@ lane divided expressway with signalled intersections as far south as Eglinton Avenue . Originally known as the Northwest Arterial Road , the expressway was transferred to Metropolitan Toronto on March 1 , 1983 and named Black Creek Drive . In exchange , the province was given the expropriated land purchased for Spadina south of Eglinton Avenue . 
 Widening of Highway 400 began in 1971 . An additional lane in either direction was created by reducing the 9 @.@ 1 m median by 6 m ( 20 ft ) and using 1 @.@ 2 m ( 4 ft ) of the shoulder on each side . The first section to be widened was from Highway 401 to Finch Avenue , which was widened to eight lanes . Soon thereafter , the section from Finch to Highway 88 was widened to six lanes . A year later , the six lane freeway was extended 41 @.@ 8 km ( 26 mi ) north to Highway 11 . 
 The two @-@ lane highway north of Barrie was widened starting in 1977 , necessitated by the increasing use of the highway by recreational tourists and vacationers . This work involved the construction of two southbound lanes parallel to the original , with a 30 metres ( 98 ft ) median between them . In addition , at @-@ grade intersections were converted into grade @-@ separated interchanges . This work was completed as far as Highway 93 north of Craighurst by 1982 . In 1980 construction began on four @-@ laning the section from Highway 93 to Simcoe County Road 19 , which was completed by the end of 1982 . During the summer of 1983 , four @-@ laning began between Simcoe County Roads 19 and 23 , bypassing west of Coldwater . This was completed during the summer of 1985 . 
 Between 1985 and 1987 , the pace of construction slowed temporarily as the foundations for the new structures over <unk> Bay were compacted and settled . During the fall of 1987 , a contract was awarded to extend the four @-@ laning north to Waubaushene and to complete the interchange with Highway 12 , first constructed during the late 1950s with the two @-@ lane highway . This work was completed a year later during the fall of 1988 . Several structures were constructed over the next few years . In 1989 construction began on the <unk> Bay structures as well as the Canadian National Railway crossing north of Highway 12 . Both were complete by the end of 1990 . During 1991 , construction began on the interchanges at Quarry Road and Port Severn Road , new service roads between those interchanges and the southbound structure over the Trent – Severn Waterway . 
 = = = Twinning Highway 69 = = = 
 Following the completion of Highway 400 to Port Severn , the next target became Parry Sound . In 1988 , the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario completed a study of the Highway 69 corridor between Muskoka Road 5 in Port Severn and Tower Road southwest of <unk> , a distance of approximately 45 km ( 28 mi ) . This work was carried out through the 1990s , reaching as far as Muskoka Road 38 ( former Highway 660 ) by 1999 . The four @-@ laning was extended north to the Musquash River in October 1999 , although an interchange wasn 't constructed at Muskoka Road 32 / 38 until October 2005 . However , a land claim dispute between the Government of Ontario and the <unk> Mohawk Territory prevented the twinning of Highway 69 between the Musquash and Moon Rivers . The Territorial Reserve did not oppose the construction of the highway ; however , the land was unobtainable due to a technicality requiring a minimum voter turnout of 65 percent . 
 Construction of the Parry Sound Bypass , a new alignment from Badger Road to the Seguin River , began with an interchange along Highway 518 at the site of the future freeway , which was completed during the autumn of 1999 . Construction south of the interchange to Badger Road started in November 1999 , while the section north of the interchange to the Seguin River began three months later . 
 On February 7 , 2000 , the government officially committed to complete Highway 400 to Parry Sound . Work began on two projects as a result of this : a 26 @.@ 5 km ( 16 @.@ 5 mi ) bypass of Highway 69 on a new alignment between the Moon River , south of <unk> , and Rankin Lake Road near Horseshoe Lake , as well as a 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) segment connecting that to the Parry Sound Bypass . 
 The first segment of freeway to be completed north of the Musquash River was the Parry Sound Bypass , which opened on November 1 , 2001 . This section bypassed to the east of the old highway , now known as Oastler Park Drive . However , it was numbered as Highway 69 for the moment . In October 2002 , the section south of the Parry Sound Bypass to Rankin Lake Road was opened . This was followed a year later on October 7 with the opening of the bypass of Highway 69 from the Moon River to Rankin Lake Road , connecting with the Parry Sound segment . At that point , the Highway 400 designation was extended north to the Seguin River . However , the Highway 69 designation remained in place as far south as the Musquash River . 
 The remaining 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) gap through the <unk> Mohawk Territory would eventually be constructed , starting in December 2004 . It opened to traffic during the summer of 2008 , completing the freeway south of Parry Sound . Since then , the Highway 69 designation has been removed south of Nobel . 
 = = = Since 2000 = = = 
 In the early 2000s , the junctions with Rutherford Road and Major Mackenzie Drive in Vaughan were extensively reconstructed to modern Parclo A4 configurations , and a new partial interchange was added for Bass Pro Mills Drive in 2004 to accommodate the opening of the Vaughan Mills shopping centre . 
 On October 27 , 2010 , one lane in either direction on the Nobel Bypass opened to traffic . The new four @-@ lane bypass , which travels as far north as Highway 559 , was fully opened in November . The former route of Highway 69 through the town was renamed as Nobel Drive and will be reduced in width from four to two lanes , with the decommissioned lanes to be converted into a recreational trail . Some businesses in Nobel were affected after the opening of the new highway 400 realignment and had to be closed down . 
 On February 27 , 2014 , a major snowsquall affected Highway 400 in Innisfil with heavy wind gusts and near @-@ zero visibility . A total of 96 vehicles were involved in a major collision that ensued near Innisfil Beach Road . Although no injuries were reported , the highway was closed for a day and buses were shuttled in to warm stranded motorists . 
 = = Future = = 
 On June 28 , 2005 , it was officially confirmed that Highway 69 would be twinned and bypassed north to Highway 17 in Sudbury . This announcement was accompanied by a time line with the completion date set for 2017 ; in March 2015 , the Ministry of Transportation acknowledged that the original completion date will not be met , and announced that its current goal is to have the project completed by 2021 . However , work was already underway in 2003 to expand Highway 69 south of Sudbury to four lanes . As work is completed at the southern end near Nobel , the Highway 400 designation is being extended north . 
 Construction began on the segment from Sudbury southwards to Estaire in 2005 , while route planning studies were completed for the Estaire to Parry Sound segment . Portions of the route will be opened to traffic in segments as contracts are fulfilled ; the segment between Sudbury and Estaire opened on November 12 , 2009 , while the Nobel bypass from Parry Sound to Highway 559 opened October 26 , 2010 . As the Sudbury segment of the freeway is discontinuous with the remainder of Highway 400 , it will not be renumbered until the southern segment is connected with it . 
 As one of the oldest 400 @-@ series freeways , several vintage overpasses have been demolished in recent years to accommodate the future expansion of Highway 400 to a ten @-@ lane freeway in the section from Vaughan to Barrie . Sixteen of these historic structures , sub @-@ standard by today 's freeway requirements , remained as of summer 2009 , with all slated for replacement in the near future . In order to preserve some of this heritage the Ministry of Transportation created a <unk> x <unk> reusable urethane mould of the provincial coat @-@ of @-@ arms from the 5th Line overpass located south of Bradford , which will be used to decorate the replacement structures . 
 Construction began north of Barrie in April 2013 to replace the overpass at the Crown Hill junction with Highway 11 . The new structure , designed to accommodate future highway expansion , was completed in October 2015 . The original overpass , built during the 1950s , was demolished during an overnight closure on December 13 , 2015 . The overall cost of this project was C $ 8 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = Services = = 
 There are four service centres located along Highway 400 : Maple , King City , Innisfil and Barrie . The centres were originally leased to and operated by several major gasoline distributors ; however , those companies have chosen not to renew their leases as the terms end . In response , the MTO put the operation of the full network of service centres out for tender , resulting in a 50 @-@ year lease with Host Kilmer Service Centres , a joint venture between hospitality company HMSHost ( a subsidiary of Autogrill ) and Larry Tanenbaum 's investment company Kilmer van Nostrand , which operates them under the <unk> brand . 
 Three of the four service centres will be upgraded and will feature a Canadian Tire gas station , an HMSHost @-@ operated convenience store known as " The Market " , as well as fast food brands such as Tim Hortons , A & W and Burger King . The southbound Vaughan service centre is not included in these plans . The Barrie centre closed for reconstruction on October 19 , 2010 . The King City service centre relocated a few hundred meters south in October 2012 . The Cookstown centre had its developments underway in February 1 , 2013 and reopened in June 2015 , however it moved to a new location north of 4th line and rebranded as Innisfil <unk> 
 Service centres are located at the following points along Highway 400 : 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 400 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = New York State Route 215 ( 1940s – 1970s ) = 
 New York State Route 215 ( NY 215 ) was a north – south state highway located within the town of Hamlin in Monroe County , New York , in the United States . It served as the primary highway to and from Hamlin Beach State Park prior to the construction of the Lake Ontario State Parkway . The southern terminus of the route was at an intersection with NY 360 east of the hamlet of Morton . Its northern terminus was at the park on the shore of Lake Ontario . The entirety of NY 215 was named Redman Road . 
 NY 215 was assigned in the early 1940s to provide a signed connection between NY 360 and Hamlin Beach State Park . It ceased to exist in the early 1970s once it was severed from the Lake Ontario shoreline by a westward extension of the Lake Ontario State Parkway . However , the remaining portion of NY 215 remained state maintained for another 30 years as New York State Route 941P , an unsigned reference route . Ownership and maintenance of NY 941P was transferred to Monroe County as part of a highway maintenance swap that took effect on November 26 , 2007 . The former routing of NY 941P is now part of unsigned County Route 236 ( CR 236 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 215 began at a three @-@ way intersection with NY 360 east of the hamlet of Morton in the town of Hamlin . NY 360 turned off Redman Road here to follow Morton Road west to the hamlet of Morton while NY 215 headed north on Redman Road . It passed by open , cultivated fields and small pockets of residences as it proceeded through rural northwestern Monroe County . After 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) , NY 215 intersected Moscow Road , a local highway connecting NY 215 to the then @-@ western end of the Lake Ontario State Parkway . 
 North of Moscow Road , the fields on the highway 's east side slowly gave way to forested areas as the route approached Hamlin Beach State Park and intersected Cook Road . The route terminated 500 feet ( 150 m ) north of Cook Road at the southern boundary of Hamlin Beach State Park . The physical roadway continued into the park and to nearby Lake Ontario as a local highway . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of Redman Road north of modern NY 360 in Hamlin was a state highway as early as 1920 ; however , it was not assigned a designation until the early 1940s , when it became NY 215 . At the time , it was the primary highway to and from Hamlin Beach State Park on the Lake Ontario shoreline , as no continuous east – west lakeside roadway existed at the time . This changed in the late 1940s and early 1950s following the construction of the Lake Ontario State Parkway , a lakeshore highway connecting the park to NY 261 in Greece . The parkway began east of NY 215 at Moscow Road and provided a direct connection to Hamlin Beach State Park from Greece , and eventually Rochester . As a result , NY 215 became merely an alternate route to the park . 
 In the early 1970s , the Lake Ontario State Parkway was extended westward across Monroe and Orleans counties to Lakeside Beach State Park in Carlton . NY 215 's connection to Hamlin Beach State Park was severed as part of the construction . As a result , the remaining portion of NY 215 from NY 360 to Cook Road lost its signed route status and was redesignated NY 941P , an unsigned reference route . 
 The highway remained state maintained until 2007 , when ownership and maintenance of it was transferred from the state of New York to Monroe County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . A bill ( S4856 , 2007 ) to enact the swap was introduced in the New York State Senate on April 23 and passed by both the Senate and the New York State Assembly on June 20 . The act was signed into law by Governor Eliot Spitzer on August 28 . Under the terms of the act , it took effect 90 days after it was signed into law ; thus , the maintenance swap officially took place on November 26 , 2007 . The former routing of NY 941P is now part of CR 236 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Hamlin , Monroe County . 
 = Team effectiveness = 
 Team effectiveness ( also referred to as group effectiveness ) is the capacity a team has to accomplish the goals or objectives administered by an authorized personnel or the organization . A team is a collection of individuals who are interdependent in their tasks , share responsibility for outcomes , and view themselves as a unit embedded in an institutional or organizational system which operates within the established boundaries of that system . Teams and groups have established a synonymous relationship within the confines of processes and research relating to their effectiveness ( i.e. group cohesiveness , teamwork ) while still maintaining their independence as two separate units , as groups and their members are independent of each other 's role , skill , knowledge or purpose versus teams and their members , who are interdependent upon each other 's role , skill , knowledge and purpose . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The evaluation of how effective a team is , is achieved with the aid of a variety of components derived from research and theories that help in creating a description of the multifaceted nature of team effectiveness . According to Hackman ( 1987 ) , team effectiveness can be defined in terms of three criteria : 
 Output - The final outputs produced by the team must meet or exceed the standards set by key constituents within the organization 
 Social Processes - The internal social processes operating as the team interacts should enhance , or at least maintain , the group ’ s ability to work together in the future 
 Learning - The experience of working in the team environment should act to satisfy rather than aggravate the personal needs of team members 
 In order for these criteria to be assessed appropriately , an evaluation of team effectiveness should be conducted , which involves both a measure of the teams ’ final task performance as well as criteria with which to assess intragroup process . The three major intragroup process constructs examined are intra @-@ group conflict , team cohesion , and team @-@ efficacy . Intra @-@ group conflict is an integral part of the process a team undergoes and the effectiveness of the unit that was formed . Previous research has differentiated two components of intra @-@ group conflict : 
 Relationship conflict - This is the interpersonal incompatibilities between team members such as annoyance and animosity 
 Task conflict - This occurs when members convey divergent ideas and opinions about specific aspects related to task accomplishment 
 Team cohesion is viewed as ‘ ‘ a general indicator of synergistic group interaction — or process ’ ’ . Furthermore , cohesion has been linked to greater coordination during team @-@ tasks as well as improved satisfaction , productivity , and group interactions . Team efficacy refers to team members ’ perceptions of task @-@ specific team competence . This construct is thought to create a sense of confidence within the team that enables the group to persevere when faced with hardship . According to Hackman ( 2002 ) , there are also 5 conditions that research has shown to optimize the effectiveness of the team : 
 Real Team - Stability in the group membership over time 
 Compelling Direction - A clear purpose that relies on end goals 
 Enabling Structure - The groups dynamic must be producing good , not bad 
 Social Support - The group must have a system to collaborate properly 
 Coaching - Opportunities for a coach to give help 
 = = Work teams = = 
 Work teams ( also referred to as production and service teams ) are continuing work units responsible for producing goods or providing services for the organization . Their membership is typically stable , usually full @-@ time , and well @-@ defined . These teams are traditionally directed by a supervisor who mandates what work is done , who does it , and in what manner is it executed . Work teams are effectively used in manufacturing sectors such as mining and apparel and service based sectors such as accounting which utilize audit teams . 
 = = = Self @-@ managed = = = 
 Self @-@ managed work teams ( also referred to as autonomous work groups ) allow their members to make a greater contribution at work and constitute a significant competitive advantage for the organization . These work teams determine how they will accomplish the objectives they are mandated to achieve and decide what route they will take to complete the current assignment . Self @-@ managed work teams are granted the responsibility of planning , scheduling , organizing , directing , controlling and evaluating their own work process . They also select their own members and evaluate the members ' performance . Self @-@ managed work teams have been favored for their effectiveness over traditionally managed teams due their ability to enhance productivity , costs , customer service , quality , and safety . 
 = = Parallel teams = = 
 Parallel teams ( also referred to as advice and involvement teams ) pull together people from different work units or jobs to perform functions that the regular organization is not equipped to perform well . These teams are given limited authority and can only make recommendations to individuals higher in the organizational hierarchy . Parallel teams are used for solving problems and activities that are in need of revision or improvement . Examples of parallel teams are quality circles , task forces , quality improvement teams , employee involvement groups . The effectiveness of parallel teams is proven by the continuation of their usage and expansion throughout organizations due to their ability to improve quality and increase employee involvement . 
 = = Project teams = = 
 Project teams ( also referred to as development teams ) produce new products and services for an organization or institution on a one @-@ time or limited basis , of which the copyrights of that new product or service will belong to the establishment that it was made for once it is completed . The task of these teams may vary from just improving a current project , concept or plan to creating an entirely new projects with very few limitations . Projects teams rely on their members being knowledgeable and well versed in many disciplines and functions , as this allows them to complete the task effectively . Once a project is completed , the team either disbands and are individually moved to other special functions or moves on to other projects and tasks that they as a unit can accomplish or develop . A common example of project teams are cross @-@ functional teams . A project team 's effectiveness is associated with the speed with which they are able to create and develop new products and services which reduces time spent on individual projects . 
 = = Management teams = = 
 Management teams ( also referred to as action and negotiation teams ) are responsible for the coordination and direction of a division within an institution or organization during various assigned projects and functional , operational and / or strategic tasks and initiatives . Management teams are responsible for the total performance of the division they oversee with regards to day @-@ to @-@ day operations , delegation of tasks and the supervision of employees . The authority of these teams are based on the members position on the company 's or institution 's organizational chart . These management teams are constructed of managers from different divisions ( e.g. Vice President of Marketing , Assistant Director of Operations ) . An example of management teams are executive management teams , which consists of members at the top of the organization 's hierarchy , such as Chief Executive Officer , Board of Directors , Board of Trustees , etc . , who establish the strategic initiatives that a company will undertake over a long term period ( ~ 3 – 5 years ) . Management teams have been effective by using their expertise to aid companies in adjusting to the current landscape of a global economy , which helps them compete with their rivals in their respective markets , produce unique initiatives that sets them apart from their rivals and empower the employees who are responsible for the success of the organization or institution . 
 = Spotlight ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Spotlight " is a song by American singer Madonna from her first remix album You Can Dance ( 1987 ) . It was released as a single in Japan on April 25 , 1988 by Sire Records and Warner @-@ Pioneer Japan . Initially rejected during her True Blue album recording sessions , it was written by Madonna , Stephen Bray and Curtis Hudson . It was inspired by the song " Everybody Is a Star " ( 1970 ) , by American rock band Sly and the Family Stone . The song was remixed by Shep Pettibone , with additional mixing done by John " Jellybean " Benitez . 
 " Spotlight " features instrumentation from drums , bass synths and handclaps , accompanied by vocal echos , a piano segment and violin phrases in the musical interlude . The lyrics talk about how one can be famous if one sings about it . The song received mixed reviews from critics . After its release , it reached number 68 on the Japanese Oricon weekly singles chart , as well as number three on its international singles chart . Although not released in the United States , the song managed to chart on Billboard 's Airplay chart in early 1988 . The song was used in a Mitsubishi VCR commercial , in which she appeared . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the mid @-@ eighties , post @-@ disco dance music was extremely popular and the concept of remix was widely regarded as a new direction of music . Several artists were remixing their tracks and compiling them to create new albums . Hence Madonna , who was the most popular dance artist of that era , decided to create a similar remix compilation album , later titled You Can Dance , which included seven of her up @-@ tempo songs . Along with the pre @-@ released tracks in remixed form , " Spotlight " was included as an added bonus . Madonna said that she was inspired by the song " Everybody Is a Star " ( 1970 ) , by American rock band Sly and the Family Stone . 
 In 1983 , Curtis Hudson and Lisa Stevens of the group Pure Energy had written the song " Holiday " , which Madonna recorded and released as the third single from her self @-@ titled debut album . After the single 's commercial success , Hudson wrote a song sounding like " Holiday " , in case Warner , Madonna 's record company , wanted to release a similar song to it . He named it " Spotlight " and offered it to Madonna , who recorded the song for her 1986 album True Blue . However , Madonna didn 't include it in the album because she felt that it was similar in composition and structure to " Holiday " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 When Madonna decided to create You Can Dance , she and Stephen Bray reworked the demo composed by Hudson and Madonna asked Shep Pettibone , who had remixed her songs from True Blue , to remix " Spotlight " and included it on the album . John " Jellybean " Benitez , who had recorded the original demo during the True Blue sessions , assisted Pettibone in remixing the song . 
 " Spotlight " begins with the sound of drums , bass synths and handclaps , followed by Madonna uttering the words " Spotlight , shine bright " . After the first verse , the sound of keyboard is heard during the effect . It continues like this through the second verse , which is followed by an interlude featuring vocal echos , a piano segment and violin phrases . Madonna follows the music played by the piano and utters the words " Pa @-@ da @-@ pa @-@ da @-@ pappa pappa pa pa " in the same melody . The lyrics deal with Madonna making the listener remember that " Everybody is a Star " and that if one wants to be famous and be under the " Spotlight " , the person should sing about it and reality may catch up with him or her . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mark Bego , author of Madonna : Blonde Ambition wrote that " Spotlight " was a " typical Madonna ' look @-@ at @-@ me ' dance routine , that sounds flat besides the heavy remixes in You Can Dance . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic said that the song " sounds dated — this is quite clearly extended mixes from the mid 80 's — but that 's part of the charm . " Dave Barry from The Miami Herald commented that although You Can Dance sounds like " old Madonna " , " Spotlight " sounds surprisingly fresh to his ears . Joe Brown from The Washington Post commented that the song should have been a " flat reject " . Don McLeese from Chicago Sun @-@ Times called the song " exuberant " . Dennis Hunt from Los Angeles Times commented that " [ You Can Dance ] is an attractive package for dance fans — particularly with the inclusion of a new cut , ' Spotlight ' " . He went on to add that the " lyrics of ' Spotlight ' aren 't great , but they 're still more interesting than the others . Still , the words , like those of most dance songs , are just window dressing that 's secondary to the beat . The big attraction of ' Spotlight ' is a long , hard @-@ driving , closing passage that 's guaranteed to turn dancers on . " Jan DeKnock , while writing for Orlando Sentinel , noted that the song was already receiving airplay from radio stations . 
 " Spotlight " was not officially released as a single in the United States ; therefore it was not eligible at the time to appear on Billboard 's Hot 100 . Even so , it managed to garner enough airplay to appear on the publication 's Hot 100 Airplay survey in early 1988 . It debuted on the Airplay chart at 37 on the issue dated January 16 , 1988 . After three weeks , " Spotlight " reached a peak of 32 , but fell to 40 the next week before exiting the chart . It had also reached the Hot Crossover 30 chart beginning on the issue dated December 12 , 1987 , peaking at 15 for two consecutive weeks beginning January 9 , 1988 and spending eight total weeks on the chart . The song was released commercially in Japan on April 25 , 1988 . " Spotlight " peaked at number 68 on the Oricon weekly singles chart , remaining on the chart for five weeks . It also charted on the Oricon international singles chart , reaching a peak of three on May 19 , 1988 , staying on the chart for ten weeks . 
 = = Media appearance = = 
 " Spotlight " was featured in the last of a series of Japanese TV commercials Madonna filmed for electronics company Mitsubishi . The commercial promoted their VCR model F @-@ 5 @.@ 3 . In the commercial , Madonna was featured as coming out of a car and sitting down on a sofa , while watching a film on the VCR , as " Spotlight " is played in the background . The song was also used as cross @-@ promotion for the Japanese leg of her 1987 Who 's That Girl World Tour under the campaign name of " Dreams Come True " . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 Japanese 7 " single , 3 " Mini CD single 
 " Spotlight " ( Single Edit ) – 4 : 32 
 " Where 's The Party " ( Remix Single Edit ) – 4 : 13 
 US 12 " Vinyl Promo 
 " Where 's The Party " ( Extended Remix ) – 7 : 11 
 " Where 's The Party " ( Dub ) – 6 : 22 
 " Spotlight " ( Extended Remix ) – 6 : 34 
 " Spotlight " ( Dub ) – 4 : 49 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – vocals , writer 
 Stephen Bray – producer , writer 
 Curtis Hudson – writer 
 Shep Pettibone – remixing 
 John " Jellybean " Benitez – additional mixing 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = On the Pulse of Morning = 
 " On the Pulse of Morning " is a poem by African @-@ American writer and poet Maya Angelou that she read at the first inauguration of President Bill Clinton on January 20 , 1993 . With her public recitation , Angelou became the second poet in history to read a poem at a presidential inauguration , and the first African American and woman . ( Robert Frost was the first inaugural poet , at the 1961 inauguration of John F. Kennedy . ) Angelou 's audio recording of the poem won the 1994 Grammy Award in the " Best Spoken Word " category , resulting in more fame and recognition for her previous works , and broadening her appeal . 
 The poem 's themes are change , inclusion , responsibility , and role of both the President and the citizenry in establishing economic security . Its symbols , references to contemporary issues , and personification of nature has inspired critics to compare " On the Pulse of Morning " with Frost 's inaugural poem and with Clinton 's inaugural address . It has been called Angelou 's " autobiographical poem " , and has received mixed reviews . The popular press praised Clinton 's choice of Angelou as inaugural poet , and her " <unk> " of the American people and its President . Critic Mary Jane Lupton said that " Angelou 's ultimate greatness will be attributed " to the poem , and that Angelou 's " theatrical " performance of it , using skills she learned as an actor and speaker , marked a return to the African @-@ American oral tradition of speakers such as Frederick Douglass , Martin Luther King , Jr. and Malcolm X. Poetry critics , despite praising Angelou 's recitation and performance , gave mostly negative reviews of the poem . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Angelou wrote and recited " On the Pulse of Morning " , she was already well known as a writer and poet . She had written five of the seven of her series of autobiographies , including the first and most highly acclaimed , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) . Although she was best known for her autobiographies , she was primarily known as a poet rather than an autobiographer . Early in her writing career she began alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . Her first volume of poetry Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' Fore I Diiie , published in 1971 shortly after Caged Bird , became a best @-@ seller and was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize . As scholar Marcia Ann Gillespie writes , Angelou had " fallen in love with poetry " during her early childhood in Stamps , Arkansas . After her rape at the age of eight , which she depicted in Caged Bird , Angelou memorized and studied great works of literature , including poetry . According to Caged Bird , her friend Mrs. Flowers encouraged her to recite them , which helped bring her out her self @-@ imposed period of muteness caused by her trauma . 
 Angelou was the first poet to read an inaugural poem since Robert Frost read his poem " The Gift Outright " at President John F. Kennedy 's inauguration in 1961 , and the first Black and woman . When it was announced that Angelou would read one of her poems at Clinton 's inauguration , many in the popular press compared her role as inaugural poet with that of Frost 's , especially what critic Zofia Burr called their " representativeness " , or their ability to speak for and to the American people . The press also pointed to the nation 's social progress that a Black woman would " stand in the place of a white man " at his inauguration , and praised Angelou 's involvement as the Clinton administration 's " gesture of inclusion " . 
 Angelou told her friend Oprah Winfrey that the call requesting her to write and recite the poem came from television producer Harry Thomason , who organized the inauguration , shortly after Clinton 's election . Even though she suspected that Clinton made the request because " he understood that I am the kind of person who really does bring people together " , Angelou admitted feeling overwhelmed , and even requested that the audiences attending her speaking engagements pray for her . 
 She followed her same " writing ritual " that she had followed for years and used in writing all of her books and poetry : she rented a hotel room , closeted herself there from the early morning to the afternoon , and wrote on legal pads . After deciding upon the theme " America " , she wrote down everything she could think of about the country , which she then " pushed and squeezed into a poetic form " . Angelou recited the poem on January 20 , 1993 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " On the Pulse of Morning " shared many of the themes in President Clinton 's inaugural address , which he gave immediately before Angelou read her poem , including change , responsibility , and the President 's and the citizenry 's role in establishing economic security . The symbols in Angelou 's poem ( the tree , the river , and the morning , for example ) paralleled many of the same symbols Clinton used in his speech , and helped to enhance and expand Clinton 's images . Clinton 's address and the poem , according to Hagen , both emphasized unity despite the diversity of American culture . " On the Pulse of Morning " attempted to convey many of the goals of Clinton 's new administration . 
 Burr compared Angelou 's poem with Frost 's , something she claimed the poetry critics who gave " On the Pulse of Morning " negative reviews did not do . Angelou " rewrote " Frost 's poem , from the perspective of personified nature that appeared in both poems . Frost praised American colonization , but Angelou attacked it . The cost of the creation of America was abstract and ambiguous in Frost 's poem , but the personified Tree in Angelou 's poem signified the cultures in America that paid a significant cost to create it . Both Frost and Angelou called for a " break with the past " , but Frost wanted to relive it and Angelou wanted to confront its mistakes . Burr also compared Angelou 's poem with Audre Lorde 's poem " For Each of You " , which has similar themes of looking towards the future , as well as with Walt Whitman 's " Song of Myself " and Langston Hughes ' " The Negro Speaks of Rivers " . According to Hagen , the poem contains a recurring theme in many of Angelou 's other poems and autobiographies , that " we are more alike than unalike " . 
 " On the Pulse of Morning " was full of contemporary references , including toxic waste and pollution . Angelou 's poem was influenced by the African @-@ American oral tradition of spirituals , by poets such as James Weldon Johnson and Langston Hughes , and by modern African poets and folk artists such as Kwesi Brew and Efua Sutherland , which also influenced her autobiographies . 
 = = Critical response and impact = = 
 According to Lupton , " On the Pulse of Morning " is Angelou 's most famous poem . Lupton has argued that " Angelou 's ultimate greatness will be attributed " to the poem , and that Angelou 's " theatrical " performance of it , using skills she learned as an actor and speaker , marked a return to the African @-@ American oral tradition of speakers such as Frederick Douglass , Martin Luther King , Jr. and Malcolm X. British reporter Kate Kellaway compared Angelou 's appearance as she read the poem at Clinton 's inauguration with the eight @-@ year @-@ old child in Caged Bird , noting that the coats she wore in both occasions were similar : " She looked magnificent , sternly theatrical with an unsmiling bow mouth . She wore a coat with brass buttons , a strange reminder of the eight @-@ year @-@ old Maya Angelou who stood in a courtroom , terrified at the sight of the man who had raped her " . Gillespie stated regarding Kellaway 's observations : " But standing tall on the steps of the Capitol , she was light @-@ years removed from that terrible time , and America was no longer an ' unfriendly place . ' Her poem ' On the Pulse of Morning ' was a soaring call for peace , justice , and harmony . Capturing the hope embodied in the human spirit , it was a solemn and joyful reminder that all things are possible . She wished us ' Good morning ' in her poem , and one felt as if a new day was truly dawning . " 
 Angelou recognized that although " On the Pulse of Morning " was a better " public poem " than a great poem , her goal of conveying the message of unity was accomplished . Poet David Lehman agreed , stating that although it fulfilled its theatrical and political objectives , the poem was " not very memorable " . Poet Sterling D. <unk> found Angelou 's performance " brilliant " , but was " not as enthusiastic about it as a text " . Burr stated that the negative reviews of Angelou 's poem , like the majority of the reviews about her other poetry , was due to their elitism and narrow views of poetry , which were limited to written forms rather than spoken ones like " On the Pulse of Morning " , which was written to recite aloud and perform . Burr compared the response of literary critics to Angelou 's poem with critics of Frost 's poem : " Frost 's powerful reading served to supplement the poem in the sense of enhancing it , while Angelou 's powerful reading of her poem supplemented it in the sense of making evident its inadequacy and lack . " 
 Angelou 's recitation of " On the Pulse of Morning " resulted in more fame and recognition for her previous works , and broadened her appeal " across racial , economic , and educational boundaries " . The week after Angelou 's recitation , sales of the paperback version of her books and poetry rose by 300 – 600 percent . Bantam Books had to reprint 400 @,@ 000 copies of all her books to keep up with the demand . Random House , which published Angelou 's hardcover books and published the poem later that year , reported that they sold more of her books in January 1993 than they did in all of 1992 , accounting for a 1200 percent increase . The sixteen @-@ page publication of the poem became a best @-@ seller , and the recording of the poem was awarded a Grammy Award . 
 = Hygrophorus bakerensis = 
 Hygrophorus bakerensis , commonly known as the Mt . Baker waxy cap , the brown almond waxy cap or the tawny almond waxy cap , is a species of fungus in the Hygrophoraceae family . It is characterized by its medium to large , relatively slender @-@ <unk> fruit bodies with an almond odor , and growth often on or near rotting conifer wood . The slimy cap is brown in the center and cream to white near its curved edges . The gills and the stem are white , and in moist environments are often covered with droplets of a translucent liquid . The mushroom is known only from the United States , where it is common in coniferous forests throughout the Pacific Northwest . It was initially collected in Washington State on Mount Baker , a volcano . Although edible , the mushroom is not considered to be of high quality . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by American mycologists Alexander H. Smith and Lexemuel Ray Hesler in a 1942 publication . The specific epithet bakerensis refers to Mount Baker , a volcano in the North Cascades of Washington State in the United States , where the mushroom was first collected . It is commonly known by various names , including the " Mt . Baker waxy cap " , the " brown almond waxy cap " , and the " tawny almond waxy cap " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Young fruit bodies of H. bakerensis have rounded caps with cottony margins that are rolled inward ; as the mushrooms mature the caps flatten out and the margins may lift upward . The diameter of the cap reaches between 4 and 15 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 and 5 @.@ 9 in ) . The center of the cap is colored yellow @-@ brown , tawny or amber , reducing to nearly white at the margin . The cap surface is slimy when wet , and sticky as it gets older and dries out . Beneath the slime layer are hairs that are plastered tightly to the surface , which clump together a few at a time to form many little streaks . The firm white flesh of the cap is thick — 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 inches ) near the stem attachment — and tapers evenly to the margin . It does not change color when cut or bruised . It has a mild taste and a characteristic fragrant odor that resembles almonds , or " crushed peach pits " . The waxy gills are decurrent or bluntly attached to the stem . The gill spacing is close to subdistant — between 56 – 88 individual gills reach the stem , with 2 – 3 tiers of short lamellulae ( shorter gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stem ) . The gills have even edges , and are narrow but become broad in large caps ( 8 – 12 mm ) , ranging in color from creamy white to pinkish @-@ buff . They do not discolor when they are bruised . Young specimens often have drops of a clear liquid beaded on the gills . The gills of dried specimens darken considerably . The stem is 7 to 14 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 to 5 @.@ 5 in ) long , 0 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick at the apex , solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , and either equal in width throughout or narrowed downward . Its color is white to pale pinkish @-@ buff , with a dry surface . The top portion of young specimens have a cottony , fine whitish powder near the top , but this sloughs off as it matures . Like the gills , the top of the stem is often beaded with drops of translucent liquid in moist weather . 
 The spores are ellipsoid , smooth , and measure 7 – 9 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 µm . They are yellowish when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells in the hymenium ) are four @-@ spored , and measure 40 – 54 by 6 – 8 µm . There are no cystidia on the gill faces or edges . The cap cuticle is an ixotrichoderm — a layer of gelatinized tissue where the distal portion of the filamentous hyphae are different lengths and the hyphae themselves are arranged perpendicular to the surface ; this layer of gelatinous hyphae is between 100 and 250 µm thick . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of the cuticle and the gill tissue . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 The mushroom is edible , but considered " low @-@ quality " . Smith does not recommend the mushroom for consumption , noting " I have been informed by a number of collectors that the species is edible , but many of them thought it was a Clitocybe or a Tricholoma ! " . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Hygrophorus <unk> is very similar in overall appearance , differing only in having a stem made slimy by a gelatinous partial veil . H. <unk> is another lookalike species , but has a farinaceous odor ( like raw potatoes ) and a bitter taste . H. <unk> is a European species found under oaks . The " clay waxy cap " ( H. <unk> ) is another lookalike European species ; there is a North American equivalent H. <unk> var. <unk> found at high elevations in the Sierra Nevada . Other North American species of Hygrophorus with an odor of almonds include H. agathosmus ( which has a gray cap ) , H. monticola ( larger spores ) , and H. vinicolor ( which has larger spores and an unpleasant taste ) . Collybia oregonensis has a similar coloration and odor , but has adnexed or notched and non @-@ waxy gills . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Hygrophorus bakerensis is an ectomycorrhizal species , and forms a mutualistic relationship with compatible host plant by forming a sheath around their root tips . In this way , the fungus gains carbon and other essential organic substances from the tree and in return helps the trees take up water , mineral salts and metabolites . It can also fight off parasites and predators such as nematodes and soil pathogens . Associated tree species include Douglas @-@ fir . The fruit bodies of H. bakerensis grow scattered , clustered , or in groups on the forest floor under conifers . They are common at elevations of 1 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 to 1 @,@ 220 m ) throughout the Pacific Northwest region of the United States and the northern Rocky Mountains , and have been collected from California , Idaho , Washington , and Oregon . It has been found as far north as Hazelton , British Columbia east to Quebec , Canada . Fruit bodies typically appear from September to December , and they can be very common . 
 = Isaac Perrins = 
 Isaac Perrins was an English bareknuckle prizefighter and 18th @-@ century engineer . A man reputed to possess prodigious strength but a mild manner , he fought and lost one of the most notorious boxing matches of the era , a physically mismatched contest against the English Champion Tom Johnson . Such was the mismatch that Perrins was described as Hercules fighting a boy . 
 During the period when he was prizefighting Perrins worked for Boulton and Watt , manufacturers of steam engines , based at their Soho Foundry , Birmingham , but also travelled around the country and at times acted as an informant on people who were thought to have breached his employer 's patents . In the later years of his life he also ran a public house in Manchester and undertook engineering work on his own account . He was appointed to lead the Manchester fire brigade in 1799 , and died a little over 12 months later in the performance of his duties . 
 = = Early life = = 
 There is little information regarding Issac Perrins ' early life , but he was probably born in about 1751 . His father , also called Isaac , worked for Boulton and Watt erecting stationary steam engines in the West Midlands until his death in 1780 . In that year Isaac junior was offered work in Cornwall by the business but turned it down . He subsequently accepted a Birmingham @-@ based job with the firm in 1782 . 
 = = Prizefighting = = 
 <unk> fighting was " particularly popular " in Birmingham during Perrins ' lifetime . From a legal standpoint such fights ran the risk of being classified as disorderly assemblies but in practice the authorities were concerned mainly about the number of criminals congregating there . The patronage of the aristocracy – including royal princes and dukes – and other wealthy people ensured that any legal scrutiny was generally benign , in particular because fights could take place on private estates . There was increased support for the sport from around 1786 because of the interest shown in it by the Prince of Wales ( later King George IV ) and his brothers , the future King William IV and Duke of Kent . 
 Prizefighting in early 18th @-@ century England took many forms rather than just pugilism , which was referred to by noted swordsman and then boxing champion James Figg as " the noble science of defence " . By the middle of the century the term was generally used to denote boxing fights only . The appeal of prizefighting at that time has been compared to that of duelling , with historian Adrian Harvey saying that 
 Patriotic writers often extolled the manly sports of the British , claiming that they reflected a courageous , robust , individualism in which the nation could take pride . <unk> was regarded as humane and fair and its practice was presented in chivalrous terms . It was also a symbol of national courage , embodying the worth which Englishmen placed upon their own individual honour . The French , it was argued , did not like pugilism because they were not a free people and relied on the authorities to resolve their disputes . By contrast , the British dealt with their own problems in a straightforward manner , according to established rules of fair play . 
 Showell 's Dictionary of Birmingham reported that although pugilism was long practised in the area the first local records it could find were of a prizefight on 7 October 1782 at Coleshill between Isaac Perrins , " the knock @-@ kneed <unk> from Soho " , and a professional called Jemmy Sargent . The fighters received 100 guineas each . Perrins won in around six minutes , after knocking Sargent down thirteen times . Perrins ' friends apparently won £ 1 @,@ 500 with their betting . This record is an exception to the rule : the records of fights are not detailed for this period and particularly so in the case of those which did not involve men from London . Unless a death or some other remarkable incident occurred , the information is scarce . 
 London was the premier centre for boxing because the aristocratic supporters of the sport dispersed to their country estates during the summer months but tended to congregate in the city for the winter period . Birmingham was often portrayed as second only to London for the sport and in 1789 there were a series of challenges issued by fighters from the Birmingham area to opponents based around London . The challenges were intended to demonstrate the level of organisation and confidence among the Birmingham boxers and their supporters . Three of these challenges were accepted , including that from Perrins to Tom Johnson . Perrins had already issued a general challenge , offering to fight any man in England for a prize of 500 guineas , having beaten all challengers in the counties around Birmingham . 
 The Perrins – Johnson fight took place at Banbury on 22 October 1789 and was billed as a battle between Birmingham and London as well as for the English Championship . The venue had been intended to be Newmarket during a race meeting but permission could not be obtained . The two men were around the same age but physically very different . Perrins stood 6 ' 2 " ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) tall and weighed 238 pounds ( 108 kg ) , while Johnson was 5 ' 10 " ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) and weighed 196 pounds ( 89 kg ) . It was claimed that Perrins had lifted 896 pounds ( 406 kg ) of iron with ease , and he was " universally allowed to possess much skill and excellent bottom " . That is , it was acknowledged that he was skilful and courageous . The physical mismatch was later described as a fight between Hercules , in the form of Perrins , and a boy . 
 The first five minutes of competition saw neither man strike a blow and then when Perrins tried to make contact Johnson dodged and felled Perrins in return . Although Perrins recovered to hold the upper hand in the first few rounds , Johnson then began to dance around the ring , forcing Perrins to follow to make a fight of it . This " shifting " confused Perrins because the custom at the time was for the fighters to stand still and hit each other , but the rules for this particular fight did not prevent it . Nor did they specify what should happen if a contestant fell to the ground , which is what Johnson did to avoid being hit – this action was thought by the spectators to be unsporting but was permitted by the two umpires . Before long both fighters showed signs of their opponent 's attacks , with first Perrins and then Johnson suffering cut eyes and then further damage to their faces . By the fight 's end Perrins ' head " had scarcely the traces left of a human being " , according to Pierce Egan in his history of boxing . The contest lasted 62 rounds , which took a total of 75 minutes to complete , until Perrins became totally exhausted . Tony Gee has said that 
 Perrins had overwhelming physical advantages but , owing to his naïvety , no clause was inserted in the articles of agreement to prevent " shifting " ... Moreover , Perrins was inexperienced in the subterfuges of the sport and found himself outwitted by his artful adversary . 
 A celebrated champion , Jack Broughton , and his supporters had gone some way to codifying some rules in 1743 , based on work by an earlier champion called James Figg , but by Johnson 's time they were still very loose in interpretation and implementation . 
 Perrins ' supporters had gambled heavily on him because of his reputation and his advantage in size . In the event it was a major supporter of Johnson , a Thomas Bullock , who gained ; he won £ 20 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 220 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) from his bets in favour of Johnson and gifted the victor £ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 The event was recorded in The Gentleman 's Magazine of that month 
 ... a great boxing match took place ... between two <unk> , Perrins and Johnson : for which a turf stage had been erected 5 foot 6 inches high , and about 40 feet square . The combatants set @-@ to at one in the afternoon ; and , after sixty @-@ two rounds of fair and hard fighting , victory was declared in favour of Johnson , exactly at fifteen minutes after two . The number of persons of family and fortune , who interested themselves in this brutal conquest , is astonishing : many of whom , it is proper to add , paid dearly for their diversion . 
 The contestants received 250 guineas each , with Johnson also receiving two @-@ thirds of the entrance takings ( after costs ) and Perrins receiving the other third . The net takings were £ 800 , with the number of spectators variously stated as being 3 @,@ 000 or 5 @,@ 000 . Johnson called on Perrins and left him a guinea to buy himself a drink before leaving Banbury . The fight had proved to be " one of the hardest , cleanest and most brilliant encounters that ever took place " . 
 Copper medals were struck to commemorate each of the contestants . The obverse side of these contained a picture of the respective fighter ; the reverse had the Latin inscription Bella ! <unk> bella ! ( a quotation from Virgil which can be translated as wars , horrible wars ) and the words Strength and magnanimity in the case of Perrins , and Science and intrepidity for that of Johnson . Chaloner has speculated that these may have been produced by his employers and says that they bear similarities with the work of a French die maker called <unk> who was supplying the firm with industrial items from at least 1791 . The National Portrait Gallery holds two pictures of the Banbury fight , one being an etching published by George <unk> in 1812 , and the other by Joseph <unk> in 1789 . 
 It is possible that his last fight was an 85 @-@ minute contest at Shrewsbury in July 1790 . This was widely reported in the London press and that of provincial cities but was subsequently denied by newspapers more local to the event . There were unsuccessful attempts after that date to match him against Ben Bryan ( sometimes known as Ben Brian , Ben Brain or Ben Bryant ) , who had by that time defeated Johnson . Indeed , these attempts , conducted by Daniel Mendoza , did not help the cause of his employment with Boulton and Watt as the firm thought that they were a distraction and expressed concern regarding his commitment to his work . 
 Despite the brutal nature of prizefighting , it was the opinion of boxing historian Henry Downes Miles , in his book <unk> , that Perrins was of a " lamb @-@ like disposition " and an intelligent , modest , discerning , and well @-@ liked man . He was also jolly , full of anecdotes , and ever ready to sing a tune , all of which stood him in good stead when he became a publican . Nonetheless , he was " an erratic histrionic genius , whose reckless riot ruined and extinguished his higher gifts " . 
 = = Work = = 
 Employed as a foreman by Boulton and Watt in Birmingham , Perrins was sent around the country by the firm . In 1787 he visited Scotland , from where he reported on an invention by the <unk> which might possibly have infringed a patent held by his employers , although Watt was disparaging of the device and its creator . He installed the first Boulton and Watt stationary steam engine in Manchester , at Drinkwater 's Mill in 1789 . He was there again by June 1791 , when he spotted a copy of a Boulton and Watt product in Deansgate , one of many examples which infringed the firm 's patents . An engine had been built by Joshua Wrigley and used a " smokeless fire @-@ place " similar to one patented by Boulton and Watt , although in this instance the matter was not pursued any further by them . 
 His position in the firm was sufficiently elevated that he received business correspondence at the factory ; for example , a letter to Perrins survives from October 1791 , when a John Stratford sought his advice . Perrins was educated and literate by the standards of his time , although economic historian Eric Robinson has said that all engine @-@ erectors needed to be literate to understand fitting instructions sent to their work site by their employers . 
 Perrins eventually moved to Manchester permanently in 1793 , to run a public house . This was not an unusual thing for retired <unk> then : they often received the proceeds of a financial collection by their supporters to enable them to buy a licence to operate such premises and " today 's fighter was merely tomorrow 's publican in waiting " . In a 1901 review of sporting prints titled The old and new pugilism , which lamented the passing of the style and the discipline of prize @-@ fighting , " the goal of the successful pugilist was a sporting public house ... they were generally in side or back streets , where the house did not command a transient trade . Most of these sporting " pubs " had a large room at the back or upstairs , which was open one night a week ( preferably Saturday ) , for public sparring , which was always conducted by a pugilist of some note . " 
 As well as running his public house , Perrins continued to do work for Boulton and Watt , and was an accredited engine @-@ <unk> for them . In 1794 he was dismissed from employment by them due to his drunkenness . He had also been arguing with another of the firm 's engineers , James Lawson , had upset customers with his manner and was accused of failing to maintain the engines in the Manchester area to a satisfactory standard . He tried to rebuff the last charge in particular , on the grounds that the firm did not pay him a retainer for the maintenance work 
 If you had allowed me a competency to have kept them clean , I should not be afraid of <unk> ( sic ) my hands with doing it as some of your servants are that you send here with ruffles at hands and powdered heads , more like some Lord than an engineer . It cannot be thought that I can lose my time and neglect my own business without some consideration for it 
 Even after this setback he still did some work for the firm . He tracked down and informed the firm of patent infringing copies of their engines in Leeds between 1795 – 1796 and probably also did the same thing subsequently in Lancashire . 
 Scholes 's Manchester and Salford Directory for 1797 shows Perrins as a " victualler and engineer " , living at the Fire Engine public house , 24 Leigh Street . ( The street is listed as being off George Street , which was in turn off Great Ancoats Street . It is now called George Leigh Street . ) His entry in the directory is one of the first references to the term " engineer " found in Mancunian documents , the job description at that time being a relatively new one . It has been stated that at the time of his death he was running another public house , the Neptune , but historian W. H. Chaloner believes the source of the statement to be unreliable . 
 In 1800 he was still doing engineering work for his former employers , who were beset with manufacturing problems and a shortage of engine @-@ erectors . He was also running his own business engaged in general <unk> and was still called upon by various Manchester engine owners who preferred to use his services for their machine erection and maintenance needs than those of Boulton and Watt . He had moved to New Street , Hanover Street and in December 1799 was appointed to the position of conductor of firemen and inspector of engines by the Manchester police commissioners , positions which effectively put him in charge of the fire brigade . One source – the one considered unreliable by Chaloner – has stated that he had held the position for 20 years prior to his death . 
 = = Death = = 
 Perrins ' death at the age of 50 was announced on 10 December 1800 in the Annual Register , which noted him as being an " engine @-@ worker " . The Register said that 
 This pugilistic hero will ever be remembered for the well @-@ contested battle he fought with the celebrated Johnson ... Perrins possessed most astonishing muscular power , which rendered him well calculated for a <unk> , to which was united a disposition the most placid and amiable . His death was occasioned by too violently exerting himself in assisting to save life and property at a fire in Manchester . 
 However , this announcement of his demise was premature as in fact he died on 6 January 1801 after contracting a fever because of his exertions during the rescue , which had occurred during a huge fire that burned all through the night of 10 December . The fire may be that described in The Annals of Manchester : " warehouses in Hodson Square were burnt down December 10 , caused damages to the extent of £ 50 @,@ 000 , exclusive of the buildings " . On 29 December 1800 he had been awarded £ 20 per annum by the commissioners for " meritorious services " . 
 A memorial to Perrins and his wife , Mary ( who had predeceased him by a few months ) , was placed at St John 's Church , Byrom Street , Manchester . 
 = Nation Alliance Party = 
 The Nation Alliance Party was a minor political party in British Columbia , Canada . While the party was registered with Elections BC as a provincial party , it also participated in the 2008 federal election , the 2008 municipal election , as well as the 2009 provincial election . The party sought to promote multiculturalism , advocate for rights of ethnic minorities and recent immigrants focusing on employment access , security , health care , education and overall rights and status . It was an advocacy party that sought to politically empower and enable those who do not speak English as a first language to participate in politics . 
 Led by Wei Ping Chen , the party was founded in June 2007 . Chen stood for election in Richmond in the October 2008 federal election , and for mayor of Richmond , British Columbia in the November 2008 municipal election , losing both times . In the May 2009 provincial election the party nominated two candidates , one in Richmond Centre and the other in Richmond East , neither of whom were elected but combined for 818 total votes . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Nation Alliance Party was founded in June 2007 by four people : realtor Wei Ping Chen of Delta , renovator Steven Lian from Surrey , tourism guide Randy Liu from Burnaby , and Simon Fraser University student <unk> Wang . Party leader Wei Ping Chen had immigrated to Canada from Beijing , via Australia . He witnessed the challenges that recent immigrants faced once in a new country , and how uninvolved they were in politics . Contrasted to his experience in China , Wei Ping Chen was impressed with the political freedoms available in Canada and felt motivated to start a political party . He felt that political campaigns oriented towards recent immigrants and people whose first language is not English , would empower those communities to become more politically active . 
 Wei Ping Chen was a candidate in the October 2008 federal election in the Richmond electoral district . However , because the party was not registered with Elections Canada , he ran as an independent . He came in fifth place , with 397 votes ( 0 @.@ 93 % ) , losing to the Conservative Party 's Alice Wong . 
 In November 2008 , Nation Alliance Party members nominated candidates for the municipal election in Richmond . Wei Ping Chen challenged incumbent Malcolm Brodie for the mayoral position and Kang Chen , Yang Dai , <unk> Cheung , Jian Liu , and Bai Chen were nominated for councillor positions . Like the federal campaign , they were classified as independents . The latest census at the time reported that 50 % of Richmond 's population was of Chinese descent and their campaign highlighted the language barrier faced by those who did not speak English , for example tax notices were only available in English . They participated in the all @-@ candidate forums that were translated in Cantonese and Mandarin . None of its candidates were elected with Wei Ping Chen receiving 7 % of the vote . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 The Nation Alliance Party was guided by a support for multiculturalism . Specifically , the party sought to increase translation services for people who could not read or speak English or people whose first language is not English , equivalency of academic standards , more supportive immigration services that assist transition into Canadian society , and better working conditions for recent immigrants and migrant labourers . 
 While the party did not maintain a full slate of policy positions , its candidates advocated for increasing the number of police in Richmond , especially along the SkyTrain route , protection of green spaces , support for affordable housing , and trade missions with China . They were generally in favour of lower taxes but with more spending on senior services and education . In the 2009 provincial election they campaigned against the carbon tax which the governing BC Liberal Party had implemented the previous year . 
 = = Election results = = 
 In the 2009 provincial election , the party nominated candidates in two ridings . Wei Ping Chen stood in the Richmond East riding but got only 419 votes ( 2 @.@ 27 % ) , coming in last place , losing to BC Liberal Linda Reid . In Richmond Centre , the Nation Alliance Party candidate was Kang Chen . He came in last with 399 votes ( 2 @.@ 33 % ) , losing to BC Liberal Rob Howard . The party de @-@ registered with Elections BC in May 2012 , one year prior to the next election , scheduled for May 2013 . 
 = = Finances = = 
 In 2009 provincial election both candidates only reported $ 250 worth of expenditures to Elections BC . In that same election the party claimed $ 318 in general election expenditures . 
 = 1992 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1992 Giro d 'Italia was the 75th edition of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The Giro started off in Genoa on 24 May with a 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) individual time trial . The race concluded in Milan with an 66 km ( 41 @.@ 0 mi ) individual time trial on 14 June . Twenty teams entered the race , which was won by the Spaniard Miguel Indurain of the Banesto team . Second and third respectively were the Italians Claudio Chiappucci and Franco Chioccioli . Indurain 's victory in the 1992 Giro was his first step in completing the Giro - Tour double – winning the Giro d 'Italia and Tour de France in one calendar year - becoming the sixth rider to accomplish this feat , with the first being Fausto Coppi in 1949 . 
 Thierry Marie won the events opening leg and in doing so , became the first rider to wear the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) in this edition . He held the race lead for another stage , before he lost it to eventual winner Indurain upon the conclusion of the third stage who held it for the rest of the race 's duration . Indurain built upon his advantage during the fourth and twenty @-@ second stages , both individual time trials , and protected the lead by responding to most attacks from his rivals during the mountainous stages . 
 Indurain became the first Spanish rider to win the Giro d 'Italia . Indurain also won the secondary intergiro classification . In the race 's other classifications , Lampre – Colnago rider Pavel Tonkov of Russia finished as the best rider aged 25 or under in the general classification , finishing in seventh place overall ; Mario Cipollini of the GB – MG Maglificio team was the winner of the points classification , with GB @-@ MG Maglificio finishing as the winners of the team classification , ranking each of the twenty teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Twenty teams were invited by the race organizers to participate in the 1992 edition of the Giro d 'Italia . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , which meant that the race started with a peloton of 180 cyclists . From the riders that began the race , 148 made it to the finish in Milan . 
 The twenty teams that took part in the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The starting peloton did include the previous year 's winner Franco Chioccioli . According to author Bill McGann , Miguel Indurain came into the race with the aims of riding it for preparation for the Tour de France in July . Claudio Chiappucci came into the race as a contender after finishing on the podium at the previous season 's Giro d 'Italia and Tour de France . The Spanish newspaper El País believed Indurain to be the favorite heading into the first day of racing . However , the newspaper did state that his chances were lower since his teammate Jean @-@ François Bernard was not participating in the race due to an <unk> l 'Unità writer Dario Ceccarelli and Avui writer <unk> believed that Chiappucci and Indurain were the favorites to win the overall crown . Spanish newspaper <unk> de Girona named Indurain , Chiappucci , Laurent Fignon , and Massimiliano Lelli the main contenders to win the race . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 1992 Giro d 'Italia was unveiled by race director Carmine Castellano on 30 November 1991 . It contained three time trial events , all of which were individual . There were eleven stages containing high mountains , of which four had summit finishes : stage 10 , to Monte Terminillo ; stage 14 , to Monte Bondone ; stage 18 , to Monviso ; and stage 19 , to Pila . The organizers chose to include no rest days . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 128 km ( 80 mi ) longer and lacked an opening time trial prologue . In addition , this race contained one less of half stages . 
 El País felt that the route was best suited for an all @-@ round cyclist , while stating that final 66 km ( 41 mi ) individual time trial would be decisive in determining the winner of the race . Avui writer <unk> believed that the course was the toughest in years , while also stating that many experts found that the race route was well balanced between the time spent in the mountains and the distance allocated to time trials . The race 's nineteenth stage , which began and ended in Saluzzo , was named the queen stage for the amount of difficult mountains contained in the stage . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The Giro began with a short 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) individual time trial that navigated through the streets of Genoa , which was won by Thierry Marie by a margin of three seconds . The next day of racing culminated with a bunch sprint that was won by Jolly Componibili @-@ Club 88 's Endrio Leoni after the leading two @-@ man breakaway just kilometers before the finish . Banesto controlled the pace @-@ making for most of the third stage before general classification contender Claudio Chiappucci attacked . Chiappucci attacked near the end of the stage , but was caught by his rivals . Motorola 's Maximilian Sciandri edged out Massimiliano Lelli for the stage win as the race lead shifted from Marie to Miguel Indurain . Indurain increased his advantage over the rest of the competing riders by winning the stage 4 individual time trial by thirty @-@ two seconds . 
 The race 's sixth stage was the first stage containing several climbs of great difficulty . As the stage progressed , the general classification contenders formed a group on the road . Chiappucci and Marco Giovannetti attacked a few times , with all of their attempts being marked by the other riders . The contenders all crossed the finish line together seconds after stage winner Franco Vona , with Frenchman Laurent Fignon being the only one to lose time . The following day , sprinter Guido Bontempi and Giuseppe <unk> formed a breakaway group that survived to the stage 's conclusion , with Bontempi taking the stage victory . Stages 8 and 9 both came down to field sprints won by Mario Cipollini and Bontempi , respectively . 
 The event 's tenth stage featured a summit finish to Monte Terminillo . The general classification contenders were all in a group together as they reached the final climb of the day . Piotr Ugrumov was the first of the group to attack and was joined by Roberto Conti shortly after . Behind , Indurain led a chase group that contained Andrew Hampsten , Chiappucci , Giovannetti , and Luis Herrera , while general classification hopefuls Chioccioli and Fignon dropped off the back since they could not keep pace . The group caught Conti , who was alone after Ugrumov slowed , and from there , Herrera attacked to win the stage . The next day 's route was an undulating one . Chioccioli , Roberto Pagnin , and Marco <unk> formed a breakaway group and gained an advantage of three and a half minutes over the main field which was led by Indurain 's team , Banesto . The group remained in front , Pagnin took the stage victory , and Indurain finished over two minutes later . With around nine kilometers remaining in the twelfth stage , there was an accident that saw <unk> and Giovannetti amongst others go down . The peloton continued on , gearing up for a sprint finish that Leoni won . 
 The race entered the Dolomites in the thirteenth stage . Indurain was attacked several times on the final climb of the day by Chioccioli , Giovannetti , and Chiappucci ; however , he was able to counter each attack and the group of main competitors finished together three after the stage winner , Vona . The next day was the most mountainous of the race , according to El Pais writer Paolo Viberti , as it contained the Passo Pordoi and twice climbed Monte Bondone , with the second being the end of the stage . Giorgio Furlan launched a solo attack that won him the stage as the general classification contenders attacked each other behind . Indurain marked each move that was made by his rivals , except for a last ditch effort by Chioccioli that allowed him to finish five seconds ahead of the rest of the general classification hopefuls . The next leg of the race saw a nine @-@ man group form a breakaway after the stage started . The breakaway group was not caught and reached the finish line where Castorama 's François Simon won sprint to the line . Marco Saligari won the sixteenth stage after participating in a breakaway that lasted around 146 km ( 90 @.@ 7 mi ) . 
 The eighteenth stage featured a summit finish to the Pian del Re . After several rival riders attacked Indurain , a group of general classification riders were leading on the road going into the final climb of the day . As the climb wore on , the group thinned and Gatorade – Chateau d 'Ax 's Giovannetti attacked on a false flat with about 500 m ( 1 @,@ 640 @.@ 4 ft ) remaining in the stage to win the day . Giancarlo Perini and Udo Bölts caught the nineteenth stage 's leading rider on the road , Ramon Gonzalez . Bölts attacked with two kilometers left on the day and rode solo to stage victory . Meanwhile , race leader Indurain countered all the attacks made by his rivals and maintained his advantage . 
 The event 's twentieth stage saw Chioccioli and Chiappucci attack Indurain several times . Chioccioli won the stage and was the first over most of the categorized climbs on the stage , but Indurain finished with the same time . The penultimate stage resulted in a field sprint that was won by Cipollini for his fourth victory of this edition . The final stage of the race was a 66 km ( 41 @.@ 0 mi ) individual time trial . Race leader Indurain won the stage by two minutes and forty @-@ six seconds over the second @-@ place finisher on the stage , thereby sealing his overall victory . 
 Five riders achieved multiple stage victories : Cipollini ( stages 5 , 8 , 17 , and 21 ) , Bontempi ( stages 7 and 9 ) , Leoni ( stages 2 and 12 ) , Vona ( stages 6 and 13 ) , and Indurain ( stages 4 and 22 ) . Stage wins were achieved by eleven of the twenty competing squads , six of which won multiple stages . GB @-@ MG Maglificio collected a total of seven stage wins through three riders , Cipollini , Vona , and Chioccioli ( stage 20 ) . Carrera Jeans @-@ Vagabond amassed a total of two stage victories through Bontempi . Jolly Componibili @-@ Club 88 achieved the same feat through Leoni . Castorama earned two stage wins through Marie ( stage 1 ) and Simon ( stage 15 ) . Ariostea gained two stage victories through Furlan ( stage 14 ) and Saligari ( stage 16 ) . Banesto collected two stage success through Indurain . Motorola , <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> , Lotus @-@ <unk> , Gatorade @-@ Chateau d 'Ax , and Team Telekom all won a single stage at the Giro , the first through Sciandri ( stage 3 ) , the second through Herrera ( stage 10 ) , the third with Pagnin ( stage 11 ) , the fourth with Giovannetti ( stage 18 ) , and the fifth through Bölts ( stage 19 ) . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Five different jerseys were worn during the 1992 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Passo Pordoi . The first rider to cross the Pordoi Pass was Italian Claudio Chiappucci . The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification , a ranking decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1968 were eligible for it . 
 The intergiro classification was marked by a blue jersey . The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification , in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped . As the race goes on , their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also one classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = = = Team classification = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Miguel Indurain entered the Tour de France in July as the favorite to win the race . He would go on to win the race after taking the lead upon the finish of the thirteenth stage . By winning the Tour , he became the sixth rider to complete the Giro - Tour double in history . Indurain would go on to repeat this feat again the following calendar year . 
 = You ( George Harrison song ) = 
 " You " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released as the opening track of his 1975 album Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) . It was also the album 's lead single , becoming a top 20 hit in America and reaching number 9 in Canada . A 45 @-@ second instrumental portion of the song , titled " A Bit More of You " , appears on Extra Texture also , opening side two of the original LP format . Harrison wrote " You " in 1970 as a song for Ronnie Spector , formerly of the Ronettes , and wife of Harrison 's All Things Must Pass co @-@ producer Phil Spector . The composition reflects Harrison 's admiration for 1960s American soul / R & B , particularly Motown . 
 In February 1971 , Ronnie Spector recorded " You " in London for a proposed solo album on the Beatles ' Apple record label , but the recording remained unissued . Four years later , Harrison returned to this backing track while making his final album for Apple Records , in Los Angeles . The released recording features the 1971 contributions from Leon Russell , Jim Gordon and others , with further instrumentation and vocals overdubbed in 1975 , notably a series of saxophone solos by Jim Horn . On release , the song was well received by the majority of music critics , who viewed it as a return to form for Harrison after his disappointing 1974 North American tour and the accompanying Dark Horse album . Dave Marsh of Rolling Stone hailed it as Harrison 's best work since his 1970 – 71 hit song " My Sweet Lord " ; author Ian Inglis describes " You " as " a near @-@ perfect pop song " . 
 Capitol Records included " You " as one of just six Harrison solo hits , alongside compositions of his performed with the Beatles , on the 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison . For the first time since the debut CD release of Extra Texture in the early 1990s , " You " was remastered , along with its parent album , as part of Harrison 's 2014 Apple Years reissues . Lisa <unk> and Les Fradkin are among the artists who have covered the song . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 George Harrison 's admiration for American soul / R & B acts dated back to the early 1960s , to singles by Doris Troy , Marvin Gaye , Mary Wells and others . A similar influence on him and his fellow Beatles was that era 's girl group sound , as reflected in the band 's choice of cover versions during 1962 – 63 . In 1969 , while producing Billy Preston 's debut album on Apple Records , Harrison worked with Doris Troy in London and signed her to the label as a recording artist , songwriter and producer . Another of his favourite female vocalists was Ronnie Spector – formerly known as Veronica Bennett , lead singer of girl group the Ronettes until 1967 , and latterly married to American producer Phil Spector . After co @-@ producing Harrison 's acclaimed All Things Must Pass triple album in 1970 , following the break @-@ up of the Beatles , Spector was granted an unofficial role as head of A & R for Apple Records , and had previously insisted that his wife record for the label . That year , Harrison wrote the soul @-@ inspired " You " as what he later termed " a Ronettes sort of song " , specifically for Ronnie Spector . 
 The main lyrics – " I ... love ... you " and " You ... love ... me " , in verses one and two , respectively – make it one of Harrison 's simplest compositions . Author Ian Inglis observes that Harrison 's lyrics here recall the Beatles ' use of personal pronouns in songs such as " Love Me Do " , " From Me to You " and " She Loves You " to effectively " include the listener in the song 's narrative " . 
 A deviation from these lines occurs only with the repeated bridges : 
 And when I 'm holding you , what a feeling 
 Seems so good to be true 
 That I 'm telling you all that I must be dreaming . 
 Harrison musical biographer Simon Leng notes the importance of soul music in Harrison 's solo career during the 1970s and views " You " as a song that most obviously demonstrates the influence of Motown on its composer . Inglis suggests that Harrison 's former Beatles bandmate Paul McCartney adopted part of the melody of " You " for his 1976 hit single with Wings , " Silly Love Songs " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 = = = 1971 basic track = = = 
 According to Leng , Harrison taped demos of " You " during the lengthy recording sessions for All Things Must Pass . The sessions for a proposed Ronnie Spector solo album began at London 's Abbey Road Studios on 2 February 1971 , with Harrison and Phil Spector again co @-@ producing and Phil McDonald as recording engineer . 
 Since the Ronettes ' break @-@ up in early 1967 , Ronnie Spector had worked only sporadically , and she later claimed to have been a virtual prisoner in her husband 's 23 @-@ room Los Angeles mansion during this period . She flew in from California for the sessions , which featured three musicians who had been part of the so @-@ called " blue @-@ eyed soul school " of the late 1960s , via their association with Delaney & Bonnie : multi @-@ instrumentalist Leon Russell on piano , Jim Gordon on drums , and Carl Radle on bass . In addition to Harrison , who supplied guitar , another participant was Gary Wright , on keyboards , reprising his role on All Things Must Pass . For two days , this group of musicians taped the basic tracks for " You " and five other songs written or co @-@ written by Harrison , with Ronnie Spector recording guide vocals only . The sessions then " broke down " , according to authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter , due to " Phil 's health issues " , which had similarly interrupted the recording of All Things Must Pass in 1970 . 
 Despite the fact that " You " was tailor @-@ made for his wife , Phil Spector opted not to issue the song as her comeback single ; he had likewise held back recordings by the Ronettes and the Crystals , another act signed to his label , Philles Records , in the 1960s . With the solo @-@ album plan abruptly abandoned , another Harrison original from the sessions , " Try Some , Buy Some " , was completed and selected for release as a Ronnie Spector single on Apple . A minor hit in America only , that song 's disappointing commercial reception led to the cancellation of a second single , which was to be " You " . 
 = = = 1975 overdubs = = = 
 Four years after the Abbey Road sessions , Harrison revisited " You " while completing his final album for Apple Records , the soul @-@ influenced Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) , at A & M Studios in Los Angeles . His standing with music critics had recently plummeted following a North American tour with Ravi Shankar in November – December 1974 and his accompanying album , Dark Horse . These two projects had been marred by Harrison 's laryngitis @-@ ravaged singing voice ; in addition , a number of concert reviewers had condemned Harrison for refusing to indulge the public 's nostalgia for the Beatles , and for his on @-@ stage spiritual pronouncements . Looking to rehabilitate himself with critics and his audience in early 1975 , Harrison had what author Robert Rodriguez describes as " at least one ace in the commercial hole ... the Motown @-@ esque ' You ' " . 
 Harrison recorded his own lead vocal onto the 1971 basic track , as he had done earlier with " Try Some , Buy Some " , for Living in the Material World ( 1973 ) . On 31 May 1975 , further overdubs were carried out on " You " , comprising a second drum part , by Jim Keltner ; tenor sax solos from Jim Horn ; and ambient keyboards , played by David Foster . The overdubs added to the song 's radio @-@ friendly qualities , particularly through the use of ARP String Synthesizer , but Madinger and Easter note that Keltner 's drum part , which is higher in the mix than Gordon 's and was played in half @-@ time , produces an effect whereby the song 's tempo appears to be slower than on the 1971 recording . With a significant amount of post @-@ production work having been carried out in Los Angeles , Spector did not receive a co @-@ producer 's credit for " You " as he had for Harrison 's version of " Try Some , Buy Some " . 
 In September 1975 Harrison told BBC Radio 1 's Paul Gambaccini that it was " such a good backing track " originally , yet he had forgotten about its existence until coming across the tape years later . In a 1987 interview , Harrison acknowledged the difficulty he had in singing the song in so high a key ; " it was recorded in Ronnie 's register , " he explains in his 1980 autobiography , " a bit high for me . " Although Ronnie Spector 's name did not appear in the album credits , snippets of her 1971 guide vocal remain on Harrison 's released recording . Spector 's voice can be heard intermittently from the two @-@ minute mark onwards , with her signature " <unk> oh @-@ oh oh @-@ oh " s audible during the song 's playout . 
 = = Release = = 
 An upbeat pop song in a similar vein to Harrison 's 1971 hit " What Is Life " , " You " was the most obvious choice for a single off Extra Texture . It was released in advance of the album , backed by " World of Stone " , on 12 September 1975 in Britain ( as Apple R <unk> ) and three days later in the United States ( as Apple 1884 ) . The picture sleeve in Britain featured a photo of a smiling Harrison taken on stage by 1974 tour photographer Henry Grossman ; the US picture sleeve incorporated Roy Kohara 's humorous design for the album , showing blue lettering on a vivid orange background . In another example of the upbeat mood that was otherwise lacking in the musical content of Extra Texture , the single 's face labels showed the familiar Apple Records logo as an apple core , a pun on the demise of the company . 
 In the UK , where Harrison had undertaken promotional activities for the first time for Extra Texture , " You " was Radio 1 's Record of the Week , guaranteeing it substantial airplay . The song peaked no higher than Harrison 's previous hit there , " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " , at number 38 , however . As with his Dark Horse singles , " You " performed better in America , where it held the number 20 position for two weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 , during a ten @-@ week chart stay . 
 The song served as both the opener for Extra Texture as well as , in the form of a 45 @-@ second instrumental portion titled " A Bit More of You " , the first track on side two of the original LP . Harrison biographer Dale Allison dismisses this reprise with the words " It 's filler " , while Leng suggests its purpose was to " fashion a soul mood " for the song that follows , the pop @-@ soul ballad " Can 't Stop Thinking About You " . The full version of " You " appears on the 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison as one of only six selections from Harrison 's solo career up to the end of 1975 . Having last been remastered for the 1991 – 92 CD release of Extra Texture , the song was remastered for inclusion on Harrison 's Apple Years 1968 – 75 reissues , released in September 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 After the so @-@ called " Dark Hoarse " debacle in 1974 , and with his singing voice now healed , music critics viewed " You " as a return to form for Harrison . The tone of the song suggested that , in the words of Robert Rodriguez , " the irritable , gravel @-@ voiced mystic on tour the previous year had been but an illusion " – an impression that was supported by the lightheartedness evident in the parent album 's artwork and Harrison 's self @-@ deprecating " <unk> " producer 's moniker . 
 Dave Marsh of Rolling Stone wrote of the song : " ' You , ' the single which preceded Extra Texture ... is not only the best thing he has done since 1971 's ' My Sweet Lord , ' but also promised some of the prestige and credibility he lost with last year 's <unk> album ( Dark Horse ) and fizzled tour . " In the NME , Neil Spencer opined : " ' You ' seems at least to proclaim a return to energy . It has the kind of semi @-@ Spector production that was spread all over All Things Must Pass . It bounds along OK , Harrison 's double @-@ tracked vocals gasp convincingly , and it deserves to be the hit that it will be . " Writing later in the 1970s , however , in their book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , Roy Carr and Tony Tyler dismissed it with the words : " <unk> , lacklustre , [ with ] would @-@ be singalongs which quite fail to arouse . " 
 = = = Retrospective assessment and legacy = = = 
 Modern @-@ day critical opinion of the song is almost unanimously favourable . In his review of Harrison 's 1987 album Cloud Nine , for Creem magazine , Bill Holdship included the track among the " scattered brilliant moments " of Harrison 's career post @-@ All Things Must Pass , saying : " ' You ' from the Extra Texture LP sounds like punk ( depends on your definition ) pop as Phil Spector might 've done it , and remains a killer to this day . And when I saw Harrison perform in 1974 , he put on a far better show than the one I would later see Wings do . " 
 Writing in the posthumous Rolling Stone Press tribute , Harrison , in 2002 , Mikal Gilmore similarly identified " You " as a highlight of the artist 's work in the mid to late 1970s . In the same publication , Greg Kot deemed it to be " a terrific single " , adding : " Its roaring Wall of Sound arrangement suits Harrison well , right down to its closing quote of the Ronettes ' ' Be My Baby ' . " In a January 2002 review of Harrison 's solo releases , for Goldmine magazine , Dave Thompson described the song as " magnificent " . 
 AllMusic 's Lindsay Planer admires it as a " propulsive and rocking love song ... backed by one of Harrison 's most liberated and driving melodies " ; Planer also notes the " nonstop powerhouse instrumental track " , driven by Gordon and Keltner 's " double @-@ barreled percussive assault " . Richard Ginell , also writing for AllMusic , calls the song an " instantly winning " single and album @-@ opener , and rates it among the best tracks of Harrison 's solo career . 
 Reviewing Harrison 's 2014 Apple Years reissues , New Zealand Herald critic Graham Reid describes " You " as a " remarkably upbeat rocker " , while Walter Tunis of the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader considers Extra Texture to be " a delight " , from the opening , " brightly orchestrated pop of You " through to the closing track , " His Name Is Legs " . Conversely , Paul Trynka of Classic Rock opines that the song " sounds dull today , with its dated <unk> funk " , whereas " it 's the confessional songs [ on Extra Texture ] that have worn well . " 
 Among Harrison 's biographers , Simon Leng views it as " a great pop record " , noting : " ' You ' has the same surging spirit as [ Motown classics ] " Dancing in the Street " and " Heat Wave " and , as the lyrics are full of boy @-@ meets @-@ girl triteness , the groove is what carries it . " Ian Inglis identifies the song 's strengths as its lyrical simplicity , a " soaring , galloping melody ... [ that ] encapsulates the joy of reciprocated love and the liberation of rock ' n ' roll at its most exuberant " , and the quality of the musicianship on the recording , particularly Jim Horn 's contribution . Inglis concludes of " You " : " Even the slight unease [ Harrison ] has in striving to maintain some of the higher notes cannot detract from what is , quite simply , a near @-@ perfect pop song . " 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Two years after Harrison 's death from cancer in November 2001 , American singer @-@ songwriter Lisa <unk> covered " You " for the multi @-@ artist compilation He Was Fab : A Loving Tribute to George Harrison ( 2003 ) – a reading that Lindsay Planer describes as " affective " and a highlight of the album . Original Beatlemania cast member Les Fradkin released a version of the song on his 2005 tribute CD Something for George . At the New York Celebrates George Harrison Concert on 26 February 2011 , in honour of what would have been Harrison 's 68th birthday , New York band the 253 Boys performed " You " in a medley with his 1987 song " This Is Love " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals * , electric guitar , acoustic guitar * , backing vocals * 
 Ronnie Spector – vocals 
 Jim Horn – saxophone * 
 Leon Russell – piano 
 Gary Wright – electric piano 
 David Foster – organ * , string synthesizer * 
 Carl Radle – bass 
 Jim Gordon – drums , tambourine 
 Jim Keltner – drums * 
 * denotes May – June 1975 overdubs 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Luke Foster = 
 Luke James Foster ( born 8 September 1985 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a defender for National League North club Harrogate Town . 
 Foster started his career as a trainee with Sheffield Wednesday , signing a professional contract with the club at the age of 18 . He joined Scarborough on work experience in September 2004 , and was also loaned out to Conference North side Alfreton Town in February 2005 until the end of the 2004 – 05 season . On returning to his parent club , Foster was released , and joined Lincoln City in June 2005 . After failing to cement a first @-@ team place at Lincoln , he was loaned out to York City the following season on a two @-@ month loan , making a handful of appearances for the club . 
 In January 2007 , Foster was released by Lincoln , and he joined Stalybridge Celtic on a short @-@ term contract , making six appearances for the club . He left Stalybridge a month later , in order to join Oxford United on an initial six @-@ month deal . Foster went on to play over 100 times for Oxford in just under three years at the club , winning two end of season awards in the process . However , he joined Mansfield Town in January 2010 for an undisclosed fee after he was told that his contract would not be extended at Oxford . He was made club captain at Mansfield and played regularly until the end of the 2009 – 10 season . Despite this , he left the club at the end of the season and joined Stevenage on a two @-@ year contract in May 2010 , helping the club earn promotion to League One in their first ever season in the Football League . After just one season at Stevenage , Foster joined Rotherham United in June 2011 , spending an injury @-@ hit season with the club before being released . He briefly spent time at Matlock Town , before joining Preston North End in December 2012 for a six @-@ month period . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born in Mexborough , South Yorkshire , Foster began his career as a trainee with the Sheffield Wednesday youth system . He joined Conference National club Scarborough on work experience in September 2004 . Foster made his debut for Scarborough in a 1 – 0 defeat to Hereford United , coming on as a 76th minute substitute . He started the following match in the club 's 2 – 1 loss at Carlisle United , and went on to make 10 appearances during his loan spell . Foster returned to his parent club , but failed to make any first @-@ team appearances , and was subsequently loaned out to Conference North outfit Alfreton Town in February 2005 until the end of the season . He made his Alfreton debut in the club 's 3 – 0 victory against Woking in the FA Trophy . He scored his first goal for the club in a 3 – 1 loss against Southport , and scored again a week later in Alfreton 's 2 – 1 defeat against Kettering Town . His third and final goal for Alfreton came in the following game , scoring the first goal in the club 's 3 – 0 win at Barrow . He played his last game for the club in the final game of the 2004 – 05 season , in a 3 – 1 loss at Stafford Rangers . Foster played in 19 games for the club , scoring three goals . 
 On his return to Sheffield Wednesday in May 2005 , Foster was released and later joined League Two side Lincoln City on a one @-@ year contract ahead of the 2005 – 06 season . Foster made his debut for Lincoln in the club 's first game of the season , a 2 – 1 defeat to Notts County . However , he failed to hold down a first @-@ team place and had to wait a month to make another appearance for the club – coming on as a 73rd @-@ minute substitute in Lincoln 's 2 – 0 win against Stockport County . However , he was unable to string a series of appearances together throughout the campaign , and made 17 appearances , scoring once in a 5 – 0 win against Grimsby Town on 25 March 2006 . Despite a lack of first @-@ team appearances , Foster signed an extended one @-@ year contract at the end of the season . However , Foster did not feature again for Lincoln during the 2006 – 07 campaign and after training with York City , he joined the Conference National team on a one @-@ month emergency loan on 5 October 2006 due to injuries to defenders , making his debut for the club the following day in a 1 – 0 win against Aldershot Town . This loan deal was extended for a second month in November , but after Foster suffered an ankle injury during the last week of the loan , he returned to his parent club in December . He made his last appearance for York in the club 's 1 – 0 loss to League One side Bristol City in the FA Cup first round . He made seven appearances for York during a two @-@ month loan spell with the club . 
 Foster returned to Lincoln in December , and a month later was told by the club that he was free to find another club after being deemed surplus to requirements at Sincil Bank . Shortly after , in January 2007 , he mutually agreed to cancel his contract with Lincoln , enabling him to join Conference North side Stalybridge Celtic . He made his debut for Stalybridge in the FA Trophy , starting in a 1 – 1 draw against Kettering Town , scoring an own goal just before half @-@ time . He scored his first goal for the club against one of his former employers , Alfreton , netting the winner in a 2 – 1 victory . He made six appearances for the club in all competitions , scoring once . 
 = = = Oxford United = = = 
 After just a month at Stalybridge , Foster returned to the highest tier in non @-@ League football , joining Oxford United in February 2007 . He made his Oxford debut two weeks after signing for the club , starting in a 1 – 0 home defeat to Kidderminster Harriers . He played nine times during the club 's 2006 – 07 campaign , scoring once in a 2 – 0 win over St Albans City at Clarence Park . At the end of the season , he signed a new one @-@ year contract with Oxford keeping him contracted to the club throughout the 2007 – 08 season . Foster featured off the bench in the club 's first two fixtures of the season , but only made one further appearance during September 2007 – with Oxford manager Jim Smith stating that Foster needed to " improve the way he leads his life " in order to " stand a chance " of getting back into the Oxford first @-@ team . After this , Foster witnessed an upturn in form , featuring regularly until the end of the season , although he was given a one match suspension following his sending off against Northwich Victoria in March 2008 . At the end of the 2007 – 08 season , in which he made 39 appearances , he won Oxford 's Supporters Player of the Year and Players ' Player of the Year awards . As a result of his impressive form , he signed a new two @-@ year contract with the club in July 2008 . 
 During the 2008 – 09 season , Foster continued to feature regularly for Oxford , starting in both of the club 's two defeats at the start of the season – a 3 – 0 defeat to newly promoted Barrow , followed by a 1 – 0 loss to Weymouth at the Kassam Stadium . He assisted one of the goals in the following game , a 6 – 3 win against Eastbourne Borough . However , in Oxford 's next game against Wrexham , Foster was sent off after just 11 minutes for " denying Wrexham 's Shaun Whalley a clear goalscoring opportunity " . As a result , he missed the next two games , returning to first @-@ team action against Ebbsfleet United in late August 2008 , but was again sent off for a foul on Craig Stone . Foster did not feature again in the first @-@ team for another month , when playing in a 3 – 1 win against Cambridge United . He consequently regained his place in Oxford 's defence , and played regularly until the end of the season . He scored his only goal of the season in a 2 – 1 victory over Lewes in February 2009 . Foster made 44 appearances for the club during the season , scoring one goal , as Oxford narrowly missed out on a place in the Conference Premier play @-@ offs . The following campaign , Foster was again a regular under manager Chris Wilder , appearing in all of Oxford 's games up until December 2009 . He scored his first goal of the season in Oxford 's 1 – 1 draw against Barrow on 3 October 2009 . On 28 November 2009 , Foster was sent off in a 1 – 1 draw against Barrow in the FA Cup , resulting in Barrow being awarded a penalty kick and subsequently scoring . During January 2010 , manager Chris Wilder revealed that Oxford would not be extending Foster 's contract in the summer , stating " we were not going to extend Luke 's contract after the summer . He wanted that option to pursue offers from other clubs and he has done that " . 
 = = = Mansfield Town = = = 
 He subsequently entered talks with Cambridge United in January 2010 , although nothing materialised . Mansfield Town also enquired about signing Foster , although they initially decided against making a bid , citing Foster 's " high wages as the main stumbling block " . However , a week later , Mansfield signed Foster on a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract for an undisclosed fee and he was instantly appointed the club captain . He made his debut in Mansfield 's 4 – 1 victory over Forest Green Rovers , but was sent off in a 1 – 0 defeat to York in March , which resulted in him receiving a two @-@ match suspension . He made 16 appearances for Mansfield during the second half of the 2009 – 10 season . At the end of the season Foster made a comment on his Facebook page , calling the club a " shambles " , but later apologised to both the club and its fans . He was released in May 2010 , with Mansfield boss David Holdsworth saying " it 's a practical decision for both the club and Luke " . 
 = = = Stevenage = = = 
 Foster joined newly promoted League Two side Stevenage on a two @-@ year contract on 31 May 2010 . Foster made his Stevenage debut in the club 's first ever Football League fixture , a 2 – 2 draw against Macclesfield Town , playing the whole game in the centre of defence . After the Macclesfield game , Foster did not appear in the first @-@ team until late September 2010 , coming on as a late substitute in Stevenage 's 1 – 0 away win at Lincoln City . He then appeared as a 52nd @-@ minute substitute in the club 's victory over Burton Albion , but was sent @-@ off for a foul on Shaun Harrad . Foster scored his first goal for Stevenage in January 2011 , scoring the first goal of the game in Stevenage 's 4 – 2 home win over Barnet . Foster received his second red card of the 2010 – 11 season in a game against Northampton Town , receiving the red card for a foul on Nana <unk> @-@ <unk> , a game that Stevenage went on to lose 2 – 0 . Stevenage appealed against the sending off , but the appeal was subsequently rejected . This ultimately meant that Foster had played his last game of the 2010 – 11 season , serving a four @-@ match suspension that ruled him out of Stevenage 's end of season 3 – 3 draw with Bury , as well as the club 's subsequent play @-@ off campaign . Foster played 23 times for Stevenage in his only season with the club , scoring once , and the team went on to win promotion into League One via the play @-@ offs . 
 = = = Rotherham United = = = 
 Foster signed for League Two side Rotherham United on 20 June 2011 . He signed a one @-@ year contract with the club , with an option of a second year . Foster made his debut for the club in a 3 – 0 home victory against Gillingham on 27 August 2011 , coming on as an 84th @-@ minute substitute with Rotherham already holding a three @-@ goal advantage . After making no further first @-@ team appearances the following month , Foster was made available for loan by manager Andy Scott . Scott stated Foster lacked both desire and fitness since signing for the club — " If you want to be match fit , you get yourself match fit . You can work in training , you can stay behind , you have days off , you can get yourself fit . Luke has not been in the side and that tells you everything you need to know " . However , no loan move materialised , and Foster made his second appearance for Rotherham in a 3 – 3 away draw at Morecambe on 25 October 2011 . He appeared as a 27th @-@ minute substitute in the club 's following match four days later , a 1 – 1 draw against Northampton Town , and subsequently made his first start in a 2 – 0 home victory over Aldershot Town on 5 November — Rotherham 's first win in 10 matches . In December 2011 , Rotherham manager Andy Scott revealed that Foster would miss the rest of the 2011 – 12 season as a result of a cruciate ligament damage sustained in a match against Hereford United on 10 December 2011 . He was released by Rotherham in May 2012 , having made six appearances for the club . 
 = = = Matlock Town = = = 
 Ahead of the 2012 – 13 season , Foster went on trial with League One side Sheffield United . He played in the club 's opening pre @-@ season fixture , coming on as a 62nd @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 1 draw with Ilkeston . No move materialised , and Foster signed non @-@ contract terms with Northern Premier League Premier Division side Matlock Town to build match fitness ahead of a return to the professional game . He made his Matlock debut just a day after signing , on 18 August , playing the whole match as Matlock opened the season with a 5 – 0 home loss to Nantwich Town . Foster made ten appearances in all competitions for the club , leaving in October 2012 . 
 = = = Preston North End = = = 
 After a month without a club , Foster went on trial at League One club Preston North End in November 2012 , managed by former Stevenage manager Graham Westley . The trial proved successful , and he signed on non @-@ contract terms with the club on 18 December 2012 . He made his debut on the same day in a 3 – 3 draw against Bury in the Football League Trophy , with Preston progressing following a penalty shoot @-@ out . After impressing in his first four matches for the club , Foster signed a permanent contract , keeping him at Preston for the remainder of the 2012 – 13 season . In the club 's next match , on 10 January 2013 , a televised 3 – 2 defeat to Coventry City at the Ricoh Arena in the Football League Trophy , Foster scored his only goal for Preston , briefly restoring parity in the match as Coventry scored two injury @-@ time goals to win the match . Foster made eight appearances in all competitions during his time with the club , and at the end of the season , new Preston manager Simon Grayson told him that his contract would not be renewed when it expired in June 2013 . 
 = = = Return to Lincoln City = = = 
 On 1 August 2013 , Foster agreed to rejoin Conference Premier side Lincoln City on a one @-@ year @-@ contract . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Foster signed for Lincoln 's Conference Premier rivals Southport on 18 June 2014 . On 24 February 2016 , he joined National League North club Harrogate Town on a contract until the end of 2015 – 16 , in order to move closer to his home in Barnsley . 
 = = International career = = 
 Foster was named on standby for the England C team in November 2007 for a game against Finland C , but did not receive a call @-@ up . He was called up again to represent England C in a game against Bosnia and Herzegovina in Sarajevo in September 2008 . Foster played the whole match as England C lost 6 – 2 to Bosnia , assisting Luke Moore 's goal . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Foster grew up in South Yorkshire . He has described himself as a " family man " , but admits to making bad lifestyle choices in his " younger years " . He has one son , whom his partner gave birth to in January 2010 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 20 February 2016 . 
 = Bob Barr presidential campaign , 2008 = 
 The Bob Barr presidential campaign of 2008 began when the former Republican Congressman of Georgia announced his candidacy for the Libertarian Party 's presidential nomination on May 12 , 2008 after months of grassroots draft efforts . Barr 's candidacy was criticized by Libertarians who opposed his efforts in Congress , which included a vote in favor of the USA PATRIOT Act and authorization of the War in Iraq , but he was supported by others who accepted his regret for the votes . Barr won the party 's nomination after six rounds of balloting at the 2008 Libertarian Party National Convention . Former contender Wayne Allyn Root was named as his running mate . Reason magazine senior editor Radley Balko called Barr " the first serious candidate the LP has run since I 've been eligible to vote . " 
 In the general election , Barr hoped to portray himself as a conservative alternative to the Republican nominee John McCain . He emphasized his opposition to the Republican Party for its positions on the War in Iraq and the USA PATRIOT Act , but stood as an advocate for border security and fiscal constraint , demonstrated by his opposition to the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 . The candidate never made headway in election polls , placing third or fourth when included . Barr 's efforts to be invited to presidential debates with the two main candidates also fell short when he failed to meet the 15 % polling threshold . 
 Barr campaigned throughout the nation . He litigated to gain ballot access in several states and to prevent McCain and the Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama from appearing on the Texas ballot for failing to meet the filing deadline . On election day , Barr appeared on the ballot in 44 states ; he finished fourth in the general election , behind Ralph Nader , receiving 523 @,@ 686 votes , or 0 @.@ 4 % of the total . 
 = = Background = = 
 Bob Barr was first elected to the House of Representatives in 1994 as part of the Republican Revolution . While in office , he was a strong proponent of the War on Drugs , called for further investigations into the Waco Siege , and authored the Defense of Marriage Act . In 1998 , he was a central figure in the Lewinsky scandal investigation , being the first congressman to call for President Bill Clinton 's resignation after the allegations surfaced . Near the end of his time in Congress , Barr voted in favor of the USA PATRIOT Act and the authorization for use of force against Iraq . After his congressional district was redrawn in 2002 , making reelection more difficult , Barr was ousted from the House . After leaving Congress , Barr became critical of the Bush administration , specifically for the administration 's use of the USA PATRIOT Act , which Barr now believed to be unconstitutional . He also worked as a privacy consultant for the American Civil Liberties Union . In 2004 , he left the Republican Party and endorsed Libertarian Party nominee Michael <unk> for president , formally joining the party in 2006 . 
 = = Early stages = = 
 On March 19 , 2008 , Barr confirmed his interest in running for president . This coincided with the media acknowledging a movement on Facebook encouraging the former Congressman to begin a campaign . Barr talked about a widespread " dissatisfaction with the candidates for the two major parties " but complimented presidential candidate and Republican Congressman Ron Paul for " <unk> [ ing ] libertarian and true conservative principles " . Pollster John Zogby commented that a possible Barr candidacy would be potentially upsetting for Republicans , and described his possible supporters as individuals who saw him " as a consistent libertarian who opposed the PATRIOT Act , budget deficits and gun control . " Later in the month , Barr stated that he was " looking very seriously at " a presidential run . 
 Barr launched an exploratory committee and created a campaign website on April 5 , 2008 . Within two days , the committee reported that $ 25 @,@ 000 had been contributed . Russ Verney , who had served as an adviser to Ross Perot in the 1992 and 1996 presidential elections , joined the campaign as a volunteer adviser and worked with Barr 's consulting firm , Liberty Strategies LLC , to form a campaign team and build an organization . Verney became the campaign manager after Barr officially announced his candidacy . A poll in late April by Barr 's exploratory committee showed that Barr had the support of 7 % of the electorate before he had officially declared his candidacy . Leading up to Barr 's announcement , columnist George Will wrote an article in Newsweek chronicling the Libertarian Party and the potential candidate 's run . Will stated that Barr could have an effect on the election similar to Ralph Nader 's in 2000 . He described the potential effect as a " <unk> punishment " for presumptive Republican Party nominee John McCain for his co @-@ sponsorship of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 , which Barr opposed . 
 = = Campaign developments = = 
 = = = Libertarian Party nomination campaign = = = 
 Barr publicly announced his candidacy on May 12 , 2008 . He commented that his run would give the American people a " meaningful choice " to vote for in November , preventing them from having to " hold their nose and pull a lever ... for the lesser of two evils . " During his speech , Barr cited out of control government growth as the primary reason for his run . In response to the announcement , Republican consultant Christopher Barron countered the claim of George Will on the campaign 's potential " spoiler effect . " Baron stated that Barr 's run " is unlikely to hurt Sen. McCain in any significant way " but would aide the Republican Party " by siphoning off some of the enthusiasm among college voters and antiwar advocates for Obama . " 
 During an interview with Newsweek following his entrance into the race , Barr was asked why he had announced his candidacy only two weeks before the Libertarian Party convention . He remarked that he had not " seriously consider [ ed ] [ running ] until about five or six weeks " prior to his official announcement . When asked about the " spoiler effect " , he stated that " the votes [ Barr would receive ] are not going to come from people that are committed to voting for McCain . " Also during the interview , Barr articulated that his campaign would make use of the internet with methods similar to those employed by Ron Paul and Barack Obama to mobilize young voters . Barr attempted to tap into Ron Paul 's resources and supporters to raise funds , and used the same company that Paul used , Terra Eclipse , to design his campaign website . Stephen P. Gordon , who worked for Paul , was hired as the e @-@ Campaign manager , and Doug <unk> , who previously worked as an advisor for both Ron Paul and Ronald Reagan , was hired as the Senior Policy Advisor . 
 Barr 's campaign manager Russ Verney sent a fundraising memorandum on May 19 that included his projections for the campaign , and compared Barr favorably to Ross Perot . His predictions included participation in the nationally televised debates in October 2008 and a popular vote total of 19 % . The manager commented that this was " no ordinary presidential campaign " and that Barr would do well because " America is swamped in Libertarian information . " May 18 , 2008 Rasmussen polling reports showed Barr at 6 % nationally in a four @-@ way race with Barack Obama , John McCain , Ralph Nader . He led Nader by 2 % . A breakdown of Barr 's support showed that 7 % of Republicans , 5 % of Democrats and 5 % of unaffiliated voters supported his campaign . The report concluded that most Americans did not have enough information about Barr to form an opinion . May 20 polls from the Insider Advantage @-@ Majority Opinion Survey of 652 individuals showed that in his home state of Georgia , Barr would receive 8 % of the popular vote , placing him in third place , and 27 % behind Barack Obama for second . 
 Barr participated in the Libertarian Party presidential debate , an event sponsored by Reason Magazine , on May 20 , 2008 , at Dupont Circle . Fellow contenders Mike Gravel and Wayne Allyn Root each appeared at the event . During the discussion , Barr remarked that " inside the heart of every American beats the heart of a libertarian " , and said that the nation was on the verge of entering a " Libertarian era . " He also stated that as president he would eliminate the Department of Education , a mainstay of the party platform . Later in the debate , Barr 's opponent , Root , criticized the Washington media for its portrayal of Barr as the " only candidate " , an action he described as " absurd " . 
 = = = Libertarian Party presidential nomination = = = 
 As the 2008 Libertarian National Convention in Denver approached , members of the Libertarian Party 's Radical Caucus criticized Barr by distributing fliers that declared : the " Libertarian Party [ is ] not for sale . " The criticism was in response to allegations that Barr 's campaign was an attempt by conservatives to take over the party . Libertarian delegates disagreed with the media 's portrayal of the race and said that Barr was " not a shoo @-@ in " for the nomination . At the convention , Barr was attacked by fellow candidates Steve <unk> and Mary <unk> for his PATRIOT Act vote in 2001 . Barr responded , by saying that he regretted the vote and had spent the previous five years " working [ to ] ... drive a stake through [ the PATRIOT ACT 's ] heart , burn it , shoot it , [ and ] burn it again ... " Barr was named the Libertarian Party 's nominee after six rounds of balloting on May 25 , 2008 . Las Vegas businessman , and fellow Libertarian primary opponent Wayne Allyn Root , was named as his running mate . 
 = = General election campaign = = 
 As the nominee of the Libertarian Party , Barr promised to " travel the width and breadth of this great land " to vie for the presidency . Executive Vice President of the Cato Institute David Boaz commented that Barr had the best chance to be successful in the western states . Russ Verney confirmed that certain states would be targeted , and that a strategy would be drawn that would enable the campaign to raise $ 30 million . On May 28 , the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution reported that Barr had raised $ 163 @,@ 000 in cash donations . Barr invited the Republican and Democratic Parties ' presumptive presidential nominees , John McCain and Barack Obama respectively , to participate in weekly presidential debates . To participate in official presidential debates the Barr campaign had to surpass the 15 % threshold put in place by the Commission on Presidential Debates . CNN polling on June 7 placed Barr at 2 % nationally . 
 = = = Campaign exposure = = = 
 Barr received some media exposure a few days after his nomination by visiting New York City to appear on both the Colbert Report and on Glenn Beck 's Headline News program for an hour @-@ long interview . The former appearance was part of the campaign 's strategy to inform young voters and former Ron Paul supporters about the campaign . During the interview with Colbert , Barr was asked why he " voted for the PATRIOT Act " if he was such a " big advocate of personal privacy . " He responded by saying that the Bush Administration " went back on everything they told us [ in Congress ] they would do with the PATRIOT Act . " In early June , the campaign dealt with the issue of racism when a white supremacist group posted a Barr endorsement on <unk> , urging whites to vote for the " best man " rather than the " liberal " John McCain . The Barr campaign repudiated this endorsement . Campaign manager Russ Verney stated , " We do not want and will not accept the support of haters . Tell the haters I said don 't let the door hit you in the backside on the way out . " He emphasized that " anyone with love in their heart for our country and for every resident of our country regardless of race , religion , nationality , or sexual orientation is welcome with open arms . " 
 Although the campaign garnered $ 300 @,@ 000 in donations by June 28 , Barr had yet to hold a campaign fundraiser or film television advertisements . 
 On June 30 , Barr appeared on Fox News Sunday with Chris Wallace . He described his qualms with the presumptive Republican nominee , and said " John McCain is symptomatic of what 's wrong with the Republican Party in these first years of the 21st century . They talk one thing but do something different . " When asked if he agreed that McCain would be a better choice than Barack Obama , he responded that it was " a mixed bag " and that " Senator Obama clearly is much better [ on ] civil liberties and privacy issues " but that he " would favor a more expansive federal spending policy . " Barr opined that " neither of these candidates is talking about the deep cuts in government spending and returning power to the people . " He identified the Republican Party 's position on FISA legislation as his biggest aversion to the party . When confronted with opinion polls that showed the candidate with 3 % in the presidential race , Barr explained that the numbers would increase in the following weeks , announcing that his campaign would be launched " full @-@ time " on July 4 . 
 = = = Full @-@ time escalation = = = 
 Barr launched his " full @-@ time " campaign at Atlanta 's Fourth of July parade , where the city celebrated the opening of the Millennium Gate arch . Democratic Congressman John Lewis spoke alongside Barr at the dedication . 
 The next week , Barr appeared on Fox News , where he criticized the United States Treasury Department 's plan to help Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae . His opposition was based on the government 's use of taxpayer money to credit the enterprises , explaining that " the taxpayers of this country are being put at further risk . " But Barr did state that " doing nothing would not be advisable " and that the government " has to do something . " He explained that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac must be <unk> . Barr was criticized by some Libertarians for these remarks . 
 Barr was invited by former Vice President Al Gore to attend a We Campaign event to raise awareness for global warming . He met with Gore privately before attending the July 17 event . Barr remarked that " global warming is a reality " , and affirmed his belief that the government should " remain firmly committed to free market solutions and innovations to address this issue ; not tax @-@ driven policies . " He praised Gore for his efforts and said he was " pleased that Mr. Gore agrees that the public debate of this issue should include me . " He criticized fellow candidates John McCain and Barack Obama for not attending the event and said that their absence showed " their unwillingness to address this important issue . " He called on his fellow candidates to appear at other We Campaign events to debate solutions to the problem of climate change . 
 During a visit to Austin for a fundraiser , Barr made a surprise appearance at the July 19 <unk> Nation convention . The candidate remarked at the meeting of progressive bloggers that " there are a lot of libertarians here , [ and ] a lot of [ Barr ] supporters . " His presence was acknowledged by Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi , who observed that " Bob Barr — even Bob Barr — opposed " the domestic spying bill that she was discussing . On July 23 , CNN polling placed Barr at 3 % in a four @-@ way race , while Zogby placed Barr at 6 % . He polled at 8 % in Georgia , Colorado , Iowa , and Minnesota , and at 9 % in Oklahoma , New Mexico , and Nevada . Surveys in New Hampshire put Barr at 10 % . 
 In August , Barr spoke at the Minuteman Civil Defense Corps ' protest during the Democratic National Convention in Denver . Approximately a dozen individuals were in attendance at the event . Former Republican candidates Tom Tancredo and Alan Keyes also attended the event , which organizers called a success . Barr presented a " common sense " approach to the issue by promising to put an end to birthright citizenship and public education for illegal immigrants , while supporting an increase in green cards . Claremont McKenna College professor John Pitney argued that the candidate was sending mixed messages since " the Libertarian Party essentially supports open borders , " and was unlikely to gain the support of anti @-@ immigration activists . A Zogby poll released on August 15 , 2008 indicated that most Republicans and Democrats wanted Barr included in the presidential debates . The poll also indicated that nearly 70 % of independent voters would have liked to see him included . 
 = = = Final stages = = = 
 As September began , commentator Greg Pierce of The Washington Times noted that the " grass @-@ roots enthusiasm for [ Barr 's ] candidacy seems to have faded a bit in the wake of individualist Governor Sarah Palin joining the Republican ticket . " 
 It was announced at a press conference on September 10 , 2008 that former Republican Presidential candidate Ron Paul would give his open endorsement to Constitution Party nominee Chuck Baldwin , Green Party nominee Cynthia McKinney , independent Ralph Nader , and Barr , in opposition to the Republican and Democratic Parties ' nominees . Barr chose not to attend the event , and his name was not included in the final statement released by the other candidates . Paul had previously made favorable comments about Barr 's campaign , leaving the candidate to feel that he alone should have received the endorsement . Later that day , it was revealed that Barr had earlier offered the Libertarian vice @-@ presidential nomination to Paul , via a letter . The letter stated that Barr 's current running mate , Wayne Allyn Root , would willingly step down should Paul accept the offer . A spokesman for the Paul campaign called Barr 's offer " terribly interesting " , but added that Paul had no intentions of running on a third party ticket . Ron Paul dropped his endorsement of Barr on September 22 , citing the candidate 's criticism of his earlier endorsements . Paul opted to instead support Chuck Baldwin 's candidacy . Barr received $ 252 @,@ 383 of donations in September , which was slightly more than the $ 224 @,@ 350 the campaign raised in August . 
 On the dawn of the final month of campaigning , Barr appeared on National Public Radio , and discussed his political positions , including those on health care , a topic that had rarely been discussed by Barr over the course of his campaign . Barr gave his shortest response to the issue , saying that " everybody ought to be able to get health care , but that 's up to them ... " and went on to say that " the government could be ... reducing and removing the onerous regulations that actually prevent people from being able to afford health care . " Close to the end of the campaign , Barr 's polling numbers remained stagnant . An Associated Press @-@ GfK poll from late October placed the candidate at 1 % nationally , the same figure he had stood at three weeks previously . 
 = = Ballot access = = 
 Barr achieved ballot access in 45 states according to the Libertarian Party website . He was denied access in Oklahoma after failing to reach the minimum threshold of petition signatures . In July , the campaign filed a lawsuit against the state to try to get the candidate on the ballot despite not meeting the guidelines . Barr also filed lawsuits in Massachusetts , West Virginia and Maine to appear on the ballot under similar circumstances . Barr 's plea in West Virginia failed on September 7 after U.S. District Court Judge John T. Copenhaver Jr. dismissed the lawsuit . The judge proclaimed that " it was their ( the campaign 's ) lack of reasonable diligence that ultimately thwarted their effort to gain ballot access here " in West Virginia . 
 Lawsuits were filed against Barr by GOP members in Pennsylvania to prevent the candidate from appearing on the state 's ballot on charges that the Libertarian Party tricked individuals into signing the state 's ballot access petition . Commonwealth Court Judge Johnny Butler dismissed these allegations on September 16 , allowing Barr to remain on the state 's ballot . The Barr campaign filed a lawsuit to prevent John McCain and Barack Obama from appearing on the ballot in Texas , charging that the candidates ' parties did not reach the state 's August 26 deadline to report their nominations to the Secretary of State . Texas Secretary of State Esperanza Andrade reported that all the correct paperwork was filed , though neither the Democratic nor Republican parties formally nominated their candidates ( at their respective conventions ) until after the deadline . On September 23 , 2008 , the Texas Supreme Court rejected Barr 's request without giving a reason . 
 On September 26 , 2008 , the Louisiana Supreme Court reversed an earlier decision to keep Barr and Root on the ballot , and ordered that they both be removed due to missing the state 's deadline , which passed while state offices were closed due to Hurricane Gustav . The Barr @-@ Root campaign announced that it planned to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court . The court refused to hear the case , and Barr 's name was absent from the state 's ballot on election day . 
 = = Results = = 
 Barr 's campaign ended after receiving 523 @,@ 686 ( 0 @.@ 40 % ) of the popular vote on Election Day . He finished in fourth place , winning a higher percentage than the 2004 Libertarian nominee Michael <unk> . 67 @,@ 582 of his votes were won in California , the nation 's most populous state , but Barr won his largest percentage in Indiana with 1 @.@ 06 % . Reason Magazine 's Brian Doherty commented that Barr 's showing did not meet earlier expectations . He wrote that Barr did not win a significant percentage of the population because he was " not Libertarian enough , " distanced himself too far from Ron Paul , and lacked adequate " communication and coordination . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the campaign , Barr was certified as a mediator to resolve disputes upon request . He currently writes a regular column for The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution titled " The Barr Code " , and is a contributor for CNN . In his column , he discusses privacy issues and often criticizes the Obama administration , disapproving of the effect of its spending on the federal budget . He has become involved in the Tea Party movement , and remains a member of the Libertarian Party . He supported former running mate Wayne Allyn Root 's bid to be chairman of the Party . Root was also considered a potential 2012 presidential candidate . 
 Barr reflected on the campaign in an interview with Reason shortly after the election . He explained that his campaign 's inability to gain access to donor lists hindered the campaign 's fundraising capacity . In April 2009 , he commented that his exclusion from the presidential debates prevented his campaign from gaining significant traction . Barr has stated that he will not run for public office in the future . 
 In May 2010 , the Barr campaign was sued by libertarian pundit Jim Bovard , who was hired to ghostwrite a book about the campaign . Bovard claims he was never paid the $ 47 @,@ 000 he was to receive for his efforts . Campaign manager Russ Verney stated that the campaign hoped to raise enough money to pay Bovard , and asked for donations . The ensuing litigation resulted in a judgment entered for Bovard against the Bar 2008 Presidential Committee , Inc . , in the full amount of $ 47 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 . 
 = River Hull = 
 The River Hull is a navigable river in the East Riding of Yorkshire in the north of England . It rises from a series of springs to the west of Driffield , and enters the Humber estuary at Kingston upon Hull . Following a period when the Archbishops of York charged tolls for its use , it became a free navigation . The upper reaches became part of the Driffield Navigation from 1770 , after which they were again subject to tolls , and the section within the city of Hull came under the jurisdiction of the Port of Hull , with the same result . 
 Most of its course is through low @-@ lying land that is at or just above sea level , and regular flooding has been a long @-@ standing problem along the waterway . Drainage schemes to alleviate it were constructed on both sides of the river . The Holderness Drainage scheme to the east was completed in 1772 , with a second phase in 1805 , and the Beverley and Barmston Drain to the west was completed in 1810 . Since 1980 , the mouth of the river has been protected by a tidal barrier at the estuary , which can be closed to prevent tidal surges entering the river system and causing flooding upriver . 
 Most of the bridges which cross the river are movable , to allow shipping to pass . There are six swing bridges ; four bascule bridges , two of which have twin leaves , one for each carriageway of the roads which they carry ; and three Scherzer lift bridges , which are a type of rolling bascule bridge . Scott Street Bridge , which is now permanently raised , was originally powered from a high pressure water main maintained by the first public power distribution company in the world . 
 = = Course = = 
 The source of the River Hull is in the Yorkshire Wolds . It rises from a series of springs to the west of Driffield , near the site of the medieval village of <unk> . The <unk> Beck flows eastwards from these , and is joined by the Little Driffield Beck , which flows southwards from Little Driffield . It continues as the Driffield Beck , flowing around the south @-@ western edge of Driffield , where it is joined by the Driffield Trout Stream . After the junction , it becomes the River Hull or the West Beck and flows to the east , before turning south to reach Corps Landing . For much of the route below Driffield , the Driffield Navigation runs parallel to the river . 
 The river from Corps Landing to its mouth is navigable . At <unk> , it is joined by the Frodingham Beck , which is also navigable , and leads to the canal into Driffield , which forms the major part of the Driffield Navigation . <unk> Dyke joins from the west and is followed by <unk> Hill lock , which marks the end of the Navigation , and the official start of the navigable River Hull . Below here , the river is tidal . The tidal range of tides can be up to 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) in winter and 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in summer . Just above the lock , the Beverley and Barmston Drain , which collects water from the catchwater drains on either side of the main channel , flows under the navigation in a tunnel , and runs just to the west of the river almost to its mouth . Below the lock , the surrounding land is almost at sea level , and the river is constrained by flood banks on both sides . 
 On its route southwards , the river passes the former junction with Aike Beck , once navigable to Lockington Landing , but the stream was subsequently re @-@ routed to join the Arram Beck . The Leven Canal used to join on the east bank , but the entrance lock has been replaced by a sluice . The Arram Beck flows in from the west , and then the river is crossed by Hull Bridge , the cause of repeated disagreement between the owners of the Driffield Navigation and the Corporation of Beverley , who owned the bridge . Just above Beverley Beck , which joins from the west , is Grovehill Bridge , now a lift bridge but once a ferry bridge . 
 Once the river reaches the outskirts of Hull , its course is marked by a series of bridges , most of which open to allow boats to pass . There are swing bridges , lift bridges and bascule bridges , and the river becomes part of the Port of Hull . The river , which is the dividing line between West and East Hull , bisects the city 's industrial area . The bridges can cause ship traffic delays during high tides , though river traffic is less than it once was . The Beverley and Barmston Drain rejoins the river above Scott Street Bridge . Below North Bridge , an unused dry dock on the west bank marks the former entrance to Queens Dock . Below Drypool Bridge , a muddy basin on the east bank was once the entrance to Drypool Basin and Victoria Dock . The river reaches its confluence with the Humber estuary in the centre of Kingston upon Hull . At its mouth , a tidal barrier has been constructed to prevent tidal surges from entering the river . In the past , these had regularly flooded the town and the flat countryside to the north . 
 = = History = = 
 The River Hull has served as a navigation and a drainage channel , and has been subject to the conflicts that this usually creates , as water levels need to be raised for navigation , but lowered for efficient drainage . In 1213 , the Archbishops of York laid claim to the river , and declared their right to navigate on a 24 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) channel . A number of fish @-@ weirs made navigation difficult , and the Archbishop negotiated their removal in 1296 , so that a wharf could be established at Grovehill to serve the town of Beverley . By 1321 , river rights had been extended to the charging of tolls . One @-@ third of a shilling ( 1 @.@ 7 p ) was charged for each bushel carried on the river between <unk> and the Humber , but the merchants of Hull were unhappy with this ; eventually the river had free navigation , and goods could be carried on it without toll . The Arram Beck was also exempt from all tolls . It has remained free , except for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the mouth , which is part of the Port of Hull and is under the control of Hull Corporation . 
 The outlet of the river onto the Humber is thought to have changed in the early medieval period . The original outlet has been identified at a place called Limekiln creek . A second channel Sayers creek was cut or widened , with both outlets existing simultaneously at one point . Limekiln creek was subsequently reduced in flow to the level of a drain . 
 The lower river was bordered by salt marshes in medieval times , when efforts were first made to drain them . Further upstream , channels were cut through the fens in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries by the monks of Meaux Abbey , primarily to enable travel by boat , but these gradually became part of the drainage system . John Smeaton , when asked by the merchants of Driffield to advise on ways to allow keels to reach their town , suggested a small cut of about 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) including one lock , from the river near <unk> . The merchants sought a second opinion , and John Grundy , Jr. suggested a much longer canal , running for 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from <unk> on the Frodingham Beck . When fully opened in 1770 , the new route was some 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) shorter than the river , which follows an extremely winding course in its upper reaches . The river above Aike was now considered to be part of the Driffield Navigation , and tolls were charged for its use . Also in this period the first cut of the Holderness Drain was made , enabled by an act of 1964 , originally <unk> onto the river . In addition to the drainage works to the east of the river , the banks were raised for 17 miles ( 27 km ) on the east side , to prevent flooding . 
 Although beyond their jurisdiction , the Navigation commissioners attempted to extend their powers , to improve the river below the junction with Aike Beck . They particularly wanted to replace the stone Hull Bridge , near Beverley , with a swing bridge , which would make it easier for keels to reach Frodingham bridge . The Corporation of Beverley objected , because the bridge was the main route of communication between Beverley and Holderness , and the commissioners instead dredged parts of the river to improve access . Plans to improve Hull Bridge were again resisted by Beverley Corporation in 1799 , but an agreement was finally reached in 1801 , and an Act of Parliament was obtained in July of that year . William Chapman acted as engineer , as the act authorised the construction of towpaths , a new cut between <unk> Bridge and the lock at <unk> Hill , to avoid a long loop in the river , and rebuilding of the bridge . The bridge cost £ 500 , half of which was met by Richard Bethell , the owner of the Leven Canal , on condition that the tolls for passing through it were reduced significantly . 
 Passage through Hull had long been difficult , because of the number of ships which used the river for loading and unloading goods . In 1794 , the merchants of Beverley had advocated the building of docks at Hull , with a separate entrance , so that traffic to the upper river would not be impeded , while the Driffield Navigation had unsuccessful attempted to get a clause inserted into the Act of Parliament which the Hull Dock Company obtained in 1840 , to ensure free passage for vessels , and the removal of tolls for boats not using the docks . The Navigation Company also received complaints from the Beverley and Barmston Drainage Commissioners , who believed that water levels were being kept at a higher level than was good for drainage . 
 In 1980 , the Environment Agency constructed a tidal barrier at the mouth of the river . The structure spans the river , and a huge steel gate , weighing 202 tonnes , can be lowered into the waterway , effectively sealing the river from the Humber , and preventing tidal surges from moving up the river and flooding parts of the city and the low @-@ lying areas beyond . The gate is lowered between eight and twelve times a year , and protects around 17 @,@ 000 properties . In 2009 , a £ 10 million upgrade of the structure was started , to ensure it would stay operational for a further 30 years . The upgrade included a new drive mechanism , which raises and lowers the gate , and pivots it when it is at the top of the structure , so that it lies horizontally rather than vertically . It also included a new control system . Plans have been considered to build a barrage at the mouth of the Hull where it joins the Humber Estuary to maintain a constant water level as it passes through the city . The idea was first raised by the Abercrombie report , which considered how to redevelop Hull after significant destruction during the Second World War . The estimated cost of such a project was around £ 195 million in 2007 . 
 = = Traffic = = 
 Because the river was a free river , there are no figures for traffic on the lower river . However , it connected to a number of waterways on which tolls were collected , and so an indication of the traffic can be gained from the figures for these waterways . The main cargoes on Beverley Beck in 1730 were coal , bricks , turfs and wool , together with cereal crops , consisting of wheat , barley , oats and malt . Receipts from tolls more than doubled between 1732 and 1748 , after which the tolls were let to an independent collector . The annual rent charged for this privilege doubled again between 1748 and 1792 . There was a steady expansion of trade on the Driffield Navigation during the same period , as the dividends paid to shareholders rose from 1 @.@ 5 to 4 per cent . In 1789 , Bainton , Boyes and Co negotiated a lump sum payment to cover coal from the Aire and Calder Navigation to their new carpet factory and the export of their carpets in the downstream direction . The factory later became a corn mill . 
 Toll rentals continued to increase on the Beverley Beck , rising from £ 190 to £ 435 between 1793 and 1835 . Some 31 @,@ 185 tons of cargo were carried in 1838 . In 1817 , a steam packet service started to run between Driffield and Hull . Three return trips each week were made , but the journey times were too long , and an advertisement in 1825 indicated that the engine had been altered and an express steam packet service would commence . Three boats were recorded as trading between Driffield and Hull every other day in a directory of Yorkshire published in 1823 . Traffic for 1832 included 7 @,@ 394 chaldrons of coal , 18 @,@ 173 quarters of wheat , 7 @,@ 745 quarters of oats , 19 @,@ 396 quarters of barley and 4 @,@ 555 sacks of flour . An additional 1 @,@ 564 quarters of wheat and 8 @,@ 194 sacks of flour were carried to or from Foston Mill , reached from Frodingham Beck . A regular carrier also operated between the Leven Canal and Hull once a week . 
 Between 1848 and 1905 , traffic on Beverley Beck more than trebled , from 33 @,@ 498 tons to 101 @,@ 540 tons . Coal and other minerals accounted for around one quarter of the traffic in 1905 , while goods carried in 1906 included fertiliser , burnt ore , flour and scrap metal . Commercial traffic continued into the 1970s , when tolls of £ 2 @,@ 365 were collected on 28 @,@ 169 tons of cargo . Traffic on the Driffield Navigation was relatively steady between 1871 and 1905 , falling slightly from 35 @,@ 654 to 32 @,@ 666 tons . Goods carried included coal , linseed , cottonseed , wheat , flour and artificial manures . In 1922 , £ 7 of income was received from pleasure craft using the navigation . Traffic declined during the 1930s , with commercial traffic finally ceasing in 1944 . The Leven Canal carried 4 @,@ 242 tons in 1888 and 4 @,@ 546 in 1905 , but then succumbed to road competition , and closed in 1935 . 
 = = Drainage = = 
 The problems of flooding of the land adjacent to the river were addressed by the construction of catchwater drains to both sides of it . The east side of the river was protected by the Holderness Drainage scheme . John Grundy worked on plans for the scheme which would protect 11 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 500 ha ) of low @-@ lying land to the north @-@ east of Hull . John Smeaton was also involved , although the final report was largely Grundy 's work , and an Act of Parliament to authorise the work was passed on 5 April 1764 . The Trustees for the scheme wrote to Grundy and Smeaton in May 1764 , asking them to work on the project . Grundy 's wife had died only a fortnight previously , and the two engineers corresponded , but besides valuable comment on Grundy 's plans for the outfall sluice , Smeaton had no further involvement , and it was Grundy who ran the project , which included 17 miles ( 27 km ) of barrier bank along the east side of the river . John Hoggard acted as Superintendent for the scheme , while Joseph Page was appointed as resident engineer , to oversee the construction of the drains and the outfall sluice . Grundy made regular visits until October 1767 , by which time the sluice and the main drainage channels were completed , at which point he and Page moved on , while Hoggard oversaw additional work on the drains and banks , which lasted for several more years . By the time of its completion in 1772 , the scheme had cost £ 24 @,@ 000 . 
 Despite the Holderness scheme , there were still problems near Leven and Weel , and William Jessop spent a month inspecting the area before writing a report in July 1786 . His plan advocated separating the water which fell on the uplands to the north and flowed through the low @-@ lying areas , from the local drainage of those low @-@ lying areas . George Plummer carried out most of the subsequent survey work on Jessop 's behalf , although Jessop surveyed the River Hull in 1787 , to identify how the outfall could be improved . Jessop visited the works from time to time , making seven visits between 1789 and 1792 , while the day to day oversight of the scheme was handled by Plummer as resident engineer . Plummer was succeeded by Anthony Bower , who was engineer from 1792 to 1795 , and the whole scheme was completed in 1805 , having cost £ 16 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1796 , Robert Chapman was asked to report on possible solutions for flooding to the west . His report formed the basis for the Beverley and Barmston Drainage Act , which was passed by Parliament in June 1798 . Chapman was appointed as engineer for the scheme , which would cost £ 115 @,@ 000 , and would provide flood defences and drainage for 12 @,@ 600 acres ( 5 @,@ 100 ha ) of land to the west of the river . The project included the construction of 23 miles ( 37 km ) of drainage cuts , and building embankments along 20 miles ( 32 km ) of the river . At Hull , an outfall sluice was constructed , and the drain passed through tunnels under eleven waterways , including the Beverley Beck . 27 bridges were built to carry roads over the drain , and the whole project was finished in 1810 . 
 = = River crossings = = 
 There are several bridges in the Hull area which cross the River Hull . Details of them are shown in the following table , starting from that furthest north and moving south to the river mouth . 
 The present Drypool bridge was designed by W. Morris , the Hull City Engineer , and it was built in Hull . The previous wrought iron swing bridge , which had opened in 1888 , was too narrow , with a carriageway which was 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) wide . It was closed in May 1959 , so that it could be demolished and Morris 's new bridge opened in March 1961 . 
 Scott Street bridge had gradually deteriorated , and a public consultation was held in 1986 , to determine its future . By that time a 10 @-@ ton weight limit had been imposed on traffic using the bridge , because of its poor structural state . Three suggestions were made as to its future . These were to close and demolish it , to refurbish it at an estimated cost of £ 1 @.@ 6 million , and to build a new bridge on the same site but a different alignment , to eliminate the awkward turn at the west end , which was costed at £ 2 million . None of these actions have been taken , as the bridge leaves were raised in 1994 , and have remained raised ever since . Consideration was given in 2007 to preserving two of the hydraulic rams which operated the bridge , during planning to demolish the structure . The Hull Hydraulic Power Company was set up in 1872 , and by 1876 was operating a pumping station on <unk> Street . This supplied water to a high pressure main which ran from Wellington Street to Sculcoates Bridge , and was used by local industries to power machinery , including the bridge when it was constructed . Although the power company closed in the 1940s , it made Hull the first city in the world to have a public system of power distribution . 
 The design for the <unk> Link road included a tunnel under the river . Initial investigations suggested that there was a layer of boulder clay below the alluvium of the river bed , and that a chalk aquifer was below the clay . Construction work started in July 1991 . A cofferdam was built on the east bank , and the cutting which would have provided access to the twin @-@ bore tunnel was nearly excavated when a 6 @.@ 6 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) hole appeared in the river bed , and the entire site flooded . A 3 @-@ month investigation took place , which suggested that it would be difficult to finish the tunnel and maintain the integrity of the aquifer . Despite some £ 10 million having been spent on the project , it was abandoned in 1993 . A contract for a replacement bridge was awarded in June 1995 and the river was crossed by twin lift bridges , which were opened in April 1997 . The project had cost £ 30 million , compared to an original budget of just £ 13 million . 
 A tunnel was successfully constructed under the river in 2001 . The 6 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 10 @.@ 0 km ) long sewer runs from the city centre to a treatment works at Salt End . It was excavated using two tunnelling machines , which were manufactured in Canada and were named Maureen and Gloria . The tunnel was officially opened on 21 August 2001 , when a Mini car was driven through it , recreating scenes from the film The Italian Job . Before 1897 , there had been a ferry at Grovehill , and a shipyard on the east bank , owned by Joseph Scarr . To assist his workers to reach the shipyard , Scarr designed and built a ferry bridge , which cost him £ 300 . It consisted of a large rectangular pontoon , above which was fitted a bridge deck with handrails . Two jack screws enabled the deck to be raised or lowered in relation to the pontoon , so that it remained at approximately the same height , whatever the state of the tide . On the eastern bank , Scarr constructed a variable @-@ height landing , but the landing on the west bank was constructed by Beverley Council , and was fixed . Scarr campaigned to have a variable landing here as well , and was prepared to fund it , but his requests were always rejected . The fixed landing made access to the bridge difficult at high tides . When a boat needed to pass , the west end was freed , and the pontoon swung round to lie parallel to the bank , either upstream or downstream , depending on the state of the tide . It would then be winched back into position by a small barrel winch . At night the bridge was closed and moored beside the bank . 
 Responsibility for the bridge was taken over by Beverley Council before the Second World War . Its condition deteriorated , and in 1948 , they attempted to replace it with a footbridge around 400 yards ( 370 m ) further upstream . Because the ferry rights had been in existence for more than 600 years , an Act of Parliament was needed , and this was thwarted by a petition containing 84 signatures , presented by the people of Weel to the House of Lords . Plans for a new lift bridge were drawn up , and it was opened on 19 October 1953 . 
 In 1913 , the Hull Bridge upstream of Beverley , which had caused so much disagreement in the 18th century until it had been replaced in 1801 , was demolished by the County Council , who installed a steel rolling bridge in its place . Once the <unk> Bypass bridge had been built a short distance upstream , it no longer needed to carry road traffic , and it was replaced by a footbridge in 1976 . 
 At the other end of the river , the Millennium Bridge was opened in 2001 . There was once a ferry at this point , before 1865 , which gave access to the Victoria Dock , opened in 1850 . South Bridge replaced the ferry in 1865 , making it easier for workers to reach the dock . The swing footbridge was closed in 1934 , but was not demolished until 1944 . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = Noye 's Fludde = 
 Noye 's Fludde is a one @-@ act opera by the British composer Benjamin Britten , intended primarily for amateur performers , particularly children . First performed on 18 June 1958 at that year 's Aldeburgh Festival , it is based on the 15th @-@ century Chester " mystery " or " miracle " play which recounts the Old Testament story of Noah 's Ark . Britten specified that the opera should be staged in churches or large halls , not in a theatre . 
 By the mid @-@ 1950s Britten had established himself as a major composer both of operas and of works for mixed professional and amateur forces , including the mini @-@ opera for young audiences involving child performers , The Little Sweep ( 1949 ) . He had also used text from the Chester play cycle , retelling the story of Abraham and Isaac , for his 1952 Canticle II . Noye 's Fludde was composed as a project for television ; to the Chester text Britten added three congregational hymns , the Greek prayer Kyrie eleison as a children 's chant , and an Alleluia chorus . A large children 's chorus represents the pairs of animals who march into and out of the ark , and proceedings are directed by the spoken Voice of God . Of the solo sung roles , only the parts of Noye ( Noah ) and his wife were written to be sung by professionals ; the remaining roles are for child and adolescent performers . A small professional ensemble underpins the mainly amateur orchestra which contains numerous unconventional instruments to provide particular musical effects ; bugle fanfares for the animals , handbell chimes for the rainbow , and various improvisations to replicate musically the sounds of a storm . 
 At its premiere Noye 's Fludde was acclaimed by critics and public alike , both for the inspiration of the music and the brilliance of the design and production . The opera received its American premiere in New York in March 1959 , and its first German performance at Ettal in May of that year . Since then it has been staged worldwide ; the performance in Beijing in October 2012 was the first in China of any Britten opera . The occasion of Britten 's centenary in 2013 led to numerous productions at music festivals , both in the UK and abroad . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Chester mystery plays = = = 
 English mystery or " miracle " plays were dramatised Bible stories , by ancient tradition performed on Church feast days in town squares and market places by members of the town 's craft guilds . They covered the full range of the narrative and metaphor in the Christian Bible , from the fall of Lucifer to the Last Judgement . From the many play cycles that originated in the late Middle Ages , the Chester cycle is one of four that has survived into the 21st century . The texts , by an unidentified writer , were revised during the late 15th century into a format similar to that of contemporary French passion plays , and were published in 1890 , in Alfred W. Pollard 's English Miracle Plays , <unk> , and Interludes . 
 The story of Noah and the flood , the third play in the Chester cycle , was originally performed by the city 's Guild of the <unk> of Dee , otherwise known as the water @-@ carriers . A feature of this play , observed by the historian Rosemary Woolf , is the depiction of Noah 's wife , and by implication women generally , as disobedient , obdurate and finally abusive , in contrast to the " grave and obedient " Noah and his patient sons . 
 By the end of the 16th @-@ century Reformation , the Church grew less tolerant of mystery plays . A performance in Chester in 1575 is the last recorded from the city until the 20th century . The Chester cycle was then revived as part of the city 's Festival of Britain celebrations in June 1951 , under the supervision of Christopher Ede . This production was received enthusiastically , and was repeated the following year ; thereafter it became a regular feature and tourist attraction . 
 = = = Inception = = = 
 By the late 1940s Benjamin Britten had established himself as a leading composer of English opera , with several major works to his credit . In 1947 he suggested to his librettist Eric Crozier that they should create a children 's opera , based on a bible story . Crozier gave Britten a copy of Pollard 's book , as a possible source of material . Nothing came of this project immediately ; instead , Britten and Crozier wrote the cantata Saint Nicolas ( 1948 ) , the first of several works in which Britten combined skilled performers with amateurs . The cantata involves at least two children 's choirs , and incorporates two congregational hymns sung by the audience . Britten also used this fusion of professional with amateur forces in The Little Sweep ( 1949 ) , which forms the second part of his entertainment for children , Let 's Make an Opera , that he devised with Crozier . Again , child singers ( also doubling as actors ) were used , and the audience sings choruses at appropriate points . In 1952 , although Britten 's collaboration with Crozier had ended , he used the Chester plays book as the source text for his Canticle II , based on the story of Abraham and Isaac . 
 In April 1957 Boris Ford , Head of Schools Broadcasting at Associated Rediffusion ( A @-@ R ) , wrote to Britten , proposing a series of half @-@ hour programmes . These would show Britten composing and rehearsing a work through to its performance , and would provide children with " an intimate piece of musical education , by ... watching a piece of music take shape and in some degree growing with it " . Britten was initially cautious ; he found the idea interesting but , he warned Ford , he was at that time busy travelling , and had little time for writing . He was also anxious not to cover the same ground as he had with Let 's Make an Opera . However , he agreed to meet Ford to discuss the project further . On 11 July they met in London , together with Britten 's musical assistant Imogen Holst . Britten told Ford that he had " for some months or a year vaguely been thinking of doing something with the [ Chester ] miracle plays " , and agreed to write an opera for A @-@ R 's 1958 summer term of school programmes . The subject would be Noah and the flood , based on the Chester text . Later , Ford and his script editor , Martin Worth , travelled to Aldeburgh , and with Britten looked at possible churches for the performance . The Church of St Bartholomew , Orford , was chosen as , unlike most other churches in East Suffolk , its pews were not fixed , thus offering a more flexible performing space . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 After the opening congregational hymn " Lord Jesus , think on me " , the spoken Voice of God addresses Noye , announcing the forthcoming destruction of the sinful world . God tells Noye to build an ark ( " a <unk> " ) that will provide salvation for him and his family . Noye agrees , and calls on the people and his family to help . His sons and their wives enter with tools and materials and begin work , while Mrs Noye and her Gossips ( close friends ) mock the project . 
 When the ark is completed , Noye tries to persuade his wife to enter : " <unk> , in this vessel we shall be <unk> " , but she refuses , and they quarrel . The Voice of God foretells forty days and forty nights of rain , and instructs Noye to fill the ark with animals of every kind . The animals enter the ark in pairs , while Noye 's sons and their wives provide a commentary . Noye orders his family to board the ark ; again Mrs Noye and the Gossips refuse , preferring to carouse . The sons finally drag Mrs Noye on board , while the Gossips are swept away by the encroaching flood ; she rewards her husband with a slap . Rain begins to fall , building to a great storm at the height of which the first verse of the naval hymn " Eternal Father , Strong to Save " is heard from the ark . The congregation joins in the second and third verses of the hymn , during which the storm gradually subsides . When it is calm , Noye sends out a Raven , saying " If this <unk> come not againe / it is a signe <unk> to <unk> / that dry it is on hill or playne . " When the Raven fails to return , Noye knows that the bird has discovered dry land . He sends out a Dove , who eventually brings back an olive branch . Noah accepts this as a sign of deliverance , and thanks God . 
 The Voice of God instructs everyone to leave the ark . As they do , the animals sing " Alleluias " and the people sing a chorus of praise : " Lord we <unk> thee through thy <unk> " . God promises that he will never again destroy the earth with water , and produces a rainbow as his token . The cast begins Addison 's hymn " The spacious firmament on high " , with the congregation joining in the last two verses . All the cast depart except Noye , who receives God 's blessing and promise of no more vengeance : " And <unk> fare well , my darling <unk> " before his departure from the stage . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Britten began detailed planning for the opera in August 1957 , while sailing to Canada for a tour with the English Opera Group . He told Colin Graham , at that time the <unk> 's stage manager , that he wanted him to direct the new work . After a further meeting at Associated Rediffusion 's London headquarters on 18 October , Britten began a composition draft in Aldeburgh on 27 October . To Pollard 's edition of the Noah play 's text , he added three congregational Anglican hymns : " Lord Jesus , think on me " ; " Eternal Father , strong to save " ; and " The spacious firmament on high " . Britten introduced the repetitive Greek chant " Kyrie eleison " ( " Lord , have mercy " ) at the entry of the animals , and " Alleluias " at their triumphant exit . He had completed about two @-@ thirds of the opera when Ford was dismissed from A @-@ R , allegedly for administrative shortcomings and inexperience . A @-@ R then decided to withdraw from the project , which was then taken up by Associated Television ( ATV ) , whose chairman Lew Grade personally took responsibility for signing the contract and urged that Britten should complete the opera . 
 In November 1957 Britten moved to the Red House , just outside Aldeburgh , but continued to work on the opera throughout the upheaval . According to a letter he wrote to Edith Sitwell on 14 December , " the final bars of the opera [ were ] punctuated by hammer @-@ blows " from workmen busy at the Red House . Before he finished the composition draft ( on 18 December ) , Britten wrote to the baritone Owen Brannigan , who had sung in several previous Britten operas , asking if he would take the title role . Britten completed the full score of the opera in March 1958 , which he dedicated " To my nephew and nieces , Sebastian , Sally and <unk> Welford , and my young friend Ronald Duncan [ one of Britten 's <unk> ] " . 
 = = = Performance requirements = = = 
 With the wide variety of child performers required in the opera , and in light of how it was cast and performed at its premiere , Britten detailed some of its specific requirements for performance in the vocal and study scores published by Boosey & Hawkes . The opera is intended for a large hall or church , not a theatre . The action should take place on raised rostra , though not on a formal stage set apart from the audience , and the orchestra should be placed in full sight , with the conductor in a position to conduct both the orchestra and , when performing the hymns , the congregation . Noye and Mrs Noye are sung by " accomplished singer @-@ actors " , and the Voice of God , although not necessarily a professional actor , should have " a rich speaking voice , with a simple and sincere delivery , without being at all ' stagey ' " . The young amateurs playing the parts of Noye 's children should be between 11 and 15 years old , with " well @-@ trained voices and lively personalities " ; <unk> , the eldest , could have a broken voice . Mrs Noye 's Gossips should be older girls with strong voices and considerable acting ability . The children playing the animals should vary in size , and range in age from seven to eighteen . The older age groups , with perhaps some broken voices , should represent the larger animals ( lions , leopards , horses , camels etc . ) , while the younger play rats , mice and birds . There is a dance or ballet involving two child performers playing the roles of the raven and the dove . 
 For the first time in any of his works involving amateurs , Britten envisaged a large complement of child performers among his orchestral forces , led by what Graham described as " the professional stiffening " of a piano duet , string quintet ( two violins , viola , cello and bass ) , recorder and a timpanist . The young musicians play a variety of instruments , including a full string ensemble with each section led by a member of the professional string quintet . The violins are further divided into parts of different levels of difficulty , from the simplest ( mostly playing open strings ) to those able to play in third position . The recorders should be led by an accomplished soloist able to flutter @-@ tongue ; bugles , played in the original production by boys from a local school band , are played as the children representing animals march into the ark , and at the climax of the opera . The child percussionists , led by a professional timpanist , play various exotic and invented percussion instruments : the score itself specifies sandpaper ( " two pieces of sandpaper attached to blocks of wood and rubbed together " ) , and " <unk> <unk> " , the latter used to represent the first drops of rain . Britten originally had the idea of striking <unk> with a spoon , but having failed to make this work , he sought Imogen Holst 's advice . She recalled that " by great good fortune I had once had to teach Women 's Institute percussion groups during a wartime ' social half hour ' , so I was able to take him into my kitchen and show him how a row of china mugs hanging on a length of string could be hit with a large wooden spoon . 
 Britten also added – relatively late in the process of scoring the work – an ensemble of handbell ringers . According to Imogen Holst , a member of the Aldeburgh Youth Club brought Britten 's attention to a local ensemble of young handbell ringers ; hearing them play , Britten was so enchanted by the sound that he gave the ensemble a major part to play as the rainbow unfolds towards the end of the opera . Several commentators , including Michael Kennedy , Christopher Palmer and Humphrey Carpenter , have noted the affinity between the sound of Britten 's use of the handbells and the gamelan ensembles he had heard first @-@ hand in Bali in 1956 . The scarcity of handbells tuned at several of the pitches Britten required in the opera was to become an issue when the score was being prepared for publication . 
 = = Performance history and reception = = 
 = = = Premiere = = = 
 The first performance of Noye 's Fludde was staged during the 1958 Aldeburgh Festival , at Orford Church on 18 June . The conductor was Charles Mackerras , who had participated in several productions at past Aldeburgh festivals . The production was directed by Colin Graham , who also designed its set , with costume designs by Ceri Richards . Apart from Brannigan as Noye , two other professional singers were engaged : Gladys Parr , in her last role before retirement , sang the part of Mrs Noye , and the spoken Voice of God was provided by the Welsh bass Trevor Anthony . The other major roles were taken by child soloists , who were selected from extensive auditions . Among these was the future actor @-@ singer , Michael Crawford , then 16 years old and described by Graham as " a very recently broken @-@ voiced young tenor " , who played the role of <unk> . Mrs Noye 's Gossips were originally to be performed by girls from a Suffolk school , but when the headmistress heard rumours about the " dissolute " parts they were to play , she withdrew her pupils . 
 The professional element in the orchestra was provided by the English Opera Group players , led by Emanuel Hurwitz , with Ralph Downes at the organ . The children players , billed as " An East Suffolk Children 's Orchestra " , included handbell ringers from the County Modern School , Leiston ; a percussion group , whose instruments included the slung mugs , from <unk> Hall School ; recorder players from Framlingham College ; and bugle players from the Royal Hospital School , Holbrook . Graham , recalling the premiere some years later , wrote : " The large orchestra ( originally 150 players ) ... were massed around the font of Orford Church while the opera was played out on a stage erected at the end of the nave . " Philip Hope @-@ Wallace , writing for The Manchester Guardian , observed that " Charles Mackerras conducted the widespread forces , actually moving round a pillar to be able to control all sections in turn . " Martin Cooper of The Daily Telegraph noted : " The white walls of Orford Church furnished an ideal background to the gay colours of Ceri Richards 's costumes and the fantastic head @-@ dresses of the animals . In fact , the future of the work will lie in village churches such as this and with amateur musicians , for whom Britten has written something both wholly new and outstandingly original . " 
 The general critical reception was warmly enthusiastic . Felix Aprahamian in The Sunday Times called the performance " a curiously moving spiritual and musical experience " . Eric Roseberry , writing in Tempo magazine , found the music " simple and memorably tuneful throughout ... the writing for strings , recorders and percussion is a miracle of inspiration " . Andrew Porter in Opera magazine also found the music touched " by high inspiration " ; the evening was " an unforgettable experience ... extraordinarily beautiful , vivid and charming , and often deeply moving " . The design and production , Porter reported , were " brilliant " , while Mackerras commanded his disparate forces masterfully . Several critics remarked favourably on the sound of the handbells . The Times 's critic noted the effectiveness of Britten 's setting of the mystery play : " It is Britten 's triumph that in this musically slender piece he has brought to new life the mentality of another century by wholly modern means . These means included a miscellaneous orchestra such as he alone could conceive and handle " . 
 After the premiere , there were two further performances by the same forces in Orford Church , on 19 and 21 June . Noye 's Fludde became the first of Britten 's operas to be shown on television , when it was broadcast by ATV on 22 June 1958 . 
 = = = Later performances = = = 
 Noye 's Fludde had been largely created according to the resources available from the local Suffolk community . However , according to the Aldeburgh Festival organiser , Stephen Reiss , once Britten witnessed the public and critical reception following the premiere , he insisted on taking it to London . Looking for a suitable London church , Britten settled on Southwark Cathedral , somewhat reluctantly as he felt that it did not compare favourably with Orford . Four performances featuring the same principals as the premiere were given , on 14 and 15 November 1958 , with Britten conducting the first . All four performances sold out on the first day of booking , even , as Britten told a friend , " before any advertisement & with 2000 circulars yet to be sent ! ! " On 24 and 25 April 1959 the Finchley Children 's Music Group , which was formed in 1958 specially to perform Noye 's Fludde , gave what was billed as " the first amateur London performance " of the work , at All Saint 's Church , Finchley ; the cast included the operatic bass Norman Lumsden as Noah . 
 In the United States , after a radio broadcast in New York City on 31 July 1958 , the School of Sacred Music of Union Theological Seminary staged the US premiere on 16 March 1959 . The following year saw the opera 's Canadian premiere , conducted by John <unk> , staged during the 1960 Vancouver International Festival in Christchurch Cathedral . 
 During preparations for the first German performance of Noye 's Fludde in Ettal , planned for May 1959 , the problem of the scarcity of handbells became acute . Britten suggested that in the absence of handbells a set of tubular bells in E flat in groups of twos and threes could be played by four or six children with two hammers each to enable them to strike the chords . Britten was not present in Ettal , but he learned from Ernst Roth , of Boosey & Hawkes , that the Ettal production had substituted glockenspiel and <unk> for the handbells ; according to Roth the bells in Carl Orff 's <unk> percussion ensembles were " too weak " for the purpose . Britten later wrote to a friend : " I am rather relieved that I wasn 't there ! – no church , no bugles , no handbells , no recorders – but they seem to have done it with a great deal of care all the same . Still I rather hanker after doing it in Darmstadt as we want it – even importing handbells for instance . " 
 In the UK , Christopher Ede , producer of the landmark performances of the Chester mystery plays during the Festival of Britain , directed Britten 's opera in Winchester Cathedral , 12 – 14 July 1960 . Writing to Ede on 19 December 1959 , Britten urged him to keep the staging of Noye 's Fludde simple rather than elaborate . In 1971 the Aldeburgh Festival once again staged Noye 's Fludde at Orford ; a full television broadcast of the production , transferred to Snape Maltings , was made by the BBC , conducted by Steuart Bedford under the composer 's supervision , with Brannigan resuming the role of Noah , Sheila Rex as his wife , and Lumsden as the Voice of God . 
 In 1972 Jonathan Miller directed his first opera with a production of Noye 's Fludde , staged during 21 – 23 December at the Roundhouse Theatre , London . The adult roles were taken by Michael Williams ( God ) , Bryan Drake ( Noah ) and Isabelle Lucas ( Mrs Noah ) , and the conductor was John Lubbock . 
 Among less conventional productions , in September 2005 Noye 's Fludde was performed at Nuremberg zoo , in a production by the Internationales <unk> Nürnberg involving around 180 children from Nuremberg and from England , directed by Nina Kühner , conducted by Peter Selwyn . A subsequent zoo production was presented in Belfast , Northern Ireland , by NI Opera and the KT Wong Foundation . The performance was directed by Oliver Mears and conducted by Nicholas Chalmers , with Paul Carey Jones as Noye and Doreen Curran as Mrs Noye . The same production was performed in China , in October 2012 , at the Beijing Music Festival , this being the Chinese premiere of the work , and the first full performance of a Britten opera in China . It was performed again at the Shanghai Music In The Summer Air ( MISA ) Festival in July 2013 . 
 Britten 's centenary year 2013 prompted numerous performances across the UK , including at Tewkesbury Abbey during the Cheltenham Music Festival , and the Thaxted Festival where 120 local children appeared as the animals . An Aldeburgh Festival production as a finale to the centenary year was staged in November , on the eve of Britten 's 100th birthday anniversary , in his home town of Lowestoft . Andrew Shore appeared as Noye , and Felicity Palmer as Mrs Noye . This performance was broadcast in the UK on BBC Radio 3 on 24 November . Outside the UK , several professional companies mounted centenary year productions involving local children , including the Santa Fe Opera , and the New Orleans Opera which mounted its first production of any Britten opera . 
 = = Music = = 
 Noye 's Fludde has been described by the musicologist Arnold Whittall as a forerunner of Britten 's church parables of the 1960s , and by the composer 's biographer Paul Kildea as a hybrid work , " as much a cantata as an opera " . Most of the orchestral writing , says the music analyst Eric Roseberry , lies " well within the range of intelligent young players of very restricted technique " . Several episodes of the opera – such as " the grinding conflict of Britten 's passacaglia theme against Dykes 's familiar hymn @-@ tune in the storm " – introduces listeners and the youthful performers to what Roseberry terms " a contemporary idiom of dissonance " , in contrast to the " outworn style " of most music written for the young . With its innovatory arrangement of vocal and instrumental forces , Noye 's Fludde is summarised by Whittall as " a brilliant demonstration of how to combine the relatively elementary instrumental and vocal skills of amateurs with professionals to produce a highly effective piece of music theatre . " 
 The opera begins with a short , " strenuous " instrumental prelude , which forms the basis of the musical accompaniment to the opening congregational hymn ; its first phrase is founded on a descending bass E @-@ B @-@ F , itself to become an important motif . Humphrey Carpenter notes that throughout the hymn the bass line is out of step with the singing , an effect which , he says , " suggests an adult world where purity is unattainable " . Following the hymn , the Voice of God is accompanied , as it is in all his pre @-@ flood warnings and declamations , by the E @-@ B @-@ F notes from the opera 's opening bass line , sounded on the timpani . After Noye 's response in recitative , the next musical episode is the entry of Noye 's children and their wives , a passage which , Carpenter suggests , replaces the pessimism of the adult word with " the blissful optimism of childhood " . The syncopated tune of the children 's song is derived from the final line of Noye 's recitative : " As God has bidden us doe " . 
 Mrs Noye and her Gossips enter to an F sharp minor distortion of the children 's tune , which reflects their mocking attitude . In Noye 's song calling for the ark to be built , a flood leitmotiv derived from the first line of the opening hymn recurs as a solemn refrain . The music which accompanies the construction work heavily involves the children 's orchestra , and includes recorder trills , pizzicato open strings , and the tapping of oriental temple @-@ blocks . After the brief " quarrel " duet between Noye and his wife in 6 / 8 time , timpani @-@ led percussion heralds the Voice of God 's order to fill the ark . Bugle fanfares announce the arrival of the animals , who march into the ark to a " <unk> innocent " tune in which Roseberry detects the spirit of Mahler ; the fanfares punctuate the entire march . The birds are the last group to enter the ark , to the accompaniment of a three @-@ part canon sung by Noye 's children and their wives . In the final scene before the storm , where Noye and his family try to persuade Mrs Noye to join them in the ark in G major , the music expresses Mrs Noye 's obstinacy by having her reply accompanied by a D sharp pedal which prepares for the Gossips ' drinking scherzo in E minor . The slap which Mrs Noye administers when finally persuaded is accompanied by an E major fortissimo . 
 The storm scene which forms the centre of the opera is an extended passacaglia , the theme of which uses the entire chromatic scale . In a long instrumental introduction , full rein is given to the various elements of the children 's orchestra . <unk> mugs struck with a wooden spoon give the sound of the first raindrops . Trills in the recorders represent the wind , strings impersonate waves , while piano chords outline the flood leitmotiv . The sound builds to a peak with thunder and lightning from the percussion . When " Eternal Father " is sung at the climax of the storm , the passacaglia theme provides the bass line for the hymn . After the hymn , the minor @-@ key fury of the passacaglia gradually subsides , resolving into what Roseberry describes as " a dewy , pastoral F major " akin to that of the finale of Beethoven 's Pastoral Symphony . Noye 's reappearance is followed by the brief waltzes for the Raven , accompanied by solo cello , and the Dove , the latter a flutter @-@ tongued recorder solo the melody of which is reversed when the Dove returns . 
 Following God 's instruction , the people and animals leave the ark singing a thankful chorus of Alleluias with more bugle fanfares in B flat . The appearance of the rainbow is accompanied by handbell chimes , a sound which dominates the final stages of the work . In the final canonical hymn , the main tune moves from F major to G major and is sung over reiterated bugle calls , joined by the handbells . In the third verse , the organ provides a brief discordant intervention , " the one jarring note in Noye 's Fludde " according to the musicologist Peter Evans . Graham Elliott believes that this may be a musical joke in which Britten pokes gentle fun at the habits of some church organists . The mingled chimes of slung mugs and bells continue during God 's final valedictory blessing . As Noye leaves , the full orchestra provides a final fortissimo salute , the opera then concluding peacefully with B flat chimes of handbells alternating with extended G major string chords – " a hauntingly beautiful close " , says Roseberry . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Several of the opera 's novel features , including the use of a large amateur orchestra , and specifically its use of handbells , posed problems for Britten 's publishers , Boosey & Hawkes . Ernst Roth made enquiries about the availability of handbells to the firm Mears & Stainbank ( the bell foundry based in Whitechapel , London ) , and then wrote to Britten urging him to prepare an alternative , simplified version of Noye 's Fludde for publication , since the rarity of handbells in the scale of E flat made the original score , in his view , impractical . Britten resisted such a proposal : " I think if you consider a performance of this work in a big church with about fifty or more children singing , you will agree that the orchestra would sound totally inadequate if it were only piano duet , a few strings and a drum or two . " Britten suggested , rather , that Boosey & Hawkes should invest in a set of E flat handbells to hire for performances ; or , that the handbells music could be simply cued in the piano duet part . 
 After the score had been published , and in the face of an imminent performance in Ettal , Britten suggested that he could attempt to rewrite the music for a handbell ensemble in D , since sets in that key were more common than in E flat . Britten never prepared this alternative version for reduced instrumentation . He did agree , however , to make the published full score " less bulky " by presenting the amateur forces of recorders , ripieno strings and percussion in the form of short score , on the understanding that full scores for those groups would be available to hire for rehearsal and performance purposes . The full score was published in 1958 , and the vocal score , prepared by Imogen Holst with the libretto translated into German by Prince Ludwig of Hesse and the Rhine , under the pseudonym Ludwig Landgraf , was published in 1959 . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 = Allegra Byron = 
 Clara Allegra Byron ( 12 January 1817 – 20 April 1822 ) , initially named Alba , meaning " dawn " , or " white " , by her mother , was the illegitimate daughter of the poet George Gordon , Lord Byron and Claire Clairmont , the stepsister of Mary Shelley . 
 Born in Bath , England , she initially lived with her mother and Mary Shelley and Percy Bysshe Shelley , but was turned over to Byron when she was fifteen months @-@ old . She lived most of her short life with boarders chosen by Byron or in a Roman Catholic convent , where she died at age five of typhus or malaria . She was visited only intermittently by her father , who displayed inconsistent paternal interest in her . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Allegra was the product of a short @-@ lived affair between the Romantic poet and her starstruck teenage mother , who was living in reduced circumstances in the household of her stepsister and brother @-@ in @-@ law . Claire wrote to Byron during the pregnancy begging him to write back and promise to take care of her and the baby . Byron ignored her . After her birth , she was initially taken into the household of Leigh Hunt as the child of a cousin . A few months later the Shelleys and Claire took the baby back as an " adopted " child . Claire bonded with her baby daughter and wrote in her journal with delight about her close , physical connection with little Allegra , but she was also dealing with emotional and financial pressures from the Shelleys that made it difficult for her to keep the baby with her . The Shelleys were fond of Allegra , but Mary Shelley feared that neighbours would believe Percy Bysshe Shelley fathered her as the truth about her relationship to Claire leaked out . William Godwin , Mary 's father and Claire 's stepfather , had immediately leaped to that conclusion when he learned of Allegra 's birth . In an October 1817 letter to Percy Bysshe Shelley , Mary Shelley remarked that their toddler son William disliked Allegra , but was fond of his baby sister Clara . She saw her son 's reaction to Allegra , who was no blood relation to him , as " an argument in favor of those who advocate instinctive natural affection . The Shelleys were constantly in debt . Mary Shelley wanted the baby to be sent to Byron and wanted her difficult and temperamental stepsister , who had too close a relationship with her husband , to leave her house . 
 After the child 's birth , Shelley wrote to Byron " of the exquisite symmetry " and beauty of " a little being whom we ... call Alba , or the Dawn . " He asked Byron what his plans were for the child . Later , Shelley acknowledged the child 's presence was becoming something of an embarrassment . Byron asked his half @-@ sister Augusta Leigh to take Allegra into her household , but Augusta refused . Hostile to Claire and initially sceptical that he had fathered her daughter , Byron agreed to take custody of Allegra under the condition that her mother have only limited contact with her . Shelley warned Claire that this might not , after all , be the best plan for Allegra , but Claire hoped that her daughter would be more financially comfortable and would have a better chance at a good life if she lived with her father . " I have sent you my child because I love her too well to keep her , " she wrote to Byron . 
 Byron requested that her name be changed from Alba , which also related to " <unk> , " Claire Clairmont 's nickname for Byron , to Allegra , an Italian name meaning " cheerful , brisk " and relating to the musical term " allegro . " During the journey to turn the child over to Byron , Claire wrote in her journal that she had bathed her daughter in Dover , but then crossed the passage out , as if afraid to mention the baby 's name . The child was baptised with the name Clara Allegra before her mother relinquished her to Byron . Byron discussed spelling Allegra 's surname as " Biron " instead of as " Byron " to further distinguish her from his legitimate daughter , Augusta Ada Byron . Byron offered to pay Shelley for the expense of Allegra 's upkeep during her first months of life , but Shelley indignantly refused and said the cost was a trifle . 
 = = Resemblances to Byron = = 
 Mary Shelley had called the baby Allegra " the little Commodore " because of her sturdy body and alert , intelligent look . Byron was also pleased with Allegra 's resemblances to himself in appearance and temperament . When she was eighteen months old , he wrote in a letter to a friend : " My bastard came three days ago — very like — healthy — noisy & capricious . " In an 1818 letter to his half @-@ sister Augusta Leigh , Byron wrote that " She is very pretty — remarkably intelligent ... She has very blue eyes — that singular forehead — fair curly hair — and a devil of a spirit — but that is Papa 's . " In 1819 , in another letter to Augusta Leigh , Byron described two and a half @-@ year @-@ old Allegra as " very droll " and again commented on her resemblance to himself in physical appearance , temperament and interests : " ( She ) has a very good deal of the Byron . Can 't articulate the letter ' r ' at all — frowns and pouts quite in our way — blue eyes — light hair growing darker daily — and a dimple in the chin — a scowl on the brow — white skin — sweet voice — and a particular liking of Music — and of her own way in every thing — is that not B. all over ? " The child had forgotten any English she had learned and now spoke only Venetian Italian . In March 1820 , he complained in a letter that three @-@ year @-@ old Allegra was vain and " obstinate as a mule " . Her behaviour was sometimes unmanageable , probably as a result of her unstable living arrangements and frequent changes in caregivers . At age four , the naughty child terrorised Byron 's servants with her temper tantrums and other misbehavior and told frequent lies . 
 As she grew older , Allegra also demonstrated a talent for acting and singing . Byron 's mistress Teresa , Contessa Guiccioli , whom Allegra called " <unk> " , remarked on Allegra 's talent for mimicking the servants and for singing popular songs . Byron felt her talent for mimicry , another talent she shared with him , might amuse other people in the short term but would eventually be a cause of trouble for her . 
 Stability and the affection of the nuns at the Capuchin convent in Bagnacavallo , where she spent the last year of her life , improved Allegra 's self @-@ control . Still , the nuns indulged her because of her charm and she was rarely punished for breaking the rules . 
 = = In poetry = = 
 Percy Bysshe Shelley , remembering his 1818 visit to Byron , when he rolled billiard balls with Allegra , immortalised the toddler as Count <unk> 's child in his 1819 poem Julian and <unk> : A Conversation : 
 In the next stanza he imagines her grown to a woman : " A wonder of this earth ... Like one of Shakespeare 's women . " 
 = = Convent education = = 
 Shelley , who visited the toddler Allegra while she was being boarded with a family chosen by Byron , objected to the child 's living arrangements over the years , though he had initially approved of Claire Clairmont 's plan to relinquish her to her father . During the summer of 1819 , Allegra stayed with four different families and was abandoned by her nursemaid . Byron sent her to stay for long periods with his friend , British consul Richard Belgrave Hoppner , but Hoppner 's wife didn 't like Allegra and sent her to stay with three other families in as many months . Though he 'd originally agreed to permit Claire to visit their daughter , Byron reneged on the agreement . Shelley often tried to persuade Byron to let Claire see her daughter and they thought of ways to regain custody of her . Claire was alarmed by reports in 1820 that her daughter had suffered a malarial @-@ type fever and that Byron had moved her to warm Ravenna at the height of the summer . Claire wrote that Allegra must be moved to a more healthy climate if she was to survive and pleaded with Byron to send their daughter to her in Bagni di Lucca , a town with a cool mountain climate . However , Byron didn 't want to send Allegra back to be raised in the Shelley household , where he was sure she 'd grow ill from eating a vegetarian diet and would be taught atheism . He pointed out that all of the other children in the Shelley household had died . The Shelleys ' first three children had all died young . Byron believed the rumours that a fourth child , Elena Adelaide Shelley , was Claire 's daughter by Shelley and Allegra 's half @-@ sister . Elena died in a foster home in 1820 at age seventeen months . " Have they raised one ? " Byron wrote in a letter to a friend in the fall of 1820 . 
 Shelley wrote to his wife Mary that Allegra looked pale and quiet when he saw her in 1818 . When he saw her again in 1821 at the Capuchin convent in Bagnacavallo , when she was four , he again felt she looked pale and delicate and was infuriated by the Roman Catholic education she was receiving , though he had initially told Byron he approved of her being sent to a convent . " ( Besides ) Paradise & angels ... she has a prodigious list of saints — and is always talking of the Bambino ... The idea of bringing up so sweet a creature in the midst of such trash till Sixteen ! " he wrote . " However , though Shelley thought the little girl was more serious and contemplative than he remembered , he said she had not lost her " excessive vivacity . " After five months in the convent school , her behaviour had also improved ; she obeyed the nuns readily and was well @-@ disciplined , though Shelley didn 't think the nuns had been too severe with her . The child asked Shelley to " tell her mother she wanted a kiss and a gold dress and would he please beg her Papa and <unk> to visit her . " Allegra no longer had any real memory of Claire , but had grown attached to " her <unk> , " Byron 's mistress Teresa , Countess Guiccioli , who had mothered her . Teresa gave the little girl her own childhood toys and played with her when she spent weeks recovering from a childhood illness . 
 Claire Clairmont had always opposed Byron 's decision to send her daughter to the convent in March 1821 . Shortly afterwards , she wrote him a furious , condemnatory letter accusing him of breaking his promise that their daughter would never be apart from one of her parents . She felt that the physical conditions in convents were unhealthy and the education provided was poor and was responsible for " the state of ignorance & profligacy of Italian women , all pupils of <unk> . They are bad wives & most unnatural mothers , licentious & ignorant they are the dishonour & unhappiness of society ... This step will procure to you an innumerable addition of enemies & of blame . " In March 1822 , she dreamed up a plot to kidnap her daughter from the convent and asked Shelley to forge a letter of permission from Byron . Shelley refused . 
 Byron had arranged for Allegra to be educated in the convent precisely because he , unlike his former lover Claire , thought favourably of the manners and attitudes of Italian women who had received convent educations . He disapproved of what he called Claire 's " loose morals " and " Bedlam behavior " and didn 't want her to influence Allegra . He also believed that his daughter , given her illegitimacy , would have a far better chance of marrying well in Italy than she would in England . A Roman Catholic girl with a suitable dowry , raised in a convent , would have a decent chance of marrying into high Italian society . He wanted the child to become a Roman Catholic , which he viewed as the " best religion . " " If Claire thinks that she shall ever interfere with the child 's morals or education , she mistakes ; she never shall , " wrote Byron in a letter to Richard Belgrave Hoppner in September 1820 . " The girl shall be a Christian and a married woman , if possible . " Her mother could see Allegra , he added , only with the " proper restrictions . " Byron wrote to Hoppner in March 1821 that Allegra would receive better care in the convent than she would with him . His mistress , Teresa , Countess Guiccioli , had a happy experience at the convent boarding school where she had lived from the age of five , and had also persuaded Byron that a convent school would be the best place for Allegra . He also viewed the convent as the safest place for her with revolution brewing in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies . 
 Allegra was doted on by the nuns at the convent , who called her " <unk> , " and was visited once by Teresa 's relatives . Probably with considerable assistance from the nuns , four @-@ year @-@ old Allegra wrote her father a letter in Italian from the convent , dated 21 September 1821 , asking him to visit her : 
 My dear Papa . It being fair @-@ time , I should like so much a visit from my Papa as I have many wishes to satisfy . Won 't you come to please your <unk> who loves you so ? 
 The abbess of the convent included her own note inviting Byron to come to see Allegra before he left for Pisa and assuring him " how much she is loved . " On the back of this letter , Byron wrote : " Sincere enough , but not very flattering – for she wants to see me because ' it is the fair ' to get some paternal Gingerbread – I suppose . " Byron never responded to Allegra 's letter or visited the child during the thirteen months she was in the convent . 
 = = Death , burial , and a memorial = = 
 Allegra died on 20 April 1822 , attended by three doctors and all of the nuns at the convent , of what some biographers have identified as typhus . Byron biographer Benita Eisler speculated that she died after suffering a recurrence of her malarial @-@ type fevers , which she had also suffered from the previous autumn . 
 Byron sent her body to England and wrote an inscription for her gravestone that read : " In memory of Allegra , daughter of G.G. , Lord Byron , who died at <unk> Cavallo in Italy , 20 April 1822 , Aged Five Years and Three Months , - ' I shall go to her , but she shall not return to me . ' -2 Samuel , xii , 23 " Byron felt guilty about his neglect of the child after her death , he told Marguerite , Countess of <unk> , a few months afterwards : 
 Let the object of affection be snatched away by death , and how is all the pain ever inflicted upon them avenged ! The same imagination that led us to slight or overlook their sufferings , now that they are forever lost to us , magnifies their estimable qualities ... How did I feel this when my daughter , Allegra , died ! While she lived , her existence never seemed necessary to my happiness ; but no sooner did I lose her , than it appeared to me as if I could not live without her . 
 The memory of Allegra haunted Shelley and her mother . Before his own death by drowning in July 1822 , Shelley had a vision of the dead child in which she rose naked from the sea , laughed , clapped her hands , and beckoned to him . Claire Clairmont furiously accused Byron of murdering Allegra . She demanded that Byron send her a portrait of Allegra , a lock of the child 's hair , and that she be placed in charge of the funeral arrangements . In the end , though , Claire could not bear to see Allegra 's coffin or to hold a funeral service for her daughter . She blamed Byron for the rest of her life for Allegra 's death . 
 <unk> by Byron 's reputation and the child 's illegitimacy , the rector of St. Mary 's Parish Church in Harrow , Middlesex , England , refused to place a plaque on Allegra 's grave and permitted her only to be buried at the entrance of the church without a marker . When Byron died two years later , the rector also refused to bury him at St. Mary 's Parish Church in Harrow . He was also denied burial at Westminster . He was ultimately buried at St. Mary Magdalens ' Church in Hucknall <unk> , Nottinghamshire , England . 
 In 1980 , The Byron Society placed a memorial plaque for Allegra at Harrow , inscribed with words from a letter Byron wrote to Shelley after her death : " I suppose that Time will do his usual work ... – Death has done his . " 
 = Toby Creek = 
 Toby Creek ( also known as Toby 's Creek ) is a tributary of the Susquehanna River in Luzerne County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 10 @.@ 5 miles ( 16 @.@ 9 km ) long and flows through Dallas Township , Dallas , Kingston Township , Courtdale , Luzerne , Pringle , Kingston , Edwardsville , and Larksville . The watershed of the creek has an area of 36 @.@ 5 square miles ( 95 km2 ) . The entire drainage basin is designated as a Migratory Fishery and parts are designated as either a Coldwater Fishery , a Warmwater Fishery , or a Trout Stocking Fishery . The creek has two named tributaries : Huntsville Creek and Trout Brook . It is said to show " some degraded conditions " , but does not experience severe pollution and is not considered to be impaired . The creek is piped underground in Pringle , but resurfaces in Edwardsville . 
 The watershed of Toby Creek occupies part or all of ten boroughs and four townships . The creek 's watershed is mainly rural . Pennsylvania Route 309 , Pennsylvania Route 118 , and US Route 11 are partially within it . The two @-@ billion @-@ gallon Huntsville Reservoir is also in the creek 's drainage basin . Several mills were built along the creek in the 1800s and many bridges have been constructed over it . The creek experienced significant floods in 1942 and 1972 . 
 = = Course = = 
 Toby Creek begins in Dallas Township . It flows south @-@ southeast for a short distance before turning south and then southeast . The creek then flows east @-@ southeast alongside Pennsylvania Route 415 for a few miles , passing through Dallas on the way . It then crosses Pennsylvania Route 309 and enters Dallas Township . At this point , it turns east for a few tenths of a mile and receives the tributary Trout Brook from the left . The creek then turns south and slightly east for a few miles , flowing not far from Pennsylvania Route 309 and entering Kingston Township . It then turns south @-@ southeast , crossing Pennsylvania Route 309 and receiving the tributary Huntsville Creek from the right . At this point , the creek enters a water gap , flowing very close to Pennsylvania Route 309 . After several tenths of a mile , it gradually turns northeast and then turns south @-@ southeast , briefly passing through Courtdale and into Luzerne , where it exits the water gap . After several tenths of a mile , the creek turns south , crossing Pennsylvania Route 309 and entering Pringle , where it disappears from the surface . The creek reappears in Edwardsville and flows west for a few tenths of a mile before turning south and then south @-@ southwest . Several tenths of a mile further downstream , it reaches its confluence with the Susquehanna River on the border between Edwardsville and Larksville . 
 Toby Creek joins the Susquehanna River 187 @.@ 79 miles ( 302 @.@ 22 km ) upriver of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Toby Creek has two named tributaries : Huntsville Creek and Trout Brook . Huntsville Creek joins Toby Creek 5 @.@ 04 miles ( 8 @.@ 11 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 14 @.@ 7 square miles ( 38 km2 ) . Trout Brook joins Toby Creek 7 @.@ 60 miles ( 12 @.@ 23 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 4 @.@ 20 square miles ( 10 @.@ 9 km2 ) . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 The lower reaches of Toby Creek were polluted by coal mining waste in the early 1900s . However , in modern times , no part of the watershed of Toby Creek is considered to be impaired . It has been described as showing " some degraded conditions " , but does not rank among the most polluted watersheds in the Middle Susquehanna Subbasin . However , the creek has high levels of nutrients and sodium . There is one combined sewer overflow in the watershed , near the mouth of the creek . 
 The discharge of Toby Creek in its lower reaches is lowest in August and September , when it averages 15 and 19 cubic feet per second . In July and October , the average discharge is also relatively low ( 22 and 21 cubic feet per second , respectively ) . The highest average discharges occur in April and March : 83 and 82 cubic feet per second , respectively . The highest average monthly discharge between 1941 and 1993 was 269 @.@ 3 cubic feet per second , in April 1993 . However , during severe floods , the discharge can top 3000 cubic feet per second . The lowest recorded average monthly discharge during that time , 3 @.@ 00 cubic feet per second , occurred in September 1951 . The average discharge of the creek between 1941 and 1993 was 41 @.@ 2 cubic feet per second . The gage height of the creek between 1986 and 1993 ranged from 0 @.@ 25 feet ( 0 @.@ 076 m ) to 1 @.@ 46 feet ( 0 @.@ 45 m ) , but can be over 4 to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 8 m ) during severe floods . 
 The turbidity of Toby Creek ranges from 1 to 150 <unk> . The creek 's specific conductance ranges from 70 to 210 micro @-@ siemens per centimeter at 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) . This value was historically somewhat higher . The creek is very slightly alkaline , with an average pH of 7 @.@ 1 . Its pH ranges from 6 @.@ 4 to 7 @.@ 7 . The concentration of water hardness in the creek 's waters ranges from 26 to 84 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 026 to 0 @.@ 084 oz / cu ft ) . 
 The concentration of dissolved oxygen in the waters of Toby Creek ranges from 9 @.@ 1 to 13 @.@ 6 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ <unk> to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) and is typically over 10 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 0100 oz / cu ft ) . The concentration of carbon dioxide in the waters of the creek ranges from 0 @.@ 9 to 12 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ <unk> to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) and the ammonia concentration ranges from 0 @.@ 05 to 0 @.@ 76 milligrams per liter ( 5 @.@ 0 × 10 − 5 to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) per liter . The nitrite concentration ranges from 0 @.@ 048 to 0 @.@ 124 milligrams per liter ( 4 @.@ 8 × 10 − 5 to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) and the nitrate concentration ranges from 0 @.@ 94 to 1 @.@ 60 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 00094 to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) . The phosphorus concentration ranges between 0 @.@ 06 and 0 @.@ 62 milligrams per liter ( 6 @.@ 0 × 10 − 5 and 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) . The concentration of chloride ranges from 7 to 25 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 0070 to 0 @.@ 0250 oz / cu ft ) and the sulfate concentration ranges from 2 to 24 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 0020 to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) . The average concentration of total dissolved solids in the creek is 117 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 117 oz / cu ft ) , but this was historically slightly higher . A total of 10 @,@ 200 tons of dissolved solids flow through the creek per day . 
 The calcium concentration in the waters of Toby Creek ranges from 8 @.@ 8 to 152 micrograms per liter ( 8 @.@ 8 × 10 − 6 to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) and the magnesium concentration ranges from 1 to 13 micrograms per liter ( 1 @.@ 00 × 10 − 6 to 1 @.@ 299 × 10 − 5 oz / cu ft ) . The concentration of recoverable iron in the creek ranges from 20 to 21 @,@ 000 micrograms per liter ( 2 @.@ 0 × 10 − 5 to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) and the concentration of recoverable aluminum was once measured to be 12 @,@ 000 milligrams per liter ( 12 oz / cu ft ) . The concentrations of chromium and copper were both once measured to be 20 micrograms per liter ( 2 @.@ 0 × 10 − 5 oz / cu ft ) and the arsenic concentration was measured to be 1 microgram per liter ( 1 @.@ 00 × 10 − 6 oz / cu ft ) . The manganese and zinc concentrations were once measured to be 520 and 70 micrograms per liter ( 0 @.@ <unk> and 7 @.@ 0 × 10 − 5 oz / cu ft ) . 
 = = Geography , geology , and climate = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Toby Creek is 518 feet ( 158 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the creek 's source is between 1 @,@ 220 and 1 @,@ 240 feet ( 370 and 380 m ) above sea level . Its gradient is relatively low . In its upper 8 miles ( 13 km ) , the creek 's elevation decreases at a rate of 92 @.@ 5 feet ( 28 @.@ 2 m ) per mile . In its lower 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) , its elevation decreases at a rate of 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) per mile . 
 Toby Creek passes through a gorge between <unk> and Luzerne . Downstream of Luzerne , it flows through broad bottom lands . The creek is surrounded by steep slopes in the borough of Courtdale . The topography of the creek 's watershed is described as " rough and hilly " in a 1921 book . The watershed has been affected by glaciation . 
 The channel of Toby Creek is sinuous . Rock formations consisting of sandstone and shale occur in its vicinity . There are also coal deposits along the creek in its lower reaches . Rocks of the Chemung Formation occur in the vicinity of Toby Creek . The bedrock is 4 @.@ 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 3 m ) underground in some areas of the watershed . 
 A large impounding basin diverts water away from Kingston and Pringle . The creek is then piped via gravity into a " massive " underground pipe for some distance . The creek resurfaces in Edwardsville . There is also a pressure conduit on the creek . A levee is situated on the creek in Edwardsville Township , as are flumes and conduits . It is protected by riprap in Dallas Township . The creek is channelized for much of its length and has been relocated in places . 
 In the uppermost 31 @.@ 8 square miles ( 82 km2 ) of the watershed of Toby Creek , the annual rate of precipitation ranges from 35 to 50 @.@ 4 inches ( 89 to 128 cm ) , with an average of 40 @.@ 6 inches ( 103 cm ) . The waters of the creek at one site have a velocity of 10 @.@ 7 feet ( 3 @.@ 3 m ) per second . The water temperature was measured several times between January and August 1976 . In January , February , and March , it ranged from 0 @.@ 0 to 5 @.@ 0 ° C ( 32 @.@ 0 to 41 @.@ 0 ° F ) . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Toby Creek has an area of 36 @.@ 5 square miles ( 95 km2 ) . The watershed is situated in north @-@ central Luzerne County . The creek is entirely within the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Kingston . The stream density of the uppermost 31 @.@ 8 square miles ( 82 km2 ) of the watershed is 1 @.@ 6 miles ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) per 1 square mile ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) . A total of 59 @.@ 7 percent of this segment of the watershed is forested and 17 @.@ 7 percent is urban . 
 Toby Creek 's watershed is in part or all of 14 municipalities . It is in ten boroughs : <unk> , Pringle , Luzerne , Larksville , Kingston , Harveys Lake , Fort Fort , Edwardsville , Dallas , and Courtdale . It is also in four townships : Lehman Township , Kingston Township , Jackson Township , and Dallas Township . It is adjacent to watersheds such as those of Harveys Creek and Abrahams Creek . A 9 @-@ mile ( 15 @-@ kilometer ) long stretch of land along the main stem of Toby Creek is highly urbanized . This stretch of land begins in Dallas , near the creek 's headwaters , and passes through <unk> , Luzerne , Kingston , and Edwardsville . Both the Back Mountain and Endless Mountain regions are associated with the creek 's watershed and are adjacent to it . 
 The watershed of Toby Creek is predominantly rural . Most of it ( 61 @.@ 3 percent ) is forested land . Considerably less common are grassland ( 19 @.@ 6 percent ) and urban land ( 16 @.@ 4 percent ) . A total of 2 @.@ 1 percent of the creek 's watershed consists of wetlands and 0 @.@ 6 percent consists of mining lands . The mining land is confined to one area near the mouth of the creek . 
 The watershed of Toby Creek is very narrow in its lower reaches . However , it becomes much broader in its middle and upper reaches . The watershed is developed . The number of employees in the creek 's drainage basin is expected to increase until 2030 . Pennsylvania Route 309 runs through the watershed in a north @-@ south direction . Pennsylvania Route 118 is in the watershed 's northwestern portion and US Route 11 passes through its southernmost part . 
 A total of 4 @.@ 03 million gallons of water per day are withdrawn from Toby Creek and its tributaries . 3 @.@ 38 million gallons per day ( 84 percent ) are removed by registered water suppliers and 0 @.@ 51 million gallons per day ( 13 percent ) are removed for commercial and industrial purposes . 0 @.@ 10 million gallons per day ( 2 percent ) are removed for mineral purposes and 0 @.@ 04 million gallons per day ( 1 percent ) are removed for residential purposes . A reservoir known as the Huntsville Reservoir is located in the watershed of Toby Creek . It has a capacity of approximately 1 @.@ 915 billion gallons . 
 Toby Creek is the main source of flooding in Courtdale , Dallas , Luzerne , Pringle , and Kingston Township . It is also one of the main sources of flooding in the borough of Kingston . However , the creek 's floods cause little damage in Courtdale , since its floodplain is relatively undeveloped in that borough . The creek has an Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan . 
 There are numerous swamps , lakes , and ponds in the watershed of Toby Creek . 
 = = History = = 
 Toby Creek was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . 
 An ancient fortification is located on a plain near Toby Creek in Kingston Township . The fort is elliptical and measures 337 by 272 feet ( 103 by 83 m ) . It is 150 feet ( 46 m ) from the creek and 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) from the Susquehanna River . 
 In the beginning of the 1800s , there were no roads going through the valley of Toby Creek . However , one was built by the late 1800s or early 1900s . Peter Grubb operated a gristmill and sawmill on Toby Creek in the late 1700s and / or early 1800s . They were the only gristmill and sawmill that were ever built in Kingston up to 1893 . The later came to be owned by Thomas <unk> , who tore them down in 1826 . In 1812 , a Mr. Buckingham , a Mr. Carbon , a Mr. Tuttle , and a Mr. Parker constructed a paper mill on Toby Creek . Later , in 1836 , George W. Little built a small charcoal furnace on the creek at the site of the paper mill . Jude Baldwin constructed a mill on the creek in 1813 . In 1847 , Miner Fuller built another mill approximately 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) further upstream . Both were torn down in the late 1800s since they were no longer needed . In the early 1900s , the main industries in the watershed were agriculture and coal mining . The creek was also used as water power for several mills . Around this time , the Lehigh Valley Railroad crossed the watershed , following the creek for its entire length . The Delaware , Lackawanna , and Western Railroad followed also traversed the watershed and followed the creek in its lower reaches . 
 The two most severe floods in the watershed of Toby Creek occurred on December 30 , 1942 and June 22 , 1972 . During these floods there were peak discharges of 3 @,@ 010 and 3 @,@ 390 cubic feet per second ( 85 and 96 m3 / s ) , respectively . The gage heights reached 4 @.@ 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and 6 @.@ 1 feet ( 1 @.@ 9 m ) . 
 Numerous bridges have been built over Toby Creek . One was built in 1920 and repaired in 1989 . Another was built in 1928 and repaired in 1963 and a third was built in 1939 . Six bridges were built over the creek in 1941 , all of them in Kingston Township or Dallas Township . Another bridge was built over Toby Creek in 1955 and four more were built in 1963 , one of which was repaired in 1988 . One was built in 1970 and repaired in 1980 and another was built in 1976 and repaired in 1997 . Two more bridges were built across the creek in 1980 , one more in 1984 , and one in 1989 . 
 The streambank of Toby Creek underwent a stabilization project after 2005 . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The drainage basin of Toby Creek upstream of the tributary Huntsville Creek is designated as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . From below Huntsville Creek downstream to Pringle , where Toby Creek disappears from the surface , Toby Creek and its drainage basin are designated as a Trout Stocking Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . From that point downstream to the creek 's mouth , the drainage basin is designated as a Warmwater Fishery . Wild trout naturally reproduce in the creek from its headwaters downstream to its mouth . 
 The concentration of fecal coliform bacteria in the waters of Toby Creek was once measured to be 1000 colonies per 100 millilitres ( 3 @.@ 5 imp fl oz ; 3 @.@ 4 US fl oz ) . 
 Out of a number of stream segments studied by the Susquehanna River Basin Commission , a section of Toby Creek was found to be the poorest habitat . Specific problems faced by the creek at this site include embeddedness , a lack of riffles , poor <unk> substrate , low instream cover , low @-@ quality streambanks , and sediment deposition . The borough of Dallas has plans to construct a greenway along the creek . 
 = Hafizullah Amin = 
 Hafizullah Amin ( Persian : <unk> الله <unk> born 1 August 1929 – 27 December 1979 ) was an Afghan politician and statesman during the Cold War . Amin was born in Paghman and educated at Kabul University , after which he started his career as a teacher . After a few years in that occupation , he went to the United States to study . He would visit the United States a second time before moving permanently to Afghanistan , and starting his career in radical politics . He ran as a candidate in the 1965 parliamentary election but failed to secure a seat . Amin was the only Khalqist elected to parliament in the 1969 parliamentary election , thus increasing his standing within the party . He was one of the leading organisers of the Saur Revolution which overthrew the government of Mohammad Daoud Khan . 
 Amin 's short @-@ lived presidency was marked by controversies from beginning to end . He came to power by ordering the death of his predecessor Nur Muhammad Taraki . The revolt against communist rule which had begun under Taraki worsened under Amin , and was a problem that his government was unable to solve . The Soviet Union , which alleged that Amin was an agent of the CIA , intervened in Afghanistan while invoking the Twenty @-@ Year Treaty of Friendship between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union . Amin was assassinated by the Soviets in December 1979 as part of Operation Storm @-@ 333 , having ruled for slightly longer than three months . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Hafizullah Amin was born to a Ghilzai Pashtun family in Paghman on 1 August 1929 . His father , a civil servant , died when he was still very young . Thanks to his brother Abdullah , a primary school teacher , Amin was able to attend both primary and secondary school , which in turn allowed him to attend Kabul University ( KU ) . After studying mathematics there , he also graduated from the Darul Mualimeen Teachers College in Kabul , and became a teacher . Amin later became vice @-@ principal of the Darul Mualimeen College , and then principal of the prestigious Avesina High School , and in 1957 left Afghanistan for Columbia University in New York City , where he earned M. A. in education . It was at Columbia that Amin became attracted to Marxism , and in 1958 he became a member of the university 's Socialist Progressive Club . When he returned to Afghanistan , Amin became a teacher at Kabul University , and later , for the second time , the principal of Avesina High School . During this period Amin became acquainted with Nur Muhammad Taraki , a communist . Around this time , Amin quit his position as principal of Avesina High School in order to become principal of the Darul Mualimeen College . 
 It is alleged that Amin became radicalised during his second stay in the United States in 1962 , when he enrolled in a work @-@ study group at the University of Wisconsin . Amin studied in the doctoral programme at the Columbia University Teachers College , but started to neglect his studies in favour of politics ; in 1963 he became head of the Afghan students ' association at the college . When he returned to Afghanistan in the mid @-@ 1960s , the route flew to Afghanistan by way of Moscow . There , Amin met the Afghan ambassador to the Soviet Union , his old friend Ali Ahmad <unk> , a previous Afghan Minister of Education . During his short stay , Amin became even more radicalised . Some people , Nabi <unk> for instance , do not believe he travelled through Moscow , but rather West Germany and Lebanon . By the time he had returned to Afghanistan , the Communist People 's Democratic Party of Afghanistan ( PDPA ) had already held its founding congress , which was in 1965 . Amin ran as a candidate for the PDPA in the 1965 parliamentary election , and lost by a margin of less than fifty votes . 
 In 1966 , when the PDPA Central Committee was expanded , Amin was elected as a non @-@ voting member , and in the spring of 1967 he gained full membership . Amin 's standing in the Khalq faction of the PDPA increased when he was the only Khalqist elected to parliament in the 1969 parliamentary election . When the PDPA split along factional lines in 1967 , between Khalqists led by Nur and Parchamites led by Babrak Karmal , Amin joined the Khalqists . As a member of parliament , Amin tried to win over support from the Pashtun people in the armed forces . According to a biography about Amin , he used his position as member of parliament to fight against imperialism , feudalism , and reactionary tendencies , and fought against the " rotten " regime , the monarchy . Amin himself said that he used his membership in parliament to pursue the class struggle against the bourgeoisie . Relations between Khalqists and Parchamites deteriorated during this period . Amin , the only Khalq member of parliament , and Babrak Karmal , the only Parcham member of parliament , did not cooperate with each other . Amin would later , during his short stint in power , mention these events with bitterness . Following the arrest of fellow PDPA members Dastagir Panjsheri and Saleh Mohammad <unk> in 1969 , Amin became one of the party 's leading members , and was still a pre @-@ eminent party member by the time of their release in 1973 . 
 = = = The Daoud era = = = 
 From 1973 until the PDPA unification in 1977 , Amin was second only to Taraki in the Khalqist PDPA . When the PDPA ruled Afghanistan , their relationship was referred to as a disciple ( Amin ) following his mentor ( Taraki ) . This official portrayal of the situation was misleading ; their relationship was more work @-@ oriented . Taraki needed Amin 's " tactical and strategic talents " ; Amin 's motivations are more uncertain , but it is commonly believed that he associated with Taraki to protect his own position . Amin had attracted many enemies during his career , the most notable being Karmal . According to the official version of events , Taraki protected Amin from party members or others who wanted to hurt the PDPA and the country . 
 When Mohammed Daoud Khan ousted the monarchy , and established the Republic of Afghanistan , the Khalqist PDPA offered its support for the new regime if it established a National Front which presumably included the Khalqist PDPA itself . The Parchamite PDPA had already established an alliance with Daoud at the beginning of his regime , and Karmal called for the dissolution of the Khalqist PDPA . Karmal 's call for dissolution only worsened relations between the Khalqist and Parchamite PDPA . However , Taraki and Amin were lucky ; Karmal 's alliance actually hurt the Parchamites ' standing in Afghan politics . Some communists in the armed forces became disillusioned with the government of Daoud , and turned to the Khalqist PDPA because of its apparent independence . Parchamite association with the Daoud government indirectly led to the Khalqist @-@ led PDPA coup of 1978 , popularly referred to as the Saur Revolution . From 1973 until the 1978 coup , Amin was responsible for organising party work in the Afghan armed forces . According to the official version , Amin " met patriotic liaison officers day or night , in the desert or the mountains , in the fields or the forests , enlightening them on the basis of the principles of the working class ideology . " Amin 's success in recruiting military officers lay in the fact that Daoud " betrayed the left " soon after taking power . When Amin began recruiting military officers for the PDPA , it was not difficult for him to find disgruntled military officers . In the meantime , relations between the Parchamite and Khalqist PDPA deteriorated ; in 1973 it was rumoured that Major Zia <unk> , a Parchamite and head of the Republican Guard , planned to assassinate the entire Khalqist leadership . The plan , if true , failed because the Khalqists found out about it . 
 The assassination attempt proved to be a further blow to relations between the Parchamites and Khalqists . The Parchamites deny that they ever planned to assassinate the Khalqist leadership , but historian Beverley Male argues that Karmal 's subsequent activities give credence to the Khalqist view of events . Because of the Parchamite assassination attempt , Amin pressed the Khalqist PDPA to seize power in 1976 by ousting Daoud . The majority of the PDPA leadership voted against such a move . The following year , in 1977 , the Parchamites and Khalqists officially reconciled , and the PDPA was unified . The Parchamite and Khalqist <unk> , which had separate general secretaries , <unk> , central committees and other organisational structures , were officially unified in the summer of 1977 . One reason for unification was that the international communist movement , represented by the Communist Party of India , Iraqi Communist Party and the Communist Party of Australia , called for party unification . 
 = = = Saur Revolution = = = 
 On 18 April 1978 Mir Akbar Khyber , the chief ideologue of the Parcham faction , was killed ; he was commonly believed to have been assassinated by the Daoud government . Khyber 's assassination initiated a chain of events which led to the PDPA taking power eleven days later , on 27 April . The assassin was never caught , but Anahita Ratebzad , a Parchamite , believed that Amin had ordered the assassination . Khyber 's funeral evolved into a large anti @-@ government demonstration . Daoud , who did not understand the significance of the events , began a mass arrest of PDPA members seven days after Khyber 's funeral . Amin , who organised the subsequent revolution against Daoud , was one of the last Central Committee members to be arrested by the authorities . His late arrest can be considered as proof of the regime 's lack of information ; Amin was the leading revolutionary party organiser . The government 's lack of awareness was proven by the arrest of Taraki – Taraki 's arrest was the pre @-@ arranged signal for the revolution to commence . When Amin found out that Taraki had been arrested , he ordered the revolution to begin at 9am on 27 April . Amin , in contrast to Taraki , was not imprisoned , but instead put under house arrest . His son , Abdur Rahman , was still allowed freedom of movement . The revolution was successful , thanks to overwhelming support from the Afghan military ; for instance , it was supported by Defence Minister Ghulam Haidar <unk> , Aslam Watanjar the commander of the ground forces , and the Chief of Staff of the Afghan Air Force , Abdul Qadir . 
 = = PDPA rule = = 
 = = = Khalq – Parcham break = = = 
 After the Saur revolution , Taraki was appointed Chairman of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers , and retained his post as PDPA general secretary . Taraki initially formed a government which consisted of both Khalqists and Parchamites ; Karmal became Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council while Amin became Minister of Foreign Affairs and a Deputy Prime Minister , and Mohammad Aslam Watanjar became a Deputy Prime Minister . The two Parchamites Abdul Qadir and Mohammad Rafi became Minister of National Defence and Minister of Public Works respectively . According to Angel Rasanayagam , the appointment of Amin , Karmal and Watanjar as Deputy Prime Ministers led to the establishment of three cabinets ; the Khalqists were answerable to Amin , the Parchamites were answerable to Karmal , and the military officers ( who were Parchamites ) were answerable to Watanjar . The first conflict between the Khalqists and Parchamites arose when the Khalqists wanted to give PDPA Central Committee membership to the military officers who participated in the Saur Revolution . Amin , who had previously opposed the appointment of military officers to the PDPA leadership , switched sides ; he now supported their elevation . The PDPA Politburo voted in favour of giving membership to the military officers ; the victors ( the Khalqists ) portrayed the Parchamites as opportunists , implying that the Parchamites had ridden the revolutionary wave , but not actually participated in the revolution . To make matters worse for the Parchamites , the term Parcham was , according to Taraki , a word synonymous with factionalism . 
 On 27 June 1978 , three months after the revolution , Amin managed to outmaneuver the Parchamites at a Central Committee meeting . The meeting decided that the Khalqists had exclusive rights to formulate and decide policy , a policy which left the Parchamites impotent . Karmal was exiled , but was able to establish a network with the remaining Parchamites in government . A coup to overthrow Amin was planned for September . Its leading members in Afghanistan were Qadir , the defence minister , and Army Chief of Staff General Shahpur <unk> . The coup was planned for 4 September , on the Festival of Eid , because soldiers and officers would be off duty . The conspiracy failed when the Afghan ambassador to India told the Afghan leadership about the plan . A purge was initiated , and Parchamite ambassadors were recalled ; few returned , for example Karmal and Mohammad Najibullah both stayed in their assigned countries . 
 = = = Amin – Taraki break = = = 
 The Afghan people revolted against the PDPA government when the government introduced several socialist reforms , including land reforms . By early 1979 , twenty @-@ five out of Afghanistan 's twenty @-@ eight provinces were unsafe because of armed resistance against the government . On 29 March 1979 , the Herat uprising began ; the uprising turned the revolt into an open war between the Mujahideen and the Afghan government . It was during this period that Amin became Kabul 's strongman . Shortly after the Herat uprising had been crushed , the Revolutionary Council convened to ratify the new Five @-@ Year Plan , the Afghan – Soviet Friendship Treaty , and to vote on whether or not to reorganise the cabinet and to enhance the power of the executive ( the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council ) . While the official version of events said that all issues were voted on democratically at the meeting , the Revolutionary Council held another meeting the following day to ratify the new Five @-@ Year Plan and to discuss the reorganisation of the cabinet . 
 Alexander Puzanov , the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan , was able to persuade Aslam Watanjar , Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy and <unk> Mazdoryar to become part of a conspiracy against Amin . These three men put pressure on Taraki , who by this time believed that " he really was the ' great leader ' " , to sack Amin from office . It is unknown if Amin knew anything about the conspiracy against him , but it was after the cabinet reorganisation that he talked about his dissatisfaction . On 26 March the PDPA Politburo and the Council of Ministers approved the extension of the powers of the executive branch , and the establishment of the Homeland Higher Defence Council ( HHDC ) to handle security matters . Many analysts of the day regarded Amin 's appointment as Prime Minister as an increase in his powers at the expense of Taraki . However , the reorganisation of the cabinet and the strengthening of Taraki 's position as Chairman of the Revolutionary Council , had reduced the authority of the Prime Minister . The Prime Minister was , due to the strengthening of the executive , now appointed by the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council . While Amin could appoint and dismiss new ministers , he needed Taraki 's consent to actually do so . Another problem for Amin was that while the Council of Ministers was responsible to the Revolutionary Council and its chairman , individual ministers were only responsible to Taraki . When Amin became Prime Minister , he was responsible for planning , finance and budgetary matters , the conduct of foreign policy , and for order and security . The order and security responsibilities had been taken over by the HHDC , which was chaired by Taraki . While Amin was HHDC Deputy Chairman , the majority of HHDC members were members of the anti @-@ Amin faction . For instance , the HHDC membership included Watanjar the Minister of National Defence , Interior Minister Mazdoryar , the President of the Political Affairs of the Armed Forces Mohammad Iqbal , Mohammad Yaqub , the Chief of the General Staff , the Commander of the Afghan Air Force Nazar Mohammad and Assadullah Sarwari the head of <unk> , the Afghan secret police . 
 The order of precedence had been institutionalised , whereby Taraki was responsible for defence and Amin responsible for assisting Taraki in defence related matters . Amin 's position was given a further blow by the democratisation of the decision @-@ making process , which allowed its members to contribute ; most of them were against Amin . Another problem for Amin was that the office of HHDC Deputy Chairman had no specific functions or powers , and the appointment of a new defence minister who opposed him drastically weakened his control over the Ministry of National Defence . The reorganisation of ministers was a further blow to Amin 's position ; he had lost control of the defence ministry , the interior ministry and the <unk> . Amin still had allies at the top , many of them in strategically important positions , for instance , Yaqub was his brother @-@ in @-@ law and the Security Chief in the Ministry of Interior was Sayed Daoud Taroon , who was also later appointed to the HHDC as an ordinary member in April . Amin succeeded in appointing two more of his allies to important positions ; Mohammad Sediq <unk> as Minister of Planning and <unk> Mohammad <unk> as Minister of Information and Culture ; and <unk> Mohammad <unk> was appointed Deputy Prime Minister in April 1978 . Amin 's political position was not secure when Alexei Yepishev , the Head of the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and Navy , visited Kabul . Yepishev met personally with Taraki on 7 April , but never met with Amin . The Soviets were becoming increasingly worried about Amin 's control over the Afghan military . Even so , during Yepishev 's visit Amin 's position was actually strengthened ; Taroon was appointed Taraki 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp . 
 Soon after , at two cabinet meetings , the strengthening of the executive powers of the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council was proven . Even though Amin was Prime Minister , Taraki chaired the meetings instead of him . Amin 's presence at these two meetings was not mentioned at all , and it was made clear that Taraki , through his office as Chairman of the Revolutionary Council , also chaired the Council of Ministers . Another problem facing Amin was Taraki 's policy of autocracy ; he tried to deprive the PDPA Politburo of its powers as a party and state decision @-@ making organ . The situation deteriorated when Amin personally warned Taraki that " the prestige and popularity of leaders among the people has no common aspect with a personality cult . " 
 Factionalism within the PDPA made it ill prepared to handle the intensified counter @-@ revolutionary activities in the country . Amin tried to win support for the communist government by depicting himself as a devout Muslim . Taraki and Amin blamed different countries for helping the counter @-@ revolutionaries ; Amin attacked the United Kingdom and the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) and played down American and Chinese involvement , while Taraki blamed American imperialism and Iran and Pakistan for supporting the uprising . Amin 's criticism of the United Kingdom and the BBC fed on the traditional anti @-@ British sentiments held by rural Afghans . In contrast to Taraki , " Amin bent over backwards to avoid making hostile reference to " , China , the United States or other foreign governments . Amin 's cautious behavior was in deep contrast to the Soviet Union 's official stance on the situation ; it seemed , according to Beverley Male , that the Soviet leadership tried to force a confrontation between Afghanistan and its enemies . Amin also tried to appease the Shia communities by meeting with their leaders ; despite this , a section of the Shia leadership called for the continuation of the resistance . Subsequently a revolt broke out in a Shia populated district in Kabul ; this was the first sign of unrest in Kabul since the Saur Revolution . To add to the government 's problems , Taraki 's ability to lead the country was questioned – he was a heavy drinker and was not in good health . Amin on the other hand was characterised in this period by portrayals of strong self @-@ discipline . In the summer of 1979 Amin began to disassociate himself from Taraki . On 27 June Amin became a member of the PDPA Politburo , the leading decision @-@ making body in Afghanistan . 
 = = = Rise to power = = = 
 In @-@ mid July the Soviets made their view official when Pravda wrote an article about the situation in Afghanistan ; the Soviets did not wish to see Amin become leader of Afghanistan . This triggered a political crisis in Afghanistan , as Amin initiated a policy of extreme repression , which became one of the main reasons for the Soviet intervention later that year . On 28 July , a vote in the PDPA Politburo approved Amin 's proposal of creating a collective leadership with collective decision @-@ making ; this was a blow to Taraki , and many of his supporters were replaced by pro @-@ Amin PDPA members . Ivan Pavlovsky , the Commander of the Soviet Ground Forces , visited Kabul in mid @-@ August to study the situation in Afghanistan . Amin , in a speech just a few days after Pavlovsky 's arrival , said that he wanted closer relations between Afghanistan and the People 's Republic of China ; in the same speech he hinted that he had reservations about Soviet meddling in Afghanistan . He likened Soviet assistance to Afghanistan with Vladimir Lenin 's assistance to the Hungarian Soviet Republic in 1919 . Taraki , a delegate to the conference held by the Non @-@ Aligned Movement in Havana , met personally with Andrei Gromyko , the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs , to discuss the Afghanistan situation on 9 September . Shah Wali , the Minister of Foreign Affairs , who was a supporter of Amin , did not participate in the meeting . This , according to Beverley Male , " suggested that some plot against Amin was in preparation " . Within hours of his return to Kabul on 11 September , Taraki convened the cabinet " ostensibly to report on the Havana Summit " . Instead of reporting on the summit , Taraki tried to dismiss Amin as Prime Minister . This was a miscalculation , and all but the Gang of Four ( consisting of Watanjar , Mazdoryar , <unk> and Sarwari ) , supported retaining Amin as Prime Minister . 
 Taraki sought to neutralise Amin 's power and influence by requesting that he serve overseas as an ambassador . Amin turned down the proposal , shouting " You are the one who should quit ! Because of drink and old age you have taken leave of your senses . " The following day Taraki invited Amin to the presidential palace for lunch with him and the Gang of Four . Amin turned down the offer , stating he would prefer their resignation rather than lunching with them . Soviet ambassador Puzanov persuaded Amin to make the visit to the Presidential Palace along with Taroon , the Chief of Police and Nawab Ali ( an intelligence officer ) . Upon arriving at the palace , unknown individuals within the building opened fire on the visitors . Taroon was killed , while Ali sustained an injury and escaped , together with Amin , who was unharmed . Shortly afterward , Amin returned to the palace with a contingent of Army officers , and placed Taraki under arrest . The Gang of Four , however , had " disappeared " and their whereabouts would remain unknown for the duration of Amin 's 104 @-@ day rule . After Taraki 's arrest , Amin reportedly discussed the incident with Leonid Brezhnev , and indirectly asked for the permission to kill Taraki . Brezhnev replied that it was his choice . Amin , who now believed he had the full support of the Soviets , ordered the death of Taraki . Taraki was subsequently suffocated with pillows . The Afghan media would report that the ailing Taraki had died , omitting any mention of his murder . 
 = = = Presidency = = = 
 = = = = Domestic policies = = = = 
 Following Taraki 's fall from power , Amin was elected Chairman of the <unk> of the Revolutionary Council and General Secretary of the PDPA Central Committee by the PDPA Politburo . The election of Amin as PDPA General Secretary and the removal of Taraki from all party posts was unanimous . The only members of the cabinet replaced when Amin took power were the Gang of Four – Beverley Male saw this as " a clear indication that he had their [ the ministers ' ] support " . Amin 's rise to power was followed by a policy of moderation , and attempts to persuade the Afghan people that the regime was not anti @-@ Islamic . Amin 's government began to invest in the reconstruction , or reparation , of mosques . He also promised the Afghan people freedom of religion . Religious groups were given copies of the Quran , and Amin began to refer to Allah in speeches . He even claimed that the Saur Revolution was " totally based on the principles of Islam " . The campaign proved to be unsuccessful , and many Afghans held Amin responsible for the regime 's totalitarian behavior . Amin 's rise to power was officially endorsed by the <unk> Ulama on 20 September 1979 . Their endorsement led to the official announcement that Amin was a pious Muslim – Amin thus scored a point against the counter @-@ revolutionary propaganda which claimed the communist regime was atheist . Amin also tried to increase his popularity with tribal groups , a feat Taraki had been unable or unwilling to achieve . In a speech to tribal elders Amin was defensive about the Western way he dressed ; an official biography was published which depicted Amin in traditional Pashtun clothes . During his short stay in power , Amin became committed to establishing a collective leadership ; when Taraki was ousted , Amin promised " from now on there will be no one @-@ man government ... " 
 Attempting to pacify the population , Amin released a list of 18 @,@ 000 people who had been executed , and blamed the executions on Taraki . The total number of arrested during Taraki 's and Amin 's combined reign number between 17 @,@ 000 and 45 @,@ 000 . Amin was not liked by the Afghan people . During his rule , opposition to the communist regime increased , and the government lost control of the countryside . The state of the Afghan military deteriorated ; due to desertions the number of military personnel in the Afghan army decreased from 100 @,@ 000 in the immediate aftermath of the Saur Revolution , to somewhere between 50 @,@ 000 and 70 @,@ 000 . Another problem Amin faced was the KGB 's penetration of the PDPA , the military and the government bureaucracy . While Amin 's position in Afghanistan was becoming more perilous by the day , his enemies who were exiled in the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc were agitating for his removal . Babrak Karmal , the Parchamite leader , met several leading Eastern Bloc figures during this period , and Mohammad Aslam Watanjar , Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy and Assadullah Sarwari wanted to exact revenge upon Amin . 
 = = = = Foreign policy = = = = 
 When Amin became leader , he tried to reduce Afghanistan 's dependence on the Soviet Union . To accomplish this , he aimed to balance Afghanistan 's relations with the Soviet Union by strengthening relations with Pakistan and Iran . The Soviets were concerned when they received reports that Amin had met personally with Gulbuddin Hekmatyar , one of the leading anti @-@ communists in Afghanistan . His general <unk> and his unpopularity amongst Afghans made it more difficult for Amin to find new " foreign patrons " . Amin 's involvement in the death of Adolph Dubs , the American Ambassador to Afghanistan , strained his relations with the United States . He tried to improve relations by reestablishing contact , met with three different American chargé d 'affaires , and was interviewed by an American correspondent . But this did not improve Afghanistan 's standing in the eyes of the United States Government . After the third meeting with Amin , J. Bruce <unk> , the American Ambassador to Afghanistan from 1979 to 1980 , believed the wisest thing to do was to maintain " a low profile , trying to avoid issues , and waiting to see what happens " . In early December 1979 , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs proposed a joint summit meeting between Amin and Muhammad Zia @-@ ul @-@ Haq , the President of Pakistan . The <unk> Government , accepting a modified version of the offer , agreed to send Agha Shahi , the Pakistani foreign minister , to Kabul for talks . In the meanwhile , the Inter @-@ Services Intelligence ( ISI ) , Pakistani 's secret police , continued to train Mujahideen fighters who opposed the communist regime . 
 = = = = = Afghan – Soviet relations = = = = = 
 Contrary to popular belief , the Soviet leadership headed by Leonid Brezhnev , Alexei Kosygin and the Politburo , were not eager to send troops to Afghanistan . The Soviet Politburo decisions were guided by a Special Commission on Afghanistan , which consisted of Yuri Andropov the KGB Chairman , Andrei Gromyko the Minister of Foreign Affairs , Defence Minister Dmitriy Ustinov , and Boris Ponomarev , the head of the International Department of the Central Committee . The Politburo was opposed to the removal of Taraki and his subsequent murder . According to Brezhnev , the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , " Events developed so swiftly in Afghanistan that essentially there was little opportunity to somehow interfere in them . Right now our mission is to determine our further actions , so as to preserve our position in Afghanistan and to secure our influence there . " Although Afghan – Soviet relations deteriorated during Amin 's short stint in power , he was invited on an official visit to Moscow by Alexander Puzanov , the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan , because of the Soviet leadership 's satisfaction with his party and state @-@ building policy . Not everything went as planned , and Andropov talked about " the undesirable turn of events " taking place in Afghanistan under Amin 's rule . Andropov also brought up the ongoing political shift in Afghanistan under Amin ; the Soviets were afraid that Amin would move Afghanistan 's foreign policy from a pro @-@ Soviet position to a pro @-@ United States position . By early @-@ to @-@ mid December 1979 , the Soviet leadership had established an alliance with Babrak Karmal and Assadullah Sarwari . 
 As it turned out , the relationship between Puzanov and Amin broke down . Amin started a smear campaign to discredit Puzanov . This in turn led to an assassination attempt against Amin , in which Puzanov participated . The situation was worsened by the KGB accusing Amin of misrepresenting the Soviet position on Afghanistan in the PDPA Central Committee and the Revolutionary Council . The KGB also noted an increase in anti @-@ Soviet agitation by the government during Amin 's rule , and harassment against Soviet citizens increased under Amin . A group of senior politicians reported to the Soviet Central Committee that it was necessary to do " everything possible " to prevent a change in political orientation in Afghanistan . However , the Soviet leadership did not advocate intervention at this time , and instead called for increasing its influence in the Amin leadership to expose his " true intentions " . A Soviet Politburo assessment referred to Amin as " a power @-@ hungry leader who is distinguished by brutality and treachery " . Amongst the many sins they alleged were his " insincerity and duplicity " when dealing with the Soviet Union , creating fictitious accusations against PDPA @-@ members who opposed him , indulging in a policy of nepotism , and his tendency to conduct a more " balanced policy " towards First World countries . 
 By the end of October the Special Commission on Afghanistan , which consisted of Andropov , Gromyko , Ustinov and Ponomarev , wanted to end the impression that the Soviet government supported Amin 's leadership and policy . The KGB 's First Chief Directorate was put under orders that something had to be done about Afghanistan , and several of its personnel were assembled to deal with the task . Andropov fought hard for Soviet intervention , saying to Brezhnev that Amin 's policies had destroyed the military and the government 's capabilities to handle the crisis by use of mass repression . The plan , according to Andropov , was to assemble a small force to intervene and remove Amin from power and replace him with Karmal . The Soviet Union declared its plan to intervene in Afghanistan on 12 December 1979 , and the Soviet leadership initiated Operation Storm @-@ 333 ( the first phase of the intervention ) on 27 December 1979 . 
 = = = = Death = = = = 
 Amin trusted the Soviet Union until the very end , despite the deterioration of official relations . When the Afghan intelligence service handed Amin a report that the Soviet Union would invade the country and topple him , Amin claimed the report was a product of imperialism . His view can be explained by the fact that the Soviet Union , after several months , finally gave in to Amin 's demands and sent troops into Afghanistan to secure the PDPA government . Contrary to common Western belief , Amin was informed of the Soviet decision to send troops into Afghanistan . General <unk> , Commander of the 40th Army , met with Afghan Major General <unk> to talk about Soviet troop movements before the Soviet army 's intervention . On 25 December Dmitriy Ustinov issued a formal order , stating " The state frontier of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan is to be crossed on the ground and in the air by forces of the 40th Army and the Air Force at 1500 hrs on 25 December " . This was the formal beginning of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan . 
 Concerned for his safety , Amin moved from the Presidential Palace , in the centre of Kabul , to the <unk> Palace , which had previously been the headquarters of the Central Army Corps of the Afghan military . The palace was formidable , with walls strong enough to withstand artillery fire . According to <unk> Braithwaite , " its defences had been carefully and intelligently organised " . All roads to the palace had been mined , with the exception of one , which had heavy machine guns and artillery positioned to defend it . To make matters worse for the Soviets , the Afghans had established a second line of defence which consisted of seven posts , " each manned by four sentries armed with a machine gun , a mortar , and automatic rifles " . The external defences of the palace were handled by the Presidential Guard , which consisted of 2 @,@ 500 troops and three T @-@ 54 tanks . Several Soviet commanders involved in the assassination of Amin thought the plan to attack the palace was " crazy " . Several soldiers hesitated , claiming , in contradiction of what their commanders Yuri <unk> and Vasily Kolesnik had told them ( they in turn had been informed by the Soviet leadership ) , it seemed strange that Amin , the leader of the PDPA government , was an American sympathiser ( accused of being a " CIA agent " by the Soviets ) and betrayed the Saur Revolution . Despite several objections , the plan to assassinate Amin went ahead . 
 Before resorting to killing Amin by brute force , the Soviets had tried to poison him ( but nearly killed his nephew instead ) and to kill him with a sniper shot on his way to work ( this proved impossible as the Afghans had improved their security measures ) . They even tried to poison Amin just hours before the assault on the Presidential Palace . Amin had organised a lunch for party members to show guests his palace and to celebrate Ghulam Dastagir Panjsheri 's return from Moscow . Panjsheri 's return improved the mood even further ; he boasted that the Soviet divisions had already crossed the border , and that he and Gromyko always kept in contact with each other . During the meal , Amin and several of his guests lost consciousness as they had been poisoned . Luckily for Amin , but unfortunately for the Soviets , he survived his encounter with death . Mikhail <unk> , a KGB agent , was given responsibility for the poisonings . 
 The assault on the palace began shortly afterward . During the attack Amin still believed the Soviet Union was on his side , and told his adjutant , " The Soviets will help us " . The adjutant replied that it was the Soviets who were attacking them ; Amin initially replied that this was a lie . Only after he tried but failed to contact the Chief of the General Staff , he muttered , " I guessed it . It 's all true " . There are various accounts of how Amin died , but the exact details have never been confirmed . Amin was either killed by a deliberate attack or died by a " random burst of fire " . Amin 's son was fatally wounded and died shortly after . His daughter was wounded , but survived . It was Gulabzoy who had been given orders to kill Amin and Watanjar who later confirmed his death . 
 = E ² = 
 " E ² " is the seventy @-@ third episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the twenty @-@ first episode of season three . It first aired on May 5 , 2004 , on the UPN network in the United States . The episode was the fifth of the season written by Mike Sussman , and it was directed by Star Trek : Voyager alumni Roxann Dawson , her fourth of the third season . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship , Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . Season three of Enterprise features an ongoing story following an attack on Earth by previously unknown aliens called the Xindi . In this episode , the Enterprise encounters a version of itself which was sent 117 years into the past and is now populated by the descendants of the crew and became a generational ship . The two crews have to work together to allow the modern Enterprise to gain access to a wormhole which is defended by Xindi vessels . 
 The episode made use of the standing Enterprise sets , as well as those created for Degra 's ship . Guest stars included those who had previously appeared as members of the Xindi Council , as well as several who are new to Enterprise , who appeared as members of the future Enterprise . Most scenes were filmed between February 3 and February 11 , 2004 , with an additional special effect shoot on February 13 . Reviewers compared " E ² " to a number of several other episodes , including " Children of Time " , " Deadlock " and " All Good Things ... " . The Nielsen ratings received by the episode equated to a 3 @.@ 3 / 5 % audience share . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In " E ² " , Enterprise is approaching a nebula containing a subspace corridor defended by <unk> vessels . Suddenly an older yet enhanced copy of Enterprise appears , captained by a half @-@ Vulcan man named Lorian , who explains that after entering the corridor , it will destabilize causing Captain Archer 's version to travel 117 years into the past . Confronted with this situation , and not wanting to contaminate Earth 's time stream , it then turns itself into a generational ship to re @-@ await the Xindi crisis . Arriving on board , Lorian then reveals himself to be the son of Commander Tucker and Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol . 
 Lorian , after considering his knowledge of events , believes that the wormhole must be avoided altogether . Archer and Lorian then disagree over whether to implement an engine modification to Enterprise , since there is a 22 % chance it may cause the destruction of the ship . Archer then meets with old T 'Pol on board old Enterprise , and considers a plan where his ship could pass through it safely , due to alternate modifications suggested by her . A frustrated Lorian then reveals a secret plan : to steal the newer plasma injectors from Enterprise to allow them to confront the Xindi in the place of their ancestors . 
 Lorian leads a raid and successfully steals the parts , but old Enterprise is disabled as it is about to go to warp . He is placed in the brig . Archer is angered at having his own method of stealing engine components ( as seen in " Damage " ) used against him , but they finally agree to work towards their shared mission . Meanwhile , T 'Pol meets her older self and discuss her addiction to <unk> @-@ D and her relationship with Tucker . The Enterprises then enter the nebula , but Archer 's is quickly disabled . Lorian 's then tows it into the corridor using a tractor beam , intending , as it turns to attack the <unk> ships , to follow shortly . Archer 's Enterprise arrives safely , but old Enterprise never emerges and Archer wonders if , by successfully traversing the corridor , they ceased to exist . His thoughts are soon cut short as Degra arrives for their rendezvous . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was the fifth to be written by Mike Sussman during the third season . His previous work was " Hatchery " , co @-@ written with André Bormanis . It was also the fourth episode of the season to be directed by Roxann Dawson . With " E ² " , she had directed more episodes than any other director at this point in the season , having previously worked on " Doctor 's Orders " , " Exile " and " Chosen Realm " . Scott Bakula was involved in a webchat on StarTrek.com during the production of the episode , which he described as " a great episode along the lines of " Twilight " and " Similitude . " It 's a classic sci @-@ fi and Star Trek episode . " 
 Filming began on February 3 , 2004 , overlapping with the final day of production on the previous episode , " The Forgotten " . Production required the use of the standing Enterprise sets as well as those which were used to represent Degra 's ship . The majority of the shoot was completed on February 11 , but an additional day of special effects filming with part of the cast also took place on February 13 . The actors who played the members of the Xindi Council were amongst the guest stars who appeared in this episode ; Randy Oglesby , Rick Worthy and Tucker Smallwood . In addition there were several guest actors who appeared in Star Trek for the first time , these included David Andrews , Tess Lina , Tom <unk> and Steve Truitt . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " E ² " was first aired on May 5 , 2004 . It received a 3 @.@ 3 / 5 % share , meaning that it was seen by 3 @.@ 3 percent of all households , and 5 percent of all households watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was a similar level of ratings that were drawn by the previous episode , " The Forgotten " and slightly less than the following episode , The Council " . Compared to other shows in the same time slot , it placed sixth on the night , one place behind Smallville on The WB . 
 Michelle Erica Green watched the episode for TrekNation , saying that it " focused far more on the characters and the consequences of their contact with their descendants than it is on the vast technobabble resulting in a successful traverse of the Xindi corridor " . She praised David Andrews as Lorian , calling it " a wonderful bit of casting " , and felt that the character 's actions mirrored those of Captain Archer previously in the series . She compared the resolution of " E ² " to the Star Trek : Voyager episode " Deadlock " and the series finale of Star Trek : The Next Generation , " All Good Things ... " . She felt that the lack of conclusion to what happened to the future Enterprise was " very satisfying " . Jamahl Epsicokhan on his website Jammer 's Reviews , called the episode an " acceptable but all @-@ too @-@ familiar time @-@ travel concept " and a " step down " compared to the previous three episodes of the series . He compared it to the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Children of Time " , which he said " was a far superior episode because it was about our characters — astonishingly and agonizingly — choosing one destiny over another , and sacrificing a great deal in coming to that decision . " He gave " E ² " a rating of two and a half out of four . 
 The first home media release of " E ² " was as part of the season three DVD box set , released in the United States on September 27 , 2005 . The Blu @-@ ray release of Enterprise was announced in early 2013 , and released on January 7 , 2014 . This also featured deleted scenes from this episode . 
 = Pray ( Justin Bieber song ) = 
 " Pray " is a song performed by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber . The song was written by Bieber along with Omar Martinez and Adam Messinger and Nasri of The Messengers , with the latter duo producing the track . The song is taken as a single in several European countries from his first compilation album , My Worlds : The Collection . In the United States and Canada , the song is included on My Worlds Acoustic . According to Bieber , he was inspired by Michael Jackson 's " Man in the Mirror " ( 1988 ) when writing the song . The song is a contemporary Christian song , while deriving from pop and R & B influences , and using a world music backdrop . It primarily features acoustic instruments , however does make small usages of electronic sounds . 
 " Pray " received generally positive reviews , with critics appreciating the message portrayed in the song . It reached the lower half on the singles charts in Germany and Austria , and charted in several regions where it was not released as a single such as the United States and Australia . The song 's music video premiered on Facebook on December 11 , 2010 . The video , which also has religious undertones , features clips of places affected by natural disasters , sick children , possessed homes , and more , which are intercut with Bieber performing . Bieber debuted and performed the song on the American Music Awards , accompanied by a full choir . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Pray " was written by Omar Martinez and Adam Messinger and Nasri Atweh of The Messengers . While Bieber was being interviewed by Ryan Seacrest on his radio show , Bieber talked about the songs initial writing stating the song was influenced by Michael Jackson , Bieber elaborated , " It 's a very uplifting song , very motivational . It definitely comes from the heart . It 's very beautiful . I definitely thought of Michael [ Jackson 's ] ' Man in the Mirror ' when I was writing it . " The song was released as a CD single in Germany on December 3 , 2010 . " Pray " is a mid @-@ tempo song that uses a " world @-@ music beat " as a backing . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Universal Music Group , " Pray " is set in common time with a tempo of 80 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of B major with Bieber 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of F ♯ 3 to the high @-@ note of B4 . The song follows in the chord progression of B / G ♯ – B / F ♯ – E – B. 
 Present throughout the songs background is the use of violins and a choir , as well as guitar , string instruments , congas and a <unk> . However it does make subtle use of synths and electronic sounds . Musically and lyrically , it is influenced by Contemporary Christian music , and has a gospel feel , while including standard pop and R & B. The song opens with Bieber singing , " And I pray " over a keyboard , while the song 's chorus repeats one simple refrain , " I close my eyes and I can see a better day / I close my eyes and pray . " In the lyrics , Bieber " recognizes the pain and suffering in the world " and then offers " a passive solution " through lines such as " Children are crying / soldiers are dying / Some people don 't have a home , " before compromising , " I know there 's sunshine beyond that rain / good times beyond that pain . " Vocally , Bieber 's vocals are sung in a lower key compared to previous singles . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Referring to the song as a " junior varsity " take on " Man in the Mirror " , Allison Stewart of Washington Post said " as an indicator of the Bieb 's awakening social consciousness , it 's a good start . " Melinda Newman of HitFix called the song a " lovely testament to the power of prayer , " commenting that it was " for True Believers , not just True <unk> " Calling it Bieber 's " Man in the Mirror " moment , Newman also said while it did not have the " staying power or resonance of the Michael Jackson classic , " she said the themes of how to effect change were the same . Lucy Jones of The Daily Telegraph noted the song as a recommended download from the album . Dan Savoie of Rockstar Weekly said the song " is a more advanced lyric and shows a more political side to the young singer , but the gospel feel of the song really works with his voice . " Savoie went on to say " The song just moved Bieber from the category of pop child star to responsible young man . " Monica Herrera of Billboard wrote that the song was " a treacly but well @-@ meaning ballad that taps into Bieber 's spiritual beliefs . " Katie Amoroso of <unk> writes , " The song itself is less poppy and more natural than other Justin songs and shows strong musical talent . Many have commented that the song made them emotional ... promotes deep thought on our impact on the world " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Pray " was only released as a single in select European countries , and had moderate success . On the Belgian Flanders Tip chart , the song charted at number five , while on the Belgian Tip chart for Wallonia , the song charted at number fifteen . On the Austrian Singles Chart , " Pray " peaked at number sixty @-@ five , spending a week on the chart . " Pray " debuted at fifty @-@ one on the German Singles Chart , and spent eight weeks on the chart . Despite not being released as a single in these countries , due to sales after the digital releases of My Worlds : The Collection and My Worlds Acoustic , " Pray " debuted at number ninety @-@ four on the Australian Singles Chart , and number 112 on the UK Singles Chart . It also debuted at number ninety @-@ one in the US Billboard Hot 100 and reached number sixty @-@ one the following week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 In the music video , Bieber highlights several social injustices around the world . Clips are shown from footage of earthquake @-@ torn Haiti , a suffering post @-@ Katrina New Orleans , and Bieber himself visiting sick children in hospital beds . More scenes feature military soldiers being reunited with their families , and homes being possessed because families cannot pay mortgage . The video is intercut with scenes of Bieber performing . Like the song itself , the video also includes religious undertones , including the video ending with the quote , " God speaks in the silence of the heart . Listening is the beginning of prayer . " Bill Lamb of About.com likened the video to the saying , " There are times when putting pictures to the words does indeed make a song more powerful than simply listening to the track . " Calling the video " outstanding for the holiday season " Lamb said the theme of " bringing hope and joy into the lives of others " related to " the celebrations that bring all of us together in hope for a brighter future for our world . " 
 = = Live performance = = 
 " Pray " debuted and was performed for the first time at the 2010 American Music Awards . The performance opened with Bieber sitting playing the piano while singing . Midway through the performance Bieber arose from the piano and took center stage , he was accompanied by a choir singing background vocals . The performance was ended with Bieber kneeling singing the songs title , the performance was greeted by standing ovation from the audience . According to Jocelyn Vena of MTV News Bieber , " threw in that showmanship that 's made him famous . " Thomas Conner of Chicago Sun @-@ Times noted Bieber as the standout performance of the night , saying it was proof that he could sing , besting " the wavering pitches " of Taylor Swift and Miley Cyrus . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Classic single 
 " Pray " 
 " U Smile " ( Acoustic Version ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = No. 75 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 75 Squadron is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) fighter unit based at RAAF Base Tindal in the Northern Territory . The squadron was formed in 1942 and saw extensive action in the South West Pacific theatre of World War II , operating P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks . It was disbanded in 1948 , but reformed the following year and operated jet aircraft throughout the Cold War . The squadron was based at Malta from 1952 to 1954 , flying de Havilland Vampires , and Malaysia from 1968 to 1983 , with Dassault Mirage IIIs , before returning to Australia . 
 The squadron was re @-@ equipped with F / A @-@ 18 Hornet fighters and moved to RAAF Base Tindal in 1988 . It was placed on alert to support the Australian @-@ led INTERFET peacekeeping deployment to East Timor in 1999 , and saw combat in 2003 as part of the Australian contribution to the invasion of Iraq and in 2015 during the military intervention against ISIL . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Port Moresby and Milne Bay = = = 
 In February and March 1942 the Allied position in New Guinea was under pressure and Japanese aircraft had been sighted over the Torres Strait Islands and Cape York in northern Australia . As a result , priority was given to basing a fighter squadron at Port Moresby in New Guinea to defend the town 's important airfields and port facilities . The RAAF received an allocation of 25 P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters in late February that were flown to Townsville , Queensland , and used to form No. 75 Squadron on 4 March 1942 . The need to reinforce Port Moresby 's defences was so pressing that the squadron was allowed only nine days to train with the aircraft before it deployed . Commanded initially by Squadron Leader Peter Jeffrey , No. 75 Squadron 's advance party arrived in Port Moresby on 17 March and its aircraft followed between the 19th ( when Squadron Leader John Jackson assumed command ) and 21st of the month . At this time only four of the squadron 's 21 pilots , including its commander , had previously seen combat . 
 No. 75 Squadron took part in the Battle of Port Moresby between March and April 1942 . The squadron scored its first " kill " on the afternoon of 21 March when two Kittyhawks shot down a Japanese bomber which was conducting a reconnaissance of the town . On 22 March nine Kittyhawks attacked the Japanese airstrip at Lae , destroying 14 aircraft ( including two during a dogfight ) and damaging another five ; two Australian aircraft were lost in this operation though another three crashed in separate accidents on 22 March . The Japanese launched a retaliatory raid on Port Moresby the next day . No. 75 Squadron was in action over Port Moresby or Lae almost every day during late March and April , and was generally outnumbered by Japanese aircraft . As well as mounting their own attacks on Japanese positions , the Kittyhawks also frequently escorted a squadron of United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) A @-@ 24 Banshee dive bombers , which were stationed at Port Moresby . No. 75 Squadron 's casualties quickly mounted and were exacerbated by high rates of disease . Squadron Leader Jackson was shot down and killed on 28 April , shortly after he had destroyed a Japanese fighter . His younger brother Squadron Leader Les Jackson assumed command the next day . By the time two USAAF squadrons arrived to reinforce it on 30 April , No. 75 Squadron had been reduced to just three serviceable aircraft and a further seven Kittyhawks in need of repair . The squadron was withdrawn from operations on 3 May after losing two aircraft the day before . During its period at Port Moresby No. 75 Squadron was confirmed to have destroyed 35 Japanese aircraft , probably destroyed another four and damaged 44 . The squadron suffered twelve fatalities and lost 22 Kittyhawks , including six in accidents . 
 The squadron departed Port Moresby to return to Australia on 7 May 1942 . It was first located at Townsville and later moved to Kingaroy followed by Lowood to be re @-@ equipped . During this period it also received a number of pilots who had served in Supermarine Spitfire @-@ equipped squadrons in Europe . In late July the unit departed Queensland and returned to New Guinea . 
 No. 75 Squadron arrived at Milne Bay on 31 July 1942 where it joined No. 76 Squadron , which was also equipped with Kittyhawks . At the time an Allied base was being developed at Milne Bay to both protect Port Moresby and mount attacks against Japanese positions in New Guinea and nearby islands . Japanese aircraft made their first major raid on Milne Bay on 11 August , which was intercepted by Kittyhawks from both No. 75 and No. 76 Squadrons . In mid @-@ August the Milne Bay defenders were warned that they might be the target of a Japanese landing , and on 24 August Japanese barges were sighted heading for the area . These vessels were destroyed the next day on Goodenough Island by nine No. 75 Squadron Kittyhawks . However , on the night of 25 / 26 August another Japanese convoy landed an invasion force at Milne Bay . During the resulting Battle of Milne Bay the two Kittyhawk squadrons provided important support to the Allied defenders by heavily attacking Japanese positions and intercepting Japanese air raids on the area . On 28 August the Kittyhawks were withdrawn to Port Moresby when the Japanese troops came close to their airstrips , but they returned to Milne Bay the next day . No. 75 and No. 76 Squadrons later supported the Allied counter @-@ offensive at Milne Bay which ended with the remaining Japanese troops being evacuated in early September . Following the battle Lieutenant General Sydney Rowell , the commander of New Guinea Force , stated that the attacks made by the two squadrons on the day of the Japanese landing were " the decisive factor " in the Allied victory . From 21 to 23 September No. 75 Squadron flew sorties in support of the 2 / 12th Battalion during the Battle of Goodenough Island . 
 In late September the two Australian squadrons at Milne Bay were relieved by two USAAF squadrons , and No. 75 Squadron was redeployed to Horn Island . It subsequently moved again to Cairns for a period of rest before returning to Milne Bay in February 1943 , under the command of Squadron Leader Wilfred Arthur . During this deployment the squadron operated alongside No. 77 Squadron . No. 75 Squadron flew patrols over Milne Bay and Goodenough Island , and on 14 May a mixed force of 17 Kittyhawks from it and No. 77 Squadrons inflicted heavy casualties on a force of 65 Japanese aircraft bound for Milne Bay while only a single Australian aircraft was lost . This was No. 75 Squadron 's last major air battle of the war . From August to December the squadron was issued with two F @-@ 4 Lightning aircraft for photo reconnaissance tasks . No. 75 Squadron moved to Goodenough Island in October 1943 to support the Allied offensive in the Louisiade Archipelago and New Britain . 
 = = = Offensive operations = = = 
 In December 1943 No. 75 Squadron became part of No. 78 Wing , which in turn formed part of the newly established No. 10 Operational Group . This group had been formed to provide a mobile organisation capable of supporting the offensives in and around New Guinea which were planned for 1944 . During the first half of 1944 the squadron frequently moved between air bases to support Allied operations and was based at Nadzab from January to March , Cape Gloucester from March to May , Tadji in May , Hollandia from May to June and Biak from June to July . During this period its role was to provide close air support for Australian and US ground troops and protect Allied shipping from air attack . No. 75 Squadron was stationed at Noemfoor from July to November 1944 where it conducted long @-@ range attacks on Japanese airstrips and shipping in the eastern islands of the Netherlands East Indies . No. 10 Operational Group was renamed the First Tactical Air Force ( 1TAF ) on 25 October 1944 ; at this time No. 75 Squadron continued to form part of No. 78 Wing alongside No. 78 and No. 80 Squadrons . The squadron was ordered back to Biak by 1TAF on 2 November to provide air defence for the island , to the displeasure of the pilots who considered that they were " being taken out of the war " . Only 149 sorties were flown from Biak before No. 75 Squadron returned to Noemfoor on 11 December . 
 No. 75 Squadron and the rest of No. 78 Wing moved to Morotai in the Netherlands East Indies in late December 1944 . The squadron arrived at Morotai on 21 December and flew 147 operational sorties that month during attacks on Japanese positions in the nearby Halmahera islands . Attacks on Halmahera and other islands in the NEI continued in early 1945 , and No. 75 Squadron also flew sorties in support of US troops who were attacking the remaining Japanese on Morotai . These and similar operations were seen as wasteful by many of 1TAF 's fighter pilots and their leaders . On 20 April , eight officers including Wilf Arthur , now a group captain and No. 78 Wing 's commander , attempted to resign in protest during the " Morotai Mutiny " . 
 From May 1945 No. 75 Squadron participated in the Borneo Campaign . While the squadron 's ground crew landed on Tarakan with the invasion force in early May 1945 , delays in bringing the island 's airstrip into operation meant that its aircraft could not be deployed there until mid @-@ July rather than 3 May as had been originally planned . During this period No. 75 Squadron 's pilots remained at Morotai but conducted little flying , causing their morale to decline . Once established at Tarakan the Kittyhawks attacked targets near Sandakan and supported Australian forces during the Battle of Balikpapan in the war 's last weeks . 
 Following the Japanese surrender No. 75 Squadron flew reconnaissance patrols over prisoner of war camps and continued general flying . The Kittyhawks were later flown to Oakey , Queensland and the ground crew returned to Australia in December 1945 on board the British aircraft carrier HMS Glory . The squadron suffered 42 fatalities during World War II . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
