 From December 1945 to May 1946 No. 75 Squadron was maintained as a cadre located at Deniliquin and manned by one officer and three airmen without any aircraft . In May 1946 the squadron moved to RAAF Station Schofields near Sydney , but was not issued with any aircraft or further personnel until it moved to RAAF Base Williamtown in September that year and was equipped with P @-@ 51 Mustang fighters . No. 75 Squadron used these aircraft for routine training and exercises until it was disbanded on 25 March 1948 . 
 The squadron was re @-@ formed at Williamtown on 24 January 1949 equipped with de Havilland Vampire jet fighters . From 1949 to early 1952 No. 75 Squadron conducted training exercises , which included teaching new pilots to operate Vampires , as well as making acceptance flights of Vampires delivered to the RAAF . During this period a key role for the squadron was training pilots for combat in the Korean War with the Gloster Meteor @-@ equipped No. 77 Squadron . In March 1952 the Australian Government decided to reform No. 78 Wing and deploy it to Malta where it would form part of a British force which sought to counter the Soviet Union 's influence in the Middle East . No. 75 and No. 76 Squadrons were selected to form the wing 's flying units , and they arrived at RAF Hal Far in Malta during July 1952 and were equipped with Vampires leased from the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . While based at Malta the wing took part in numerous training exercises in the Mediterranean region as well as Europe , including a large @-@ scale NATO exercise in 1953 which involved 2 @,@ 000 aircraft and 40 @,@ 000 personnel . In addition , the wing participated in a royal review to commemorate the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II . No. 78 Wing moved to the RAF station at Ta ' Qali in June 1953 where it remained until it returned to Australia in late December 1954 . In preparation for its return to Australia No. 75 Squadron was disbanded in November 1954 . 
 No. 75 Squadron was reestablished at Williamtown in April 1955 . It was initially equipped with Vampires and Gloster Meteor fighters , but these were replaced with CAC Sabre aircraft in early 1957 . While operating Sabres the squadron made a number of deployments to Darwin for air defence exercises which often involved RAF units . On 8 December 1958 No. 75 Squadron transferred from No. 78 Wing to become an independent unit under the direct command of RAAF Base Williamtown . In November 1964 several of the squadron 's pilots took part in an emergency deployment to Darwin when an Indonesian attack was feared as part of an apparent escalation of the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation . 
 The squadron became the first Australian fighter unit to be equipped with Dassault Mirage III fighters in December 1964 and was declared operational with these aircraft on 1 August 1967 . It subsequently maintained a detachment of Mirages at Darwin from 2 May 1966 until early 1967 . Following a period of training No. 75 Squadron transferred to RAAF Base Butterworth in Malaysia during May 1967 . From this base the squadron took part in regular exercises with the Royal Malaysian Air Force ( RMAF ) , Royal New Zealand Air Force ( RNZAF ) , Republic of Singapore Air Force ( RSAF ) and occasional exercises involving the RAF . No. 75 Squadron also trained with the United States Air Force and United States Navy on occasion , including the large @-@ scale Cope Thunder series of exercises during which it deployed to Clark Air Base in the Philippines . Throughout its period based at Butterworth No. 75 Squadron deployed detachments of six Mirages to Tengah Air Base in Singapore on a rotational basis with No. 3 Squadron RAAF , with this responsibility swapping between the two units every three months . 
 In 1981 the Australian Government decided to withdraw a RAAF fighter squadron from Malaysia to Darwin pending the completion of RAAF Base Tindal near Katherine in the Northern Territory . No. 75 Squadron was the unit selected , and it arrived in Darwin in October 1983 , becoming the first fighter squadron to be permanently based in the Northern Territory since World War II . The unit began to convert to F / A @-@ 18 Hornets in May 1988 and moved to Tindal in October that year . No. 75 Squadron also became part of No. 81 Wing during 1988 . Tindal was close to the RAAF 's newly developed Delamere Air Weapons Range and the squadron was assigned two GAF Nomad light transport aircraft between January 1989 and 1993 to fly supplies to the facilities there . 
 = = = Current role = = = 
 During late 1999 No. 75 Squadron was placed on alert to provide close air support and air defence to protect the international forces which had deployed to East Timor as part of INTERFET . However , despite the threat posed by Indonesian forces , ultimately they were not required . 
 No. 75 Squadron saw action for the first time since 1945 as part of the Australian contribution to the 2003 invasion of Iraq . The Australian Government announced that it would deploy a squadron of F / A @-@ 18s to the Middle East on 1 February 2003 and 14 No. 75 Squadron Hornets flew from Tindal to Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar via Diego Garcia between 13 and 16 February . Following the outbreak of the Iraq War on 20 March the squadron was initially used to escort high @-@ value Coalition aircraft such as tankers and E @-@ 3 Sentry aircraft . As it became clear that the Iraqi Air Force posed no threat , the role of No. 75 Squadron shifted to providing close air support to Coalition ground forces and air interdiction against Iraqi forces . These missions were initially flown in support of the US Army but the squadron was later switched to supporting the US Marine Corps . The squadron also supported the Australian Special Air Service Regiment and 4th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment on 12 April when these units captured Al Asad Airbase . No. 75 Squadron flew its last combat sortie on 27 April . During the war the squadron flew 350 combat missions and dropped 122 laser @-@ guided bombs . During these operations the squadron was augmented with pilots from No. 81 Wing 's other F / A @-@ 18 squadrons . No. 75 Squadron 's aircraft returned to Tindal on 14 May 2003 and its ground crew arrived there the next day . The squadron was awarded a Meritorious Unit Citation on 27 November 2003 for " sustained outstanding service during warlike operations , in the Middle East Area of operations , over Iraq during Operation Falconer " . 
 In August 2005 , a group of current and veteran members of No. 75 Squadron travelled to Papua New Guinea to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the end of the Pacific War , and the 63rd anniversary of the Battle of Milne Bay . As at 2011 , No. 75 Squadron remained at Tindal and was the RAAF 's largest F / A @-@ 18 @-@ equipped unit . The squadron regularly exercises with units from the RMAF , RNZAF , RSAF and US Military and conducts training using the facilities of the Delamere Air Weapons Range . As of 2014 , No. 75 Squadron is scheduled to transition to Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35A Lightning II fighters from late 2021 . 
 In March 2015 , six F / A @-@ 18As from No. 75 Squadron deployed to the Middle East during Operation Okra as part of the military intervention against ISIL . The aircraft replaced a detachment of six F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets from No. 1 Squadron , and began flying combat operations late that month . The squadron was deployed to the Middle East until September 2015 , when it handed over to the next rotation from No. 77 Squadron . 
 = Greyfriars , Bristol = 
 Greyfriars , in Bristol , England , was a Franciscan friary . The name Greyfriars derived from the grey robes worn by the friars . It was founded at some time before 1234 , within the town walls and then moved to Lewin 's Mead in 1250 . The site included extensive gardens surrounded by a stone wall . Following the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the sixteenth century , the premises were leased to the town council in 1541 , who desired to use the stone to make repairs to the town walls , and the harbour facilities . In succeeding centuries many different uses have been made of the site , which is currently occupied by an office block and part of Bristol Dental School . 
 = = History = = 
 The friary was established at some time before 1234 , this being known because Henry III granted wood for fuel to the friars in that year , followed by further grants of oak wood and fresh fish landed at Bristol . The friars wore long grey coats , with a grey hood or cowl , hence the name , grey friars . Originally located within the town walls , the friary was moved to Lewin 's Mead in 1250 . This followed the diversion of the river Frome into St Augustine 's Reach . A marshy area on the north bank of the Frome was drained and some of the clay and rock from the excavations was deposited on it . 
 The earliest church on the site was approximately 50 by 9 metres ( 164 ft × 30 ft ) . It was later enlarged with cloisters , a bell tower and a chapter house being added . The buildings were constructed from the local red sandstone . Bristol City Museum houses some stained glass which was recovered from the chapter house , probably after the dissolution of the monasteries . Writing in the fifteenth century , William Worcester described the area of the precinct as roughly bounded by the modern Upper Maudlin Street , Lower Maudlin Street , Lewin 's Mead and Johnny Ball Lane . The friars had extensive gardens devoted to horticulture . There were also two lime kilns and the whole was surrounded by freestone walls . 
 A report in 1538 , by Richard Yngworth , during the Dissolution of the Monasteries , describes the warden of the friary as " stiff " . The warden also held office in Richmond and Yngworth went on to say " yet for all his great port , I think him twenty marks in debt , and not able to pay it . " Six remaining friars surrendered the property to <unk> and it was dissolved . The precinct was leased to one Jeremy Green for a total annual rent of 20 shillings and 8 pence . In 1541 , Henry VIII granted the friary , together with other dissolved houses , to the Mayor and Commonalty of Bristol for a " consideration of £ 1 @,@ 000 cash and a yearly fee farm rent of £ 20 " . The Mayor had earlier petitioned the king , saying " The Grey Friars of Bristol is of the foundation ... of the town , built by ancient burgesses at their cost ; we should like it to repair the walls and quay and to make a wharf . " 
 = = Post @-@ dissolution = = 
 The site has been redeveloped many times in subsequent centuries ; amongst other uses , a Moravian church and a chocolate factory have occupied premises there . It is currently occupied by an office development , also called Greyfriars , and parts of Bristol Dental School . Traces of the abbot 's house were discovered during building works in 1989 and a small oval window was incorporated into the new building . Archaeological investigations have found graves with human remains , dating to the thirteenth to fifteenth century , and a medieval conduit , similar to one excavated at Saint Augustine 's Abbey in Bristol . 
 = Wookey Hole Caves = 
 Wookey Hole Caves are a series of limestone caverns , show cave and tourist attraction in the village of Wookey Hole on the southern edge of the Mendip Hills near Wells in Somerset , England . The River Axe flows through the cave . It is a Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) for both biological and geological reasons . Wookey Hole cave is a " solutional cave " , one that is formed by a process of weathering in which the natural acid in groundwater dissolves the rocks . Some water originates as rain that flows into streams on impervious rocks on the plateau before sinking at the limestone boundary into cave systems such as Swildon 's Hole , <unk> Cavern and St Cuthbert 's Swallet ; the rest is rain that percolates directly through the limestone . The temperature in the caves is a constant 11 ° C ( 52 ° F ) . 
 The caves have been used by humans for around 45 @,@ 000 years , demonstrated by the discovery of tools from the Palaeolithic period , along with fossilised animal remains . Evidence of Stone and Iron Age occupation continued into Roman Britain . A corn grinding mill operated on the resurgent waters of the River Axe as early as 1086 . The waters of the river are used in a handmade paper mill , the oldest extant in Britain , which began operations circa 1610 . The low temperature of the caves means that they can be used for maturing Cheddar cheese . 
 The caves are the site of the first cave dives in Britain which were undertaken by Jack Sheppard and Graham Balcombe . Since the 1930s divers have explored the extensive network of chambers developing breathing apparatus and novel techniques in the process . The full extent of the cave system is still unknown with approximately 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) , including 25 chambers , having been explored . Part of the cave system opened as a show cave in 1927 following exploratory work by Herbert E. Balch . As a tourist attraction it has been owned by Madame Tussauds and , most recently , the circus owner Gerry Cottle . The cave is noted for the Witch of Wookey Hole – a roughly human shaped stalagmite that legend says is a witch turned to stone by a monk from Glastonbury . It has also been used as a location for film and television productions . 
 = = Description = = 
 The show cave consists of a dry gallery connecting three large chambers , the first of which contains the Witch of Wookey formation . There are various high level passages leading off from these chambers , with two small exits above the tourist entrance . The River Axe is formed by the water entering the cave systems and flows through the third and first chambers , from which it flows to the resurgence , through two sumps 40 metres ( 130 ft ) and 30 metres ( 98 ft ) long , where it leaves the cave and enters the open air . 
 The river is maintained at an artificially high level and falls a couple of metres when the sluice is lowered to allow access to the fourth and fifth chambers , two small air spaces . Normally , however , these are only accessible by cave diving . Beyond the fifth chamber a roomy submerged route may be followed for a further 40 metres ( 130 ft ) , passing under three large rifts with air spaces , to surface in the ninth chamber - a roomy chamber over 30 metres ( 98 ft ) long and the same high . High level passages here lead to a former resurgence , now blocked , some 45 metres ( 148 ft ) above the current resurgence . 
 An artificial tunnel 180 metres ( 590 ft ) leading off from the third chamber allows show cave visitors to cross the seventh and eight chambers on bridges , and skirt around the ninth chamber on a walkway , before exiting near the resurgence . A second excavated 74 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 243 ft ) tunnel from Chamber 9 allows visitors to visit Chamber 20 . 
 From the ninth chamber , a dive of about 200 metres ( 660 ft ) passes almost immediately from the Dolomitic Conglomerate into the limestone , and descends steadily for 70 metres ( 230 ft ) to a depth of 23 metres ( 75 ft ) under a couple of high rifts with <unk> , which are enclosed air spaces between the water and the roof , before reaching air space in the nineteenth chamber . The twentieth chamber is at the top of a large boulder slope - 60 metres ( 200 ft ) long , 15 metres ( 49 ft ) wide , and 22 metres ( 72 ft ) high . From here a roomy passage some 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) long ascends towards a now @-@ blocked fossil resurgence in the Ebbor Gorge . The total length of passages in this area is about 820 metres ( 2 @,@ 690 ft ) . A passage near the end is being cleared in an attempt to provide an easier connection with Wookey 24 , which is only an estimated 30 metres ( 98 ft ) away . 
 The continuation is found in the nineteenth chamber , where 152 metres ( 499 ft ) of passage descending to a depth of 24 metres ( 79 ft ) surfaces in the twenty second chamber - 300 metres ( 980 ft ) of dry passages at various levels with a static pool . The way on is within this pool at a depth of 19 metres ( 62 ft ) where 100 metres ( 330 ft ) of passage ascends to surface in Wookey 23 - 100 metres ( 330 ft ) of large passage , followed by four short sumps that arrive in Wookey 24 . This is 370 metres ( 1 @,@ 210 ft ) of what is described in the guide book as " magnificent " river passage , 13 metres ( 43 ft ) high and 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) wide , which finishes at a cascade falling from a 30 metres ( 98 ft ) long lake . There are also more than 370 metres ( 1 @,@ 210 ft ) of high level passages above the river . The way on continues underwater for some 100 metres ( 330 ft ) reaching a depth of 25 metres ( 82 ft ) before surfacing in Wookey 25 - called the Lake of Gloom because of its thick mud deposits . The sump at the end of this has been dived for 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) to a maximum depth of 90 metres ( 300 ft ) before gravel chokes prevented further progress . The end is located about 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) north @-@ east of the entrance . 
 = = Hydrology and geology = = 
 Wookey Hole is on the southern escarpment of the Mendip Hills , and is the resurgence which drains the southern flanks of North Hill and Pen Hill . It is the second largest resurgence on Mendip , with an estimated catchment area of 46 @.@ 2 square kilometres ( 17 @.@ 8 sq mi ) , and an average discharge of 789 litres ( 174 imp gal ; 208 US gal ) per second . Some of the water is <unk> in origin i.e. drained off non @-@ limestone rocks , collecting as streams on the surface before sinking at or near the Lower Limestone Shale — Black Rock Limestone boundary , often through <unk> such as Plantation Swallet near St Cuthbert 's lead works between the Hunter 's Lodge Inn and Priddy Pools . It then passes through major cave systems such as Swildon 's Hole , <unk> Cavern and St Cuthbert 's Swallet , around Priddy , but 95 % is water that has percolated directly into the limestone . 
 The southern slopes of the Mendip Hills largely follow the flanks of an anticline , a fold in the rock that is convex upwards and has its oldest beds at its core . On the Mendips the crest of the anticline is truncated by erosion , forming a plateau . The rock strata here dip 10 ° -15 ° to the south @-@ west . The outer slopes are mainly of Carboniferous Limestone , with Devonian age Old Red Sandstone exposed as an <unk> at the centre . Wookey Hole is a solutional cave mainly formed in the limestone by chemical weathering whereby naturally acidic groundwater dissolves the carbonate rocks , but it is unique in that the first part of the cave is formed in Triassic Dolomitic Conglomerate , a well @-@ cemented fossil limestone scree representing the in @-@ fill of a Triassic valley . 
 The cave was formed under phreatic conditions i.e. below the local water table , but lowering base levels to which the subterranean drainage was flowing resulted in some passages being abandoned by the river , and there is evidence of a number of abandoned <unk> . In particular , the passages in the twentieth chamber are interpreted as a former <unk> spring , the waters of which once surfaced in the Ebbor Gorge . It is uncertain whether that was the original rising or whether it formed when the main rising at Wookey was blocked . 
 The current resurgence is located close to the base of the Dolomitic Conglomerate at the head of a short gorge formed by headward erosion with subsequent cavern collapse . The morphology of the passages is determined by the rock strata in which they are formed . The <unk> in the outer part of the cave system that is formed within the Dolomitic Conglomerate is characterised by shallow loops linking low bedding chambers , or tall narrow passages , known as ' rifts ' , developed by phreatic solutional enlargement of fractured rifts . The <unk> in the inner part of the system formed within the limestone is characterised by deep phreatic loops reaching depths as much as 90 metres ( 300 ft ) , with the water flowing down @-@ dip along bedding planes and rising up enlarged joints . In the far reaches of the cave the passages descend to 26 metres ( 85 ft ) below sea level . 
 = = History = = 
 <unk> suggests that the name Wookey is derived from the Celtic ( Welsh ) for ' cave ' , " <unk> " or " Ogof " which gave the early names for this cave of " <unk> " " <unk> " . Hole is Anglo @-@ Saxon for cave , which is itself of Latin / Norman derivation . Therefore , the name Wookey Hole Cave basically means ' cave cave cave . Eilert Ekwall gives an alternative derivation of Wookey from the Old English " <unk> " meaning a noose or snare for animals . 
 Fossils of a range of animals have been found including the Pleistocene lion ( Felis leo <unk> ) , Cave hyena ( Crocuta crocuta spelaea ) and Badger ( Meles meles ) . Wookey Hole was occupied by humans in the Iron Age , possibly around 250 @-@ 300 BC , while nearby Hyena Cave was occupied by Stone Age hunters . Badger Hole and Rhinoceros Hole are two dry caves on the slopes above the Wookey ravine near the Wookey Hole resurgence and contain in situ cave sediments laid down during the Ice Age . Just outside the cave the foundations of a 1st @-@ century hut have been identified . These had been built on during the Roman era up to the end of the 4th century . 
 In 1544 products of Roman lead working in the area were discovered . The lead mines across the Mendips have produced contamination of the water emerging from the underground caverns at Wookey Hole . The lead in the water is believed to have affected the quality of the paper produced . 
 The designation of the water catchment area for Wookey Hole , covering a large area of the Mendip Hills as far away as Priddy Pools as a Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) during the 1970s and 1980s was controversial because of conflicts of interest between land owners , recreational <unk> and cave scientists . Initially proposals were put forward by the Council of Southern Caving Clubs which is part of the British Caving Association was that SSSI designation , which would restrict what farmers and other landowners were allowed to do , would cover the entire catchment area . This was opposed as being too restrictive and difficult to enforce . It was argued that agricultural uses of fields which were not directly in contact with cave entrances would have little detrimental effect on the caves themselves . There was also debate about which caves and cave features should be considered " important " . The final settlement resulted in a smaller area being designated and many agricultural practices being removed from the list of proscribed " Potentially Damaging Operations " . 
 The entrance weir and sluice gate servicing the paper mill was built about 1852 . The tunnel excavated from the Third Chamber to the Ninth Chamber and then out to daylight was dug in 1974 / 1975 by ex @-@ coal miners from the Radstock area . The show cave was further extended in 2015 by excavating a tunnel from Chamber 9 to Chamber 20 . 
 The constant temperature of 11 ° C ( 52 ° F ) in the caves is used by Ford Farm of Dorset to mature Cheddar cheese in the ' Cheese Tunnel ' - an excavated side tunnel between the Ninth Chamber and the exit to the show cave . 
 = = = Cave archaeology = = = 
 Archaeological investigations were undertaken from 1859 to 1874 by William Boyd Dawkins , who moved to Somerset to study classics with the vicar of Wookey . On hearing of the discovery of bones by local workmen he led excavations in the area of the hyena den . His work led to the discovery of the first evidence for the use by Palaeolithic man in the Caves of the Mendip Hills . Middle Paleolithic tools have been found in association with butchered bones with a radiocarbon age of around 41 @,@ 000 years . 
 Herbert E. Balch continued the work from 1904 to 1914 , when he led excavations of the entrance passage ( 1904 – 15 ) , Witch 's Kitchen ( the first chamber ) and Hell 's Ladder ( 1926 – 1927 ) and the Badger Hole ( 1938 – 1954 ) , where Roman coins from the 3rd century were discovered along with Aurignacian flint implements . Rhinoceros Hole was scheduled as an ancient monument in 1992 . The 1911 work found a 4 to 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 1 m ) of stratification , mostly dating from the Iron age and sealed into place by Romano @-@ British artefacts . Finds included a silver coin of Marcia ( 124 BC ) , pottery , weapons and tools , bronze ornaments , and Roman coins from Vespasian to Valentinian II ( first to fourth centuries ) . 
 The work was continued , first by E. J. Mason from 1946 to 1949 , and then by G. R. Morgan in 1972 . Later work led by Edgar Kingsley <unk> explored the human occupation of the Rhinoceros hole , and showed that the fourth chamber of the great cave was a Romano @-@ British cemetery . During excavations in 1954 @-@ 7 at Hole Ground , just outside the entrance to the cave , the foundations of a 1st @-@ century hut and Iron Age pottery were seen . These were covered by the foundations of Roman buildings , dating from the 1st to the late 4th century . 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 The cave as far as the third chamber and side galleries has been known since at least the Iron Age period . Prior to the construction of a dam at the resurgence to feed water to the paper mill downstream , two more chambers ( the Fourth and Fifth ) were accessible . Further upstream the way lies underwater . Diving was first tried by the Cave Diving Group under the leadership of Graham Balcombe in 1935 . With equipment on loan from Siebe Gorman , he and Penelope ( " Mossy " ) Powell penetrated 52 m ( 170 ft ) into the cave , reaching the seventh chamber , using standard diving dress . The events marked the first successful cave dives in Britain . 
 Diving at Wookey resumed in early June 1946 when Balcombe used his home @-@ made respirator and waterproof suit to explore the region between the resurgence and first chamber , as well as the underground course of the river between the third and first chambers . During these dives , the Romano @-@ British remains were found and archaeological work dominated the early dives in the cave . The large ninth chamber was first entered on 24 April 1948 by Balcombe and Don <unk> . Using this as an advance dive base , the tenth and then eleventh chambers were discovered . The way on , however , was too deep for divers breathing pure oxygen from a closed @-@ circuit rebreather . The cave claimed its first life on 9 April 1949 when Gordon Marriott lost his life returning from the ninth chamber . Another fatality was to occur in 1981 when Keith Potter was drowned on a routine dive further upstream . 
 Further progress required apparatus which could overcome the depth limitation of breathing pure oxygen . In 1955 using an <unk> and swimming with fins , Bob Davies reached the bottom of the eleventh chamber 11 at 15 m ( 49 ft ) depth in clear water and discovered the 12th and 13th chambers . Unfortunately , he got separated from his guideline and the other two divers in the eleventh chamber , ending up spending three hours trapped in chamber 13 and had much trouble getting back to safety . Opinion hardened against the use of the short @-@ duration <unk> in favour of longer @-@ duration closed @-@ circuit equipment . Likewise , the traditional approach of walking along the bottom was preferred over swimming . Employing semi @-@ closed circuit nitrogen @-@ oxygen rebreathers , between 1957 and 1960 John Buxton and Oliver Wells went on to reach the elbow of the sump upstream from the ninth chamber at a depth of 22 m ( 72 ft ) . This was at a point known as " The Slot " , the way on being too deep for the gas mixture they were breathing . 
 A six @-@ year hiatus ensued while open circuit air diving became established , along with free @-@ swimming and the use of neoprene wetsuits . The new generation of cave diver was now more mobile above- and under @-@ water and able to dive deeper . Using this approach , Dave Savage was able to reach air surface in the eighteenth chamber ( chambers did not have to have air spaces to be so named ; they were the limits of each exploration ) in May 1966 . A brief lull in exploration occurred while the mess of guidelines laid from the ninth chamber was sorted out before John Parker progressed first to the large , dry , inlet passage of the twentieth chamber , and thence followed the River Axe upstream on a dive covering 152 metres ( 499 ft ) at a maximum depth of 152 metres ( 499 ft ) to the twenty second chamber where the way on appeared to be lost . 
 Meanwhile , climbing operations in the ninth chamber found an abandoned outlet passage which terminated very close to the surface , as well as a dry overland route downstream through the higher levels of the eight to sixth chambers as far as the fifth chamber . These discoveries were used to enable the show cave to be extended into the ninth chamber and the cave divers to start directly from here , bypassing the dive from the third chamber onwards . The way on from the twenty second chamber was at last found by Colin Edmond and Martyn Farr in February 1976 and was explored until the line ran out . A few days later Geoff Yeadon and Oliver Statham somewhat controversially reached the twenty third chamber after laying just a further 9 metres ( 30 ft ) of line . A further three short dives and they surfaced in the twenty fourth chamber to be confronted by what Statham described as " a magnificent sight — the whole of the River Axe pouring down a passage 40 feet high by five feet wide " terminating in a blue lake after 90 metres ( 300 ft ) . This lake was dived by Farr a few days later for 90 metres ( 300 ft ) at a maximum depth of 18 metres ( 59 ft ) to emerge in the twenty fifth chamber 25 , a desolate , muddy place named " The Lake of Gloom " . 
 The twenty fifth chamber represents the furthest upstream air surface in Wookey Hole Cave . From here the River Axe rises up from a deep sump where progressive depth records for cave diving in the British Isles have been set : firstly by Farr ( 45 m or 148 ft ) in 1977 , then Rob Parker ( 68 m or 223 ft ) in 1985 , and finally by John <unk> and Rick Stanton ( 76 m or 249 ft ) in 2004 . The pair returned again in 2005 to explore the sump to a depth of 90 m ( 300 ft ) , setting a new British Isles depth record for cave diving . This record was broken in 2008 by Polish explorer Artur <unk> on a dive in <unk> in Ireland . 
 During 1996 – 1997 water samples were collected at various points throughout the caves and showed different chemical compositions . Results showed that the location of the " Unknown Junction " , from where water flows to the static sump in the twenty second chamber by a different route from the majority of the River Axe , is upstream of <unk> 25 . 
 = = Witch of Wookey Hole = = 
 There are old legends of a " witch of Wookey Hole " , which are still preserved in the name of a stalagmite in the first chamber of the caves . The story has several different versions with the same basic features : 
 A man from Glastonbury is engaged to a girl from Wookey . A witch living in Wookey Hole Caves curses the romance so that it fails . The man , now a monk , seeks revenge on this witch who — having been jilted herself — frequently spoils budding relationships . The monk stalks the witch into the cave and she hides in a dark corner near one of the underground rivers . The monk blesses the water and splashes some of it at the dark parts of the cave where the witch was hiding . The blessed water immediately petrifies the witch , and she remains in the cave to this day . 
 A 1000 @-@ year @-@ old skeleton of a woman was discovered in the caves by Balch in 1912 , and has also traditionally been linked to the legendary witch . The remains have been part of the collection of the Wells and Mendip Museum , which was founded by Balch , since they were excavated , though in 2004 the owner of the Caves said that he wanted them to be returned to Wookey Hole . 
 It was partly down to the legend of the witch that prompted TV 's Most Haunted team to visit Wookey Hole Caves and Mill to explore the location in depth , searching for evidence of paranormal activity . The show , which aired on 10 March 2009 , was the last episode transmitted in series eleven of the show 's run on the satellite and cable TV channel Living . In 2009 a new actor to play the ' witch ' was chosen by Wookey Hole Ltd amid much media interest . Carole <unk> in the role of Carla Calamity was selected ahead of over 3 @,@ 000 other applicants . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 The cave was first opened to the public by the owner Captain G.W. Hodgkinson in 1927 following preparatory work by Balch . Three years later , John Cowper Powys wrote of the caves in the novel A Glastonbury Romance . Hodgkinson took offence at the portrayal of his fictional equivalent , initiating a costly libel suit . 
 The current paper mill building , whose water wheel is powered by a small canal from the river , dates from around 1860 and is a Grade II @-@ listed building . The commercial production of handmade paper ceased in February 2008 after owner Gerry Cottle concluded there was no longer a market for the product , and therefore sold most of the historic machinery . Visitors to the site are still able to watch a short video of the paper being made from cotton . Other attractions include the dinosaur yard , a small museum about the cave and cave diving , a theatre with circus shows , House of mirrors and Penny arcades . 
 In 1956 , Olive Hodgkinson , a cave guide whose husband 's family owned the caves for over 500 years , was a contestant on What 's My Line ? 
 The cave and mill were joined , after purchase , by Madame Tussauds in 1973 and operated together as a tourist attraction until there was a management team buyout in 1989 . A collection of fairground art of Wookey Hole was sold in 1997 at Christie 's . The present owner is the former circus proprietor Gerry Cottle , who has introduced a circus school . 
 The cave was used for the filming of episodes of the BBC TV series Doctor Who : the serial Revenge of the Cybermen ( 1975 ) starring Tom Baker . This has since been referenced in the comedy of The League of Gentlemen . The cave was also used in the filming of the British series Blake 's 7 ( 1978 ) and Robin of Sherwood ( 1983 ) . The caves were used again for Doctor Who in The End of Time ( 2009 ) , including a scene with the Doctor sharing thoughts and visions with the Ood . 
 On 1 August 2006 , CNN reported that Barney , a Doberman Pinscher employed as a security dog at Wookey Hole , had destroyed parts of a valuable collection of teddy bears , including one which had belonged to Elvis Presley , which was estimated to be worth $ 75 @,@ 000 . The insurance company insuring the exhibition of stuffed animals had insisted on having guard dog protection . 
 In February 2009 Cottle turned the Victorian bowling green next to the caves into a crazy golf course without first obtaining planning permission . 
 = Summer Love ( Justin Timberlake song ) = 
 " Summer Love " is a song recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake for his second studio album , FutureSex / LoveSounds ( 2006 ) . It was written and produced by Timberlake , Tim " Timbaland " Mosley and Nate " Danja " Hills . " Summer Love " is a pop song about " wanting to fall in love with the lusty seasonal lover " . Its instrumentation consists of keyboards , drums , guitars , pianos , and handclaps . 
 " Summer Love " received generally positive acclaim from music critics ; with some comparing it to his work with NSYNC . " Summer Love " reached number six on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the Billboard Pop Songs chart . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for selling over one million units . The song also peaked at the top ten in Belgium and Canada . " Summer Love " was included in the set list of Timberlake 's second worldwide tour FutureSex / LoveShow in 2007 . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 When composing songs for his second studio album FutureSex / LoveSounds , Timberlake went to former Justified collaborator Timbaland 's studio in Virginia Beach , Virginia to begin sessions for his second album . However , not one of them had an idea of what the album would be – no plan for it and even a title . " Summer Love / Set the Mood ( Prelude ) " was written and produced by Timo " Timbaland " Mosley , Nate " Danja " Hills and Timberlake himself . The song was recorded by Jimmy Douglas , while its mixing was done by Douglas together with Timbaland . The keyboards were provided by Timberlake , Timbaland and Danja ; the latter also played the drums in the single . 
 " Summer Love " was released as the sixth and final single from FutureSex / LoveSounds . The song was remixed with additional vocals by American rapper Stat Quo . A reviewer of DJ Booth commented that the collaboration will " burn up the dance floors " . He also stated that " the collaboration is chalked full of infectious production work from none other than Timbo [ Timbaland ] . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Summer Love " is an uptempo pop ballad song , with a length of four minutes and thirteen seconds ( 4 : 13 ) . According to digital sheet music published at <unk> by Universal Music Publishing Group , " Summer Love " was written in the key of D minor , in common time with a moderately slow 96 beat @-@ per @-@ minute tempo . Timberlake 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of D4 to the high note of A5 . Its instrumentation consists of keyboards , drums , guitar , piano and handclaps . Barry Schwartz of Stylus Magazine praised the song and commented that " with its good foot hesitation boom @-@ clap and cascading chorus <unk> " " Summer Love " shows Timberlake 's best vocals on FutureSex / LoveSounds . Schwartz further stated that " the beat drops out while he sings in perfect harmony , ' Tell me how they got that pretty little face on that pretty little frame girl ' " . Lyrically , the single is about " wanting to fall in love with the lusty seasonal lover " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Critics reacted in a generally positive manner to " Summer Love " . Barry Schwartz of Stylus Magazine gave " Summer Love " a positive review and additionally praised " its good foot hesitation boom @-@ clap and cascading chorus " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian stated , " a dreary central @-@ casting pop ballad called ' Summer Love ' is enlivened only by another of Timberlake 's peculiar announcements : ' I 'm sick and tired of trying to save the world . ' Shaheem Reid and Jayson Rodriguez off MTV News stated that " Summer Love " alongside Timberlake 's 2007 singles " My Love " and " LoveStoned " , rocked every iPod , stereo player and stadium during his tour . North by Northwestern 's Dagny Salas called " Summer Love / Set the Mood ( Interlude ) " a stand @-@ out track on FutureSex / LoveSounds . According to him the song " oozes sun , sex , and a sultry affair " . A reviewer of IGN commented that " the bulk of the album is focused on funk lite , but with ' Summer Love / Set The Mood ( Prelude ) ' Timberlake and Timbaland slip into darkness . " An editor of Billboard criticized Timbaland 's production : " [ W ] hile the track offers cunning instrumentation , Timbaland 's heavy production hand is so overwhelming that the singer is pushed to the back of the track " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The song debuted at number 74 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart in the issue dated April 28 , 2007 . After seven weeks on the chart , on June 9 , 2007 , the single reached its peak at number six . The next week it fell to number eight and stayed on the position for four weeks , before falling to number nine in the issue dated July 14 , 2007 . " Summer Love " became <unk> 's sixth single to reach the top ten and stayed a total of 20 weeks on the chart . It ranked at number 39 on Billboard 's Best of 2007 – Hot 100 Songs . The single debuted on the US Pop Songs chart at number 39 in the issue dated April 21 , 2007 , and peaked at number one on June 23 , 2007 . " Summer Love " became Timberlake 's fifth number one single on the US Pop Songs chart . For the issue dated July 28 , 2007 , the song peaked at number 24 on the US Adult Pop Songs chart . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) after one million downloads of the song were sold . " Summer Love " peaked at number eight on the Canadian Hot 100 chart , for the issue dated June 30 , 2007 and stayed on the chart for 16 weeks . 
 Elsewhere , the song attained moderate success . In New Zealand , " Summer Love " debuted at number 35 on August 27 , 2007 . After thirteen weeks fluctuating on the chart it reached its peak of 15 on November 26 , 2007 . The song stayed on the chart for total of 19 weeks . In Europe , the single entered on six national charts . In Austria it debuted at number 52 , and after two weeks the song peaked at number 47 . It stayed on the chart for total of seven weeks . " Summer Love " was more successful in Belgium , where it reached number six on the Flandrian Singles Chart and number eight on the Wallonian Singles Chart . The single entered the Swedish Singles Chart at number 53 and the next week it reached its peak at number 38 . In Germany , " Summer Love " charted together with " Until the End of Time " and peaked at number 39 . It stayed on the chart for nine weeks . The song also reached number 22 on the Slovakian Singles Chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD single and digital download 
 " Summer Love " – 4 : 13 
 " Until the End of Time " ( duet with Beyoncé ) – 5 : 22 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Technical 
 Recorded and mixed at Thomas Crown Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia 
 Personnel 
 Jimmy Douglas – Recording , mixing 
 Nate " Danja " Hills – Drums , keyboards , production , songwriting 
 Tim " Timbaland " Mosley – Drums , keyboards , mixing , production , songwriting 
 Justin Timberlake – Background vocals , keyboards , production , songwriting 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of FutureSex / LoveSounds . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = What Now ( song ) = 
 " What Now " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her seventh studio album , Unapologetic ( 2012 ) . It was written by Olivia Waithe , Parker Ighile and Nathan Cassells alongside Rihanna , with production handled by Ighile and Cassells . A remix collection was released exclusively to Beatport on August 29 , 2013 and later via iTunes , Amazon , and Google Play on September 17 , 2013 . The single was serviced to US rhythmic radio on September 24 , 2013 , before impacting mainstream radio on October 1 , 2013 as the fifth international single and sixth overall from Unapologetic . Another remix collection was released to Beatport on October 29 , 2013 . The song is a mid @-@ tempo piano ballad which incorporates sounds which resemble " sonic bombs " during the chorus and " crashing " drums . 
 " What Now " received generally positive reviews from music critics , with many calling it an emotional , stand @-@ out song on the album and praising Rihanna 's vocals . Following the release of Unapologetic , " What Now " made appearances on various charts around the world . Following its release as a single , the song re @-@ peaked in multiple territories , having it also reach new peaks at number 25 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 25 on the UK Singles Chart , while topping the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart and attaining a top three peak on the UK R & B Chart . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Jeff Nicholas , Jonathan Craven , and Darren Craig from Uprising Creativity . It portrays Rihanna having an " emotional breakdown " and performing exorcism @-@ type dance moves . Critics complimented the video and compared it to Rihanna 's 2008 video for the song " Disturbia " . Rihanna promoted " What Now " on Alan Carr : Chatty Man and the song is included on the set list of her Diamonds World Tour ( 2013 ) . British television network ITV used the song for their " Where Drama Lives " 2014 advertisement . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 Rihanna began " working on the new sound " for her seventh studio album in March 2012 , even though she had not yet begun recording . On September 12 , 2012 , Def Jam France announced via Twitter that Rihanna would release a new single the upcoming week while her seventh studio album was scheduled to be released in November 2012 . On October 11 , 2012 , in one of her tweets revealed that the title of her new album is Unapologetic alongside with its cover . 
 " What Now " was written by British singer @-@ songwriter Livvi Franc together with Rihanna , Parker Ighile and Nathan Cassells , while the production of the song was done by the latter two . Ighile and Cassells recorded the music for the track in Metropolis Studios located in London , United Kingdom , and provided all of the instrumentation and programming . Kuk Harrell provided the vocal production of the song and also recorded Rihanna 's vocals together with Marcos Tovar at Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California . Blake Mares and Robert Cohen served as assistant vocal engineer of " What Now " . It was mixed by Phil Tan at Ninja Club Studios in Atlanta , Georgia with Daniela Rivera serving as assistant mixing engineer . 
 " What Now " was released as the sixth single from the album Unapologetic . Ten remixes of the song were digitally released via Beatport on August 28 , 2013 in the United States . The same remixes , were also added on the iTunes Store on September 17 . " What Now " was serviced to rhythmic contemporary radio in the United States on September 24 . It was later sent to contemporary hit radio on October 1 . Via her Instagram account , Rihanna revealed the official artwork for the song on October 16 . It features the singer dressed in black and " stares out with piercing eyes " while her name is written on chalkboard behind her . Jocelyn Vena of MTV News described Rihanna 's style on the artwork as goth and noted that it is reminiscent of the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes shot she posted during filming the song 's video . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " What Now " is a piano @-@ led mid tempo pop ballad which lasts four minutes and three seconds . According to Sony / ATV Music Publishing 's digital sheet music for the song , it is composed in the key of G ♯ minor and set in compound duple meter ( 68 time ) with a moderately slow groove of 60 beats per minute . Rihanna 's vocals span from the low note of A ♯ 3 to the high note of C ♯ 5 . " What Now " follows a chord progression of G ♯ m – B2 – F ♯ – F ♯ sus4 – F ♯ . The instrumental features " crashing " drums ; Dean Martin of NME described it as a ' bonkers marriage of pianos and bass @-@ pop ' . According to Mesfin Fekadu of The Huffington Post , the song " builds nicely from its calming verse to its electrified hook . " 
 The Urban Daily 's Smokey D. Fountaine compared " What Now " to the works by singer Pink as according to him contains " yell @-@ as @-@ long @-@ as @-@ you @-@ have @-@ a @-@ great @-@ hook style " . Its structure " flips " from verse to chorus " like they ’ re from two different planets " , according to Michael Gallucci of PopCrush . Gallucci also felt that Rihanna 's over @-@ sings on the track , in contrast with Chris Younie of 4Music who said that Rihanna sounds " sweet " . During the " roaring " chorus , sounds which resemble " sonic bombs " are included in the background . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 A Billboard reviewer praised " What Now " and called the song an " emotional highlight on an album filled with moments of resonance in its second half . " Giovanny Caquias of Culture Blues wrote that the song feels like the first " candid " and " insightful " track on Unapologetic . He continued , " Rihanna gets a little introspective on What Now , and doesn ’ t resort to being overtly sexual or defiantly callous ( more on that later ) , which gave me the feeling that she stripped away her armor for a moment and actually allowed herself to be ' real ' . " Daily News Jim Farber wrote that the song shows a heft . 
 Brad Stern of MTV Buzzworthy praised Rihanna 's vocals on the song and referred to it as a " most poignant offering on the record " . The Star @-@ Ledger 's reviewer labelled the song as " staggering power ballad that makes all her other mid @-@ tempo numbers sound featherweight by comparison . " Andy Kellman of Allmusic praised " What Now " and called it a " massive , slamming , wailing power ballad " . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times positively reviewed the song writing , " Rihanna is doing some of her most direct , ambitious singing here . It ’ s the album ’ s one real purge , and a sign of a pulse beneath the armor . " Genevieve Koski for The A.V. Club criticised " What Now " , writing that it ( as well as " Stay " ) are the types of " milquetoast ballads " which have never been Rihanna 's speciality . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Upon the release of Unapologetic , " What Now " charted in France and on two charts in the United Kingdom due to strong digital download sales . It debuted on the French Singles Chart at number 144 for the week dated December 1 , 2012 , and remained on the chart for one week . On July 13 , 2013 , it re @-@ entered the chart at number 174 ; the song peaked at number 83 two weeks later . On December 2 , 2012 , it debuted at number 165 on the UK Singles Chart , and number 32 on the UK R & B Chart . On July 27 , 2013 , " What Now " debuted at number 38 on the singles chart of the Wallonia region of Belgium . " What Now " was later serviced to radio in Australia as the fourth single from the album . It debuted at number 37 on the ARIA Singles Chart on August 18 , 2013 , and peaked at number 21 . According to IFPI , the song has sold 2 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Production and synopsis = = = 
 Rihanna shot the music video for " What Now " inside a warehouse in Phuket , Thailand on September 17 , 2013 , during a tour stop of the Diamonds World Tour . It was directed by Jeff Nicholas , Jonathan Craven , and Darren Craig from Uprising Creativity . Nicholas and Craven previously worked on the video for Justin Timberlake 's single " Tunnel Vision " from his third studio album The 20 / 20 Experience . According to Steven Gottlieb of <unk> the double @-@ exposure body shots are a visible common similarity of the two videos . On November 13 , Rihanna unveiled a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video via her official Vevo account . During it she explained the concept of the video , " It 's gonna be kind of eerie , very creepy because ' What Now ' is one of those songs that you can get really boring with the visual . You can get really almost expected . Everybody 's probably expecting narrative type of video , a love story of some sorts or something really soft and pretty " and then says , " It is pretty and kind of soft , but it 's really a little demented . " Prior to the video 's release , Rihanna posted a sneak peek of the video on YouTube . The official music video was released to VEVO on November 15 , 2013 . 
 Rob Newman is the producer of the video , while Craven , Nicholas and <unk> <unk> executively produced the visual . Sing Howe Yam performed the direction of the photography while Clark Eddy is the editor . The video opens to Rihanna appearing on a static television screen in a simple nude gown and crucifix necklace . She then begins to sing whilst being in a darkened room with a black gown on and later appearing in a brightened room with a white gown on . Throughout the video , Rihanna seems to have an " emotional breakdown " and does exorcism @-@ type dance moves . The video switches between the creepy and the pretty Rihanna as she mopes in a sparse warehouse space , possessed by her loneliness . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jocelyn Vena of MTV compared the video to four of Rihanna 's past videos , with " Disturbia " being one of the four , she says " both ' What Now ' and ' Disturbia ' have a dark , supernatural vibe about them . And in addition to sharing that similarity , the visuals ' shots are layered , giving off a sort of 3 @-@ D effect . " Other comparisons included were " Diamonds " and " Stay " , which is also included on her 2012 Unapologetic , and " We Found Love " . Even Rachel Brodsky of MTV 's Buzzworthy Blog used seven comparisons of how the video relates to the 1996 film The Craft . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard says that Rihanna " dials it down " for the video after the " twerking , pole @-@ dancing and general skin @-@ showing " video she released for " Pour It Up " the month before . Other reviewers gave similar opinions , as an anonymous reviewer of The Huffington Post says " The clip shows the 25 @-@ year @-@ old singer in a spooky place , writhing in a sparse room shot in a fashion similar to many horror movies . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On September 27 , 2013 , Rihanna performed the song on Channel 4 's Alan Carr : Chatty Man . It is also included on the set list of her Diamonds World Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Metropolis Studios , London , United Kingdom . 
 Vocals recorded at Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California . 
 Mixed at Ninja Club Studios , Atlanta , Georgia . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Unapologetic , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 | - class = " <unk> " style = " text @-@ align : center ; " | <unk> = 3 | * sales figures based on certification alone ^ shipments figures based on certification alone 
 | } 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Nicky Barr = 
 Andrew William " Nicky " Barr , OBE , MC , DFC & Bar ( 10 December 1915 – 12 June 2006 ) was a member of the Australian national rugby union team , who became a fighter ace in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) during World War II . He was credited with 12 aerial victories , all scored flying the Curtiss P @-@ 40 fighter . Born in New Zealand , Barr was raised in Victoria and first represented the state in rugby in 1936 . Selected to play for Australia in the United Kingdom in 1939 , he had just arrived in England when the tour was cancelled following the outbreak of war . He joined the RAAF in 1940 and was posted to North Africa with No. 3 Squadron in September 1941 . The squadron 's highest @-@ scoring ace , he attained his first three victories in the P @-@ 40D Tomahawk and the remainder in the P @-@ 40E Kittyhawk . 
 Barr 's achievements as a combat pilot earned him the Distinguished Flying Cross and Bar . Shortly after taking command of No. 3 Squadron in May 1942 , he was shot down and captured by Axis forces , and incarcerated in Italy . He escaped and assisted other Allied fugitives to safety , receiving for his efforts the Military Cross , a rare honour for an RAAF pilot . Repatriated to England , he saw action during the invasion of Normandy in June 1944 before returning to Australia as chief instructor with No. 2 Operational Training Unit . After the war he became a company director , and rejoined the RAAF as an active reserve officer from 1951 to 1953 . From the early 1960s he was heavily involved in the oilseed industry , for which he was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 1983 . He died in 2006 , aged 90 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Andrew Barr was born in Wellington , New Zealand , on 10 December 1915 ; he had a twin brother , Jack . The family moved to Australia when the boys were six . Growing up in Melbourne , Andrew attended Kew Public School and played Australian rules football . He was also the Victorian Schoolboys ' 100 yards athletics champion three years in succession , from 1926 to 1928 . In 1931 , aged fifteen , he began his association with the Lord Somers Camp and Power House social and sporting organisations located at Western Port . After leaving school , Barr studied construction at Swinburne Technical College , but later took a diploma course in accountancy and made it his profession . He started playing rugby union in 1935 through a friend in the Power House club . Weighing 80 kilograms ( 180 lb ) and just under 6 feet ( 180 cm ) tall , Barr gained selection for Victoria as a hooker the following year . In 1939 , he was chosen to play in the United Kingdom with the Australian national team , the Wallabies . The tour was cancelled less than a day after the team arrived in the UK on 2 September , due to the outbreak of World War II . Keen to serve as a fighter pilot , Barr initially tried to enlist in the Royal Air Force , but withdrew his application when told that it was unlikely he would fly anytime in the near future , and that he could expect only administrative duties in the interim . 
 Returning to Australia on the RMS Strathaird , Barr joined the Royal Australian Air Force as an air cadet on 4 March 1940 . After undergoing instruction on Tiger Moths at No. 3 Elementary Flying Training School , Essendon , and on Hawker Demons and Avro Ansons at No. 1 Service Flying Training School , Point Cook , he was commissioned as a pilot officer on 24 September . He gained a reputation as something of a rebel during training , and became forever known as " Nicky " , for " Old Nick " , or the Devil . In his quest to gain assignment as a fighter pilot , he had deliberately aimed poorly during bombing practice , a stratagem also adopted by at least two of his fellow students . By November 1940 , he had been posted to No. 23 ( City of Brisbane ) Squadron , flying CAC Wirraways on patrol off the Queensland coast . The aircraft was , according to Barr , " our front line fighter in those days , but it didn 't take too long to realise that the capacity of the Wirraway , compared with the types of planes that we were going to encounter , left much to be desired " . Though his duties frustrated him somewhat , Barr was grateful to have this extensive flight experience under his belt when he eventually saw combat . While based in Queensland , he served as honorary aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Governor , Sir Leslie Wilson , and also captained the RAAF rugby union team . He was promoted to flying officer on 24 March 1941 . 
 = = Combat service = = 
 Barr was posted to North Africa on 28 September 1941 , to fly with No. 3 Squadron under the command of Squadron Leader Peter Jeffrey . He converted to P @-@ 40D Tomahawk fighters at an RAF operational training unit in Khartoum . There he also received his " <unk> chit " , a piece of paper to be shown to local tribesmen in the event he was shot down , reading in Arabic : " don 't kill the bearer , feed him and protect him , take him to the English and you will be rewarded . Peace be upon you . " Returning to North Africa , Barr achieved his first aerial victory , over a Messerschmitt Bf 110 , on 12 December . He followed this up with a Junkers Ju 88 and a Messerschmitt Bf 109 the next day . The squadron then re @-@ equipped with P @-@ 40E Kittyhawks ; Barr was flying the new model when he became an ace on New Year 's Day 1942 , shooting down two Junkers Ju 87 Stukas . On 8 March , he led a flight of six Kittyhawks to intercept a raid on Tobruk by twelve Ju 87s escorted by ten Macchi C. <unk> and two Bf 109s . The Australians destroyed six Macchis and three Ju 87s without loss , Barr personally accounting for one of the Macchis . 
 Eventually credited with victories over twelve enemy aircraft , plus two probables and eight damaged , Barr became No. 3 Squadron 's highest @-@ scoring member . He flew a total of eighty @-@ four combat sorties , twenty of them in one fortnight , and six on 16 June 1942 alone . His philosophy was that the P @-@ 40 was not a top @-@ class fighter , but that its shortcomings " could be offset by unbridled aggression " , so he resolved to treat aerial combat as he would a boxing match and " overcome much better opponents by simply going for them " . Bobby Gibbes became No. 3 Squadron 's commanding officer in February 1942 , and made Barr his senior flight commander . Promoted to flight lieutenant on 1 April , Barr was raised to acting squadron leader and appointed to command the unit in May , barely six months after he commenced operations , following Gibbes 's hospitalisation with a broken ankle . Barr had never sought leadership of the squadron , and felt that others were just as well qualified for the role . As a commander he delegated most administrative tasks to his adjutant but , contrary to normal practice , wrote letters to the next @-@ of @-@ kin of casualties himself . 
 Three times while serving with No. 3 Squadron , Barr was himself shot down . The first occasion was on 11 January 1942 when , having destroyed a Bf 109 and a Fiat G.50 , he was preparing to touch down in the desert to pick up a fellow pilot who had crash landed . He had his undercarriage halfway down when he was " jumped " by two other Bf 109s . He immediately engaged both and shot one down before more German fighters arrived and he was hit and forced to land behind enemy lines . As one of the German planes came in low to strafe the downed Kittyhawk , Barr ran straight at it in an attempt to throw the pilot off his aim , and was injured by fragments of rock sent airborne by impact from cannon shells . A tribe of friendly Senussi Arabs found him , dressed his wounds , and helped him return to Allied lines . For this exploit , and his earlier successes , Barr was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) , the full citation being published in the London Gazette on 20 February 1942 : 
 This officer , who commenced operational flying in November , 1941 , has displayed the greatest keenness and skill as a fighter pilot . In December , 1941 , during a patrol over the Derna area , he shot down a Messerschmitt 110 ; the next day , in the same area , he destroyed a Messerschmitt 110 and a Junkers 88 . One day in January , 1942 , his squadron formed part of an escort to bomber aircraft operating over El Agheila . Enemy aircraft were encountered and , in the ensuing engagement , Flying Officer Barr attacked 2 Italian fighters , one of which he shot down . He then observed one of his fellow pilots , who had been shot down , waving to him from the ground but , when preparing to make a landing in an attempt to rescue him , Flying Officer Barr was attacked by 2 Messerschmitt 109s . Although the undercarriage of his aircraft was not fully retracted , he immediately manoeuvred to engage the attackers , only to find that his guns had jammed . Quickly rectifying the fault he delivered an accurate burst of fire which caused one of the Messerschmitts to disintegrate in the air . A further 2 enemy aircraft joined in the combat and Flying Officer Barr was wounded and forced down . While on the ground he was further wounded by the enemy 's fire but , despite this , he made his way through the enemy 's lines and rejoined our own forces some 3 days later . He brought back much valuable information regarding the disposition of enemy tanks and defences . Flying Officer Barr displayed the greatest courage and tenacity throughout . He has destroyed 8 enemy aircraft . 
 On 25 May 1942 , Barr had to land in the desert when his engine overheated . Having just taken off the engine cowling , he spotted enemy tanks approaching and immediately took off with the engine exposed to the elements , safely landing back at base . He was shot down for the second time on 30 May , when he engaged eight Bf 109s and destroyed one before being hit and forced to crash land at high speed in no @-@ man 's land . He came down in a minefield during a fierce tank battle , and was forced to remain where he was as troops of both sides slowly converged on him ; British forces managed to reach him first and , after treatment for wounds , he again returned to his squadron . On 26 June , however , after being attacked by two Bf 109s and bailing out of his burning Kittyhawk , he was captured by Italian soldiers and taken as a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war , first to Tobruk , and then to Italy , where he received hospital treatment for serious wounds . He later learned that the pilot who shot him down was Oberleutnant Werner Schroer , a Luftwaffe ace credited with sixty @-@ one victories in North Africa . Bobby Gibbes , having recovered from his own injuries , again took command of No. 3 Squadron . During his incarceration , on 5 February 1943 , Barr was awarded a Bar to his DFC for " destroying further enemy aircraft " . 
 Barr tried to escape from his confinement four times . By November 1942 he had recovered sufficiently from the injuries received in June to break out of the hospital where he was being held in Bergamo , northern Italy . He made his way to the Swiss border , but was challenged by an Italian customs official , whom he struck with a rock before being recaptured . Court @-@ martialled on a charge of murder , Barr only avoided a death sentence when the Swiss Red Cross colonel representing him located the official and proved that he had not died . Barr was instead sentenced to ninety days solitary confinement in <unk> Prison Camp , Genoa . In August 1943 , with Italy on the verge of surrender , prisoners of war were rounded up for transport to Germany . Barr jumped from a moving train bound for the Brenner Pass and joined a group of Italian partisans in Pontremoli , remaining at large for two months before again being captured . Taken to a transit camp just over the Austrian border , Barr and fourteen other prisoners escaped by tunnelling under the barbed wire . Eventually he managed to link up with an Allied special operations unit , which was gathering intelligence behind enemy lines , sabotaging Axis infrastructure , and helping Allied prisoners and Italian refugees escape over the Apennine Mountains along the so @-@ called " Alpine Route " . Barr was recaptured and escaped once more before finally making it through the Alpine crossing himself , leading a group of more than twenty . After reaching friendly lines in March 1944 , he was sent to a military hospital in Vasto , weighing only 55 kilograms ( 121 lb ) and in poor health , suffering malaria , malnutrition , and blood poisoning . The assistance he rendered to fellow Allied fugitives earned him the Military Cross ( MC ) for " Exceptional courage in organising escapes " ; the award was gazetted on 1 December 1944 . He is thought to be one of only five or six RAAF pilots to receive the MC during World War II . 
 Posted to Britain in April 1944 , Barr went ashore at Omaha Beach two days after D @-@ Day as part of an air support control unit . During the campaign in Normandy , he flew rocket @-@ armed Hawker Typhoons on operations against V @-@ 1 flying bomb launch sites . After his return to Australia on 11 September , Barr was promoted to acting wing commander and appointed chief instructor at No. 2 Operational Training Unit in Mildura , Victoria , taking over from Bobby Gibbes . He also went to New Guinea and flew some ground @-@ attack missions in the Kittyhawk to gain experience in the South West Pacific theatre . Following the end of hostilities in August 1945 , Barr was treated for recurring fever and underwent two operations on his limbs in No. 6 RAAF Hospital , Heidelberg . He was discharged from the Air Force on 8 October . 
 = = Later career = = 
 After leaving the Air Force , Barr remained in Mildura with his wife , Dorothy ( Dot ) . They had met on a blind date in 1938 and been married only a few weeks when Nicky joined the RAAF . During the war she was told on three occasions that her husband was dead . The couple had two sons , born in 1945 and 1947 . Barr 's injuries prevented him from returning to a rugby career , and he took up yachting as a sport . He also briefly assisted fellow No. 3 Squadron veteran Bobby Gibbes in an airline venture in New Guinea , before going into business as a company manager and director with civil engineering and pharmaceutical firms . Barr rejoined the RAAF on 20 March 1951 as a pilot in the active Citizen Air Force ( CAF ) , with the acting rank of wing commander . On 15 April 1953 , he transferred to the CAF reserve . A member of the Royal Air Forces Escaping Society , Barr began travelling to Italy with his wife on a regular basis in the late 1950s to seek out and offer assistance to those who had helped him during his wartime escape attempts . 
 In 1961 , Barr became General Manager of Meggitt Ltd , an oilseed @-@ crushing firm ; he eventually rose to become Executive Chairman . The firm 's board was joined in 1971 by the recently retired Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Sir Alister Murdoch . Barr 's work in the industry led to his appointment in the 1983 New Year Honours as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) . The same year , he became Australian representative and Chairman of the International Oil Seed Group . In June 1987 , Barr accepted an invitation to join John Glenn , Chuck Yeager , and fifteen other famed flyers in a so @-@ called " Gathering of Eagles " for a seminar at the USAF Air Command and Staff College in Montgomery , Alabama . Generally reluctant to talk publicly about the war , he agreed to discuss his experiences during an episode of the television series Australian Story in 2002 , appearing with his biographer Peter Dornan , and Bobby Gibbes . By this time Barr was said to be receiving daily treatment for the injuries he had suffered in combat . He died at the age of ninety on 12 June 2006 , a few months after his wife . Four F / A @-@ 18 Hornet jet fighters from No. 3 Squadron overflew his funeral service on the Gold Coast , Queensland . He was further honoured at a rugby test match between Australia and England at Telstra Dome in Melbourne on 17 June , the day after his funeral . On 14 September 2006 , No. 3 Squadron dedicated a stone memorial in Barr 's honour ; the unveiling was attended by his sons Bob and Brian . 
 = LGBT themes in American mainstream comics = 
 LGBT themes in American mainstream comics is a relatively new concept , as lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) themes and characters were historically omitted intentionally from the content of comic books , due to either formal censorship or the perception that comics were for children and thus LGBT themes were somehow inappropriate . With any mention of homosexuality in mainstream United States comics forbidden by the Comics Code Authority ( CCA ) until 1989 , earlier attempts at exploring these issues in the US took the form of subtle hints or subtext regarding a character 's sexual orientation . LGBT themes were tackled earlier in underground comix from the early 1970s onward . Independently published one @-@ off comic books and series , often produced by gay creators and featuring autobiographical storylines , tackled political issues of interest to LGBT readers . 
 Mainstream comics — the genre of superhero comics published in the United States since the late 1930s — have historically excluded gay characters , and the superhero genre and its two largest publishing houses , Marvel Comics and DC Comics , have been criticised for their lack of inclusivity . Transgender characters have likewise been under @-@ represented , although the common storyline of a superhero having their sex changed by magical or technological means has been regarded as an oblique reference to transgender and transsexual issues . Queer theory analyses have noted that LGBT characters in mainstream comic books are often shown as assimilated into heterosexual society , whereas in alternative comics the diversity and uniqueness of LGBT culture is at the forefront . Mainstream comics have also been labelled as " heteronormative " , in comparison to " integrationist " alternative comics . Since the 1990s LGBT themes have become more common in mainstream US comics , including in a number of titles in which a gay character is the star . 
 = = Censorship , criticism and inclusivity = = 
 For much of the 20th century , creators were strongly discouraged from depicting gay relationships in comic books , which were regarded as a medium for children . Until 1989 the Comics Code Authority ( CCA ) , which imposed de facto censorship on comics sold through newsstands in the United States , forbade any suggestion of homosexuality , and LGBT characters were excluded from comics bearing the CCA seal . The CCA itself came into being in response to Fredric Wertham 's Seduction of the Innocent , in which comic book creators were accused of attempting to negatively influence children with images of violence and sexuality , including subliminal homosexuality . Wertham claimed that Wonder Woman 's strength and independence made her a lesbian , and stated that " The Batman type of story may stimulate children to homosexual fantasies . " Storytellers subsequently had to drop subtle hints while not stating directly a character 's orientation . Overt gay and lesbian themes were first found later in underground and alternative titles which did not carry the CCA 's seal of approval . 
 In recent years the number of LGBT characters in mainstream superhero comics has increased greatly . At first gay characters appeared in supporting roles , but their roles have become increasingly prominent . The trend has prompted both praise from the LGBT community and organizations like the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation ( GLAAD ) , and criticism from conservative groups . Critics make regular accusations that comics are attempting to subvert readers into a " gay lifestyle " , trying to " lure young American boys into the kinky web of homosexuality and AIDS " . 
 According to writer Devin Grayson , the amount of creative freedom allowed by editors in the portrayal of LGBT characters depends upon how popular and established a character already is . Long @-@ standing characters that would require a retcon to change their sexuality are less likely to be shown as LGBT than newer characters . When such changes to a character 's continuity are made , fans are often disgruntled , particularly when sexuality is involved , and Alan Moore suggests that creating a new character is preferable . 
 Scott Lobdell claims that it is more often the fans , rather than editors , that have stronger negative reaction to LGBT issues . Moore notes however , that " it 's probably quite fashionable ... to have the odd gay character , " and that the inclusion of LGBT people continues to improve in mainstream comics , but that the characters continue to be limited by stereotypes and do not represent a varied cross @-@ section of LGBT people . Greg Rucka says that some scenes of same @-@ sex interactions are rejected by editors due to unease with sexual content in general rather than the LGBT content . 
 On the other hand , inclusion of LGBT issues attract media attention , in which the hype makes some fans and creators uncomfortable . <unk> Faust points out for example , that gay marriage in a comic issue is treated almost as an “ event ” , when that series had already been significant with openly gay characters . Lobdell , while wondering about the attention media gives gay characters , hopes that in the near future , they will not “ make the news at all , because they are as common as capes and cowls . ” 
 = = DC = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ 1990s = = = 
 The Encyclopedia of Gay Histories and Cultures ( 2000 ) notes that gay subtext can be found in DC Comics publications as early as the Golden Age of Comic Books , with readers inferring homosexuality between superheroes and their same @-@ sex sidekicks and on the women @-@ only Paradise Island . Batman 's relationship with Robin has famously come under scrutiny , in spite of the majority of creators associated with the character denying that the character is gay . Psychologist Fredric Wertham , who in Seduction of the Innocent asserted that " Batman stories are psychologically homosexual , " claimed to find a " subtle atmosphere of homoeroticism which pervades the adventures of the mature ' Batman ' and his young friend ' Robin . ' " It has also been claimed that Batman is interesting to gay audiences because " he was one of the first fictional characters to be attacked on the grounds of his presumed homosexuality , " and " the 1960s TV series remains a touchstone of camp . " Frank Miller has described the Joker as a " homophobic nightmare , " and views the character as sublimating his sexual urges into crime fighting . Burt Ward has also remarked upon this interpretation in his autobiography , noting that the relationship between the two could be interpreted as a sexual one . When creating the character of Jericho in Teen Titans , Marv Wolfman and George Perez considered making him gay , which would have marked one of the first appearances of a gay character in a major super hero book . However , they ultimately passed on the idea after concluding that it would be too stereotypical to make the sensitive , artistic , effeminate featured Jericho a homosexual . 
 The first obviously gay character was Extraño , an effeminate Hispanic man whose name means " Strange " in Spanish , who was created by Steve Englehart and Joe Staton and appeared in Millennium and New Guardians in 1987 . New Guardians was not successful , but during its short run it also featured a character dying of AIDS . An official aftermath to Millennium , The Spectre ( vol . 2 ) # 11 , depicted a " mostly male and mostly gay " AIDS rally . Several characters , including the Enchantress ( describing them as " filthy disgusting men " ) and a police helicopter pilot named Ed ( screaming about " fags " ) are influenced into attempting to crush the rally by a seven @-@ headed spirit . Thanks to the actions of the Spectre , Doctor Fate , Deadman , Madame Xanadu , and Ben Turner , the men are saved . Previous to this , in the hugely influential Watchmen ( 1986 ) , one of the central characters , Ozymandias , is referred to as " possibly homosexual " by Rorschach , who critics have interpreted as asexual . The series also strongly implied that minor characters the Hooded Justice and Captain Metropolis were gay , and that Silhouette was kicked off the Minutemen superhero team when she was publicly outed as a lesbian . In Watchmen and Philosophy , Mark White and William Irwin write that the gay relationships in Watchmen remain ambiguous as " lots of <unk> are <unk> out by <unk> " , and also that Watchmen is particularly surprising and challenges preconceptions of homosexuality , as " if it 's true that Hooded Justice and Captain Metropolis are gay , they sure as heck don 't act or look like they are gay " . Alan Moore was described by AfterElton.com writer Lyle Masaki as " very gay friendly " , due to his inclusion of complex LGBT characters and realistic treatment of LGBT issues in Watchmen and V for Vendetta . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 The early 1990s saw a few more LGBT minor characters portrayed in DC titles . Transsexual themes were explored in a 1992 storyline in Legion of Super @-@ Heroes , in which Element Lad finds out that <unk> Erin , the woman he is in love with , is actually a man who has taken a sex @-@ change drug to be with him ; Element Lad subsequently reveals that he prefers <unk> as a male . A lesbian relationship was also implied between the Legion of Super @-@ Heroes ' Shrinking Violet and Lightning Lass , but all these non @-@ heterosexual characters were retconned during the Zero Hour " reboot " to be straight . Camelot 3000 also explored transsexual themes by having Sir Tristan reincarnated into the body of a woman , to his initial dismay . Notable storylines featuring LGBT themes include the 1991 ’ s The Flash ( vol . 2 ) # 53 , which had received the first GLAAD Award for Best Comic Book in 1992 . Here , the reformed villain Pied Piper was revealed as gay . Another is the coming out of Kyle Rayner 's assistant and an arc about his " gay bashing " in Green Lantern , both written by Judd Winick . These stories earned the writer title two GLAAD awards and a Gaylactic Spectrum Awards ( and a further nomination ) . Green Lantern also has a lesbian couple , Lee and Li , as supporting characters . 
 The 1990s title Doom Patrol introduced a number of LGBT characters and explored transsexual themes . Doom Patrol 's base of operations in later stories is the sentient transvestite street Danny the Street . Danny is named after British female impersonator Danny La Rue , and " dresses in drag " by hosting typically masculine shops ( such as gun shops ) , but decorating them in bright frilly patterns and pastel curtains . " His inclusion is described by Timothy Callahan as part of the " increasingly absurd " tone of the book from the twentieth issue . One member of the team is the transsexual , bisexual Coagula , who can coagulate liquids and dissolve solids , created by transsexual fantasy writer Rachel Pollack . Coagula gains her powers while working as a prostitute : One of her customers is <unk> , a radioactive hermaphrodite and Coagula gains her powers after having sex with them . 
 DC Comics has a number of imprints , including Wildstorm and Vertigo . Wildstorm was originally a studio producing work for Image Comics , which is noted to have a greater proportion of LGBT characters . Vertigo is an imprint that produces comics for more mature audiences , allowing more sexual themes . George Haggerty notes in Gay histories and cultures : an encyclopedia that " substantive mainstream presentation of gay themes in the future seems most likely in DC 's adult @-@ orientated Vertigo titles . " Vertigo titles that have tackled LGBT themes include the Sandman , Shade , The Changing Man and Enigma . The Sandman : A Game of You ( 1991 ) had a transsexual character , and its creator Neil Gaiman said that he included transgender characters in his works in response to the lack of realistic representation of such people in comics . The title character of Shade , the Changing Man was an alien who could change his surface form : This resulted in people sometimes perceiving him as female , and although he remained essentially male , it was implied that he had relationships with both genders . Enigma ( 1992 ) deconstructed the superhero genre , with the title characters homosexuality playing a large part . John Constantine , the protagonist of Hellblazer was first hinted as bisexual in 1992 , and confirmed in 2002 . In the television series however , Constantine was portrayed straight due to NBC guidelines , which brought on criticism from both critics and fans . 
 An example of a gay character in a starring role is the violent vigilante superhero Midnighter , who appears in comic books first published by Wildstorm . The Batman @-@ like Midnighter was revealed to be in a relationship with the Superman @-@ like Apollo during their time as members of the superhero team The Authority . The portrayal of the relationship was initially subtle , with writer Warren Ellis not informing the artist of his intentions . However , the DC editorial board still censored a kiss between the two characters in 2000 . Described as the " first openly gay couple in comics , " Midnighter and Apollo married in a later issue and have an adopted daughter . Midnighter starred in his own solo title from 2006 ; the Midnighter comic was criticised by François <unk> for ignoring the protagonist 's relationship with his husband , and also for the continual use of homophobic insults by villains . Criticism has also been leveled at a storyline in which Apollo is raped , with critics saying that straight superheroes are never subjected to such treatment . Alan Moore pointed to the characters as an example of comics ' " strange attitude " towards LGBT themes , describing them as " vicious muscle queens . " Starting 2015 , Midnighter once again stars in his own solo series , published from DC Comics , making him the first gay male superhero to have his own series in a mainstream publisher . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Manhunter , created by Mark Andreyko in 2004 , caused reaction in the fan community when it was revealed that the boyfriend of the title character 's gay co @-@ counsel was long @-@ time Infinity , Inc. member Obsidian . Obsidian had a number of failed heterosexual romances in Infinity , Inc. and while a member of the Justice League , and later struggled to come to terms with his sexuality , but it wasn 't until his appearances Manhunter that the character was revealed to be gay and to have accepted his homosexuality . Andreyko said that making the character openly gay could be seen as a retcon , but that this seemed a logical step in character 's growth . 
 Homosexual interpretations of Batman have continued into the 21st century . One notable example occurred in 2000 , when DC Comics refused permission for the reprinting of four panels ( from Batman # 79 , 92 , 105 , and 139 ) to illustrate Christopher York 's paper All in the Family : Homophobia and Batman Comics in the 1950s . In summer 2005 , painter Mark Chamberlain displayed a number of watercolours depicting both Batman and Robin in suggestive and sexually explicit poses . DC threatened both the artist and the Kathleen Cullen Fine Arts gallery with legal action if they did not cease selling the works and demanded the surrender of all remaining art , as well as any profits derived from them . 
 In 2006 DC drew widespread media attention by announcing a new , lesbian incarnation of the well @-@ known character Batwoman even while openly lesbian characters such as Gotham City police officer Renee Montoya already existed in DC Comics . It was revealed at the 2009 New York Comic Con that she would be DC Comics ' highest profile gay superhero , appearing in a new Justice League comic book written by James Robinson and taking over as the lead character in Detective Comics with issue # 854 . Greg Rucka said that DC 's editors had no problem with his writing Montoya or Batwoman as lesbian , but the media controversy over Batwoman 's sexuality " nullified any positive effect Batwoman might have had on the industry " and forced the character into minor roles during major crossover storylines . In 2011 Batwoman gained her own title as part of The New 52 DC comics relaunch . This makes her the first LGBT character to headline a monthly series in the DC Universe . 
 In 2006 , Gail Simone brought back the Secret Six as a team of villains with new members , in which many are LGBT , including lesbian Scandal Savage , her lover Knockout , pansexual Rag Doll , bisexual Jeannette , and <unk> , who is also bisexual . Secret Six relaunched in December 2014 , with Gail Simone returning as the writer . Scandal Savage , Rag Doll , and Jeannette return as recurring characters . The team consists of new members save <unk> , and among them , Porcelain is genderfluid . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 In Earth 2 , Green Lantern Alan Scott was revealed as gay . In issue 3 , Scott is revealed to have a boyfriend named Sam , to whom he intends to propose while on vacation in China . Before he can do so , however , the train on which the couple is travelling is suddenly wrecked . A mysterious green flame protects Scott and heals him ; a disembodied voice informs him that the crash was caused by a force that threatens the whole world , and that Sam did not survive . The grief @-@ stricken Scott is then told that he will be given the power to avenge his love and protect the world . 
 Alongside Batwoman , DC also released a series starring Voodoo , a bisexual African American woman , as part of The New 52 relaunch . The same relaunch also introduced Bunker , an openly @-@ gay Latino superhero , as part of the core cast of the new Teen Titans series . Demon Knights brought back Shining Knight , who previously appeared in Grant Morrison ’ s Seven Soldiers of Victory as a girl <unk> as a male knight . In the new series however , The Shining Knight says that he is “ not just a man or a woman [ , but ] both . ” This makes him the possible first intersex hero . 
 The number of minor DC characters being identified as LGBT continues to increase , including bisexual superheroes Sarah Rainmaker and <unk> , as well as major ones such as Catwoman . In Catwoman # 39 , she was confirmed bisexual , which critics claim iconic , as she is one of the most famous characters in the DC Universe . Furthermore , DC Comics officially stated that Harley Quinn and Poison Ivy , whose relationship many fans have speculated as romantic or sexual , are “ girlfriends without the jealousy of monogamy . ” 
 = = Marvel = = 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Marvel Comics ' incorporation of LGBT themes has been unfavorably compared with that of DC ; its use of gay characters has been described as " less prolific but more deliberate " . Marvel reportedly had a " No Gays in the Marvel Universe " policy during Jim Shooter 's 1980s tenure , and Marvel 's policy from the 1990s had stated that all series emphasizing solo gay characters must carry an " Adults Only " label , in response to conservative protests . Yet in 2006 publisher Joe Quesada claimed that this policy is no longer in force . Although same @-@ sex couples are depicted occasionally kissing , intimate or sexual scenes have not been shown , even in Marvel 's " Adult only " imprint . The use of mutants and the discrimination they face in the X @-@ Men comics has been seen as a metaphor for the real @-@ world discrimination directed at minority groups including LGBT people . 
 Alpha Flight ’ s Northstar , a member of the original Alpha Flight superhero team , was the first major gay character created by Marvel Comics . Creator John Byrne said that Northstar was planned to be gay from his inception in 1979 , but although hints about Northstar 's sexual identity appeared during 1983 in issues 7 and 8 of Alpha Flight , his apparent lack of interest in women was attributed to his obsessive drive to win as a ski champion . The character was finally revealed to be gay in 1992 's Alpha Flight issue 106 , the only comic book issue to have been inducted into the Gaylactic Hall of Fame . Storylines involving Northstar have included an illness seen by some readers as a metaphor for AIDS , which was cured when it revealed that the character is actually a part " fairy " , a race of non @-@ human beings . Northstar also adopts an abandoned baby , which soon dies of AIDS . Criticism has been levelled at the fact that in 30 years Northstar has never been shown kissing another man , although many interactions with other gay characters are shown , as in the Marvel Swimsuit Special , in which he is shown socializing with the gay Pantheon member Hector . 
 After the cancellation of Alpha Flight Northstar appeared in his own miniseries , which mostly ignored his sexuality , and eventually became a member of the X @-@ Men . During his time in this team he became a mentor to gay teenage mutant Anole , who later became a Young X @-@ Men member along with another gay teen , Graymalkin . Notable also in Northstar 's tenure in the X @-@ Men was his death in three separate continuities in the same month . Other LGBT members of Marvel 's mutant teams were X @-@ Statix 's Phat , <unk> , and Bloke ( until their deaths ) and the villain Mystique , the latter having been in a relationship with the character Destiny , although this was not explicitly revealed until years after the relationship had ended with Destiny 's murder . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Freedom Ring was a character depicted as gay from his debut by his creator Robert Kirkman . Joe Quesada touted him as Marvel Comics ' leading gay hero , with stories dedicated to his adventures in Marvel Team @-@ Up . Despite this , the character was killed one month later . His death and general treatment was met with some negative reactions , including accusations of homophobia , particularly with respect to the phallic imagery of the death , with the character being killed by being impaled with spikes . Kirkman commented on the controversy , stating " Freedom Ring was always planned as an inexperienced hero who would get beaten up constantly and probably die . I wanted to comment on the fact that most superheroes get their powers and are okay at it ... and that 's not how life works . During working on the book , I was also noticing that most gay characters ... are all about being gay . Straight characters are well @-@ rounded characters who like chicks . So I wanted to do a well @-@ rounded character who just happened to like dudes . Then I decided to combine the two ideas . In hindsight , yeah , killing a gay character is no good when there are so few of them ... but I really had only the best of intentions in mind . " Kirkman later stated , " Frankly , with the SMALL amount of gay characters in comics in general , and how unfortunate the portrayals have been thus far , whether intentional or not — I completely understand the backlash on the death of Freedom Ring , regardless of my intentions . If I had it to do all over again ... I wouldn 't kill him . I regret it more and more as time goes on . I got rid of what ? 20 % of the gay characters at Marvel by killing off this ONE character . I just never took that stuff into consideration while I was writing . " 
 In 2002 , Marvel revived Rawhide Kid in their Marvel MAX imprint , introducing the first openly gay comic book character to star in his own magazine . The first edition of the Rawhide Kid ’ s gay saga was called Slap Leather . According to a CNN.com article , “ The new series pairs the original artist , John Severin , now 86 , with Ron Zimmerman , a television writer . Making the Rawhide Kid gay was Zimmerman ’ s idea . The character ’ s sexuality is conveyed indirectly , through euphemisms and puns , and the comic ’ s style is campy . Conservative groups protested the gay take on the character , which they claimed would corrupt children , and the covers carried an " Adults only " label . 
 The Young Avengers series , which debuted in 2005 , featured two gay teenager major characters , Hulkling and Wiccan , from its inception . The characters ' sexuality was criticised by some readers and defended by the writers in an extended series of letters on the title 's letters page . The Young Avengers earned Marvel its first ( and to date only ) GLAAD Award Best Comic Book Award in 2005 . Hulkling was originally planned to be a female character : According to Tom Brevoort , " Originally , Allan pitched Hulkling as a female character using her shape @-@ changing abilities to pose as a man . I suspect this was as close as Allan felt he could get to depicting an openly gay relationship in a Marvel comic . But as we got underway ... he started to have second thoughts and approached me about maintaining Hulkling and Wiccan as two involved male characters . " 
 In the latest incarnation of X @-@ Factor , written by Peter David , depowered mutant Rictor and his longtime friend Shatterstar ( with whom he 'd had an ambiguous relationship ) were shown in an on @-@ panel kiss . After the issue was published , Peter David confirmed Rictor and Shatterstar 's bisexuality in his blog and expressed his desire to develop the relationship between them further . Shortly after , one of Shatterstar 's creators , Rob Liefeld , expressed his disapproval of Peter David 's decision . Despite his complaints , however , both Peter David and Marvel editor @-@ in @-@ chief Joe Quesada have defended the development , and the story will most likely go on as planned . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 2012 ’ s Astonishing X @-@ Men # 51 held Northstar and his long @-@ term partner , Kyle <unk> ’ s wedding . Though it is not the first same @-@ sex marriage to be featured in superhero comics , as Apollo and Midnighter had married in The Authority , this is the first in mainstream comics . 
 Due to flirtations with characters of various genders and sexuality , fans have speculated Deadpool as <unk> or omnisexual . Writers Gerry Duggan and Gail Simone , as well as Terry Miller , the director of the Deadpool film , accepts the fan theory . However , Fabian Nicieza , one of the creators of the character , stated on Twitter that such speculation on his sexuality is invalid because his “ brain cells are in CONSTANT <unk> . He can be gay one minute , hetero the next , etc . ” The comment upset many fans , for it suggests that Deadpool ’ s sexuality is linked to his mental disorder . 
 Hercules , in previous works such as Hercules : Fall of an Avenger and X @-@ Treme X @-@ Men have been portrayed as bisexual . However , Marvel ’ s editor @-@ in @-@ chief Axel Alonso stated that Hercules in the new series will be heterosexual , which disappointed fans and critics for “ <unk> ” an LGBT character . 
 Other recent major characters that have confirmed to be LGBT include Iceman , who came out as gay , and Loki , who is now genderfluid and bisexual . 
 = = Other publishers : Malibu , Image , Dark Horse = = 
 The 1990s saw the creation of a number of independent publishing houses with output that competed with the giants of mainstream comics publishing , Marvel and DC . The companies included Malibu Comics , Image Comics and later , Dark Horse Comics . These companies gave greater artistic freedom to their writers and artists and chose not to ascribe to the Comics Code , allowing exploration of more mature themes . As a result , comics from these companies included a greater relative number of LGBT characters and storylines than their more traditional competitors . LGBT superhero characters include Spectral and Turbo Charge ( from Malibu comics ) , and <unk> and Gen13 's Sarah Rainmaker ( both created by Wildstorm for Image Comics before being taken over by DC ) . Image comic 's A Distant Soil , written by Colleen Doran , depicts an alien culture with exotic gender and sexual mores and gay romances that gained the series a Gaylactic Spectrum Award nomination . 
 Dark Horse 's Buffy the Vampire Slayer @-@ related comics feature the lesbian characters of Willow , Tara and Kennedy and the closeted character Andrew from the television series . The Buffy Season Eight comics attracted media attention when the title character has a one night stand with another girl who had fallen in love with her . The encounter was repeated , but both the character and the creators denied that this made Buffy gay , with Joss Whedon saying : " We 're not going to make her gay , nor are we going to take the next 50 issues explaining that she 's not . She 's young and experimenting , and did I mention open @-@ minded ? " . 
 Archie featured their first gay character , Kevin Keller , in 2010 . The American Family Association spoke out against the character and issues containing same @-@ sex romance , but Veronica # 202 had been so popular it sold out , resulting in his own solo series . 
 = = Fandom and Awards = = 
 As the visibility of LGBT comic book creators and characters has increased , comic book fandom has taken notice . Panels discussing LGBT topics occur regularly at comic book and LGBT conventions such as Comicon and Gaylaxicon , and conventions also feature stands dedicated to LGBT comics . Ted <unk> , event chair of Prism Comics said in 2008 , “ We ’ re in our sixth year of exhibiting at Comic @-@ Con , presenting a larger booth and more panels and events than ever before . ” A number of websites dedicated to LGBT comic book fandom and featuring content from staff writers exist , such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> 
 = = = GLAAD awards = = = 
 The first GLAAD Award for " outstanding comic book " was awarded in 1992 ( to DC 's The Flash ) . Since then , a number of GLAAD awards have been awarded to mainstream titles , including for DC 's Green Lantern and The Authority titles , and Marvel 's Young Avengers . According to Paul Lopez , LGBT fans and creators have " debated whether the awards for mainstream comics were more about media hype than the actual content of the comic 's stories . " 
 = = = Gaylactic Spectrum Awards = = = 
 The Gaylactic Spectrum Awards are given to works of science fiction , fantasy or horror published in the United States , and their " other works " category allows nomination of comic book series or individual issues . Comic book winners include issues of DC 's Green Lantern , The Authority and Gotham Central , and nominations have been given to titles from Marvel ( X @-@ Force , X @-@ Statix ) , Dark Horse ( Buffy Season Eight ) and Image Comics ( A Distant Soil ) . 
 = = = General = = = 
 Haggerty , George E. ( 2000 ) , Encyclopedia of Gay Histories and Cultures , Taylor & Francis , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1880 @-@ 4 
 Rothschild , D. Aviva ( 1995 ) , Graphic novels : a bibliographic guide to book @-@ length comics , Libraries Unlimited , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 086 @-@ 9 
 Lopes , Paul ( 2009 ) , Demanding Respect : The Evolution of the American Comic Book , Temple University Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 59213 @-@ 443 @-@ 4 
 Furey , Emmett . Homosexuality in Comics – Part I , Part II , Part III and Part IV , Comic Book Resources , July 16 – 19 , 2007 
 = Ron Paul presidential campaign , 1988 = 
 The Ron Paul presidential campaign of 1988 began in early 1987 when former Congressman Ron Paul of Texas announced his candidacy for the 1988 presidential nomination of the Libertarian Party . He joined the third party after leaving the Republican Party over the Reagan administration 's handling of the federal budget . He ran on a platform that included non @-@ interventionism in foreign conflicts , decriminalization of illegal drugs on a federal level , a return to the gold standard , the abolition of the Federal Reserve and a reduction in all government spending . 
 Paul defeated Native American activist Russell Means at the Libertarian Party 's National Convention in Seattle to win the party 's presidential nomination . Former Alaska State representative Andre Marrou was selected as his running mate . After over a year of campaigning as the Libertarian Party nominee , Paul received very little media coverage , and was excluded from presidential debates . On Election Day , he was on the ballot in 46 states and the District of Columbia , and finished in third place with approximately 0 @.@ 47 % of the vote , behind Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis and the winner Vice President George H.W. Bush . 
 = = Background = = 
 Paul was elected to Texas 's 22nd congressional district as a Republican during a special election early in 1976 , and he supported Ronald Reagan 's presidential bid that year . Paul lost his bid for re @-@ election in late 1976 , but was elected back to the seat in 1978 . During his time in office , Paul followed the political and economic <unk> of laissez @-@ faire advocate Ludwig von Mises , and gained a reputation as Dr. No , voting against legislation he felt was unconstitutional . He also advanced legislation establishing term limits for Congressmen , and opposed any implementation of a military draft . After serving four terms in the U.S. House of Representatives , Paul vied for the 1984 Republican Party Senatorial nomination in Texas , and gained a reputation as an adept fundraiser . He was defeated in the primary and returned to his practice of obstetrics and gynecology 
 In January 1987 , Paul officially left the Republican Party to run for the Libertarian Party nomination after becoming disillusioned by the spending policies of the Reagan administration and presumptive Republican presidential nominee George H.W. Bush . On leaving the party , Paul remarked : " Ronald Reagan has given us a deficit ten times greater than what we had with the Democrats . It didn 't take more than a month after 1981 , to realize there would be no changes . " The Libertarian Party had courted Paul for the previous six years . 
 = = Campaign developments = = 
 = = = Libertarian Party nomination campaign = = = 
 Ron Paul announced his candidacy for the Libertarian Party 's presidential nomination on February 16 , 1987 during a party luncheon in San Francisco , California . During his announcement speech , Paul commented that " Big government is running away with our freedom and our money , and the Republicans are just as much to blame as the Democrats . " He later proclaimed himself as " a choice for freedom . " According to Paul , Libertarian Party leaders notified him that there would be little opposition to his run at the party 's September 1987 National convention . 
 Paul campaigned for the nomination for the most part of 1987 , traveling to numerous state conventions . He visited Pennsylvania in April to discuss the Libertarian Party 's platform with students from Penn State . Native American activist , and challenger to Paul , Russell Means of South Dakota also appeared at the event . Means had officially announced his Libertarian presidential nomination candidacy a day before Paul . While Means received heightened media attention for his comments regarding Native Americans and militancy , reports in the news media circulated that highlighted Paul 's calls for the nation to return to the Gold Standard , and diminish the power of the Federal Reserve . Paul and Means were described as members of the right and left wing of the Libertarian Party , respectively . 
 By June , Paul was appearing at speaking events with Libertarian vice presidential candidate Andre Marrou . Marrou had previously served as a Libertarian member of the Alaska House of Representatives . The pair campaigned side @-@ by @-@ side in Idaho where Paul remarked " that a Libertarian can win the White House in the not @-@ too @-@ distant future . " After that , Paul traveled west to address Libertarian Party officials in Washington and Oregon . By the end of the month , Paul had raised $ 200 @,@ 000 for his campaign . As the convention approached , Paul was one of seven candidates vying for the party 's nomination . However , he and Means were the only candidates mentioned in the press . Speculation that Marrou could be chosen as a compromise candidate also surrounded the event , at which 800 attendees were expected . 
 = = = Libertarian National Convention = = = 
 The Libertarian National Convention , formally called the Culture of Freedom Conference and Presidential Nominating Convention , was held from September 2 – 6 at the Sheraton Hotel in Seattle , Washington . His candidacy was seen as problematic because of the party 's long support for freedom of choice on abortions . One of his opponents , Native American activist Russell Means , emphasized that he was pro @-@ choice on the abortion issue . In a forum held prior to the nomination , Means dismissed the greater funds raised by Paul 's campaign , commenting that Means was receiving " 10 times more press " than the former Congressman and was therefore " 100 times more effective . " Another candidate expressed his desire to " put handcuffs on all IRS agents . " 
 Paul was nominated on the first ballot with 196 of the 368 votes cast , with his closest opponent , Means , receiving 120 votes . He accepted the nomination and thanked the delegates with his wife , Carol , by his side . Andre Marrou was chosen as the vice presidential nominee . 
 = = General election campaign = = 
 Paul returned to the campaign trail and entered the General election stretch of the campaign a year ahead of the nominees for the two major parties . He traveled to Universities held press conferences and filmed an eight @-@ minute television advertisement , to be shown in small states and on cable television , to help spread his message . He focused on gaining enough support to win a place in the League of Women Voters @-@ sponsored presidential debates . 
 = = = Spreading the message = = = 
 Paul held one of his numerous press conferences in Helena , Montana , where he pushed for the Reagan administration to balance the budget and cut spending and taxes . He argued that Reagan had reneged on his 1980 campaign promise to balance the budget , resulting in voter dissatisfaction . Paul stated that Treasury Secretary James Baker should be removed from his office for the administration 's monetary policy . 
 Paul was featured in the November 1987 issue of Texas Monthly . The article compared the campaign to that of former U.S. Senator Eugene McCarthy , and made note of Paul 's opposition to the CIA 's assistance of the Contras in Nicaragua . Journalist Tom Curtis described Paul 's supporters as " a ragtag coalition of <unk> activists , tax rebels , anti @-@ war types , gold bugs and other anti @-@ establishment , single issue voters . " Curtis noted that Paul 's monthly newsletter , The Ron Paul Investment Letter had 12 @,@ 000 subscribers who paid an annual fee of $ 99 . 
 Paul traveled to Rome , Georgia and appeared at the downtown Holiday Inn in November 1987 . During the appearance , he railed against the policies of Washington D.C. , commenting that there was no difference between the two major parties , and that both supported " intervention overseas , ... in our personal lives ... [ and ] in the marketplace . " Paul went on to compare his Libertarian ideology to the mindset of the founding fathers . The next month , vice presidential nominee Andre Marrou traveled to Texas and discussed the Paul campaign 's prospects . He opined that the ticket could possibly win 2 to 12 million votes in the following year 's election , and that Paul might win if Jesse Jackson and Pat Robertson were selected as the Democratic and Republican presidential nominees , respectively . He explained that America did not want a preacher as president . Since the chance that either of those candidates would be named as their party 's representative seemed unlikely , by this point in the election one of the campaign 's priorities was securing a place on the ballot , which they had done in 20 of the 50 states . 
 = = = " Kamikaze " campaign = = = 
 Paul arrived in North Florida for a campaign event in early January 1988 , with ten months still remaining until the election . The event was chronicled by a journalist for the Ocala Star @-@ Banner , who compared Paul to a kamikaze and remarked that he never gives up even though his " chance of becoming president " was no greater than that for the journalist himself . Paul was described as " slim , attractive , graying , immaculately attired and most articulate , " but as a candidate who was dismissed by the media for his political positions such as support of the decriminalization of hard drugs . Paul visited the University of Florida during his trip , and gave a campaign speech in front of 200 students in the auditorium in Turlington Hall . Later in the month , he left Florida and campaigned in Iowa , where he spoke at Drake University and the University of Iowa . In February , he received the endorsement of Former Congressman Pete McCloskey ( R @-@ Calif . ) . He was also endorsed by comedian and talk @-@ show host David Letterman , as well as psychologist and counterculture icon Timothy Leary , who held a fundraiser for Paul . 
 Paul had received little media attention during the early stages of the Democratic and Republican primary contests . But as Vice President George H.W. Bush and Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis secured their respective parties ' nominations , mentions of Paul increased . It was noted that if Bush became unacceptable to conservatives , they would not turn to Dukakis , but would most likely vote for Paul as a protest . During this time , publications also started discussed Paul 's tax policy . It called for a flat income tax rate of 10 % on all earnings over $ 10 @,@ 000 annually . Paul sold his tax plan while campaigning in Utah . In front of 250 people in Kane County , he hailed California 's 1978 passage of Proposition 13 as starting the " tax revolt and [ sending ] a message across the country . The next big message for this country should be the overwhelming passage of the tax initiatives ... in November . " Paul was also part of C @-@ SPAN 's program Road to the White House , which followed different candidates on the campaign trail . In June , they aired Paul 's address to the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws . 
 During a July press conference in Spokane , Washington , while lobbying for ballot access , Paul promised that as president he would veto spending increases for both domestic programs and the military . He asked in reference to the portrayal of his party 's plank , " what 's extreme about a balanced budget ? " Paul conceded that he would not win the election but explained that votes for his ticket would give a bigger voice to Libertarian issues in American politics , and that he would only be disappointed if he did not receive at least 5 % of the vote in the state . A few weeks later , The New York Times discovered that many former members of the Pat Robertson campaign were helping Ron Paul 's candidacy . They found that the campaign workers were disseminating literature in Michigan that criticized Bush , and stated that Paul would " carry the standard " of the free market . Paul commented in a San Diego Union interview that he " <unk> [ ied ] with Robertson " although " he 's not a libertarian . " Paul spent the beginning of August , campaigning in his home state of Texas . 
 = = = Final stages = = = 
 In August , Republicans began to argue that a vote for Paul would equate to a vote for Dukakis . Later in the month , Republicans grew weary of Dan Quayle as the party 's vice presidential nominee . Paul commented that " we like Dan Quayle . We also like George Bush and Mike Dukakis . They have been the best recruiters we have . " He explained that the Libertarian Party was receiving around 100 calls a day from people interested in the party because " a large number of Americans are disenchanted with the choice they have . " Paul held a rally in Salt Lake City that drew 200 supporters , and proclaimed that he " wouldn 't be surprised if we got 20 % of the vote in Utah . " 
 By October 1988 , the campaign had secured ballot access in 46 states and the District of Columbia , and newspapers across the nation began running editorials and letters supporting Paul 's run , and criticizing the low volume of media coverage . The New York Times chronicled Paul 's campaign in late October . Paul 's 25 @-@ year @-@ old son , Rand Paul who served as the aide @-@ de @-@ camp , was interviewed and explained that Paul had raised $ 2 million , $ 500 @,@ 000 of which was spent on ballot access . Paul had spent $ 40 @,@ 000 a month on traveling expenses . Just prior to Election Day , Paul predicted a low voter turnout . 
 = = Results = = 
 Paul finished in third place on Election Day , far behind Dukakis and the victorious George H.W. Bush . He received 431 @,@ 750 votes , which made up 0 @.@ 47 % of the overall vote . The largest percentage won by Paul came in Alaska , where he received 2 @.@ 74 % . In Washington , he missed his goal of 5 % with a 0 @.@ 92 % showing . In Utah , Paul received 1 @.@ 16 % . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the election , Paul was speculated to run for president in 1992 but opted instead to work on the campaign for Pat Buchanan . That year , Marrou received the Libertarian presidential nomination . Paul later returned to the Republican Party and was re @-@ elected to his seat in Congress in 1996 , without much support from establishment Republicans , who supported the party @-@ switching Democratic incumbent . Back in Congress , Paul regained his nickname of Dr. No , favoring a free market and advocating a reduction in the size of the federal government . He was drafted to challenge President George W. Bush in the 2004 Republican primaries , but chose not to run . He ran for president again in 2008 and 2012 as a Republican , attracting a large amount of grassroots support . 
 = J. R. Richard = 
 James Rodney Richard ( born March 7 , 1950 ) is an American , right @-@ handed , former starting pitcher in Major League Baseball who played his entire career , from 1971 to 1980 , with the Houston Astros . 
 After leaving high school , Richard was selected by the Astros as the second pick in the first round of the 1969 amateur draft . From the time he made his major league debut with the Astros in 1971 until 1975 , Richard had a limited role as an Astros pitcher , throwing no more than 72 innings in a season . In 1975 , Richard played his first full season in the majors as a starting pitcher . 
 From 1976 to 1980 , he was one of the premier pitchers in the majors , leading the National League twice in strikeouts , once in earned run average , and three times in hits allowed per nine innings , winning at least 18 games between 1976 and 1979 . On July 30 , 1980 , Richard suffered a stroke and collapsed while playing a game of catch before an Astros game , and was rushed to the hospital for emergency surgery to remove a life @-@ threatening blood clot in his neck . His condition brought a sudden end to his major league career at the age of 30 . His 313 strikeouts in 1979 remains an Astros franchise record , and he held the team 's record for career strikeouts ( 1 @,@ 493 ) until 1987 . 
 In 1981 , Richard attempted a comeback with the Astros , but this failed because the stroke had slowed down his reaction time and weakened his depth perception . He spent the next few seasons in the minor leagues before being released by the Astros in 1984 . After his professional baseball career ended , Richard became involved in unsuccessful business deals and went through two divorces , which led to him being homeless and destitute in 1994 . Richard found succor in a local church and later became a Christian minister . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard was born to Clayton and Lizzie ( née Frost ) Richard in Vienna , Louisiana and gained prominence in both baseball and basketball at historically black and since closed Lincoln High School in nearby Ruston . By the time he was a high school senior , Richard stood 6 feet 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 03 m ) tall and weighed 220 pounds ( 99 @.@ 8 kg ; 15 @.@ 7 st ) . That year , he was one of the starting pitchers for Lincoln High School and did not concede a run for the entire season . In one game Richard hit four consecutive home runs while pitching his team to a 48 – 0 victory against its local rival , Jonesboro 's Jackson High School . Richard , whose baseball idol was St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Bob Gibson , never lost a game he started in his high school career . 
 Upon graduating from high school , he turned down more than 200 basketball scholarship offers to sign with the Houston Astros . The Astros would later select him with the second overall pick in the 1969 amateur baseball draft , behind the Washington Senators ' selection of outfielder Jeff Burroughs . Richard later recalled , " There were other guys in my high school with as much ability as I had , but instead of working at a job , they wanted to drink wine on Saturday nights . They thought that was the in thing to do , and consequently our lives went in different directions . For some people it takes that to make a world . It does not for me . " 
 = = Early minor league career = = 
 After the Astros drafted Richard , they sent him to play for the Covington Astros , a rookie @-@ level minor league baseball team in the Appalachian League . Richard started 12 games for Covington , finishing with five wins and four losses . Despite accumulating an average of 11 @.@ 41 strikeouts per nine innings , Richard had trouble throughout the season with his pitching mechanics and control . In 56 innings , Richard struck out 71 batters but walked 52 and gave up 41 earned runs , resulting in a 6 @.@ 59 earned run average . 
 The following year , at 20 years of age , Richard was promoted to the Cocoa Astros of the Florida State League in high @-@ A minor league baseball . Richard again compiled a low hits per nine innings ( H / <unk> ) ratio by giving up only 67 hits in 109 total innings pitched . Despite his 4 – 11 win – loss record , Richard finished the season with a 2 @.@ 39 ERA and even threw a no @-@ hitter against the Daytona Beach Dodgers . During the season , Richard was able to throw an accurate fastball which occasionally exceeded 100 miles per hour , and his slider 93 miles per hour , faster than those of most major @-@ league pitchers . During the 1970 – 71 off @-@ season , the Astros again promoted Richard : this time to Class @-@ AAA baseball , one step below the major leagues , with the Oklahoma City 89ers of the now @-@ defunct American Association . Richard wore number 50 and kept that number for the rest of his minor @-@ league and major @-@ league career . Richard started all but one of the games he pitched that season . He pitched eight complete games and led the league with 202 strikeouts in 173 innings of work . He ended the season with twelve wins and seven losses before being called up by the Houston Astros . 
 = = Early major league career = = 
 = = = 1971 season = = = 
 Richard entered Major League Baseball with the Astros in 1971 as a September call @-@ up . On September 5 , Richard made his major league debut at just 21 years of age , in the second game of a doubleheader against the San Francisco Giants . Richard used his fastball – slider combination to pick up the win and tied Karl Spooner 's 17 @-@ year @-@ old major league record for striking out 15 batters in his first major league start . Richard was charged with two earned runs and seven hits in the 5 – 3 Astros win but struck out Willie Mays and Dick Dietz three times . 
 Richard made his next start , after five days rest , against the Cincinnati Reds , who would later finish the NL West season in a tie for fourth place with the Astros . Richard gave up a lead @-@ off home run to Pete Rose in the first inning and pitched five innings of the a two @-@ hit , one @-@ run game . He struck out five batters but walked six . Richard struggled in his two following starts . In a September 16 match @-@ up against the Astros ' division rival , the third @-@ place Atlanta Braves , Richard pitched seven innings and surrendered four runs on seven hits . He struck out nine batters and even struck out the side in the first inning but also walked four batters . Furthermore , he threw two wild pitches in the first and fifth innings . In his final game of the season , against the Giants , Richard was replaced in the first inning after pitching to only four batters . 
 = = = In and out of the minors = = = 
 During the next few seasons , Richard split time between the minors and majors and did not become a regular starter with the Astros until 1975 . After his " cup of coffee " with the Astros in 1971 , Richard was sent back down to Class @-@ AAA baseball to work on his pitching with the Oklahoma City 89ers for the 1972 season . He started 19 games with the 89ers before being called back up to the Astros . In Triple @-@ A baseball in the American Association , Richard finished with 10 wins and eight losses in 128 innings of work . His 3 @.@ 02 ERA was slightly higher than that of the previous season , but he maintained approximately the same walks per nine innings ratio ( BB / <unk> ) that he had the previous year . He recorded six complete games and finished with 169 strikeouts , for a ratio of 11 @.@ 88 strikeouts per 9 innings . Richard re @-@ entered the majors , starting a day game of a day @-@ night doubleheader for the Astros against the San Diego Padres on July 30 , 1972 . He struggled and took the 10 – 7 loss . Richard did not pitch again until two weeks later , when he entered in relief for Ken Forsch in the fifth inning to keep the Giants limited to a one @-@ run lead . In two innings of relief , Richard gave up one hit , struck out three batters and garnered the win . In his two final relief appearances of the season , Richard gave up five earned runs in just over one inning of work . He finished the season with a 13 @.@ 50 ERA in only six innings of work and was again sent back down to Triple @-@ A , this time with the Astros @-@ affiliated Denver Bears . 
 Richard started eight games with the Bears in 1973 and posted minor league career @-@ worsts in ERA and hits allowed per nine innings . Despite his poor performance with the Bears , Richard was again called up by the Astros . Richard entered in the fourth inning of a June 16 game against the St. Louis Cardinals and his idol Bob Gibson . He pitched four innings of one @-@ run ball and three innings of a two @-@ hit game in his next relief outing . Afterwards , the Astros placed Richard in the starting rotation , and he made his first major league start since July 30 of the previous year . He pitched six solid innings of a one @-@ run ballgame and struck out six while walking three batters . Richard would make his next start four days later . Richard again pitched more than six innings but earned no decision after the Astros ' bullpen gave up nine runs during the top of the ninth inning . 
 After starting a July 4 game against the Braves ( which he won ) , Richard was sent into the bullpen to add Tom Griffin into the Astros ' starting rotation . He made three relief appearances against the Montreal Expos before making a start against the Los Angeles Dodgers on July 27 . Four days later , Richard threw his first shutout against the Dodgers , in which he gave up just five hits and struck out nine batters . Nineteen days later , Richard pitched another complete game , this time giving up two runs while striking out nine and walking three batters . He concluded the season with six wins and two losses in 16 total games , 10 of which he started . He finished with a 4 @.@ 00 ERA , and struck out 75 batters in 72 innings . He walked 38 batters , giving him a ratio of 4 @.@ 75 walks per nine innings , which was lower than the ratio he had had in his two previous minor league seasons . 
 Despite his improved performance in the 1973 season , Richard was sent down to work on his pitching mechanics and ball control in Class @-@ AA baseball with the Columbus Astros of the Southern League . He started 13 games with Columbus before being moved back up to Class @-@ AAA with the Denver Bears . In four starts with the Bears , Richard threw three shutouts and pitched 33 scoreless innings with a 4 – 0 record and 26 strikeouts . He was called back into the majors on July 13 and stayed with the Astros for the remainder of the season . He first pitched 14 innings of baseball in six relief appearances before being placed on the starting rotation . He then started in all nine of the games he pitched during the remainder of the season . Richard finished with a 4 @.@ 18 ERA in just over 64 innings of work during the 15 pitching appearances he made during the season . 
 Even though Richard 's statistics showed he bounced between Houston and the minors during his first four years with the Astros due to his wildness , he often told reporters that racism played a role in keeping him from becoming a regular with the big club sooner . 
 = = <unk> with the Astros = = 
 In the off @-@ season , the Astros traded starting pitcher Claude Osteen to the Cardinals , and lost pitching ace Don Wilson , who died from carbon monoxide poisoning at the age of 29 on January 5 , 1975 . As a result , Richard entered the 1975 season as the third starter of the Astros ' pitching rotation , behind veterans Larry Dierker and Dave Roberts . Richard was scheduled to start on April 9 versus the Braves . He was removed from the game in the fifth inning after jamming his toe on the first base bag but gave up no earned runs in his start . Richard continued to exhibit wildness , as shown when he issued eight walks in both his third and fourth starts of the season . He followed by pitching a complete game win against the San Diego Padres on April 29 . The following start , he walked a career @-@ high eleven batters in just six innings of pitching and also gave up seven runs in the Astros ' 12 – 8 win over the Giants . By the All @-@ Star break , Richard had six wins and four losses with a 4 @.@ 93 ERA in just over 98 innings of work . 
 In an August 10 game against the Pittsburgh Pirates , Richard yielded just one hit in six innings but walked 10 batters . He rebounded with a complete game shutout against the New York Mets eight days later . Richard ended the season on a strong note by winning three of his last four starts , including his final two games against the Dodgers . He finished the year with a 12 – 10 record for the Astros , who finished with a franchise @-@ worst 64 – 97 record . Richard was the only starter on the Astros ' pitching staff who had a winning record for the season . He led the team with 176 strikeouts , which was also the fifth @-@ highest in the National League . Richard also led the league in walks allowed and wild pitches thrown , with 138 and 20 , respectively . 
 = = = Breakout season = = = 
 Richard entered the 1976 season as the pitching staff ace and took over Larry Dierker 's position as the Opening Day starter for the Astros . In his first start of the season , Richard gave up four runs in four innings against the defending World Series champion Cincinnati Reds on April 8 . He followed this inauspicious beginning with wins in five of his next six decisions . One of them included a 10 @-@ inning shutout effort that led to a 16 @-@ inning 1 – 0 Astros victory against the Dodgers . By the end of May , however , Richard was sitting even with a 5 – 5 record , loser of four straight decisions . He closed the first half of the season by winning a 10 @-@ inning shutout against the Mets on July 6 , and an eight @-@ inning start against the Expos four days later . At the All @-@ Star break , Richard had a 9 – 9 record with a 2 @.@ 88 ERA in over 153 innings of work . From July 10 to August 31 , Richard racked up eight complete games , including one shutout , and he improved his record from 9 – 9 to 16 – 13 . He pitched 98 innings and yielded only 22 earned runs , which gave him an ERA of 2 @.@ 02 during the approximately 50 @-@ day span . On August 26 , Richard hit his first home run of the season during the second inning of the game . In his last game of the season on October 2 , Richard pitched a complete game 13 @-@ strikeout performance , and he also hit a two @-@ run home run in the sixth inning . 
 Richard finished the season with a 20 – 15 record , 14 complete games , three shutouts , and 214 strikeouts in 291 innings of work . At age 26 , Richard became only the second pitcher in Astros ' history ( after Dierker in 1969 ) to record 20 wins in a season , tying him for fourth in the NL that year . Richard also became the ninth member of the Black Aces , an organization founded by Mudcat Grant that consists of all African American pitchers who have won at least 20 major league games in a season . He was named the Most Valuable Player of the Astros by the Houston chapter of the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) . Richard finished 17th in MVP Award voting and seventh in the NL 's Cy Young Award voting . His 2 @.@ 75 ERA was the seventh @-@ best among the league 's starting pitchers , and he held hitters to a 0 @.@ 212 batting average . He led the league in lowest number of hits allowed per nine innings and in walks allowed ; Richard also finished the season second in batters faced , innings pitched and games started . In addition , he led all NL pitchers with 14 hits , two home runs , and nine runs batted in as a hitter . However , during the year he committed ten errors and finished with an 0 @.@ 853 fielding percentage , nearly 0 @.@ 100 lower than the league average . 
 = = Middle years = = 
 = = = 1977 season = = = 
 Richard began the 1977 season on a high note with a nine @-@ inning , seven @-@ strikeout performance on April 8 against the Braves . He pitched seven complete game victories in the first half of the season . By the All @-@ Star break , Richard had nine wins and six losses in over 160 innings of work , accompanied by 119 strikeouts and a 2 @.@ 69 ERA . Although Richard struggled through July and early August , he did manage to pitch three complete games ( including two shutouts ) in five starts from August 27 to September 17 . He had 11 and 10 strikeouts respectively in the final two starts of that roughly 20 @-@ day span . 
 Richard closed out the season with two complete games , the first against the Braves on September 27 , and the second against the Dodgers on October 2 . He had a season @-@ high 14 strikeouts in his final start , which tied Steve Carlton 's season @-@ high mark . Richard concluded the season on a high note by winning nine of his last twelve decisions . At the end of the season , he led the Astros ' pitching staff in wins , starts , complete games , innings pitched , walks and strikeouts . He had 18 wins and 12 losses in 267 innings pitched and posted a 2 @.@ 97 ERA and 214 strikeouts . For the first time since becoming a permanent member of the Astros ' starting rotation , Richard was not the league leader in walks allowed , but as he had done in 1976 , he led the league in wild pitches . He finished fourth in the league with 13 complete games , and he improved his fielding from the previous season by going through an error @-@ free season . 
 Richard hit well for a pitcher , going 20 @-@ for @-@ 87 in the season with two triples , two home runs and seven runs batted in . After the season was completed , Richard underwent an emergency <unk> on October 26 , 1977 at a Houston hospital . He spent most of the off @-@ season working out at the Houston Astrodome and , for relaxation , fishing . In early 1978 , he was a participant in ABC 's Superstars all @-@ around sports competition . 
 = = = Record @-@ setting year = = = 
 Richard entered the 1978 season as the Astros ' Opening Day starter . In the first game of the season , he gave up seven runs on 11 hits and just made it into the fifth inning before being replaced in a loss to the Cincinnati Reds . He recovered from the loss by pitching a complete game two @-@ hit shutout in his next outing against the Dodgers . In an eight @-@ start period from April 26 to June 4 , Richard threw six complete games , including two back @-@ to @-@ back shutouts , and lowered his ERA from 4 @.@ 15 to 3 @.@ 05 . He struck out 67 and gave up only 39 hits in the 63 total innings he pitched . On a June 9 start against the Cardinals , Richard struck out 12 batters but also walked six and gave up five earned runs . By the end of the first half of the season Richard had pitched back @-@ to @-@ back games with nine and 12 strikeout performances , against the Reds and Dodgers , respectively . At the All @-@ Star break , he had an 8 – 9 record with a 3 @.@ 49 ERA but also had 157 strikeouts in 139 innings of work . 
 After the break , Richard threw an 11 @-@ inning , 10 @-@ strikeout game against the Expos and followed with two complete games and another nine @-@ inning performance in a game that went into extra innings . He was selected as the National League Pitcher of the Month after going a perfect 4 – 0 with a 1 @.@ 29 ERA and 58 strikeouts in 56 innings during July . Throughout much of August , his season ERA hovered below 3 @.@ 00 , and he averaged well over a strikeout per inning . On August 21 , in an 8 – 3 victory over the Chicago Cubs , he broke Don Wilson 's 1969 club record of 235 strikeouts . In the final two months of the season , Richard 's strikeout average dramatically increased , and he struck out a double @-@ digit number of batters in three of his last five starts . In his third @-@ to @-@ last start , Richard broke Tom Seaver 's NL record of 290 strikeouts by a right @-@ hander when he struck out Bob Horner . In his final outing of the season , Richard reached the 300 @-@ strikeout pinnacle by striking out Rowland Office in a September 28 victory over the Braves . He also hit his seventh career home run , making him the Astros ' career leader in home runs by a pitcher . At that time , he became only the tenth pitcher , third National Leaguer and first NL right @-@ hander in history to strike out more than 300 batters in a single season . 
 Richard finished the season with 18 wins , 11 losses and a 3 @.@ 11 ERA . He led the team 's pitching staff in innings pitched , starts , complete games , shutouts , hits allowed , earned runs , walks allowed and strikeouts . He held batters to a .156 batting average at home and a .196 average overall , which was the lowest in the NL . Richard again fared well in the field , finishing with three errors and a 0 @.@ 957 fielding percentage , slightly higher than the 0 @.@ 950 league average . He finished fourth in the Cy Young Award voting , behind Gaylord Perry , Burt Hooton and Vida Blue . He finished atop the league in strikeouts per nine innings ( 9 @.@ 90 ) , fewest hits allowed per nine innings ( 6 @.@ 28 ) , walks ( 141 ) , and wild pitches ( 16 ) . 
 = = = 1979 season = = = 
 In his second game of the 1979 season , Richard set the modern @-@ day record for throwing six wild pitches in a single game against the Dodgers . Despite this , he finished the game with a 13 @-@ strikeout performance in a 2 – 1 Astros victory . He won his first four decisions that season but those victories were followed by four losses . He continued to accumulate strikeouts and finally began to walk fewer batters on average , exhibiting greater control over his pitching . Richard evened out his record at seven wins and seven losses by pitching a complete game three @-@ hit shutout against the Padres on June 30 . By the All @-@ Star break , Richard had 7 wins , 10 losses , a 3 @.@ 52 earned run average and 158 strikeouts in just a bit over 157 innings of work . By July 25 , his record stood at eight wins and 11 losses , but after he pitched nine straight complete games ( including two @-@ hit and three @-@ hit shutouts on August 27 and September 6 , respectively ) through September 6 and worked 86 consecutive innings without the need of a relief pitcher , which set an Astros club record , it was clear that he was on a winning streak . On September 21 , in a game against the Reds , he pitched 11 innings and matched a career high of 15 strikeouts , which he also reached earlier in the season on August 3 in a game against the Braves . He closed out the season against the Dodgers by winning his 11th straight game against the team , with his last loss coming on June 23 , 1976 . He was honored as the National League Pitcher of the Month for September after going 4 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 24 ERA , four complete games , two shutouts and 69 strikeouts in 53 innings pitched during the stretch . 
 He finished the season with 18 – 13 record and a league @-@ best 2 @.@ 71 ERA . He struck out 10 or more batters 14 times in the season , and totaled a league @-@ leading 313 strikeouts for the season , breaking his own club record . Richard joined Nolan Ryan and Sandy Koufax as the only modern @-@ day pitchers to strike out over 300 batters in consecutive seasons . He led the club in ERA , complete games and innings pitched and tied Joe Niekro in number of games started . He gave up 220 hits in the season , which gave him a league @-@ best 6 @.@ 77 hits per nine innings ratio . He again led the league by limiting the opposing hitters ' batting averages to .209 that year . Richard finished fifth in the league in walks allowed , with his first sub @-@ 100 total since he became a mainstay starter with the Astros . He also led the league with a 9 @.@ 64 strikeouts per nine innings ratio . Richard finished 19th in National League MVP Award voting and third in Cy Young Award voting , behind winner Bruce Sutter and teammate Joe Niekro , who had 21 wins and a 3 @.@ 00 ERA that season . Richard fared slightly worse in batting and fielding , finishing with a <unk> batting average and a <unk> fielding percentage and five errors . On October 11 , Richard signed a four @-@ year contract with the Astros . 
 = = 1980 season and stroke = = 
 By now Richard was among the best pitchers in baseball . When asked in 2012 who was the " toughest pitcher to get a hit off of " during his career , Dale Murphy answered " Anybody that played in the late 70 's or early 80 's will probably give you the same answer : JR Richard " . In 1980 , Richard was now teamed with seven @-@ time American League strikeout champion Nolan Ryan , who had joined the Astros as a free agent . During the first half of the season , Richard was virtually unhittable , starting the year with five straight wins , 48 strikeouts ( including two starts with 12 and 13 strikeouts ) , and a sub @-@ 2 @.@ 00 ERA . He was named National League Pitcher of the Month for April . At one point , Richard threw three straight complete @-@ game shutouts , two against the Giants and one against the Cubs . On July 3 , he broke Dierker 's team record of 1487 career strikeouts in a 5 – 3 win over the Braves ; it was to be Richard 's last major league victory . After finishing the first half of the season with a 10 – 4 record , 115 strikeouts and a 1 @.@ 96 ERA , Richard was selected to be the National League 's starting pitcher in the All @-@ Star Game on July 8 , but he pitched just two innings due to various back and shoulder problems . As the season progressed , Richard began to complain of a " dead arm " , citing discomfort in his shoulder and forearm . His concerns fell on deaf ears . Some in the media even interpreted these complaints as whining or malingering , citing Richard 's reputation for moodiness . Others hypothesized that Richard was egotistical and could not handle the pressure of pitching for the Astros , while others suggested he was jealous of Ryan 's $ 4 @.@ 5 million contract . 
 During his next start on July 14 against the Braves , Richard was pitching well and even struck out the side in the second inning , but had trouble seeing catcher Alan Ashby 's signs and also had difficulty moving his arm . He left the game in the fourth inning after throwing a fastball and feeling his right arm go " dead " . He had numbness in the fingers of his right hand and could not grasp a baseball . The Astros placed Richard on the 21 @-@ day disabled list . As it turned out , it would be his last major league game . 
 Nine days later , he checked into Methodist Hospital in Houston for a series of physical and psychological tests to determine the cause of his mysterious arm problems . An angiogram revealed an obstruction in the distal subclavian and axillary arteries of the right arm . Richard 's blood pressure in his left arm was normal but pressure was nearly absent in his right arm due to the completely obstructed artery . On July 25 , however , the arteries in his neck were studied , and the doctors reached a conclusion that all was normal and no surgical treatment needed to be performed . 
 On July 30 , Richard went to see a chiropractor who rotated his neck to fix the flow of blood in his upper torso region . Later that day , Richard was participating in warm @-@ ups before the game when he suffered a major stroke and collapsed in the outfield . Before the stroke , he had a headache and a feeling of weakness through his body . Eventually , that progressed into vision problems and paralysis in the left side of his body . A massive blockage in his right carotid artery necessitated emergency surgery that evening . An examination by neurologist William S. Fields showed that Richard was still experiencing weakness in his extremities and on the left side of his face . He also had blurred vision through his left eye . A CAT scan of Richard 's brain later showed that Richard had experienced three separate strokes from the different obstructions in his arterial system . Furthermore , the arteries in his right arm were still obstructed . Later examinations showed that Richard was suffering from extensive arterial thoracic outlet syndrome . While pitching , his clavicle and first rib pinched his subclavian artery . As a result of this problem , Richard would feel normal for the first few innings of the game but after putting repeated pressure on his subclavian artery , his arm would start to ache in pain and eventually start to feel " heavy " . His wife at the time , Carolyn , told reporters , " It took death , or nearly death , to get an apology . They should have believed him . " 
 Richard underwent rehabilitation and missed the rest of the season . Meanwhile , the Astros recovered from the loss of one of their staff aces and qualified for the playoffs for the first time in the club 's 18 @-@ year history . 
 = = = Comeback attempt = = = 
 In 1981 , Richard underwent a rehabilitation program with the aim of recovering from the effects of the stroke . He trained with the Astros and the Texas Southern University team , participating regularly in pitching and batting practice with both towards the end of the baseball season . After pitching in a few simulated games , Richard was placed on the 40 @-@ man active roster on September 1 , 1981 . Astros manager Bill Virdon thought Richard was not ready to return , so Richard did not pitch with the team during the last two months of the season . 
 The following year , Richard pitched in a single spring training game and then went into extended spring training in Sarasota , Florida , during the first two months of the season . There he registered three wins and two losses and a 3 @.@ 38 ERA in seven starts with thirty @-@ two total innings . Afterwards , he joined the major league rehabilitation program with the Daytona Beach Astros of the Florida State League . In his six starts , Richard notched three wins , two complete games and posted a 2 @.@ 79 ERA . He was then promoted to Triple @-@ A baseball with the Tucson Toros of the Pacific Coast League . He struggled to control the ball , conceding a high number of runs to opposing teams . He took a loss on August 12 against the Phoenix Giants and on August 27 against the Salt Lake City Gulls in a 13 – 0 rout . His longest outing as a starter — more than five innings — was an appearance against the Giants in the last game of the season on September 1 . He then joined the Astros ' extended roster but did not play in any games . 
 In 1983 , Richard started to complain of pain in his left calf . The synthetic graft inserted in his July 1980 surgery had closed off , which meant that he needed a surgical bypass in his left leg . Richard was granted free agency by the Astros on November 7 , 1983 , but the Astros still had faith in him , so he was re @-@ signed on February 17 of the following year . Just a little over two months later , he was released by the Astros , thus ending his baseball career . Despite an almost complete recovery , the risk of future complications was so great that he never pitched again . His final major league record was 107 – 71 , with 1 @,@ 493 strikeouts and a 3 @.@ 15 ERA in 238 games and 1 @,@ 606 innings . Nolan Ryan broke his Astros record for career strikeouts in 1987 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 * 
 = Led NL 
 † = 
 Top 10 in National League 
 ∞ 
 = Selected to All @-@ Star Team 
 * * = 
 Top 10 in Cy Young Award voting 
 ‡ = Top 10 in MVP voting 
 Source : 
 = = After baseball = = 
 After his professional baseball career ended , Richard returned to Louisiana and invested in some business ventures . He fell prey to an oil business scam , losing over $ 300 @,@ 000 in the deal . A few years later , Richard paid $ 669 @,@ 000 in a divorce settlement to ex @-@ wife Carolyn . He married and divorced again , losing his suburban Houston home and most of his money . In 1989 , Richard was drafted into the Senior Professional Baseball Association and played for the Orlando Juice but was cut from the team in preseason play . In the winter of 1994 , Richard was homeless and destitute and lived under a highway overpass in Houston . 
 By 1995 , Richard was eligible for his pension from Major League Baseball . He played in the Old @-@ Timers ' Day game with the Astros in the same year . In the following months , after spending many nights under the overpass Highway 59 at Beechnut Road in Houston , he turned to the Now Testament Church and sought help from its minister , Reverend Floyd Lewis . Richard overcame his homelessness by working with this minister , with a belief that he " always knew God was on his side " . Richard started working at an asphalt company and later returned to the church as a minister . 
 Richard became involved in the Houston community , working with local financial donors to help establish baseball programs for children . A small @-@ budget 2005 movie , Resurrection : The J. R. Richard Story , depicted Richard 's baseball career as well as his life after baseball . 
 = John Kefalas = 
 John Michael Kefalas ( born December 26 , 1954 ) is a legislator in the U.S. state of Colorado . An educator and lobbyist before first running for the legislature in 2004 , Kefalas defeated a Republican incumbent to win election to the Colorado House of Representatives as a Democrat in 2006 . Kefalas won election to the State Senate in 2012 and he now represents Senate District 14 . In the legislature , Kefalas has focused primarily on health care and poverty issues . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life , education , and career = = = 
 Born in Piraeus , Greece , Kefalas earned a bachelor 's degree in botany from Colorado State University in 1978 and then joined the Peace Corps in 1979 , serving as an agricultural extension worker in El Salvador . After returning to the United States , he earned a master 's degree in teaching , with a secondary science specialization from Fairleigh Dickinson University in 1982 and taught in the Poudre School District . He has also worked as an employment counselor for Larimer County , Colorado , and as a health outreach worker . 
 = = = Public service and volunteerism = = = 
 From 1997 to 2004 , Kefalas worked as a public policy advocate and community development coordinator for Catholic Charities until his departure amidst a controversy regarding his public support for Roe v. Wade and abortion rights during his 2004 legislative campaign . Before entering the legislature , he directed the Colorado Progressive Coalition 's Tax Fairness Project . He has served as a member of the Fort Collins Housing Authority and the Colorado Social Legislation Committee , and , in 2001 , won the City of Fort Collins Human Relations Award . 
 From 1980 to 1994 , Kefalas redirected a portion of his federal income taxes to charitable organizations as a protest against United States military actions in Central America . He has paid his income taxes in full since 1994 , but continued to boycott the federal telephone excise tax as recently as 2004 . As a result , Kefalas has had a lien filed him and has had wages garnished . Kefalas has paid his back taxes and considers his actions to be a conscientious protest . He has also written about his experience of " war tax resistance " for the newsletter of the National War Tax Resistance Coordinating Committee . In both his 2004 and 2006 legislative campaigns , Kefalas was accused of avoiding his federal tax obligation , both by his Republican opponent and by independent political committees . Kefalas has also been an outspoken opponent of the Iraq War , and has engaged in non @-@ violent civil disobedience in protest of the war . 
 Kefalas is married ; he and his wife Beth have two sons — Harlan , an active @-@ duty U.S. Army soldier who has served in Iraq , Kosovo , and Afghanistan , and Timothy , the coach of the Colorado State University ultimate frisbee team . 
 = = Legislative career = = 
 = = = 2004 and 2006 campaigns = = = 
 Kefalas first ran for the state legislature in 2004 , winning the Democratic Party primary by only seven votes over Fort Collins councilman Bill Bertschy after a recount process that lasted for several weeks . Kefalas lost the general election by fewer than 500 votes to incumbent Republican Bob McCluskey in a race that also included Libertarian Party candidate <unk> Bowman . Kefalas ran unchallenged for the Democratic nomination in 2006 , and narrowly prevailed over McCluskey in the general election . 
 = = = 2007 legislative session = = = 
 In the 2007 @-@ 2008 session of the Colorado General Assembly , Kefalas sat on the House Finance Committee and the House Health and Human Services Committee . 
 While in the legislature , he sponsored successful bills to encourage state purchasing of " environmentally preferable " products , to allow Colorado State University to require graduate student health insurance , and to create licensing standards for hemodialysis technicians . 
 Kefalas proposed a bill to explore alternative voting systems , which was defeated in committee , but which led to the creation of an 11 @-@ member multi @-@ partisan task force to study related issues . Another of Kefalas ' proposed bills , which would have required the Colorado Department of Revenue to regularly report on tax burdens across individual income groups , was also defeated in committee . 
 During his first year in the legislature , Kefalas also founded the bipartisan Common Good Caucus to address poverty issues , and was a member of the Hispanic Caucus and the Diabetes / Obesity Caucus . 
 = = = 2008 legislative session = = = 
 In the 2008 session of the Colorado General Assembly , Kefalas sat on the House Finance Committee and the House Health and Human Services Committee . Representative Kefalas was joined by chief of staff Anne Bellows , a legal and civil rights expert . For the 2008 legislative session , Kefalas worked with other Fort Collins legislators , particularly Rep. Randy Fischer , on bills to increase scrutiny of proposed uranium mining operations . While one bill , which would require that groundwater quality be restored following mining operations , passed the state legislature and was signed into law , another measure , which would have created stronger public disclosure requirements for mining operations , was killed in committee , but later revived in the state senate . 
 With Sen. Ron Tupa , Kefalas was the house sponsor of legislation designed to reduce the cost of college textbooks by requiring textbook publishers to disclose costs and offer textbooks unbundled from additional materials , and he sponsored legislation to allow outpatient surgery centers to establish peer review committees ; both bills were signed into law by Gov. Ritter . For his support of ambulatory surgical centers , Kefalas was awarded the Legislator of the Year Award by the Colorado Ambulatory Surgery Center Association later that year . 
 Kefalas also sponsored a bill to authorize local pilot tests of ranked choice voting methods . Kefalas sponsored a bill to establish a Colorado Housing Investment Fund , but withdrew the bill when proponents moved forward with a similar ballot initiative . He later expressed frustration when plans for the ballot measure were withdrawn . Building on his 2007 bill to allow purchasing of " green " products , Kefalas also sponsored a measure to require Colorado governments to consider products ' expected life and cost of ownership in making purchasing decisions , which was signed into law . 
 Among Kefalas ' top priorities is restoring and expanding Colorado 's earned income tax credit , a move which met with resistance from legislative leaders in 2007 due to budget constraints . Kefalas introduced a bill in the 2008 session to restore Colorado 's <unk> at ten percent of the federal credit , but the bill was defeated in a House committee . 
 = = = 2008 election = = = 
 Holding office in a closely contested district , Kefalas is expected to be targeted by Colorado Republicans during his 2008 re @-@ election bid , which he formally announced in January 2008 . Since taking office , Kefalas sought to maintain a dialogue with constituents by leading a series of monthly " community conversations " on topics ranging from health care to mobile home parks , and named sustainable economic development his top priority in office . 
 Former Rep. Bob McCluskey announced his intention to run against Kefalas in February 2008 , pitting the two against each other for the third time in as many election cycles and creating a competitive race in what was seen as one of Colorado 's " swing " districts . 
 During the campaign , Kefalas held a fundraising advantage over McCluskey , with $ 60 @,@ 000 cash on hand — three times as much as McCluskey — in mid @-@ September . By late October , Kefalas had raised over $ 100 @,@ 000 , about $ 15 @,@ 000 short of McCluskey 's fundraising total ; which included $ 65 @,@ 000 that McCluskey donated to his own campaign . 
 McCluskey targeted Kefalas with a direct mail advertisement blaming Kefalas and the Democratic state legislature for high gasoline prices , a tactic Kefalas dismissed as " negative campaigning . " Kefalas also condemned independent ads attacking McCluskey 's legislative record as having " crossed the line of civility . " The 527 group Accountability for Colorado also spent over $ 50 @,@ 000 in support of Kefalas ' re @-@ election , including mailers attacking McCluskey 's legislative record ; Kefalas also expressed disapproval of these advertisements . 
 McCluskey 's bid to unseat Kefalas was endorsed by the Denver Post , while Kefalas was endorsed by the Windsor Beacon and the Fort Collins Coloradoan . Kefalas ultimately won a second term with about 59 percent of the popular vote , becoming the first Democrat to win re @-@ election in the east Fort Collins district since 1936 . 
 = = = 2009 legislative session = = = 
 For the 2009 legislative session , Kefalas was named to seats on the House Appropriations Committee , the House Finance Committee , and the House Health and Human Services Committee . Kefalas has named health care reform as his top priority and plans on introducing legislation to create a single @-@ payer universal health care system in Colorado during the 2009 session . The bill was introduced as a proposal to create a 23 @-@ member commission to make recommendations as to how to implement a single @-@ payer system , and was reported favorably out of a House committee . However , Kefalas was one vote short of the 33 necessary to pass the legislation out of the house , and in April , asked that the legislation be killed . 
 Kefalas also sponsored the Colorado Innovation Investment Tax Credit , legislation to create $ 750 @,@ 000 in tax credits for angel investors in startup companies , to increase support for job training programs , and to create a Colorado Railroad Authority to begin planning for statewide passenger rail service . 
 Kefalas also sponsored legislation to create an Economic Opportunity / Poverty Reduction Task Force , which he chaired following the regular session . The committee 's objective is to develop plans to reduce Colorado 's poverty rate by half in ten years , examining a broad range of issues from economic development to education to transportation to tax policy , and it considered potential legislation on topics ranging from the earned income tax credit to rent control . 
 Following the legislation session , Kefalas was the only male legislator honored with the Colorado Lawmakers Award by the Denver Women ’ s Commission and the Colorado Women ’ s Chamber of Commerce . 
 = = = 2010 election = = = 
 In August 2009 , Kefalas announced his intention to seek a third term in the legislature in the November 2010 legislative elections . Kefalas was reelected with 57 % of the vote . 
 = = = 2012 election = = = 
 Representative Kefalas announced that he would seek election to the state senate seat vacated by Bob Bacon . Kefalas ' bid was endorsed by The Fort Collins Coloradoan and several former elected officials . In the 2012 General Election , Representative Kefalas faced Republican challenger <unk> Anderson for the open Senate seat . Kefalas was elected by a wide margin of 58 % to 36 % with the remainder of the vote going to third @-@ party candidates . Senator Kefalas now represents the people of State Senate District 14 . 
 = Rika 's Landing Roadhouse = 
 Rika 's Landing Roadhouse , also known as Rika 's Landing Site or the McCarty Roadhouse , is a roadhouse located at a historically important crossing of the Tanana River , in the Southeast Fairbanks Area , Alaska , United States . It is off mile 274 @.@ 5 of the Richardson Highway in Big Delta . 
 The roadhouse is named after Rika Wallen , who acquired it from John Hajdukovich and operated it for many years . It became a hub of activity in that region of the interior . With the construction of the ALCAN ( now Alaska ) Highway and the replacement of the ferry with a bridge downstream , traffic moved away and patronage declined . The roadhouse was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1976 , and is now a centerpiece of Big Delta State Historical Park , also listed on the National Register . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Richardson Highway , an important route through the Alaska Interior that contributed significantly to development and settlement of the region , began as a pack trail from the port at Valdez to Eagle , downstream on the Yukon River from Dawson . It was built in 1898 by the U.S. Army to provide an " all @-@ American " route to the Klondike gold fields during the gold rush . After the rush ended , the Army kept the trail open in order to connect its posts at Fort <unk> in Valdez , and Fort Egbert in Eagle . The Valdez @-@ to @-@ Eagle trail , and its branch to Fairbanks , became one of the most important access routes to the Alaska Interior during the Fairbanks ' gold rush of 1902 , and the 1903 construction of a <unk> telegraph line along the trail . This was accomplished by men of the U.S. Army Signal Corps , directed in part by then @-@ Lieutenant Billy Mitchell , who later rose to the rank of general . 
 Many roadhouses , some 37 in all and some now listed on the National Register of Historic Places , were built along this trail for the convenience of travelers . These roadhouses offered meals , sleeping quarters , and supplies . They were typically located about 15 to 20 miles apart . 
 = = Early activity = = 
 The Tanana River was one of the major rivers to be crossed by travelers along the Valdez @-@ Eagle trail . A ferry was established just upriver of the Tanana 's confluence with the Delta River , at a location then called Bates Landing . Bates Landing was about 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) north of the current settlement of Delta Junction , in the area known now as Big Delta . The government collected a ferry toll on the south side from all those traveling northbound . The <unk> telegraph line was relocated to parallel the trail after a fire . McCarty Station was established at the line 's crossing of the Tanana in 1907 to maintain the telegraph . Several log cabins housed the telegraph office , a dispatcher , two repairmen and their supplies . 
 A trading post was constructed on the south bank of the Tanana , at Bates Landing in April 1904 by a prospector named Ben Bennett on his claim of 80 acres ( 32 ha ) , but Bennett sold the post and land to Daniel G. McCarty in April 1905 . However since E.T. Barnette , the founder of Fairbanks , and McCarty 's former employer , had financed the goods in the post , Barnette retained ownership of them . The post property , now being used as a roadhouse , soon became known as McCarty 's . Another prospector named Alonzo Maxey , and a friend , built Bradley 's Roadhouse to compete with McCarty 's and by 1907 , McCarty 's had been transferred to Maxey . 
 = = Hajdukovich era = = 
 In 1906 , or perhaps sometime after , Jovo ' John ' Hajdukovich ( Montenegrin : Jovo <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , an entrepreneur who had come to Alaska from Montenegro in 1903 , sensed a business opportunity and purchased the trading post and roadhouse from Maxey . Hajdukovich built a new and bigger roadhouse in 1909 using logs floated downriver . He continued to use the old trading post to store his gear . 
 Hadukovich had other business interests , including prospecting , freighting , acting as a hunting guide by taking hunting parties into the nearby Granite Mountains , and trading with , and advocating for , the Athabaskan natives . ( Later he was instrumental in founding the <unk> Reserve . ) After he was appointed as US Game Commissioner for the area , he could no longer personally operate the roadhouse full @-@ time . As with many informally managed roadhouses , Hadukovich asked travelers to " make themselves at home and leave some money on the table " for what they used . Despite this informality , the operations prospered . 
 Starting in 1904 , the trail was improved and upgraded . In 1907 , By 1910 , the Alaska Road Commission completed the upgrade , making the trail usable as a wagon road . Major Wilds P. Richardson led the project and later became the namesake for the highway . He was promoted to general later in his career . ) Stages plied the road , using horse @-@ drawn sledges in winter and wagons in summer . By 1913 the roadhouse was a local center of activity for gold prospectors , local hunters , traders , and freighters . 
 Meanwhile Erika ' Rika ' Wallen , born Lovisa Erika Jakobson in 1874 on a farm near Örebro Sweden , immigrated with her sister in 1891 to the United States . They traveled to Minneapolis , Minnesota to join their brother Carl Jakobson . There they changed their last name to Wallen to distinguish themselves from the many other <unk> and <unk> . After Carl died in an accident , the sisters moved to San Francisco , which they heard was booming . Rika took a job as a cook for the Hills Brothers coffee family , which lasted until the 1906 San Francisco earthquake . 
 In 1916 Rika Wallen traveled to Valdez , reportedly " because she thought Alaska would be like Sweden " . 
 = = Rika Wallen takes over the Roadhouse = = 
 After jobs cooking at the Kennecott copper mine and for a Fairbanks boarding house , Rika Wallen made her way to Big Delta . In 1917 , or 1918 , she was hired by Hadukovich to manage operations at his roadhouse , then still known as McCarty 's . 
 Although Hadukovich had many business interests , he was not always solvent . For example , in later years he failed to be paid for timber he supplied to the ALCAN Highway project due to not keeping adequate records . In either 1918 , or 1923 , he transferred ownership of the roadhouse to Wallen for " $ 10 @.@ 00 and other considerations , " presumably in lieu of back wages . Their friendship and partnership continued for many years ; historians and writers have not been able to define their relationship . Following local custom of naming places for people , the roadhouse was soon named Rika 's . At that time , the roadhouse had eleven bedrooms , a living room , and a large kitchen / dining area . 
 By 1925 , Wallen had applied for US citizenship , and filed a homestead claim on 160 acres ( 65 ha ) . She began growing food and raising livestock , including sheep , chicken , and goats . Sheep provided wool that she wove , and the goats provided milk , from which she made butter and cheese . She also raised silver fox , ducks , geese , rabbits and honeybees . She cultivated grain by using a yoke of oxen for plowing . Rika was a talented farmer , and she successfully grew crops where others failed . She developed a heating and ventilation system for her stable to protect the livestock through the harsh winters . 
 When Wallen bought the roadhouse , it still had packed dirt floors and rough wood walls . To improve the interior , she scavenged wallpaper , sometimes using different patterns on different walls of the same room . She made a hardwood parquet floor from wooden kerosene crates collected from the freighters and boatmen who patronized the roadhouse . Her ability to grow crops and to make a pleasant space transformed the inn and its offerings . For meals , she provided fresh milk and eggs , berries , fish , game , and produce picked from the garden and nearby orchard . Afterward , travelers could go to clean , comfortable beds in the multi @-@ story building . A 1929 travelogue of the Richardson Highway described Rika 's by the following : " a commodious roadhouse boasting of such luxuries as fresh milk and domestic fowls . " 
 About 1926 , Rika added a wing , which she used for additional living space , a liquor store , fur storage , and the Big Delta ( then known as Washburn ) Post Office . She was appointed as the US postmaster and served until 1946 . Eventually Wallen also homesteaded an adjoining piece of land , bringing her holdings to 320 acres ( 130 ha ) . 
 = = End of an era = = 
 The construction of the Alaska Railroad was completed in 1922 , but by the 1930s , due to effects of the Great Depression , freight traffic declined on the railroad . In 1935 , the Alaska Road Commission tried to force shippers to use the railroad , and raised the toll at the Tanana ferry crossing to almost 10 dollars a ton . The truckers rebelled at this , with some violent skirmishes . Pirate ferry operations were started , lasting until the start of World War II . 
 With the coming of the war and construction of the ALCAN Highway , which connected to the Richardson south of Big Delta , road traffic waned further . The ferry crossing was replaced by a wooden bridge , and later , a larger steel bridge was constructed downriver . This caused rerouting of the highway away from the roadhouse , drawing off traffic and travelers . Wallen operated the roadhouse through the 1940s and early 1950s , although in later years guests were by invitation only . John Hajdukovich died in 1965 , and Rika Wallen died four years later in 1969 . 
 = = Big Delta State Historical Park = = 
 According to Judy Ferguson in Parallel Destinies , a biography of Hajdukovich and Wallen : 
 " For fifty years , Rika was a stake in the ground for the roaming John . While John traded and prospected , Rika ran the hub of the Upper Tanana 's cross @-@ roads . Her establishment was " town " to the three hundred people who walked the trails to the Alaskan @-@ Canadian border . John and Rika were the history of the Upper Tanana Valley . " 
 Rika 's Roadhouse , the adjacent outbuildings , and property are preserved as the Big Delta State Historical Park . In 1976 the roadhouse was placed on the National Register of Historic Places , and the entire cluster was listed as the " Big Delta Historic District " in 1991 . The structure was restored in 1984 by Stanton and Stanton Construction ( owned and operated by brothers , Eldon and Richard Stanton ) . It was placed on a new foundation using original timbers , and in some areas , the packing crate floor was restored . It is now operated as a " house museum " ; some rooms have been fitted with 1920s @-@ 1930s period furniture and accessories donated by local residents . The property also has a food service facility called the " <unk> Pavilion " operated by a local concessionaire . 
 = Bobby Dodd = 
 Robert Lee Dodd ( November 11 , 1908 – June 21 , 1988 ) was an American college football coach at Georgia Tech . He was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame as a player and coach , something that only three people have accomplished . 
 After playing quarterback at the University of Tennessee , he served as an assistant coach under William Alexander at Georgia Tech beginning in December 1930 . Alexander made the hire while Dodd was still a student at Tennessee . Dodd succeeded Alexander in 1945 as the third head coach at the Institute . He retired from coaching after the 1966 season , compiling a 165 – 64 – 8 record . He also served as Athletic Director from 1950 until 1976 . All together , Dodd served Georgia Tech 57 years in various capacities . Bobby Dodd died in June 1988 at the age of 79 in Atlanta , Georgia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert Lee " Bobby " Dodd was born in 1908 in <unk> , Virginia . He was named after another famous Virginian , Confederate General Robert E. Lee . Dodd was the youngest of Edwin and Susan Dodd 's four children . In the fall of 1921 , the Dodd family relocated to Kingsport , Tennessee . When Dodd was twelve years old and weighed only 100 pounds , he made the seventh @-@ grade team of Kingsport 's first organized football program . 
 However , the happiness of Bobby Dodd 's early life came to a sad end in 1924 when his father committed suicide due to business failure and financial troubles . The family was forced to move , but was held together by the perseverance of Dodd 's mother . During the next three seasons , the Kingsport Indians football team at <unk> Bennett High School was very successful gaining two state titles . They were helped by Dodd , who moved from receiver to quarterback and kicker positions . In 1926 , Bobby Dodd graduated high school and was admitted to the University of Tennessee with a football scholarship . 
 = = Player = = 
 Bobby Dodd played quarterback for the Tennessee Volunteers football team from 1928 to 1930 , playing under legendary coach Robert Neyland . He wore number 17 . Dodd wanted to play for Georgia Tech but was not offered a scholarship . Ironically , he would later go on to coach the Yellow Jackets . In the games that Dodd started at UT , the Vols held a record of 27 – 1 – 2 . 
 Dodd was a difference in one famous game . During his sophomore year , in his first game of The Third Saturday in October rivalry against Alabama played in Tuscaloosa , " Dodd threw a touchdown pass in that game to tie Alabama , 13 – 13 . Then he punted out of bounds inside the Alabama 1 @-@ yard line and Tennessee got a safety on the next play to win , 15 – 13 " . 
 Another instance in Dodd 's career foreshadowed the creativity he would use in his coaching career . 
 " Against Florida in 1930 he got his teammates in a huddle and told them about a play he had used in high school . When the ball was snapped , it was placed on the ground unattended . The players ran in one direction . Then the center returned , picked up the ball , and waltzed to the winning touchdown . " 
 This play would later come to be popularly known as the " <unk> " , after Nebraska famously used it in the 1984 Orange Bowl versus Miami . Tennessee fans even developed a catch phrase for Dodd during his time there : " In Dodd we trust " . 
 During his time at UT , Dodd twice earned All @-@ Southern team honors . Dodd led Tennessee to back @-@ to @-@ back unbeaten seasons with identical 9 @-@ 0 @-@ 1 records his sophomore and junior years . During Dodd 's era , the Vols went 33 games without a loss until an 18 @-@ 6 setback against Alabama in 1930 , which ranks as the longest unbeaten streak in UT history . After the loss , Dodd and his teammates helped kick off a 28 @-@ game unbeaten streak that ranks as the second longest . " It is doubtful if any quarterback in the south can match Dodd on all @-@ around ability . He is a fine passer , a punter of ability , and the greatest field general to ever grace southern turf since the days of the one and only Pooley Hubert , " according to newspaper article of this era . 
 In his senior year " The Dodger " again showed his versatility in a 13 @-@ 0 win against Vanderbilt . Dodd finished with 14 punts for a 42 @-@ yard average , had nine carries for 39 yards , was 7 @-@ of @-@ 12 passing for 159 yards and two touchdowns and intercepted two passes . During that game , Dodd gained 212 all @-@ purpose yards , collecting all but 14 of Tennessee 's team total of 226 . The Vols finished the 1930 season with 9 @-@ 1 record , and Dodd earned multiple honors for his dominance on the gridiron . 
 Dodd was named to Grantland Rice 's All @-@ American team in 1930 , making him the 2nd granted that honor at Tennessee ( following Gene <unk> ) . In 1959 , Dodd was named to the University of Tennessee 's Hall of Fame and to the College Football Hall of Fame as a player . He was elected in the same year as teammate Herman Hickman . He was nominated though not selected for an Associated Press All @-@ Time Southeast 1920 @-@ 1969 era team . Dodd also won varsity letters in baseball , basketball , and track during his time at Tennessee . 
 = = Coach = = 
 After being recognized as 1928 national champions , Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets football team struggled during the next two season . Georgia Tech football coach William Alexander began looking for a new assistant . During 1930 football season , Alexander sent his line coach , Mac Tharpe , to scout future opponent North Carolina , playing Tennessee in Knoxville . Tharpe 's car broke down and by the time he reached Knoxville , the game was over . Tharpe asked Tennessee head coach Bob Neyland for information , who suggested that he talk to Dodd . When Tharpe returned to Atlanta he told Alexander : " Dodd 's analysis of Carolina is better than any scouting report that I could have made . " Alexander was also impressed by reports of Dodd 's performance during games . Dodd joined Alexander 's staff as an assistant coach on December 28 , 1930 . Dodd served as an assistant coach at Tech for 14 years , even though he received many offers for head coaching positions from other schools during that time frame . Dodd lionized Coach Alexander which was later reflected in his coaching style . " He taught me to treat athletes as men , not boys - to never use their failings as an alibi for a loss , " Dodd said . 
 Dodd took over the Georgia Tech football program in 1945 following Coach Alexander 's retirement as head football coach . Dodd 's coaching philosophy revolved around player treatment and character development . He did not believe in intense physical practices but rather precise and well executed practices . Dodd 's philosophy translated to winning ; he set the record for career wins at Tech at 165 career coaching wins , including a 31 @-@ game unbeaten streak from 1951 – 1953 . He also managed to capture two Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) championships ( 1951 and 1952 ) and the 1952 national title , which concluded a perfect 12 – 0 season and Sugar Bowl conquest of Ole Miss . Under Dodd 's leadership , Tech played in 13 major bowl games , winning 9 , including six in a row from 1952 to 1956 . Bobby Dodd compiled a 165 – 64 – 8 record as head coach at Georgia Tech . 
 Football was Dodd 's lifelong passion , but at Tech he was just as obsessed with the notion that his players should get an education as he was with teaching them how to play football . Other coaches and sportswriters of his era were united in their puzzlement that anyone could coach with such a light hand and still win so many games . However , Coach Dodd knew that his " Books First " reputation caused parents to favor Georgia Tech over his competition . Georgia Tech often played teams that were physically superior but Bobby Dodd would still find a way win . The experts called it " Dodd 's luck , " but his success actually came from an understanding of motivational psychology , football strategy , and innovative game @-@ planning . 
 Georgia Tech football was Atlanta 's one major sports franchise during this time frame . To hold a ticket to watch the Yellow Jackets play was highly valued and was difficult to obtain . During the games , Bobby Dodd sat in a folding chair at a card table on the side line , rarely standing or showing interest in the game . Dodd took his seat and left the pacing to his assistants . When a crisis arose , Dodd would decide which plays to be run and the designated players to run them . Dodd sometimes made unusual substitutions , as on a Saturday in Athens when Georgia Tech was about to be upset . Dodd sent in a small halfback who had been frequently injured during his career , who then broke to the right faking a run , stopped , threw a pass for a touchdown and returned to the bench . What Dodd brought to Grant Field was a kind of <unk> football other coaches couldn 't understand : <unk> halfbacks ; lightweight linemen ; rarely a classic quarterback . Once free substitution became possible , no one made more use of it than Dodd . 
 Georgia Tech had an intense rivalry with University of Alabama which ended during Bobby Dodd 's tenure as head football coach . Until that time , the matchup between the Crimson Tide and the Yellow Jackets was a fall football classic . The two teams have met on the gridiron a total of 52 times with Georgia Tech coming away victorious in 21 of those matchups with 3 additional tied games . Bobby Dodd 's football teams won 7 out of 17 games played against the University of Alabama . The contests were annual events until Georgia Tech withdrew from the SEC . 
 Dodd considered two of his biggest victories at Tech came against Alabama , including a 7 – 3 victory in 1952 and a 7 – 6 victory in 1962 . The former victory secured a perfect season for Georgia Tech which led to a national title . The latter victory came against a top ranked Alabama team and cost the Crimson Tide another national title . 
 Dodd also understood the deep @-@ seated rivalry with the University of Georgia . His teams won 8 games in a row over the Bulldogs from 1949 – 1956 outscoring the Bulldogs 176 – 39 during the winning streak . This 8 – game winning streak is still the longest winning streak for either side in the series , which is commonly referred to as " The Drought " by UGA football fans . Dodd would finish his career with a 12 – 10 record against the Bulldogs . 
 By the end of his coaching career , Dodd had built a reputation not only as a good coach , but also as a lucky one . University of Georgia 's longtime football coach Wallace Butts once said " If Bobby Dodd were trapped in the center of an H @-@ Bomb explosion , he 'd walk away with his pockets full of marketable uranium . " However , the following describes Dodd 's perspective regarding his luck : 
 In 1967 , Dodd stepped down as head football coach due to health concerns , and he was succeeded by assistant Bud Carson . Dodd simply retained his athletic director position , which he had acquired in 1950 from William Alexander . Dodd retired as athletic director in 1976 and was followed in the position by Doug Weaver . Dodd continued to serve during his retirement years as an Alumni Association consultant and as a fundraiser for Georgia Tech . In 1983 , he expressed interest in running a United States Football League team if Atlanta were awarded one , but the league folded before Atlanta received a team . 
 = = Integration = = 
 During Bobby Dodd 's tenure , Georgia Tech played against several integrated football teams while the South was resisting integration . Georgia Tech played against Notre Dame in 1953 with Wayne Edmonds starting at offensive tackle and defensive end for the Irish . Edmonds was the first black player to win a monogram at Notre Dame . Georgia Tech lost to Notre Dame by score 27 @-@ 14 . 
 Georgia Tech also participated in the first integrated bowl game in the Deep South . The 1956 Sugar Bowl featured the 7th ranked Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets , and the 11th ranked Pitt Panthers . There was controversy over whether Bobby Grier from Pitt should be allowed to play because he was black , and whether Georgia Tech should even play at all due to Georgia governor Marvin Griffin 's opposition to integration . Ultimately , Bobby Grier played which made the game the first integrated Sugar Bowl and the first integrated bowl game in the Deep South . Georgia Tech won the 1956 Sugar Bowl by score 7 @-@ 0 . 
 Bobby Dodd oversaw the integration of Georgia Tech football team as Athletic Director . Eddie McAshan was the first African American football player to start for Georgia Tech . Bud Carson started McAshan in 1970 at quarterback as a sophomore and McAshan would go on to set several career records for Georgia Tech ( which have since been broken by Shawn Jones and Joe Hamilton ) . McAshan 's first career start was on September 12 , 1970 against South Carolina . His start marked the first time that an African American had ever started at quarterback for a major Southeastern university and McAshan did not disappoint . He rallied Tech with a fourth quarter deficit , defeating the Gamecocks 23 @-@ 20 with two late touchdown drives . McAshan threw for 32 touchdowns during his college football career , and Georgia Tech had 22 @-@ 13 @-@ 1 record during that time frame . 
 = = Georgia Tech 's withdrawal from SEC = = 
 = = = Feud with Bear Bryant = = = 
 Dodd 's tenure included Georgia Tech 's withdrawal from the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) . The initial spark for Dodd 's withdrawal was an historic feud with Alabama Crimson Tide Coach Bear Bryant . The feud began when Tech was playing the Tide at Legion Field in Birmingham in 1961 . After a Tech punt , Alabama fair @-@ caught the ball . Chick Graning of Tech was playing coverage and relaxed after the signal for the fair catch . Darwin Holt of Alabama continued play and smashed his elbow into Graning 's face causing severe fracturing in his face , a broken nose , and blood @-@ filled sinuses . Graning was knocked unconscious and suffered a severe concussion , the result of which left him unable to play football ever again . Dodd sent Bryant a letter asking Bryant to suspend Holt after game film indicated Holt had intentionally injured Graning . Bryant never suspended Holt . The lack of discipline infuriated Dodd and sparked Dodd 's interest in withdrawing from the SEC . Georgia Tech lost that game , 10 – 0 , and Alabama went on to win its first Associated Press national championship . 
 = = = Over @-@ recruitment = = = 
 Another issue of concern for Dodd was Alabama 's and other SEC schools ' over @-@ recruitment of players . Universities would recruit more players than available space on their rosters . During the summer the teams in question would cut the players well after signing day . This practice prevented the cut players from being able to play for other colleges during the following football season . Dodd appealed the SEC administration to punish the " tryout camps " of his fellow SEC members but the SEC did not . Finally , Dodd withdrew Georgia Tech from the SEC after 1963 football season . Tech would remain an independent like Notre Dame and Penn State ( at the time ) during the final three years of Dodd 's coaching tenure . 
 Dodd insisted the only reason he left the SEC was due to the " 140 Rule " , which allowed colleges to over @-@ recruit . The 140 Rule stated a college program could only have 140 football and basketball players on scholarship at any one time , but the teams were still allowed to sign up to 45 players a year . Therefore , if a school recruited its full allotment of players each year it would exceed the 140 maximum even with normal attrition . Dodd would sign about 30 @-@ 32 football players a year to meet the guidelines , but the other schools in the SEC were offering 45 scholarships a year , and most were allotting all but a nominal amount to football . Players not good enough to fall under the 140 Rule had their scholarships withdrawn before the end of each year by the other schools . Dodd insisted the recruiting of athletes by this method amounted to nothing more than a tryout for a scholarship . Dodd would not allow any of the football players choosing Tech to be dismissed from Tech , because they were not the best players . Dodd said , " it is not the recruit 's fault for not making the squad , it was the coaches ' fault for misjudging their talents . " If a recruit came to Tech , he would stay on a football scholarship until he graduated . 
 Dodd wanted the SEC to limit the amount of scholarships to about 32 per year , which would keep the other schools from offering 45 scholarships , picking the best , and withdrawing scholarships from the rest . A vote was to be taken by the presidents of the colleges on the issue , and Dodd made it clear that Tech would have to leave the SEC unless the rule was changed . The presidents were split six for Dodd ’ s position and six against . Bear had promised Dodd he would get his president to vote for Dodd ’ s position , which would have changed the rule . When the meeting was held on January 24 , 1964 , the Alabama president voted against Dodd ’ s position and the 140 Rule was upheld . Tech ’ s president immediately walked to the podium and announced Tech was withdrawing from the SEC . 
 = = Legacy and awards = = 
 Dodd was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame as a player in 1959 and as a coach in 1993 . He was voted Southeastern Conference Coach of the Year by his fellow coaches in 1951 , and " National Coach of the Year " by the New York Daily News poll in 1952 . After retiring , he was awarded a special " Citation of Honor " by the Football Writers Association of America for his accomplishments and contributions to football . Dodd also developed 22 recognized All @-@ America football players as head football coach . Dodd was also inducted into the Virginia Sports Hall of Fame in 1973 . Coach Dodd has also received honors not related to football . The Bobby Dodd Institute is an organization that helps people with disabilities ; it is named in honor of Coach Dodd for his assistance to the disabled . 
 = = = Bobby Dodd Stadium = = = 
 Georgia Tech named its stadium Bobby Dodd Stadium in honor of the legendary coach in April 1988 , two months before he died . In 1989 part of Third Street located next to Bobby Dodd Stadium was rechristened Bobby Dodd Way . On Friday September 14 , 2012 , Georgia Tech provided another honor for the former coach by unveiling the Bobby Dodd statue in Callaway Plaza on the Georgia Tech campus , which was funded by former players for Coach Dodd . In attendance for the unveiling included members of the 1952 national championship squad , the President of the Institute , Bud Peterson , athletic director , current head football coach , Paul Johnson , and Bobby Dodd 's son and daughter . 
 = = = Bobby Dodd Coach of the Year Award = = = 
 While Bobby Dodd was a determined competitor , he cared deeply for those who played for him . Unlike some other coaches , he did not believe in winning at any costs ; he truly believed that the most important aspect of college football was the college football player . As a testament to the character of Bobby Dodd , each year a Division I college coach whose team excels on the field , in the classroom , and in the community is awarded the Bobby Dodd Coach of the Year Award , presented by the Bobby Dodd Coach of the Year Foundation . 
 = = = Influence on other coaches = = = 
 Many coaches have been influenced by Dodd 's style and approach to the game , including Vince Dooley , University of Georgia 's longtime football coach , who was the first recipient of the Bobby Dodd Coach of the Year Award . In addition , several assistant coaches for Bobby Dodd went on to have successful careers as head football coach for other colleges , including Frank Broyles with University of Arkansas and Ray Graves with University of Florida . Broyles led the Razorbacks to 14 @-@ 7 victory over the Yellow Jackets in the 1960 Gator Bowl , which was the first bowl game Georgia Tech had lost with Bobby Dodd as head coach . 
 The 1990 Georgia Tech National Championship football team was led by another coach named " Bobby , " who had more in common with Dodd than his first name . Like Dodd , Bobby Ross was a fair and caring coach who wanted his players to reach their potential in both academics and athletics . As a result , Bobby Ross won the Bobby Dodd Coach of the Year Award at the end of the 1990 football season . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 Dodd married Alice Davis in 1933 , and they had two children , Linda Dodd Thompson and Robert Lee Dodd Jr . , who played quarterback for the University of Florida during 1960 and 1961 football seasons . Dodd Jr. had wanted to play for Georgia Tech , but Dodd thought it would be best if he played for another college . On October 1 , 1960 , Dodd Jr. contributed to Florida 's 18 @-@ 17 upset win over the Yellow Jackets at Florida Field with Ray Graves , Dodd 's former assistant , as the Gators ' head coach . 
 Alice Davis was a younger sister to Wink Davis , who played half back on Georgia Tech football team . Dodd met Alice in 1931 through Ed Hamm , who was the track coach at that time . They went on a few double dates together and then Bobby started dating Alice . They postponed their wedding until after the 1933 football season since Dodd was coaching his future brother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Bobby Dodd and Bear Bryant ended their feud in 1975 after Bill Curry helped negotiate a peace settlement between the two old football coaches . As a result , Georgia Tech and Alabama resumed their series during 1979 through 1984 football seasons . 
 Dodd stayed in touch with many of his former football players over the years , and he was like a father to them up until his death . " The record I am most proud of , " he said , " is from all those years of coaching I probably don 't have five former players who are bitter at me or Georgia Tech . That means more than the number of games we won . " 
 Alice Dodd was named honorary alumnus of the Georgia Tech Alumni Association in 1967 . After her husband 's death in 1988 , she continued to attend Homecoming functions and special events , such as the 1991 Florida Citrus Bowl which led to Georgia Tech winning its fourth national championship . 
 = Jessica Hardy = 
 Jessica Adele Hardy ( born March 12 , 1987 ) is an American competition swimmer who specializes in breaststroke and freestyle events . Hardy earned a bronze medal in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle and a gold medal in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relays at the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 She has won a total of twenty @-@ eight medals in major international competition , fourteen gold , nine silver , and five bronze spanning the Olympics , World and the Pan Pacific Championships . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hardy was born in Orange , California , in 1987 , the daughter of George Hardy and Denise Robinson . Her mother swam collegiately for Indiana State University for one week and is currently a psychotherapist . She is a 2005 graduate of Wilson Classical High School in Long Beach and was Swimming World 's Female High School Swimmer of the Year in 2004 and 2005 . Hardy attended the University of California , Berkeley , where she competed for coach Teri McKeever 's California Golden Bears swim team for two years . She was a four @-@ time NCAA Champion , and met her husband Dominik <unk> , a Swiss swimmer and 3 @-@ time Olympian , at Berkeley . She gave up her eligibility and turned professional in 2007 , to train with coach Dave Salo for Trojan Swim Club of the University of Southern California . In 2016 , she announced that she would now be training with Mark Schubert at the Golden West Swim Club in Huntington Beach , CA . She also completed her Bachelors of Science degree from Arizona State University in 2016 . 
 She married Dominik <unk> on October 5 , 2013 . 
 In 2015 , she released an autobiography , titled Swimming Toward the Gold Lining : How Jessica Hardy turned her wounds into wisdom , in 2015 . The book " covers her journey from trials to triumph , from wounds to wisdom , and from setbacks to comebacks . You know her name , but you won ’ t know her true story until you ’ ve read [ the ] book . " 
 She also has a long history of philanthropy work with organizations such as the USA Swimming Foundation , the Jessie Rees Foundation , the Special Olympics , Surf Aid International , the Long Beach Water Department , and volunteering as an athlete representative on the Olympic Internal Operations Committee , the USA Swimming Steering Committee , and the USA Swimming Athletes ’ Executive Committee . 
 = = 2005 – 08 = = 
 At the 2005 World Aquatics Championships , a long course meet , Hardy competed in two individual breaststroke events and in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . She won silver in all of those events . Hardy broke Leisel Jones ' world record in the semifinals of the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke on July 25 before ultimately finishing second in the finals two days later . In the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , on July 30 , Hardy won a silver medal with Natalie Coughlin , Rachel <unk> , and Amanda Weir . On July 31 , Hardy placed second in the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke , finishing behind Jade <unk> of Australia . 
 At the 2006 Short Course World Championships in Shanghai , Hardy competed in two individual breaststroke events and swam in the heats of the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . At the conclusion of the meet , she won a silver and bronze medal . In the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke on April 6 , Hardy won a bronze medal , finishing behind Jade <unk> and Brooke Hanson of Australia . Hardy then competed in the heats of the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay ( with Mary Mohler , Elaine Breeden , and Amanda Weir ) on April 7 , and won a silver medal after the United States placed second in the finals . On April 8 , Hardy finished in fourth place in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke . 
 At the 2007 World Aquatics Championships , a long course meet , Hardy competed in two individual breaststroke events and in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . She won a gold and silver medal at this competition . In her first event , the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , on March 27 , Hardy placed fourth . Hardy then swam in the heats of the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay ( with Leila Vaziri , Dana Vollmer , and Amanda Weir ) on March 31 , and won a silver medal after the United States placed second in the finals . On April 1 , Hardy won the gold in the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke . 
 At the 2008 Short Course World Championships in Manchester , England , Hardy won a total of three gold medals . In her first event , the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke , on April 10 , Hardy won gold with a world record time of 29 @.@ 58 . In the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley , on April 11 , Hardy teamed with Margaret <unk> , Rachel <unk> , and Kara Denby to win gold in a world record time of 3 : 51 @.@ 36 . Going into the final of the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Hardy was the clear favorite for gold . She topped the heats with a time of 1 : 05 @.@ 31 and broke the championship record in the semifinals with a time of 1 : 04 @.@ 63 both on April 11 . In the final of the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , on April 12 , Hardy won gold with a time of 1 : 04 @.@ 22 , and broke her own championship record . 
 = = Positive drug test = = 
 At the 2008 U.S. Olympic Team Trials , Hardy qualified for the USA Olympic Team . A few weeks later , on July 23 , 2008 , Hardy was notified that the second of her three tests from the Trials came back as positive for low levels of clenbuterol ; this notification subsequently leaked to the media . Her attorney confirmed on July 24 , 2008 , that Hardy 's " A " and " B " samples from a test administered on July 4 were positive for clenbuterol . 
 Hardy claimed innocence and said she had never even heard of clenbuterol . Media coverage of the issue noted that tainted supplements have played a part in some previous instances of bans . An example offered has been that of American swimmer Kicker <unk> , who won a lawsuit against a company that provided him with tainted supplements that resulted in a positive dope test and two @-@ year ban from the sport . Under both American and international regulations , a lack of knowledge of the source of the substance ingested is not considered to be a defence against a positive result . 
 On August 1 , 2008 , following Hardy 's hearing before the United States Anti @-@ Doping Agency ( USADA ) , USADA released a statement stating , " The U.S. Anti @-@ Doping Agency ( USADA ) announced today that U.S. swimmer , Jessica Hardy , of Long Beach , CA , tested positive for the prohibited substance clenbuterol at the U.S. Olympic Trials on July 4 , 2008 , and has agreed to withdraw from the 2008 United States Olympic Team in the best interests of the team . " On August 1 , 2008 , Hardy officially , and voluntarily , left the 2008 U.S. Olympic Team . In May 2009 , it was announced that Hardy would be banned from the sport for one year for the positive test . 
 On May 21 , 2010 , the Court of Arbitration for Sport ( CAS ) agreed with the 2009 decision of the American Arbitration Association and dismissed the appeal by WADA ( the World Anti @-@ Doping Agency ) to increase the suspension from one to two years . However , CAS did not entertain Hardy 's request to have the International Olympic Committee join this arbitration nor her request to make a recommendation on her eligibility for the 2012 London Olympic games . In April 2012 , it was announced that Hardy would be eligible for the 2012 Olympics . 
 = = 2009 comeback = = 
 Hardy returned from her suspension on August 5 , at the U.S. Open National Championships . On August 6 , Hardy broke Yuliya Yefimova 's world record in the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke ( long course ) with a time of 29 @.@ 95 to become the first woman under 30 seconds in the event . On August 7 , Hardy lowered the world record for the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke with a time of 1 : 04 @.@ 45 . En route to this world record , she also lowered her own world record in the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke with a time of 29 @.@ 80 . 
 At the World Cup on October 17 , Hardy broke her own 50 @-@ meter breaststroke ( short course ) record set in April 2008 with a time of 29 @.@ 45 . On November 7 , Hardy again bettered her own world record in the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke ( short course ) with a time of 29 @.@ 36 . On November 12 , Hardy broke her own world record for the third time with a 28 @.@ 96 , the first woman to go sub 29 in the 50 @-@ meter short course breaststroke . On November 15 , Hardy bettered her record for the fourth time with a time of 28 @.@ 80 , 0 @.@ 16 seconds faster than her previous record . Hardy was the overall winner in the female division for the 2009 FINA Swimming World Cup . She received U.S. $ 100 @,@ 000 for her efforts . 
 = = 2010 = = 
 = = = 2010 National Championships = = = 
 At the 2010 National Championships , Hardy made the American team that competed at the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships after finishing second in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle . On August 5 , despite being the world record holder in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Hardy finished in seventh place with a time of 1 : 09 @.@ 24 . At the first 50 , Hardy came in first in 30 @.@ 92 , but faded badly at the end . Hardy did not blame her poor performances on her physical condition but rather her mental state . On her final chance of making the team , on August 7 , Hardy finished in second place in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle in 54 @.@ 14 , a personal best for her . After the competition , Hardy said , " I 've been struggling so much with the pressure I put on myself , especially in the 100 [ meter ] breaststroke . " 
 = = = 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships = = = 
 Going into the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships , Hardy said her only goal was to have fun . Hardy competed in two individual freestyle events ( the 50 @-@ meter and 100 @-@ meter freestyle ) , the 50 @-@ meter butterfly , the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke , and in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley and freestyle relays . She went on to win four gold medals . On the first day of competition , on August 18 , Hardy competed in the 50 @-@ meter butterfly and finished in sixth place . On the second day of competition , on August 19 , Hardy didn 't qualify to swim in the 100 m freestyle A final and had to compete in the B final . In the 100 @-@ meter freestyle B final , she finished first with a time of 54 @.@ 16 . On the third day of competition , on August 20 , Hardy won gold in the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay . In the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke , Hardy won gold in a time of 30 @.@ 03 . Less than an hour later , Hardy competed in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay with Natalie Coughlin , Amanda Weir and Dana Vollmer . As the second leg of the relay , Hardy had a 53 @.@ 43 split , the fastest in the field . The next day , on August 21 , Hardy competed in both the 50 @-@ meter freestyle and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In the 50 @-@ meter freestyle , Hardy won gold in a championship record time of 24 @.@ 63 , just ahead of Amanda Weir who recorded a time of 24 @.@ 70 . Hardy then competed in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay with Natalie Coughlin , Dana Vollmer and Rebecca Soni . As the freestyle leg , Hardy recorded a time of 53 @.@ 12 and the American team went on to win the gold medal in a time of 3 : 55 @.@ 23 . 
 = = 2011 World Championships = = 
 Hardy won the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke at the 2011 World Championships in Shanghai , China . She swam the race in 30 @.@ 19 seconds , beating defending champion and training partner Yuliya <unk> by 0 @.@ 3 seconds . It was her first win in the event since 2007 . After qualifying from the 50 @-@ meter freestyle heats with the joint fastest time , she finished eighth in the final . She also won a silver medal with the 4x100 @-@ meter freestyle relay . 
 = = 2012 Summer Olympic Games = = 
 At the 2012 United States Olympic Trials in Omaha , Nebraska , Hardy won the 50 @-@ meter freestyle with a time of 24 @.@ 50 seconds , and also won the 100 @-@ meter freestyle in 53 @.@ 96 seconds , thus qualifying to compete in those two events , as well as the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relays , at the 2012 Olympics . She also competed in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , and placed third in the final behind Olympic newcomer <unk> Larson and veteran Rebecca Soni . 
 At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , Hardy won her first Olympic medal , a bronze , in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle with Missy Franklin , Lia Neal and Allison Schmitt , when the U.S. team finished third behind the teams from Australia and the Netherlands . Swimming the second leg , Hardy had a split of 53 @.@ 53 seconds and the team finished with a total time of 3 : 34 @.@ 24 , an American record . She also earned a gold medal by swimming for the winning U.S. team in the preliminary heats of the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In her two individual events , she finished seventh in the 50 @-@ meter freestyle and eighth in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle . 
 = = 2013 @-@ 2015 = = 
 Jessica won a gold and two bronze medals at the long course 2013 World Championships in Barcelona , Spain . Her first bronze medal was in the 100 breaststroke , with her best time coming from the heats with a 1 : 05 @.@ 18 . Her second bronze medal was in the 50 breaststroke , tying her American Record time of 29 @.@ 80 seconds . The gold medal was in the 4x100 @-@ meter medley relay , swimming with Missy Franklin , Dana Vollmer , and Megan Romano . 
 Jessica won gold in the 100 breaststroke at the 2014 Pan Pacific Championships , as well as a silver in the 4x100 @-@ meter medley relay with Missy Franklin , <unk> Stewart , and Simone Manuel . She was voted team captain of the 2014 Pan Pacific USA team , along with Caitlin <unk> , Matt Grevers , and Anthony Ervin . 
 Despite competing on a <unk> shoulder tear , fractured ribs , and a micro @-@ fracture in her left knee , Jessica was able to compete in the final of the 50 breaststroke , finishing 5th , missing out on the gold medal by a mere .15 of a second . She also placed 4th in the 4x100 medley relay , and 10th in the individual 100 breaststroke . She was again voted team captain of the 2015 World Championships team along with Elizabeth <unk> , <unk> Adams , Matt Grevers , Anthony Ervin , and David Plummer . 
 = = Personal bests = = 
 As of June 30 , 2012 . 
 = Manchester Martyrs = 
 The Manchester Martyrs – William Philip Allen , Michael Larkin , and Michael O 'Brien – were members of the Irish Republican Brotherhood , an organisation dedicated to ending British rule in Ireland . They were executed for the murder of a police officer in Manchester , England , in 1867 , during an incident that became known as the Manchester Outrages . The trio were members of a group of 30 – 40 Fenians who attacked a horse @-@ drawn police van transporting two arrested leaders of the Brotherhood , Thomas J. Kelly and Timothy Deasy , to Belle Vue Gaol . Police Sergeant Charles Brett , travelling inside with the keys , was shot and killed as the attackers attempted to force the van open by blowing the lock . Kelly and Deasy were released after another prisoner in the van took the keys from Brett 's body and passed them to the group outside through a ventilation grill ; the pair were never recaptured , despite an extensive search . 
 Two others were also charged and found guilty of Brett 's murder , Thomas Maguire and Edward O 'Meagher Condon , but their death sentences were overturned : O 'Meagher Condon through the intercession of the United States government – he was an American citizen – and Maguire because the evidence given against him was considered unsatisfactory . Allen , Larkin , and O 'Brien were publicly hanged on a temporary structure built on the wall of Salford Gaol , on 23 November 1867 , in front of a crowd of 8 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 . 
 Brett was the first Manchester City Police officer to be killed on duty , and he is memorialised in a monument in St Ann 's Church . Allen , Larkin , and O 'Brien are also memorialised , both in Manchester – where the Irish community made up more than 10 percent of the population – and in Ireland , where they were regarded by many as inspirational heroes . 
 = = Background = = 
 The whole of Ireland had been under British rule since the end of the Nine Years ' War in 1603 . The Irish Republican Brotherhood ( IRB ) was founded on 17 March 1858 by James Stephens , with the aim of establishing an independent democratic republic in Ireland . The IRB was a revolutionary fraternal organisation , rather than an insurrectionary conspiracy ; Stephens believed that a " thorough social revolution " was required in Ireland before the people could become republicans . The Fenian Brotherhood was founded in New York in 1858 by John O 'Mahony , ostensibly the IRB 's American wing . By 1865 the IRB had an estimated 100 @,@ 000 members , and was carrying out frequent acts of violence in metropolitan Britain . The Irish community in Manchester accounted for more than 10 per cent of the population , and one contemporary estimate put the number of Fenians and Fenian sympathisers living within 50 miles ( 80 km ) of the city at 50 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1867 the Fenians were preparing to launch an armed uprising against British rule , but their plans became known to the authorities , and several key members of the movement 's leadership were arrested and convicted . Two succeeded in evading the police , Thomas J. Kelly and Timothy Deasy , and travelled from Ireland to Britain to reorganise and raise the morale of the Fenian groups there in the wake of the failed uprising . Both were Irish Americans who had fought with distinction in the American Civil War – Kelly achieving the rank of colonel and Deasy that of captain – and both had played important roles in the abortive uprising ; Kelly had been declared the chief executive of the Irish Republic at a secret republican convention , and Deasy commanded a Fenian brigade in County Cork . 
 During the early hours of 11 September 1867 , police arrested two men found loitering in Oak Street , <unk> , suspecting them of planning to rob a shop . Both were charged under the Vagrancy Act and held in custody . The Manchester police were initially unaware of their identities , until their colleagues in the Irish police identified them as Kelly and Deasy . 
 = = Rescue = = 
 On 18 September 1867 , Kelly and Deasy were being transferred from the courthouse to Belle Vue Gaol on Hyde Road , Gorton . They were handcuffed and locked in two separate compartments inside a police van escorted by a squad of 12 mounted policemen . The van contained six prisoners : a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy who was being taken to a reformatory , three women convicted of misdemeanours , and the two Fenians . As it passed under a railway arch , a man darted into the middle of the road , pointed a pistol at the driver and told him to stop . Simultaneously , a party of about 30 – 40 men leaped over a wall at the side of the road , surrounded the van and seized the horses , one of which they shot . The unarmed police were described by O 'Meagher Condon , who organised the attack on the police van , as " a miscellaneous lot , apparently embracing the long and short and the fat and lean of the Manchester force " ; they offered little resistance and soon fled . 
 The rescuers , after an unsuccessful attempt to force open the van with hatchets , sledgehammers , and crowbars , called upon Police Sergeant Brett , who was inside the van with the prisoners , to open the door . Brett refused , so one of the rescuers placed his revolver at the keyhole of the van to blow the lock , just as Brett looked through the keyhole to see what was happening outside . The bullet passed through his eye into his brain and killed him . The door was opened when one of the women prisoners took the keys from Brett 's pocket , and passed them through a ventilator to the Fenians outside , allowing Kelly and Deasy to escape . Brett was the first Manchester police officer to be killed on duty , in an incident that became known locally as the " Manchester Outrages " . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The police suspected that Kelly and Deasy had been taken by their rescuers to Ancoats , considered at that time to be a Fenian area of Manchester . Anonymous letters alleged that the pair were being sheltered in a house on Every Street , but the 50 armed police who raided the premises found no signs of the fugitives . Despite a reward of £ 300 ( £ 24 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) offered by the authorities , neither Kelly nor Deasy were recaptured . An article published in the 14 November edition of The Times newspaper reported that they had made their way to Liverpool , from where they had taken passage on a ship bound for New York . 
 The police raided Manchester 's Irish quarters and brought " dozens of suspects , selected almost at random " , before local magistrates ; the raids have been described as a " reign of terror " for the Irish in Manchester . Amongst those arrested was Thomas Maguire , a young Royal Marine on leave , who unfortunately for him had been in the vicinity of the attack on the police van and was Irish . Such was the zeal of the police that one man with a strong Irish accent surrendered himself to the magistrates " as the only means I have of saving myself from being arrested over and over again wherever I go , as a Fenian " . 
 = = Committal proceedings = = 
 On 27 September 1867 committal proceedings were heard in front of a magistrate to establish whether there was a prima facie case against the 28 accused . The team of defence barristers included Chartist leader Ernest Jones , who had spent two years in prison for making seditious speeches , and W. P. Roberts , whose fee was paid by subscribers to a defence fund to represent nine of the men . Jones , representing Condon and O 'Brien , clashed with the court almost immediately because the accused were handcuffed , saying " It appears to be discreditable to the administration of justice that men whom the law presumes to be innocent should be brought into Court handcuffed together like a couple of hounds . " Jones also objected to the presence of a number of soldiers in the courtroom , and when the magistrate refused to order the prisoners ' handcuffs to be removed he " marched dramatically " out of the courtroom saying " Then as a member of the Bar I decline to sit in any Court where the police override the Magistrate ... I cannot disgrace the Bar by proceeding with the defence . " 
 All but two of the accused – Allen and Larkin – claimed that they had witnesses who would testify that they were elsewhere when the police van was attacked . The defence argued that " the rescue was not illegal as the prisoners [ Kelly and Deasy ] were wrongly imprisoned " , and that there was no intention of " sacrificing human life " , as evidenced by only a single fatality despite the presence of so many guns and so many shots being fired . Nevertheless , 26 of the prisoners were sent for trial before a judge and jury at the next assizes ; two were released because of " unsatisfactory identification " . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Proceedings began on 28 October 1867 , in front of Mr Justice Blackburne and Mr Justice Mellor . Twenty @-@ six appeared in court on the first day in front of a grand jury , which found that there was a prima facie case against all of the defendants for murder , felony , and misdemeanour . It was decided to charge the five " principal offenders " – Allen , Larkin , Gould ( O 'Brien ) , Shore ( Condon ) , and Maguire – under one indictment . They were therefore brought back to the courtroom the following day , when their trial proper began , despite none of them having fired the fatal shot . 
 Allen was a 19 @-@ year @-@ old carpenter ; Larkin was a tailor , the only married member of the group , and had five children . O 'Brien , who had fought in the American Civil War , was a 30 @-@ year @-@ old shop assistant from County Cork . O 'Meagher Condon , born in Cork and 32 years old , had also fought for the Union side in the American Civil War . Thomas Maguire was a Royal Marine who had served for 10 years and had just returned home on leave . 
 The jury retired at 6 : 15 pm on the fifth day and returned at 7 : 30 pm to give its verdict of guilty for each of the five defendants . When asked if they had anything to say before sentence was passed , several of the convicted men made a closing speech . Allen stated his innocence , and that he regretted the death of Sergeant Brett , but that he was prepared to " die proudly and triumphantly in defence of republican principles and the liberty of an oppressed and enslaved people " . 
 Larkin said he felt that he had received a fair trial , and that his counsel had done everything they could in his defence . He ended by saying : " So I look to the mercy of God . May God forgive all who have sworn my life away . As I am a dying man , I forgive them from the bottom of my heart . May God forgive them . " 
 O 'Brien claimed that all of the evidence given against him was false , and that as an American citizen he ought not to be facing trial in a UK court . He then went on at length to condemn the British government , the " imbecile and tyrannical rulers " of Ireland , until he was interrupted by the judge , who appealed to him to cease his remarks : " The only effect of your observations must be to tell against you with those who have to consider the sentence . I advise you to say nothing more of that sort . I do so entirely for your own sake . " 
 O 'Meagher Condon 's address to the court was considered by The Times to have " excelled all the other convicts in his zeal for the Fenian cause " . He admitted to having organised the attack on the police van in his role as leader of the north @-@ west section of the movement , but claimed that he " never threw a stone or fired a pistol ; I was never at the place [ where the attack took place ] ... it is all totally false " . He went on to say that " had I committed anything against the Crown of England , I would have scorned myself had I attempted to deny it " . Towards the end of his speech he shouted , " God save Ireland ! " , a cry taken up by his companions in the dock . 
 William Allen , Michael Larkin , Michael O 'Brien , Thomas Maguire , and Edward O 'Meagher Condon , were sentenced to death by hanging – the only punishment English law at that time allowed for murder – again crying " God save Ireland " from the dock after sentence was pronounced . Maguire was subsequently pardoned and discharged , and O 'Meagher Condon 's sentence was commuted on the eve of his execution . 
 The trial took place in what was described as a " climate of anti @-@ Irish hysteria " by the weekly Reynold 's Newspaper , which described it as a " deep and everlasting disgrace to the English government " , the product of an ignoble panic which seized the governing classes . A yell of vengeance , it said , had issued from every aristocratic organ , and that before any evidence had been obtained the prisoners ' guilt was assumed and their executions had been demanded . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 In Thomas Maguire 's case the witnesses who had identified the prisoners and had testified that Maguire was in the forefront of the attack had their evidence shown to be transparently false . This resulted in over 30 English reporters sending an appeal to the Home Secretary to have him pardoned . With such widespread doubts about the conviction of Maguire the government yielded to the pressure to grant him a pardon . This led many to believe that the other four would not be hanged since they had been convicted on the evidence of the same witnesses who , according to Liz Curtis , had " blatantly perjured themselves in the case of Maguire " . While eminent lawyers tried through procedural means to halt the executions , leading figures such as John Bright , Charles Bradlaugh and John Stuart Mill appealed for clemency . 
 = = Execution = = 
 A crowd estimated at 8 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 gathered outside the walls of Salford Gaol on the evening of 22 November 1867 to witness the public execution of the three convicted men the following morning . A platform had been built about 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) above ground , through the outside wall of the jail facing New Bailey Street , to support the gallows . The spectators were " well supplied by the gin palaces of Deansgate and the portable beer and coffee stalls " . According to Father Gadd , one of the three Catholic priests who attended to the men : 
 A crowd of inhuman ghouls from the <unk> of Deansgate and the slums of the City ... made the night and early morning hideous with the raucous bacchanalian strains of " Champagne Charlie " , " John Brown " , and " Rule Britannia " . No Irish mingled with the throng ... They had obeyed the instructions of their Clergy . Throughout Manchester and Salford , silent congregations with tear @-@ stained faces ... assembled for a celebration of early Mass for the eternal welfare of the young Irishmen doomed to die a dreadful death that morning . 
 The authorities took considerable pains to discourage any rescue attempt . Over 2 @,@ 500 regular and special police were deployed in and around the prison , augmented by a military presence which included a detachment of the 72nd Highlanders and a squadron of the Eighth Hussars . All traffic in and out of the city was stopped . The Times newspaper reported that by the time the hangings took place , shortly after 8 : 00 am , " the mob were quiet and orderly " , in contrast to the previous night and early morning . 
 The executioner , William Calcraft , was the most famous of the 19th century , but was reportedly nervous of executing Fenians , because of threats he had received . He was also " particularly incompetent " , and was " notoriously unable to calculate the correct length of rope required for each individual hanging ; he frequently had to rush below the scaffold to pull on his victim 's legs to hasten death " . Most accounts claim that Allen died almost instantaneously from a broken neck , but Larkin and O 'Brien were not so fortunate . Father Gadd , reported that : 
 The other two ropes , stretched taut and tense by their breathing twitching burdens , were in ominous and distracting movement . The hangman had bungled ! ... Calcraft then descended into the pit and there finished what he could not accomplish from above . He killed Larkin . 
 Father Gadd refused to allow Calcraft to dispatch O 'Brien in the same way , and so " for three @-@ quarters of an hour the good priest knelt , holding the dying man 's hands within his own , reciting the prayers for the dying . Then the long drawn out agony ended . " 
 The bodies of the three men were buried in the New Bailey Prison graveyard , from which they were transferred to Strangeways Prison Cemetery when New Bailey Prison closed in 1868 . In 1991 their remains were cremated and reinterred at Blackley Cemetery in Manchester . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Most of the British press had demanded " retribution swift and stern " , not because the men were Irish , but because they were Fenians ; " the public demand for the death penalty was not simply an expression of anti @-@ Irish sentiment , but rather a product of the Fenian panic and popular feelings of insecurity and the desire for order . " The Daily Telegraph , for instance , although like most of its contemporaries describing Brett 's death as " a vulgar , dastardly murder " , nevertheless supported reform in Ireland ; " we may hang convicted Fenians with good conscience , but we should also thoroughly redress those evils distinctly due to English policy and still supported by English power . " 
 Many funeral processions were held in Ireland and even in a few British cities during the weeks following the executions , sometimes attracting crowds of thousands . These demonstrations of support for the three Fenians further outraged British public opinion , and " reinforced the prevailing sentiment that the Irish moral compass was somehow off @-@ center " . The executions gave rise to an enormous groundswell of feeling among Irish communities the world over . In New Zealand , for instance , seven men were convicted of unlawful assembly in a high @-@ profile trial following a mock funeral to Hokitika cemetery ; two of the seven , a newspaper editor and a priest , pleaded guilty to seditious libel , having published " a succession of very rabid articles about the Queen 's Government . " The viceregal government declared the holding of a Manchester Martyr funeral procession illegal . Throughout Ireland Masses , even public ones , were said for the three , although Bishop David Moriarty of Kerry prohibited celebration of Mass for them in his diocese . Archbishop John <unk> of Tuam , on the other hand , personally assisted at a High Mass for them , and Cardinal Archbishop Paul Cullen of Dublin , while opposing public celebrations , instructed his priests to pray for the dead Fenians , and to say Mass privately for them . 
 The day after the executions , Frederick Engels wrote to Karl Marx : 
 So yesterday morning the Tories , by the hand of Mr Calcraft , accomplished the final act of separation between England and Ireland . The only thing that the Fenians still lacked were martyrs . They have been provided by Derby and G Hardy . Only the execution of the three has made the liberation of Kelly and Deasy the heroic deed which will now be sung to every Irish babe in the cradle in Ireland , England and America ... To my knowledge , the only time that anybody has been executed for a similar matter in a civilised country was the case of John Brown at Harpers Ferry . The Fenians could not have wished for a better precedent . The Southerners had at least the decency to treat J. Brown as a rebel , whereas here everything is being done to transform a political attempt into a common crime . 
 The cry of the condemned men was the inspiration for the song " God Save Ireland " , which became Ireland 's unofficial national anthem until officially replaced by " Amhrán na <unk> " ( " The Soldier 's Song " ) . The executions were also " incalculable " in their influence on the " political awakening " of Charles Stewart Parnell . Speaking in the House of Commons ten years later , Parnell told the House : " I wish to say as directly as I can that I do not believe , and never shall believe , that any murder was committed in Manchester . " 
 = = Monuments = = 
 Monuments erected in honour of Allen , Larkin , and O 'Brien stand in Tralee ( County Kerry ) , Limerick , <unk> ( County Clare ) , Clonmel ( County Tipperary ) , Birr ( County Offaly ) , Ennis ( County Clare ) , Milltown Cemetery , Belfast , ( County Antrim ) , Glasnevin Cemetery ( Dublin ) , and in St Joseph 's Cemetery , Moston , Manchester . The monument in St Joseph 's Cemetery was designed by J. Geraghty and unveiled in November 1898 ( 53 ° 30 ′ 56 @.@ 17 ″ N 2 ° 11 ′ 24 @.@ 14 ″ W ) . Commissioned by the Manchester Martyrs Central Memorial Committee , it stands just over 20 feet ( 6 m ) high and takes the form of a Celtic cross . On three sides of the pedestal are medallion portraits of the three men , originally surmounted by figures of the Irish Wolfhound , now removed . The site of this monument has been the scene of several disturbances , as it has been the tradition for Republican sympathisers to parade there on the anniversary of the deaths of those hanged . The monument has suffered several attacks to its structure , as well as acts of vandalism , and is listed as being " at risk " by the Public Monument and Sculpture Association National Recording Project . 
 To commemorate the centenary of the men 's execution , the Manchester Connolly Association commissioned the artist Arthur Dooley to produce a memorial sculpture to stand on the site of New Bailey prison in Salford . There was opposition to the proposal , and it seems that the sculpture was never made , let alone installed . Dooley did however produce a foot @-@ high maquette which now forms part of the collection of the Working Class Movement Library in Manchester . The maquette suggests that the memorial was to consist of a Wicklow granite base with three standing steel pillars with attached Celtic shields each bearing a martyr 's name and some detail of the event 's significance . The maquette was donated to the WCML in 2011 by the family of Jud Cooper who had been given the maquette by Dooley . 
 Police Sergeant Brett was buried in Harpurhey Cemetery ; the words " I will do my duty " are engraved on his tombstone . There is also a memorial tablet to him in St Ann 's Church , Manchester . 
 = Testaroli = 
 Testaroli , sometimes referred to as <unk> , is a type of pasta or bread in Italian cuisine that is prepared using water , flour and salt , which is sliced into triangular shapes . A common dish in the Lunigiana region and historical territory of Italy , it is an ancient pasta originating from the Etruscan civilization of Italy . Testaroli has been described as " the earliest recorded pasta . " It is also a native dish of the southern Liguria and northern Tuscany regions of Italy . 
 Testaroli is prepared from a batter that is cooked on a hot flat surface , after which it may be consumed . It is traditionally cooked on a testo , a flat terra cotta or cast iron cooking surface from which the food 's name is derived . It is sometimes cooked further in boiling water and then served . Testaroli is sometimes referred to as a bread , similar to focaccia in composition , and is sometimes referred to as a crêpe . It may be dressed with pesto sauce or other ingredients such as olive oil , Pecorino cheese , Parmigiano @-@ Reggiano , and garlic . <unk> testaroli al <unk> is a similar dish prepared using sliced pasta dough and a ragù sauce . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Testaroli 's name is based upon the testo , a terra cotta or cast iron cooking device with a hot , flat surface that testaroli is traditionally cooked on . 
 = = History = = 
 Testaroli is an ancient pasta that originated from the Etruscan civilization , a civilization of ancient Italy . The book Rustico : Regional Italian Country Cooking states that testaroli is " a direct descendant of the <unk> of the Neolithic age that were poured over hot stones to cook . " It is a native dish of the southern Liguria and northern Tuscany regions of Italy . According to an article published by The Wall Street Journal , it is " the earliest recorded pasta . " 
 In the Italian province of Massa and Carrara , located within the Tuscany region , it was a peasant food consumed as a one @-@ course meal , topped with grated cheese and olive oil . In Massa and Carrara , it was sometimes accompanied with <unk> cheese or charcuterie . Testaroli remains a very popular dish in Pontremoli , a small city in the province of Massa and Carrara , where it is served at virtually every restaurant in the city , during both mornings and evenings . Testaroli is also a common and specialty dish in the Lunigiana region and historical territory of Italy , which is located between the Liguria and Tuscany regions . 
 = = Overview = = 
 = = = Ingredients and preparation = = = 
 Testaroli is a type of pancake @-@ like pasta prepared using water , wheat flour and salt that is sliced into triangular shapes . Chestnut flour is sometimes used in its preparation . The ingredients are mixed together and prepared as a batter , after which it is cooked , sometimes using a two @-@ stage cooking process . In the typical first stage , and sometimes only stage of cooking , the batter is poured and cooked on a hot , flat surface in the style of a pancake or crêpe . In this process , testaroli is traditionally cooked on a testo , which may be prepared for use by being heated over hot coals . A skillet is another cooking device that can be used to cook the batter . The pasta is then sliced into triangles , and is sometimes directly served after this cooking process . In the second cooking stage that is sometimes performed , the pasta may be set aside to cool , and then cooked further in boiling water . 
 Testaroli is sometimes referred to as a type of bread that is similar to focaccia , and is also sometimes referred to as a crêpe . The book The Italian Country Table refers to testaroli as a " near cousin to pasta " , and as a " great round pancake @-@ like bread no more than a quarter inch thick . " This book also states that when it is baked to a crisp texture , it can be consumed in the style of a bread , whereas when baked less , it may have a spongy and soft texture , like a pasta . Cooking methods vary in different areas of Italy , and some of these methods are traditional in nature . 
 = = = Service = = = 
 Testaroli is sometimes served with pesto sauce , which is a common addition to it in the Liguria and Tuscany regions of Italy . Another dressing method includes the addition of olive oil , Pecorino cheese , Parmigiano @-@ Reggiano , garlic and basil . Significant amounts of sauce may absorb into testaroli . 
 = = <unk> testaroli al <unk> = = 
 A very similar dish is <unk> testaroli al ragù ( English : " false testaroli in ragù " ) , which is prepared using sliced pasta dough and does not involve the use of a batter or cooking on a testo . It is served with a ragù , an Italian meat @-@ based sauce . 
 = Telecommunication = 
 Telecommunication is the transmission of signs , signals , writings , images and sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire , radio , optical or other electromagnetic systems , as defined by the International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) . 
 Telecommunication occurs when the exchange of information between communication participants includes the use of technology . It is transmitted either electrically over physical media , such as cables , or via electromagnetic radiation . Such transmission paths are often divided into communication channels which afford the advantages of multiplexing . The term is often used in its plural form , telecommunications , because it involves many different technologies . 
 Early means of communicating over a distance included visual signals , such as beacons , smoke signals , semaphore telegraphs , signal flags , and optical heliographs . Other examples of pre @-@ modern long @-@ distance communication included audio messages such as coded drumbeats , lung @-@ blown horns , and loud whistles . Modern technologies for long @-@ distance communication usually involve electrical and electromagnetic technologies , such as telegraph , telephone , and teleprinter , networks , radio , microwave transmission , fiber optics , and communications satellites . 
 A revolution in wireless communication began in the first decade of the 20th century with the pioneering developments in radio communications by Guglielmo Marconi , who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1909 . Other notable pioneering inventors and developers in the field of electrical and electronic telecommunications include Charles Wheatstone and Samuel Morse ( telegraph ) , Alexander Graham Bell ( telephone ) , Edwin Armstrong , and Lee de Forest ( radio ) , as well as Vladimir K. <unk> , John Logie Baird and Philo Farnsworth ( television ) . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word telecommunication was adapted from the French . It is a compound of the Greek prefix <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " distant " , and the Latin <unk> , meaning " to share " in 1904 by the French engineer and novelist Édouard <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beacons and pigeons = = = 
 In the Middle Ages , chains of beacons were commonly used on hilltops as a means of relaying a signal . Beacon chains suffered the drawback that they could only pass a single bit of information , so the meaning of the message such as " the enemy has been sighted " had to be agreed upon in advance . One notable instance of their use was during the Spanish Armada , when a beacon chain relayed a signal from Plymouth to London . 
 In 1792 , Claude Chappe , a French engineer , built the first fixed visual telegraphy system ( or semaphore line ) between Lille and Paris . However semaphore suffered from the need for skilled operators and expensive towers at intervals of ten to thirty kilometres ( six to nineteen miles ) . As a result of competition from the electrical telegraph , the last commercial line was abandoned in 1880 . 
 Homing pigeons have occasionally been used throughout history by different cultures . Pigeon post is thought to have Persians roots and was used by the Romans to aid their military . Frontinus said that Julius Caesar used pigeons as messengers in his conquest of Gaul . The Greeks also conveyed the names of the victors at the Olympic Games to various cities using homing pigeons . In the early 19th century , the Dutch government used the system in Java and Sumatra . And in 1849 , Paul Julius Reuter started a pigeon service to fly stock prices between Aachen and Brussels , a service that operated for a year until the gap in the telegraph link was closed . 
 = = = Telegraph and telephone = = = 
 Sir Charles Wheatstone and Sir William Fothergill Cooke invented the electric telegraph in 1837 . Also , the first commercial electrical telegraph is purported to have been constructed by Wheatstone and Cooke and opened on 9 April 1839 . Both inventors viewed their device as " an improvement to the [ existing ] electromagnetic telegraph " not as a new device . 
 Samuel Morse independently developed a version of the electrical telegraph that he unsuccessfully demonstrated on 2 September 1837 . His code was an important advance over Wheatstone 's signaling method . The first transatlantic telegraph cable was successfully completed on 27 July 1866 , allowing transatlantic telecommunication for the first time . 
 The conventional telephone was invented independently by Alexander Bell and Elisha Gray in 1876 . Antonio Meucci invented the first device that allowed the electrical transmission of voice over a line in 1849 . However Meucci 's device was of little practical value because it relied upon the <unk> effect and thus required users to place the receiver in their mouth to " hear " what was being said . The first commercial telephone services were set @-@ up in 1878 and 1879 on both sides of the Atlantic in the cities of New Haven and London . 
 = = = Radio and television = = = 
 In 1832 , James Lindsay gave a classroom demonstration of wireless telegraphy to his students . By 1854 , he was able to demonstrate a transmission across the Firth of Tay from Dundee , Scotland to Woodhaven , a distance of two miles ( 3 km ) , using water as the transmission medium . In December 1901 , Guglielmo Marconi established wireless communication between St. John 's , Newfoundland ( Canada ) and Poldhu , Cornwall ( England ) , earning him the 1909 Nobel Prize in physics ( which he shared with Karl Braun ) . However small @-@ scale radio communication had already been demonstrated in 1893 by Nikola Tesla in a presentation to the National Electric Light Association . 
 On 25 March 1925 , John Logie Baird was able to demonstrate the transmission of moving pictures at the London department store Selfridges . Baird 's device relied upon the <unk> disk and thus became known as the mechanical television . It formed the basis of experimental broadcasts done by the British Broadcasting Corporation beginning 30 September 1929 . However , for most of the twentieth century televisions depended upon the cathode ray tube invented by Karl Braun . The first version of such a television to show promise was produced by Philo Farnsworth and demonstrated to his family on 7 September 1927 . 
 = = = Computers and the Internet = = = 
 On 11 September 1940 , George <unk> was able to transmit problems using teletype to his Complex Number Calculator in New York and receive the computed results back at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire . This configuration of a centralized computer or mainframe with remote dumb terminals remained popular throughout the 1950s . However , it was not until the 1960s that researchers started to investigate packet switching — a technology that would allow chunks of data to be sent to different computers without first passing through a centralized mainframe . A four @-@ node network emerged on 5 December 1969 ; this network would become ARPANET , which by 1981 would consist of 213 nodes . 
 ARPANET development centered around the Request for Comment process and on 7 April 1969 , RFC 1 was published . This process is important because ARPANET eventually merged with other networks to form the Internet and many of the protocols the Internet relies upon today were specified through the Request for Comment process . In September 1981 , RFC 791 introduced the Internet Protocol v4 ( IPv4 ) and RFC 793 introduced the Transmission Control Protocol ( TCP ) — thus creating the TCP / IP protocol that much of the Internet relies upon today . 
 However , not all important developments were made through the Request for Comment process . Two popular link protocols for local area networks ( LANs ) also appeared in the 1970s . A patent for the token ring protocol was filed by Olof <unk> on 29 October 1974 and a paper on the Ethernet protocol was published by Robert Metcalfe and David Boggs in the July 1976 issue of Communications of the ACM . 
 = = Key concepts = = 
 A number of key concepts reoccur throughout the literature on modern telecommunication theory and systems . Some of these concepts are discussed below . 
 = = = Basic elements = = = 
 Telecommunications is primarily divided up between wired and wireless subtypes . Overall though , a basic telecommunication system consists of three main parts that are always present in some form or another : 
 A transmitter that takes information and converts it to a signal . 
 A transmission medium , also called the " physical channel " that carries the signal . An example of this is the " free space channel " . 
 A receiver that takes the signal from the channel and converts it back into usable information for the recipient . 
 For example , in a radio broadcasting station the station 's large power amplifier is the transmitter ; and the broadcasting antenna is the interface between the power amplifier and the " free space channel " . The free space channel is the transmission medium ; and the receiver 's antenna is the interface between the free space channel and the receiver . Next , the radio receiver is the destination of the radio signal , and this is where it is converted from electricity to sound for people to listen to . 
 Sometimes , telecommunication systems are " duplex " ( two @-@ way systems ) with a single box of electronics working as both the transmitter and a receiver , or a transceiver . For example , a cellular telephone is a transceiver . The transmission electronics and the receiver electronics within a transceiver are actually quite independent of each other . This can be readily explained by the fact that radio transmitters contain power amplifiers that operate with electrical powers measured in watts or kilowatts , but radio receivers deal with radio powers that are measured in the <unk> or <unk> . Hence , transceivers have to be carefully designed and built to isolate their high @-@ power circuitry and their low @-@ power circuitry from each other , as to not cause interference . 
 Telecommunication over fixed lines is called point @-@ to @-@ point communication because it is between one transmitter and one receiver . Telecommunication through radio broadcasts is called broadcast communication because it is between one powerful transmitter and numerous low @-@ power but sensitive radio receivers . 
 Telecommunications in which multiple transmitters and multiple receivers have been designed to cooperate and to share the same physical channel are called multiplex systems . The sharing of physical channels using multiplexing often gives very large reductions in costs . <unk> systems are laid out in telecommunication networks , and the multiplexed signals are switched at nodes through to the correct destination terminal receiver . 
 = = = Analog versus digital communications = = = 
 Communications signals can be sent either by analog signals or digital signals . There are analog communication systems and digital communication systems . For an analog signal , the signal is varied continuously with respect to the information . In a digital signal , the information is encoded as a set of discrete values ( for example , a set of ones and zeros ) . During the propagation and reception , the information contained in analog signals will inevitably be degraded by undesirable physical noise . ( The output of a transmitter is noise @-@ free for all practical purposes . ) Commonly , the noise in a communication system can be expressed as adding or subtracting from the desirable signal in a completely random way . This form of noise is called additive noise , with the understanding that the noise can be negative or positive at different instants of time . Noise that is not additive noise is a much more difficult situation to describe or analyze , and these other kinds of noise will be omitted here . 
 On the other hand , unless the additive noise disturbance exceeds a certain threshold , the information contained in digital signals will remain intact . Their resistance to noise represents a key advantage of digital signals over analog signals . 
 = = = Telecommunication networks = = = 
 A telecommunications network is a collection of transmitters , receivers , and communications channels that send messages to one another . Some digital communications networks contain one or more routers that work together to transmit information to the correct user . An analog communications network consists of one or more switches that establish a connection between two or more users . For both types of network , repeaters may be necessary to amplify or recreate the signal when it is being transmitted over long distances . This is to combat attenuation that can render the signal indistinguishable from the noise . Another advantage of digital systems over analog is that their output is easier to store in memory , i.e. two voltage states ( high and low ) are easier to store than a continuous range of states . 
 = = = Communication channels = = = 
 The term " channel " has two different meanings . In one meaning , a channel is the physical medium that carries a signal between the transmitter and the receiver . Examples of this include the atmosphere for sound communications , glass optical fibers for some kinds of optical communications , coaxial cables for communications by way of the voltages and electric currents in them , and free space for communications using visible light , infrared waves , ultraviolet light , and radio waves . This last channel is called the " free space channel " . The sending of radio waves from one place to another has nothing to do with the presence or absence of an atmosphere between the two . Radio waves travel through a perfect vacuum just as easily as they travel through air , fog , clouds , or any other kind of gas . 
 The other meaning of the term " channel " in telecommunications is seen in the phrase communications channel , which is a subdivision of a transmission medium so that it can be used to send multiple streams of information simultaneously . For example , one radio station can broadcast radio waves into free space at frequencies in the neighborhood of 94 @.@ 5 MHz ( megahertz ) while another radio station can simultaneously broadcast radio waves at frequencies in the neighborhood of 96 @.@ 1 MHz . Each radio station would transmit radio waves over a frequency bandwidth of about 180 kHz ( kilohertz ) , centered at frequencies such as the above , which are called the " carrier frequencies " . Each station in this example is separated from its adjacent stations by 200 kHz , and the difference between 200 kHz and 180 kHz ( 20 kHz ) is an engineering allowance for the imperfections in the communication system . 
 In the example above , the " free space channel " has been divided into communications channels according to frequencies , and each channel is assigned a separate frequency bandwidth in which to broadcast radio waves . This system of dividing the medium into channels according to frequency is called " frequency @-@ division multiplexing " . Another term for the same concept is " wavelength @-@ division multiplexing " , which is more commonly used in optical communications when multiple transmitters share the same physical medium . 
 Another way of dividing a communications medium into channels is to allocate each sender a recurring segment of time ( a " time slot " , for example , 20 milliseconds out of each second ) , and to allow each sender to send messages only within its own time slot . This method of dividing the medium into communication channels is called " time @-@ division multiplexing " ( TDM ) , and is used in optical fiber communication . Some radio communication systems use TDM within an allocated FDM channel . Hence , these systems use a hybrid of TDM and FDM . 
 = = = Modulation = = = 
 The shaping of a signal to convey information is known as modulation . Modulation can be used to represent a digital message as an analog waveform . This is commonly called " keying " – a term derived from the older use of Morse Code in telecommunications – and several keying techniques exist ( these include phase @-@ shift keying , frequency @-@ shift keying , and amplitude @-@ shift keying ) . The " Bluetooth " system , for example , uses phase @-@ shift keying to exchange information between various devices . In addition , there are combinations of phase @-@ shift keying and amplitude @-@ shift keying which is called ( in the jargon of the field ) " quadrature amplitude modulation " ( <unk> ) that are used in high @-@ capacity digital radio communication systems . 
 Modulation can also be used to transmit the information of low @-@ frequency analog signals at higher frequencies . This is helpful because low @-@ frequency analog signals cannot be effectively transmitted over free space . Hence the information from a low @-@ frequency analog signal must be impressed into a higher @-@ frequency signal ( known as the " carrier wave " ) before transmission . There are several different modulation schemes available to achieve this [ two of the most basic being amplitude modulation ( AM ) and frequency modulation ( FM ) ] . An example of this process is a disc jockey 's voice being impressed into a 96 MHz carrier wave using frequency modulation ( the voice would then be received on a radio as the channel " 96 FM " ) . In addition , modulation has the advantage that it may use frequency division multiplexing ( FDM ) . 
 = = Society = = 
 Telecommunication has a significant social , cultural and economic impact on modern society . In 2008 , estimates placed the telecommunication industry 's revenue at $ 4 @.@ 7 trillion or just under 3 percent of the gross world product ( official exchange rate ) . Several following sections discuss the impact of telecommunication on society . 
 = = = Economic impact = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 On the microeconomic scale , companies have used telecommunications to help build global business empires . This is self @-@ evident in the case of online retailer Amazon.com but , according to academic Edward <unk> , even the conventional retailer Walmart has benefited from better telecommunication infrastructure compared to its competitors . In cities throughout the world , home owners use their telephones to order and arrange a variety of home services ranging from pizza deliveries to electricians . Even relatively poor communities have been noted to use telecommunication to their advantage . In Bangladesh 's <unk> district , isolated villagers use cellular phones to speak directly to wholesalers and arrange a better price for their goods . In Côte d 'Ivoire , coffee growers share mobile phones to follow hourly variations in coffee prices and sell at the best price . 
 = = = = Macroeconomics = = = = 
 On the macroeconomic scale , Lars @-@ Hendrik <unk> and Leonard <unk> suggested a causal link between good telecommunication infrastructure and economic growth . Few dispute the existence of a correlation although some argue it is wrong to view the relationship as causal . 
 Because of the economic benefits of good telecommunication infrastructure , there is increasing worry about the inequitable access to telecommunication services amongst various countries of the world — this is known as the digital divide . A 2003 survey by the International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) revealed that roughly a third of countries have fewer than one mobile subscription for every 20 people and one @-@ third of countries have fewer than one land @-@ line telephone subscription for every 20 people . In terms of Internet access , roughly half of all countries have fewer than one out of 20 people with Internet access . From this information , as well as educational data , the ITU was able to compile an index that measures the overall ability of citizens to access and use information and communication technologies . Using this measure , Sweden , Denmark and Iceland received the highest ranking while the African countries Nigeria , Burkina Faso and Mali received the lowest . 
 = = = Social impact = = = 
 Telecommunication has played a significant role in social relationships . Nevertheless , devices like the telephone system were originally advertised with an emphasis on the practical dimensions of the device ( such as the ability to conduct business or order home services ) as opposed to the social dimensions . It was not until the late 1920s and 1930s that the social dimensions of the device became a prominent theme in telephone advertisements . New promotions started appealing to consumers ' emotions , stressing the importance of social conversations and staying connected to family and friends . 
 Since then the role that telecommunications has played in social relations has become increasingly important . In recent years , the popularity of social networking sites has increased dramatically . These sites allow users to communicate with each other as well as post photographs , events and profiles for others to see . The profiles can list a person 's age , interests , sexual preference and relationship status . In this way , these sites can play important role in everything from organising social engagements to courtship . 
 Prior to social networking sites , technologies like short message service ( SMS ) and the telephone also had a significant impact on social interactions . In 2000 , market research group Ipsos MORI reported that 81 % of 15- to 24 @-@ year @-@ old SMS users in the United Kingdom had used the service to coordinate social arrangements and 42 % to flirt . 
 = = = Other impacts = = = 
 In cultural terms , telecommunication has increased the public 's ability to access music and film . With television , people can watch films they have not seen before in their own home without having to travel to the video store or cinema . With radio and the Internet , people can listen to music they have not heard before without having to travel to the music store . 
 Telecommunication has also transformed the way people receive their news . A survey led in 2006 by the non @-@ profit Pew Internet and American Life Project found that when just over 3 @,@ 000 people living in the United States were asked where they got their news " yesterday " , more people said television or radio than newspapers . The results are summarised in the following table ( the percentages add up to more than 100 % because people were able to specify more than one source ) . 
 Telecommunication has had an equally significant impact on advertising . TNS Media Intelligence reported that in 2007 , 58 % of advertising expenditure in the United States was spent on mediums that depend upon telecommunication . The results are summarised in the following table . 
 = = Government = = 
 Many countries have enacted legislation which conforms to the International Telecommunication Regulations established by the International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) , which is the " leading UN agency for information and communication technology issues . " In 1947 , at the Atlantic City Conference , the ITU decided to " afford international protection to all frequencies registered in a new international frequency list and used in conformity with the Radio Regulation . " According to the ITU 's Radio Regulations adopted in Atlantic City , all frequencies referenced in the International Frequency Registration Board , examined by the board and registered on the International Frequency List " shall have the right to international protection from harmful interference . " 
 From a global perspective , there have been political debates and legislation regarding the management of telecommunication and broadcasting . The history of broadcasting discusses some debates in relation to balancing conventional communication such as printing and telecommunication such as radio broadcasting . The onset of World War II brought on the first explosion of international broadcasting propaganda . Countries , their governments , insurgents , terrorists , and militiamen have all used telecommunication and broadcasting techniques to promote propaganda . Patriotic propaganda for political movements and colonization started the mid @-@ 1930s . In 1936 , the BBC broadcast propaganda to the Arab World to partly counter similar broadcasts from Italy , which also had colonial interests in North Africa . 
 Modern insurgents , such as those in the latest Iraq war , often use intimidating telephone calls , <unk> and the distribution of sophisticated videos of an attack on coalition troops within hours of the operation . " The Sunni insurgents even have their own television station , Al @-@ <unk> , which while banned by the Iraqi government , still broadcasts from Erbil , Iraqi Kurdistan , even as coalition pressure has forced it to switch satellite hosts several times . " 
 On 10 November 2014 , President Obama recommended the Federal Communications Commission reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality . 
 = = Modern media = = 
 = = = Worldwide equipment sales = = = 
 According to data collected by Gartner and Ars Technica sales of main consumer 's telecommunication equipment worldwide in millions of units was : 
 = = = Telephone = = = 
 In a telephone network , the caller is connected to the person they want to talk to by switches at various telephone exchanges . The switches form an electrical connection between the two users and the setting of these switches is determined electronically when the caller dials the number . Once the connection is made , the caller 's voice is transformed to an electrical signal using a small microphone in the caller 's handset . This electrical signal is then sent through the network to the user at the other end where it is transformed back into sound by a small speaker in that person 's handset . 
 The landline telephones in most residential homes are analog — that is , the speaker 's voice directly determines the signal 's voltage . Although short @-@ distance calls may be handled from end @-@ to @-@ end as analog signals , increasingly telephone service providers are transparently converting the signals to digital signals for transmission . The advantage of this is that digitized voice data can travel side @-@ by @-@ side with data from the Internet and can be perfectly reproduced in long distance communication ( as opposed to analog signals that are inevitably impacted by noise ) . 
 Mobile phones have had a significant impact on telephone networks . Mobile phone subscriptions now outnumber fixed @-@ line subscriptions in many markets . Sales of mobile phones in 2005 totalled 816 @.@ 6 million with that figure being almost equally shared amongst the markets of Asia / Pacific ( 204 m ) , Western Europe ( 164 m ) , <unk> ( Central Europe , the Middle East and Africa ) ( 153 @.@ 5 m ) , North America ( 148 m ) and Latin America ( 102 m ) . In terms of new subscriptions over the five years from 1999 , Africa has outpaced other markets with 58 @.@ 2 % growth . Increasingly these phones are being serviced by systems where the voice content is transmitted digitally such as GSM or W @-@ CDMA with many markets choosing to depreciate analog systems such as AMPS . 
 There have also been dramatic changes in telephone communication behind the scenes . Starting with the operation of TAT @-@ 8 in 1988 , the 1990s saw the widespread adoption of systems based on optical fibers . The benefit of communicating with optic fibers is that they offer a drastic increase in data capacity . TAT @-@ 8 itself was able to carry 10 times as many telephone calls as the last copper cable laid at that time and today 's optic fibre cables are able to carry 25 times as many telephone calls as TAT @-@ 8 . This increase in data capacity is due to several factors : First , optic fibres are physically much smaller than competing technologies . Second , they do not suffer from crosstalk which means several hundred of them can be easily bundled together in a single cable . Lastly , improvements in multiplexing have led to an exponential growth in the data capacity of a single fibre . 
 Assisting communication across many modern optic fibre networks is a protocol known as Asynchronous Transfer Mode ( ATM ) . The ATM protocol allows for the side @-@ by @-@ side data transmission mentioned in the second paragraph . It is suitable for public telephone networks because it establishes a pathway for data through the network and associates a traffic contract with that pathway . The traffic contract is essentially an agreement between the client and the network about how the network is to handle the data ; if the network cannot meet the conditions of the traffic contract it does not accept the connection . This is important because telephone calls can negotiate a contract so as to guarantee themselves a constant bit rate , something that will ensure a caller 's voice is not delayed in parts or cut off completely . There are competitors to ATM , such as <unk> Label Switching ( <unk> ) , that perform a similar task and are expected to supplant ATM in the future . 
 = = = Radio and television = = = 
 In a broadcast system , the central high @-@ powered broadcast tower transmits a high @-@ frequency electromagnetic wave to numerous low @-@ powered receivers . The high @-@ frequency wave sent by the tower is modulated with a signal containing visual or audio information . The receiver is then tuned so as to pick up the high @-@ frequency wave and a <unk> is used to retrieve the signal containing the visual or audio information . The broadcast signal can be either analog ( signal is varied continuously with respect to the information ) or digital ( information is encoded as a set of discrete values ) . 
 The broadcast media industry is at a critical turning point in its development , with many countries moving from analog to digital broadcasts . This move is made possible by the production of cheaper , faster and more capable integrated circuits . The chief advantage of digital broadcasts is that they prevent a number of complaints common to traditional analog broadcasts . For television , this includes the elimination of problems such as snowy pictures , ghosting and other distortion . These occur because of the nature of analog transmission , which means that perturbations due to noise will be evident in the final output . Digital transmission overcomes this problem because digital signals are reduced to discrete values upon reception and hence small perturbations do not affect the final output . In a simplified example , if a binary message 1011 was transmitted with signal amplitudes [ 1 @.@ 0 0 @.@ 0 1 @.@ 0 1 @.@ 0 ] and received with signal amplitudes [ 0 @.@ 9 0 @.@ 2 1 @.@ 1 0 @.@ 9 ] it would still decode to the binary message 1011 — a perfect reproduction of what was sent . From this example , a problem with digital transmissions can also be seen in that if the noise is great enough it can significantly alter the decoded message . Using forward error correction a receiver can correct a handful of bit errors in the resulting message but too much noise will lead to incomprehensible output and hence a breakdown of the transmission . 
 In digital television broadcasting , there are three competing standards that are likely to be adopted worldwide . These are the ATSC , DVB and <unk> standards ; the adoption of these standards thus far is presented in the captioned map . All three standards use MPEG @-@ 2 for video compression . ATSC uses Dolby Digital AC @-@ 3 for audio compression , <unk> uses Advanced Audio Coding ( MPEG @-@ 2 Part 7 ) and DVB has no standard for audio compression but typically uses MPEG @-@ 1 Part 3 Layer 2 . The choice of modulation also varies between the schemes . In digital audio broadcasting , standards are much more unified with practically all countries choosing to adopt the Digital Audio Broadcasting standard ( also known as the Eureka 147 standard ) . The exception is the United States which has chosen to adopt HD Radio . HD Radio , unlike Eureka 147 , is based upon a transmission method known as in @-@ band on @-@ channel transmission that allows digital information to " piggyback " on normal AM or FM analog transmissions . 
 However , despite the pending switch to digital , analog television remains being transmitted in most countries . An exception is the United States that ended analog television transmission ( by all but the very low @-@ power TV stations ) on 12 June 2009 after twice delaying the switchover deadline , Kenya also ended analog television transmission in December 2014 after multiple delays . For analog television , there are three standards in use for broadcasting color TV ( see a map on adoption here ) . These are known as PAL ( German designed ) , NTSC ( North American designed ) , and <unk> ( French designed ) . ( It is important to understand that these are the ways of sending color TV , and they do not have anything to do with the standards for black & white TV , which also vary from country to country . ) For analog radio , the switch to digital radio is made more difficult by the fact that analog receivers are sold at a small fraction of the price of digital receivers . The choice of modulation for analog radio is typically between amplitude ( AM ) or frequency modulation ( FM ) . To achieve stereo playback , an amplitude modulated subcarrier is used for stereo FM . 
 = = = Internet = = = 
 The Internet is a worldwide network of computers and computer networks that communicate with each other using the Internet Protocol . Any computer on the Internet has a unique IP address that can be used by other computers to route information to it . Hence , any computer on the Internet can send a message to any other computer using its IP address . These messages carry with them the originating computer 's IP address allowing for two @-@ way communication . The Internet is thus an exchange of messages between computers . 
 It is estimated that the 51 % of the information flowing through two @-@ way telecommunications networks in the year 2000 were flowing through the Internet ( most of the rest ( 42 % ) through the landline telephone ) . By the year 2007 the Internet clearly dominated and captured 97 % of all the information in telecommunication networks ( most of the rest ( 2 % ) through mobile phones ) . As of 2008 , an estimated 21 @.@ 9 % of the world population has access to the Internet with the highest access rates ( measured as a percentage of the population ) in North America ( 73 @.@ 6 % ) , Oceania / Australia ( 59 @.@ 5 % ) and Europe ( 48 @.@ 1 % ) . In terms of broadband access , Iceland ( 26 @.@ 7 % ) , South Korea ( 25 @.@ 4 % ) and the Netherlands ( 25 @.@ 3 % ) led the world . 
 The Internet works in part because of protocols that govern how the computers and routers communicate with each other . The nature of computer network communication lends itself to a layered approach where individual protocols in the protocol stack run more @-@ or @-@ less independently of other protocols . This allows lower @-@ level protocols to be customized for the network situation while not changing the way higher @-@ level protocols operate . A practical example of why this is important is because it allows an Internet browser to run the same code regardless of whether the computer it is running on is connected to the Internet through an Ethernet or Wi @-@ Fi connection . Protocols are often talked about in terms of their place in the OSI reference model ( pictured on the right ) , which emerged in 1983 as the first step in an unsuccessful attempt to build a universally adopted networking protocol suite . 
 For the Internet , the physical medium and data link protocol can vary several times as packets traverse the globe . This is because the Internet places no constraints on what physical medium or data link protocol is used . This leads to the adoption of media and protocols that best suit the local network situation . In practice , most intercontinental communication will use the Asynchronous Transfer Mode ( ATM ) protocol ( or a modern equivalent ) on top of optic fiber . This is because for most intercontinental communication the Internet shares the same infrastructure as the public switched telephone network . 
 At the network layer , things become standardized with the Internet Protocol ( IP ) being adopted for logical addressing . For the World Wide Web , these " IP addresses " are derived from the human readable form using the Domain Name System ( e.g. 72 @.@ 14 @.@ 207 @.@ 99 is derived from <unk> ) . At the moment , the most widely used version of the Internet Protocol is version four but a move to version six is imminent . 
 At the transport layer , most communication adopts either the Transmission Control Protocol ( TCP ) or the User <unk> Protocol ( UDP ) . TCP is used when it is essential every message sent is received by the other computer whereas UDP is used when it is merely desirable . With TCP , packets are retransmitted if they are lost and placed in order before they are presented to higher layers . With UDP , packets are not ordered or retransmitted if lost . Both TCP and UDP packets carry port numbers with them to specify what application or process the packet should be handled by . Because certain application @-@ level protocols use certain ports , network administrators can manipulate traffic to suit particular requirements . Examples are to restrict Internet access by blocking the traffic destined for a particular port or to affect the performance of certain applications by assigning priority . 
 Above the transport layer , there are certain protocols that are sometimes used and loosely fit in the session and presentation layers , most notably the Secure <unk> Layer ( SSL ) and Transport Layer Security ( TLS ) protocols . These protocols ensure that data transferred between two parties remains completely confidential . Finally , at the application layer , are many of the protocols Internet users would be familiar with such as HTTP ( web browsing ) , POP3 ( e @-@ mail ) , FTP ( file transfer ) , IRC ( Internet chat ) , BitTorrent ( file sharing ) and XMPP ( instant messaging ) . 
 Voice over Internet Protocol ( VoIP ) allows data packets to be used for synchronous voice communications . The data packets are marked as voice type packets and can be prioritized by the network administrators so that the real @-@ time , synchronous conversation is less subject to contention with other types of data traffic which can be delayed ( i.e. file transfer or email ) or buffered in advance ( i.e. audio and video ) without detriment . That prioritization is fine when the network has sufficient capacity for all the VoIP calls taking place at the same time and the network is enabled for prioritization i.e. a private corporate style network , but the Internet is not generally managed in this way and so there can be a big difference in the quality of VoIP calls over a private network and over the public Internet . 
 = = = Local area networks and wide area networks = = = 
 Despite the growth of the Internet , the characteristics of local area networks ( LANs ) <unk> networks that do not extend beyond a few kilometers — remain distinct . This is because networks on this scale do not require all the features associated with larger networks and are often more cost @-@ effective and efficient without them . When they are not connected with the Internet , they also have the advantages of privacy and security . However , purposefully lacking a direct connection to the Internet does not provide assured protection from hackers , military forces , or economic powers . These threats exist if there are any methods for connecting remotely to the LAN . 
 Wide area networks ( WANs ) are private computer networks that may extend for thousands of kilometers . Once again , some of their advantages include privacy and security . Prime users of private LANs and WANs include armed forces and intelligence agencies that must keep their information secure and secret . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , several sets of communication protocols emerged to fill the gaps between the data @-@ link layer and the application layer of the OSI reference model . These included <unk> , IPX , and <unk> with the dominant protocol set during the early 1990s being IPX due to its popularity with MS @-@ DOS users . TCP / IP existed at this point , but it was typically only used by large government and research facilities . 
 As the Internet grew in popularity and its traffic was required to be routed into private networks , the TCP / IP protocols replaced existing local area network technologies . Additional technologies , such as DHCP , allowed TCP / IP @-@ based computers to self @-@ configure in the network . Such functions also existed in the AppleTalk / IPX / <unk> protocol sets . 
 Whereas Asynchronous Transfer Mode ( ATM ) or <unk> Label Switching ( <unk> ) are typical data @-@ link protocols for larger networks such as WANs ; Ethernet and Token Ring are typical data @-@ link protocols for LANs . These protocols differ from the former protocols in that they are simpler , e.g. , they omit features such as quality of service guarantees , and offer collision prevention . Both of these differences allow for more economical systems . 
 Despite the modest popularity of IBM Token Ring in the 1980s and 1990s , virtually all LANs now use either wired or wireless Ethernet facilities . At the physical layer , most wired Ethernet implementations use copper twisted @-@ pair cables ( including the common <unk> @-@ T networks ) . However , some early implementations used heavier coaxial cables and some recent implementations ( especially high @-@ speed ones ) use optical fibers . When optic fibers are used , the distinction must be made between <unk> fibers and single @-@ mode fibers . <unk> fibers can be thought of as thicker optical fibers that are cheaper to manufacture devices for , but that suffers from less usable bandwidth and worse attenuation – implying poorer long @-@ distance performance . 
 = = Transmission capacity = = 
 The effective capacity to exchange information worldwide through two @-@ way telecommunication networks grew from 281 petabytes of ( optimally compressed ) information in 1986 , to 471 petabytes in 1993 , to 2 @.@ 2 ( optimally compressed ) <unk> in 2000 , and to 65 ( optimally compressed ) <unk> in 2007 . This is the informational equivalent of two newspaper pages per person per day in 1986 , and six entire newspapers per person per day by 2007 . Given this growth , telecommunications play an increasingly important role in the world economy and the global telecommunications industry was about a $ 4 @.@ 7 trillion sector in 2012 . The service revenue of the global telecommunications industry was estimated to be $ 1 @.@ 5 trillion in 2010 , corresponding to 2 @.@ 4 % of the world ’ s gross domestic product ( GDP ) . 
 = Can 't Take That Away ( Mariah 's Theme ) = 
 " Can 't Take That Away ( Mariah 's Theme ) " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Mariah Carey . It was released by Columbia Records on June 6 , 2000 , written by Carey and Diane Warren , and produced by Carey and Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis for Carey 's seventh studio album Rainbow ( 1999 ) . It was released as the album 's third single as a double A @-@ side with " Crybaby " . The song is a ballad , blending pop and R & B beats while incorporating its sound from several instruments including the violin , piano and organ . Lyrically , the song speaks of inner strength , and not allowing others to tear away your dreams . 
 The song was well received by critics , many of whom complimented the lyrics , as well as Carey 's vocals . The song was not commercially successful due to its limited release and other factors . The song was the center of a very public controversy between Carey and her label Sony Music , based on what she perceived to be weak promotion of the single . It peaked at number 40 in Belgium Wallonia , number 45 in Italy and number 65 in the Netherlands . Stateside , due to Billboard rules at the time , it was not eligible to chart on the Hot 100 , only managing a peak of number six on the dance chart . 
 Two music videos were filmed for " Can 't Take That Away ( Mariah 's Theme ) " . Both feature personal videos left by five fans , re @-@ telling their stories of pain and emotional abuse and how the song had inspired them . Additionally , a large screen is shown next to Carey throughout the video , playing other inspirational stories from famous athletes . The ending alternates in both videos , with one climaxing on the balcony overlooking the city , while the other by a large indoor window . The song was performed on The Today Show and The View , as well as Carey 's Rainbow ( 2000 ) and Charmbracelet World Tours ( 2002 – 03 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to Carey , writing " Can 't Take That Away ( Mariah 's Theme ) " helped her get through rough emotional moments with her label 's management , and even times when she felt overwhelmed by others . During the early stages of the album , Carey said she felt pressured to complete the Rainbow album as quickly as possible , due to the fact that it was the last album under her contract with Columbia . During troubled times for the singer , as well as her divorce from record executive Tommy Mottola , she claimed writing and singing the song helped her get through troubled times and hoped her listeners would get the same message out of it . Carey thought it would become an anthem for fans and listeners who were going through difficult times in their life and could relate to the song . Additionally , during the taping of the Mariah Carey Homecoming Special , Carey told audience members that after the Columbine High School massacre in 1999 , she felt the song would help family members and friends of the victims during the tragedy , and hoped it would give them strength to get by the tragic event . For that reason , Carey included the song on the album , and campaigned for its radio release in mid @-@ 2000 . 
 = = Composition and lyrical content = = 
 " Can 't Take That Away ( Mariah 's Theme ) " is a slow tempo song that blends pop and R & B beats . Additionally , it incorporates its sound from several instruments including the violin , piano and organ . The ballad is set in the signature of common time , with a slowly tempo of 52 beats per minute . It is written in the key of A major , with Carey 's vocals spanning almost three octaves , from the low note of A2 to the high note of F # 5 . Although the song was written by Carey and Diane Warren , the latter does not usually share songwriting credit . Although there were no conflicts during the recording process , the pair had minor disagreements during the songwriting stages : Carey said that Warren liked to repeat lyrical phrases often . The second song that Carey and Warren wrote together was " There for Me " which was released as a B @-@ side to the " Never Too Far / Hero Medley " charity single Carey recorded in late 2001 . The song 's protagonist details the struggles of dealing with people who put you down , and how to overcome these struggles through faith , courage , and the power of God . Carey explains in the song 's lyrics how although people can try to make her feel down and depressed , no matter what happens , she can 't let them win : " There 's a light in me that shines brightly . They can try but they can 't take that away from me . " 
 = = Label dispute = = 
 As with Butterfly two years prior , Rainbow became the center of a conflict in between Carey and her label . After Carey 's divorce with Sony record official and Columbia CEO Tommy Mottola , the working relationship with Carey and her label deteriorated . After the first two singles from Rainbow were released , Carey was gearing up for a third single to be released . She intended for " Can 't Take That Away ( Mariah 's Theme ) " to be the next single , as it held very personal lyrical content . However , after getting wind of her plan , Sony made it clear that the album needed a more up @-@ beat and urban track to warm airwaves . These different opinions led to a very public feud in between them , as Carey began posting messages on her webpage during early and mid @-@ 2000 , telling fans inside information on the scandal , as well as instructing them to request " Can 't Take That Away ( Mariah 's Theme ) " on radio stations . One of the messages Carey left on her page read : 
 " Basically , a lot of you know the political situation in my professional career is not positive . It 's been really , really hard . I don 't even know if this message is going to get to you because I don 't know if they want you to hear this . I 'm getting a lot of negative feedback from certain corporate people . But I am not willing to give up . " 
 Carey 's actions were given mixed reception , with critics and executives both commending her bold actions towards a song she felt needed to be heard , while others criticized her for publicizing the scandal further . Soon after , Sony involved themselves further , stripping Carey 's webpage of any messages and began trying to reach an agreement with her . Fearing to lose their label 's highest seller , and the best @-@ selling artist of the decade , Sony chose to release the song . Carey , initially content with the agreement , soon found out that the song had only been allowed a very limited and low @-@ promotion release , not allowing the song to chart on the official US chart , and making international charting extremely difficult and unlikely . 
 = = Reception = = 
