 = Tropical Storm Mekkhala ( 2015 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Mekkhala , known in the Philippines as Tropical Storm Amang , was an early @-@ season tropical cyclone that made landfall over the Philippines in January 2015 . Mekkhala killed three people in the Bicol Region and caused light crop damage . Notably , the storm disturbed Pope Francis ’ visit to the country after the victims of Typhoon Haiyan on November 8 , 2013 . Although the storm also caused an airplane crash in Tacloban , nobody was hurt in the incident . 
 The system developed on January 13 between the Philippines and Guam . Moving west @-@ northwest for its duration , Mekkhala passed north of Yap State on January 14 while slowly intensifying due to moderate wind shear . Conditions became more favorable on January 16 , when the storm quickly strengthened to peak winds of at least 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) ; a ragged eye prompted the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to upgrade it to a typhoon . The storm weakened slightly and made landfall on the Philippine island of Samar on January 17 . Mekkhala weakened further over land , dissipating on January 21 east of Luzon . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical disturbance formed approximately 390 km ( 240 miles ) south @-@ southwest of Pohnpei early on January 9 . The system remained disorganized until the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert to it late on January 12 , when deepened convection with formative started to wrap into a slowly @-@ consolidating low @-@ level circulation center ( LLCC ) . Afterwards , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) upgraded the low @-@ pressure area to a tropical depression early on January 13 , as did the JTWC with the designation 01W Although deep convection was displaced to the northwest of an exposed LLCC early on January 14 , the JMA still upgraded the system to a tropical storm and named it Mekkhala , under moderate vertical wind shear offset by excellent poleward outflow . In post @-@ season analysis , the agency upgraded the storm at 12 : 00 UTC on the previous day . Late on January 14 , the PAGASA named the storm Amang right after it entered the Philippine Area of Responsibility . 
 Tracking west @-@ northwestward and then westward along the southern periphery of a subtropical ridge , Mekkhala was upgraded to a tropical storm by the JTWC early on January 15 , due to its slightly improved structure . Mekkhala quickly intensified on the next day due to improved conditions ; the wind shear became in @-@ phase with the storm 's motion while the robust divergent outflow persisted . Therefore , the JMA upgraded the system to a severe tropical storm at 06 : 00 UTC on January 16 , and later that day the JTWC upgraded it to a typhoon , when a central dense overcast has significantly deepened and totally obscured the LLCC . Later , a microwave imagery revealed that Mekkhala formed a ragged eyewall structure . The system reached peak intensity at 00 : 00 UTC on January 17 with ten @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , although operationally the JMA estimated typhoon @-@ force winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . 
 After slightly weakening , Mekkhala tracked northwestward and made landfall over Dolores , Eastern Samar of the Philippines at around 15 : 00 Philippine Standard Time ( 07 : 00 UTC ) , where Typhoon Hagupit also made landfall the month before . Both the JMA and the JTWC downgraded Mekkhala to a tropical storm on January 17 , due to land interaction weakening the storm significantly . Mekkhala eroded further while crossing the Bicol Region on January 18 , leading the JTWC to downgrade it to a tropical depression when it turned northward and emerged into the Philippine Sea . Late on the same day , the JMA downgraded Mekkhala to a tropical depression , and shortly after the JTWC issued the final warning as strong wind shear exposed the LLCC . The tropical depression drifted northeastward and maintained its exposed low @-@ level circulation east of Luzon , until the system was completely absorbed by a stationary front early on January 21 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 During January 14 , Mekkhala passed about 95 km ( 60 mi ) to the north of Yap State and less than 45 km ( 30 mi ) to the south of the atoll Ulithi . A peak wind gust of 58 km / h ( 36 mph ) was recorded in Yap State , along with a rainfall total of around 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) . On Ulithi a rainfall total of 100 mm ( 4 in ) was recorded , while there were no reports of any deaths or significant damage on either Ulithi or in Yap State . 
 Severe Tropical Storm Mekkhala , also known as Tropical Storm Amang , killed three people in the Bicol Region of the Philippines . Damage in the region amounted to ₱ 318 @.@ 7 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 1 million ) , stemming mostly from agriculture . In addition , the storm caused agricultural damage of ₱ 30 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 680 @,@ 000 ) in Samar . The crop damage and a subsequent drought caused rice shortages in the country , prompting the government to import the grain in May 2015 . Throughout the country , 48 homes were destroyed while a further 490 sustained damage . Infrastructural losses reached ₱ 49 @.@ 7 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 million ) ; repairs to roadways was quick and completed by January 21 . A volunteer from the Bicol Region , who worked for a Catholic Relief Services station in Salcedo , Eastern Samar , was hit by a <unk> due to a collapsed scaffolding caused by heavy winds during a papal Mass held in Daniel Z. Romualdez Airport in Tacloban , Leyte . 
 To comfort Tacloban people who suffered from the devastating disaster caused by Typhoon Haiyan in 2013 , and Typhoon Hagupit a month prior , Pope Francis visited the storm @-@ ravaged city on January 17 . However , the schedule is significantly impacted by Severe Tropical Storm Mekkhala , making thousands of pilgrims and even Pope himself have to wear a raincoat during the rain @-@ soaked Mass in the airport . Only several minutes after Pope Francis ’ own aircraft left the airport , a private jet was veered off the runway by strong winds of Mekkhala and eventually crashed . The 15 passengers on the plane were all safe , including many officials from the Cabinet of the Philippines . 
 = Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) = 
 " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " is the debut song recorded by Romanian recording artist Alexandra Stan for her debut studio album , Saxobeats ( 2011 ) . The track was written by Marcel Prodan and Andrei Nemirschi , and produced by Prodan . It was first released in Romania in 2009 . Following the international success of Stan 's 2010 single " Mr. Saxobeat " , " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " was re @-@ released in Canada , Germany , and the United States in 2011 . The music video for " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " features Stan and other female dancers dancing to the song in front of a purple backdrop ; interspersed scenes portray Stan licking a lollipop . She herself described the song as " club @-@ friendly " and as featuring " funny lyrics " , while music critics praised it for being a " catchy pop song " and a " club sensation " . Commercially , the single peaked at number 18 on her native Romanian Top 100 . 
 = = Background , composition and reception = = 
 Before being signed to a record label , Stan participated in various music @-@ related contests , including the Mamaia Music Festival . In 2009 , she was discovered by Romanian producers and songwriters Marcel Prodan and Andrei Nemirschi at a karaoke bar . They offered her a record deal with their own label , Maan Records , through which she also released a promotional single called " Show Me The Way " . During one of Stan 's televised performances on Romanian TV show <unk> Direct , she explained that " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " was produced " just for fun " after she arrived from a club one night . When interviewed by Urban.ro while premiering Saxobeats , Stan confessed that she expected positive and negative reception for the song , also saying that it emphasised more her image than her vocal abilities . 
 While Stan said that the track was " club @-@ friendly " and features " funny lyrics " , German magazine <unk> Tratsch named it a " catchy pop song " . Celeste Rhoads , writing for AllMusic , praised " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " during his review for Saxobeats , calling it a " club sensation " along with 2011 singles " Mr. Saxobeat " and " Get Back ( ASAP ) " . Mike Schiller from PopMatters described the production of the track " generic " and its lyrics " crude " , while wishing " that it had been conveniently forgotten about [ on the album ] " . 
 = = Impact and promotion = = 
 The song reached number 18 on Stan 's native Romanian Top 100 , being extensively broadcast by domestic radio stations there . It also impacted mainstream radio stations from the United States in early 2010 . Meanwhile , the music video for " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " garnered 25 million views on YouTube a short time . Following this , various labels from the United Kingdom , Ireland , Canada , Czech Republic , Russia , Italy , France , Israel and the United States asked for license to release the song through their means . In order to promote the single , Stan was invited to perform the recording on various native TV shows , with her as well embarking on a tour in her native Romania . She also provided a live performance of the single during the 2012 Après Ski Hits event in Germany , and sang the song during the concert tours that promoted Saxobeats . 
 A low @-@ budget accompanying music video for " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " was posted onto Maan Studio 's YouTube channel on 22 December 2009 and filmed by Andrei Nemirschi in a restaurant . The whole clip portrays Stan and two fellow female dancers performing in front of a purple backdrop . It commences with Stan asking herself which sweets she likes the most , with the words " candy " , " chocolate " and " ice cream " appearing on the screen . Following this , the other females are presented wearing white underwear until one of them is shown with a saxophone . Next , Stan is shown blowing a bubble with bubble gum and , after she further dances to the song , the clip ends with the screen displaying the phrase " <unk> pam pam " and finally becoming dark . Scenes interspersed through the main video portrayed Stan seductively licking a lollipop . The clip was not received well by the audience . Spanish @-@ language music station Los 40 Principales named the video for " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " as one of Stan 's best clips ever . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) [ Radio Edit ] − 3 : 55 
 Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) [ Club Edit ] − 4 : 12 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Saxobeats and The Collection . 
 Maan Studio – recording studio 
 Marcel Prodan – songwriter , producer 
 Andrei Nemirschi – songwriter , photography , director 
 Alexandra Stan – lead vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " was released as Stan 's debut recording in her native Romania in late 2009 , charting early in the following year . After the international success of her breakthrough single " Mr. Saxobeat " ( 2011 ) , it was also made available for digital download on iTunes Store through Ultra Records on 31 May 2011 in Canada and the United States . In Germany , the single was launched digitally on 9 September 2011 through Prime Music , within the period of the release of its parent record , Saxobeats ( 2011 ) . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = Army of the Danube = 
 The Army of the Danube ( French : Armée du Danube ) was a field army of the French Directory in the 1799 southwestern campaign in the Upper Danube valley . It was formed on 2 March 1799 by the simple expedient of renaming the Army of Observation , which had been observing Austrian movements on the border between French First Republic and the Holy Roman Empire . It was commanded by General Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan , 1st Comte Jourdan ( 1762 – 1833 ) . 
 The formation of the army was part of the French Directory 's long term strategy to undermine Habsburg influence in the Holy Roman Empire , and , conversely , to strengthen French hegemony in central Europe after the wars of the First Coalition and the Treaty of Campo Formio in 1797 . Despite the Treaty , Austria and France remained suspicious of each other 's motives , and the purpose of the Army of the Observation was to watch for Austrian border transgressions . Understanding that the negotiations at the Congress of Rastatt were going no @-@ where , the Army of Observation was instructed to cross the Rhine . Once across the Rhine , the Army of the Danube , was to secure strategic positions in southwestern Germany ( present day Baden @-@ Württemberg ) and engage Archduke Charles ' Austrian army . In the meantime , the Army of Helvetia , under command of André Masséna , would secure such strategic locations as St. Gotthard Pass , the Swiss Plateau , and upper Rhine basin . 
 The army participated in four battles . In the battles of Ostrach and first Stockach , the Army of the Danube withdrew after suffering heavy losses . After reorganization , in which elements of the army were combined with Massena 's Army of Switzerland , it withdrew after an engagement with Charles ' superior force at Zürich in early June 1799 ; only in the Second Battle of Zurich did the Army of the Danube secure an uncontested victory . In December 1799 , the Army of the Danube merged with the Army of the Rhine . 
 = = Background = = 
 Initially , such rulers of Europe as Joseph II , Holy Roman Emperor viewed the revolution in France as an event between the French king and his subjects , and not something in which they should interfere . As the rhetoric grew more strident , the monarchies started to view events with distrust . Leopold , who had succeeded Joseph as Emperor in 1791 , saw the situation surrounding his sister , Marie Antoinette , and her children , with greater and greater alarm . As the revolution grew more and more radical , he still sought to avoid war , but in the late summer , he , in consultation with French émigré nobles and Frederick William II of Prussia , issued the Declaration of Pillnitz , in which they declared the interest of the monarchs of Europe as one with the interests of Louis and his family . They threatened vague , but serious , consequences if anything should happen to the royal family . 
 By 1792 , the French republican position had become increasingly difficult . Compounding internal economic and social problems , French émigrés agitated abroad for support of a counter @-@ revolution that would restore an absolute monarchy . Chief among them were Louis Joseph , Prince of Condé ( cousin of Louis XVI ) , Condé 's son , Louis Henri , Duke of Bourbon , and Condé 's grandson , Louis Antoine , Duke of Enghien . From their base in Koblenz , immediately over the French border , they sought direct support for military intervention from the royal houses of Europe , and themselves raised a small army . The ascension of young and uncompromising Francis as Holy Roman Emperor @-@ elect on the death of his father in July 1792 also contributed to their unease . 
 On 20 April 1792 , the French National Convention declared war on Austria . In this War of the First Coalition ( 1792 – 98 ) , France ranged itself against most of the European states sharing land or water borders with her , plus Portugal and the Ottoman Empire . Although the Coalition forces achieved several victories at Verdun , Kaiserslautern , Neerwinden , Mainz , Amberg and Würzburg , the efforts of Napoleon Bonaparte in northern Italy pushed Austrian forces across the Italian @-@ Austrian border and resulted in the negotiation of the Peace of Leoben ( 17 April 1797 ) and the subsequent Treaty of Campo Formio ( October 1797 ) . 
 From October 1797 until the Army of the Danube crossed into Germany in March 1799 , the signatories of the Treaty of Campo Formio had avoided armed conflict . Despite their agreement at Campo Formio , the two primary combatants , France and Austria , remained suspicious of each other 's motives . Several diplomatic incidents undermined the agreement . The French demanded additional territory not mentioned in the Treaty . The Habsburgs were reluctance to hand over designated territories , much less additional ones . The Congress at Rastatt proved inept at orchestrating the transfer of territories to compensate the German princes for their losses . Ferdinand of Naples refused to pay tribute to France , followed by a general Neapolitan rebellion , the French suppression , and the subsequent establishment of the Parthenopean Republic . Republicans in the Swiss cantons , supported by the French army , overthrew the central government in Bern and established the Helvetic Republic . 
 Other factors contributed to the rising tensions . On his way to Egypt , Napoleon had stopped on Malta and forcibly removed the Hospitallers from their possessions , angering Paul , Tsar of Russia , who was the honorary head of the Order . The French Directory , furthermore , was convinced that the Austrians were conniving to start another war . Indeed , the weaker the French Republic seemed , the more seriously the Austrians , the Neapolitans , the Russians and the English actually discussed this possibility . 
 = = Purpose and formation = = 
 Military planners in Paris understood that the northern Rhine Valley , the south @-@ western German territories , and Switzerland were strategically important for the defense of the Republic . The Swiss passes commanded access to northern Italy ; consequently , the army that held those passes could move troops to and from northern and southern theaters quickly . The river was a formidable barrier to what the French perceived as Austrian aggression , and the state that controlled its crossings controlled the river itself . Finally , control of the Upper Danube would allow France to move its troops from Italy to the North Sea , or any point in between , offering immense strategic value . 
 Toward this end , in the early November 1798 , Jourdan arrived in Hüningen , near the Swiss city of Basel , to take command of the Army of Observation , so @-@ called because its function was to observe the security of the French border on the Rhine . Once there , Jourdan assessed the quality and disposition of the forces and identified needed supplies and manpower . He found the army woefully inadequate for its assignment . The Army , and its flanking armies , the Army of Helvetia ( Switzerland ) and the Army of Mayence , were equally short of manpower , supplies , ammunition , and training . Jourdan documented assiduously these shortages , pointing out in lengthy correspondence to the Directory the consequences of an under @-@ manned and under @-@ supplied army ; his petitions seemed to have little effect on the Directory , which sent neither significant additional manpower nor supplies . 
 Jourdan 's orders were to take the army into Germany and secure strategic positions , particularly on the roads through Stockach and Schaffhausen , at the western @-@ most border of Lake Constance . Similarly , as commander of the Army of Helvetia , André Masséna would acquire strategic positions in Switzerland , in particular the St. Gotthard Pass , the passes above Feldkirch , particularly Maienfeld ( St. <unk> ) , and hold the central plateau in and around Zürich and Winterthur . These positions would prevent the Allies of the Second Coalition from moving troops back and forth between the northern Italian and German theaters , and insure French access to these strategic passes . Ultimately , this positioning would allow the French to control all western roads leading to and from Vienna . Finally , to complete Vienna 's isolation , the army of Mayence would sweep through the north , blocking further access to and from Vienna from any of the northern Provinces , or from Britain . 
 = = Crossing the Rhine = = 
 On March 1 , 1799 , the Army of Observation , in an order of battle of approximately 30 @,@ 000 men in four divisions , crossed the Rhine at Kehl and Basel as units crossed , they took the name Army of the Danube . 
 Advance Guard , with approximately 9 @,@ 000 men under General François Joseph Lefebvre , and temporary commanded by Dominique Vandamme . This also included the detached left flank of 3 @,@ 000 Vandamme eventually took to Stuttgart . 
 I. Division , with approximately 8 @,@ 000 men under General Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino . 
 II . Division , with approximately 7 @,@ 000 men under General Joseph Souham . 
 III . Division , approximately 7 @,@ 000 men under Laurent Saint @-@ Cyr constituted the left flank . 
 Reserve , with approximately 3 @,@ 000 men under Jean @-@ Joseph Ange d 'Hautpoul . 
 The army advanced in four columns . First Division , the right wing , assembled at Hüningen , crossed at Basel and advanced eastward along the north shore of the Rhine toward Lake Constance . The Advanced Guard crossed at Kehl , and Vandamme led it north @-@ east through the mountains via Freudenstadt . This column eventually became the left flank . It was followed across the Rhine , also at Kehl , by the II . Division . The Third Division and the Reserve also crossed at Kehl , and then divided into two columns , III . Division traveling through the Black Forest via Oberkirch , and the Reserve , with most of the artillery and horse , further south via the valley at Freiburg im Breisgau , where they would find more forage , and then over the mountains past the <unk> to <unk> and <unk> . 
 Although Jourdan could have established a position on the immediate eastern slope of the mountains — and indeed he might have been better advised to do so — he pushed eastward across the Danube plain , taking a temporary position between Rottweil and Tuttlingen . Eventually he directed the army to establish a line centered in Pfullendorf . He planned to engage the Austrian army under the Habsburg commander @-@ in @-@ chief Archduke Charles on the Ostrach plateau . 
 While this may have seemed like a good plan , Jourdan 's choice of ground created problems for him later . The plain below Pfullendorf was riddled with such streams and brooks as the Ostrach , a Danube tributary , which drained out of the marshes and swamps of <unk> ; in the spring of most years , this was not the best choice of ground . Although from Pfullendorf and the more moderate heights to the north of the village of Ostrach , Jourdan could establish reasonable artillery positions , the softness of the marshland itself would diminish the impact of a cannonade on the Austrian line . The marsh was also prone to <unk> , which would hinder visual planning and tactics . Furthermore , the softness of the ground would make the use of cavalry difficult , and cavalry maneuvers would be made more difficult by the likelihood of fog . Finally , the major part of Charles ' army had wintered immediately east of the Lech , which Jourdan knew , because he had sent agents into Germany with instructions to identify the location and strength of his enemy . This was less than 64 kilometers ( 40 mi ) distant ; any passage over the Lech was facilitated by available bridges , both of permanent construction and temporary pontoons and a traverse through friendly territory . 
 = = Engagements = = 
 In March 1799 , the Army of the Danube engaged in two major battles , both in the southwestern German theater . At the Battle of Ostrach , 20 – 22 March 1799 , the first battle of the War of the Second Coalition , Austrian forces , under the command of Archduke Charles , defeated French forces . The French suffered significant losses and were forced to retreat from the region , taking up new positions at Messkirch ( also spelled <unk> or <unk> ) , and then at Stockach and Engen . At the second battle , in Stockach , on 25 March 1799 , the Austrian army achieved a decisive victory over the French forces , and again pushed the French army west . Jourdan instructed his generals to take up positions in the Black Forest , and he himself established a base at Hornberg . From there , General Jourdan relegated command of the army to his chief of staff , Jean Augustin Ernouf , and traveled to Paris to ask for more and better troops and , ultimately , when these were not forthcoming , to request a medical leave . The Army was reorganized , and a portion placed under the command of André Masséna and merged with the Army of Helvetia . Following the reorganization and change in command , the Army participated in the Battle of Winterthur and the First Battle of Zürich and , three months later , the Second Battle of Zürich . 
 = = = Battle of Ostrach = = = 
 The Battle of Ostrach , also called the Battle by Ostrach , occurred 20 – 23 March 1799 . In early March , the Army of the Danube pressed forward toward Pfullendorf and Ostrach , the former an imperial city in Upper Swabia and the latter a nearby village of 300 belonging to the Imperial Abbey of Salem . Their goal was to cut the Austrian line at Switzerland , preventing the Coalition use of Switzerland as an overland route between central and southern Europe . This would ostensibly isolate the armies of the Coalition in northern Italy and Germany , and prevent them from assisting one another ; furthermore , if the French held the interior passes in Switzerland , they could use the routes to move their own forces between the two theaters . 
 The battle occurred during Holy Week in 1799 , amid rain and dense fog , on the marsh southeast of the village . Initially , on 20 March , the French were able to take , and hold , the village of Ostrach and the nearby hamlet of Hoßkirch . On the morning of 21 March , as General Jourdan later wrote , as the Austrian army attacked , his men seemed to disappear in a cloud of redcoats , which referred to the Austrian Hussar and Grenadier uniforms . That evening , after more than 15 hours in general engagement , the Austrians flanked his left wing , and Saint Cyr 's force was pressed back to the Pfullendorf heights . In the early morning , as the fog lifted , Jourdan could see the Archduke 's formidable force arrayed on the plains below him . The archduke 's arrangements made it clear that Jourdan could not keep the heights of Pfullendorf . As he withdrew , a portion of his right flank was cut off from the main force . 
 Although casualties appeared even in numbers for both sides , the Austrians fielded a significantly larger fighting force of nearly 55 @,@ 000 at Ostrach , with another 60 @,@ 000 stretched along a line between Lake Constance and Ulm . French casualties amounted to more than 12 percent of their force , and Austrian , approximately four percent . The French were forced back to Stockach , where on 25 March the armies engaged again , this time with greater losses on both sides , and a decisive Austrian victory . 
 = = = Battle of Stockach = = = 
 At the Battle of Stockach , Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan and Archduke Charles again directed the French force of 40 @,@ 000 and the Austrian force of 80 @,@ 000 , respectively . While attempting to rally his troops , Jourdan was dismounted , nearly trampled to death by his soldiers , and barely escaped capture by the Austrians . Charles ' personal intervention was crucial for the Austrians , and he was in the thick of the fighting , buying time for reinforcements to arrive . The French were defeated and driven back upon the Rhine . 
 The general engagement was brutal and bloody . Before daybreak on 25 March , the French left wing launched a headlong attack on the Austrian right wing , coordinated with assaults on the Austrian left . The ferocious attack forced the Austrians out of the woods in which they had been positioned overnight , and pushed them to the village of <unk> . Fearing that his forces would shortly be flanked , Charles directed reinforcements to back up the right wing . The Archduke himself led eight battalions of Hungarian grenadiers into the fight , and during this part of the action , both the Prince of Anhalt and Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg were killed by French case shot . The main French assault on the Austrian center was stalled by the superior numbers . 
 On the French right flank , General Ferino attempted to push the Austrians back , first with a cannonade , followed by an attack through the woods on both sides of the road between the hamlet of Asch and Stockach . A third charge succeeded in taking the road , but the Austrian forces reformed the line and the artillery , now at the head of a wedge , bombarded the French troops . In a bayonet charge , the French took the hamlet of <unk> , but Ferino 's troops could not hold it and withdrew during the night . Jourdan then ordered a general withdrawal from the region , instructing his divisions to retreat along the lines of march they had followed into the region , and himself establishing a command post at Hornberg . He sent the cavalry to the western side of the Black Forest , where the horses could expect to find better forage . 
 = = = Battle of Winterthur = = = 
 By mid @-@ May , 1799 , the Austrians had wrested control of the eastern portions of the newly formed Helvetic Republic from the French as the forces of Hotze and pushed them out of the Grisons . Archduke Charles ' own sizable force — about 110 @,@ 000 strong — crossed the Rhine west of Schaffhausen , and prepared to join with the armies of Friedrich , Baron von Hotze and Friedrich Joseph , Count of Nauendorf on the Swiss Plateau by Zürich . The French Army of Switzerland and the Army of the Danube , now both under the command of André Masséna , tried to prevent this merger of the Austrian forces at the Winterthur crossroads . 
 Masséna sent the newly promoted General of Division Michel Ney and part of the Army of the Danube to Winterthur on 27 May 1799 to stop the Austrian advance from eastern Switzerland . If the Austrians succeeded in uniting Hotze 's army from the east with Nauendorf 's directly north of Zurich , and Archduke Charles ' which lay to the north and west , the French would be half encircled at Zurich and dangerously exposed . 
 On the morning of 27 May , Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze assembled his force into three columns and marched toward Winterthur . Opposite him , Michel Ney deployed his force around the heights , the so @-@ called Ober @-@ Winterthur , a ring of low @-@ lying hills some 6 kilometers ( 4 mi ) north of the city . The overall commander of the forward line , Jean Victor Tharreau , had informed Ney that he would send Jean @-@ de @-@ Dieu Soult 's division to support him ; Ney understood this to mean he was to make a stand along the entire outpost line , and that he would not be isolated . His small force would receive reinforcements from Soult 's division . Consequently , Ney directed the weakest brigade , under the command of Gazan , to move up a long valley toward Frauenfeld , and another brigade , under the command of Roget , to take the right , preventing any Austrian flanking maneuver . 
 By mid @-@ morning , Hotze 's advanced guard had encountered moderate French resistance first from the two brigades Ney had at his disposal . The Austrian advance troops quickly overran the weaker brigade and took possession of the woods surrounding the village of Islikon . After securing the villages of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , further west of Islikon , Hotze deployed two of his columns facing the French front , while a third angled to the French right , as Ney had expected he would . Soult never appeared ( he was later court martialed for insubordination ) , and Ney withdrew his forces through Winterthur , regrouping with Tharreau 's main force in the outskirts of Zurich . A day later , Hotze 's force united with the main Austrian force of Archduke Charles . 
 = = = First Battle of Zürich = = = 
 In the First Battle of Zürich , on 4 – 7 June 1799 , approximately 45 @,@ 000 French and 53 @,@ 000 Austrians clashed on the plains around the city . On the left wing , Hotze had 20 battalions of infantry , plus support artillery , and 27 squadrons of cavalry , in total , 19 @,@ 000 men . On the right wing , General Friedrich Joseph , Count of Nauendorf commanded another 18 @,@ 000 . The battle cost both sides dearly ; General of Brigade <unk> was killed , on the French side , and on the Austrian side , Feldzeugmeister ( General of Infantry ) Olivier , Count of Wallis , was killed . On the French side , 500 died , 800 were wounded and 300 captured ; on the Austrian side , 730 killed , 1 @,@ 470 wounded , and 2 @,@ 200 captured . When the Austrians took the French positions in the city , they also captured over 150 guns . Ultimately , French general André Masséna yielded the city to the Austrians , under Archduke Charles . Massena retreated beyond the Limmat , where he managed to fortify his positions . Hotze 's force harassed their retreat , and secured the river shoreline . Despite Hotze 's aggressive harassment of the French retreat , Charles did not follow up on the withdrawal ; Masséna established himself on the opposite bank of the Limmat without threat of pursuit from the main body of the Austrian Army , much to the annoyance of the Russian liaison officer , Alexander Ivanovich , Count Ostermann @-@ Tolstoy . 
 On 14 August 1799 , a Russian force of 6 @,@ 000 cavalry , 20 @,@ 000 infantry , and 1 @,@ 600 Cossacks , under Alexander Korsakov , joined Archduke Charles ' force in Schaffhausen . In a vice @-@ like operation , together with the Russians , they would surround André Masséna 's smaller army on the banks of the Limmat , where it had taken refuge the previous spring . To divert this attack , General Claude Lecourbe attacked the pontoon bridges over which the Austrians crossed the Rhine , destroying most of them , and making the rest unusable . 
 Before Charles could regroup , orders arrived from the Aulic Council , the imperial body in Vienna charged with conduct of war , to <unk> his plan ; Charles ' troops were to leave Zurich in the supposedly capable hands of <unk> , re @-@ cross the Rhine and march north to Mainz . Charles stalled this operation as long as he could , but eventually he had to concede to Vienna 's orders . Consequently , the Russian troops under a novice general replaced the Austrian troops and their seasoned commander in the strategically important city . Charles withdrew his force to the north of the Rhine and marched slowly toward Mainz . In Italy , the Russian generalissimo , Alexander Suvorov , was horrified when he heard this : he depended upon a stable Austro @-@ Russian presence in Switzerland to protect his flank and he expected to join this army by September or October at the latest . Although the order to Charles to recross the Rhine and march north was eventually countermanded , by the time such instructions reached him , he had gone too far to return to Zurich in time . 
 = = = Second Battle of Zürich = = = 
 In the Second Battle of Zürich , the French regained control of the city , along with the rest of Switzerland . Notably , Masséna out @-@ <unk> Korsakov ; surrounded him , tricked him , and then took more than half his army as a prisoner . Massena also captured the baggage train and most of Korsakov cannons , and inflicted over 8 @,@ 000 casualties . Most of the fighting took place on both banks of the river Limmat , up to the gates of Zürich , and in part within the city itself . Zürich had declared itself neutral , and was spared general destruction . General Oudinot commanded the French forces on the right bank and general Joseph Mortier , those on the left . 
 At the same time , Soult led a small force , some 150 musket @-@ men , across the river Linth — the men held their muskets over their heads and waded across , through water to their chests — and protected the crossing site for the remainder of the force . Baron von Hotze , commander of the Austrian force there , advanced on the position near Richterswil to direct its defense , and was killed by a French musket ball . His successor , Franz Petrasch , could not push the French back , and organized a retreat from the region , falling back to St. Gallen and losing another 8 @,@ 000 men and some guns . By the time Suvorov arrived in St. Gallen in early October , the Austrians and the Russians had been pushed out and he was forced to lead his men over the Alps to the Vorarlberg , resulting in additional losses . 
 = = Organizational and command problems = = 
 The French army experienced a variety of command problems , especially in its early operations in southwestern Germany . After the defeat at Stockach , the army withdrew into the Black Forest . Jourdan relinquished command provisionally to Ernouf , who was a capable staff officer but had insufficient experience to hold together a varied and demoralized force . Jourdan retired to Strasbourg , where he was , or claimed he was , indisposed . By the time Masséna arrived to take command , organization and discipline was in shambles . Only four divisional generals had remained at their posts : Klein , Ferino , Souham , and Vandamme . Decaen was under arrest in Strasbourg , pending a Courts @-@ martial , as was d 'Hautpoul , for his failure to organize a timely cavalry attack at Stockach . The others had disappeared to different parts of the southwest or had gone to France . No one knew where Bernadotte had gone , and Saint Cyr had retired to Mannheim . The latter was at least reachable . Lecourbe , who had been injured at Stockach , had withdrawn to Paris to recover ; in a strategically astute move , he remained there until late November , when he was able to offer Napoleon direct assistance in his coup , and thus acquired Bonaparte 's attention and gratitude . 
 = = = School for marshals = = = 
 Initially , the Army included five future Marshals of France : Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan , its commander @-@ in @-@ chief , François Joseph Lefebvre , Jean @-@ Baptiste Drouet , Laurent de Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr , and Édouard Adolphe Casimir Joseph Mortier . After the defeat at Ostrach , the Army was reorganized and command shifted to another future marshal , André Masséna . 
 = = Subsequent variations = = 
 The Army of Switzerland and portions of the Army of the Danube merged in a joint command under André Masséna in April 1799 ; in June , portions of the Army of the Danube were used to strengthen the Army of the Rhine . Both the Army of the Rhine and the Army of the Danube subsequently merged in 24 November 1799 to form a new , enlarged army designated the Army of the Rhine . 
 = = Commanders = = 
 = Libellus responsionum = 
 The Libellus responsionum ( Latin for " little book of answers " ) is a papal letter ( also known as a papal rescript or decretal ) written in 601 by Pope Gregory I to Augustine of Canterbury in response to several of Augustine 's questions regarding the nascent church in Anglo @-@ Saxon England . The Libellus was reproduced in its entirety by Bede in his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum , whence it was transmitted widely in the Middle Ages , and where it is still most often encountered by students and historians today . Before it was ever transmitted in Bede 's Historia , however , the Libellus circulated as part of several different early medieval canon law collections , often in the company of texts of a penitential nature . 
 The authenticity of the Libellus ( notwithstanding Boniface 's suspicions , on which see below ) was not called into serious question until the mid @-@ twentieth century , when several historians forwarded the hypothesis that the document had been concocted in England in the early eighth century . It has since been shown , however , that this hypothesis was based on incomplete evidence and historical misapprehensions . In particular , twentieth @-@ century scholarship focused on the presence in the Libellus of what appeared to be an impossibly lax rule regarding consanguinity and marriage , a rule that ( it was thought ) Gregory could not possibly have endorsed . It is now known that this rule is not in fact as lax as historians had thought , and moreover that the rule is fully consistent with Gregory 's style and mode of thought . Today , Gregory I 's authorship of the Libellus is generally accepted . The question of authenticity aside , manuscript and textual evidence indicates that the document was being transmitted in Italy by perhaps as early as the beginning of the seventh century ( i.e. shortly after Gregory I 's death in 604 ) , and in England by the end of the same century . 
 = = Creation = = 
 The Libellus is a reply by Pope Gregory I to questions posed by Augustine of Canterbury about certain disciplinary , administrative , and sacral problems he was facing as he tried to establish a bishopric amongst the Kentish people following the initial success of the Gregorian mission in 596 . Modern historians , including Ian Wood and Rob <unk> , have seen the Libellus as indicating that Augustine had more contact with native British Christians than is indicated by Bede 's narrative in the Historia Ecclesia . Augustine 's original questions would have been sent to Rome around 598 , but Gregory 's reply was delayed some years due to illness , and was not composed until perhaps the summer of 601 . The Libellus may have been brought back to Augustine by Laurence and Peter , along with letters to the king of Kent and his wife and other items for the mission . However , some scholars have pointed out that the Libellus may in fact never have reached its intended recipient ( Augustine ) in Canterbury . Paul Meyvaert , for example , has noted that no early Anglo @-@ Saxon copy of the Libellus survives that is earlier than Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica ( ca 731 ) , and Bede 's copy appears to derive not from a Canterbury file copy but rather from a Continental canon law collection . This would be strange had the letter arrived in Canterbury in the first place . A document as important to the fledgling mission and to the history of the Canterbury church as the Libellus is likely to have been protected and preserved quite carefully by Canterbury scribes ; yet this seems not to have been the case . Meyvaert therefore suggested that the Libellus may have been waylaid on its journey north in 601 from Rome to England , and only later arrived in England , long after Augustine 's death . This theory is supported well by the surviving manuscript and textual evidence , which strongly suggests that the Libellus circulated widely on the Continent for perhaps nearly a century before finally arriving in England ( see below ) . Still , the exact time , place , and vector by which the Libellus arrived in England and fell into Bede 's hands is still far from certain , and scholars continue to explore these questions . 
 = = Title = = 
 Gregory does not appear to have provided the Libellus with a title . This is not unusual since the work is a letter and Gregory was not in the habit of titling his many letters . " Libellus responsionum " is the name given the letter by Bede in his Historia Ecclesiastica , and most modern commentators translate Bede 's nomenclature as " Little book of answers " or " Little book of responses " . " Libellus " can also be translated as " letter " ; thus " Letter of answers " is another possible translation . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The Libellus consists of a series of questions posed by Augustine and answered by Gregory . There are nine different questions that are asked , although some questions address multiple issues at once . Gregory 's first response addresses questions about the relationship of a bishop to his clergy and vice versa , how gifts from the laymen to the church should be divided amongst the clergy , and what the tasks of a bishop were . The second reply addresses why the various regional churches had differing customs and liturgies , and what Augustine should do when he encounters these differences . The third reply was in answer to questions about the proper punishment of church robbers . The fourth and fifth responses deal with who might marry whom , including whether it was allowed for two brothers to marry two sisters , or for a man to marry his step @-@ sister or step @-@ mother . The sixth response concerns whether it was acceptable for a bishop to be consecrated without other bishops present , if the distances involved prevented other bishops from attending the ceremony . The next question from Augustine dealt with the relations between the church in England and the church in Gaul . The eighth response concerns what a pregnant , newly delivered , or menstruating woman might do or not do , including whether or not she is allowed to enjoy sex with her husband and how long after child @-@ birth she has to wait to re @-@ enter a church . The last response deals with questions about whether men might have communion after a sexual dream or if priests might celebrate mass after similar dreams . An additional chapter , not included by Bede in his Historia is known as the " <unk> " : it contains a reply by Gregory to Augustine 's request for relics of the local martyr Sixtus . Gregory 's reply says that he is sending relics of Pope Sixtus II to replace the local saint 's remains , as Gregory has doubts about the actual saintly status of the local saint . Although the authenticity of the " <unk> " has occasionally been questioned , most modern historians accept that it is genuine . 
 = = Later use = = 
 In the early seventh century an augmented version of the Dionysian conciliar and decretal collections was assembled in Bobbio , in northern Italy . To this canon law collection — known today as the Collectio canonum <unk> Bobiensis — there was appended at some time a long series of additional papal documents and letters , including the Libellus responsionum and Libellus <unk> . Some scholars date the addition of this series of documents to as early as the seventh century . Klaus <unk> @-@ <unk> has even suggested the first half of the seventh century as the date for when the addition was made , that is only shortly after the Bobiensis ’ s initial compilation and at most only fifty years after Gregory ’ s death . If <unk> @-@ <unk> 's dating is correct , it would make the Collectio Bobiensis the earliest surviving witness by far to the Libellus . 
 How and when the Libellus eventually reached England is not clear . It is not known if the original letter ever reached Augustine , its intended recipient . Bede assumed that it had , though he is rather vague on specifics at this point . On the strength of Bede 's word alone many later historians have claimed that the Libellus reached Augustine in a timely fashion ; however , as mentioned above , recent scholarship has brought this assumption into serious question . In any event , some version of the letter seems to have been available in England by the late seventh century , for it was then that it was quoted by Archbishop Theodore of Tarsus in a series of judgments known today as the <unk> <unk> . It is possible that Theodore found a copy of the Libellus at Canterbury ; however , given that no one in England previous to Theodore 's <unk> seems to have known of the Libellus , it seems more likely that the Libellus was one of the texts that Theodore brought to England from Italy . It is known that Theodore brought numerous books with him from Italy , and that at least one of these books was a canon law collection very much like the one prepared at Bobbio some decades earlier ( i.e. the Bobiensis ) . Elliot has speculated that Theodore introduced a Bobiensis @-@ type collection to Canterbury in the second half of the seventh century , and thereby finally delivered the Libellus ( as part of the <unk> ) to its originally intended destination . This hypothesis is supported by the fact that it was only shortly after Theodore 's tenure at Canterbury that Anglo @-@ Saxons begin to demonstrate knowledge of the Libellus . 
 Bede inserted the entire text of the Libellus into book I of his Historia ( completed ca . 731 ) , where it makes up the bulk of chapter 27 . Bede also appears to have relied upon the Libellus while writing his prose Vita Sancti <unk> in about the year 720 . Where Bede acquired his copy of the Libellus is not known , but it seems that by the early eighth century it was beginning to be read widely throughout England . 
 In the later Middle Ages , the text of the Libellus was used to support the claims of the monks of the Canterbury Cathedral chapter that the chapter had always included monks , back to the founding of the cathedral by Augustine . But the Libellus does not explicitly say that the cathedral chapter should be composed of monks , only that the monks that were members of the chapter should live in common and have some other aspects of monastic life . 
 = = Controversy over authenticity = = 
 Twentieth @-@ century scholarship 's focus on the doubt expressed by Boniface regarding the authenticity of the Libellus has led to the widely held belief that a general atmosphere of suspicion surrounded the Libellus in the Middle Ages . In fact , Boniface appears to have been the only medieval personality to have ever expressed doubt about the authorship of this letter . As missionary to the Germanic peoples of Europe and legate of the papal see , Boniface spent much of his later life in Continental Europe , where he encountered many canonical traditions that were unfamiliar to the Anglo @-@ Saxons and that appeared to Boniface out of step with his knowledge of church tradition . The Libellus represented one such tradition . Boniface in fact had very practical reasons for questioning the Libellus . He had witnessed its recommendations being exploited by certain members of the Frankish nobility who claimed that the Libellus permitted them to enter into unions with their aunts , unions Boniface considered to be incestuous . Eager to get to the bottom of this controversy , in 735 Boniface wrote to Nothhelm , the Archbishop of Canterbury requesting Nothhelm send him Canterbury 's own copy of the Libellus ; presumably Boniface hoped that Canterbury ( being the one @-@ time residence of Augustine ) possessed an authentic copy of the Libellus , one that perhaps preserved more ancient readings than the copies then circulating in France and Bavaria , and would therefore serve as a corrective to the Continental copies and the incestuous nobles who relied upon them . Boniface also requested Nothhelm 's opinion on the document 's authenticity , for his own inquiries at the papal archives had failed to turn up an official " registered " copy of the letter there . His failed attempt to locate a " registered " papal copy of the Libellus presumably suggested to Boniface the possibility that the document was spurious and had in fact not been authored by Pope Gregory I. 
 Boniface had other concerns about the wording of the Libellus . At least three versions of the Libellus were circulating on the Continent during Boniface 's lifetime , all of these within collections of canonical and penitential documents . Boniface is known to have encountered ( perhaps even helped produce ) at least one canon law collection — the Collectio canonum vetus Gallica — that included the " Q / A " version of the Libellus , and it is also possible that he knew of the Collectio Bobiensis , with its appended " Capitula " version of the Libellus . A third version of the Libellus known as the " Letter " version may also have been known to Boniface . There are slight differences in wording and chapter order between the three versions , but for the most part they are the same , with one important exception : the " Q / A " and " Capitula " versions contain a passage that discusses how closely a man and a woman can be related before they are prohibited from being married ; the " Letter " version omits this passage . According to Karl Ubl and Michael D. Elliot , the passage in the " Q / A " and " Capitula " versions is authentic , and its absence from the " Letter " version represents a later modification of the text probably made in the mid @-@ seventh century . The passage in the " Q / A " and " Capitula " versions has Gregory saying that those related within the second degree of kinship ( including siblings , parents and their children , first cousins , and nephews / nieces and their aunts / uncles ) are prohibited from marrying each other , but that church tradition sets no prohibition against marrying a more distant relation . However , Gregory used a method of reckoning degrees of kinship ( or consanguinity ) that was unfamiliar to many living in the mid @-@ eighth century . Ubl has shown that Gregory 's method of reckoning degrees of kinship was one that would come to be known as the " scriptural " or " canonical " method . Boniface , the papacy , and apparently most of Western Europe ca . 750 followed a different method of reckoning , known as the " Roman " method , whereby a restriction within the second degree merely precluded siblings from marrying each other and parents from marrying their children , and implicitly allowed all unions beyond these . Thus , Boniface came to misunderstand this passage in the Libellus to mean that Gregory permitted first cousins to marry each other and nephews / nieces to marry their aunts / uncles — an opinion that Boniface ( rightly ) believed Gregory would not have held . 
 Boniface seems to have been unable to correct his misunderstanding of the meaning of the Libellus on this point . But this was perhaps due as much to a general interpretative error prevailing among eighth @-@ century readers of the text , as to the fact that Boniface 's authorities so frequently conflicted on this subject . In a long series of letters written to subsequent bishops of Rome — Pope Gregory II , Pope Gregory III , Pope Zachary — Boniface periodically brought up the issue of consanguinity and marriage , and each time he received a slightly different answer as to what was permitted and what was prohibited . Suspicion about the authenticity of the Libellus seems to have ended with Boniface 's death in 754 , though misinterpretation of its chapter on consanguinity continued for long after that . Nevertheless , no medieval authority except Boniface is on record as ever having questioning the authenticity of the Libellus and its marriage chapter . In fact , there arose a vigorous tradition of forged documents that defended the authenticity of the Libellus and attempted to explain why it contained the supposed lax ruling on marriage . 
 Boniface 's doubts about the Libellus were revived in the twentieth century by several modern historians . In 1941 Suso Brechter made a study of the historical sources for Gregory the Great 's Anglo @-@ Saxon mission . Among other things , Brechter attempted to prove that the Libellus was an eighth @-@ century forgery by Nothhelm . Brechter thought that the Libellus contained too much that was only relevant in terms of eighth @-@ century theological concerns . He argued that the forgery was completed in 731 and was foisted on Bede by Nothhelm in that year , making it a late insertion into Bede 's Historia . Brechter 's work did not attract much scholarly interest until 1959 , when Margaret Deanesly and Paul Grosjean wrote a joint journal article refuting or modifying most of Brechter 's arguments about the Libellus . Deanesly and Grosjean thought that Nothhelm had taken genuine Gregorian letters , added information on theological questions current at Canterbury , and presented the finished product to Bede as a " Gregorian " work . They further argued that Nothhelm did this in two stages , a first stage that they named the Capitula version , which they considered was best exemplified by a manuscript now in Copenhagen ; and a second version , which was rearranged in the form of questions paired with answers . In their view , this second version was the work sent to Bede by Nothhelm . The upshot of Deanesly and Grosjean 's research was that the Libellus was quasi @-@ authentic : while not a genuine work of Gregory I , it was nevertheless based extensively on authentic Gregorian writings . 
 Deanesly and Grosjean 's thesis was successfully refuted by the textual work of Paul Meyvaert , following whose work most scholars have come to accept the Libellus as a genuine letter of Gregory . The only portion of the Libellus that Meyvaert could not accept as genuine was the chapter on marriage , which Meyvaert ( like Boniface before him ) believed could not have been written by Gregory . Meyvaert therefore pronounced this chapter to be the single interpolation in an otherwise genuine document . All subsequent scholarship up until the year 2008 has followed him on this point . In 2008 Ubl not only showed that the marriage chapter was in fact authored by Gregory , but he also explained exactly how it was the Boniface and later historians came to misunderstand its meaning . 
 = Mary II of England = 
 Mary II ( 30 April 1662 – 28 December 1694 ) was joint monarch of England , Scotland , and Ireland with her husband and first cousin , William of Orange , from 1689 until her death . William and Mary , both Protestants , became king and queen regnant following the Glorious Revolution , which resulted in the adoption of the English Bill of Rights and the deposition of her Roman Catholic father , James II and VII . William became sole ruler upon her death in 1694 . Popular histories usually refer to their joint reign as that of " William and Mary " . 
 Mary wielded less power than William when he was in England , ceding most of her authority to him , though he heavily relied on her . She did , however , act alone when William was engaged in military campaigns abroad , proving herself to be a powerful , firm , and effective ruler . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mary , born at St. James 's Palace in London on 30 April 1662 , was the eldest daughter of James , Duke of York ( the future James II & VII ) , and his first wife , Anne Hyde . Mary 's uncle was King Charles II , who ruled the three kingdoms of England , Scotland and Ireland ; her maternal grandfather , Edward Hyde , 1st Earl of Clarendon , served for a lengthy period as Charles 's chief advisor . She was baptised into the Anglican faith in the Chapel Royal at St. James 's , and was named after her ancestor , Mary , Queen of Scots . Her godparents included her father 's cousin , Prince Rupert of the Rhine . Although her mother bore eight children , all except Mary and her younger sister Anne died very young , and King Charles II had no legitimate children . Consequently , for most of her childhood , Mary was second in line to the throne after her father . 
 The Duke of York converted to Roman Catholicism in 1668 or 1669 , but Mary and Anne were brought up as Anglicans , pursuant to the command of Charles II . They were moved to their own establishment at Richmond Palace , where they were raised by their governess Lady Frances Villiers , with only occasional visits to see their parents at St. James 's or their grandfather Lord Clarendon at Twickenham . Mary 's education , from private tutors , was largely restricted to music , dance , drawing , French , and religious instruction . Her mother died in 1671 , and her father remarried in 1673 , taking as his second wife Mary of Modena , a Catholic who was only four years older than Mary . 
 From about the age of nine until her marriage , Mary wrote passionate letters to an older girl , Frances Apsley , the daughter of courtier Sir Allen Apsley . In time , Frances became uncomfortable with the correspondence , and replied more formally . At the age of fifteen , Mary became betrothed to her cousin , the Protestant Stadtholder of Holland , William of Orange . William was the son of the King 's late sister , Mary , Princess Royal , and thus fourth in the line of succession after James , Mary , and Anne . At first , Charles II opposed the alliance with the Dutch ruler — he preferred that Mary wed the heir to the French throne , the Dauphin Louis , thus allying his realms with Catholic France and strengthening the odds of an eventual Catholic successor in Britain ; but later , under pressure from Parliament and with a coalition with the Catholic French no longer politically favourable , he approved the proposed union . The Duke of York agreed to the marriage , after pressure from chief minister Lord Danby and the King , who incorrectly assumed that it would improve James 's popularity among Protestants . When James told Mary that she was to marry her cousin , " she wept all that afternoon and all the following day " . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 William and a tearful Mary were married in St. James 's Palace by Bishop Henry Compton on 4 November 1677 . Mary accompanied her husband on a rough sea crossing back to the Netherlands later that month , after a delay of two weeks caused by bad weather . Rotterdam was inaccessible because of ice , and they were forced to land at the small village of Ter <unk> , and walk through the frosty countryside until met by coaches to take them to Huis <unk> . On 14 December , they made a formal entry to The Hague in a grand procession . 
 Mary 's animated and personable nature made her popular with the Dutch people , and her marriage to a Protestant prince was popular in Britain . She became devoted to her husband , but he was often on campaign , which led to Mary 's family supposing him to be cold and neglectful . Within months of the marriage Mary was pregnant ; however , on a visit to her husband at the fortified city of Breda , she suffered a miscarriage , which may have permanently impaired her ability to have children . She suffered further bouts of illness that may have been miscarriages in mid @-@ 1678 , early 1679 , and early 1680 . Her childlessness would be the greatest source of unhappiness in her life . 
 From May 1684 , the King 's illegitimate son , James Scott , Duke of Monmouth , lived in the Netherlands , where he was fêted by William and Mary . Monmouth was viewed as a rival to the Duke of York , and as a potential Protestant heir who could supplant James in the line of succession . William , however , did not consider him a viable alternative and correctly assumed that Monmouth had insufficient support . 
 = = James 's reign = = 
 Upon the death of Charles II without legitimate issue in February 1685 , the Duke of York became king as James II in England and Ireland and James VII in Scotland . Mary was playing cards when her husband informed her of her father 's accession , and that she was heir presumptive . When Charles 's illegitimate son Monmouth assembled an invasion force at Amsterdam , and sailed for Britain , William informed James of Monmouth 's departure , and ordered English regiments in the Low Countries to return to Britain . To William 's relief , Monmouth was defeated , captured and executed , but both he and Mary were dismayed by James 's subsequent actions . 
 James had a controversial religious policy ; his attempt to grant freedom of religion to non @-@ Anglicans by suspending acts of Parliament by royal decree was not well received . Mary considered such action illegal , and her chaplain expressed this view in a letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury , William Sancroft , on her behalf . She was further dismayed when James refused to help when the Catholic King of France , Louis XIV , invaded Orange and persecuted Huguenot refugees there . In an attempt to damage William , James encouraged his daughter 's staff to inform her that William was having an affair with Elizabeth Villiers . Acting on the information , Mary waited outside Villiers 's room and caught her husband leaving it late at night . William denied adultery , and Mary apparently believed and forgave him . Possibly , Villiers and William were not meeting as lovers but to exchange diplomatic intelligence . Mary 's staff was dismissed and sent back to Britain . 
 = = Glorious Revolution = = 
 Disgruntled Protestant politicians and noblemen were in contact with Mary 's husband as early as 1686 . After James took the step of forcing Anglican clergymen to read the Declaration of Indulgence — the proclamation granting religious liberty to Catholics and dissenters — from their churches in May 1688 , his popularity plunged further . Alarm amongst Protestants increased when his wife , Mary of Modena , gave birth to a son — James Francis Edward — in June 1688 , for the son would , unlike Mary and Anne , be raised a Roman Catholic . Some charged that the boy was " supposititious " , having been secretly smuggled into the Queen 's room in a bed @-@ warming pan as a substitute for her stillborn baby . Seeking information , Mary sent a pointed list of questions to her sister , Anne , regarding the circumstances of the birth . Anne 's reply , and continued gossip , seemed to confirm Mary 's suspicions that the child was not her natural brother , and that her father was conspiring to secure a Catholic succession . 
 On 30 June , the " Immortal Seven " secretly requested William — then in the Netherlands with Mary — to come to England with an army to depose James . At first , William was reluctant ; possibly he was jealous of his wife 's position as the heiress to the English Crown and feared she would become more powerful than he was . According to Gilbert Burnet , however , Mary convinced her husband that she did not care for political power , and told him " she would be no more but his wife , and that she would do all that lay in her power to make him King for life " . She would , she assured him , always obey her husband as she had promised to do in her marriage vows . 
 William agreed to invade and issued a declaration which referred to James 's newborn son as the " pretended Prince of Wales " . He also gave a list of grievances of the English people and stated that his proposed expedition was for the sole purpose of having " a free and lawful Parliament assembled " . William and the Dutch army , without Mary who stayed behind in the Netherlands , finally landed on 5 November 1688 , having been turned back by storms in October . The disaffected English Army and Navy went over to William , and on 11 December the defeated King James attempted to flee , but was intercepted . A second attempt at flight , on 23 December , was successful ; William deliberately allowed James to escape to France , where he lived in exile until his death . 
 Mary was upset by the circumstances surrounding the deposition of her father , and was torn between concern for him and duty to her husband , but was convinced that her husband 's actions , however unpleasant , were necessary to " save the Church and State " . When Mary travelled to England after the New Year , she wrote of her " secret joy " at returning to her homeland , " but that was soon checked with the consideration of my father 's misfortunes " . William ordered her to appear cheerful on their triumphant arrival in London . As a result , she was criticised for appearing cold to her father 's plight . James , too , wrote a diatribe against her criticising her disloyalty , an action which deeply affected the pious Mary . 
 In January 1689 , a Convention Parliament summoned by the Prince of Orange assembled , and much discussion relating to the appropriate course of action ensued . A party led by Lord Danby held that Mary should be sole monarch , as the rightful hereditary heir , while William and his supporters were adamant that a husband could not be subject to his wife . William wished to reign as a king , rather than function as a mere consort of a queen . For her part , Mary did not wish to be queen regnant , believing that women should defer to their husbands , and " knowing my heart is not made for a kingdom and my inclination leads me to a retired quiet life " . 
 On 13 February 1689 , Parliament passed the Declaration of Right , in which it deemed that James , by attempting to flee on 11 December 1688 , had abdicated the government of the realm , and that the Throne had thereby become vacant . Parliament offered the Crown not to James 's eldest son , James Francis Edward ( who would have been the heir apparent under normal circumstances ) , but to William and Mary as joint sovereigns . The only precedent for a joint monarchy dated from the sixteenth century : when Queen Mary I married Philip of Spain , it was agreed that the latter would take the title of king , but only during his wife 's lifetime , and restrictions were placed on his power . William , however , would be king even after his wife 's death , and " the sole and full exercise of the regal power [ would be ] executed by the said Prince of Orange in the names of the said Prince and Princess during their joint lives . " The declaration was later extended to exclude not only James and his heirs ( other than Anne ) from the throne , but all Catholics , since " it hath been found by experience that it is inconsistent with the safety and welfare of this Protestant kingdom to be governed by a papist prince " . 
 The Bishop of London , Henry Compton , crowned William and Mary together at Westminster Abbey on 11 April 1689 . Normally , the Archbishop of Canterbury performs coronations , but the incumbent Archbishop , William Sancroft , although an Anglican , refused to recognise the validity of James II 's removal . Neither William nor Mary enjoyed the ceremony ; she thought it " all vanity " and William called it " Popish " . On the same day , the Convention of the Estates of Scotland — which was much more divided than the English Parliament — finally declared that James was no longer King of Scotland , that " no Papist can be King or Queen of this Realm " , that William and Mary would be joint sovereigns , and that William would exercise sole and full power . The following day , they were proclaimed king and queen in Edinburgh . They took the Scottish coronation oath in London on 11 May . 
 Even after the declaration , there was still substantial support for James in Scotland . Viscount Dundee raised an army in the Scottish Highlands and won a convincing victory at Killiecrankie on 27 July . The huge losses suffered by Dundee 's troops , however , coupled with his fatal wounding at the start of the battle , served to remove the only effective resistance to William and the uprising was quickly crushed , suffering a resounding defeat the next month at the Battle of Dunkeld . 
 = = Reign = = 
 In December 1689 , Parliament passed one of the most important constitutional documents in English history , the Bill of Rights . This measure — which restated and confirmed many provisions of the earlier Declaration of Right — established restrictions on the royal prerogative ; it declared , among other things , that the Sovereign could not suspend laws passed by Parliament , levy taxes without parliamentary consent , infringe the right to petition , raise a standing army during peacetime without parliamentary consent , deny the right to bear arms to Protestant subjects , unduly interfere with parliamentary elections , punish members of either House of Parliament for anything said during debates , require excessive bail , or inflict cruel or unusual punishments . The Bill of Rights also confirmed the succession to the throne . Following the death of either William III or Mary II , the other was to continue to reign . Next in the line of succession would be any children of the couple , to be followed by Mary 's sister Anne and her children . Last in the line of succession stood any children William III might have had from any subsequent marriage . 
 From 1690 onwards , William was often absent from England on campaign , each year generally from the spring until the autumn . In 1690 , he fought Jacobites ( who supported James ) in Ireland , and whilst her husband was away , Mary administered the government of the realm with the advice of a nine @-@ member Cabinet Council . She was not keen to assume power and felt " deprived of all that was dear to me in the person of my husband , left among those that were perfect strangers to me : my sister of a humour so reserved that I could have little comfort from her . " Anne had quarrelled with William and Mary over money , and the relationship between the two sisters had soured . William had crushed the Irish Jacobites by 1692 , but he continued with campaigns abroad in order to wage war against France in the Netherlands . When her husband was away , Mary acted on her own if his advice was not available ; whilst he was in England , Mary completely refrained from interfering in political matters , as had been agreed in the Declaration and Bill of Rights , and as she preferred . She proved a firm ruler , ordering the arrest of her own uncle , Henry Hyde , 2nd Earl of Clarendon , for plotting to restore James II to the throne . In January 1692 , the influential John Churchill , 1st Earl of Marlborough , was dismissed on similar charges ; the dismissal somewhat diminished her popularity and further harmed her relationship with her sister Anne ( who was strongly influenced by Churchill 's wife , Sarah ) . Anne appeared at court with Sarah , obviously supporting the disgraced Churchill , which led to Mary angrily demanding that Anne dismiss Sarah and vacate her lodgings . Mary fell ill with a fever in April , and missed Sunday church service for the first time in 12 years . She also failed to visit Anne , who was suffering a difficult labour . After Mary 's recovery and the death of Anne 's baby soon after it was born , Mary did visit her sister , but chose the opportunity to berate Anne for her friendship with Sarah . The sisters never saw each other again . Marlborough was arrested and imprisoned , but then released after his accuser was revealed to be an impostor . Mary recorded in her journal that the breach between the sisters was a punishment from God for the " irregularity " of the Revolution . She was extremely devout , and attended prayers at least twice a day . Many of her proclamations focus on combating licentiousness , <unk> and vice . She often participated in the affairs of the Church — all matters of ecclesiastical patronage passed through her hands . On the death of Archbishop of Canterbury John Tillotson in December 1694 , Mary was keen to appoint Bishop of Worcester Edward Stillingfleet to the vacancy , but William overruled her and the post went to Bishop of Lincoln Thomas <unk> . 
 Mary was tall ( 5 foot 11 inches ; 180 cm ) and apparently fit ; she would regularly walk between her palaces at Whitehall and Kensington . In late 1694 , however , she contracted smallpox . She sent away anyone who had not previously had the disease , to prevent the spread of infection . Anne , who was once again pregnant , sent Mary a letter saying she would run any risk to see her sister again , but the offer was declined by Mary 's groom of the stole , the Countess of Derby . Mary died at Kensington Palace shortly after midnight on the morning of 28 December . William , who had grown increasingly to rely on Mary , was devastated by her death , and told Burnet that " from being the happiest " he was " now going to be the <unk> creature on earth " . While the Jacobites considered her death divine retribution for breaking the fifth commandment ( " honour thy father " ) , she was widely mourned in Britain . During a cold winter , in which the Thames froze , her embalmed body lay in state in Banqueting House , Whitehall . On 5 March , she was buried at Westminster Abbey . Her funeral service was the first of any royal attended by all the members of both Houses of Parliament . For the ceremony , composer Henry Purcell wrote Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mary endowed the College of William and Mary ( in the present day Williamsburg , Virginia ) in 1693 , supported Thomas Bray , who founded the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge , and was instrumental in the foundation of the Royal Hospital for Seamen , Greenwich , after the Anglo @-@ Dutch victory at the Battle of La Hogue . She is credited with influencing garden design at Het Loo and Hampton Court Palaces , and with popularising blue and white porcelain and the keeping of goldfish as pets . 
 Mary was depicted by Jacobites as an unfaithful daughter who destroyed her father for her own and her husband 's gain . In the early years of their reign , she was often seen as completely under the spell of her husband , but after she had temporarily governed alone during his absences abroad , she was portrayed as capable and confident . Nahum Tate 's A Present for the Ladies ( 1692 ) compared her to Queen Elizabeth I. Her modesty and diffidence were praised in works such as A Dialogue Concerning Women ( 1691 ) by William Walsh , which compared her to Cincinnatus , the Roman general who took on a great task when called to do so , but then willingly abandoned power . 
 A week before her death , Mary went through her papers , weeding out some which were burnt , but her journal survives , as do her letters to William and to Frances Apsley . The Jacobites lambasted her , but the assessment of her character that came down to posterity was largely the vision of Mary as a dutiful , submissive wife , who assumed power reluctantly , exercised it with considerable ability when necessary , and willingly deferred it to her husband . 
 = = = In film and television = = = 
 Mary is portrayed by : 
 Lisa <unk> in the 1969 mini @-@ series The First Churchills 
 Sarah Crowden in the 1992 film Orlando 
 Rebecca Front in the 1995 film England , My England 
 Victoria Wood in the 2005 film The League of Gentlemen 's Apocalypse 
 = = Title , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 30 April 1662 – 13 February 1689 : Her Highness The Lady Mary 
 4 November 1677 – 13 February 1689 : Her Highness The Princess of Orange 
 ( England ) 13 February 1689 – 28 December 1694 : Her Majesty The Queen 
 ( Scotland ) 11 April 1689 – 28 December 1694 : Her Majesty The Queen 
 The joint style of William III and Mary II was " William and Mary , by the Grace of God , King and Queen of England , France and Ireland , Defenders of the Faith , etc . " when they ascended the Throne . From 11 April 1689 — when the Estates of Scotland recognised them as Sovereigns — the royal couple used the style " William and Mary , by the Grace of God , King and Queen of England , Scotland , France and Ireland , Defenders of the Faith , etc . " . 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 The coat of arms used by the King and Queen were : Quarterly , I and IV Grandquarterly , Azure three fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis Or ( for France ) and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or ( for England ) ; II Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory @-@ counter @-@ flory Gules ( for Scotland ) ; III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent ( for Ireland ) ; overall an escutcheon Azure billetty a lion rampant Or ( for the House of Orange @-@ Nassau ) . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 = Stephen Crane = 
 Stephen Crane ( November 1 , 1871 – June 5 , 1900 ) was an American poet , novelist , and short story writer . Prolific throughout his short life , he wrote notable works in the Realist tradition as well as early examples of American Naturalism and Impressionism . He is recognized by modern critics as one of the most innovative writers of his generation . 
 The ninth surviving child of Protestant Methodist parents , Crane began writing at the age of four and had published several articles by the age of 16 . Having little interest in university studies , he left college in 1891 to work as a reporter and writer . Crane 's first novel was the 1893 Bowery tale Maggie : A Girl of the Streets , generally considered by critics to be the first work of American literary Naturalism . He won international acclaim in 1895 for his Civil War novel The Red Badge of Courage , which he wrote without having any battle experience . 
 In 1896 , Crane endured a highly publicized scandal after appearing as a witness in the trial of a suspected prostitute , an acquaintance named Dora Clark . Late that year he accepted an offer to travel to Cuba as a war correspondent . As he waited in Jacksonville , Florida , for passage , he met Cora Taylor , with whom he began a lasting relationship . En route to Cuba , Crane 's vessel the SS Commodore , sank off the coast of Florida , leaving him and others adrift for 30 hours in a dinghy . Crane described the ordeal in " The Open Boat " . During the final years of his life , he covered conflicts in Greece ( accompanied by Cora , recognized as the first woman war correspondent ) and later lived in England with her . He was befriended by writers such as Joseph Conrad and H. G. Wells . Plagued by financial difficulties and ill health , Crane died of tuberculosis in a Black Forest sanatorium in Germany at the age of 28 . 
 At the time of his death , Crane was considered an important figure in American literature . After he was nearly forgotten for two decades , critics revived interest in his life and work . Crane 's writing is characterized by vivid intensity , distinctive dialects , and irony . Common themes involve fear , spiritual crises and social isolation . Although recognized primarily for The Red Badge of Courage , which has become an American classic , Crane is also known for his poetry , journalism , and short stories such as " The Open Boat " , " The Blue Hotel " , " The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky " , and The Monster . His writing made a deep impression on 20th @-@ century writers , most prominent among them Ernest Hemingway , and is thought to have inspired the Modernists and the Imagists . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Stephen Crane was born on November 1 , 1871 , in Newark , New Jersey , to Jonathan Townley Crane , a minister in the Methodist Episcopal church , and Mary Helen Peck Crane , daughter of a clergyman , George Peck . He was the fourteenth and last child born to the couple . At 45 , Helen Crane had suffered the early deaths of her previous four children , each of whom died within one year of birth . Nicknamed " Stevie " by the family , he joined eight surviving brothers and sisters — Mary Helen , George Peck , Jonathan Townley , William Howe , Agnes Elizabeth , Edmund <unk> , Wilbur Fiske , and Luther . 
 The Cranes were descended from Jaspar Crane , a founder of New Haven Colony , who had migrated there from England in 1639 . Stephen was named for a putative founder of Elizabethtown , New Jersey , who had , according to family tradition , come from England or Wales in 1665 , as well as his great @-@ great @-@ grandfather Stephen Crane ( 1709 – 1780 ) , a Revolutionary War patriot who served as New Jersey delegate to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia . Crane later wrote that his father , Dr. Crane , " was a great , fine , simple mind , " who had written numerous tracts on theology . Although his mother was a popular spokeswoman for the Woman 's Christian Temperance Union and a highly religious woman , Crane wrote that he did not believe " she was as narrow as most of her friends or family . " The young Stephen was raised primarily by his sister Agnes , who was 15 years his senior . The family moved to Port Jervis , New York , in 1876 , where Dr. Crane became the pastor of Drew Methodist Church , a position that he retained until his death . 
 As a child , Stephen was often sickly and afflicted by constant colds . When the boy was almost two , his father wrote in his diary that his youngest son became " so sick that we are anxious about him . " Despite his fragile nature , Crane was an intelligent child who taught himself to read before the age of four . His first known inquiry , recorded by his father , dealt with writing ; at the age of three , while imitating his brother Townley 's writing , he asked his mother , " how do you spell O ? " In December 1879 , Crane wrote a poem about wanting a dog for Christmas . Entitled " I 'd Rather Have – " , it is his first surviving poem . Stephen was not regularly enrolled in school until January 1880 , but he had no difficulty in completing two grades in six weeks . Recalling this feat , he wrote that it " sounds like the lie of a fond mother at a <unk> , but I do remember that I got ahead very fast and that father was very pleased with me . " 
 Dr. Crane died on February 16 , 1880 , at the age of 60 ; Stephen was eight years old . Some 1 @,@ 400 people mourned Dr. Crane at his funeral , more than double the size of his congregation . After her husband 's death , Mrs. Crane moved to Roseville , near Newark , leaving Stephen in the care of his older brother Edmund , with whom the young boy lived with cousins in Sussex County . He next lived with his brother William , a lawyer , in Port Jervis for several years . 
 His older sister Helen took him to Asbury Park to be with their brother Townley and his wife , Fannie . Townley was a professional journalist ; he headed the Long Branch department of both the New @-@ York Tribune and the Associated Press , and also served as editor of the Asbury Park Shore Press . Agnes , another Crane sister , joined the siblings in New Jersey . She took a position at Asbury Park 's intermediate school and moved in with Helen to care for the young Stephen . 
 Within a couple of years , the Crane family suffered more losses . First , Townley and his wife lost their two young children . His wife Fannie died of Bright 's disease in November 1883 . Agnes Crane became ill and died on June 10 , 1884 , of meningitis at the age of 28 . 
 = = = Schooling = = = 
 Crane wrote his first known story , " Uncle Jake and the Bell Handle " , when he was 14 . In late 1885 , he enrolled at Pennington Seminary , a ministry @-@ focused coeducational boarding school 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of Trenton . His father had been principal there from 1849 to 1858 . Soon after her youngest son left for school , Mrs. Crane began suffering what the Asbury Park Shore Press reported as " a temporary aberration of the mind . " She had apparently recovered by early 1886 , but later that year , her son , 23 @-@ year @-@ old Luther Crane , died after falling in front of an oncoming train while working as a flagman for the Erie Railroad . It was the fourth death in six years among Stephen 's immediate family . 
 After two years , Crane left Pennington for Claverack College , a quasi @-@ military school . He later looked back on his time at Claverack as " the happiest period of my life although I was not aware of it . " A classmate remembered him as a highly literate but erratic student , lucky to pass examinations in math and science , and yet " far in advance of his fellow students in his knowledge of History and Literature " , his favorite subjects . While he held an impressive record on the drill field and baseball diamond , Crane generally did not excel in the classroom . Not having a middle name , as was customary among other students , he took to signing his name " Stephen T. Crane " in order " to win recognition as a regular fellow " . Crane was seen as friendly , but also moody and rebellious . He sometimes skipped class in order to play baseball , a game in which he starred as catcher . He was also greatly interested in the school 's military training program . He rose rapidly in the ranks of the student battalion . One classmate described him as " indeed physically attractive without being handsome " , but he was aloof , reserved and not generally popular at Claverack . Although academically weak , Crane gained experience at Claverack that provided background ( and likely some anecdotes from the Civil War veterans on the staff ) that proved useful when he came to write The Red Badge of Courage . 
 In mid @-@ 1888 , Crane became his brother Townley 's assistant at a New Jersey shore news bureau , working there every summer until 1892 . Crane 's first publication under his byline was an article on the explorer Henry M. Stanley 's famous quest to find the Scottish missionary David Livingstone in Africa . It appeared in the February 1890 Claverack College Vidette . Within a few months , Crane was persuaded by his family to forgo a military career and transfer to Lafayette College in Easton , Pennsylvania , in order to pursue a mining engineering degree . He registered at Lafayette on September 12 , and promptly became involved in extracurricular activities ; he took up baseball again and joined the largest fraternity , Delta Upsilon . He also joined both rival literary societies , named for ( George ) Washington and ( Benjamin ) Franklin . Crane infrequently attended classes and ended the semester with grades for four of the seven courses he had taken . 
 After one semester , Crane transferred to Syracuse University , where he enrolled as a non @-@ degree candidate in the College of Liberal Arts . He roomed in the Delta Upsilon fraternity house and joined the baseball team . Attending just one class ( English Literature ) during the middle trimester , he remained in residence while taking no courses in the third semester . 
 Concentrating on his writing , Crane began to experiment with tone and style while trying out different subjects . He published his fictional story , " Great Bugs of Onondaga , " simultaneously in the Syracuse Daily Standard and the New York Tribune . Declaring college " a waste of time " , Crane decided to become a full @-@ time writer and reporter . He attended a Delta Upsilon chapter meeting on June 12 , 1891 , but shortly afterward left college for good . 
 = = = Full @-@ time writer = = = 
 In the summer of 1891 , Crane often camped with friends in the nearby area of Sullivan County , New York , where his brother Edmund owned a house . He used this area as the geographic setting for several short stories , which were posthumously published in a collection under the title Stephen Crane : Sullivan County Tales and Sketches . Crane showed two of these works to Tribune editor Willis Fletcher Johnson , a friend of the family , who accepted them for the publication . " Hunting Wild Dogs " and " The Last of the Mohicans " were the first of fourteen unsigned Sullivan County sketches and tales that were published in the Tribune between February and July 1892 . Crane also showed Johnson an early draft of his first novel , Maggie : A Girl of the Streets . 
 Later that summer , Crane met and befriended author Hamlin Garland , who had been lecturing locally on American literature and the expressive arts ; on August 17 he gave a talk on novelist William Dean Howells , which Crane wrote up for the Tribune . Garland became a mentor for and champion of the young writer , whose intellectual honesty impressed him . Their relationship suffered in later years , however , because Garland disapproved of Crane 's alleged immorality , related to his living with a woman married to another man . 
 Stephen moved into his brother Edmund 's house in Lakeview , a suburb of Paterson , New Jersey , in the fall of 1891 . From here he made frequent trips into New York City , writing and reporting particularly on its impoverished tenement districts . Crane focused particularly on The Bowery , a small and once prosperous neighborhood in the southern part of Manhattan . After the Civil War , Bowery shops and mansions had given way to saloons , dance halls , brothels and <unk> , all of which Crane frequented . He later said he did so for research . He was attracted to the human nature found in the slums , considering it " open and plain , with nothing hidden " . Believing nothing honest and unsentimental had been written about the Bowery , Crane became determined to do so himself ; this was the setting of his first novel . On December 7 , 1891 , Crane 's mother died at the age of 64 , and the 20 @-@ year @-@ old appointed Edmund as his guardian . 
 Despite being frail , undernourished and suffering from a hacking cough , which did not prevent him from smoking cigarettes , in the spring of 1892 Crane began a romance with Lily Brandon Munroe , a married woman who was estranged from her husband . Although Munroe later said Crane " was not a handsome man " , she admired his " remarkable almond @-@ shaped gray eyes . " He begged her to elope with him , but her family opposed the match because Crane lacked money and prospects , and she declined . Their last meeting likely occurred in April 1898 , when he again asked her to run away with him and she again refused . 
 Between July 2 and September 11 , 1892 , Crane published at least ten news reports on Asbury Park affairs . Although a Tribune colleague stated that Crane " was not highly distinguished above any other boy of twenty who had gained a reputation for saying and writing bright things , " that summer his reporting took on a more skeptical , hypocrisy @-@ deflating tone . A storm of controversy erupted over a report he wrote on the Junior Order of United American Mechanics ' American Day Parade , entitled " Parades and Entertainments " . Published on August 21 , the report juxtaposes the " bronzed , slope @-@ shouldered , uncouth " marching men " <unk> with dust " and the spectators dressed in " summer gowns , lace parasols , tennis trousers , straw hats and indifferent smiles " . Believing they were being ridiculed , some <unk> marchers were outraged and wrote to the editor . The owner of the Tribune , Whitelaw Reid , was that year 's Republican vice @-@ presidential candidate , and this likely increased the sensitivity of the paper 's management to the issue . Although Townley wrote a piece for the Asbury Park Daily Press in his brother 's defense , the Tribune quickly apologized to its readers , calling Stephen Crane 's piece " a bit of random correspondence , passed inadvertently by the copy editor " . Hamlin Garland and biographer John Barry attested that Crane told them he had been dismissed by the Tribune , although Willis Fletcher Johnson later denied this . The paper did not publish any of Crane 's work after 1892 . 
 = = = Life in New York = = = 
 Crane struggled to make a living as a free @-@ lance writer , contributing sketches and feature articles to various New York newspapers . In October 1892 , he moved into a rooming house in Manhattan whose boarders were a group of medical students . During this time , he expanded or entirely reworked Maggie : A Girl of the Streets , which is about a girl who " blossoms in a mud @-@ puddle " and becomes a pitiful victim of circumstance . In the winter of 1893 , Crane took the manuscript of Maggie to Richard Watson Gilder , who rejected it for publication in The Century Magazine . 
 Crane decided to publish it privately , with money he had inherited from his mother . The novel was published in late February or early March 1893 by a small printing shop that usually printed medical books and religious tracts . The typewritten title page for the Library of Congress copyright application read simply : " A Girl of the Streets , / A Story of New York . / — By — / Stephen Crane . " The name " Maggie " was added to the title later . Crane used the pseudonym " Johnston Smith " for the novel 's initial publication , later telling friend and artist Corwin Knapp Linson that the nom de plume was the " commonest name I could think of . I had an editor friend named Johnson , and put in the " t " , and no one could find me in the mob of Smiths . " Hamlin Garland reviewed the work in the June 1893 issue of The Arena , calling it " the most truthful and <unk> study of the slums I have yet read , fragment though it is . " Despite this early praise , Crane became depressed and destitute from having spent $ 869 for 1 @,@ 100 copies of a novel that did not sell ; he ended up giving a hundred copies away . He would later remember " how I looked forward to publication and pictured the sensation I thought it would make . It fell flat . Nobody seemed to notice it or care for it ... Poor Maggie ! She was one of my first loves . " 
 In March 1893 , Crane spent hours lounging in Linson 's studio while having his portrait painted . He became fascinated with issues of the Century that were largely devoted to famous battles and military leaders from the Civil War . Frustrated with the dryly written stories , Crane stated , " I wonder that some of those fellows don 't tell how they felt in those scraps . They spout enough of what they did , but they 're as emotionless as rocks . " Crane returned to these magazines during subsequent visits to Linson 's studio , and eventually the idea of writing a war novel overtook him . He would later state that he " had been unconsciously working the detail of the story out through most of his boyhood " and had imagined " war stories ever since he was out of knickerbockers . " This novel would ultimately become The Red Badge of Courage . 
 From the beginning , Crane wished to show how it felt to be in a war by writing " a psychological portrayal of fear . " Conceiving his story from the point of view of a young private who is at first filled with boyish dreams of the glory of war and then quickly becomes disillusioned by war 's reality , Crane borrowed the private 's surname , " Fleming " , from his sister @-@ in @-@ law 's maiden name . He later said that the first paragraphs came to him with " every word in place , every comma , every period fixed . " Working mostly nights , he wrote from around midnight until four or five in the morning . Because he could not afford a typewriter , he wrote carefully in ink on legal @-@ sized paper , seldom crossing through or interlining a word . If he did change something , he would rewrite the whole page . 
 While working on his second novel , Crane remained prolific , concentrating on publishing stories to stave off poverty ; " An Experiment in Misery " , based on Crane 's experiences in the Bowery , was printed by the New York Press . He also wrote five or six poems a day . In early 1894 , he showed some of his poems , or " lines " as he called them , to Hamlin Garland , who said he read " some thirty in all " with " growing wonder . " Although Garland and William Dean Howells encouraged him to submit his poetry for publication , Crane 's free verse was too unconventional for most . After brief wrangling between poet and publisher , Copeland & Day accepted Crane 's first book of poems , The Black Riders and Other Lines , although it would not be published until after The Red Badge of Courage . He received a 10 percent royalty , and the publisher assured him that the book would be in a form " more severely classic than any book ever yet issued in America . " 
 In the spring of 1894 , Crane offered the finished manuscript of The Red Badge of Courage to McClure 's Magazine , which had become the foremost magazine for Civil War literature . While McClure 's delayed giving him an answer on his novel , they offered him an assignment writing about the Pennsylvania coal mines . " In the Depths of a Coal Mine " , a story with pictures by Linson , was syndicated by McClure 's in a number of newspapers , heavily edited . Crane was reportedly disgusted by the cuts , asking Linson : " Why the hell did they send me up there then ? Do they want the public to think the coal mines gilded ball @-@ rooms with the miners eating ice @-@ cream in boiled shirt @-@ fronts ? " 
 Sources report that following an encounter with a male prostitute that spring , Crane began a novel on the subject entitled Flowers of Asphalt , which he later abandoned . The manuscript has never been recovered . 
 After discovering that McClure 's could not afford to pay him , Crane took his war novel to Irving Bacheller of the Bacheller @-@ Johnson Newspaper Syndicate , which agreed to publish The Red Badge of Courage in serial form . Between the third and the ninth of December 1894 , The Red Badge of Courage was published in some half @-@ dozen newspapers in the United States . Although it was greatly cut for syndication , Bacheller attested to its causing a stir , saying " its quality [ was ] immediately felt and recognized . " The lead editorial in the Philadelphia Press of December 7 said that Crane " is a new name now and unknown , but everybody will be talking about him if he goes on as he has begun " . 
 = = = Travels and fame = = = 
 At the end of January 1895 , Crane left on what he called " a very long and circuitous newspaper trip " to the west . While writing feature articles for the Bacheller syndicate , he traveled to Saint Louis , Missouri , Nebraska , New Orleans , Galveston , Texas and then Mexico City . Irving Bacheller would later state that he " sent Crane to Mexico for new color " , which the author found in the form of Mexican slum life . Whereas he found the lower class in New York pitiful , he was impressed by the " superiority " of the Mexican peasants ' contentment and " even refuse [ d ] to pity them . " 
 Returning to New York five months later , Crane joined the Lantern ( alternately spelled " <unk> " or " <unk> " ) Club organized by a group of young writers and journalists . The Club , located on the roof of an old house on William Street near the Brooklyn Bridge , served as a drinking establishment of sorts and was decorated to look like a ship 's cabin . There Crane ate one good meal a day , although friends were troubled by his " constant smoking , too much coffee , lack of food and poor teeth " , as Nelson Greene put it . Living in near @-@ poverty and greatly anticipating the publication of his books , Crane began work on two more novels : The Third Violet and George 's Mother . 
 The Black Riders was published by Copeland & Day shortly before his return to New York in May , but it received mostly criticism , if not abuse , for the poems ' unconventional style and use of free verse . A piece in the Bookman called Crane " the Aubrey Beardsley of poetry , " and a commentator from the Chicago Daily Inter @-@ Ocean stated that " there is not a line of poetry from the opening to the closing page . Whitman 's Leaves of Grass were luminous in comparison . Poetic lunacy would be a better name for the book . " In June , the New York Tribune dismissed the book as " so much trash . " Crane was pleased that the book was " making some stir " . 
 In contrast to the reception for Crane 's poetry , The Red Badge of Courage was welcomed with acclaim after its publication by Appleton in September 1895 . For the next four months the book was in the top six on various bestseller lists around the country . It arrived on the literary scene " like a flash of lightning out of a clear winter sky " , according to H. L. Mencken , who was about 15 at the time . The novel also became popular in Britain ; Joseph Conrad , a future friend of Crane , wrote that the novel " detonated ... with the impact and force of a twelve @-@ inch shell charged with a very high explosive . " Appleton published two , possibly three , printings in 1895 and as many as eleven more in 1896 . Although some critics considered the work overly graphic and profane , it was widely heralded for its realistic portrayal of war and unique writing style . The Detroit Free Press declared that The Red Badge would give readers " so vivid a picture of the emotions and the horrors of the battlefield that you will pray your eyes may never look upon the reality . " 
 Wanting to capitalize on the success of The Red Badge , McClure Syndicate offered Crane a contract to write a series on Civil War battlefields . Because it was a wish of his to " visit the battlefield — which I was to describe — at the time of year when it was fought " , Crane agreed to take the assignment . Visiting battlefields in Northern Virginia , including Fredericksburg , he would later produce five more Civil War tales : " Three Miraculous Soldiers " , " The Veteran " , " An Indiana Campaign " , " An Episode of War " and The Little Regiment . 
 = = = Scandal = = = 
 At the age of 24 , Crane , who was reveling in his success , became involved in a highly publicized case involving a suspected prostitute named Dora Clark . At 2 a.m. on September 16 , 1896 , he escorted two chorus girls and Clark from New York City 's Broadway Garden , a popular " resort " where he had interviewed the women for a series he was writing . As Crane saw one woman safely to a streetcar , a plainclothes policeman named Charles Becker arrested the other two for solicitation ; Crane was threatened with arrest when he tried to interfere . One of the women was released after Crane confirmed her erroneous claim that she was his wife , but Clark was charged and taken to the precinct . Against the advice of the arresting sergeant , Crane made a statement confirming Dora Clark 's innocence , stating that " I only know that while with me she acted respectably , and that the policeman 's charge was false . " On the basis of Crane 's testimony , Clark was discharged . The media seized upon the story ; news spread to Philadelphia , Boston and beyond , with papers focusing on Crane 's courage . The Stephen Crane story , as it became known , soon became a source for ridicule ; the Chicago Dispatch in particular quipped that " Stephen Crane is respectfully informed that association with women in scarlet is not necessarily a ' Red Badge of Courage ' " . 
 A couple of weeks after her trial , Clark pressed charges of false arrest against the officer who had arrested her . The next day , the officer physically attacked Clark in the presence of witnesses for having brought charges against him . Crane , who initially went briefly to Philadelphia to escape the pressure of publicity , returned to New York to give testimony at Becker 's trial despite advice given to him from Theodore Roosevelt , who was Police Commissioner at the time and a new acquaintance of Crane . The defense targeted Crane : police raided his apartment and interviewed people who knew him , trying to find incriminating evidence in order to lessen the effect of his testimony . A vigorous cross @-@ examination took place that sought to portray Crane as a man of dubious morals ; while the prosecution proved that he frequented brothels , Crane claimed this was merely for research purposes . After the trial ended on October 16 , the arresting officer was exonerated , but Crane 's reputation was ruined . 
 = = = Cora Taylor and the Commodore shipwreck = = = 
 Given $ 700 in Spanish gold by the Bacheller @-@ Johnson syndicate to work as a war correspondent in Cuba as the Spanish – American War was pending , the 25 @-@ year @-@ old Crane left New York on November 27 , 1896 , on a train bound for Jacksonville , Florida . Upon arrival in Jacksonville , he registered at the St. James Hotel under the alias of Samuel Carleton to maintain anonymity while seeking passage to Cuba . While waiting for a boat , he toured the city and visited the local brothels . Within days he met 31 @-@ year @-@ old Cora Taylor , proprietor of the downtown bawdy house Hotel de Dream . Born into a respectable Boston family , Taylor ( whose legal name was Cora Ethel Stewart ) had already had two brief marriages ; her first husband , Vinton Murphy , divorced her on grounds of adultery . In 1889 , she had married British Captain Donald William Stewart . She left him in 1892 for another man , but was still legally married . By the time Crane arrived , Taylor had been in Jacksonville for two years . She lived a bohemian lifestyle , owned a hotel of assignation , and was a well @-@ known and respected local figure . The two spent much time together while Crane awaited his departure . He was finally cleared to leave for the Cuban port of Cienfuegos on New Year 's Eve aboard the SS Commodore . 
 The ship sailed from Jacksonville with 27 or 28 men and a cargo of supplies and ammunition for the Cuban rebels . On the St. Johns River and less than 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Jacksonville , Commodore struck a sandbar in a dense fog and damaged its hull . Although towed off the sandbar the following day , it was beached again in Mayport and again damaged . A leak began in the boiler room that evening and , as a result of malfunctioning water pumps , the ship came to a standstill about 16 miles ( 26 km ) from Mosquito Inlet . As the ship took on more water , Crane described the engine room as resembling " a scene at this time taken from the middle kitchen of <unk> . " Commodore 's lifeboats were lowered in the early hours of the morning on January 2 , 1897 and the ship ultimately sank at 7 a.m. Crane was one of the last to leave the ship in a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) dinghy . In an ordeal that he recounted in the short story " The Open Boat " , Crane and three other men ( including the ship 's Captain ) floundered off the coast of Florida for a day and a half before trying to land the dinghy at Daytona Beach . The small boat overturned in the surf , forcing the exhausted men to swim to shore ; one of them died . Having lost the gold given to him for his journey , Crane wired Cora Taylor for help . She traveled to Daytona and returned to Jacksonville with Crane the next day , only four days after he had left on the Commodore . 
 The disaster was reported on the front pages of newspapers across the country . Rumors that the ship had been sabotaged were widely circulated but never substantiated . Portrayed favorably and heroically by the press , Crane emerged from the ordeal with his reputation enhanced , if not restored , after the battering he had received in the Dora Clark affair . Meanwhile , Crane 's affair with Taylor blossomed . 
 Three seasons of archaeological investigation were conducted in 2002 @-@ 04 to examine and document the exposed remains of a wreck near Ponce Inlet , FL conjectured to be that of the SS Commodore . The collected data , and other accumulated evidence , finally substantiated the identification of the Commodore beyond a reasonable doubt . 
 = = = Greco @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 Despite contentment in Jacksonville and the need for rest after his ordeal , Crane became restless . He left Jacksonville on January 11 for New York City , where he applied for a passport to Cuba , Mexico and the West Indies . Spending three weeks in New York , he completed " The Open Boat " and periodically visited Port Jervis to see family . By this time , however , blockades had formed along the Florida coast as tensions rose with Spain , and Crane concluded that he would never be able to travel to Cuba . He sold " The Open Boat " to Scribner 's for $ 300 in early March . Determined to work as a war correspondent , Crane signed on with William Randolph Hearst 's New York Journal to cover the impending Greco @-@ Turkish conflict . He brought along Taylor , who had sold the Hotel de Dream in order to follow him . 
 On March 20 , they sailed first to England , where Crane was warmly received . They arrived in Athens in early April ; between April 17 ( when Turkey declared war on Greece ) and April 22 , Crane wrote his first published report of the war , " An Impression of the ' Concert ' " . When he left for Epirus in the northwest , Taylor remained in Athens , where she became the Greek war 's first woman war correspondent . She wrote under the pseudonym " Imogene Carter " for the New York Journal , a job that Crane had secured for her . They wrote frequently , traveling throughout the country separately and together . The first large battle that Crane witnessed was the Turks ' assault on General Constantine <unk> 's Greek forces at Velestino . Crane wrote , " It is a great thing to survey the army of the enemy . Just where and how it takes hold upon the heart is difficult of description . " During this battle , Crane encountered " a fat waddling puppy " that he immediately claimed , dubbing it " Velestino , the Journal dog " . Greece and Turkey signed an armistice on May 20 , ending the 30 @-@ day war ; Crane and Taylor left Greece for England , taking two Greek brothers as servants and Velestino the dog with them . 
 = = = England and Spanish – American War = = = 
 After staying in Limpsfield , Surrey , for a few days , Crane and Taylor settled in <unk> , a plain brick villa in Oxted . Referring to themselves as Mr. and Mrs. Crane , the couple lived openly in England , but Crane concealed the relationship from his friends and family in the United States . Admired in England , Crane thought himself attacked back home : " There seem so many of them in America who want to kill , bury and forget me purely out of unkindness and envy and — my unworthiness , if you choose " , he wrote . Velestino the dog sickened and died soon after their arrival in England , on August 1 . Crane , who had a great love for dogs , wrote an emotional letter to a friend an hour after the dog 's death , stating that " for eleven days we fought death for him , thinking nothing of anything but his life . " The Limpsfield @-@ Oxted area was home to members of the socialist Fabian Society and a magnet for writers such as Edmund Gosse , Ford Madox Ford and Edward Garnett . Crane also met the Polish @-@ born novelist Joseph Conrad in October 1897 , with whom he would have what Crane called a " warm and endless friendship " . 
 Although Crane was confident among peers , strong negative reviews of the recently published The Third Violet were causing his literary reputation to dwindle . Reviewers were also highly critical of Crane 's war letters , deeming them self @-@ centered . Although The Red Badge of Courage had by this time gone through fourteen printings in the United States and six in England , Crane was running out of money . To survive financially , he worked at a feverish pitch , writing prolifically for both the English and the American markets . He wrote in quick succession stories such as The Monster , " The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky " , " Death and the Child " and " The Blue Hotel " . Crane began to attach price tags to his new works of fiction , hoping that " The Bride " , for example , would fetch $ 175 . 
 As 1897 ended , Crane 's money crisis worsened . Amy Leslie , a reporter from Chicago and a former lover , sued him for $ 550 . The New York Times reported that Leslie gave him $ 800 in November 1896 but that he 'd repaid only a quarter of the sum . In February he was summoned to answer Leslie 's claim . The claim was apparently settled out of court , because no record of adjudication exists . Meanwhile , Crane felt " heavy with troubles " and " chased to the wall " by expenses . He confided to his agent that he was $ 2 @,@ 000 in debt but that he would " beat it " with more literary output . 
 Soon after the USS Maine exploded in Havana Harbor on February 15 , 1898 , under suspicious circumstances , Crane was offered a £ 60 advance by Blackwood 's Magazine for articles " from the seat of war in the event of a war breaking out " between the United States and Spain . His health was failing , and it is believed that signs of his pulmonary tuberculosis , which he may have contracted in childhood , became apparent . With almost no money coming in from his finished stories , Crane accepted the assignment and left Oxted for New York . Taylor and the rest of the household stayed behind to fend off local creditors . Crane applied for a passport and left New York for Key West two days before Congress declared war . While the war idled , he interviewed people and produced occasional copy . 
 In early June , he observed the establishment of an American base in Cuba when Marines seized Guantánamo Bay . He went ashore with the Marines , planning " to gather impressions and write them as the spirit moved . " Although he wrote honestly about his fear in battle , others observed his calmness and composure . He would later recall " this prolonged tragedy of the night " in the war tale " Marines Signaling Under Fire at Guantanamo " . After showing a willingness to serve during fighting at Cuzco , Cuba , by carrying messages to company commanders , Crane was officially cited for his " material aid during the action " . 
 He continued to report upon various battles and the worsening military conditions and praised Theodore Roosevelt 's Rough Riders , despite past tensions with the Commissioner . In early July , Crane was sent to the United States for medical treatment for a high fever . He was diagnosed with yellow fever , then malaria . Upon arrival in Old Point Comfort , Virginia , he spent a few weeks resting in a hotel . Although Crane had filed more than twenty dispatches in the three months he had covered the war , the World 's business manager believed that the paper had not received its money 's worth and fired him . In retaliation , Crane signed with Hearst 's New York Journal with the wish to return to Cuba . He traveled first to Puerto Rico and then to Havana . In September , rumors began to spread that Crane , who was working anonymously , had either been killed or disappeared . He sporadically sent out dispatches and stories ; he wrote about the mood in Havana , the crowded city sidewalks , and other topics , but he was soon desperate for money again . Taylor , left alone in England , was also penniless . She became frantic with worry over her lover 's whereabouts ; they were not in direct communication until the end of the year . Crane left Havana and arrived in England on January 11 , 1899 . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Rent on <unk> had not been paid for a year . Upon returning to England , Crane secured a solicitor to act as guarantor for their debts , after which Crane and Taylor relocated to Brede Place . This manor in Sussex , which dated to the 14th century and had neither electricity nor indoor plumbing , was offered to them by friends at a modest rent . The relocation appeared to give hope to Crane , but his money problems continued . Deciding that he could no longer afford to write for American publications , he concentrated on publishing in English magazines . 
 Crane pushed himself to write feverishly during the first months at Brede ; he told his publisher that he was " doing more work now than I have at any other period in my life " . His health worsened , and by late 1899 he was asking friends about health resorts . The Monster and Other Stories was in production and War Is Kind , his second collection of poems , was published in the United States in May . None of his books after The Red Badge of Courage had sold well , and he bought a typewriter to spur output . Active Service , a novella based on Crane 's correspondence experience , was published in October . The New York Times reviewer questioned " whether the author of ' Active Service ' himself really sees anything remarkable in his <unk> hero . " 
 In December , the couple held an elaborate Christmas party at Brede , attended by Conrad , Henry James , H. G. Wells and other friends ; it lasted several days . On December 29 Crane suffered a severe pulmonary hemorrhage . In January 1900 he 'd recovered sufficiently to work on a new novel , The O 'Ruddy , completing 25 of the 33 chapters . Plans were made for him to travel as a correspondent to Gibraltar to write sketches from Saint Helena , the site of a Boer prison , but at the end of March and in early April he suffered two more hemorrhages . Taylor took over most of Crane 's correspondence while he was ill , writing to friends for monetary aid . The couple planned to travel on the continent , but Conrad , upon visiting Crane for the last time , remarked that his friend 's " wasted face was enough to tell me that it was the most forlorn of all hopes . " 
 On May 28 , the couple arrived at Badenweiler , Germany , a health spa on the edge of the Black Forest . Despite his weakened condition , Crane continued to dictate fragmentary episodes for the completion of The O 'Ruddy . He died on June 5 , 1900 , at the age of 28 . In his will he left everything to Taylor , who took his body to New Jersey for burial . Crane was interred in Evergreen Cemetery in what is now Hillside , New Jersey . 
 = = Fiction and poetry = = 
 = = = Style and technique = = = 
 Stephen Crane 's fiction is typically categorized as representative of Naturalism , American realism , Impressionism or a mixture of the three . Critic Sergio Perosa , for example , wrote in his essay , " Stephen Crane fra <unk> e <unk> , " that the work presents a " symbiosis " of Naturalistic ideals and Impressionistic methods . When asked whether or not he would write an autobiography in 1896 , Crane responded that he " dare not say that I am honest . I merely say that I am as nearly honest as a weak mental machinery will allow . " Similarities between the stylistic techniques in Crane 's writing and Impressionist painting — including the use of color and chiaroscuro — are often cited to support the theory that Crane was not only an Impressionist but also influenced by the movement . H. G. Wells remarked upon " the great influence of the studio " on Crane 's work , quoting a passage from The Red Badge of Courage as an example : " At nightfall the column broke into regimental pieces , and the fragments went into the fields to camp . Tents sprang up like strange plants . Camp fires , like red , peculiar blossoms , dotted the night .... From this little distance the many fires , with the black forms of men passing to and fro before the crimson rays , made weird and satanic effects . " Although no direct evidence exists that Crane formulated a precise theory of his craft , he vehemently rejected sentimentality , asserting that " a story should be logical in its action and faithful to character . Truth to life itself was the only test , the greatest artists were the simplest , and simple because they were true . " 
 Poet and biographer John Berryman suggested that there were three basic variations , or " norms " , of Crane 's narrative style . The first , being " flexible , swift , abrupt and nervous " , is best exemplified in The Red Badge of Courage , while the second ( " supple majesty " ) is believed to relate to " The Open Boat " , and the third ( " much more closed , circumstantial and ' normal ' in feeling and syntax " ) to later works such as The Monster . Crane 's work , however , cannot be determined by style solely on chronology . Not only does his fiction not take place in any particular region with similar characters , but it varies from serious in tone to <unk> writing and light fiction . Crane 's writing , both fiction and nonfiction , is consistently driven by immediacy and is at once concentrated , vivid and intense . The novels and short stories contain poetic characteristics such as shorthand prose , suggestibility , shifts in perspective and ellipses between and within sentences . Similarly , omission plays a large part in Crane 's work ; the names of his protagonists are not commonly used and sometimes they are not named at all . 
 Crane was often criticized by early reviewers for his frequent incorporation of everyday speech into dialogue , mimicking the regional accents of his characters with colloquial stylization . This is apparent in his first novel , in which Crane ignored the romantic , sentimental approach of slum fiction ; he instead concentrated on the cruelty and sordid aspects of poverty , expressed by the brashness of the Bowery 's crude dialect and profanity , which he used lavishly . The distinct dialect of his Bowery characters is apparent at the beginning of the text ; the title character admonishes her brother saying : " Yeh knows it puts <unk> out when yes comes home half dead , an ' it 's like we 'll all get a <unk> ' . " 
 = = = Major themes = = = 
 Crane 's work is often thematically driven by Naturalistic and Realistic concerns , including ideals versus realities , spiritual crises and fear . These themes are particularly evident in Crane 's first three novels , Maggie : A Girl of the Streets , The Red Badge of Courage and George 's Mother . The three main characters search for a way to make their dreams come true , but ultimately suffer from crises of identity . Crane was fascinated by war and death , as well as fire , disfigurement , fear and courage , all of which inspired him to write many works based on these concepts . In The Red Badge of Courage , the main character both longs for the heroics of battle but ultimately fears it , demonstrating the dichotomy of courage and cowardice . He experiences the threat of death , misery and a loss of self . 
 Extreme isolation from society and community is also apparent in Crane 's work . During the most intense battle scenes in The Red Badge of Courage , for example , the story 's focus is mainly " on the inner responses of a self unaware of others " . In " The Open Boat " , " An Experiment in Misery " and other stories , Crane uses light , motion and color to express degrees of epistemological uncertainty . Similar to other Naturalistic writers , Crane scrutinizes the position of man , who has been isolated not only from society , but also from God and nature . " The Open Boat " , for example , distances itself from Romantic optimism and affirmation of man 's place in the world by concentrating on the characters ' isolation . 
 While he lived , Stephen Crane was denominated by critical readers a realist , a naturalist , an impressionist , symbolist , <unk> , expressionist and <unk> ; his posthumous life was enriched by critics who read him as nihilistic , existentialist , a neo @-@ Romantic , a sentimentalist , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , imagist and , by his most recent biographer , a “ bleak naturalist . ” At midcentury he was a “ <unk> of the New Criticism ” ; by its end he was “ a proto @-@ deconstructionist anti @-@ artist hero ” who had “ leapfrogged modernism , landing on postmodernist ground . ” Or , as Sergio Perosa wrote in 1964 , “ The critic wanders in a labyrinth of possibilities , which every new turn taken by Crane ’ s fiction seems to explode or deny . ” 
 One undeniable fact about Crane 's work , as Anthony <unk> noted in 2015 , is that Death haunts it ; like a threatening eclipse it overshadows his best efforts , each of which features the signal demise of a main character . Allegorically , " The Blue Hotel , " at the pinnacle of the short story form , may even be an <unk> , the author 's intentional exteriorization or objectification , in this case for the purpose of purgation , of his own impending death . Crane 's " Swede " in that story can be taken , following current psychoanalytical theory , as a <unk> , sacrificial victim , ritually to be purged . 
 Transcending this " dark circumstance of composition , " Crane had a particular <unk> and impetus for his creation : beyond the tautologies that all art is alterity and to some formal extent mimesis , Crane sought and obviously found " a form of catharsis " in writing . This view accounts for his uniqueness , especially as operative through his notorious " disgust " with his family 's religion , their " vacuous , futile psalm @-@ singing " . His favorite book , for example , was Mark Twain 's Life on the Mississippi , in which God is mentioned only twice — once as irony and once as " a swindle . " Not only did Crane call out God specifically with the lines " Well then I hate thee / righteous image " in " The Black Riders " ( 1895 ) , but even his most hopeful tropes , such as the " comradeship " of his " Open Boat " survivors , make no mention of deity , specifying only " indifferent nature . " His <unk> is most evident in his characterization of the human race as " lice clinging to a space @-@ lost bulb , " a climax @-@ nearing speech in " The Blue Hotel , " Ch . VI . It is possible that Crane utilized religion 's formal psychic space , now suddenly available resulting from the recent " Death of God , " as a milieu for his <unk> art . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Beginning with the publication of Maggie : A Girl of the Streets in 1893 , Crane was recognized by critics mainly as a novelist . Maggie was initially rejected by numerous publishers because of its atypical and true @-@ to @-@ life depictions of class warfare , which clashed with the sentimental tales of that time . Rather than focusing on the very rich or middle class , the novel 's characters are lower @-@ class denizens of New York 's Bowery . The main character , Maggie , descends into prostitution after being led astray by her lover . Although the novel 's plot is simple , its dramatic mood , quick pace and portrayal of Bowery life have made it memorable . Maggie is not merely an account of slum life , but also represents eternal symbols . In his first draft , Crane did not give his characters proper names . Instead , they were identified by epithets : Maggie , for example , was the girl who " blossomed in a mud @-@ puddle " and Pete , her seducer , was a " knight " . The novel is dominated by bitter irony and anger , as well as destructive morality and treacherous sentiment . Critics would later call the novel " the first dark flower of American Naturalism " for its distinctive elements of naturalistic fiction . 
 Written thirty years after the end of the Civil War and before Crane had any experience of battle , The Red Badge of Courage was innovative stylistically as well as psychologically . Often described as a war novel , it focuses less on battle and more on the main character 's psyche and his reactions and responses in war . It is believed that Crane based the fictional battle in the novel on that of Chancellorsville ; he may also have interviewed veterans of the 124th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment , commonly known as the Orange Blossoms , in Port Jervis , New York . Told in a third @-@ person limited point of view , it reflects the private experience of Henry Fleming , a young soldier who flees from combat . The Red Badge of Courage is notable in its vivid descriptions and well @-@ cadenced prose , both of which help create suspense within the story . Similarly , by substituting epithets for characters ' names ( " the youth " , " the tattered soldier " ) , Crane injects an allegorical quality into his work , making his characters point to a specific characteristic of man . Like Crane 's first novel , The Red Badge of Courage has a deeply ironic tone which increases in severity as the novel progresses . The title of the work is ironic ; Henry wishes " that he , too , had a wound , a red badge of courage " , echoing a wish to have been wounded in battle . The wound he does receive ( from the rifle butt of a fleeing Union soldier ) is not a badge of courage but a badge of shame . 
 The novel expresses a strong connection between humankind and nature , a frequent and prominent concern in Crane 's fiction and poetry throughout his career . Whereas contemporary writers ( Ralph Waldo Emerson , Nathaniel Hawthorne , Henry David Thoreau ) focused on a sympathetic bond on the two elements , Crane wrote from the perspective that human consciousness distanced humans from nature . In The Red Badge of Courage , this distance is paired with a great number of references to animals , and men with animalistic characteristics : people " howl " , " squawk " , " growl " , or " snarl " . 
 Since the resurgence of Crane 's popularity in the 1920s , The Red Badge of Courage has been deemed a major American text . The novel has been anthologized numerous times , including in Ernest Hemingway 's 1942 collection Men at War : The Best War Stories of All Time . In the introduction , Hemingway wrote that the novel " is one of the finest books of our literature , and I include it entire because it is all as much of a piece as a great poem is . " 
 Crane 's later novels have not received as much critical praise . After the success of The Red Badge of Courage , Crane wrote another tale set in the Bowery . George 's Mother is less allegorical and more personal than his two previous novels , and it focuses on the conflict between a church @-@ going , temperance @-@ adhering woman ( thought to be based on Crane 's mother ) and her single remaining offspring , who is a naive dreamer . Critical response to the novel was mixed . The Third Violet , a romance that he wrote quickly after publishing The Red Badge of Courage , is typically considered as Crane 's attempt to appeal to popular audiences . Crane considered it a " quiet little story . " Although it contained autobiographical details , the characters have been deemed inauthentic and stereotypical . Crane 's second to last novel , Active Service , revolves around the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 , with which the author was familiar . Although noted for its satirical take on the melodramatic and highly passionate works that were popular of the nineteenth century , the novel was not successful . It is generally accepted by critics that Crane 's work suffered at this point due to the speed which he wrote in order to meet his high expenses . His last novel , a suspenseful and picaresque work entitled The O 'Ruddy , was finished posthumously by Robert Barr and published in 1903 . 
 = = = Short fiction = = = 
 Crane wrote many different types of fictional pieces while indiscriminately applying to them terms such as " story " , " tale " and " sketch " . For this reason , critics have found clear @-@ cut classification of Crane 's work problematic . While " The Open Boat " and " The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky " are often considered short stories , others are variously identified . 
 In an 1896 interview with Herbert P. Williams , a reporter for the Boston Herald , Crane said that he did " not find that short stories are utterly different in character from other fiction . It seems to me that short stories are the easiest things we write . " During his brief literary career , he wrote more than a hundred short stories and fictional sketches . Crane 's early fiction was based in camping expeditions in his teen years ; these stories eventually became known as The Sullivan County Tales and Sketches . He considered these " sketches " , which are mostly humorous and not of the same caliber of work as his later fiction , to be " articles of many kinds , " in that they are part fiction and part journalism . 
 The subject matter for his stories varied extensively . His early New York City sketches and Bowery tales accurately described the results of industrialization , immigration and the growth of cities and their slums . His collection of six short stories , The Little Regiment , covered familiar ground with the American Civil War , a subject for which he became famous with The Red Badge of Courage . Although similar to Crane 's noted novel , The Little Regiment was believed to lack vigor and originality . Realizing the limitations of these tales , Crane wrote : " I have invented the sum of my invention with regard to war and this story keeps me in internal despair . " 
 The Open Boat and Other Tales of Adventure ( 1898 ) contains thirteen short stories that deal with three periods in Crane 's life : his Asbury Park boyhood , his trip to the West and Mexico in 1895 , and his Cuban adventure in 1897 . This collection was well received and included several of his most critically successful works . His 1899 collection , The Monster and Other Stories , was similarly well received . 
 Two posthumously published collections were not as successful . In August 1900 The Whilomville Stories were published , a collection of thirteen stories that Crane wrote during the last year of his life . The work deals almost exclusively with boyhood , and the stories are drawn from events occurring in Port Jervis , where Crane lived from the age of six to eleven . Focusing on small @-@ town America , the stories tend toward sentimentality , but remain perceptive of the lives of children . Wounds in the Rain , published in September 1900 , contains fictional tales based on Crane 's reports for the World and the Journal during the Spanish – American War . These stories , which Crane wrote while desperately ill , include " The Price of the Harness " and " The Lone Charge of William B. Perkins " and are dramatic , ironic and sometimes humorous . 
 Despite Crane 's prolific output , only four <unk> " The Open Boat " , " The Blue Hotel " , " The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky " , and The Monster — have received extensive attention from scholars . H. G. Wells considered " The Open Boat " to be " beyond all question , the crown of all his work " , and it is one of the most frequently discussed of Crane 's works . 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Crane 's poems , which he preferred to call " lines " , are typically not given as much scholarly attention as his fiction ; no anthology contained Crane 's verse until 1926 . Although it is not certain when Crane began to write poetry seriously , he once said that his overall poetic aim was " to give my ideas of life as a whole , so far as I know it " . The poetic style used in both of his books of poetry , The Black Riders and Other Lines and War is Kind , was unconventional for the time in that it was written in free verse without rhyme , meter , or even titles for individual works . They are typically short in length ; although several poems , such as " Do not weep , maiden , for war is kind " , use stanzas and refrains , most do not . Crane also differed from his peers and poets of later generations in that his work contains allegory , dialectic and narrative situations . 
 Critic Ruth Miller claimed that Crane wrote " an intellectual poetry rather than a poetry that evokes feeling , a poetry that stimulates the mind rather than arouses the heart " . In the most complexly organized poems , the significance of the states of mind or feelings is ambiguous , but Crane 's poems tend to affirm certain elemental attitudes , beliefs , opinions and stances toward God , man and the universe . The Black Riders in particular is essentially a dramatic concept and the poems provide continuity within the dramatic structure . There is also a dramatic interplay in which there is frequently a major voice reporting an incident seen ( " In the desert / I saw a creature , naked , bestial " ) or experienced ( " A learned man came to me once " ) . The second voice or additional voices represent a point of view which is revealed to be inferior ; when these clash , a dominant attitude emerges . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In four years , Crane published five novels , two volumes of poetry , three short story collections , two books of war stories , and numerous works of short fiction and reporting . Today he is mainly remembered for The Red Badge of Courage , which is regarded as an American classic . The novel has been adapted several times for the screen , including John Huston 's 1951 version . By the time of his death , Crane had become one of the best known writers of his generation . His eccentric lifestyle , frequent newspaper reporting , association with other famous authors , and expatriate status made him somewhat of an international celebrity . Although most stories about his life tended toward the romantic , rumors about his alleged drug use and alcoholism persisted long after his death . 
 By the early 1920s , Crane and his work were nearly forgotten . It was not until Thomas Beer published his biography in 1923 , which was followed by editor Wilson Follett 's The Work of Stephen Crane ( 1925 – 1927 ) , that Crane 's writing came to the attention of a scholarly audience . Crane 's reputation was then enhanced by faithful support from writer friends such as Joseph Conrad , H. G. Wells and Ford Madox Ford , all of whom either published recollections or commented upon their time with Crane . John Berryman 's 1950 biography of Crane further established him as an important American author . Since 1951 there has been a steady outpouring of articles , monographs and reprints in Crane scholarship . 
 Today , Crane is considered one of the most innovative writers of the 1890s . His peers , including Conrad and James , as well as later writers such as Robert Frost , Ezra Pound and Willa Cather , hailed Crane as one of the finest creative spirits of his time . His work was described by Wells as " the first expression of the opening mind of a new period , or , at least , the early emphatic phase of a new initiative . " Wells said that " beyond dispute " , Crane was " the best writer of our generation , and his untimely death was an irreparable loss to our literature . " Conrad wrote that Crane was an " artist " and " a seer with a gift for rendering the significant on the surface of things and with an incomparable insight into primitive emotions " . Crane 's work has proved inspirational for future writers ; not only have scholars drawn similarities between Hemingway 's A Farewell to Arms and The Red Badge of Courage , but Crane 's fiction is thought to have been an important inspiration for Hemingway and his fellow Modernists . In 1936 , Hemingway wrote in The Green Hills of Africa that " The good writers are Henry James , Stephen Crane , and Mark Twain . That 's not the order they 're good in . There is no order for good writers . " Crane 's poetry is thought to have been a precursor to the Imagist movement , and his short fiction has also influenced American literature . " The Open Boat " , " The Blue Hotel " , The Monster and " The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky " are generally considered by critics to be examples of Crane 's best work . 
 Several institutions and places have endeavored to keep Crane 's legacy alive . Badenweiler and the house where he died became something of a tourist attraction for its fleeting association with the American author ; Alexander Woollcott attested to the fact that , long after Crane 's death , tourists would be directed to the room where he died . Columbia University Rare Book and Manuscript Library has a collection of Crane and Taylor 's personal correspondence dating from 1895 to 1908 . Near his brother Edmund 's Sullivan County home in New York , where Crane stayed for a short time , a pond is named after him . The Stephen Crane House in Asbury Park , New Jersey , where the author lived with his siblings for nine years , is operated as a museum dedicated to his life and work . Syracuse University has an annual Stephen Crane Lecture Series which is sponsored by the <unk> Foundation . 
 Columbia University purchased much of the Stephen Crane materials held by Cora Crane at her death . The Crane Collection is one of the largest in the nation of his materials . Columbia University had an exhibit : ' The Tall Swift Shadow of a Ship at Night ' : Stephen and Cora Crane , November 2 , 1995 through February 16 , 1996 , about the lives of the couple , featuring letters and other documents and memorabilia . 
 = = Selected list of works = = 
 Maggie : A Girl of the Streets ( 1893 ) 
 The Red Badge of Courage ( 1895 ) 
 The Black Riders and Other Lines ( 1895 ) 
 George 's Mother ( 1896 ) 
 The Open Boat and Other Tales of Adventure ( 1898 ) 
 War is Kind ( 1899 ) 
 Active Service ( 1899 ) 
 The Monster and Other Stories ( 1899 ) 
 Wounds in the Rain ( 1900 ) 
 Great battles of the world ( 1901 ) 
 The O 'Ruddy ( 1903 ) 
 = Arizona State Route 347 = 
 State Route 347 ( SR 347 ) , also known as John Wayne Parkway , is a 28 @.@ 69 miles ( 46 @.@ 17 km ) long , north – south state highway in central Arizona . The route begins at SR 84 and heads north . It passes through Maricopa , meeting SR 238 . The route ends at an interchange with Interstate 10 ( I @-@ 10 ) south of Chandler . It primarily serves as the major road to Maricopa ; much of the road lies within the Gila River Indian Community , with another short stretch through the Ak @-@ Chin Indian Community . The road was built in the late 1930s and established as a state highway in the 1990s . On average , between 4 @,@ 000 and 35 @,@ 000 vehicles use the roadway daily . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The route begins at an intersection with SR 84 west of Stanfield . SR 347 then heads northward as John Wayne Parkway , a four @-@ lane expressway , which SR 347 is for its entirety , through a desert landscape . After intersecting Meadowview Road and crossing a canal , SR 347 meets Carefree Place , where a farm appears to the west part of the road . At Clayton Road , the east side of the road becomes farmland as well . John Wayne Parkway enters the Ak @-@ Chin Indian Community , passing the Harrah 's Ak @-@ Chin Casino , and intersects BIA Route 14 within this community . At Route 14 , the route becomes Maricopa Road , but retains its name as John Wayne Parkway , as it heads toward Maricopa . Continuing on its northerly path , the road exits the Indian community with a residential area to the west and desert to the east . Past <unk> road , this orientation switches , as the residential area is located on the east side of Maricopa Road . The arrangement of the landscape switches again at Desert Cedars Road , where the road passes the Maricopa First Baptist Church . Before meeting the Maricopa @-@ Casa Grande Highway , the road passes Maricopa High School . It also meets an at @-@ grade intersection with a rail line , owned by Union Pacific . 
 North of this highway , SR 347 passes Honeycutt Road and passes by the Pinal County Justice Court . After an intersection with Edison Road , SR 347 passes several businesses before intersecting SR 238 , named Smith Enke Road . The route then enters another residential area before abruptly passing into the desert . The road turns more northeasterly , heading through the Gila River Indian Community . Turning back north and slightly northeast again , the road crosses from Pinal County into Maricopa County . After intersecting Riggs Road , Maricopa Road veers away from John Wayne Parkway , which SR 347 follows . Now as Queen Creek Road , which serves as another name , SR 347 heads east for a small distance , ending at a diamond interchange at I @-@ 10 's exit 164 . Queen Creek Road continues toward Chandler Municipal Airport . 
 The route is maintained by the Arizona Department of Transportation ( ADOT ) , which is responsible for maintaining highways in the state . As part of this role , the department periodically conducts surveys to measure traffic on highways in Arizona . These surveys are most often presented in the form of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is the number of vehicles that use a highway on any average day during the year . In 2009 , ADOT calculated that around 4 @,@ 500 vehicles used the road daily near the SR 84 intersection and about 33 @,@ 000 vehicles used the route near the I @-@ 10 interchange on an average day . No part of the highway has been listed in the National Highway System , a system of roads in the United States important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The section north of Maricopa , toward present day I @-@ 10 , was built by 1939 . The road headed north toward Tempe to U.S. Route 80 . Between 1951 and 1958 , the road was extended south to its current terminus at SR 84 ; at this time , I @-@ 10 had still not been built , nor had the route become a numbered route . By 1971 , I @-@ 10 was finished through the south and east edges of the Phoenix area . In 1989 , ADOT made preparations to establish the number along Maricopa Road and reserved the right @-@ of @-@ way along the parkway . This may have been because of a controversy over the name of John Wayne Parkway , which the road was dubbed at the time . The Gila River Native Americans , whose reservation the parkway ran on , did not want this name , as John Wayne , the actor who formerly owned a ranch on the road , had appeared in several movies in which he had killed Native Americans . In 1997 , the route was officially established as a state highway with its current routing . SR 347 was widened from a two @-@ lane road to the four @-@ lane expressway that it is today . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Heart of a Woman ( Etta James album ) = 
 Heart of a Woman is an album by Etta James , released in June 1999 through RCA Records . The album consists of eleven love songs from James ' favorite female singers , as well as a recording of her most popular song " At Last " . Recorded in March 1999 , Heart of a Woman was produced by James and John Snyder , with Lupe DeLeon serving as executive producer . James ' two sons Donto and Sametto served as assistant producers , among other contributions ; guest musicians appearing on the album include Mike Finnigan on organ , Red Holloway and Jimmy Zavala on tenor saxophone , and Lee Thornburg on multiple instruments . Following its release , critical reception of Heart of a Woman was mixed . The album reached a peak position of number four on Billboard 's Top Blues Albums chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Heart of a Woman was released during a period of James ' career in which she parted from singing blues to experiment with country , jazz , and pop music , with mixed reception . Rolling Stone grouped the album in a " trifecta " with James ' previous ( not counting the 1998 holiday album 12 Songs of Christmas ) , and following studio albums , Life , Love & the Blues ( 1998 ) and Matriarch of the Blues ( 2000 ) . 
 Categorized by Rolling Stone as a jazz pop album , Heart of a Woman contains " cool , sensuous arrangements " between four and seven minutes in length . It consists of eleven love songs by James ' favorite female singers , including Billie Holiday , Carmen McRae , Sarah Vaughan , and Dinah Washington , along with a new recording of her most famous song " At Last " . The album was recorded in March 1999 , and produced by James and John Snyder , with Lupe DeLeon serving as executive producer . James ' two sons , Donto and Sametto , served as assistant producers , among other contributions . Guest musicians appearing on the album included : Mike Finnigan on organ , Red Holloway and Jimmy Zavala on tenor saxophone , and Lee Thornburg on multiple instruments . 
 Gene de Paul and Don Raye 's " You Don 't Know What Love Is " opens the album , followed by " Good Morning Heartache " , written by Ervin Drake , Dan Fisher , and Irene Higginbotham . The bossa nova arrangement of Sam <unk> and Arthur Johnston 's " My Old Flame " contains a saxophone solo by Red Holloway . Irving Berlin 's " Say It Isn 't So " is followed by James ' signature song " At Last " , written originally by Mack Gordon and Harry Warren . 
 Other love songs on the album include " Tenderly " by Walter Gross and Jack Lawrence , and " I Only Have Eyes for You " by Al Dubin . James ' vocals on Duke Ellington and Paul Francis Webster 's " I Got It Bad ( and That Ain 't Good ) " are " barely audible " as she sings " ... I ... can 't ... live without him . " " I Got It Bad " is followed by a cover of John Frederick Coots and Haven Gillespie 's 1933 popular song " You Go to My Head " . Mike Finnigan performs the Hammond organ solo on " A Sunday Kind of Love " and throughout the album , filling the gap between blues and jazz music . Closing the album are Sammy Cahn and Saul Chaplin 's " If It 's the Last Thing I Do " , and Alice Cooper 's " Only Women Bleed " . James had recorded " Only Women Bleed " previously . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of the album was mixed . PopMatters ' review concluded that , given proper arrangements and material , James delivered jazz standards " with the same devastating power " demonstrated on past blues performances . Staff wrote that James combined jazz and blues elements successfully , " [ creating ] the sense of loneliness and desperation in which James has always excelled in expressing " . PopMatters ' review was positive overall , claiming James ' rough voice made her appear to be " in tune with the woeful nature " of the songs , though it insisted that her cover of " Only Women Bleed " was a " miscalculation of major proportions " . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine called James one of the best blues performers of the twentieth century and wrote in his review of the album that " she still possesses an exceptionally strong voice , robust and filled with passion . " However , Erlewine also wrote that Heart of a Woman " never has the emotional impact James intended it to have " . Music critic Robert Christgau 's review simply reads " <unk> cocktail cool " and recommended the tracks " My Old Flame " , and " I Only Have Eyes for You " . The Advocate 's Andrew Velez felt that " I Got It Bad ( and That Ain 't Good ) " was the album 's best track . " Steve Knopper of the Chicago Tribune thought the arrangements were " tinkly " and " meandering " , with James sounding as through " she 's learning a foreign language " . Knopper considered " Only Women Bleed " to be the album 's most soulful track . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " You Don 't Know What Love Is " ( Gene de Paul , Don Raye ) – 5 : 28 
 " Good Morning Heartache " ( Ervin Drake , Dan Fisher , Irene Higgenbotham ) – 5 : 28 
 " My Old Flame " ( Sam <unk> , Arthur Johnston ) – 6 : 20 
 " Say It Isn 't So " ( Irving Berlin ) – 4 : 55 
 " At Last " ( Mack Gordon , Harry Warren ) – 4 : 40 
 " Tenderly " ( Walter Gross , Jack Lawrence ) – 5 : 27 
 " I Only Have Eyes for You " ( Al Dubin , Warren ) – 6 : 35 
 " I Got It Bad ( and That Ain 't Good ) " ( Duke Ellington , Paul Francis Webster ) – 6 : 25 
 " You Go to My Head " ( John Frederick Coots , Haven Gillespie ) – 4 : 21 
 " A Sunday Kind of Love " ( Barbara Belle , Anita Leonard , Louis Prima , Stan Rhodes ) – 6 : 00 
 " If It 's the Last Thing I Do " ( Sammy Cahn , Saul Chaplin ) – 5 : 47 
 " Only Women Bleed " ( Alice Cooper , Dick Wagner ) – 4 : 48 
 Track listing adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Chart history = = 
 Heart of a Woman reached a peak position of number four on Billboard 's Top Blues Albums chart . By November 1999 , the album had remained on the chart for seventeen weeks , and remained at number twelve . In 1999 , James had five albums chart in the United States : Life , Love & the Blues , Heart of a Woman , 12 Songs of Christmas ( 1998 ) , as well as two compilation albums : Best of Etta James , and Her Best ( 1997 ) . 
 = William Warelwast = 
 William Warelwast , sometimes known as William de Warelwast ( died 1137 ) , was a medieval Norman cleric and Bishop of Exeter in England . Warelwast was a native of Normandy , but little is known about his background before 1087 , when he appears as a royal clerk for King William II of England . Most of his royal service to William was as a diplomatic envoy , as he was heavily involved in the king 's dispute with Anselm , the Archbishop of Canterbury , which constituted the English theatre of the Investiture Controversy . He went several times to Rome as an emissary to the papacy on business related to Anselm , one of whose supporters , the medieval chronicler Eadmer , alleged that Warelwast bribed the pope and the papal officials to secure favourable outcomes for King William . 
 Possibly present at King William 's death in a hunting accident , Warelwast served as a diplomat to the king 's successor , Henry I. After the resolution of the Investiture Controversy , Warelwast was rewarded with the bishopric of Exeter in Devon , but he continued to serve Henry as a diplomat and royal judge . He began the construction of a new cathedral at Exeter , and he probably divided the diocese into archdeaconries . Warelwast went blind after 1120 , and after his death in 1137 was succeeded by his nephew , Robert Warelwast . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Little is known of Warelwast 's background or family before 1087 . Later in life he was involved in founding Augustinian houses of canons , which – according to historian D. W. Blake – implies that he was an Augustinian canon or spent some of his early years in a house of such canons . Several medieval chroniclers hostile to Warelwast , including Eadmer , claim that he was illiterate , but his career suggests otherwise , as it involved the extensive use of written documents . He must also have been an accomplished speaker , given the number of times he was used as a diplomat . He was possibly educated at Laon , where later in life he sent his nephew , Robert Warelwast , to school . Another nephew , William , became the bishop 's steward . 
 Warelwast may have been a clerk for King William I of England , as a confirmation charter from the time of King Stephen ( reigned 1135 – 1154 ) records that a grant of churches in Exeter was given to Warelwast by " Willelmus , <unk> meus " , or " William , my grandfather / ancestor " ; Stephen was a grandson of William I , who reigned 1066 – 1087 . But this charter may be a forgery , or the Willelmus referred to may have been William II rather than William I. The charter itself is insufficient evidence to confidently assert that Warelwast served William I , even though most such grants were made as a reward for royal service . It may have been that Warelwast was awarded land by William I not because he was a royal servant but because he was a relative ; certainly the late @-@ medieval writer William Worcester claimed that Warelwast was related to the king . 
 = = Royal clerk under King William II = = 
 The first reliable mentions of Warelwast occur early in the reign of King William II , when Warelwast appears as authorizing writs for the king . As well as being a royal clerk , Warelwast acted as a judge in a legal case between St Florent Abbey in Saumur and Fécamp Abbey , heard before King William II some time between 1094 and 1099 at <unk> . 
 Warelwast served the king as an envoy to Pope Urban II in 1095 , when the king was seeking to have the newly appointed Archbishop of Canterbury , Anselm of Canterbury , removed from office . He visited the pope with another royal clerk , Gerard , with orders to recognize Urban as pope in return for Anselm 's deposition , at least according to Eadmer , an Anselm partisan . The two clerks travelled very quickly , as they did not leave before 28 February 1095 and were back in England by 13 May 1095 . Eadmer claimed that the ambassadors were supposed to acquire a pallium , the symbol of an archbishop 's authority , for the king to give to his new choice as archbishop . But although the king may have instructed his envoys to attempt to secure these objects , he was probably willing to negotiate and to settle for less . The two clerks returned with a papal legate , Walter of Albano , who accepted the king 's recognition of Urban but refused to allow Anselm 's deposition . The king did nevertheless manage to secure recognition of his royal rights in the church , and a concession that no papal legates or communications would be sent without his approval . It may well be that the king always regarded Anselm 's deposition as unlikely . 
 Warelwast was probably sent as an envoy to Urban in 1096 to bribe the pope into recalling the papal legate <unk> , who had been sent to England to protest the king 's conduct towards the church . In addition to his ambassadorial duties Warelwast acted as a royal justice under King William ; the records of one case have survived . 
 Shortly before Anselm went into exile in 1097 Warelwast searched his baggage , probably looking for communications to the pope , either from Anselm or other English bishops rather than for valuables , and in particular for any letters of complaint . Warelwast was the king 's envoy at Rome when during his exile Anselm petitioned to have the king excommunicated , which according to Eadmer , who was also present , Warelwast succeeded in preventing by bribing the pope and papal officials . The king had sent Warelwast to Urban at Christmas 1098 , with his reply to a letter the pope had written ordering the restoration of Anselm 's estates . 
 = = Royal service for King Henry I = = 
 Warelwast may have been with the hunting party on 2 August 1100 in which King William was accidentally killed , as he was one of the witnesses to the letter sent on 5 August 1100 from William IIs brother , the new King Henry I to Anselm recalling the archbishop . King Henry continued to use Warelwast as an ambassador , sending him to Rome in 1101 to bring back Pope Paschal II 's reply to a letter written by Henry immediately after his accession . Henry was seeking a reconciliation with the papacy , and confirmed to the pope the rights and obedience which his father had rendered , but he also requested the same rights within the Church as his father had enjoyed , chiefly the lay investiture of bishops and the granting of the symbols of episcopal authority by laymen . Paschal declined to grant Henry those rights . 
 It was Warelwast who told Anselm in 1103 that the king would not permit his return to England . This came after a failed joint mission by Warelwast and Anselm to Paschal attempting to resolve the dispute between Henry and the archbishop over the king 's investiture of bishops , a dispute generally known as the Investiture Controversy . It is quite likely that the king had given instructions that if the mission failed , Warelwast was to inform Anselm that he should only to return to England if he agreed with the king 's position in the dispute . In 1106 Warelwast was the king 's negotiator in the discussions that led to the settlement of the Investiture Controversy in England . The king ultimately lost little , relinquishing the right to actually give the symbols of episcopal authority to a newly elected bishop in return for continuing to receive homage from the bishops . Early in 1106 Warelwast was sent to Bec Abbey , where Anselm was residing in exile , to inform him of the settlement and deliver to the archbishop the king 's invitation to return to England . In May 1107 Warelwast acted as the king 's envoy at Paschal 's council at Troyes , where Paschal was attempting to secure support for Bohemond of Antioch 's proposed campaign against Byzantium . Warelwast probably relayed to the pope the news that King Henry would make no contribution to Bohemond 's efforts . 
 Henry had reserved the episcopal see of Exeter for Warelwast since the death of Osbern FitzOsbern in 1103 , but the controversy over investiture meant that his election and consecration were not possible before a settlement was reached . Instead the king gave Warelwast the office of Archdeacon of Exeter after Osbern 's death . The medieval chronicler William of Malmesbury records that Warelwast had earlier tried to remove Osbern from office , but this story probably originates with Eadmer and is of dubious veracity . While archdeacon , Warelwast is recorded as being present at the transfer of a Devon church to Bath Cathedral . He was elected Bishop of Exeter , and was consecrated on 11 August 1107 , by Anselm at the royal palace of Westminster . Other bishops consecrated at the same time included William Giffard to Winchester , Roger of Salisbury to Salisbury , <unk> to Hereford , and Urban to Llandaff . Warelwast 's elevation was a reward for his diplomatic efforts in the investiture crisis . The mass consecration signalled the end of the investiture crisis in England . 
 After his consecration Warelwast continued to serve the king , often appearing on documents or in accounts of the royal court . The bishop served the king as a messenger , once more carrying messages to Anselm in 1108 . He also served as a royal judge , hearing a case at Tamworth in 1114 and another at Westbourne the same year . He was with the king in Normandy in 1111 , 1113 , and 1118 , and may have been in Normandy more frequently . During Henry 's reign Warelwast was a witness to 20 of the king 's charters . 
 In 1115 Henry sent Warelwast back to Rome to negotiate with Paschal , who was angry that the king was prohibiting papal legates in England , not allowing clerics to appeal to the papal court , and was failing to secure papal sanction for church councils or the translation of bishops . Warelwast was unable to change the pope 's mind , but he did manage to prevent sanctions against the king . Henry also employed Warelwast as a papal envoy during the Canterbury – York disputes over the primacy in the English Church , with visits in 1119 , 1120 , and possibly also in 1116 . 
 = = Work as bishop = = 
 As a bishop , Warelwast attended the Council of Reims in 1119 along with three other bishops from England , as well as the Council of Rouen in 1118 , a provincial synod for Normandy . In his diocese of Exeter he began the construction of a new cathedral in about 1114 ; it was consecrated in 1133 . The existing two towers in the transepts date from that period . He also replaced the secular clergy staffing collegiate churches with regular canons : at Plympton in 1121 with canons from Aldgate in London , and in 1127 at the church in Launceston in Cornwall . In addition he founded a house of regular canons at Bodmin . Royal charters survive that granted several churches in Cornwall , Devon , and Exeter to Warelwast . 
 Warelwast 's relations with his cathedral chapter were good , and no disputes arose during his episcopate . It was not until late in his bishopric that the diocese was split into multiple archdeaconries , which appears to have happened in 1133 . Warelwast instituted the two offices of treasurer and precentor for the cathedral chapter , as well as the first sub @-@ archdeacons , who were under the archdeacons . Sub @-@ archdeacons are not attested again at Exeter until the episcopate of Bartholomew Iscanus , who was bishop from 1161 – 1184 . William of Malmesbury felt that during Warelwast 's episcopate the cathedral chapter relaxed its communal living , which previously had been strong . It is likely that during Warelwast 's episcopate the canons of the cathedral chapter quit living in a communal dormitory . 
 Warelwast went blind in his later years , starting in about 1120 , which William of Malmesbury regarded as a fitting punishment for Warelwast 's alleged attempts to remove his predecessor from office early . He died about 26 September 1137 , and was buried in the priory at Plympton . He may have resigned his see prior to his death . The 16th @-@ century antiquary John Leland thought that Warelwast resigned his see before 1127 , became a canon at Plympton , and died in 1127 . Although Leland 's year of death is incorrect , it is possible that Warelwast became a canon shortly before his death . The Annales <unk> records that Robert of Bath , the Bishop of Bath , gave Warelwast his last rites on 26 September 1137 , and records that the dying bishop was made a member of the collegiate church at Plympton . Warelwast 's nephew Robert Warelwast succeeded as Bishop at Exeter in 1138 ; Robert had been appointed archdeacon of Exeter by his uncle . 
 The historian C. Warren Hollister described William Warelwast as a " canny and devoted royal servant " . 
 = Carry Out = 
 " Carry Out " is a song recorded by American rapper and producer Timbaland for his third studio album Shock Value II ( 2009 ) . The song features guest vocals from longtime collaborator , American recording artist Justin Timberlake . Timbaland and Timberlake co @-@ wrote the song with Timothy " Attitude " Clayton , Jim Beanz and Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon ; with Harmon co @-@ producing the song with Timbaland . Mosley Music Group , together with Blackground and Interscope Records , serviced the song to contemporary hit radio on December 1 , 2009 in the United States , as the third single from Shock Value II . 
 " Carry Out " received a mixed response from contemporary music critics , with many being divided on the song 's composition and lyrical content . " Carry Out " s lyrics use the term ' carry out ' as metaphor for sex . Most found the song to be one of the album 's best tracks , but criticized the use of food @-@ sex metaphors and deemed the song to be lacking in creativity . The song also received comparisons to The Lonely Island 's 2006 single " Dick in a Box " , in which Timberlake was featured . " Carry Out " peaked within the top ten of the charts in Canada , the Republic of Ireland and the United Kingdom . The song 's accompanying music video , directed by Bryan Barber , features Timbaland and Timberlake surrounded by women , which they attempt to seduce while dressed in fast @-@ food restaurant themed costumes . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Carry Out " is one of twelve songs written and produced by Timbaland and J @-@ Roc for Timbaland 's third studio album Shock Value II ( 2009 ) . Justin Timberlake , Attitude and Jim Beanz , notable collaborators with Timbaland , also assisted in the writing of the song . Timbaland , in an interview with MTV 's Shaheem Reed and Gil Kaufman , stated that he favored this song over other recordings because the process for creating the song was similar to those of other collaborations they have done . Timberlake would come in to the studio and listen to the track . Afterwards , he would then compose the lyrics in his head . Upon explaining their method of making music , Timbaland stated that : " We got a chemistry that cannot be described . People ask , ' Well , what are you and Justin like ? ' Can 't tell you what it 's like — it 's a chemistry that can 't be described . Something you would have to see for yourself and be , like , ' Them two got magic ' . " Timbaland stated that that the song resembles a " 2010 version " of Snoop Dogg 's " Drop It Like It 's Hot " , produced by The Neptunes . He also revealed that the intention of the song was to provide a different slang for women : " Instead of ' Your phat butt ' or ' Your big breasts , ' we say , ' Oh , I need you . Can I be your carry out ? Be my carry out . I want you to be my dinner , my leftovers , my everything . ' It 's a different slang . We 're grown men , I wanna be subliminal to females . Like , ' Oooh , carry out ? That 's kinda sexy ' . " 
 Recording and mix engineer Demacio " Demo " Castellon , notable for recording and mixing nearly all of Timbaland 's second studio album Shock Value ( 2007 ) , worked with Chris Godbey on recording the track , while providing additional recording for The Demolition Crew and mixing the song ; all of this took place at No Excuses Studios in Santa Monica , California . Chris <unk> and Brian Morton were signed as assistant mix engineers for the song while Beanz , in addition to writing the song , contributed additional vocals and vocal production . Musician and songwriter Mike Hartnett performed on the guitars . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Carry Out " is 3 minutes and 52 seconds ( 3 : 52 ) long . It contains an electro @-@ funk backing beat . The song moves through a Middle Eastern inspired groove and is built over a " pinging " syncopated beat . Timbaland performs the song in a spoken and sung style , while Timberlake performs his verses with a " seductive " lower register coupled with his falsetto vocals . The song contains many metaphors using food in place of sex . According to the digital music sheet published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing Co . , Inc . , the song was written in a key of E ♭ minor . Riding a moderate hip hop groove , it is set in common time with a beat rate of 110 beats per minute . Timbaland and Timberlake 's vocals range from the high note of B3 to the low note of D5 . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Carry Out " received a generally mixed response from music critics . Ben Norman of About.com praised it as a " fantastic fast food <unk> " [ sic ] and as an example of Timbaland 's ability to craft " top @-@ notch pop " . Calling it a " radio smash " , Luke Gibson of HipHop DX in his review of the single commented on the noticeable chemistry between Timbaland and Timberlake and deemed it will " have bodies moving " . Gibson concluded , writing , " The song itself captures what ’ s wrong or maybe right with the entire project . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard remarked that " Carry Out " competes with " Morning After Dark " to " burn up dancefloors " . In his review of the album , David Balls of Digital Spy called " Carry Out " and " Meet in Tha Middle " , " pretty irresistible " . David E. Gray of Yahoo ! Voices said that the song " shows how much Timberlake can add to a track when he 's in his element . " August Brown of Los Angeles Times commented that album fares better with the collaborations with artists Timbaland has worked with previously , saying that Timberlake has a " goofy good time " on " Carry Out " . 
 Will Hines of Consequence of Sound found the lyrical focus on the food metaphor for sex as " <unk> " and commented that Timberlake sounds " a little less invincible " on the track . Henry <unk> of Soul Culture labeled it a safe collaboration , noting it as a revival of Timbaland and Timberlake 's " successful chemistry " . Robert Copsey , in the review of the single itself , found the recording to be lacking in creativity , leaving him to comment that " ' Carry Out ' is one of Timbaland 's least shocking efforts to date " . Jon Parales of New York Times said the song and " Morning After Dark " were less effective than the collaboration by Timberlake and Nelly Furtado on " Give It to Me " ( Shock Value , 2007 ) and called the food @-@ to @-@ sex metaphor " unamusing " . 
 Andy Kellman of Allmusic called " Carry Out " the dirtiest track on the album and noted that the two artist aim for a contemporary form of The Lonely Island 's " Dick in a Box " ( <unk> , 2009 ) , on which Timberlake was featured . Brian Linder of IGN commented that the production on the song is tight , but panned the single for its food @-@ sex metaphors , calling it " unforgivably stupid " and " such a joke that we half expected Andy Samberg to show up with his dick in a happy meal box , " making reference to " Dick in a Box " , which premiered on Saturday Night Live in 2006 . Jesse Cataldo of Slant Magazine called the collaboration and " Say Something " " admirable turns " on the album , but comments that they are " forced to operate with <unk> tepid production . " Cataldo concludes , writing , " The overall laziness of that facet is even more inexcusable coming from one of the most renowned producers of the last decade . " Hugh Montgomery of The Observer noted it as one of the album 's best track but called it " merely passable " and said it was " weighed down by his own leaden rapping and with nothing new to add to the familiar , futurist R & B formula . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number seventy five on December 19 , 2009 . It rose to number eleven on the chart more than two months later on March 27 , 2010 . The song also appeared on the Pop Songs and Radio Songs charts , where it peaked at number eight and number ten respectively . The song spent twenty @-@ six weeks on the Hot 100 . In Canada , the song debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 at number thirty @-@ six , being the week 's second highest debut behind Jason Derülo 's " In My Head " . It fell to number seventy @-@ six in the following week . The song eventually reached a peak of number seven and charted for three months more . 
 The song experienced similar success in international territories . In New Zealand , the song debuted at number thirty nine on the New Zealand Singles Chart on March 22 , 2010 . It reached a peak at number fifteen in it fifth week on the chart . In the United Kingdom , the song entered at number ninety @-@ seven on the UK Singles Chart and rose sixty @-@ eight places to twenty @-@ nine in the following week . It peaked at number six two weeks later and stayed inside the top ten for almost a month . In the Republic of Ireland , " Carry Out " peaked at number three on the Irish Singles Chart . The song experienced a quick chart run in the Netherlands , where it debuted at number thirty nine on the Dutch Top 40 and rose to its peak at number nineteen two weeks later . It ultimately lasted a total of seven weeks on the chart . " Carry Out " was not successful in Austria and Switzerland , where it peaked at number fifty seven and number eighty on the Austrian Singles Chart and Swiss Singles Chart respectively , lasting only one to two weeks within the charts . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Two music videos for " Carry Out " were shot . The first video , shot in December 2009 , consisted of live performance footage of Timbaland and Timberlake . The video was due to be released in January 2010 . In late January 2010 , it was announced that a new video is going to be shot with director Bryan Barber . The video made its premiere on February 18 , 2010 . The video begins with sequences of several women dancing in underwear in front of light sing saying " Drive In " and " Hot Cakes " . Scenes of Timbaland and Timberlake in front of the signs are also shown . Scenes are intercut showing Timbaland and his brother in a car watching girls skating around it . During the chorus the performers are dancing in front of the sings along girl dancers . Scenes are intercut and show separate scenes of Timbaland and Timberlake sitting on a throne chairs while girls with plates full of food are around them . The video ends with several girls seductively eating cakes . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Digital EP 
 " Carry Out " ( New version ) – 3 : 52 
 " Carry Out " ( Chew Fu No MSG Fix Extended ) – 4 : 25 
 " Carry Out " ( Chew Fu No MSG Fix Radio ) – 3 : 33 
 " Carry Out " ( Chew Fu No MSG Fix Instrumental ) – 3 : 54 
 " Carry Out " ( Instrumental ) – 3 : 55 
 CD single 
 " Carry Out ( Album version ) – 3 : 53 
 " Carry Out " ( Chew Fu No MSG Fix Remix ) – 3 : 34 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded and mixed at No Excuses Studios in Santa Monica , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits taken from the liner notes of Shock Value II , Mosley Music Group , Blackground Records , Interscope Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tiger = 
 The tiger ( Panthera tigris ) is the largest cat species , most recognisable for their pattern of dark vertical stripes on reddish @-@ orange fur with a lighter underside . The largest tigers have reached a total body length of up to 3 @.@ 38 m ( 11 @.@ 1 ft ) over curves and have weighed up to 388 @.@ 7 kg ( 857 lb ) in the wild . The species is classified in the genus Panthera with the lion , leopard , jaguar and snow leopard . Tigers are apex predators , primarily preying on ungulates such as deer and bovids . They are territorial and generally solitary but social animals , often requiring large contiguous areas of habitat that support their prey requirements . This , coupled with the fact that they are indigenous to some of the more densely populated places on Earth , has caused significant conflicts with humans . 
 Tigers once ranged widely across Asia , from Turkey in the west to the eastern coast of Russia . Over the past 100 years , they have lost 93 % of their historic range , and have been extirpated from southwest and central Asia , from the islands of Java and Bali , and from large areas of Southeast and Eastern Asia . Today , they range from the Siberian taiga to open grasslands and tropical mangrove swamps . The remaining six tiger subspecies have been classified as endangered by IUCN . The global population in the wild is estimated to number between 3 @,@ 062 and 3 @,@ 948 individuals , down from around 100 @,@ 000 at the start of the 20th century , with most remaining populations occurring in small pockets isolated from each other , of which about 2 @,@ 000 exist on the Indian subcontinent . A 2016 global census estimated the population of wild tigers at approximately 3 @,@ 890 individuals . Major reasons for population decline include habitat destruction , habitat fragmentation and poaching . The extent of area occupied by tigers is estimated at less than 1 @,@ 184 @,@ 911 km2 ( 457 @,@ 497 sq mi ) , a 41 % decline from the area estimated in the mid @-@ 1990s . In 2016 , wildlife conservation group at WWF declared that world 's count of wild tigers has risen for the first time in a century . 
 Tigers are among the most recognisable and popular of the world 's charismatic megafauna . They have featured prominently in ancient mythology and folklore , and continue to be depicted in modern films and literature . They appear on many flags , coats of arms , and as mascots for sporting teams . The tiger is the national animal of Bangladesh , India , Malaysia and South Korea . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 In 1758 , Linnaeus described the tiger in his work Systema Naturae and gave it the scientific name Felis tigris . In 1929 , the British taxonomist Reginald Innes Pocock subordinated the species under the genus Panthera using the scientific name Panthera tigris . 
 The word Panthera is probably of Oriental origin and <unk> to the Ancient Greek word panther , the Latin word panthera , the Old French word <unk> , most likely meaning " the yellowish animal " , or from <unk> meaning whitish @-@ yellow . The derivation from Greek <unk> ( " all " ) and ther ( " beast " ) may be folk etymology . 
 The specific epithet , tigris , as well as the common name , tiger , come from the Middle English tigre and the Old English <unk> ( a plural word ) , both used for the animal . These derive from the Old French tigre , itself a derivative of the Latin word tigris and the Greek word tigris . The original source may have been the Persian <unk> meaning pointed or sharp and the Avestan <unk> meaning an arrow , perhaps referring to the speed with which a tiger launches itself at its prey . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The tiger 's closest living relatives were previously thought to be the lion , leopard and jaguar , all of which are classified under the genus Panthera . Genetic analysis indicates that the tiger and the snow leopard diverged from the other Panthera species about 2 @.@ 88 million years ago , and that both species may be more closely related to each other than to the lion , leopard and jaguar . 
 The oldest remains of an extinct tiger relative , called Panthera <unk> or the <unk> tiger , have been found in the Gansu province of northwestern China . This species is considered to be a sister taxon to the extant tiger and lived about 2 million years ago , at the beginning of the Pleistocene . It was smaller than the modern tiger , being the size of a jaguar , and probably did not have the same coat pattern . Despite being considered more " primitive " , the <unk> tiger was functionally and possibly ecologically similar to its modern cousin . As Panthera <unk> lived in northwestern China , that may have been where the tiger lineage originated . Tigers grew in size , possibly in response to adaptive radiations of prey species like deer and bovids which may have occurred in Southeast Asia during the early Pleistocene . 
 The earliest fossils of true tigers are from Java , and are between 1 @.@ 6 and 1 @.@ 8 million years old . Distinct fossils are known from the early and middle Pleistocene deposits in China and Sumatra . A subspecies called the Trinil tiger ( Panthera tigris <unk> ) lived about 1 @.@ 2 million years ago and is known from fossils found at Trinil in Java . 
 Tigers first reached India and northern Asia in the late Pleistocene , reaching eastern Beringia ( but not the American Continent ) , Japan , and Sakhalin . As evidenced by Sandra Herrington , some fossil skulls that are morphologically distinct from lion skulls could indicate however that tigers might have been present in Alaska within the last 100 @,@ 000 years during the last glaciation . Fossils found in Japan indicate the local tigers were , like the surviving island subspecies , smaller than the mainland forms , an example of insular dwarfism . Until the Holocene , tigers also lived in Borneo , as well as on the island of Palawan in the Philippines . 
 The tiger 's full genome sequence was published in 2013 . It and other cat genomes were found to have similar repeat composition and an appreciably conserved <unk> . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are 10 recognised tiger subspecies . One , the Trinil , became extinct in prehistoric times . The remaining subspecies all survived at least into the mid @-@ 20th century ; three of these are also considered extinct . Their historical range in Bangladesh , Siberia , Iran , Afghanistan , India , China , and southeast Asia , including three Indonesian islands , is severely diminished today . The modern subspecies are : 
 An analysis of <unk> and pelage morphology , ecology , and molecular biology of the tiger subspecies indicates that they have many traits in common and that the genetic diversity between them is low . The authors of this analysis suggest to group the Bengal , Indochinese , Malayan , South China , and Siberian tiger subspecies to the Continental tiger Panthera tigris tigris ; and the Sumatran , Javan and Bali tiger subspecies to the Sunda tiger Panthera tigris <unk> . This classification is intended to facilitate tiger conservation management , both regarding breeding programmes in zoos and future translocations in the wild . The classification is criticised by several geneticists , who maintain that the currently recognised nine subspecies can be distinguished genetically . 
 = = = Hybrids = = = 
 Lions have been known to breed with tigers ( most often the Amur and Bengal subspecies ) to create hybrids called ligers and tigons . Such hybrids were once commonly bred in zoos , but this is now discouraged due to the emphasis on conservation . Hybrids are still bred in private menageries and in zoos in China . 
 The liger is a cross between a male lion and a tigress . Because the lion sire passes on a growth @-@ promoting gene , but the corresponding growth @-@ inhibiting gene from the female tiger is absent , ligers grow far larger than either parent . They share physical and behavioural qualities of both parent species ( spots and stripes on a sandy background ) . Male ligers are sterile , but female ligers are often fertile . Males have about a 50 % chance of having a mane , but , even if they do , their manes will be only around half the size of that of a pure lion . <unk> are typically between 10 and 12 feet in length , and can weigh between 800 and 1 @,@ 000 pounds or more . 
 The less common <unk> is a cross between a lioness and a male tiger . Because the male tiger does not pass on a growth @-@ promoting gene and the lioness passes on a growth inhibiting gene , tigons are often relatively small , only weighing up to 150 kg ( 350 lb ) , which is about 10 – 20 % smaller than lions . Like ligers , they have physical and behavioural traits from both parental species , and males are sterile . Females are sometimes fertile and have occasionally given birth to <unk> when mated to a lion . 
 = = Description = = 
 Tigers have muscular bodies with powerful forelimbs , large heads and long tails . The pelage is dense and heavy ; colouration varies between shades of orange and brown with white ventral areas and distinctive vertical black stripes , whose patterns are unique to each individual . Their function is likely for camouflage in vegetation such as long grass with strong vertical patterns of light and shade . The tiger is one of only a few striped cat species ; it is not known why spotted patterns and rosettes are the more common camouflage pattern among felids . The tiger 's stripes are also found on the skin , so that if it were to be shaved , its distinctive coat pattern would still be visible . They have a mane @-@ like heavy growth of fur around the neck and jaws and long whiskers , especially in males . The pupils are circular with yellow irises . The small , rounded ears have a prominent white spot on the back , surrounded by black . These false " eyespots " , called ocelli , apparently play an important role in intraspecies communication . 
 The skull is similar to that of the lion , though the frontal region is usually not as depressed or flattened , with a slightly longer postorbital region . The skull of a lion has broader nasal openings . However , due to variation in skulls of the two species , the structure of the lower jaw is a more reliable indicator of species . The tiger also has fairly stout teeth ; the somewhat curved canines are the longest among living felids with a crown height of up to 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 The oldest recorded captive tiger lived for 26 years . A wild specimen , having no natural predators , could in theory live to a comparable age . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Tigers are the most variable in size of all big cats , much more so than lions . The Bengal and Siberian subspecies are the tallest at the shoulder and thus considered the largest living felids , ranking with the extinct Caspian tiger among the biggest that ever existed . An average adult male tiger from Northern India or Siberia outweighs an average adult male lion by around 45 @.@ 5 kg ( 100 lb ) . Males vary in total length from 250 to 390 cm ( 98 to 154 in ) and weigh between 90 to 306 kg ( 198 to 675 lb ) with skull length ranging from 316 to 383 mm ( 12 @.@ 4 to 15 @.@ 1 in ) . Females vary in total length from 200 to 275 cm ( 79 to 108 in ) , weigh 65 to 167 kg ( 143 to 368 lb ) with skull length ranging from 268 to 318 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 to 12 @.@ 5 in ) . In either sex , the tail represents about 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 1 m ( 24 to 43 in ) of total length . 
 Body size of different populations seems to be correlated with climate — Bergmann 's rule — and can be explained by thermoregulation . Large male Siberian tigers can reach a total length of more than 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 @.@ 5 ft ) over curves and 3 @.@ 3 m ( 10 @.@ 8 ft ) between pegs , and can weigh up to 306 kg ( 675 lb ) . This is considerably larger than the weight of 75 to 140 kg ( 165 to 309 lb ) reached by the smallest living subspecies , the Sumatran tiger . At the shoulder , tigers may variously stand 0 @.@ 7 to 1 @.@ 22 m ( 2 @.@ 3 to 4 @.@ 0 ft ) tall . The current record weight in the wild was 389 kg ( 858 lb ) for a Bengal tiger shot in 1967 . 
 They are a notably sexually dimorphic species , females being consistently smaller than males . The size difference between males and females is proportionally greater in the larger tiger subspecies , with males weighing up to 1 @.@ 7 times more than females . Males also have wider forepaw pads than females , enabling gender to be told from tracks . 
 = = = Colour variations = = = 
 A well @-@ known allele found only in the Bengal subspecies produces the white tiger , a colour variant first recorded in the early 19th century and found in an estimated one in 10 @,@ 000 natural births . Genetically , whiteness is recessive : a cub is white only when both parents carry the allele for whiteness . It is not albinism , pigment being evident in the white tiger 's stripes and in their blue eyes . The causative mutation changes a single amino acid in the transporter protein <unk> . 
 White tigers are more frequently bred in captivity , where the comparatively small gene pool can lead to inbreeding . This has given white tigers a greater likelihood of being born with physical defects , such as cleft palate , scoliosis ( curvature of the spine ) , and strabismus ( squint ) . Even apparently healthy white tigers generally do not live as long as their orange counterparts . Attempts have been made to cross white and orange tigers to remedy this , often mixing with other subspecies in the process . 
 Another recessive gene creates the " golden " or " golden tabby " colour variation , sometimes known as " strawberry " . Golden tigers have thicker than usual light @-@ gold fur , pale legs , and faint orange stripes . Few golden tigers are kept in captivity ; they are invariably at least part Bengal . Some golden tigers carry the white tiger gene , and when two such tigers are mated , they can produce some <unk> white offspring . Although a " pseudo @-@ melanistic " effect — wide stripes that partially obscure the orange background — has been seen in some pelts , no true black tigers have been authenticated , with the possible exception of one dead specimen examined in Chittagong in 1846 . These wholly or partially melanistic tigers , if they exist , are assumed to be intermittent mutations rather than a distinct species . There are further unconfirmed reports of a " blue " or slate @-@ coloured variant , the Maltese tiger . However , while some felids do exhibit this colouration as a solid coat , there is no known genetic configuration that would result in black stripes on a blue @-@ gray background . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 In the past , tigers were found throughout Asia , from the Caucasus and the Caspian Sea to Siberia and the Indonesian islands of Java , Bali and Sumatra . Fossil remains indicate tigers were also present in Borneo and Palawan in the Philippines during the late Pleistocene and Holocene . 
 During the 20th century , tigers became extinct in western Asia and were restricted to isolated pockets in the remaining parts of their range . They were extirpated on the island of Bali in the 1940s , around the Caspian Sea in the 1970s , and on Java in the 1980s . This was the result of habitat loss and the ongoing killing of tigers and tiger prey . Today , their fragmented and partly degraded range extends from India in the west to China and Southeast Asia . The northern limit of their range is close to the Amur River in southeastern Siberia . The only large island they still inhabit is Sumatra . Since the beginning of the 20th century , tigers ' historical range has shrunk by 93 % . In the decade from 1997 to 2007 , the estimated area known to be occupied by tigers has declined by 41 % . 
 Tigers can occupy a wide range of habitat types , but will usually require sufficient cover , proximity to water , and an abundance of prey . Compared to the lion , the tiger prefers denser vegetation , for which its camouflage colouring is ideally suited , and where a single predator is not at a disadvantage compared with the multiple felines in a pride . A further habitat requirement is the placement of suitably secluded den locations , which may consist of caves , large hollow trees , or dense vegetation . Bengal tigers in particular live in many types of forests , including wet , evergreen , and the <unk> of Assam and eastern Bengal ; the swampy mangrove forest of the Ganges Delta ; the deciduous forest of Nepal , and the thorn forests of the Western Ghats . In various parts of their range they inhabit or have inhabited additionally partially open grassland and savanna as well as taiga forests and rocky habitats . 
 = = Biology and behaviour = = 
 = = = Social activity = = = 
 Adult tigers lead largely solitary lives . They establish and maintain territories but have much wider home ranges within which they roam . Resident adults of either sex generally confine their movements to their home ranges , within which they satisfy their needs and those of their growing cubs . Individuals sharing the same area are aware of each other 's movements and activities . The size of the home range mainly depends on prey abundance , and , in the case of males , on access to females . A tigress may have a territory of 20 km2 ( 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ) , while the territories of males are much larger , covering 60 to 100 km2 ( 23 to 39 sq mi ) . The range of a male tends to overlap those of several females , providing him with a large field of prospective mating partners . 
 Unlike many felids , tigers are strong swimmers and often deliberately bathe in ponds , lakes and rivers as a means of keeping cool in the heat of the day . Among the big cats , only the jaguar shares a similar fondness for water . They may cross rivers up to 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) across and can swim up to 29 km ( 18 mi ) in a day . They are able to carry prey through or capture it in the water . 
 Young female tigers establish their first territories close to their mother 's . The overlap between the female and her mother 's territory reduces with time . Males , however , migrate further than their female counterparts and set out at a younger age to mark out their own area . A young male acquires territory either by seeking out an area devoid of other male tigers , or by living as a transient in another male 's territory until he is older and strong enough to challenge the resident male . Young males seeking to establish themselves thereby comprise the highest mortality rate ( 30 – 35 % per year ) amongst adult tigers . 
 To identify his territory , the male marks trees by spraying urine and anal gland secretions , as well as marking trails with scat and marking trees or the ground with their claws . Females also use these " scrapes " , as well as urine and scat markings . Scent markings of this type allow an individual to pick up information on another 's identity , sex and reproductive status . Females in oestrus will signal their availability by scent marking more frequently and increasing their vocalisations . 
 Although for the most part avoiding each other , tigers are not always territorial and relationships between individuals can be complex . An adult of either sex will sometimes share its kill with others , even those who may not be related to them . George Schaller observed a male share a kill with two females and four cubs . Unlike male lions , male tigers allow females and cubs to feed on the kill before the male is finished with it ; all involved generally seem to behave amicably , in contrast to the competitive behaviour shown by a lion pride . This quotation is from Stephen Mills ' book Tiger , describing an event witnessed by <unk> Thapar and Fateh Singh Rathore in Ranthambhore National Park : 
 A dominant tigress they called Padmini killed a 250 kg ( 550 lb ) male nilgai – a very large antelope . They found her at the kill just after dawn with her three 14 @-@ month @-@ old cubs and they watched uninterrupted for the next ten hours . During this period the family was joined by two adult females and one adult male , all offspring from Padmini 's previous litters , and by two unrelated tigers , one female the other unidentified . By three o 'clock there were no fewer than nine tigers round the kill . 
 Occasionally , male tigers participate in raising cubs , usually their own , but this is extremely rare and not always well understood . In May 2015 , Amur tigers were photographed by camera traps in the Sikhote @-@ Alin <unk> Reserve . The photos show a male Amur tiger pass by , followed by a female and three cubs within the span of about two minutes . In Ranthambore , a male Bengal tiger raised and defended two orphaned female cubs after their mother had died of illness . The cubs remained under his care , he supplied them with food , protected them from his rival and sister , and apparently also trained them . 
 Male tigers are generally more intolerant of other males within their territories than females are of other females . Territory disputes are usually solved by displays of intimidation rather than outright aggression . Several such incidents have been observed in which the subordinate tiger yielded defeat by rolling onto its back and showing its belly in a submissive posture . Once dominance has been established , a male may tolerate a subordinate within his range , as long as they do not live in too close quarters . The most aggressive disputes tend to occur between two males when a female is in oestrus , and may rarely result in the death of one of the males . 
 Facial expressions include the " defense threat " , where an individual bares its teeth , flattens its ears and its pupils enlarge . Both males and females show a flehmen response , a characteristic grimace , when sniffing urine markings but flehmen is more often associated with males detecting the markings made by <unk> in oestrus . Like other Panthera , tigers roar , particularly in aggressive situations , during the mating season or when making a kill . There are two different roars : the " true " roar is made using the hyoid apparatus and forced through an open mouth as it progressively closes , and the shorter , harsher " coughing " roar is made with the mouth open and teeth exposed . The " true " roar can be heard at up to 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) away and is sometimes emitted three or four times in succession . When tense , tigers will moan , a sound similar to a roar but more subdued and made when the mouth is partially or completely closed . Moaning can be heard 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) away . <unk> , soft , low @-@ frequency snorting similar to purring in smaller cats , is heard in more friendly situations . Other vocal communications include grunts , woofs , snarls , <unk> , hisses and growls . 
 Tigers have been studied in the wild using a variety of techniques . The populations of tigers have been estimated using plaster casts of their <unk> , although this method was criticised as being inaccurate . More recent attempts have been made using camera trapping and studies on DNA from their scat , while radio <unk> has been used to track tigers in the wild . Tiger spray has been found to be just as good , or better , as a source of DNA as scat . 
 = = = Hunting and diet = = = 
 In the wild , tigers mostly feed on large and medium @-@ sized animals , preferring native ungulates weighing at least 90 kg ( 200 lb ) . They typically have little or no deleterious effect on their prey populations . Sambar deer , chital , <unk> , wild boar , gaur , nilgai and both water buffalo and domestic buffalo , in descending order of preference , are the tiger 's favoured prey in Tamil Nadu , India , while gaur and sambar are the preferred prey and constitute the main diet of tigers in other parts of India . They also prey on other predators , including dogs , leopards , pythons , sloth bears , and crocodiles . In Siberia , the main prey species are Manchurian wapiti and wild boar ( the two species comprising nearly 80 % of the prey selected ) followed by sika deer , moose , roe deer , and musk deer . Asiatic black bears and Ussuri brown bears may also fall prey to tigers , and they constitute up to 40 @.@ 7 % of the diet of Siberian tigers depending on local conditions and the bear populations . In Sumatra , prey include sambar deer , muntjac , wild boar , Malayan tapir and orangutan . In the former Caspian tiger 's range , prey included saiga antelope , camels , Caucasian wisent , yak , and wild horses . Like many predators , tigers are opportunistic and may eat much smaller prey , such as monkeys , peafowl and other ground @-@ based birds , hares , porcupines , and fish . 
 Tigers generally do not prey on fully grown adult Asian elephants and Indian rhinoceros but incidents have been reported . More often , it is the more vulnerable small calves that are taken . Tigers have been reported attacking and killing elephants ridden by humans during tiger hunts in the 19th century . When in close proximity to humans , tigers will also sometimes prey on such domestic livestock as cattle , horses , and donkeys . Old or wounded tigers , unable to catch wild prey , can become man @-@ eaters ; this pattern has recurred frequently across India . An exception is in the Sundarbans , where healthy tigers prey upon fishermen and villagers in search of forest produce , humans thereby forming a minor part of the tiger 's diet . Although almost exclusively carnivorous , tigers will occasionally eat vegetation for dietary fibre such as fruit of the slow match tree . 
 Tigers are thought to be mainly nocturnal predators , but in areas where humans are typically absent , they have been observed via remote @-@ controlled , hidden cameras , hunting in daylight . They generally hunt alone and ambush their prey as most other cats do , overpowering them from any angle , using their body size and strength to knock the prey off balance . Successful hunts usually require the tiger to almost simultaneously leap onto its quarry , knock it over , and grab the throat or nape with its teeth . Despite their large size , tigers can reach speeds of about 49 – 65 km / h ( 30 – 40 mph ) but only in short bursts ; consequently , tigers must be close to their prey before they break cover . If the prey catches wind of the tiger 's presence before this , the tiger usually abandons the hunt rather than chase prey or battle it head @-@ on . Horizontal leaps of up to 10 m ( 33 ft ) have been reported , although leaps of around half this distance are more typical . One in 2 to 20 hunts , including stalking near potential prey , ends in a successful kill . 
 When hunting larger animals , tigers prefer to bite the throat and use their powerful forelimbs to hold onto the prey , often simultaneously wrestling it to the ground . The tiger remains latched onto the neck until its target dies of strangulation . By this method , gaurs and water buffaloes weighing over a ton have been killed by tigers weighing about a sixth as much . Although they can kill healthy adults , tigers often select the calves or infirm of very large species . Healthy adult prey of this type can be dangerous to tackle , as long , strong horns , legs and tusks are all potentially fatal to the tiger . No other extant land predator routinely takes on prey this large on their own . Whilst hunting <unk> , which comprise up to 60 % of their prey in India , tigers have reportedly made a passable impersonation of the male sambar 's rutting call to attract them . With smaller prey , such as monkeys and hares , the tiger bites the nape , often breaking the spinal cord , piercing the windpipe , or severing the jugular vein or common carotid artery . Though rarely observed , some tigers have been recorded to kill prey by swiping with their paws , which are powerful enough to smash the skulls of domestic cattle , and break the backs of sloth bears . 
 During the 1980s , a tiger named " Genghis " in Ranthambhore National Park was observed frequently hunting prey through deep lake water , a pattern of behaviour that had not previously been witnessed in over 200 years of observations . Moreover , he appeared to be unusually successful , with 20 % of hunts ending in a kill . 
 After killing their prey , tigers sometimes drag it to conceal it in vegetative cover , usually pulling it by grasping with their mouths at the site of the killing bite . This , too , can require great physical strength . In one case , after it had killed an adult gaur , a tiger was observed to drag the massive carcass over a distance of 12 m ( 39 ft ) . When 13 men simultaneously tried to drag the same carcass later , they were unable to move it . An adult tiger can go for up to two weeks without eating , then gorge on 34 kg ( 75 lb ) of flesh at one time . In captivity , adult tigers are fed 3 to 6 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 to 13 @.@ 2 lb ) of meat a day . 
 = = = Interaction with other predators = = = 
 Tigers usually prefer to eat prey they have caught themselves , but are not above eating carrion in times of scarcity and may even pirate prey from other large carnivores . Although predators typically avoid one another , if a prey item is under dispute or a serious competitor is encountered , displays of aggression are common . If these are not sufficient , the conflicts may turn violent ; tigers may kill competitors as leopards , dholes , striped hyenas , wolves , bears , pythons and crocodiles on occasion . Tigers may also prey on these competitors . Attacks on smaller predators , such as badgers , lynxes , and foxes , are almost certainly predatory . Crocodiles , bears and large packs of dholes may win conflicts against tigers and in some cases even kill them . 
 The considerably smaller leopard avoids competition from tigers by hunting at different times of the day and hunting different prey . In India 's Nagarhole National Park , most prey selected by leopards were from 30 to 175 kg ( 66 to 386 lb ) against a preference for prey weighing over 176 kg ( 388 lb ) in the tigers . The average prey weight in the two respective big cats in India was 37 @.@ 6 kg ( 83 lb ) against 91 @.@ 5 kg ( 202 lb ) . With relatively abundant prey , tigers and leopards were seen to successfully coexist without competitive exclusion or interspecies dominance hierarchies that may be more common to the African savanna ( where the leopard may coexist with the lion ) . Lone golden jackals expelled from their pack have been known to form commensal relationships with tigers . These solitary jackals , known as <unk> @-@ <unk> , will attach themselves to a particular tiger , trailing it at a safe distance to feed on the big cat 's kills . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Mating can occur all year round , but is more common between November and April . A female is only receptive for three to six days . Mating is frequent and noisy during that time . Gestation can range from 93 to 112 days , the average being 105 days . The litter is usually two or three cubs , occasionally as few as one or as many as six . Cubs weigh from 680 to 1 @,@ 400 g ( 1 @.@ 50 to 3 @.@ 09 lb ) each at birth , and are born blind and helpless . The females rear them alone , with the birth site and maternal den in a sheltered location such as a thicket , cave or rocky crevice . The father generally takes no part in rearing them . Unrelated wandering male tigers may kill cubs to make the female receptive , since the tigress may give birth to another litter within five months if the cubs of the previous litter are lost . The mortality rate of tiger cubs is about 50 % in the first two years . Few other predators attack tiger cubs due to the diligence and ferocity of the mother tiger . Apart from humans and other tigers , common causes of cub mortality are starvation , freezing , and accidents . 
 A dominant cub emerges in most litters , usually a male . This cub is more active than its siblings and takes the lead in their play , eventually leaving its mother and becoming independent earlier . The cubs open their eyes at six to fourteen days old . By eight weeks , the cubs make short ventures outside the den with their mother , although they do not travel with her as she roams her territory until they are older . The cubs are nursed for three to six months . Around the time they are weaned , they start to accompany their mother on territorial walks and they are taught how to hunt . The cubs often become capable ( and nearly adult size ) hunters at eleven months old . The cubs become independent around eighteen months of age , but it is not until they are around two to two and a half years old that they fully separate from their mother . Females reach sexual maturity at three to four years , whereas males do so at four to five years . 
 = = Conservation efforts = = 
 The tiger is an endangered species . Poaching for fur and body parts and destruction of habitat have simultaneously greatly reduced tiger populations in the wild . At the start of the 20th century , it is estimated there were over 100 @,@ 000 tigers in the wild , but the population has dwindled outside of captivity to between 1 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 500 . Major reasons for population decline include habitat destruction , habitat fragmentation and poaching . Demand for tiger parts for use in traditional Chinese medicine has also been cited as a major threat to tiger populations . Some estimates suggest that there are fewer than 2 @,@ 500 mature breeding individuals , with no subpopulation containing more than 250 mature breeding individuals . The global wild tiger population was estimated by the World Wide Fund for Nature at 3 @,@ 200 in 2011 and 3 @,@ 890 in 2015 — Vox reported that this was the first increase in a century . The exact number of wild tigers is unknown , as many estimates are outdated or are educated guesses ; few estimates are based on reliable scientific censuses . The table shows estimates per country according to IUCN and range country governments . The Wildlife Conservation Society and Panthera Corporation formed the collaboration Tigers Forever , with field sites including the world 's largest tiger reserve , the 21 @,@ 756 km2 ( 8 @,@ 400 sq mi ) <unk> Valley in Myanmar . Other reserves were in the Western Ghats in India , Thailand , Laos , Cambodia , the Russian Far East covering in total about 260 @,@ 000 km2 ( 100 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . 
 India is home to the world 's largest population of wild tigers but only 11 % of the original Indian tiger habitat remains , and it has become fragmented . From 1973 , India 's Project Tiger , started by Indira Gandhi , established over 25 tiger reserves in reclaimed land , where human development was forbidden . The project was credited with tripling the number of wild Bengal tigers from some 1 @,@ 200 in 1973 to over 3 @,@ 500 in the 1990s , but a 2007 census showed that numbers had dropped back to about 1 @,@ 400 tigers because of poaching . Following the report , the Indian government pledged $ 153 million to the initiative , set up measures to combat poaching , promised funds to relocate up to 200 @,@ 000 villagers in order to reduce human @-@ tiger interactions , and set up eight new tiger reserves . India also reintroduced tigers to the Sariska Tiger Reserve and by 2009 it was claimed that poaching had been effectively countered at Ranthambore National Park . A 2014 census estimated a population of 2 @,@ 226 , a 30 % increase since 2011 . 
 In the 1940s , the Siberian tiger was on the brink of extinction with only about 40 animals remaining in the wild in Russia . As a result , anti @-@ poaching controls were put in place by the Soviet Union and a network of protected zones ( <unk> ) were instituted , leading to a rise in the population to several hundred . Poaching again became a problem in the 1990s , when the economy of Russia collapsed . The major obstacle in preserving the species is the enormous territory individual tigers require ( up to 450 km2 needed by a single female and more for a single male ) . Current conservation efforts are led by local governments and NGO 's in concert with international organisations , such as the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Wildlife Conservation Society . The competitive exclusion of wolves by tigers has been used by Russian conservationists to convince hunters to tolerate the big cats . Tigers have less impact on ungulate populations than do wolves , and are effective in controlling the latter 's numbers . In 2005 , there were thought to be about 360 animals in Russia , though these exhibited little genetic diversity . However , in a decade later , the Siberian tiger census was estimated from 480 to 540 individuals . 
 Having earlier rejected the Western @-@ led environmentalist movement , China changed its stance in the 1980s and became a party to the CITES treaty . By 1993 it had banned the trade in tiger parts , and this diminished the use of tiger bones in traditional Chinese medicine . After this , the Tibetan people 's trade in tiger skins became a relatively more important threat to tigers . The pelts were used in clothing , tiger @-@ skin <unk> being worn by singers and participants in horse racing festivals , and had become status symbols . In 2004 , international conservation organizations launched successful environmental propaganda campaigns in China against the Tibetan tiger skin trade . There was outrage in India , where many Tibetans live , and the 14th Dalai Lama was persuaded to take up the issue . Since then there has been a change of attitude , with some Tibetans publicly burning their <unk> . 
 In 1994 , the Indonesian Sumatran Tiger Conservation Strategy addressed the potential crisis that tigers faced in Sumatra . The Sumatran Tiger Project ( STP ) was initiated in June 1995 in and around the Way Kambas National Park in order to ensure the long @-@ term viability of wild Sumatran tigers and to accumulate data on tiger life @-@ history characteristics vital for the management of wild populations . By August 1999 , the teams of the STP had evaluated 52 sites of potential tiger habitat in Lampung Province , of which only 15 these were intact enough to contain tigers . In the framework of the STP a community @-@ based conservation programme was initiated to document the tiger @-@ human dimension in the park in order to enable conservation authorities to resolve tiger @-@ human conflicts based on a comprehensive database rather than anecdotes and opinions . 
 = = = <unk> and reintroducing = = = 
 In 1978 , the Indian conservationist Billy Arjan Singh attempted to <unk> a tiger in <unk> National Park ; this was the captive @-@ bred tigress Tara . Soon after the release , numerous people were killed and eaten by a tigress that was subsequently shot . Government officials claimed it was Tara , though Singh disputed this . Further controversy broke out with the discovery that Tara was partly Siberian tiger . 
 The organisation Save China 's Tigers has attempted to <unk> the South China tigers , with a breeding and training programme in a South African reserve known as <unk> Valley Reserve ( <unk> ) and eventually reintroduce them to the wild of China . 
 A future <unk> project was proposed for Siberian tigers set to be reintroduced to northern Russia 's Pleistocene park . The Siberian tigers sent to Iran for a captive breeding project in Tehran are set to be <unk> and reintroduced to the <unk> peninsula to replace the now extinct Caspian tigers . 
 = = Relation with humans = = 
 = = = Tiger as prey = = = 
 The tiger has been one of the big five game animals of Asia . Tiger hunting took place on a large scale in the early 19th and 20th centuries , being a recognised and admired sport by the British in colonial India as well as the <unk> and aristocratic class of the erstwhile princely states of pre @-@ independence India . A single maharaja or English hunter could claim to kill over a hundred tigers in their hunting career . Tiger hunting was done by some hunters on foot ; others sat up on <unk> with a goat or buffalo tied out as bait ; yet others on elephant @-@ back . 
 = = = Man @-@ eating tigers = = = 
 Wild tigers that have had no prior contact with humans actively avoid interactions with humans . However , tigers cause more human deaths through direct attack than any other wild mammal . Attacks are occasionally provoked , as tigers lash out after being injured while they themselves are hunted . Attacks can be provoked accidentally , as when a human surprises a tiger or inadvertently comes between a mother and her young , or as in a case in rural India when a postman startled a tiger , used to seeing him on foot , by riding a bicycle . Occasionally tigers come to view people as prey . Such attacks are most common in areas where population growth , logging , and farming have put pressure on tiger habitats and reduced their wild prey . Most man @-@ eating tigers are old , are missing teeth , and are unable to capture their preferred prey . For example , the <unk> Tiger , a tigress found in Nepal and then India , had two broken canines . She was responsible for an estimated 430 human deaths , the most attacks known to be perpetrated by a single wild animal , by the time she was shot in 1907 by Jim Corbett . According to Corbett , tiger attacks on humans are normally in daytime , when people are working outdoors and are not keeping watch . Early writings tend to describe man @-@ eating tigers as cowardly because of their ambush tactics . 
 Man @-@ eaters have been a particular problem in recent decades in India and Bangladesh , especially in Kumaon , Garhwal and the Sundarbans mangrove swamps of Bengal , where some healthy tigers have hunted humans . Because of rapid habitat loss attributed to climate change , tiger attacks have increased in the Sundarbans . The Sundarbans area had 129 human deaths from tigers from 1969 to 1971 . In the 10 years prior to that period , about 100 attacks per year in the Sundarbans , with a high of around 430 in some years of the 1960s . Unusually , in some years in the Sundarbans , more humans are killed by tigers than vice versa . In 1972 , India 's production of honey and beeswax dropped by 50 % when at least 29 people who gathered these materials were devoured . In 1986 in the Sundarbans , since tigers almost always attack from the rear , masks with human faces were worn on the back of the head , on the theory that tigers usually do not attack if seen by their prey . This decreased the number of attacks only temporarily . All other means to prevent attacks , such as providing more prey or using electrified human dummies , worked less well . 
 At least 27 people were killed or seriously injured by captive tigers in the United States from 1998 to 2001 . 
 In some cases , rather than being predatory , tiger attacks on human seem to be territorial in nature . At least in one case , a tigress with cubs killed eight people entering her territory without consuming them at all . 
 = = = Commercial hunting and traditional medicine = = = 
 Historically , tigers have been hunted at a large scale so their famous striped skins could be collected . The trade in tiger skins peaked in the 1960s , just before international conservation efforts took effect . By 1977 , a tiger skin in an English market was considered to be worth $ 4 @,@ 250 US dollars . 
 Many people in China and other parts of Asia have a belief that various tiger parts have medicinal properties , including as pain killers and aphrodisiacs . There is no scientific evidence to support these beliefs . The use of tiger parts in pharmaceutical drugs in China is already banned , and the government has made some offences in connection with tiger poaching punishable by death . Furthermore , all trade in tiger parts is illegal under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and a domestic trade ban has been in place in China since 1993 . 
 However , the trading of tiger parts in Asia has become a major black market industry and governmental and conservation attempts to stop it have been ineffective to date . Almost all black marketers engaged in the trade are based in China and have either been shipped and sold within in their own country or into Taiwan , South Korea or Japan . The Chinese subspecies was almost completely decimated by killing for commerce due to both the parts and skin trades in the 1950s through the 1970s . Contributing to the illegal trade , there are a number of tiger farms in the country specialising in breeding the cats for profit . It is estimated that between 5 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 captive @-@ bred , semi @-@ tame animals live in these farms today . However , many tigers for traditional medicine black market are wild ones shot or snared by poachers and may be caught anywhere in the tiger 's remaining range ( from Siberia to India to the Malay Peninsula to Sumatra ) . In the Asian black market , a tiger penis can be worth the equivalent of around $ 300 U.S. dollars . In the years of 1990 through 1992 , 27 million products with tiger derivatives were found . In July 2014 at an international convention on endangered species in Geneva , Switzerland , a Chinese representative admitted for the first time his government was aware trading in tiger skins was occurring in China . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 In Ancient Roman times , tigers were kept in menageries and amphitheatres to be exhibited , trained and paraded , and were often provoked to fight humans and exotic beasts . Since the 17th century , tigers , being rare and ferocious , were sought after to keep at European castles as symbols of their owners ' power . Tigers became central zoo and circus exhibits in the 18th century : a tiger could cost up to 4 @,@ 000 francs in France ( for comparison , a professor of the Beaux @-@ Arts at Lyons earned only 3 @,@ 000 francs a year ) , or up to $ 3 @,@ 500 in the United States where a lion cost no more than $ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 China ( 2007 ) had over 4 @,@ 000 captive tigers , of which 3 @,@ 000 were held by about twenty larger facilities , with the rest held by some 200 smaller facilities . The USA ( 2011 ) had 2 @,@ 884 tigers in 468 facilities . Nineteen states have banned private ownership of tigers , fifteen require a license , and sixteen states have no regulation . Genetic ancestry of 105 captive tigers from fourteen countries and regions showed that forty @-@ nine animals belonged distinctly to five subspecies ; fifty @-@ two animals had mixed subspecies origins . As such , " many Siberian tigers in zoos today are actually the result of crosses with Bengal tigers . " 
 The Tiger Species Survival Plan has condemned the breeding of white tigers , alleging they are of mixed ancestry and of unknown lineage . The genes responsible for white colouration are represented by 0 @.@ 001 % of the population . The disproportionate growth in numbers of white tigers points to inbreeding among homozygous recessive individuals . This would lead to inbreeding depression and loss of genetic variability . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 Tigers and their superlative qualities have been a source of fascination for mankind since ancient times , and they are routinely visible as important cultural and media motifs . They are also considered one of the charismatic megafauna , and are used as the face of conservation campaigns worldwide . In a 2004 online poll conducted by cable television channel Animal Planet , involving more than 50 @,@ 000 viewers from 73 countries , the tiger was voted the world 's favourite animal with 21 % of the vote , narrowly beating the dog . 
 = = = In myth and legend = = = 
 In Chinese myth and culture , the tiger is one of the 12 animals of the Chinese zodiac . In Chinese art , the tiger is depicted as an earth symbol and equal rival of the Chinese dragon – the two representing matter and spirit respectively . The Southern Chinese martial art Hung Ga is based on the movements of the tiger and the crane . In Imperial China , a tiger was the personification of war and often represented the highest army general ( or present day defense secretary ) , while the emperor and empress were represented by a dragon and phoenix , respectively . The White Tiger ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Bái <unk> ) is one of the Four Symbols of the Chinese constellations . It is sometimes called the White Tiger of the West ( <unk> ) , and it represents the west and the autumn season . 
 The tiger 's tail appears in stories from countries including China and Korea , it being generally inadvisable to grasp a tiger by the tail . 
 In Buddhism , the tiger is one of the Three <unk> Creatures , symbolising anger , with the monkey representing greed and the deer lovesickness . The Tungusic peoples considered the Siberian tiger a near @-@ deity and often referred to it as " Grandfather " or " Old man " . The <unk> and <unk> called it " Amba " . The Manchu considered the Siberian tiger as Hu Lin , the king . In Hinduism , the god Shiva wears and sits on tiger skin . The ten @-@ armed warrior goddess Durga rides the tigress ( or lioness ) Damon into battle . In southern India the god <unk> was associated with a tiger . 
 The <unk> replaces the werewolf in shapeshifting folklore in Asia ; in India they were evil sorcerers , while in Indonesia and Malaysia they were somewhat more benign . As per Hindu epic Mahabharata , tiger is more fiercer and ruthless than lion . 
 = = = In literature and film = = = 
 In William Blake 's poem in the Songs of Experience , titled " The Tyger , " the tiger is a menacing and fearful animal . In Yann Martel 's 2001 Man Booker Prize winning novel Life of Pi , the protagonist , surviving shipwreck for months in a small boat , somehow avoids being eaten by the other survivor , a large Bengal tiger . The story was adapted in Ang Lee 's 2012 feature film of the same name . Jim Corbett 's 1944 Man @-@ Eaters of Kumaon tells ten true stories of his tiger @-@ hunting exploits in what is now the northern Uttarakhand region of India . The book has sold over four million copies , and has been the basis of both fictional and documentary films . In Rudyard Kipling 's 1894 The Jungle Book , the tiger , Shere Khan , is the mortal enemy of the human protagonist , Mowgli ; the book has formed the basis of both live @-@ action and animated films . Other tiger characters aimed at children tend to be more benign , as for instance Tigger in A. A. Milne 's Winnie @-@ the @-@ Pooh and Hobbes of the comic strip Calvin and Hobbes , both of whom are represented as simply stuffed animals come to life . 
 = = = As a symbol = = = 
 The tiger is one of the animals displayed on the Pashupati seal of the Indus Valley Civilisation . The tiger was the emblem of the Chola Dynasty and was depicted on coins , seals and banners . The seals of several Chola copper coins show the tiger , the Pandyan emblem fish and the Chera emblem bow , indicating that the Cholas had achieved political supremacy over the latter two dynasties . Gold coins found in <unk> in the Nellore district of Andhra Pradesh have motifs of the tiger , bow and some indistinct marks . The tiger symbol of Chola Empire was later adopted by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and the tiger became a symbol of the unrecognised state of Tamil Eelam and Tamil independence movement . 
 The Bengal tiger is the national animal of India and Bangladesh . The Malaysian tiger is the national animal of Malaysia . The Siberian tiger is the national animal of South Korea . Since the successful economies of South Korea , Taiwan , Hong Kong and Singapore were described as the Four Asian Tigers , a tiger economy is a metaphor for a nation in rapid development . Tiger are also mascots for various sports teams around the world . Tony the Tiger is a famous mascot for Kellogg 's breakfast cereal Frosted Flakes . The Esso ( Exxon ) brand of petrol was advertised from 1969 onwards with the slogan ' put a tiger in your tank ' , and a tiger mascot ; more than 2 @.@ 5 million synthetic tiger tails were sold to motorists , who tied them to their petrol tank caps . 
 The tiger appears in heraldry but is distinct from the heraldic beast tyger , a <unk> , snouted creature which has its roots in European Medieval bestiaries . 
 = Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki = 
 The United States , with the consent of the United Kingdom as laid down in the Quebec Agreement , dropped nuclear weapons on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 , during the final stage of World War II . The two bombings , which killed at least 129 @,@ 000 people , remain the only use of nuclear weapons for warfare in history . 
 In the final year of the war , the Allies prepared for what was anticipated to be a very costly invasion of the Japanese mainland . This was preceded by a U.S. firebombing campaign that obliterated many Japanese cities . The war in Europe had concluded when Nazi Germany signed its instrument of surrender on May 8 , 1945 . The Japanese , facing the same fate , refused to accept the Allies ' demands for unconditional surrender and the Pacific War continued . Together with the United Kingdom and China , the United States called for the unconditional surrender of the Japanese armed forces in the Potsdam Declaration on July 26 , 1945 — the alternative being " prompt and utter destruction " . The Japanese response to this ultimatum was to ignore it . 
 In July 1945 , the Allied Manhattan Project successfully detonated an atomic bomb in the New Mexico desert and by August had produced atomic weapons based on two alternate designs . The 509th Composite Group of the United States Army Air Forces was equipped with the specialized Silverplate version of the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress , that could deliver them from Tinian in the Mariana Islands . 
 On August 6 , the U.S. dropped a uranium gun @-@ type atomic bomb ( Little Boy ) on the city of Hiroshima . American President Harry S. Truman called for Japan 's surrender 16 hours later , warning them to " expect a rain of ruin from the air , the like of which has never been seen on this earth " . Three days later , on August 9 , the U.S. dropped a plutonium implosion @-@ type bomb ( Fat Man ) on the city of Nagasaki . Within the first two to four months of the bombings , the acute effects of the atomic bombings killed 90 @,@ 000 – 146 @,@ 000 people in Hiroshima and 39 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 in Nagasaki ; roughly half of the deaths in each city occurred on the first day . During the following months , large numbers died from the effect of burns , radiation sickness , and other injuries , compounded by illness and malnutrition . In both cities , most of the dead were civilians , although Hiroshima had a sizable military garrison . 
 On August 15 , six days after the bombing of Nagasaki and the Soviet Union 's declaration of war , Japan announced its surrender to the Allies . On September 2 , it signed the instrument of surrender , effectively ending World War II . The bombings ' role in Japan 's surrender and their ethical justification are still debated . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Pacific War = = = 
 In 1945 , the Pacific War between the Empire of Japan and the Allies entered its fourth year . The Japanese fought fiercely , ensuring that U.S. victory would come at an enormous cost . Of the 1 @.@ 25 million battle casualties incurred by the United States in World War II , including both military personnel killed in action and wounded in action , nearly one million occurred in the twelve @-@ month period from June 1944 to June 1945 . December 1944 saw American battle casualties hit an all @-@ time monthly high of 88 @,@ 000 as a result of the German Ardennes Offensive . In the Pacific , the Allies returned to the Philippines , recaptured Burma , and invaded Borneo . Offensives were undertaken to reduce the Japanese forces remaining in Bougainville , New Guinea and the Philippines . In April 1945 , American forces landed on Okinawa , where heavy fighting continued until June . Along the way , the ratio of Japanese to American casualties dropped from 5 : 1 in the Philippines to 2 : 1 on Okinawa . 
 As the Allied advance moved inexorably towards Japan , conditions became steadily worse for the Japanese people . Japan 's merchant fleet declined from 5 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 gross tons in 1941 to 1 @,@ 560 @,@ 000 tons in March 1945 , and 557 @,@ 000 tons in August 1945 . Lack of raw materials forced the Japanese war economy into a steep decline after the middle of 1944 . The civilian economy , which had slowly deteriorated throughout the war , reached disastrous levels by the middle of 1945 . The loss of shipping also affected the fishing fleet , and the 1945 catch was only 22 % of that in 1941 . The 1945 rice harvest was the worst since 1909 , and hunger and malnutrition became widespread . U.S. industrial production was overwhelmingly superior to Japan 's . By 1943 , the U.S. produced almost 100 @,@ 000 aircraft a year , compared to Japan 's production of 70 @,@ 000 for the entire war . By the summer of 1944 , the U.S. had almost a hundred aircraft carriers in the Pacific , far more than Japan 's twenty @-@ five for the entire war . In February 1945 , Prince Fumimaro Konoe advised the Emperor Hirohito that defeat was inevitable , and urged him to abdicate . 
 = = = Preparations to invade Japan = = = 
 Even before the surrender of Nazi Germany on May 8 , 1945 , plans were underway for the largest operation of the Pacific War , Operation Downfall , the invasion of Japan . The operation had two parts : Operation Olympic and Operation Coronet . Set to begin in October 1945 , Olympic involved a series of landings by the U.S. Sixth Army intended to capture the southern third of the southernmost main Japanese island , Kyūshū . Operation Olympic was to be followed in March 1946 by Operation Coronet , the capture of the Kantō Plain , near Tokyo on the main Japanese island of Honshū by the U.S. First , Eighth and Tenth Armies , as well as a Commonwealth Corps made up of Australian , British and Canadian divisions . The target date was chosen to allow for Olympic to complete its objectives , for troops to be redeployed from Europe , and the Japanese winter to pass . 
 Japan 's geography made this invasion plan obvious to the Japanese ; they were able to predict the Allied invasion plans accurately and thus adjust their defensive plan , Operation Ketsugō , accordingly . The Japanese planned an all @-@ out defense of Kyūshū , with little left in reserve for any subsequent defense operations . Four veteran divisions were withdrawn from the Kwantung Army in Manchuria in March 1945 to strengthen the forces in Japan , and 45 new divisions were activated between February and May 1945 . Most were immobile formations for coastal defense , but 16 were high quality mobile divisions . In all , there were 2 @.@ 3 million Japanese Army troops prepared to defend the home islands , backed by a civilian militia of 28 million men and women . Casualty predictions varied widely , but were extremely high . The Vice Chief of the Imperial Japanese Navy General Staff , Vice Admiral <unk> Ōnishi , predicted up to 20 million Japanese deaths . 
 A study from June 15 , 1945 , by the Joint War Plans Committee , who provided planning information to the Joint Chiefs of Staff , estimated that Olympic would result in between 130 @,@ 000 and 220 @,@ 000 U.S. casualties , of which U.S. dead would be in the range from 25 @,@ 000 to 46 @,@ 000 . Delivered on June 15 , 1945 , after insight gained from the Battle of Okinawa , the study noted Japan 's inadequate defenses due to the very effective sea blockade and the American firebombing campaign . The Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General of the Army George Marshall , and the Army Commander in Chief in the Pacific , General of the Army Douglas MacArthur , signed documents agreeing with the Joint War Plans Committee estimate . 
 The Americans were alarmed by the Japanese buildup , which was accurately tracked through Ultra intelligence . Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson was sufficiently concerned about high American estimates of probable casualties to commission his own study by Quincy Wright and William Shockley . Wright and Shockley spoke with Colonels James McCormack and Dean Rusk , and examined casualty forecasts by Michael E. DeBakey and Gilbert Beebe . Wright and Shockley estimated the invading Allies would suffer between 1 @.@ 7 and 4 million casualties in such a scenario , of whom between 400 @,@ 000 and 800 @,@ 000 would be dead , while Japanese fatalities would have been around 5 to 10 million . 
 Marshall began contemplating the use of a weapon which was " readily available and which assuredly can decrease the cost in American lives " : poison gas . Quantities of phosgene , mustard gas , tear gas and cyanogen chloride were moved to Luzon from stockpiles in Australia and New Guinea in preparation for Operation Olympic , and MacArthur ensured that Chemical Warfare Service units were trained in their use . Consideration was also given to using biological weapons against Japan . 
 = = = Air raids on Japan = = = 
 While the United States had developed plans for an air campaign against Japan prior to the Pacific War , the capture of Allied bases in the western Pacific in the first weeks of the conflict meant that this offensive did not begin until mid @-@ 1944 when the long @-@ ranged Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress became ready for use in combat . Operation Matterhorn involved India @-@ based B @-@ 29s staging through bases around Chengdu in China to make a series of raids on strategic targets in Japan . This effort failed to achieve the strategic objectives that its planners had intended , largely because of logistical problems , the bomber 's mechanical difficulties , the vulnerability of Chinese staging bases , and the extreme range required to reach key Japanese cities . 
 United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) Brigadier General Haywood S. Hansell determined that Guam , Tinian , and Saipan in the Mariana Islands would better serve as B @-@ 29 bases , but they were in Japanese hands . Strategies were shifted to accommodate the air war , and the islands were captured between June and August 1944 . Air bases were developed , and B @-@ 29 operations commenced from the Marianas in October 1944 . These bases were easily resupplied by cargo ships . The XXI Bomber Command began missions against Japan on November 18 , 1944 . 
 The early attempts to bomb Japan from the Marianas proved just as ineffective as the China @-@ based B @-@ 29s had been . Hansell continued the practice of conducting so @-@ called high @-@ altitude precision bombing , aimed at key industries and transportation networks , even after these tactics had not produced acceptable results . These efforts proved unsuccessful due to logistical difficulties with the remote location , technical problems with the new and advanced aircraft , unfavorable weather conditions , and enemy action . 
 Hansell 's successor , Major General Curtis LeMay , assumed command in January 1945 and initially continued to use the same precision bombing tactics , with equally unsatisfactory results . The attacks initially targeted key industrial facilities but much of the Japanese manufacturing process was carried out in small workshops and private homes . Under pressure from USAAF headquarters in Washington , LeMay changed tactics and decided that low @-@ level incendiary raids against Japanese cities were the only way to destroy their production capabilities , shifting from precision bombing to area bombardment with incendiaries . 
 Like most strategic bombing during World War II , the aim of the USAAF offensive against Japan was to destroy the enemy 's war industries , kill or disable civilian employees of these industries , and undermine civilian morale . Civilians who took part in the war effort through such activities as building fortifications and manufacturing munitions and other war materials in factories and workshops were considered combatants in a legal sense and therefore liable to be attacked . 
 Over the next six months , the XXI Bomber Command under LeMay firebombed 67 Japanese cities . The firebombing of Tokyo , codenamed Operation Meetinghouse , on March 9 – 10 killed an estimated 100 @,@ 000 people and destroyed 16 square miles ( 41 km2 ) of the city and 267 @,@ 000 buildings in a single night . It was the deadliest bombing raid of the war , at a cost of 20 B @-@ 29s shot down by flak and fighters . By May , 75 % of bombs dropped were incendiaries designed to burn down Japan 's " paper cities " . By mid @-@ June , Japan 's six largest cities had been devastated . The end of the fighting on Okinawa that month provided airfields even closer to the Japanese mainland , allowing the bombing campaign to be further escalated . Aircraft flying from Allied aircraft carriers and the Ryukyu Islands also regularly struck targets in Japan during 1945 in preparation for Operation Downfall . <unk> switched to smaller cities , with populations ranging from 60 @,@ 000 to 350 @,@ 000 . According to Yuki Tanaka , the U.S. fire @-@ bombed over a hundred Japanese towns and cities . These raids were also devastating . 
 The Japanese military was unable to stop the Allied attacks and the country 's civil defense preparations proved inadequate . Japanese fighters and antiaircraft guns had difficulty engaging bombers flying at high altitude . From April 1945 , the Japanese interceptors also had to face American fighter escorts based on Iwo Jima and Okinawa . That month , the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service and Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service stopped attempting to intercept the air raids in order to preserve fighter aircraft to counter the expected invasion . By mid @-@ 1945 the Japanese only occasionally scrambled aircraft to intercept individual B @-@ 29s conducting reconnaissance sorties over the country , in order to conserve supplies of fuel . By July 1945 , the Japanese had stockpiled 1 @,@ 156 @,@ 000 US barrels ( 137 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 l ; 36 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 US gal ; 30 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of avgas for the invasion of Japan . While the Japanese military decided to resume attacks on Allied bombers from late June , by this time there were too few operational fighters available for this change of tactics to hinder the Allied air raids . 
 = = = Atomic bomb development = = = 
 The discovery of nuclear fission by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938 , and its theoretical explanation by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch , made the development of an atomic bomb a theoretical possibility . Fears that a German atomic bomb project would develop atomic weapons first , especially among scientists who were refugees from Nazi Germany and other fascist countries , were expressed in the Einstein @-@ Szilard letter . This prompted preliminary research in the United States in late 1939 . Progress was slow until the arrival of the British MAUD Committee report in late 1941 , which indicated that only 5 – 10 kilograms of isotopically enriched uranium @-@ 235 was needed for a bomb instead of tons of un @-@ enriched uranium and a neutron moderator ( e.g. heavy water ) . 
 Working in collaboration with the United Kingdom and Canada , with their respective projects Tube Alloys and Chalk River Laboratories , the Manhattan Project , under the direction of Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , designed and built the first atomic bombs . Groves appointed J. Robert Oppenheimer to organize and head the project 's Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico , where bomb design work was carried out . Two types of bombs were eventually developed . Little Boy was a gun @-@ type fission weapon that used uranium @-@ 235 , a rare isotope of uranium separated at the Clinton Engineer Works at Oak Ridge , Tennessee . The other , known as a Fat Man , was a more powerful and efficient , but more complicated , implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon that used plutonium created in nuclear reactors at Hanford , Washington . A test implosion weapon , the gadget , was detonated at Trinity Site , on July 16 , 1945 , near Alamogordo , New Mexico . 
 There was a Japanese nuclear weapon program , but it lacked the human , mineral and financial resources of the Manhattan Project , and never made much progress towards developing an atomic bomb . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Organization and training = = = 
 The 509th Composite Group was constituted on December 9 , 1944 , and activated on December 17 , 1944 , at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah , commanded by Colonel Paul Tibbets . Tibbets was assigned to organize and command a combat group to develop the means of delivering an atomic weapon against targets in Germany and Japan . Because the flying squadrons of the group consisted of both bomber and transport aircraft , the group was designated as a " composite " rather than a " bombardment " unit . 
 Working with the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos , Tibbets selected Wendover for his training base over Great Bend , Kansas , and Mountain Home , Idaho , because of its remoteness . Each bombardier completed at least 50 practice drops of inert or conventional explosive pumpkin bombs and Tibbets declared his group combat @-@ ready . 
 The 509th Composite Group had an authorized strength of 225 officers and 1 @,@ 542 enlisted men , almost all of whom eventually deployed to Tinian . In addition to its authorized strength , the 509th had attached to it on Tinian 51 civilian and military personnel from Project Alberta , known as the 1st Technical Detachment . The 509th Composite Group 's 393d Bombardment Squadron was equipped with 15 Silverplate B @-@ 29s . These aircraft were specially adapted to carry nuclear weapons , and were equipped with fuel @-@ injected engines , Curtiss Electric reversible @-@ pitch propellers , pneumatic actuators for rapid opening and closing of bomb bay doors and other improvements . 
 The ground support echelon of the 509th Composite Group moved by rail on April 26 , 1945 , to its port of embarkation at Seattle , Washington . On May 6 the support elements sailed on the SS Cape Victory for the Marianas , while group materiel was shipped on the SS Emile Berliner . The Cape Victory made brief port calls at Honolulu and Eniwetok but the passengers were not permitted to leave the dock area . An advance party of the air echelon , consisting of 29 officers and 61 enlisted men flew by C @-@ 54 to North Field on Tinian , between May 15 and May 22 . 
 There were also two representatives from Washington , D.C. , Brigadier General Thomas Farrell , the deputy commander of the Manhattan Project , and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell of the Military Policy Committee , who were on hand to decide higher policy matters on the spot . Along with Captain William S. Parsons , the commander of Project Alberta , they became known as the " Tinian Joint Chiefs " . 
 = = = Choice of targets = = = 
 In April 1945 , Marshall asked Groves to nominate specific targets for bombing for final approval by himself and Stimson . Groves formed a Target Committee , chaired by himself , that included Farrell , Major John A. Derry , Colonel William P. Fisher , Joyce C. Stearns and David M. Dennison from the USAAF ; and scientists John von Neumann , Robert R. Wilson and William Penney from the Manhattan Project . The Target Committee met in Washington on April 27 ; at Los Alamos on May 10 , where it was able to talk to the scientists and technicians there ; and finally in Washington on May 28 , where it was briefed by Tibbets and Commander Frederick Ashworth from Project Alberta , and the Manhattan Project 's scientific advisor , Richard C. Tolman . 
 The Target Committee nominated five targets : Kokura , the site of one of Japan 's largest munitions plants ; Hiroshima , an embarkation port and industrial center that was the site of a major military headquarters ; Yokohama , an urban center for aircraft manufacture , machine tools , docks , electrical equipment and oil refineries ; Niigata , a port with industrial facilities including steel and aluminum plants and an oil refinery ; and Kyoto , a major industrial center . The target selection was subject to the following criteria : 
 The target was larger than 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) in diameter and was an important target in a large urban area . 
 The blast would create effective damage . 
 The target was unlikely to be attacked by August 1945 . 
 These cities were largely untouched during the nightly bombing raids and the Army Air Forces agreed to leave them off the target list so accurate assessment of the weapon could be made . Hiroshima was described as " an important army depot and port of embarkation in the middle of an urban industrial area . It is a good radar target and it is such a size that a large part of the city could be extensively damaged . There are adjacent hills which are likely to produce a focusing effect which would considerably increase the blast damage . Due to rivers it is not a good incendiary target . " 
 The Target Committee stated that " It was agreed that psychological factors in the target selection were of great importance . Two aspects of this are ( 1 ) obtaining the greatest psychological effect against Japan and ( 2 ) making the initial use sufficiently spectacular for the importance of the weapon to be internationally recognized when publicity on it is released . Kyoto had the advantage of being an important center for military industry , as well an intellectual center and hence a population better able to appreciate the significance of the weapon . The Emperor 's palace in Tokyo has a greater fame than any other target but is of least strategic value . " 
 Edwin O. Reischauer , a Japan expert for the U.S. Army Intelligence Service , was incorrectly said to have prevented the bombing of Kyoto . In his autobiography , Reischauer specifically refuted this claim : 
 ... the only person deserving credit for saving Kyoto from destruction is Henry L. Stimson , the Secretary of War at the time , who had known and admired Kyoto ever since his honeymoon there several decades earlier . 
 On May 30 , Stimson asked Groves to remove Kyoto from the target list due to its historical , religious and cultural significance , but Groves pointed to its military and industrial significance . Stimson then approached President Harry S. Truman about the matter . Truman agreed with Stimson , and Kyoto was temporarily removed from the target list . Groves attempted to restore Kyoto to the target list in July , but Stimson remained adamant . On July 25 , Nagasaki was put on the target list in place of Kyoto . Orders for the attack were issued to General Carl Spaatz on July 25 under the signature of General Thomas T. Handy , the acting Chief of Staff , since Marshall was at the Potsdam Conference with Truman . That day , Truman noted in his diary that : 
 This weapon is to be used against Japan between now and August 10th . I have told the <unk> of War , Mr. Stimson , to use it so that military objectives and soldiers and sailors are the target and not women and children . Even if the Japs are savages , ruthless , merciless and fanatic , we as the leader of the world for the common welfare cannot drop that terrible bomb on the old capital [ Kyoto ] or the new [ Tokyo ] . He and I are in accord . The target will be a purely military one . 
 = = = Proposed demonstration = = = 
 In early May 1945 , the Interim Committee was created by Stimson at the urging of leaders of the Manhattan Project and with the approval of Truman to advise on matters pertaining to nuclear energy . During the meetings on May 31 and June 1 , scientist Ernest Lawrence had suggested giving the Japanese a non @-@ combat demonstration . Arthur Compton later recalled that : 
 It was evident that everyone would suspect trickery . If a bomb were exploded in Japan with previous notice , the Japanese air power was still adequate to give serious interference . An atomic bomb was an intricate device , still in the developmental stage . Its operation would be far from routine . If during the final adjustments of the bomb the Japanese defenders should attack , a faulty move might easily result in some kind of failure . Such an end to an advertised demonstration of power would be much worse than if the attempt had not been made . It was now evident that when the time came for the bombs to be used we should have only one of them available , followed afterwards by others at all @-@ too @-@ long intervals . We could not afford the chance that one of them might be a dud . If the test were made on some neutral territory , it was hard to believe that Japan 's determined and fanatical military men would be impressed . If such an open test were made first and failed to bring surrender , the chance would be gone to give the shock of surprise that proved so effective . On the contrary , it would make the Japanese ready to interfere with an atomic attack if they could . Though the possibility of a demonstration that would not destroy human lives was attractive , no one could suggest a way in which it could be made so convincing that it would be likely to stop the war . 
 The possibility of a demonstration was raised again in the Franck Report issued by physicist James Franck on June 11 and the Scientific Advisory Panel rejected his report on June 16 , saying that " we can propose no technical demonstration likely to bring an end to the war ; we see no acceptable alternative to direct military use . " Franck then took the report to Washington , D.C. , where the Interim Committee met on June 21 to re @-@ examine its earlier conclusions ; but it reaffirmed that there was no alternative to the use of the bomb on a military target . 
 Like Compton , many U.S. officials and scientists argued that a demonstration would sacrifice the shock value of the atomic attack , and the Japanese could deny the atomic bomb was lethal , making the mission less likely to produce surrender . Allied prisoners of war might be moved to the demonstration site and be killed by the bomb . They also worried that the bomb might be a dud since the Trinity test was of a stationary device , not an air @-@ dropped bomb . In addition , only two bombs would be available at the start of August , although more were in production , and they cost billions of dollars , so using one for a demonstration would be expensive . 
 = = = Leaflets = = = 
 For several months , the U.S. had dropped more than 63 million leaflets across Japan warning civilians of air raids . Many Japanese cities suffered terrible damage from aerial bombings ; some were as much as 97 % destroyed . LeMay thought that leaflets would increase the psychological impact of bombing , and reduce the international stigma of area @-@ bombing cities . Even with the warnings , Japanese opposition to the war remained ineffective . In general , the Japanese regarded the leaflet messages as truthful , but anyone who was caught in possession of one was arrested . Leaflet texts were prepared by recent Japanese prisoners of war because they were thought to be the best choice " to appeal to their compatriots " . 
 In preparation for dropping an atomic bomb on Hiroshima , U.S. military leaders decided against a demonstration bomb , and against a special leaflet warning , in both cases because of the uncertainty of a successful detonation , and the wish to maximize psychological shock . No warning was given to Hiroshima that a new and much more destructive bomb was going to be dropped . Various sources give conflicting information about when the last leaflets were dropped on Hiroshima prior to the atomic bomb . Robert Jay Lifton writes that it was July 27 , and Theodore H. <unk> that it was July 3 . The USAAF history notes eleven cities were targeted with leaflets on July 27 , but Hiroshima was not one of them , and there were no leaflet sorties on July 30 . Leaflet sorties were undertaken on August 1 and August 4 . It is very likely that Hiroshima was <unk> in late July or early August , as survivor accounts talk about a delivery of leaflets a few days before the atomic bomb was dropped . One such leaflet lists twelve cities targeted for firebombing : Otaru , Akita , Hachinohe , Fukushima , <unk> , Takayama , Iwakuni , Tottori , Imabari , Yawata , <unk> , and Saga . Hiroshima was not listed . 
 = = = Potsdam Declaration = = = 
 Truman delayed the start of the summit by two weeks in the hope that the bomb could be tested before the start of negotiations with Stalin . The successful Trinity Test of July 16 exceeded expectations . On July 26 , Allied leaders issued the Potsdam Declaration outlining terms of surrender for Japan . It was presented as an ultimatum and stated that without a surrender , the Allies would attack Japan , resulting in " the inevitable and complete destruction of the Japanese armed forces and just as inevitably the utter devastation of the Japanese homeland " . The atomic bomb was not mentioned in the communiqué . On July 28 , Japanese papers reported that the declaration had been rejected by the Japanese government . That afternoon , Prime Minister Suzuki Kantarō declared at a press conference that the Potsdam Declaration was no more than a rehash ( <unk> ) of the Cairo Declaration and that the government intended to ignore it ( mokusatsu , " kill by silence " ) . The statement was taken by both Japanese and foreign papers as a clear rejection of the declaration . Emperor Hirohito , who was waiting for a Soviet reply to non @-@ committal Japanese peace feelers , made no move to change the government position . Japan 's willingness to surrender remained conditional on the preservation of the imperial institution ; that Japan not be occupied ; that the Japanese armed forces be disbanded voluntarily ; and that war criminals be prosecuted by Japanese courts . 
 Under the 1943 Quebec Agreement with the United Kingdom , the United States had agreed that nuclear weapons would not be used against another country without mutual consent . In June 1945 the head of the British Joint Staff Mission , Field Marshal Sir Henry Maitland Wilson , agreed that the use of nuclear weapons against Japan would be officially recorded as a decision of the Combined Policy Committee . At Potsdam , Truman agreed to a request from Winston Churchill that Britain be represented when the atomic bomb was dropped . William Penney and Group Captain Leonard Cheshire were sent to Tinian , but found that LeMay would not let them accompany the mission . All they could do was send a strongly worded signal back to Wilson . 
 = = = Bombs = = = 
 The Little Boy bomb , except for the uranium payload , was ready at the beginning of May 1945 . The uranium @-@ 235 projectile was completed on June 15 , and the target on July 24 . The target and bomb pre @-@ assemblies ( partly assembled bombs without the fissile components ) left Hunters Point Naval Shipyard , California , on July 16 aboard the cruiser USS Indianapolis , arriving July 26 . The target inserts followed by air on July 30 . 
 The first plutonium core , along with its polonium @-@ beryllium urchin initiator , was transported in the custody of Project Alberta courier Raemer Schreiber in a magnesium field carrying case designed for the purpose by Philip Morrison . Magnesium was chosen because it does not act as a tamper . The core departed from Kirtland Army Air Field on a C @-@ 54 transport aircraft of the 509th Composite Group 's 320th Troop Carrier Squadron on July 26 , and arrived at North Field July 28 . Three Fat Man high @-@ explosive pre @-@ assemblies , designated F31 , F32 , and F33 , were picked up at Kirtland on July 28 by three B @-@ 29s , from the 393d Bombardment Squadron , plus one from the 216th Army Air Force Base Unit , and transported to North Field , arriving on August 2 . 
 = = Hiroshima = = 
 = = = Hiroshima during World War II = = = 
 At the time of its bombing , Hiroshima was a city of both industrial and military significance . A number of military units were located nearby , the most important of which was the headquarters of Field Marshal Shunroku Hata 's Second General Army , which commanded the defense of all of southern Japan , and was located in Hiroshima Castle . Hata 's command consisted of some 400 @,@ 000 men , most of whom were on Kyushu where an Allied invasion was correctly anticipated . Also present in Hiroshima were the headquarters of the 59th Army , the 5th Division and the 224th Division , a recently formed mobile unit . The city was defended by five batteries of 7 @-@ cm and 8 @-@ cm ( 2 @.@ 8 and 3 @.@ 1 inch ) anti @-@ aircraft guns of the 3rd Anti @-@ Aircraft Division , including units from the 121st and 122nd Anti @-@ Aircraft Regiments and the 22nd and 45th Separate Anti @-@ Aircraft Battalions . In total , an estimated 40 @,@ 000 Japanese military personnel were stationed in the city . 
 Hiroshima was a minor supply and logistics base for the Japanese military , but it also had large stockpiles of military supplies . The city was also a communications center , a key port for shipping and an assembly area for troops . It was also the second largest city in Japan after Kyoto that was still undamaged by air raids , due to the fact that it lacked the aircraft manufacturing industry that was the XXI Bomber Command 's priority target . On July 3 , the Joint Chiefs of Staff placed it off limits to bombers , along with Kokura , Niigata and Kyoto . 
 The center of the city contained several reinforced concrete buildings and lighter structures . Outside the center , the area was congested by a dense collection of small timber @-@ made workshops set among Japanese houses . A few larger industrial plants lay near the outskirts of the city . The houses were constructed of timber with tile roofs , and many of the industrial buildings were also built around timber frames . The city as a whole was highly susceptible to fire damage . 
 The population of Hiroshima had reached a peak of over 381 @,@ 000 earlier in the war but prior to the atomic bombing , the population had steadily decreased because of a systematic evacuation ordered by the Japanese government . At the time of the attack , the population was approximately 340 @,@ 000 – 350 @,@ 000 . Residents wondered why Hiroshima had been spared destruction by firebombing . Some speculated that the city was to be saved for U.S. occupation headquarters , others thought perhaps their relatives in Hawaii and California had petitioned the U.S. government to avoid bombing Hiroshima . More realistic city officials had ordered buildings torn down to create long , straight firebreaks , beginning in 1944 . <unk> continued to be expanded and extended up to the morning of August 6 , 1945 . 
 = = = Bombing of Hiroshima = = = 
 Hiroshima was the primary target of the first nuclear bombing mission on August 6 , with Kokura and Nagasaki as alternative targets . Having been fully briefed under the terms of Operations Order No. 35 , the 393d Bombardment Squadron B @-@ 29 Enola Gay , piloted by Tibbets , took off from North Field , Tinian , about six hours ' flight time from Japan . The Enola Gay ( named after Tibbets ' mother ) was accompanied by two other B @-@ 29s . The Great Artiste , commanded by Major Charles Sweeney , carried instrumentation , and a then @-@ nameless aircraft later called Necessary Evil , commanded by Captain George Marquardt , served as the photography aircraft . 
 After leaving Tinian the aircraft made their way separately to Iwo Jima to rendezvous with Sweeney and Marquardt at 05 : 55 at 9 @,@ 200 feet ( 2 @,@ 800 m ) , and set course for Japan . The aircraft arrived over the target in clear visibility at 31 @,@ 060 feet ( 9 @,@ 470 m ) . Parsons , who was in command of the mission , armed the bomb during the flight to minimize the risks during takeoff . He had witnessed four B @-@ 29s crash and burn at takeoff , and feared that a nuclear explosion would occur if a B @-@ 29 crashed with an armed Little Boy on board . His assistant , Second Lieutenant Morris R. Jeppson , removed the safety devices 30 minutes before reaching the target area . 
 During the night of August 5 – 6 , Japanese early warning radar detected the approach of numerous American aircraft headed for the southern part of Japan . Radar detected 65 bombers headed for Saga , 102 bound for Maebashi , 261 en route to Nishinomiya , 111 headed for Ube and 66 bound for Imabari . An alert was given and radio broadcasting stopped in many cities , among them Hiroshima . The all @-@ clear was sounded in Hiroshima at 00 : 05 . About an hour before the bombing , the air raid alert was sounded again , as Straight Flush flew over the city . It broadcast a short message which was picked up by Enola Gay . It read : " Cloud cover less than 3 / 10th at all altitudes . Advice : bomb primary . " The all @-@ clear was sounded over Hiroshima again at 07 : 09 . 
 At 08 : 09 Tibbets started his bomb run and handed control over to his bombardier , Major Thomas Ferebee . The release at 08 : 15 ( Hiroshima time ) went as planned , and the Little Boy containing about 64 kg ( 141 lb ) of uranium @-@ 235 took 44 @.@ 4 seconds to fall from the aircraft flying at about 31 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 400 m ) to a detonation height of about 1 @,@ 900 feet ( 580 m ) above the city . Enola Gay traveled 11 @.@ 5 mi ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) before it felt the shock waves from the blast . 
 Due to crosswind , the bomb missed the aiming point , the <unk> Bridge , by approximately 800 ft ( 240 m ) and detonated directly over Shima Surgical Clinic at 34 @.@ <unk> ° N 132 @.@ <unk> ° E ﻿ / 34 @.@ <unk> ; 132 @.@ <unk> . It created a blast equivalent to 16 kilotons of TNT ( 67 TJ ) , ± 2 kt . The weapon was considered very inefficient , with only 1 @.@ 7 % of its material fissioning . The radius of total destruction was about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , with resulting fires across 4 @.@ 4 square miles ( 11 km2 ) . 
 People on the ground reported seeing a pika or brilliant flash of light followed by a don , a loud booming sound . Some 70 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 people , of whom 20 @,@ 000 were Japanese soldiers and 20 @,@ 000 Korean slave laborers , or around 30 % of the population of Hiroshima , were killed by the blast and resultant firestorm , and another 70 @,@ 000 injured . 
 Enola Gay stayed over the target area for two minutes and was ten miles away when the bomb detonated . Only Tibbets , Parsons , and Ferebee knew of the nature of the weapon ; the others on the bomber were only told to expect a blinding flash and given black goggles . " It was hard to believe what we saw " , Tibbets told reporters , while Parsons said " the whole thing was tremendous and awe @-@ inspiring ... the men aboard with me gasped ' My God ' " . He and Tibbets compared the shockwave to " a close burst of ack @-@ ack fire " . 
 = = = Events on the ground = = = 
 Some of the reinforced concrete buildings in Hiroshima had been very strongly constructed because of the earthquake danger in Japan , and their framework did not collapse even though they were fairly close to the blast center . Since the bomb detonated in the air , the blast was directed more downward than sideways , which was largely responsible for the survival of the Prefectural Industrial Promotional Hall , now commonly known as the <unk> ( A @-@ bomb ) dome . This building was designed and built by the Czech architect Jan <unk> , and was only 150 m ( 490 ft ) from ground zero . The ruin was named Hiroshima Peace Memorial and was made a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1996 over the objections of the United States and China , which expressed reservations on the grounds that other Asian nations were the ones who suffered the greatest loss of life and property , and a focus on Japan lacked historical perspective . 
 The Americans estimated that 4 @.@ 7 square miles ( 12 km2 ) of the city were destroyed . Japanese officials determined that 69 % of Hiroshima 's buildings were destroyed and another 6 – 7 % damaged . The bombing started fires that spread rapidly through timber and paper homes . As in other Japanese cities , the firebreaks proved ineffective . 
 <unk> Nomura was the closest known survivor , who was in the basement of a reinforced concrete building ( it remained as the Rest House after the war ) only 170 metres ( 560 ft ) from ground zero ( the hypocenter ) at the time of the attack . He lived into his 80s . Akiko <unk> was among the closest survivors to the hypocenter of the blast . She had been in the solidly built Bank of Hiroshima only 300 meters ( 980 ft ) from ground @-@ zero at the time of the attack . 
 Over 90 % of the doctors and 93 % of the nurses in Hiroshima were killed or injured — most had been in the downtown area which received the greatest damage . The hospitals were destroyed or heavily damaged . Only one doctor , <unk> Sasaki , remained on duty at the Red Cross Hospital . Nonetheless , by early afternoon , the police and volunteers had established evacuation centres at hospitals , schools and tram stations , and a morgue was established in the Asano library . 
 Most elements of the Japanese Second General Army headquarters were at physical training on the grounds of Hiroshima Castle , barely 900 yards ( 820 m ) from the hypocenter . The attack killed 3 @,@ 243 troops on the parade ground . The communications room of <unk> Military District Headquarters that was responsible for issuing and lifting air raid warnings was in a semi @-@ basement in the castle . <unk> Oka , a <unk> Girls High School student who had been mobilized to serve as a communications officer had just sent a message that the alarm had been issued for Hiroshima and Yamaguchi when the bomb exploded . She used a special phone to inform Fukuyama Headquarters that " Hiroshima has been attacked by a new type of bomb . The city is in a state of near @-@ total destruction . " 
 Since Mayor <unk> <unk> had been killed while eating breakfast with his son and granddaughter at the mayoral residence , Field Marshal Hata , who was only slightly wounded , took over the administration of the city , and coordinated relief efforts . Many of his staff had been killed or fatally wounded , including a Korean prince of the Joseon Dynasty , Yi Wu , who was serving as a lieutenant colonel in the Japanese Army . Hata 's senior surviving staff officer was the wounded Colonel <unk> Imoto , who acted as his chief of staff . Hiroshima Ujina Harbor was undamaged , and soldiers from there used suicide boats intended to repel the American invasion , collected the wounded and took them down the rivers to the military hospital at Ujina . Trucks and trains brought in relief supplies and evacuated survivors from the city . 
 Twelve American airmen were imprisoned at the <unk> Military Police Headquarters located about 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) from the hypocenter of the blast . Most died instantly , although two were reported to have been executed by their captors , and two prisoners badly injured by the bombing were left next to the <unk> Bridge by the <unk> Tai , where they were stoned to death . Later reports indicated that 8 US prisoners of war held in Hiroshima Castle and executed as part of a medical experiments program prior to the bombing were reported by Japanese authorities as having been killed in the atomic blast . 
 = = = Japanese realization of the bombing = = = 
 The Tokyo control operator of the Japan Broadcasting Corporation noticed that the Hiroshima station had gone off the air . He tried to re @-@ establish his program by using another telephone line , but it too had failed . About 20 minutes later the Tokyo railroad telegraph center realized that the main line telegraph had stopped working just north of Hiroshima . From some small railway stops within 16 km ( 10 mi ) of the city came unofficial and confused reports of a terrible explosion in Hiroshima . All these reports were transmitted to the headquarters of the Imperial Japanese Army General Staff . 
 Military bases repeatedly tried to call the Army Control Station in Hiroshima . The complete silence from that city puzzled the General Staff ; they knew that no large enemy raid had occurred and that no sizable store of explosives was in Hiroshima at that time . A young officer was instructed to fly immediately to Hiroshima , to land , survey the damage , and return to Tokyo with reliable information for the staff . It was felt that nothing serious had taken place and that the explosion was just a rumor . 
 The staff officer went to the airport and took off for the southwest . After flying for about three hours , while still nearly 160 km ( 100 mi ) from Hiroshima , he and his pilot saw a great cloud of smoke from the bomb . After circling the city in order to survey the damage they landed south of the city , where the staff officer , after reporting to Tokyo , began to organize relief measures . Tokyo 's first indication that the city had been destroyed by a new type of bomb came from President Truman 's announcement of the strike , sixteen hours later . 
 = = Events of August 7 – 9 = = 
 After the Hiroshima bombing , Truman issued a statement announcing the use of the new weapon . He stated , " We may be grateful to Providence " that the German atomic bomb project had failed , and that the United States and its allies had " spent two billion dollars on the greatest scientific gamble in history — and won " . Truman then warned Japan : " If they do not now accept our terms , they may expect a rain of ruin from the air , the like of which has never been seen on this earth . Behind this air attack will follow sea and land forces in such numbers and power as they have not yet seen and with the fighting skill of which they are already well aware . " 
 The Japanese government did not react . Emperor Hirohito , the government , and the war council considered four conditions for surrender : the preservation of the kokutai ( Imperial institution and national polity ) , assumption by the Imperial Headquarters of responsibility for disarmament and demobilization , no occupation of the Japanese Home Islands , Korea , or Formosa , and delegation of the punishment of war criminals to the Japanese government . 
 The Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov informed Tokyo of the Soviet Union 's unilateral abrogation of the Soviet – Japanese Neutrality Pact on August 5 . At two minutes past midnight on August 9 , Tokyo time , Soviet infantry , armor , and air forces had launched the Manchurian Strategic Offensive Operation . Four hours later , word reached Tokyo of the Soviet Union 's official declaration of war . The senior leadership of the Japanese Army began preparations to impose martial law on the nation , with the support of Minister of War Korechika Anami , in order to stop anyone attempting to make peace . 
 On August 7 , a day after Hiroshima was destroyed , Dr. Yoshio Nishina and other atomic physicists arrived at the city , and carefully examined the damage . They then went back to Tokyo and told the cabinet that Hiroshima was indeed destroyed by an atomic bomb . Admiral Soemu Toyoda , the Chief of the Naval General Staff , estimated that no more than one or two additional bombs could be readied , so they decided to endure the remaining attacks , acknowledging " there would be more destruction but the war would go on " . American Magic codebreakers intercepted the cabinet 's messages . 
 Purnell , Parsons , Tibbets , Spaatz , and LeMay met on Guam that same day to discuss what should be done next . Since there was no indication of Japan surrendering , they decided to proceed with dropping another bomb . Parsons said that Project Alberta would have it ready by August 11 , but Tibbets pointed to weather reports indicating poor flying conditions on that day due to a storm , and asked if the bomb could be readied by August 9 . Parsons agreed to try to do so . 
 = = Nagasaki = = 
 I realize the tragic significance of the atomic bomb ... It is an awful responsibility which has come to us ... We thank God that it has come to us , instead of to our enemies ; and we pray that He may guide us to use it in His ways and for His purposes . 
 = = = Nagasaki during World War II = = = 
 The city of Nagasaki had been one of the largest seaports in southern Japan , and was of great wartime importance because of its wide @-@ ranging industrial activity , including the production of ordnance , ships , military equipment , and other war materials . The four largest companies in the city were Mitsubishi Shipyards , Electrical Shipyards , Arms Plant , and Steel and Arms Works , which employed about 90 % of the city 's labor force , and accounted for 90 % of the city 's industry . Although an important industrial city , Nagasaki had been spared from firebombing because its geography made it difficult to locate at night with AN / APQ @-@ 13 radar . 
 Unlike the other target cities , Nagasaki had not been placed off limits to bombers by the Joint Chiefs of Staff 's July 3 directive , and was bombed on a small scale five times . During one of these raids on August 1 , a number of conventional high @-@ explosive bombs were dropped on the city . A few hit the shipyards and dock areas in the southwest portion of the city , and several hit the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works . By early August , the city was defended by the IJA 134th Anti @-@ Aircraft Regiment of the 4th Anti @-@ Aircraft Division with four batteries of 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns and two searchlight batteries . 
 In contrast to Hiroshima , almost all of the buildings were of old @-@ fashioned Japanese construction , consisting of timber or timber @-@ framed buildings with timber walls ( with or without plaster ) and tile roofs . Many of the smaller industries and business establishments were also situated in buildings of timber or other materials not designed to withstand explosions . Nagasaki had been permitted to grow for many years without conforming to any definite city zoning plan ; residences were erected adjacent to factory buildings and to each other almost as closely as possible throughout the entire industrial valley . On the day of the bombing , an estimated 263 @,@ 000 people were in Nagasaki , including 240 @,@ 000 Japanese residents , 10 @,@ 000 Korean residents , 2 @,@ 500 conscripted Korean workers , 9 @,@ 000 Japanese soldiers , 600 conscripted Chinese workers , and 400 Allied prisoners of war in a camp to the north of Nagasaki . 
 = = = Bombing of Nagasaki = = = 
 Responsibility for the timing of the second bombing was delegated to Tibbets . Scheduled for August 11 against Kokura , the raid was moved earlier by two days to avoid a five @-@ day period of bad weather forecast to begin on August 10 . Three bomb pre @-@ assemblies had been transported to Tinian , labeled F @-@ 31 , F @-@ 32 , and F @-@ 33 on their exteriors . On August 8 , a dress rehearsal was conducted off Tinian by Sweeney using Bockscar as the drop airplane . Assembly F @-@ 33 was expended testing the components and F @-@ 31 was designated for the August 9 mission . 
 At 03 : 49 on the morning of August 9 , 1945 , Bockscar , flown by Sweeney 's crew , carried Fat Man , with Kokura as the primary target and Nagasaki the secondary target . The mission plan for the second attack was nearly identical to that of the Hiroshima mission , with two B @-@ 29s flying an hour ahead as weather scouts and two additional B @-@ 29s in Sweeney 's flight for instrumentation and photographic support of the mission . Sweeney took off with his weapon already armed but with the electrical safety plugs still engaged . 
 During pre @-@ flight inspection of Bockscar , the flight engineer notified Sweeney that an inoperative fuel transfer pump made it impossible to use 640 US gallons ( 2 @,@ 400 l ; 530 imp gal ) of fuel carried in a reserve tank . This fuel would still have to be carried all the way to Japan and back , consuming still more fuel . Replacing the pump would take hours ; moving the Fat Man to another aircraft might take just as long and was dangerous as well , as the bomb was live . Tibbets and Sweeney therefore elected to have Bockscar continue the mission . 
 This time Penney and Cheshire were allowed to accompany the mission , flying as observers on the third plane , Big Stink , flown by the group 's operations officer , Major James I. Hopkins , Jr . Observers aboard the weather planes reported both targets clear . When Sweeney 's aircraft arrived at the assembly point for his flight off the coast of Japan , Big Stink failed to make the rendezvous . According to Cheshire , Hopkins was at varying heights including 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) higher than he should have been , and was not flying tight circles over Yakushima as previously agreed with Sweeney and Captain Frederick C. Bock , who was piloting the support B @-@ 29 The Great Artiste . Instead , Hopkins was flying 40 @-@ mile ( 64 km ) dogleg patterns . Though ordered not to circle longer than fifteen minutes , Sweeney continued to wait for Big Stink , at the urging of Ashworth , the plane 's weaponeer , who was in command of the mission . 
 After exceeding the original departure time limit by a half @-@ hour , Bockscar , accompanied by The Great Artiste , proceeded to Kokura , thirty minutes away . The delay at the rendezvous had resulted in clouds and drifting smoke over Kokura from fires started by a major firebombing raid by 224 B @-@ 29s on nearby <unk> the previous day . Additionally , the Yawata Steel Works intentionally burned coal tar , to produce black smoke . The clouds and smoke resulted in 70 % of the area over Kokura being covered , obscuring the aiming point . Three bomb runs were made over the next 50 minutes , burning fuel and exposing the aircraft repeatedly to the heavy defenses of Yawata , but the bombardier was unable to drop visually . By the time of the third bomb run , Japanese antiaircraft fire was getting close , and Second Lieutenant Jacob Beser , who was monitoring Japanese communications , reported activity on the Japanese fighter direction radio bands . 
 After three runs over the city , and with fuel running low because of the failed fuel pump , they headed for their secondary target , Nagasaki . Fuel consumption calculations made en route indicated that Bockscar had insufficient fuel to reach Iwo Jima and would be forced to divert to Okinawa , which had become entirely Allied @-@ occupied territory only six weeks earlier . After initially deciding that if Nagasaki were obscured on their arrival the crew would carry the bomb to Okinawa and dispose of it in the ocean if necessary , Ashworth ruled that a radar approach would be used if the target was obscured . 
 At about 07 : 50 Japanese time , an air raid alert was sounded in Nagasaki , but the " all clear " signal was given at 08 : 30 . When only two B @-@ 29 Superfortresses were sighted at 10 : 53 , the Japanese apparently assumed that the planes were only on reconnaissance and no further alarm was given . 
 A few minutes later at 11 : 00 , The Great Artiste dropped instruments attached to three parachutes . These instruments also contained an unsigned letter to Professor <unk> Sagane , a physicist at the University of Tokyo who studied with three of the scientists responsible for the atomic bomb at the University of California , Berkeley , urging him to tell the public about the danger involved with these weapons of mass destruction . The messages were found by military authorities but not turned over to Sagane until a month later . In 1949 , one of the authors of the letter , Luis Alvarez , met with Sagane and signed the document . 
 At 11 : 01 , a last @-@ minute break in the clouds over Nagasaki allowed Bockscar 's bombardier , Captain Kermit Beahan , to visually sight the target as ordered . The Fat Man weapon , containing a core of about 6 @.@ 4 kg ( 14 lb ) of plutonium , was dropped over the city 's industrial valley at 32 @.@ <unk> ° N 129 @.@ 86325 ° E ﻿ / 32 @.@ <unk> ; 129 @.@ 86325 . It exploded 47 seconds later at 1 @,@ 650 ± 33 ft ( 503 ± 10 m ) , above a tennis court halfway between the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works in the south and the Nagasaki Arsenal in the north . This was nearly 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) northwest of the planned hypocenter ; the blast was confined to the Urakami Valley and a major portion of the city was protected by the intervening hills . The resulting explosion had a blast yield equivalent to 21 ± 2 kt ( 87 @.@ 9 ± 8 @.@ 4 TJ ) . The explosion generated heat estimated at 3 @,@ 900 ° C ( 7 @,@ 050 ° F ) and winds that were estimated at 1 @,@ 005 km / h ( 624 mph ) . 
 Big Stink spotted the explosion from a hundred miles away , and flew over to observe . Because of the delays in the mission and the inoperative fuel transfer pump , Bockscar did not have sufficient fuel to reach the emergency landing field at Iwo Jima , so Sweeney and Bock flew to Okinawa . Arriving there , Sweeney circled for 20 minutes trying to contact the control tower for landing clearance , finally concluding that his radio was faulty . Critically low on fuel , Bockscar barely made it to the runway on Okinawa 's Yontan Airfield . With enough fuel for only one landing attempt , Sweeney and Albury brought Bockscar in at 150 miles per hour ( 240 km / h ) instead of the normal 120 miles per hour ( 190 km / h ) , firing distress flares to alert the field of the uncleared landing . The number two engine died from fuel starvation as Bockscar began its final approach . Touching the runway hard , the heavy B @-@ 29 slewed left and towards a row of parked B @-@ 24 bombers before the pilots managed to regain control . The B @-@ 29 's reversible propellers were insufficient to slow the aircraft adequately , and with both pilots standing on the brakes , Bockscar made a swerving 90 @-@ degree turn at the end of the runway to avoid running off the runway . A second engine died from fuel exhaustion by the time the plane came to a stop . The flight engineer later measured fuel in the tanks and concluded that less than five minutes total remained . 
 Following the mission , there was confusion over the identification of the plane . The first eyewitness account by war correspondent William L. Laurence of The New York Times , who accompanied the mission aboard the aircraft piloted by Bock , reported that Sweeney was leading the mission in The Great Artiste . He also noted its " Victor " number as 77 , which was that of Bockscar , writing that several personnel commented that 77 was also the jersey number of the football player Red Grange . Laurence had interviewed Sweeney and his crew , and was aware that they referred to their airplane as The Great Artiste . Except for Enola Gay , none of the 393d 's B @-@ 29s had yet had names painted on the noses , a fact which Laurence himself noted in his account . Unaware of the switch in aircraft , Laurence assumed Victor 77 was The Great Artiste , which was in fact , Victor 89 . 
 = = = Events on the ground = = = 
 Although the bomb was more powerful than the one used on Hiroshima , the effect was confined by hillsides to the narrow Urakami Valley . Of 7 @,@ 500 Japanese employees who worked inside the Mitsubishi Munitions plant , including mobilized students and regular workers , 6 @,@ 200 were killed . Some 17 @,@ 000 – 22 @,@ 000 others who worked in other war plants and factories in the city died as well . Casualty estimates for immediate deaths vary widely , ranging from 22 @,@ 000 to 75 @,@ 000 . In the days and months following the explosion , more people died from bomb effects . Because of the presence of undocumented foreign workers , and a number of military personnel in transit , there are great discrepancies in the estimates of total deaths by the end of 1945 ; a range of 39 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 can be found in various studies . 
 Unlike Hiroshima 's military death toll , only 150 soldiers were killed instantly , including thirty @-@ six from the IJA 134th AAA Regiment of the 4th AAA Division . At least eight known POWs died from the bombing and as many as 13 may have died , including a British citizen , Royal Air Force Corporal Ronald Shaw , and seven Dutch POWs . One American POW , Joe <unk> , was in Nagasaki at the time of the bombing but survived , reportedly having been shielded from the effects of the bomb by the concrete walls of his cell . There were 24 Australian POWs in Nagasaki , all of whom survived . 
 The radius of total destruction was about 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , followed by fires across the northern portion of the city to 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of the bomb . About 58 % of the Mitsubishi Arms Plant was damaged , and about 78 % of the Mitsubishi Steel Works . The Mitsubishi Electric Works suffered only 10 % structural damage as it was on the border of the main destruction zone . The Nagasaki Arsenal was destroyed in the blast . 
 = = Plans for more atomic attacks on Japan = = 
 Groves expected to have another atomic bomb ready for use on August 19 , with three more in September and a further three in October . On August 10 , he sent a memorandum to Marshall in which he wrote that " the next bomb ... should be ready for delivery on the first suitable weather after 17 or 18 August . " On the same day , Marshall endorsed the memo with the comment , " It is not to be released over Japan without express authority from the President . " Truman had secretly requested this on August 10 . This modified the previous order that the target cities were to be attacked with atomic bombs " as made ready " . 
 There was already discussion in the War Department about conserving the bombs then in production for Operation Downfall . " The problem now [ August 13 ] is whether or not , assuming the Japanese do not capitulate , to continue dropping them every time one is made and shipped out there or whether to hold them ... and then pour them all on in a reasonably short time . Not all in one day , but over a short period . And that also takes into consideration the target that we are after . In other words , should we not concentrate on targets that will be of the greatest assistance to an invasion rather than industry , morale , psychology , and the like ? Nearer the tactical use rather than other use . " 
 Two more Fat Man assemblies were readied , and scheduled to leave Kirtland Field for Tinian on August 11 and August 14 , and Tibbets was ordered by LeMay to return to Albuquerque , New Mexico , to collect them . At Los Alamos , technicians worked 24 hours straight to cast another plutonium core . Although cast , it still needed to be pressed and coated , which would take until August 16 . Therefore , it could have been ready for use on August 19 . However , unable to reach Marshall , Groves ordered on his own authority on August 13 that the core should not be shipped . 
 = = Surrender of Japan and subsequent occupation = = 
 Until August 9 , Japan 's war council still insisted on its four conditions for surrender . On that day Hirohito ordered Kōichi Kido to " quickly control the situation ... because the Soviet Union has declared war against us . " He then held an Imperial conference during which he authorized minister Shigenori Tōgō to notify the Allies that Japan would accept their terms on one condition , that the declaration " does not comprise any demand which prejudices the prerogatives of His Majesty as a Sovereign ruler . " 
 On August 12 , the Emperor informed the imperial family of his decision to surrender . One of his uncles , Prince Asaka , then asked whether the war would be continued if the kokutai could not be preserved . Hirohito simply replied , " Of course . " As the Allied terms seemed to leave intact the principle of the preservation of the Throne , Hirohito recorded on August 14 his capitulation announcement which was broadcast to the Japanese nation the next day despite a short rebellion by militarists opposed to the surrender . 
 In his declaration , Hirohito referred to the atomic bombings : 
 Moreover , the enemy now possesses a new and terrible weapon with the power to destroy many innocent lives and do incalculable damage . Should we continue to fight , not only would it result in an ultimate collapse and obliteration of the Japanese nation , but also it would lead to the total extinction of human civilization . 
 Such being the case , how are We to save the millions of Our subjects , or to atone Ourselves before the hallowed spirits of Our Imperial Ancestors ? This is the reason why We have ordered the acceptance of the provisions of the Joint Declaration of the Powers . 
 In his " Rescript to the Soldiers and Sailors " delivered on August 17 , he stressed the impact of the Soviet invasion on his decision to surrender , omitting any mention of the bombs . Hirohito met with General MacArthur on September 27 , saying to him that " [ t ] he peace party did not prevail until the bombing of Hiroshima created a situation which could be dramatized " . Furthermore , the " Rescript to the Soldiers and Sailors " speech he told MacArthur about was just personal , not political , and never stated that the Soviet intervention in Manchuria was the main reason for surrender . In fact , a day after the bombing of Nagasaki and the Soviet invasion of Manchuria , Hirohito ordered his advisers , primarily Chief Cabinet Secretary <unk> <unk> , Kawada Mizuho , and Masahiro <unk> , to write up a surrender speech . In Hirohito 's speech , days before announcing it on radio on August 15 , he gave three major reasons for surrender : Tokyo 's defenses would not be complete before the American invasion of Japan , Ise Shrine would be lost to the Americans , and atomic weapons deployed by the Americans would lead to the death of the entire Japanese race . Despite the Soviet intervention , Hirohito did not mention the Soviets as the main factor for surrender . 
 = = Depiction , public response , and censorship = = 
 During the war " <unk> and <unk> rhetoric " was tolerated at all levels of U.S. society ; according to the British embassy in Washington the Americans regarded the Japanese as " a nameless mass of vermin " . <unk> depicting Japanese as less than human , e.g. monkeys , were common . A 1944 opinion poll that asked what should be done with Japan found that 13 % of the U.S. public were in favor of " killing off " all Japanese men , women , and children . 
 After the Hiroshima bomb detonated successfully , Robert Oppenheimer addressed an assembly at Los Alamos " clasping his hands together like a prize @-@ winning boxer " . The Vatican was less enthusiastic ; its newspaper L 'Osservatore Romano expressed regret that the bomb 's inventors did not destroy the weapon for the benefit of humanity . Rev. Cuthbert Thicknesse , the Dean of St Albans , prohibited using St Albans Abbey for a thanksgiving service for the war 's end , calling the use of atomic weapons " an act of wholesale , indiscriminate massacre " . Nonetheless , news of the atomic bombing was greeted enthusiastically in the U.S. ; a poll in Fortune magazine in late 1945 showed a significant minority of Americans ( 22 @.@ 7 % ) wishing that more atomic bombs could have been dropped on Japan . The initial positive response was supported by the imagery presented to the public ( mainly the powerful images of the mushroom cloud ) and the censorship of photographs that showed corpses and maimed survivors . 
 Wilfred Burchett was the first journalist to visit Hiroshima after the atom bomb was dropped , arriving alone by train from Tokyo on September 2 , the day of the formal surrender aboard the USS Missouri . His Morse code dispatch was printed by the Daily Express newspaper in London on September 5 , 1945 , entitled " The Atomic Plague " , the first public report to mention the effects of radiation and nuclear fallout . Burchett 's reporting was unpopular with the U.S. military . The U.S. censors suppressed a supporting story submitted by George Weller of the Chicago Daily News , and accused Burchett of being under the sway of Japanese propaganda . Laurence dismissed the reports on radiation sickness as Japanese efforts to undermine American morale , ignoring his own account of Hiroshima 's radiation sickness published one week earlier . 
 A member of the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey , Lieutenant Daniel McGovern , used a film crew to document the results in early 1946 . The film crew 's work resulted in a three @-@ hour documentary entitled The Effects of the Atomic Bombs Against Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The documentary included images from hospitals showing the human effects of the bomb ; it showed burned out buildings and cars , and rows of skulls and bones on the ground . It was classified " secret " for the next 22 years . During this time in America , it was a common practice for editors to keep graphic images of death out of films , magazines , and newspapers . The total of 90 @,@ 000 ft ( 27 @,@ 000 m ) of film shot by McGovern 's cameramen had not been fully aired as of 2009 . According to Greg Mitchell , with the 2004 documentary film Original Child Bomb , a small part of that footage managed to reach part of the American public " in the unflinching and powerful form its creators intended " . 
 Motion picture company Nippon Eigasha started sending cameramen to Nagasaki and Hiroshima in September 1945 . On October 24 , 1945 , a U.S. military policeman stopped a Nippon Eigasha cameraman from continuing to film in Nagasaki . All Nippon Eigasha 's reels were then confiscated by the American authorities . These reels were in turn requested by the Japanese government , declassified , and saved from oblivion . Some black @-@ and @-@ white motion pictures were released and shown for the first time to Japanese and American audiences in the years from 1968 to 1970 . The public release of film footage of the city post attack , and some research about the human effects of the attack , was restricted during the occupation of Japan , and much of this information was censored until the signing of the San Francisco Peace Treaty in 1951 , restoring control to the Japanese . 
 Only the most sensitive and detailed weapons effects information was censored during this period . There was no censorship of the factually written accounts . For example , the book Hiroshima written by Pulitzer Prize winner John Hersey , which was originally published in article form in the popular magazine The New Yorker , on August 31 , 1946 , is reported to have reached Tokyo in English by January 1947 , and the translated version was released in Japan in 1949 . The book narrates the stories of the lives of six bomb survivors from immediately prior , to months after , the dropping of the Little Boy bomb . 
 = = Post @-@ attack casualties = = 
 In the spring of 1948 , the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission ( ABCC ) was established in accordance with a presidential directive from Truman to the National Academy of Sciences – National Research Council to conduct investigations of the late effects of radiation among the survivors in Hiroshima and Nagasaki . One of the early studies conducted by the ABCC was on the outcome of pregnancies occurring in Hiroshima and Nagasaki , and in a control city , Kure , located 18 mi ( 29 km ) south of Hiroshima , in order to discern the conditions and outcomes related to radiation exposure . Dr. James V. Neel led the study which found that the number of birth defects was not significantly higher among the children of survivors who were pregnant at the time of the bombings . The National Academy of Sciences questioned Neel 's procedure which did not filter the Kure population for possible radiation exposure . Among the observed birth defects there was a higher incidence of brain malformation in Nagasaki and Hiroshima , including <unk> and <unk> , about 2 @.@ 75 times the rate seen in Kure . 
 In 1985 , Johns Hopkins University human geneticist James F. Crow examined Neel 's research and confirmed that the number of birth defects was not significantly higher in Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Many members of the ABCC and its successor Radiation Effects Research Foundation ( <unk> ) were still looking for possible birth defects or other causes among the survivors decades later , but found no evidence that they were common among the survivors . Despite the insignificance of birth defects found in Neel 's study , historian Ronald E. <unk> wrote that Hiroshima experienced " an increase in stillbirths , birth defects , and infant mortality " following the atomic bomb . Neel also studied the longevity of the children who survived the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , reporting that between 90 and 95 percent were still living 50 years later . 
 Around 1 @,@ 900 cancer deaths can be attributed to the after @-@ effects of the bombs . An epidemiology study by the <unk> states that from 1950 to 2000 , 46 % of leukemia deaths and 11 % of solid cancer deaths among the bomb survivors were due to radiation from the bombs , the statistical excess being estimated at 200 leukemia and 1 @,@ 700 solid cancers . 
 = = Hibakusha = = 
 The survivors of the bombings are called hibakusha ( <unk> , Japanese pronunciation : [ <unk> ̠ <unk> ̥ <unk> ̠ ] ) , a Japanese word that literally translates to " explosion @-@ affected people " . As of March 31 , 2015 , 183 @,@ 519 hibakusha were recognized by the Japanese government , most living in Japan . The government of Japan recognizes about 1 % of these as having illnesses caused by radiation . The memorials in Hiroshima and Nagasaki contain lists of the names of the hibakusha who are known to have died since the bombings . Updated annually on the anniversaries of the bombings , as of August 2015 the memorials record the names of more than 460 @,@ 000 hibakusha ; 297 @,@ 684 in Hiroshima and 168 @,@ 767 in Nagasaki . 
 Hibakusha and their children were ( and still are ) victims of severe discrimination in Japan due to public ignorance about the consequences of radiation sickness , with much of the public believing it to be hereditary or even contagious . This is despite the fact that no statistically demonstrable increase of birth defects or congenital malformations was found among the later conceived children born to survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . A study of the long @-@ term psychological effects of the bombings on the survivors found that even 17 – 20 years after the bombings had occurred survivors showed a higher prevalence of anxiety and <unk> symptoms . 
 = = = Double survivors = = = 
 On March 24 , 2009 , the Japanese government officially recognized Tsutomu Yamaguchi as a double hibakusha . He was confirmed to be 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) from ground zero in Hiroshima on a business trip when Little Boy was detonated . He was seriously burnt on his left side and spent the night in Hiroshima . He arrived at his home city of Nagasaki on August 8 , the day before Fat Man was dropped , and he was exposed to residual radiation while searching for his relatives . He was the first officially recognized survivor of both bombings . He died on January 4 , 2010 , at the age of 93 , after a battle with stomach cancer . 
 The 2006 documentary Twice Survived : The <unk> Atomic Bombed of Hiroshima and Nagasaki documented 165 <unk> hibakusha ( lit. double explosion @-@ affected people ) , and was screened at the United Nations . 
 = = = Korean survivors = = = 
 During the war , Japan brought as many as 670 @,@ 000 Korean conscripts to Japan to work as forced labor . Between 40 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 Koreans were killed by the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings . For many years , Koreans had a difficult time fighting for recognition as atomic bomb victims and were denied health benefits . Most issues have been addressed in recent years through lawsuits . 
 = = Debate over bombings = = 
 The atomic bomb was more than a weapon of terrible destruction ; it was a psychological weapon . 
 The role of the bombings in Japan 's surrender and the U.S. ' s ethical justification for them has been the subject of scholarly and popular debate for decades . J. Samuel Walker wrote in an April 2005 overview of recent historiography on the issue , " the controversy over the use of the bomb seems certain to continue . " He wrote that " The fundamental issue that has divided scholars over a period of nearly four decades is whether the use of the bomb was necessary to achieve victory in the war in the Pacific on terms satisfactory to the United States . " 
 Supporters of the bombings generally assert that they caused the Japanese surrender , preventing casualties on both sides during Operation Downfall . One figure of speech , " One hundred million [ subjects of the Japanese Empire ] will die for the Emperor and Nation " , served as a unifying slogan , although that phrase was intended as a figure of speech along the lines of the " ten thousand years " phrase . In Truman 's 1955 Memoirs , " he states that the atomic bomb probably saved half a million U.S. lives — anticipated casualties in an Allied invasion of Japan planned for November . Stimson subsequently talked of saving one million U.S. casualties , and Churchill of saving one million American and half that number of British lives . " Scholars have pointed out various alternatives that could have ended the war without an invasion , but these alternatives could have resulted in the deaths of many more Japanese . Supporters also point to an order given by the Japanese War Ministry on August 1 , 1944 , ordering the execution of Allied prisoners of war when the POW camp was in the combat zone . 
 Those who oppose the bombings cite a number of reasons for their view , among them : a belief that atomic bombing is fundamentally immoral , that the bombings counted as war crimes , that they were militarily unnecessary , that they constituted state terrorism , and that they involved racism against and the dehumanization of the Japanese people . Another popular view among critics of the bombings , originating with Gar <unk> in 1965 and becoming the default position in Japanese school history textbooks , is the idea of atomic diplomacy : that the United States used nuclear weapons in order to intimidate the Soviet Union in the early stages of the Cold War . The bombings were part of an already fierce conventional bombing campaign . This , together with the sea blockade and the collapse of Germany ( with its implications regarding redeployment ) , could also have led to a Japanese surrender . At the time the United States dropped its atomic bomb on Nagasaki on August 9 , 1945 , the Soviet Union launched a surprise attack with 1 @.@ 6 million troops against the Kwantung Army in Manchuria . " The Soviet entry into the war " , argued Japanese historian Tsuyoshi Hasegawa , " played a much greater role than the atomic bombs in inducing Japan to surrender because it dashed any hope that Japan could terminate the war through Moscow 's mediation " . 
 = = = Archives = = = 
 " Order from General Thomas Handy to General Carl Spaatz authorizing the dropping of the first atomic bomb " . Wikisource . 2015 . 
 " Documents on the Decision to Drop the Atomic Bomb " . Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " The Effects of the Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki " . U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey . Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum . 1946 . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " President Truman <unk> Use of Atomic Bomb , 1945 : Original Letters " . Shapell Manuscript Foundation . Retrieved February 8 , 2014 . 
 " Scientific Data of the Nagasaki Atomic Bomb Disaster " . Atomic Bomb Disease Institute , Nagasaki University . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " Correspondence Regarding Decision to Drop the Bomb " . Nuclear Age Peace Foundation . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " Tale of Two Cities : The Story of Hiroshima and Nagasaki " . National Science Digital Library . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " The Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki " . Atomic Archive . 1946 . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II " ( PDF ) . National Security Archive . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " Nagasaki Archive " . Google Earth mapping of Nagasaki bombing archives . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " Hiroshima Archive " . Google Earth mapping of Hiroshima bombing archives . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 " Annotated bibliography for atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki " . Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues . Retrieved January 3 , 2012 . 
 The short film Children of Hiroshima ( Reel 1 of 2 ) ( 1952 ) is available for free download at the Internet Archive 
 The short film Children of Hiroshima ( Reel 2 of 2 ) ( 1952 ) is available for free download at the Internet Archive 
 " Photo gallery of aftermath pictures " . Time @-@ Life . Retrieved February 8 , 2014 . 
 Video footage of the bombing of Nagasaki ( silent ) on YouTube 
 The Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima & Nagasaki public domain audiobook at LibriVox 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 An <unk> Loss – Message From Hiroshima ( film ) 
 Hiroshima National Peace Memorial Hall For The Atomic Bomb Victims 
 Nagasaki National Peace Memorial Hall For The Atomic Bomb Victims 
 Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum 
 Hiroshima and Nagasaki : A Look Back at the US Atomic Bombing 64 Years Later – video by Democracy Now ! 
 Hiroshima & Nagasaki Remembered 2005 website commemorating 60th anniversary 
 = Hurricane Charlie ( 1951 ) = 
 Hurricane Charlie was the deadliest tropical cyclone of the 1951 Atlantic hurricane season . The third named storm , second hurricane , and second major hurricane of the season , it developed from a tropical wave east of the Lesser Antilles . It moved briskly west @-@ northwest , passing between the islands of Dominica and Guadeloupe . It strengthened to a hurricane in the eastern Caribbean Sea , and it struck Jamaica with winds near Category 3 intensity . It strengthened to a peak intensity of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) prior to landfall on Quintana Roo , Yucatán Peninsula . It weakened over land , and it re @-@ strengthened over the Gulf of Mexico before it made a final landfall near Tampico . 
 In its path , Charlie caused more than 250 deaths . The hurricane produced Jamaica 's deadliest natural disaster of the 20th century , causing more than 152 deaths and $ 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in damages . The hurricane was described as Tampico 's worst tropical cyclone since 1936 , and it caused more than 100 fatalities in the surrounding areas . Many bodies were not recovered after flooding . The hurricane produced peak gusts of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) at the airport , and its strongest sustained winds were unmeasured in mainland Mexico , suggesting that it may have been a Category 4 hurricane at landfall . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 12 , a tropical wave organized to a tropical depression about 930 miles ( 1 @,@ 495 km ) east @-@ southeast of the island of Barbados . Operationally , the system was not detected until August 14 , and it was believed to have been an area of low pressure when it moved through the eastern Caribbean . It moved to the west @-@ northwest , and it slowly organized to a minimal tropical storm on August 14 . Although Hurricane hunters reported winds of hurricane force in squalls , the system was discounted as an easterly wave . On August 15 , Tropical Storm Charlie quickly intensified , attaining maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) after passing through the Lesser Antilles . The small center of circulation passed between Dominica and Guadeloupe in the early morning hours . 
 On August 16 , the hurricane moved steadily west @-@ northwest 140 miles ( 225 km ) south @-@ southwest of San Juan , Puerto Rico . Hurricane Charlie continued to strengthen , and it reached Category 2 status on August 17 as it moved quickly westward across the Caribbean Sea . The cyclone intensified as it made landfall south of Kingston , Jamaica with 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) sustained winds . The city reported peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) as the center passed 8 miles ( 10 km ) to the southwest , so Charlie may have been a Category 3 hurricane in Jamaica . On August 18 , the hurricane left the island as a Category 1 hurricane , and it quickly re @-@ intensified over water . It passed south of the Cayman Islands with 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) sustained winds . Grand Cayman reported gusts of 92 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Later , it attained major hurricane status on August 19 . The hurricane peaked at 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) just before hitting near Cozumel during the night , and it weakened as it crossed the Yucatán Peninsula on August 20 . 
 Upon reaching the Gulf of Mexico , Charlie had weakened to a 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) hurricane . On August 21 , it remained a Category 2 hurricane while crossing the Gulf of Mexico until 18 hours before landfall . On August 22 , Charlie rapidly intensified , and it strengthened to a second peak of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) off the mainland Mexican coast . Later , Charlie made landfall near Tampico with 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) sustained winds . The strongest winds were believed to have been north of the eye , and were unrecorded . The storm quickly weakened over land , and it dissipated on August 23 in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On August 15 , the Weather Bureau office in San Juan issued hurricane warnings for the eastern Caribbean from Martinique to Antigua , while storm warnings were released for the rest of the Leeward Islands . Later , hurricane warnings were also issued for the northern Leeward Islands , and northeast storm warnings were released for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands . In advance of the hurricane , flights ' scheduled departures for the Barbados region were delayed . On August 17 , the Weather Bureau noted that the hurricane would affect Jamaica , though it was not expected to strengthen significantly ; the agency also reported that the probabilities were equal for the cyclone to pass north or south of the island . Later , the cyclone was forecast to pass " over or just south " of the island ; Jamaica was urged to prepare for the cyclone , and the hurricane was expected to strengthen as the forward motion decreased . On August 20 , the cyclone was expected to affect the northern Yucatán Peninsula between Mérida and Campeche , and " extreme caution " was advised for the area . 
 The hurricane was also expected to re @-@ strengthen prior to its second landfall in Mexico , though the Weather Bureau also noted that there was a chance for the storm to affect Texas . Although the possibility never materialized , the agency expected rain bands and rough seas to affect southern Texas , and small watercraft were urged to remain in ports until the hurricane moved inland . On August 21 , the cyclone was expected to move ashore between Nautla and Tuxpan , though it eventually made landfall further north near Tampico . Local officials expressed concerns about residents in huts and other vulnerable structures . In the Harlingen Valley region of southern Texas , precautionary measures were taken and Red Cross divisions organized a meeting at the local city hall . City departments and facilities were ready for disposal if the cyclone moved closer to the area . The cyclone 's rains were also expected to impact unpicked cotton plants in the region . In advance of the storm , a Coast Guard plane dropped messages from the air to several vessels , advising them to seek shelter . In Tampico , oil industries erected barriers to protect fields , and authorities planned to evacuate residents from the surrounding low @-@ lying areas . Thousands of residents stayed in refugee centers on elevated ground . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The cyclone was compact when it moved through the Lesser Antilles , and the strongest winds on land in the eastern Caribbean islands did not exceed 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . In Jamaica , the hurricane produced heavy rainfall , peaking at 17 inches ( 430 mm ) in Kingston , which caused numerous landslides across eastern sections of the island . Peak gusts were estimated near 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) across the island . A hangar and installations were destroyed at Palisadoes Airport , and the facility received " extensive damage . " Consequently , " At Memphis , Tenn , Chicago & Southern Airline headquarters here reported that its north and southbound Constellation flights were unable to land at Kingston , bypassing the airport there on flights between Chicago and Caracas . " Several ships were sunk or overturned during the storm . Communications and power services were disrupted , suspending information from the island 's interior . The hurricane also cut communications from the island to radio stations in the United States . 70 – 80 percent of the island 's banana crops were destroyed , in addition to 30 percent of other crops . 70 convicted felons also escaped from a jail when winds blew down walls . Flooding was expected in the island 's mountainous interior because of heavy precipitation . Heavy rains caused rock slides , damaging roads , railroads , and other sources of tourism . In Kingston , electricity was initially restored to essential services , including " hospitals , refrigerating plants , pumping stations and newspaper plants . " Charlie caused around $ 50 million ( 1951 USD , $ 380 million 2005 USD ) in crop and property damage , 152 deaths , injured 2 @,@ 000 , and left 25 @,@ 000 homeless . 
 On the Yucatán Peninsula , Charlie destroyed up to 70 % of the crops , though no loss of life was reported in the area . Unofficially , one person was reportedly killed on the peninsula . Mérida reported winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . The winds toppled several thatched homes on Cozumel . A wind gust of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) was measured at the airport near Tampico , though peak gusts in the city did not exceed 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . The storm was reported to be the worst in Tampico since 1936 . The winds uprooted trees and destroyed telephone poles , and damages to corn crops were believed to exceed $ 500 @,@ 000 . At least 300 residences were " damaged or destroyed . " Outside the city , Charlie 's heavy rain led to bursting dams and flooded rivers , where upward of 100 people died . In the city , four people died , and property losses were estimated near $ 1 @,@ 160 @,@ 000 . 
 The hurricane 's outer fringes produced swells along the Texas coast , and swimmers were advised to be cautious because of hazardous conditions . The area was also experiencing rough swells and strong winds from an unrelated weather system , which produced peak gusts of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The conditions snarled marine operations in the area , and three fishermen were missing during the squall . On August 23 , Brownsville experienced gusts of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) when the hurricane struck the coast further south . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the wake of this storm , Jamaica formed a new governmental entity known as the Hurricane Housing Organization . In 1956 , this organization merged with the Central Housing Authority to become the Department of Housing . 
 = Me Haces Falta = 
 " Me Haces Falta " ( English : I Need You ) is a song recorded by American singer Jennifer Lopez for her fifth studio album , Como Ama una Mujer ( 2007 ) . It was written and produced by Marc Anthony and Estéfano . The song was released on March 23 , 2007 by Epic Records as the second and final single from the album . " Me Haces Falta " is a latin pop song about self @-@ loathing . Its instrumentation consists of drums , cello , bass and guitar . 
 Music critics were complimentary to the song 's lyrics and to Lopez 's vocals , but dismissed its production . An accompanying music video for the song was directed by Sanji . The video portrays Lopez as an undercover FBI agent who surrenders her lover to the police and has regrets afterwards . " Me Haces Falta " was included in the set list of Lopez 's co @-@ headling tour with Anthony in 2007 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Plans for Lopez to release a Spanish language album materialized in 2004 , when Lopez 's then @-@ husband Marc Anthony was finishing up production of his ninth studio album Amar Sin Mentiras ( 2004 ) with Estéfano and Julio Reyes . Lopez went into the recording studio with them to record a song entitled " <unk> " , as a duet with Anthony . She enjoyed working on the song so much that she decided to record a full @-@ length Spanish album ; something she had wanted to do for years . Prior to breaking out into the music scene in May 1999 with her single " If You Had My Love " , Lopez always pictured her music career to be in Spanish . According to Lopez : " My life took a different turn , which was great for me . But my heart was always kind of on the Spanish side . " Before recording began for her first Spanish album , Lopez recorded and released her fourth English studio album Rebirth ( 2005 ) . 
 In early 2006 it was announced that Lopez would release her first Spanish album and her fifth studio album Como Ama una Mujer later that year . The album was produced by Anthony , Estéfano and Reyes over a span of three years . According to Estéfano , Como Ama una Mujer will " prove critics wrong " from its " big songs that require a voice " ; referring to the critics about Lopez having a " limited " vocal tone . The album was released on March 27 , 2007 in the United States , preceding the release of its lead single " Qué Hiciste " in January . Como Ama una Mujer received mixed reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 45 , based on 7 reviews , which indicates " mixed or average reviews " . " Me Haces Falta " was announced to be the album 's second single and was released digitally in select countries on March 23 , 2007 , such as Austria , Canada and Italy . It was then serviced to radio on the week of June 29 , 2007 . The song was later included as a B @-@ side to " Do It Well " , the lead single from Lopez 's sixth studio album Brave ( 2007 ) , in September 2007 . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Me Haces Falta " is a latin pop ballad , with a length of three minutes and thirty @-@ seven seconds ( 3 : 37 ) . Its instrumentation consists of drums , cello , bass and guitar . Estéfano wrote the lyrics to " Me Haces Falta " , while Anthony composed its music . Both co @-@ produced the song together , while Julio Reyes provided the arrangement . Bruce Swedien and Peter Wade recorded Lopez 's vocals for the song at Midnight Blue Studios in Miami , Florida , while its mixing was done by Reyes and Swedien . 
 According to Lopez , the song is about missing someone terribly ; " someone who is missing someone so much and has done something so wrong to the person that they know they can 't fix it . So they just hate themselves right in that moment , they can 't stand [ it ] , they regret everything that they did and they wish they could change things . " James Reed of The Boston Globe noted the chorus of " Me Haces Falta " to be self @-@ loathing , with the lines : " Tú me <unk> <unk> / Sí , me <unk> / Me <unk> / Estoy <unk> " ( English : " I miss you / Yes , I repent / I hate myself / I 'm desperate " ) . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly praised the song 's lyrics , but dismissed the song 's production , stating that it does not live up the song 's " florid , romance @-@ novel lyrics " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Me Haces Falta " was shot over a period of two days in Los Angeles , California by Sanji with the production company Reactor Films . During an interview with MTV News , Lopez described the video by saying : " Basically they are getting to know each other and kind of falling for each other , and in this video , it 's not a good thing , as you 'll see how it ends up . " The music video was made available for purchase on the iTunes Store on July 17 , 2007 . 
 The clip opens with Lopez and her love interest conversing on the side walk in front of a shop window . These scenes are intercut with that of suspicious men in a van , observing Lopez and her lover . Later , Lopez and her lover split and she starts singing as she walks down the street . She goes inside a boutique and enters through at a secret door . As she enters , she takes off a wig and changes her clothing . She enters in a room where there are pictures of her lover scattered across a table . These scenes are intercut with scenes of Lopez and her lover laying in a grass . As the video progresses , Lopez is seen sad , accompanied with her love interest and his friend in an apartment ; they are observing from a window with binoculars . It is revealed that the men from the beginning of the video are FBI officers and they are entering the building abruptly . They break into Lopez and her lover 's apartment and arrest him . In the end , it is revealed that Lopez is an undercover FBI agent who surrenders her boyfriend . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Como Ama una Mujer . 
 Technical 
 " Me Haces Falta " was recorded at Midnight Blue Studios in Miami , Florida . 
 Personnel 
 = Tropical Storm Chris ( 1982 ) = 
