 Tropical Storm Chris caused minor flooding along the Gulf Coast of the United States in September 1982 . The fifth tropical cyclone and third named storm of the 1982 Atlantic hurricane season , Chris developed from a surface low @-@ pressure area in the northern Gulf of Mexico on September 9 . Although initially displaying subtropical characteristics , the low pressure area gradually acquired tropical characteristics , and was reclassified as Tropical Depression Four within 24 hours of development . The depression then began to intensify and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Chris on September 10 . Thereafter , the storm turned north @-@ northeastward and strengthened further . On September 11 , Chris peaked as a 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) tropical storm . Later that day , it made landfall near Sabine Pass , Port Arthur , Texas . By September 13 , Chris dissipated over Arkansas . 
 When Chris moved ashore , it caused high waves and tides along the shores of the Gulf of Mexico . Though the storm made landfall in Texas , minimal impact was recorded in that state , though a restaurant suffered significant damage . Much of the impact occurred to the east , in Louisiana . Rainfall was relatively light in that state , though a few isolated areas experienced precipitation amounts higher than 15 inches ( 380 mm ) . The storm caused steady rainfall in parts of the Midwestern United States . Outside of Louisiana , there were rainfall totals higher than 10 inches ( 250 mm ) in western Tennessee and slightly less as the storm progressed northward . Due to minor flooding , damage in Louisiana was around $ 1 million ( 1982 USD ) . Elsewhere , impact was limited to mostly light to moderate rainfall , though local flooding was reported in Tennessee and Kentucky . Overall , Chris caused $ 2 million ( 1982 USD ) in damage and no fatalities . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An upper @-@ low pressure system formed in the Gulf of Mexico on September 6 , with the circulation heading westward . Initially , minimal development occurred , though by September 8 , the system became a surface low . It is estimated that the surface low became a subtropical depression by 0000 UTC on the following day . Over the next 24 hours , the low began acquiring tropical characteristics , mainly from developing deep convection on its north and east sides . By early on September 10 , observations from oil rigs , radars , and Air Force reconnaissance flights indicated that the subtropical system had transitioned into Tropical Depression Four . However , the National Hurricane Center did not operationally issue advisories until 1900 UTC on September 10 , at which time Chris was already a tropical storm . 
 In post @-@ season analysis , it was indicated that Tropical Depression Five strengthened into Tropical Storm Chris at 1200 UTC on September 10 . Due to a large low pressure trough over the Southwestern United States , Chris immediately curved northward . Later that day , the National Hurricane Center noted that " even though conditions do not favor rapid strengthening ... winds could approach hurricane force before the center moves inland Saturday " . As it approached closer to the Gulf Coast of the United States , Chris curved slightly east of north . Shortly before 1200 UTC Chris made landfall near Sabine Pass , Port Arthur , Texas with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . At 1200 UTC on September 11 , Chris attained its peak intensity with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Chris weakened quickly , and was downgraded to a tropical depression by early on September 12 while centered over west @-@ central Louisiana . The storm deteriorated further , and dissipated in Arkansas at 0000 UTC on September 13 . The remnants were last noted over the Midwestern United States . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 As Chris approached the Gulf Coast , at least 6 @,@ 500 people were evacuated from the Louisiana coast . Offshore evacuations were also completed , with many oil rig workers were taken off of rigs in the Gulf of Mexico . 
 Along with the evacuations , multiple watches and warnings were issued in accordance with Tropical Storm Chris . The first was on September 9 , when a gale warning was released for the Louisiana area east of Port Arthur , Texas . Fifteen hours afterwords , a gale warning was released for Port Arthur to Port O 'Connor , Texas . The next day , the gale warnings in Texas were extended as far south as Brownsville . A hurricane watch was released at 2200 UTC on September 10 for Morgan City , Louisiana to Port O 'Connor , Texas . All watches and warnings were discontinued by 2200 UTC on September 11 , which was about 10 hours after Chris made landfall . 
 = = Impact = = 
 At an offshore oil rig , a wind gust up to 81 mph ( 130 km / h ) was reported . In addition , several boats in the Gulf of Mexico sustained heavy damage . About 9 miles ( 14 km ) southeast of Sabine Pass , a 65 feet ( 20 m ) utility boat sunk . Minimal rainfall was reported in Texas , reaching about 1 inch ( 25 mm ) . Winds were light , remaining below tropical storm force in eastern Texas . However , a restaurant on Pleasure Island suffered an estimated $ 200 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1982 USD ) . In addition , minimal damage occurred at Sea Rim State Park , totaling to only $ 1 @,@ 000 ( 1982 USD ) . In the Port Arthur area , numerous power outages were reported . Flooded roads and power outages were reported in Beaumont , though damage was not significant in that city . 
 Along the southwestern coast of Louisiana , tides between 4 and 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 and 2 @.@ 1 m ) were reported . On land , Chris produced tropical storm force winds in a few areas and light to moderate rainfall . Throughout the state , precipitation was generally between 5 and 10 inches ( 130 and 250 mm ) , though peaking at more than 16 inches ( 410 mm ) in Delhi . Elsewhere in Louisiana , about 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of rainfall was reported in Lake Charles . Street flooding in Lake Charles was severe , though only a few houses suffered flood damage . To the south of Lake Charles , minor damage was reported in Cameron Parish , totaling to about $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 1982 USD ) . However , due to high tides , damage along the coastal areas of that parish was considerable . A Cameron Parish official noted " There 's power out all over the place , and we understand there was quite a bit of damage at Holly Beach " . In Evangeline Parish , an F2 tornado on the Fujita Scale destroyed four buildings and damaged seven other structures . In northeastern Louisiana , wind damage was " spotty " and limited to downed trees and powerlines . As a result of heavy rainfall in that portion of the state , low @-@ lying areas flooded , and bayous overflowed . A tornado , rated at F3 , destroyed eleven houses and one church in Clayton . In addition , the tornado knocked down trees and powerlines in the area . Overall , damage in Louisiana was near $ 1 million ( 1982 USD ) . 
 Throughout Louisiana and Mississippi , a combined total of nine tornadoes were reported . One of the tornadoes in Mississippi damaged several homes and businesses in Cleveland , and at least four injuries were reported . Another tornado spawned in a rural area overturned a mobile home in Eden . Two other twisters in the state caused minimal damage . In Mississippi , rains peaked at about 10 inches ( 250 mm ) in the northwest section of the state . The rest of state reported widespread rains of 1 – 7 inches ( 25 – 178 mm ) . Rainfall in Alabama peaked at 3 inches ( 76 mm ) in some areas , and similar amounts were observed in Georgia . In Florida , rainfall peaked at 7 inches ( 180 mm ) in an extremely southern part of the Panhandle . Precipitation was also recorded in Lake Okeechobee , with 1 inch ( 25 mm ) reported there . The northeastern section of the state reported 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of rain . No rain was reported in the Florida Keys . 
 In Arkansas , only 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of rain was reported , which were in several portions of the state . Missouri reported a peak of 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of precipitation , in the southeastern portion of the state . Other rains in the state include 1 – 3 inches ( 25 – 76 mm ) , which was widespread . Illinois reported mainly 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of precipitation , with one area of 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , all in the southern half of the state . Very little rain was reported in Indiana , with only 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) on the southern border of the state . In Tennessee and Kentucky , rains of 10 – 16 inches ( 250 – 410 mm ) were reported with locally heavy flooding . The western portions of Tennessee reported flood waters at least waist high in some city streets . In addition , schools in Milan were closed , while portions of U.S. Routes 70 and 79 were submerged into water . A few businesses in the city of Huntington suffered flood damage . Others rains include 1 inch ( 25 mm ) in the Carolinas , New York , Michigan , Virginia and Ohio . Overall , damage from Tropical Storm Chris was slightly less than $ 2 million ( 1982 USD ) , and no fatalities were reported . 
 = Roy Paul = 
 Roy Paul ( 18 April 1920 – 21 May 2002 ) was a Welsh footballer who played as a half @-@ back for Swansea Town and Manchester City . He also represented the Welsh national team over 30 times and is regarded as one of Wales ' best ever players . 
 Brought up in the Rhondda Valley , Paul became a miner after leaving school , but an offer of a professional contract from Swansea gave him the opportunity to leave the colliery . His football career was then disrupted by Second World War , during which he was a physical training instructor . After the war , Paul made his League debut , and spent four years playing first team football for Swansea , winning the Third Division South championship in 1948 – 49 . Transfer listed after an abortive move to Colombian club Millonarios , Paul joined Manchester City for £ 19 @,@ 500 in June 1950 . 
 At Manchester City Paul spent seven years as captain , leading the club to successive FA Cup finals in 1955 and 1956 , losing the first and winning the second . In 1957 he became player @-@ manager of Worcester City , and subsequently wound down his career in his native South Wales , becoming a lorry driver . He died in 2002 aged 82 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Paul was born on 18 April 1920 in Ton Pentre , Glamorgan , in the valleys of South Wales , and was one of 12 children . He attended <unk> School in Gelli . Paul left school at 15 , and like many boys from the Rhondda Valley he became a miner . While playing football for Ton Boys Club he was spotted by Swansea Town , for whom he signed first as an amateur , and then a month later as a professional . The Swansea captain was Bill Imrie , a former Scotland international . Paul named Imrie as a strong influence in his early career , particularly for instructing him in the fundamentals of good wing @-@ half play . Paul played for Swansea 's junior sides , but just as he was approaching the fringes of the first team , the league was suspended due to the outbreak of the Second World War . 
 At the start of the war Paul returned to the mines . He continued to represent Swansea in wartime leagues , and played for the senior team for the first time in 1939 . Paul struggled to readapt to mining life , and volunteered for the Marines in 1940 . He served as a sergeant physical training instructor , primarily in Devon , though he also spent part of the war in India . When in Devon he played football as a guest for Exeter City , and when in Wales he played wartime football for Swansea . Once the war was over Paul finally made his League debut for Swansea , having lost six years of his career to the war . 
 The Swansea coach in the immediate post @-@ war period was Frank Barson , a notoriously aggressive character who was known as " the centre @-@ forward 's graveyard " in his playing days . Barson instructed Paul in the art of tackling during lengthy practise sessions , and made him aware of the tricks that a wily opponent could use to gain the upper hand in a physical battle . Paul went on to make 159 league appearances for Swansea in a four @-@ year period , winning the Third Division South championship in 1948 – 49 . An impressive appearance against top @-@ flight club Arsenal in a 1950 FA Cup match resulted in the Londoners making an offer for the player , but Swansea turned it down . 
 Later that year , Paul received an offer of a trial with Colombian club Millonarios . Colombian clubs , who were not required to pay transfer fees as their governing body was not affiliated with FIFA , made similar offers to several British players . Paul was one of seven to make the trip to South America . Millonarios offered him a £ 3 @,@ 000 signing on fee and £ 150 per month , far in excess of the £ 12 per week maximum wage in British football . Once in Colombia , Paul found himself unimpressed by the conditions . He remarked in his autobiography that seeing football pitches surrounded by barbed wire put him in mind of " a concentration camp , or maybe the monkey @-@ house in the zoo " . Paul stayed in Bogota for only ten days , without playing a single match . Swansea were angered by Paul 's trip , and transfer @-@ listed him upon his return . As a result , he transferred to Manchester City for £ 19 @,@ 500 , a British record for a half @-@ back . Ken Barnes joined the club on the same day . The two became close friends ; Paul was best man at Barnes ' wedding . 
 = = Manchester City = = 
 Paul joined a Manchester City side which had just been relegated to the Second Division , and were thus playing at the same level as Swansea . Paul made his debut for the club on the opening day of the 1950 – 51 season , a 4 – 2 victory against a Preston North End side featuring Tom Finney . Manchester City went ten matches unbeaten at the start of the season , until a 4 – 3 defeat at Doncaster Rovers , where City blew a 3 – 0 half @-@ time lead . Paul played in all but one match that season , becoming club captain and helping his club win promotion , as runners @-@ up behind champions Preston . Writer HD Davies , under his pen name Old International , attributed much of City 's cohesive play over the season to the addition of Paul to the side . 
 Promotion meant Paul was playing club football at the highest level for the first time . For the next three seasons , his club languished in the lower reaches of the league table . During one spell of particularly poor form in 1953 , newspapers wrote of a feud between Paul and his team @-@ mate Ivor Broadis . Paul was critical of Broadis , a talented inside @-@ forward , but one who in Paul 's view did not exert sufficient effort when defending . In the 1954 – 55 pre @-@ season a new tactic was introduced which would change the direction of the club . Inspired by the Hungary team which had beaten England 6 – 3 the previous year , the club 's reserves had used a tactical system in which Johnny Williamson was used as a deep @-@ lying centre @-@ forward , resulting in a lengthy unbeaten run . Manchester City manager Les McDowall decided to try the system at first team level , using Don Revie in the centre @-@ forward role . Henceforth the system became known as The Revie Plan . The opening match of the season resulted in a 5 – 0 defeat at the hands of Preston North End . The following match the system was tweaked with Ken Barnes picked in place of John McTavish . City beat Sheffield United 5 – 2 , and the system was retained for the remainder of the season . Paul 's tactical role was relatively unchanged compared to that of some of his team @-@ mates , but as captain he was responsible for retaining the cohesion of his players . The Manchester Guardian regarded Paul to be well suited to the system , calling it " a strategy which shows off to perfection the strength and maturity of Paul among his younger defenders " . 
 Using the new system , results improved . In September 1954 City beat Arsenal to go top of the league , though not without personal cost for Paul , as an elbow from Arsenal 's Tommy Lawton resulted in the loss of four teeth . City could not sustain their title challenge , finishing seventh , but Paul 's team enjoyed a successful run in the FA Cup , reaching the final , where they faced Newcastle United . An early goal by Jackie Milburn and an unfortunate injury to Jimmy Meadows on 18 minutes left City playing with 10 men and gave them an uphill task . Paul took the responsibility of changing tactics : " Like certain generals I believe that in dire emergency it is often better to attack . I clapped my hands and yelled " Let 's show these Geordies the stuff that 's taken us to Wembley " " . The performance in the remainder of the first half was improved , resulting in an equalising goal by Bobby Johnstone , but in the second half Newcastle scored twice to win 3 – 1 . Publicly , Paul vowed to take his team to Wembley again , but privately he blamed himself for the defeat , questioning whether he had failed as captain . 
 The following season the club surpassed the achievements of the previous season , finishing fourth in the league and again reaching the FA Cup final , this time facing Birmingham City . Conscious that early nerves had affected his team in 1955 , in the dressing room he focussed on instilling each member of his team with confidence . This time it was Manchester City who scored an early goal , and with City leading in the second half Paul told his men to keep the ball in play as much as possible in order to tire out the Birmingham players . Then German goalkeeper Bert Trautmann badly hurt his neck in a collision with Peter Murphy . Paul instructed Roy Little to take Trautmann 's place , but Trautmann insisted that he would keep playing . Then Manchester City held on for the victory , and Paul collected the trophy from Queen Elizabeth II . X @-@ rays later revealed that Trautmann had played on with a broken neck . Paul took the match ball from the final as a souvenir , and gave it to his son . 
 After the cup win Paul played one more season for Manchester City . In the summer of 1957 he was offered a new contract , but instead retired from the professional game aged 37 , citing loss of pace due to age as the deciding factor . His final appearance for the club came on 22 April 1957 against Everton . In total he made 293 appearances for Manchester City , scoring 9 goals . 
 Upon finishing his professional career , Paul returned to the Rhondda Valley , and settled in Gelli . He continued to play at semi @-@ professional level , joining Worcester City , who paid him £ 20 a week and loaned him a car . Paul made 124 appearances for Worcester between 1957 and 1960 , including a three @-@ month spell as player @-@ manager . In 1959 he was part of the Worcester side which knocked Liverpool out of the FA Cup . He then moved to Brecon Corinthians , and later <unk> Athletic , where he ended his career . After the end of his football career , he became a lorry driver . He died in May 2002 aged 82 , following a long illness with Alzheimer 's disease , leaving a wife , Beryl , and two children , Robert and Christine . He is buried in Treorchy Cemetery . 
 = = International career = = 
 Paul gained 33 caps for Wales . He did not gain any under @-@ age caps , as in his era Wales did not field an under @-@ 23 team . He received his first cap in October 1948 , in a 3 – 1 defeat against Scotland . His only international goal came in a 5 – 1 win against Belgium in November 1949 . In October 1955 Paul was part of the Wales team that beat England 2 – 1 , the first Welsh victory against England in 18 years . Six months later Wales faced Ireland in their final match of that season 's British Home Championship . Wales were leading 1 – 0 when a handball by Danny Blanchflower gave Wales a penalty . Paul took the kick , but it was saved by Norman <unk> . Paul 's failure cost Wales victory , as Jimmy Jones equalised in the second half and the match finished 1 – 1 . A draw in the remaining fixture between Scotland and England meant that the miss also denied Wales victory in the tournament . Instead , for the first and only time there was a four @-@ way tie . Paul did not play for Wales again . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Roy Paul played as a half @-@ back , with the exact position varying during his career . At Swansea he was primarily used as a right @-@ half , but when he joined Manchester City manager Les McDowall switched him to the left , a position which Paul preferred despite being right @-@ footed . Internationally , he represented Wales in all three half @-@ back positions over the course of his career . 
 Paul had a reputation as a physically tough player and inspirational captain . Team @-@ mate Ken Barnes described him as a player who was " more about power than guile " , and called him a " born leader " who was " brilliant in the air " . Paul 's approach to captaincy was to ensure that every player gave as much effort as possible , mixing the respect of his colleagues with the occasional attempt to frighten them into action ; in the tunnel prior to the 1956 FA Cup Final his last action before leading out his team was to hold up his fist and shout " If we don 't fucking win , you 'll get some of this " . 
 At Manchester City he was occasional penalty taker , but his success rate was not high and he was relieved when Don Revie joined the club and took the responsibility for penalties , commenting that " the only reason I took them was because no @-@ one else fancied it " . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Manchester City F.C. 
 FA Cup : 1956 
 = Tropical Storm Zelda ( 1991 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Zelda was the last storm of the 1991 Pacific typhoon season . A disturbance formed near the International Date Line , and strengthened into a tropical depression on November 27 . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) reported that the depression had reached tropical storm intensity , thus naming it Zelda . The storm quickly strengthened into a Category 1 typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale near the Marshall Islands on November 29 . It reached peak of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , with a barometric pressure of 975 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . The tropical storm traveled northwestward , and later northeastward . Zelda soon weakened into a tropical storm , and then a tropical depression . The JTWC discontinued warnings on December 4 , while the Japanese Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) continued to track the storm until it crossed the International Date Line again on December 7 . 
 Zelda caused significant damage to the Marshall Islands . Operations at Kwajalein Missile Range were disrupted severely . About 60 percent of homes were destroyed in Ebeye , leaving 6 @,@ 000 people without residence . Nearly all crops on the islands were destroyed , and food and other supplies were contaminated by salt . No deaths or injuries were reported . Later in December , President George H. W. Bush declared the storm to be a major disaster , allowing the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) to assist . The Marshall Islands also requested funds from other countries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late November , a circulation was generated near the International Date Line by westerly winds . It was included in the Significant Tropical Weather Advisory at 0600 UTC on November 25 . Vertical wind shear prevented strengthening at first , but the disturbance later continued to develop . A tropical cyclone formation alert soon followed from the JTWC . JMA started tracking the disturbance at 0600 UTC on November 27 , and JTWC issued their first warning 18 hours later on the depression , naming it 31W . The depression quickly intensified , and it became a tropical storm at 0000 UTC on November 28 for JTWC , with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Operationally , the storm was upgraded twenty @-@ four hours later , after Kwajalein received stronger winds than expected . JMA upgraded the storm at 0300 UTC on November 29 . The tropical storm received the name Zelda . JMA upgraded Zelda to a severe tropical storm eighteen hours later . Zelda rapidly intensified into a Category 1 typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale at 1200 UTC of November 29 , with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , near the Marshall Islands . At that time , JMA kept it as a tropical storm with winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) , with a pressure reading of 990 mbar ( 29 inHg ) . 
 JMA estimated Zelda has reached peak around 0600 UTC on November 30 at 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , with a barometric pressure of 975 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Six hours later , JTWC reported the storm has reached the peak of 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) , west of Enewetak . Later , a trough created by Typhoon Yuri caused the subtropical ridge to weaken , allowing Zelda to move northward . By December 1 , the storm began to weaken and turned northeast . On December 2 , JMA reported the storm had weaken to 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) , and JTWC weakened it to 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . The storm weakened below Category 1 typhoon strength on 1800 UTC of the same day , with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Upper @-@ level winds soon increased , and Zelda 's central convection became sheared . JMA downgraded Zelda to a tropical storm on December 3 , and to a tropical depression later that day . A few hours later , JTWC downgraded the storm to a tropical depression , as it turned slightly northwestward , something they did not expect . The circulation detached from the frontal cloud line , and JTWC issued the last warning of the year . The depression turned back northeastward , and JMA stopped tracking just past the International Date Line on December 7 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 The storm affected Marshall Islands around November 28 , producing winds as high as 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . The storm impacted islands of Kwajalein , Majuro , Lae , <unk> , and Eniwetok . Kwajalein Missile Range caught stronger winds than expected from the storm , and operations in the missile range were affected severely . Zelda also produced a pressure of 990 @.@ 1 hPa ( 29 @.@ 24 inHg ) , which was the lowest pressure ever recorded on Kwajalein . Later , In Ebeye , 60 percent of homes were destroyed , and 6 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Food and water supplies were contaminated from salt in surge waves , and the water desalination plant became inoperable . Fresh water production records since 1989 were lost during the storm . The local hospital was still intact , but a few power lines were cut . There were no deaths or significant injuries . Other islands in the nation had their water contaminated by saltwater , and 95 percent of the crops were destroyed by the storm surge . Coral reefs were also damaged when the storm came nearby . 
 The U.S. Army engaged in cleanup and repairing in the country . On December 6 , the 834th Airlift Division sent six C @-@ 130s to Kwajalein with supplies . On the same day , President George H. W. Bush declared a major disaster , allowing federal funding to be sent to Arno , Aur , Kwajalein , Lae , Lib , Namu and <unk> islands . Despite already getting funding from the United States , Marshall Islands requested for aid via United Nations Disaster Relief Organization ( UNDRO ) on December 18 . 
 By March 26 , 1992 , about $ 98 @,@ 000 ( 1991 USD ) worth of relief goods were sent to the Marshall Islands , from UNDRO , United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) , and Australia . FEMA sent $ 1 @.@ 518 million ( 1991 USD ) to affected families . 
 = Banksia menziesii = 
 Banksia menziesii , commonly known as firewood banksia , is a species of flowering plant in the genus Banksia . It is a gnarled tree up to 10 m ( 33 ft ) tall , or a lower spreading 1 – 3 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) shrub in the more northern parts of its range . The serrated leaves are dull green with new growth a paler grey green . The prominent autumn and winter inflorescences are often two @-@ coloured red or pink and yellow , and their colour has given rise to more unusual common names such as port wine banksia and strawberry banksia . Yellow blooms are rarely seen . 
 First described by the botanist Robert Brown in the early 19th century , no separate varieties of Banksia menziesii are recognised . It is found in Western Australia , from the Perth ( 32 ° S ) region north to the Murchison River ( 27 ° S ) , and generally grows on sandy soils , in scrubland or low woodland . Banksia menziesii provides food for a wide array of invertebrate and vertebrate animals ; birds and in particular honeyeaters are prominent visitors . A relatively hardy plant , Banksia menziesii is commonly seen in gardens , nature strips and parks in Australian urban areas with Mediterranean climates , but its sensitivity to dieback from the soil @-@ borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi makes it short @-@ lived in places with humid summers , such as Sydney . Banksia menziesii is widely used in the cut flower industry both in Australia and overseas . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia menziesii grows either as a gnarled tree to 10 m ( 33 ft ) , or a lower spreading 1 – 3 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) shrub , generally encountered at its northern limits in the vicinity of Eneabba @-@ Mount Adams ; thus , it declines steadily in size as the climate becomes warmer and dryer further north . In the shrub form , several stems arise from the woody base known as the lignotuber . The trunk is greyish , sometimes with shades of brown or pink , and the 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 – 1 @.@ 18 in ) thick rough bark breaks away easily . The new growth is covered in fine brownish hair , which wears away after two or three years , leaving smooth stems and leaves . Stems that will bear flower spikes the following year are generally thicker and longer . Oblong in shape and somewhat truncate at the tips , the leaves are grey @-@ green in colour , 8 – 25 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 8 in ) long and up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide . The new leaves are paler and finely downy . The leaf margins are serrated with many small 1 – 2 mm long triangular teeth . The lower surface of the leaf has a midrib covered in fine pale brown hair . 
 Flowering occurs in autumn and winter , peaking from May to July . Overall the inflorescences , or flower spikes , take around eight months to development from the first microscopic changes in late spring . <unk> to cylindrical in shape , the flower spikes can be up to 7 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) wide and 4 – 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) high . They are composed of numerous individual flowers ; one field study south of Perth recorded an average of 1043 per flower spike , while another on plants in cultivation in South Australia recorded an average of 720 . B. menziesii has more flower colour variants than any other Banksia species , with flower spikes occurring in a wide range of pinks , as well as chocolate , bronze , yellow and white , and greenish variants . They are particularly striking closeup but can look indistinct from a distance . They are most attractive in late bud , the styles contrasting well to the body of the inflorescence , the whole looking like a red- or pink @-@ and white vertical candy striped bloom . The inflorescences are generally a deeper red after colder weather and further into the winter . <unk> pigments are responsible for the red and pink shades in the flowers . 
 Old flowers usually fall off the spikes quickly , with up to 25 large beaked follicles developing . A mottled dark brown and grey in colour , these can be prominent and quite attractively patterned when newly developed . Oval shaped , they are 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 – 1 @.@ 38 in ) long by 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) high and 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) wide . Overall , only a small fraction of flowers develop into follicles ; the proportion is as low as one in a thousand . The plant is dependent on fire to reproduce as the follicles only open after being burnt , each one producing one or two viable wedge @-@ shaped ( cuneate ) seeds , on either side of a woody separator . The colour and level of pigmentation in the seeds foreshadows the eventual colour of the inflorescences . Kevin Collins of the Banksia Farm recalled that for many years pale seeds were discarded by seed collectors who thought they were infertile . Later , he learnt that pale seeds yielded yellow @-@ coloured blooms , dark grey the usual red @-@ coloured , and black a distinctive bronze @-@ coloured bloom . 
 Seedlings have obovate cotyledons 1 – 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 55 in ) long by 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) wide , and the leaves that develop immediately afterward are crowded and very hairy . They have serrate margins . Evidence of thickening to form a future lignotuber , as well as minute buds , has been detected from the bases of seedlings at five months of age . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The common name of firewood banksia was a result of its quick @-@ burning properties . Other names recorded include Menzies banksia , <unk> banksia , port wine banksia , flame banksia , and in the cut flower industry , strawberry banksia and raspberry frost banksia . The <unk> <unk> Noongar people of the Perth region knew it as the <unk> . Despite its variation across its range , George noted that B. menziesii was a clearly defined species , and no formal division into subspecies was warranted . 
 = = = History = = = 
 Specimens of B. menziesii were first collected by the botanist Charles Fraser during Captain ( later Admiral Sir ) James Stirling 's March 1827 exploration of the Swan River . The following year , Alexander Macleay sent some of Fraser 's specimens to Robert Brown . Brown formally published the species in his 1830 Supplementum Primum Prodromi Florae Novae Hollandiae , giving it the specific epithet in honor of Archibald Menzies , surgeon @-@ naturalist on the HMS Discovery under George Vancouver , who discovered King George Sound in 1791 . Thus the species ' full name is Banksia menziesii R.Br. Neither Brown nor Menzies ever saw the plant growing . 
 Under Brown 's taxonomic arrangement , B. menziesii was placed in subgenus Banksia verae , the " True Banksias " , because its inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike . Banksia verae was renamed Eubanksia by Stephan Endlicher in 1847 , and demoted to sectional rank by Carl Meissner in his 1856 classification . Meissner further divided Eubanksia into four series , with B. menziesii placed in series Salicinae . When George Bentham published his 1870 arrangement in Flora Australiensis , he discarded Meissner 's series , replacing them with four sections . B. menziesii was placed in Orthostylis , a somewhat heterogeneous section containing 18 species . This arrangement would stand for over a century . 
 In 1891 , German botanist Otto Kuntze challenged the generic name Banksia L.f. , on the grounds that the name Banksia had previously been published in 1775 as Banksia J.R.Forst & G.Forst , referring to the genus now known as Pimelea . Kuntze proposed Sirmuellera as an alternative , republishing B. menziesii as " Sirmuellera menziesii " . The challenge failed , Banksia L.f. was formally conserved , and Sirmuellera menziesii ( R.Br. ) Kuntze is now a nomenclatural synonym of B. menziesii . 
 = = = Current placement = = = 
 Alex George published a new taxonomic arrangement of Banksia in his classic 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) . Endlicher 's Eubanksia became B. subg . Banksia , and was divided into three sections . B. menziesii was placed in B. sect . Banksia , and this was further divided into nine series , with B. menziesii placed in B. ser . Banksia . He thought its closest relatives to be Banksia speciosa and B. baxteri , and that it also formed a link with eastern species , particularly Banksia serrata . Since Brown 's original publication had treated all of Fraser 's specimens as syntypes for the species , George also chose a lectotype , selecting a tree that Fraser had received from Macleay in May 1828 . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published a new arrangement for the genus , after cladistic analyses yielded a cladogram significantly different from George 's arrangement . Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement retained B. menziesii in series Banksia , placing it in B. subser . Cratistylis along with nine other species . This arrangement stood until 1999 , when George effectively reverted to his 1981 arrangement in his monograph for the Flora of Australia series . 
 Under George 's taxonomic arrangement of Banksia , B. menziesii 's taxonomic placement may be summarised as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Banksia 
 Series Banksia 
 B. serrata 
 B. aemula 
 B. ornata 
 B. baxteri 
 B. speciosa 
 B. menziesii 
 B. candolleana 
 B. sceptrum 
 B. menziesii 's inflorescences resemble those of no other banksia ; its closest relatives were felt by George to be B. speciosa ( showy banksia ) and B. baxteri ( bird 's nest banksia ) , which differs from B. menziesii in having yellow flowers and leaves with deep triangular lobes . In 2002 , a molecular study by Austin Mast showed its closest relatives to be the members of the series Crocinae . 
 In 2005 , Mast , Eric Jones and Shawn Havery published the results of their cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for Banksia . They inferred a phylogeny greatly different from the accepted taxonomic arrangement , including finding Banksia to be paraphyletic with respect to Dryandra . A new taxonomic arrangement was not published at the time , but early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete . In the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. menziesii is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 As B. menziesii is not similar to any other Banksia , hybrids are unlikely to occur . The only reported hybrid is a sterile hybrid with B. hookeriana ( Hooker 's Banksia ) , found north of Badgingarra by Greg Keighery . Manual cross @-@ fertilisation with B. attenuata has resulted in germination , indicating that these two species are genetically compatible , but natural hybrids are extremely unlikely because the two species flower at different times . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia menziesii grows primarily in deep sandy soils of the Swan Coastal Plain and Geraldton Sandplains , extending from <unk> in the south to Kalbarri in the north . However , It is uncommon south of Mandurah . It is generally limited to the east by the heavy soils of the Darling Scarp , but does grow on isolated patches of sand in the Jarrah Forest and Avon Wheatbelt regions , such as occur near Beverley , Toodyay and Wongan Hills . The easternmost known occurrence is a specimen collected by Roger <unk> in 1979 from north @-@ east of Brookton , about 125 km ( 78 mi ) from the coast . Much of its range on the Swan Coastal Plain coincides with Perth 's expanding metropolitan area , and much habitat has been lost to clearing . 
 Together with B. attenuata ( candlestick banksia ) , B. menziesii is a dominant component in a number of widespread vegetation complexes of the Swan Coastal Plain , including Banksia low woodland and Jarrah @-@ Banksia woodland . These complexes only occur on deep , well @-@ draining sand ; in shallower , seasonally wet soils , B. menziesii and B. attenuata give way to other Banksia species such as B. littoralis ( swamp banksia ) or B. telmatiaea ( swamp fox banksia ) . On the Geraldton Sandplains to the north , B. menziesii usually occurs as a shrub or small tree emergent above low heath . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like many members of the family Proteaceae , Banksia menziesii is largely self @-@ incompatible ; that is , inflorescences require pollinators to be fertilised and produce seed . One mechanism by which the species promotes cross @-@ pollination with other plants is protandry , whereby the male parts release pollen that becomes non @-@ viable before the female parts become receptive on the same flower spike . The individual flowers are uniform , and it is unclear why so few go on to develop follicles . Published in 1988 , a field study conducted in banksia woodland near Perth noted that anthesis occurred on an inflorescence at an average rate of 40 to 60 florets opening per day , although this varied widely between different flowerheads . Foraging by honeyeaters would cause the florets to open , but bees would not . 
 Banksia menziesii provides an important food source , as flowers and seeds , for the threatened short @-@ billed black cockatoo ( Calyptorhynchus latirostris ) . Other bird species that have been observed feeding on B. menziesii include the red @-@ capped parrot ( <unk> <unk> ) , western rosella ( Platycercus <unk> ) , red @-@ tailed black cockatoo ( Calyptorhynchus banksii ) , Australian ringneck ( Barnardius zonarius ) , western gerygone ( <unk> fusca ) and several honeyeater species , the New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) , white @-@ cheeked honeyeater ( P. nigra ) , brown honeyeater ( Lichmera indistincta ) , singing honeyeater ( Lichenostomus virescens ) , western spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus superciliosus ) , red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) and western wattlebird ( A. lunulata ) . Insects recorded include ants and bees , as well as rove beetles ( family Staphylinidae ) . A field study south of Perth noted that Banksia menziesii appeared particularly popular with the brown honeyeater and western spinebill , compared with other banksias . 
 Twenty @-@ one species from several orders of slime molds ( myxomycetes ) have been isolated from the bark of Banksia menziesii . Over half ( 13 ) were from the order Stemonitales , and Echinosteliales and <unk> were also common . The abundance of the first two orders may be due to the acidity of the bark . Another order , the <unk> , was unusually rare — other studies have demonstrated that the order is typically abundant on the bark of various species of tree around the world . 
 Banksia menziesii regenerates after bushfire by resprouting from its woody lignotuber , or from epicormic buds on the trunk . It is generally only weakly serotinous in the southern part of its range , that is , it lacks a canopy seed bank as follicles on old flower spikes in the canopy release their seed after two years , but populations retain more seed as populations move north . Lower canopies and drier climates predispose to hotter fires that are more likely to kill plants and effect seed release , and thus facilitate seedling recruitment . 
 All banksias have developed proteoid or cluster roots in response to the nutrient poor conditions of Australian soils ( particularly lacking in phosphorus ) . The plant develop masses of fine lateral roots that form a mat @-@ like structure underneath the soil surface , and enable it to extract nutrients as efficiently possible out of the soil . A study of three co @-@ occurring species in banksia woodland in southwestern Australia — Banksia menziesii , B. attenuata and B. ilicifolia — found that all three develop fresh roots in September after winter rainfall , and that the bacteria populations associated with the root systems of B. menziesii differ from the other two , and that they also change depending on the age of the roots . 
 Along with Banksia attenuata , Banksia menziesii is a facultative phreatophyte . The two species are less strictly tied to the water table and hence able to grow in a wider variety of places within banksia woodland habitat around Perth than the co @-@ occurring Banksia ilicifolia and Banksia littoralis . Recent falls of the water table on the Swan Coastal Plain from use of the Gnangara Mound aquifer for Perth 's water supply as well as years of below average rainfall have caused a drop in the population and vigour of Banksia menziesii since the mid @-@ 1960s . A 2009 Spanish study showed Banksia menziesii seedlings to be moderately sensitive to salinity . It is also sensitive to sulfur dioxide . A 1994 study by Byron Lamont and colleagues from Curtin University found that Banksia menziesii plants within 50 metres ( 160 feet ) of road verges had crowns two and a half times bigger , and set three times as many seeds as plants further away from the road , and that this was likely due to increased availability of nutrients and water from runoff . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia menziesii has several horticultural features including patterned buds and follicles , attractive pinkish new growth , and showy flowerheads . A dwarf form is commonly sold in nurseries . Byron Lamont has observed that dwarf plants may grow into taller single @-@ trunked plants in cultivation . 
 The plant is fairly easy to grow in a mediterranean climate with good drainage and a light ( sandy ) soil ; however , with medium to high susceptibility to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback , it is unreliable in conditions that favour the growth of the soil @-@ borne water mould , such as summer humidity or poor drainage . The use of phosphite fungicides does reduce the spread of Phytophthora . It generally does poorly in eastern Australia , although it is grown commercially in southeastern South Australia as a cut flower crop . It is also grown in California and Hawaii . 
 Seeds do not require any treatment prior to planting , and take 26 to 40 days to germinate . Seeds that grow into yellow @-@ flowered plants are pale and unpigmented , while future <unk> and red @-@ flowered plants are dark greyish and black respectively . It generally takes about five to seven years to flower from seed . The plant favours sandy well @-@ drained soils and a sunny position and can be heavily pruned if necessary , as new growth can arise from the lignotuber . Although it is readily propagated by seed , experiments with in vitro propagation found Banksia menziesii to be more difficult than other species trialled . 
 = = Art and culture = = 
 The nectar of Banksia menziesii was used in a drink by the <unk> <unk> Nyoongar , who were also called the <unk> people . Along with beverages from other species , it was drunk at special sweet water festivals . Banksia menziesii was the subject of a book by botanical artist Philippa <unk> , which showed the progress of an inflorescence from bud through flowering to fruiting and seed release over 22 watercolour plates . Noted wildflower artist Ellis Rowan also painted it . It was one of several wildflowers depicted on a series of plates produced by the British pottery firm Wedgwood in the early 1990s . 
 = History of aspirin = 
 The history of aspirin ( also known as acetylsalicylic acid or ASA ) and the medical use of it and related substances stretches back to antiquity , though pure ASA has only been manufactured and marketed since 1899 . 
 Medicines made from willow and other salicylate @-@ rich plants appear in Egyptian <unk> pharmacology papyri from the second millennium BC . Hippocrates referred to their use of salicylic tea to reduce fevers around 400 BC , and were part of the pharmacopoeia of Western medicine in classical antiquity and the Middle Ages . Willow bark extract became recognized for its specific effects on fever , pain and inflammation in the mid @-@ eighteenth century . Lewis and Clark allegedly used willow bark tea in 1803 – 1806 as a remedy for fever for members of the famous expedition . By the nineteenth century pharmacists were experimenting with and prescribing a variety of chemicals related to salicylic acid , the active component of willow extract . 
 In 1853 , chemist Charles Frédéric Gerhardt treated acetyl chloride with sodium salicylate to produce acetylsalicylic acid for the first time ; in the second half of the nineteenth century , other academic chemists established the compound 's chemical structure and devised more efficient methods of synthesis . In 1897 , scientists at the drug and dye firm Bayer began investigating acetylsalicylic acid as a less @-@ irritating replacement for standard common salicylate medicines . By 1899 , Bayer had dubbed this drug Aspirin and was selling it around the world . The word Aspirin was Bayer 's brand name , rather than the generic name of the drug ; however , Bayer 's rights to the trademark were lost or sold in many countries . Aspirin 's popularity grew over the first half of the twentieth century leading to fierce competition with the proliferation of aspirin brands and products . 
 Aspirin 's popularity declined after the development of acetaminophen / paracetamol in 1956 and ibuprofen in 1962 . In the 1960s and 1970s , John Vane and others discovered the basic mechanism of aspirin 's effects , while clinical trials and other studies from the 1960s to the 1980s established aspirin 's efficacy as an anti @-@ clotting agent that reduces the risk of clotting diseases . Aspirin sales revived considerably in the last decades of the twentieth century , and remain strong in the twenty @-@ first with widespread use as a preventive treatment for heart attacks and strokes . 
 = = Early history of salicylates = = 
 Medicines derived from willow trees and other salicylate @-@ rich plants have been part of pharmacopoeias at least dating back to ancient Sumer . The earliest specific reference to willow and myrtle ( another salicylate @-@ rich plant ) being used for conditions that would likely be affected by their analgesic , anti @-@ <unk> , and anti @-@ inflammatory properties comes from the Ebers Papyrus , an Egyptian medical text from ca . 1543 BC , likely a copy of a text from around the time of the Ur tablet . 
 Willow bark preparations became a standard part of the materia medica of Western medicine beginning at least with the Greek physician Hippocrates in the fifth century BC ; he recommended it to ease the pain of child @-@ bearing and to reduce fever . The Roman encyclopedist Celsus , in his De Medicina of ca . 30 AD , suggested willow leaf extract to treat the four signs of inflammation : redness , heat , swelling and pain . Willow treatments also appeared in Dioscorides 's De Materia Medica , and Pliny the Elder 's Natural History . By the time of Galen , willow was commonly used throughout the Roman and Arab worlds , as a small part of a large , growing botanical pharmacopoeia . 
 = = 18th and 19th centuries = = 
 The major turning point for salicylate medicines came in 1763 , when a letter from English chaplain Edward Stone was read at a meeting of the Royal Society , describing the dramatic power of willow bark extract to cure ague — an ill @-@ defined constellation of symptoms , including intermittent fever , pain , and fatigue , that primarily referred to malaria . Inspired by the doctrine of signatures to search for a treatment for <unk> near the brackish waters that were known to cause it , Stone had tasted the bark of a willow tree in 1758 and noticed an astringency reminiscent of the standard — and expensive — ague cure of Peruvian bark . He collected , dried , and powdered a substantial amount of willow bark , and over the next five years tested it on a number of people sick with fever and <unk> . In his letter , Stone reported consistent success , describing willow extract 's effects as identical to Peruvian bark , though a little less potent . ( In fact , the active ingredient of Peruvian bark was quinine , which attacked the infectious cause of malaria , while the active ingredient of willow extract , salicin , relieved the symptoms of malaria but could not cure it . ) Stone 's letter ( mistakenly attributed to Edmund rather than Edward Stone ) was printed in Philosophical Transactions , and by the end of the 18th century willow was gaining popularity as an inexpensive substitute for Peruvian bark . 
 In the 19th century , as the young discipline of organic chemistry began to grow in Europe , scientists attempted to isolate and purify the active components of many medicines , including willow bark . After unsuccessful attempts by Italian chemists <unk> and Fontana in 1826 , Joseph Buchner obtained relatively pure salicin crystals in 1828 ; the following year , Henri Leroux developed a better procedure for extracting modest yields of salicin . In 1834 , Swiss pharmacist Johann <unk> discovered what he thought was a new pain @-@ reducing substance , isolated from the common remedy of meadowsweet ( Spiraea ulmaria ) . By 1838 , Italian chemist Raffaele <unk> found a method of obtaining a more potent acid form of willow extract , which he named salicylic acid . The German chemist who had been working to identify the Spiraea extract , Karl Jacob <unk> , soon realized that it was in fact the same salicylic acid that <unk> had found . 
 Through the middle decades of the 19th century , the use of salicylate medicines — including salicin , salicylic acid , and sodium salicylate — grew considerably , and physicians increasingly knew what to expect from these medicines : reduction of pain , fever , and inflammation . However , the unpleasant side effects , particularly gastric irritation , limited their usefulness . By the 1880s , the German chemical industry , jump @-@ started by the lucrative development of dyes from coal tar , was branching out to investigate the potential of new tar @-@ derived medicines . The turning point was the advent of Kalle & Company 's <unk> , the branded version of the well @-@ known dye derivative <unk> — the fever @-@ reducing properties of which were discovered by accident in 1886 . <unk> 's success inspired Carl Duisberg , the head of research at the small dye firm Friedrich Bayer & Company , to start a systematic search for other chemical fever @-@ reducers . Bayer chemists soon developed <unk> , followed by the sedatives <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Synthesis of ASA = = = 
 Upon taking control of Bayer 's overall management in 1890 , Duisberg began to expand the company 's drug research program . He created a pharmaceutical group for creating new drugs , headed by former university chemist Arthur Eichengrün , and a pharmacology group for testing the drugs , headed by Heinrich Dreser ( beginning in 1897 , after periods under Wilhelm Siebel and Hermann Hildebrandt ) . In 1894 , the young chemist Felix Hoffmann joined the pharmaceutical group . Dreser , Eichengrün and Hoffmann would be the key figures in the development of acetylsalicylic acid as the drug Aspirin ( though their respective roles have been the subject of some contention ) . 
 In 1897 , Hoffmann started working to find a less irritating substitute for salicylic acid . It is generally accepted that he turned to this idea because his father was suffering the side effects of taking sodium salicylate for rheumatism . Other chemists had attempted this before as well , by <unk> salicylic acid to make acetylsalicylic acid ( ASA ) . Charles Frédéric Gerhardt was the first to prepare acetylsalicylic acid in 1853 . In the course of his work on the synthesis and properties of various acid anhydrides , he mixed acetyl chloride with a sodium salt of salicylic acid ( sodium salicylate ) . A vigorous reaction ensued , and the resulting melt soon solidified . Since no structural theory existed at that time Gerhardt called the compound he obtained " salicylic @-@ acetic anhydride " ( <unk> Salicylsäure @-@ <unk> ) . When Gerhardt tried to dissolve the solid in a diluted solution of sodium carbonate it immediately decomposed to sodium salts of salicylic and acetic acids . In 1859 , von Gilm produced ASA ( which he called " <unk> Salicylsäure " , acetylated salicylic acid ) by a different method , the reaction of salicylic acid and acetyl chloride . In 1869 Schröder , Prinzhorn and Kraut repeated both Gerhardt 's ( from sodium salicylate ) and von Gilm 's ( from salicylic acid ) syntheses and concluded that both reactions gave the same compound — acetylsalicylic acid . ( Prinzhorn is credited in the paper with conducting the experiments . ) They were first to assign to it the correct structure with the acetyl group connected to the phenolic oxygen . Kraut 's procedure was even being used by the drug company Heyden to make unbranded ASA . However , the published methods did not produce pure ASA — although Kraut 's method was efficient enough to be useful . It is likely that Hoffmann started by recreating the published methods . On October 10 , 1897 ( according to his laboratory notebooks ) , Hoffmann found a better method for making ASA , from salicylic acid refluxed with acetic anhydride . 
 Eichengrün sent ASA to Dreser 's pharmacology group for testing , and the initial results were very positive . The next step would normally have been clinical trials , but Dreser opposed further investigation of ASA because of salicylic acid 's reputation for weakening the heart — possibly a side effect of the high doses often used to treat rheumatism . Dreser 's group was soon busy testing Felix Hoffmann 's next chemical success : <unk> ( which the Bayer team soon branded as heroin because of the heroic feeling it gave them ) . Eichengrün , frustrated by Dreser 's rejection of ASA , went directly to Bayer 's Berlin representative Felix Goldmann to arrange low @-@ profile trials with doctors . Though the results of those trials were also very positive , with no reports of the typical salicylic acid complications , Dreser still demurred . However , Carl Duisberg intervened and scheduled full testing . Soon , Dreser admitted ASA 's potential and Bayer decided to proceed with production . Dreser wrote a report of the findings to publicize the new drug ; in it , he omitted any mention of Hoffmann or Eichengrün . He would also be the only one of the three to receive royalties for the drug ( for testing it ) , since it was ineligible for any patent the chemists might have taken out for creating it . For many years , however , he attributed Aspirin 's discovery solely to Hoffmann . 
 The controversy over who was primarily responsible for aspirin 's development spread through much of the twentieth century and into the twenty @-@ first . Although aspirin 's origin was in academic research and Bayer was not the first to produce it commercially , Bayer insists that " The active ingredient in Aspirin , acetylsalicylic acid , was synthesized for the first time in a chemically pure and thus stable form in 1897 by a young chemist working for Bayer , Dr. Felix Hoffmann . " Historians and others have also challenged Bayer 's early accounts of Bayer 's synthesis , in which Hoffmann was primarily responsible for the Bayer breakthrough . In 1949 , shortly before his death , Eichengrün wrote an article , " Fifty Years of <unk> " , claiming that he had not told Hoffmann the purpose of his research , meaning that Hoffmann merely carried out Eichengrün 's research plan , and that the drug would never have gone to the market without his direction . This claim was later supported by research conducted by historian Walter Sneader . Axel <unk> , General Secretary of the International Society for the History of Pharmacy , subsequently questioned the novelty of Sneader ’ s research , noting that several earlier articles discussed the Hoffmann – Eichengrün controversy in detail . Bayer countered Sneader in a press release stating that according to the records , Hoffmann and Eichengrün held equal positions , and Eichengrün was not Hoffmann 's supervisor . Hoffmann was named on the US Patent as the inventor , which Sneader did not mention . Eichengrün , who left Bayer in 1908 , had multiple opportunities to claim the priority and had never before 1949 done it ; he neither claimed nor received any percentage of the profit from aspirin sales . 
 = = = Naming the drug = = = 
 The name Aspirin was derived from the name of the chemical ASA — <unk> in German . Spirsäure ( salicylic acid ) was named for the meadowsweet plant , <unk> ulmaria , from which it could be derived . Aspirin took a- for the acetylation , <unk> from Spirsäure , and added -in as a typical drug name ending to make it easy to say . In the final round of naming proposals that circulated through Bayer , it came down to Aspirin and <unk> ; Aspirin , they feared , might remind customers of aspiration , but Arthur Eichengrün argued that <unk> ( meaning " good " ) was inappropriate because it usually indicated an improvement over an earlier version of a similar drug . Since the substance itself was already known , Bayer intended to use the new name to establish their drug as something new ; in January 1899 they settled on Aspirin . 
 = = = Rights and sale = = = 
 Under Carl Duisberg 's leadership , Bayer was firmly committed to the standards of ethical drugs , as opposed to patent medicines . Ethical drugs were drugs that could be obtained only through a pharmacist , usually with a doctor 's prescription . Advertising drugs directly to consumers was considered unethical and strongly opposed by many medical organizations ; that was the domain of patent medicines . Therefore , Bayer was limited to marketing Aspirin directly to doctors . 
 When production of Aspirin began in 1899 , Bayer sent out small packets of the drug to doctors , pharmacists and hospitals , advising them of Aspirin 's uses and encouraging them to publish about the drug 's effects and effectiveness . As positive results came in and enthusiasm grew , Bayer sought to secure patent and trademark wherever possible . It was ineligible for patent in Germany ( despite being accepted briefly before the decision was overturned ) , but Aspirin was patented in Britain ( filed December 22 , 1898 ) and the United States ( US Patent 644 @,@ 077 issued February 27 , 1900 ) . The British patent was overturned in 1905 , the American patent was also besieged but was ultimately upheld . 
 Faced with growing legal and illegal competition for the globally marketed ASA , Bayer worked to cement the connection between Bayer and Aspirin . One strategy it developed was to switch from distributing Aspirin powder for pharmacists to press into pill form to distributing standardized tablets — complete with the distinctive Bayer cross logo . In 1903 the company set up an American subsidiary , with a converted factory in Rensselaer , New York , to produce Aspirin for the American market without paying import duties . Bayer also sued the most egregious patent violators and smugglers . The company 's attempts to hold onto its Aspirin sales incited criticism from muckraking journalists and the American Medical Association , especially after the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act that prevented trademarked drugs from being listed in the United States Pharmacopeia ; Bayer listed ASA with an intentionally convoluted generic name ( <unk> acid ester of salicylic acid ) to discourage doctors referring to anything but Aspirin . 
 = = World War I and Bayer = = 
 By the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , Bayer was facing competition in all its major markets from local ASA producers as well as other German drug firms ( particularly Heyden and Hoechst ) . The British market was immediately closed to the German companies , but British manufacturing could not meet the demand — especially with phenol supplies , necessary for ASA synthesis , largely being used for explosives manufacture . On February 5 , 1915 , Bayer 's UK trademarks were voided , so that any company could use the term aspirin . The Australian market was taken over by Aspro , after the makers of Nicholas @-@ Aspirin lost a short @-@ lived exclusive right to the aspirin name there . In the United States , Bayer was still under German control — though the war disrupted the links between the American Bayer plant and the German Bayer headquarters — but phenol shortage threatened to reduce aspirin production to a trickle , and imports across the Atlantic Ocean were blocked by the Royal Navy . 
 = = = Great Phenol Plot = = = 
 To secure phenol for aspirin production , and at the same time indirectly aid the German war effort , German agents in the United States orchestrated what became known as the Great Phenol Plot . By 1915 , the price of phenol rose to the point that Bayer 's aspirin plant was forced to drastically cut production . This was especially problematic because Bayer was instituting a new branding strategy in preparation of the expiry of the aspirin patent in the United States . Thomas Edison , who needed phenol to manufacture phonograph records , was also facing supply problems ; in response , he created a phenol factory capable of pumping out twelve tons per day . Edison 's excess phenol seemed destined for <unk> production . 
 Although the United States remained officially neutral until April 1917 , it was increasingly throwing its support to the Allies through trade . To counter this , German ambassador Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff and Interior Ministry official Heinrich Albert were tasked with undermining American industry and maintaining public support for Germany . One of their agents was a former Bayer employee , Hugo Schweitzer . Schweitzer set up a contract for a front company called the Chemical Exchange Association to buy all of Edison 's excess phenol . Much of the phenol would go to the German @-@ owned Chemische Fabrik von Heyden 's American subsidiary ; Heyden was the supplier of Bayer 's salicylic acid for aspirin manufacture . By July 1915 , Edison 's plants were selling about three tons of phenol per day to Schweitzer ; Heyden 's salicylic acid production was soon back on line , and in turn Bayer 's aspirin plant was running as well . 
 The plot only lasted a few months . On July 24 , 1915 , Heinrich Albert 's briefcase , containing details about the phenol plot , was recovered by a Secret Service agent . Although the activities were not illegal — since the United States was still officially neutral and still trading with Germany — the documents were soon leaked to the New York World , an anti @-@ German newspaper . The World published an exposé on August 15 , 1915 . The public pressure soon forced Schweitzer and Edison to end the phenol deal — with the embarrassed Edison subsequently sending his excess phenol to the U.S. military — but by that time the deal had netted the plotters over two million dollars and there was already enough phenol to keep Bayer 's Aspirin plant running . Bayer 's reputation took a large hit , however , just as the company was preparing to launch an advertising campaign to secure the connection between aspirin and the Bayer brand . 
 = = = Bayer loses foreign holdings = = = 
 Beginning in 1915 , Bayer set up a number of shell corporations and subsidiaries in the United States , to hedge against the possibility of losing control of its American assets if the U.S. should enter the war and to allow Bayer to enter other markets ( e.g. , army uniforms ) . After the U.S. declared war on Germany in April 1917 , alien property custodian A. Mitchell Palmer began investigating German @-@ owned businesses , and soon turned his attention to Bayer . To avoid having to surrender all profits and assets to the government , Bayer 's management shifted the stock to a new company , nominally owned by Americans but controlled by the German @-@ American Bayer leaders . Palmer , however , soon uncovered this scheme and seized all of Bayer 's American holdings . After the Trading with the Enemy Act was amended to allow sale of these holdings , the government auctioned off the Rensselaer plant and all Bayer 's American patents and trademarks , including even the Bayer brand name and the Bayer cross logo . It was bought by a patent medicine company , Sterling Products , Inc . The rights to Bayer Aspirin and the U.S. rights to the Bayer name and trademarks were sold back to Bayer AG in 1994 for US $ 1 billion . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 With the coming of the deadly Spanish flu pandemic in 1918 , aspirin — by whatever name — secured a reputation as one of the most powerful and effective drugs in the <unk> of the time . Its fever @-@ reducing properties gave many sick patients enough strength to fight through the infection , and aspirin companies large and small earned the loyalty of doctors and the public — when they could manufacture or purchase enough aspirin to meet demand . Despite this , some people believed that Germans put the Spanish flu bug in Bayer aspirin , causing the pandemic as a war tactic . 
 The U.S. ASA patent expired in 1917 , but Sterling owned the aspirin trademark , which was the only commonly used term for the drug . In 1920 , United Drug Company challenged the Aspirin trademark , which became officially generic for public sale in the U.S. ( although it remained trademarked when sold to wholesalers and pharmacists ) . With demand growing rapidly in the wake of the Spanish flu , there were soon hundreds of " aspirin " brands on sale in the United States . 
 Sterling Products , equipped with all of Bayer 's U.S. intellectual property , tried to take advantage of its new brand as quickly as possible , before generic <unk> took over . However , without German expertise to run the Rensselaer plant to make aspirin and the other Bayer pharmaceuticals , they had only a finite aspirin supply and were facing competition from other companies . Sterling president William E. Weiss had ambitions to sell Bayer aspirin not only in the U.S. , but to compete with the German Bayer abroad as well . Taking advantage of the losses <unk> Bayer ( the German Bayer company ) suffered through the reparation provisions of the Treaty of Versailles , Weiss worked out a deal with Carl Duisberg to share profits in the Americas , Australia , South Africa and Great Britain for most Bayer drugs , in return for technical assistance in manufacturing the drugs . 
 Sterling also took over Bayer 's Canadian assets as well as ownership of the Aspirin trademark which is still valid in Canada and most of the world . Bayer bought Sterling Winthrop in 1994 restoring ownership of the Bayer name and Bayer cross trademark in the US and Canada as well as ownership of the Aspirin trademark in Canada . 
 = = = Diversification of market = = = 
 Between World War I and World War II , many new aspirin brands and aspirin @-@ based products entered the market . The Australian company Nicholas Proprietary Limited , through the aggressive marketing strategies of George Davies , built Aspro into a global brand , with particular strength in Australia , New Zealand , and the U.K. American brands such as Burton 's Aspirin , Molloy 's Aspirin , Cal @-@ Aspirin and St. Joseph Aspirin tried to compete with the American Bayer , while new products such <unk> ( aspirin with caffeine ) and Alka @-@ Seltzer ( a soluble mix of aspirin and bicarbonate of soda ) put aspirin to new uses . In 1925 , the German Bayer became part of IG Farben , a conglomerate of former dye companies ; IG Farben 's brands of Aspirin and , in Latin America , the caffeinated <unk> ( co @-@ managed with Sterling Products ) competed with less expensive <unk> such as <unk> . 
 = = Competition from new drugs = = 
 After World War II , with the IG Farben conglomerate dismantled because of its central role in the Nazi regime , Sterling Products bought half of Bayer Ltd , the British Bayer subsidiary — the other half of which it already owned . However , Bayer Aspirin made up only a small fraction of the British aspirin market because of competition from Aspro , <unk> ( a soluble aspirin drug ) and other brands . Bayer Ltd began searching for new pain relievers to compete more effectively . After several moderately successful compound drugs that mainly utilized aspirin ( <unk> and Excedrin ) , Bayer Ltd 's manager Laurie <unk> ordered an investigation of a substance that scientists at Yale had , in 1946 , found to be the metabolically active derivative of <unk> : acetaminophen . After clinical trials , Bayer Ltd brought acetaminophen to market as Panadol in 1956 . 
 However , Sterling Products did not market Panadol in the United States or other countries where Bayer Aspirin still dominated the aspirin market . Other firms began selling acetaminophen drugs , most significantly , McNeil Laboratories with liquid Tylenol in 1955 , and Tylenol pills in 1958 . By 1967 , Tylenol was available without a prescription . Because it did not cause gastric irritation , acetaminophen rapidly displaced much of aspirin 's sales . Another analgesic , anti @-@ inflammatory drug was introduced in 1962 : ibuprofen ( sold as <unk> in the U.K. and Motrin in the U.S. ) . By the 1970s , aspirin had a relatively small portion of the pain reliever market , and in the 1980s sales decreased even more when ibuprofen became available without prescription . 
 Also in the early 1980s , several studies suggested a link between children 's consumption of aspirin and Reye 's syndrome , a potentially fatal disease . By 1986 , the U.S. Food and Drug Administration required warning labels on all aspirin , further suppressing sales . The makers of Tylenol also filed a lawsuit against <unk> aspirin maker American Home Products , claiming that the failure to add warning labels before 1986 had unfairly held back Tylenol sales , though this suit was eventually dismissed . 
 = = Investigating how aspirin works = = 
 The mechanism of aspirin 's analgesic , anti @-@ inflammatory and antipyretic properties was unknown through the drug 's heyday in the early- to mid @-@ twentieth century ; Heinrich Dreser 's explanation , widely accepted since the drug was first brought to market , was that aspirin relieved pain by acting on the central nervous system . In 1958 Harry Collier , a biochemist in the London laboratory of pharmaceutical company Parke Davis , began investigating the relationship between <unk> and the effects of aspirin . In tests on guinea pigs , Collier found that aspirin , if given beforehand , inhibited the bronchoconstriction effects of <unk> . He found that cutting the guinea pigs ' vagus nerve did not affect the action of <unk> or the inhibitory effect of aspirin — evidence that aspirin worked locally to combat pain and inflammation , rather than on the central nervous system . In 1963 , Collier began working with University of London pharmacology graduate student Priscilla Piper to determine the precise mechanism of aspirin 's effects . However , it was difficult to pin down the precise biochemical goings @-@ on in live research animals , and in vitro tests on removed animal tissues did not behave like in vivo tests . 
 After five years of collaboration , Collier arranged for Piper to work with pharmacologist John Vane at the Royal College of Surgeons of England , in order to learn Vane 's new bioassay methods , which seemed like a possible solution to the in vitro testing failures . Vane and Piper tested the biochemical cascade associated with anaphylactic shock ( in extracts from guinea pig lungs , applied to tissue from rabbit <unk> ) . They found that aspirin inhibited the release of an unidentified chemical generated by guinea pig lungs , a chemical that caused rabbit tissue to contract . By 1971 , Vane identified the chemical ( which they called " rabbit @-@ aorta contracting substance , " or RCS ) as a prostaglandin . In a June 23 , 1971 paper in the journal Nature , Vane and Piper suggested that aspirin and similar drugs ( the non @-@ steroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs ) worked by blocking the production of prostaglandins . Later research showed that NSAIDs such as aspirin worked by inhibiting cyclooxygenase , the enzyme responsible for converting arachidonic acid into a prostaglandin . 
 = = Revival as heart drug = = 
 Aspirin 's effects on blood clotting ( as an antiplatelet agent ) were first noticed in 1950 by Lawrence Craven . Craven , a family doctor in California , had been directing tonsillectomy patients to chew <unk> , an aspirin @-@ laced chewing gum . He found that an unusual number of patients had to be hospitalized for severe bleeding , and that those patients had been using very high amounts of <unk> . Craven began recommending daily aspirin to all his patients , and claimed that the patients who followed the aspirin regimen ( about 8 @,@ 000 people ) had no signs of thrombosis . However , Craven 's studies were not taken seriously by the medical community , because he had not done a placebo @-@ controlled study and had published only in obscure journals . 
 The idea of using aspirin to prevent clotting diseases ( such as heart attacks and strokes ) was revived in the 1960s , when medical researcher Harvey Weiss found that aspirin had an anti @-@ adhesive effect on blood platelets ( and unlike other potential antiplatelet drugs , aspirin had low toxicity ) . Medical Research Council <unk> John O 'Brien picked up on Weiss 's finding and , in 1963 , began working with epidemiologist Peter Elwood on aspirin 's anti @-@ thrombosis drug potential . Elwood began a large @-@ scale trial of aspirin as a preventive drug for heart attacks . Nicholas Laboratories agreed to provide aspirin tablets , and Elwood enlisted heart attack survivors in a double @-@ blind controlled study — heart attack survivors were statistically more likely to suffer a second attack , greatly reducing the number of patients necessary to reliably detect whether aspirin had an effect on heart attacks . The study began in February 1971 , though the researchers soon had to break the double @-@ blinding when a study by American epidemiologist Herschel Jick suggested that aspirin either prevented heart attacks or made them more deadly . Jick had found that fewer aspirin @-@ takers were admitted to his hospital for heart attacks than non @-@ aspirin @-@ takers , and one possible explanation was that aspirin caused heart attack sufferers to die before reaching the hospital ; Elwood 's initial results ruled out that explanation . When the Elwood trial ended in 1973 , it showed a modest but not statistically significant reduction in heart attacks among the group taking aspirin . 
 Several subsequent studies put aspirin 's effectiveness as a heart drug on firmer ground , but the evidence was not incontrovertible . However , in the mid @-@ 1980s , with the relatively new technique of meta @-@ analysis , statistician Richard Peto convinced the U.S. FDA and much of the medical community that the aspirin studies , in aggregate , showed aspirin 's effectiveness with relative certainty . By the end of the 1980s , aspirin was widely used as a preventive drug for heart attacks and had regained its former position as the top @-@ selling analgesic in the U.S. 
 = Canadian comics = 
 Canadian comics refers to comics and cartooning by citizens of Canada or permanent residents of Canada regardless of residence . Canada has two official languages , and distinct comics cultures have developed in English and French Canada . The English tends to follow American trends , and the French Franco @-@ Belgian ones , with little crossover between the two cultures . Canadian comics run the gamut of comics forms , including editorial cartooning , comic strips , comic books , graphic novels , and webcomics , and are published in newspapers , magazines , books , and online . They have received attention in international comics communities and have received support from the federal and provincial governments , including grants from the Canada Council for the Arts . There are a comics publishers throughout the country , as well as large small press , self @-@ publishing , and minicomics communities . 
 In English Canada many cartoonists , from Hal Foster to Todd McFarlane , have sought to further their careers by moving to the United States ; since the late 20th century increasing numbers have gained international attention while staying in Canada . During World War II , trade restrictions led to the flourishing of a domestic comic book industry , whose black @-@ and @-@ white " Canadian Whites " contained original stories of heroes such as Nelvana of the Northern Lights as well as American scripts redrawn by Canadian artists . The war 's end saw American imports and domestic censorship lead to the death of this industry . The alternative and small press communities grew in the 1970s , and by the end of the century Dave Sim 's Cerebus and Chester Brown 's comics , amongst others , gained international audiences and critical acclaim , and Drawn and Quarterly became a leader in arts @-@ comics publishing . In the 21st century , comics have gained wider audiences and higher levels of recognition , especially in the form of graphic novels and webcomics . 
 In French Canada indigenous comics are called BDQ or bande dessinée québécoise ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> ̃ d <unk> <unk> ] ) Cartoons with speech balloons in Quebec date to the late 1700s . BDQ have alternately flourished and languished throughout Quebec 's history as the small domestic market has found it difficult to compete with foreign imports . Many cartoonists from Quebec have made their careers in the United States . Since the Springtime of BDQ in the 1970s native comics magazines , such as Croc and <unk> , and comics albums have become more common , though they account for only 5 % of total sales in the province . Since the turn of the 21st century cartoonists such as Michel Rabagliati , Guy Delisle , and the team of Dubuc and <unk> have seen international success in French @-@ speaking Europe and in translation . Éditions Mille @-@ Îles and La Pastèque are amongst the domestic publishers that have become increasingly common . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = English Canada = = = 
 = = = = Early history ( 1759 – 1910s ) = = = = 
 Brigadier @-@ General George Townshend 's cartoons lampooning General James Wolfe in 1759 are recognized as the first examples of political cartooning in Canadian history . Cartoons did not have a regular forum in Canada until John Henry Walker 's short @-@ lived weekly Punch in Canada débuted in Montreal in 1849 . The magazine was a Canadian version of Britain 's humorous Punch and featured cartoons by Walker . It paved the way for a number of similar short @-@ lived publications , until the success of the more straight @-@ laced Canadian Illustrated News , published by George @-@ Édouard Desbarats beginning in 1869 , soon after Canadian Confederation . 
 In 1873 , John Wilson Bengough founded Grip , a humour magazine in the style of Punch and the American Harper 's Weekly . It featured a large number of cartoons , especially Bengough 's own . The cartoons tended to be political , and Prime Minister John A. Macdonald and Métis rebel leader Louis Riel were favourite targets . The Pacific Scandal in the early 1870s gave Bengough much fodder to raise his reputation as a political caricaturist . According to historian John Bell , while Bengough was probably the most significant pre @-@ 20th @-@ century Canadian cartoonist , Henri Julien was likely the most accomplished . Published widely both at home and abroad , Julien 's cartoons appeared in periodicals such as Harper 's Weekly and Le Monde illustré . In 1888 , he gained employment at the Montreal Star and became the first full @-@ time newspaper cartoonist in Canada . 
 Palmer Cox , a Canadian expatriate in the United States , at this time created The Brownies , a popular , widely merchandised phenomenon whose first book collection sold over a million copies . Cox began a Brownies comic strip in 1898 that was one of the earliest English @-@ language strips , and had begun to use speech balloons by the time it ended in 1907 . 
 = = = = Age of comic strips ( 1920s – 1930s ) = = = = 
 Canadian cartoonists often found it hard to succeed in the field of comic strips without moving to the US , but in 1921 , Jimmy Frise , one of Ernest Hemingway 's drinking buddies during the journalist 's days in Toronto , sold Life 's Little Comedies to the Toronto Star 's Star Weekly . This strip was later retitled Birdseye Center , and became the longest @-@ running strip in English Canadian history . In 1947 , Frise brought the strip to the Montreal Standard , where it was renamed Juniper Junction . Nova Scotia @-@ born artist J. R. Williams single @-@ panel strip about rural and small @-@ town life , Out Our Way , began in 1922 and was syndicated in 700 newspapers at its peak . 
 Two new comic strips appeared on the same day in 1929 in American newspapers and fed the public 's desire for escapist entertainment at the dawn of the Great Depression . They were the first non @-@ humorous adventure strips , and both were adaptations . One was Buck Rogers ; the other , Tarzan , by Halifax native Hal Foster , who had worked as illustrator for catalogues from Eaton 's and the Hudson 's Bay Company before moving to the US in his late 20s . Other adventure strips soon followed and paved the way for the genre diversity that was seen in comic strips in the 1930s . In 1937 , Foster began his own strip , Prince Valiant , which has become his best @-@ known work for Foster 's dextrous , realistic artwork . After struggling to support himself at various Toronto @-@ based publications , Richard Taylor , under the pen name " Ric " , became a regular at The New Yorker and relocated to the US , where the pay and opportunities for cartoonists were better . 
 The Toronto Telegram began to run Men of the Mounted in 1933 , the first home @-@ grown adventure strip , written by Ted McCall and drawn by Harry Hall . McCall later penned the strip Robin Hood and Company , which made its appearance in comic books when McCall founded Anglo @-@ American Publishing in 1941 . 
 = = = = Golden age : Canadian Whites ( 1940s ) = = = = 
 The Golden Age of Comic Books and subsequent superhero boom began with the release in June 1938 of Action Comics # 1 . The cover story was the first appearance of Superman , drawn by Toronto @-@ born Joe Shuster . Shuster modeled Superman 's Metropolis after his memories of Toronto , and the newspaper Clark Kent worked for after the Toronto Daily Star , which he had delivered as a child . These comics crossed the border and quickly gained Canadian fans as well . 
 In December 1940 , the War Exchange Conservation Act was passed . It restricted the importation of goods from the US that were deemed non @-@ essential to combat the trade deficit Canada had with its neighbours to the south . American comic books were casualties of the Act . In 1941 , to fill the void , a number of Canadian comic book publishers sprang up , starting in March with Anglo @-@ American Publishing in Toronto and Maple Leaf Publishing in Vancouver . Adrian Dingle 's Hillborough Studios and Bell Features soon joined them . The comics printed by these companies had colour covers , but the innards were in black @-@ and @-@ white , and thus collectors collectors to call them Canadian Whites . Superheroes stories were prominent , and the " Whites " often relied on serials to keep readers coming back for more . 
 Better Comics from Maple Leaf and Robin Hood and Company from Anglo @-@ American were the first titles to hit the stands . Robin Hood was a tabloid @-@ sized comic strip reprint magazine , while Better was made up of original material in traditional comic @-@ book format , and thus can be said to be the first true Canadian comic book . It included the appearance of the first Canadian superhero , Vernon Miller 's Iron Man . John Stables , under the pen name John St. Ables , was responsible for <unk> Windsor 's debut in Better in the spring of 1944 — a fantasy @-@ adventure set far in the " land beyond the mists " in the Canadian North . The success of Better led to a proliferation of titles from Maple Leaf . 
 The driving creative forces behind Anglo @-@ American were Ted McCall , the writer of the Men of the Mounted and Robin Hood strips , and artist Ed Furness . The pair created a number of heroes with such names as Freelance , Purple Rider , Red Rover , and Commander Steel . Anglo @-@ American also published stories based on imported American scripts bought from Fawcett Publications , with fresh artwork by Canadians to bypass trade restrictions . Captain Marvel and <unk> were amongst the characters that had Canadian adaptations . Anglo @-@ American published a large number of titles , including Freelance , Grand Slam , Three Aces , Whiz , Captain Marvel and Atom Smasher , but relied less on serials , and was less patriotically Canadian than its rival publishers . It employed a number of talented artists , but they were kept to a " house style " of drawing , in the vein of Captain Marvel 's C. C. Beck . 
 In August 1941 , three unemployed artists , Adrian Dingle and André and René <unk> , formed Hillborough Studios to publish their own work . They started with Triumph @-@ Adventure Comics , whose star was Canada 's first female superhero , Nelvana of the Northern Lights , who appeared several months before Wonder Woman did in the US . Nelvana was inspired by tribal stories brought back from the Arctic Group of Seven painter Franz Johnston . The popular fur @-@ <unk> superheroine was a powerful Inuit mythological figure , daughter of a mortal woman and <unk> the Mighty , King of the Northern Lights . She had telepathic powers and was able to ride the Northern Lights at the speed of light , turn invisible , and melt metal . 
 In March 1942 , Dingle and most of the Hillborough staff moved with Nelvana to Toronto @-@ based Bell Features , which had begun publishing comics in September 1941 with the first issue of the successful Wow Comics — in colour at first , but Bell soon switched to the familiar " White " format . Bell was the most prolific of the Canadian comic @-@ book publishers . Its comics were drawn by a large pool of artists , including freelancers , adolescents , and women , and were unabashedly Canadian . Aside from Nelvana , there were Edmund <unk> 's Dixon of the Mounted , Jerry Lazare 's Phantom Rider , and Fred Kelly 's Doc Stearne . Leo <unk> 's Johnny Canuck was the second Canadian national hero , and debuted in Bell 's Dime Comics in February 1942 . 
 The new Canadian comics were successful ; Bell reached accumulated weekly sales of 100 @,@ 000 by 1943 . By this time , Educational Projects of Montréal had joined , selling comics in the " White " format . Educational specialized in a different sort of fare : biographies of prime ministers , cases of the RCMP , and historical tales , drawn by accomplished artists including George M. Rae and Sid Barron . Educational 's Canadian Heroes earned endorsements from cabinet ministers and appealed to parents and educators , but was not as appealing to the kids it was aimed at until Rae convinced publisher Harry J. Halperin to allow him to include a fictional character , Canada Jack — a hero who battled Nazis . 
 With the end of World War II in 1945 , Canadian comic @-@ book publishing faced competition from American publishers again . Educational and latecomer Feature Publications folded immediately . Maple Leaf tried to compete by switching to colour and by trying to break into the British market . Anglo @-@ American and another newcomer , Al Rucker Publications , tried to compete directly with the Americans , and even achieved distribution in the US . By the end of 1946 it was clear that the remaining publishers could not compete , and for the time being original comic @-@ book publishing came to an end in Canada , although some publishers survived by republishing American books until the War Exchange Conservation Act was officially abolished in 1951 . The cartoonists who insisted on drawing for a living faced several choices : some moved across the border to attempt to make it with the American publishers , and some moved into illustration work , as Jerry Lazare , Vernon Miller , Jack Tremblay , and Harold Bennett did . Another avenue was the route Sid Barron followed into political cartooning . By 1949 , out of 176 comics titles on the newsstand , only 23 were Canadian . 
 = = = = Post @-@ war ( late 1940s – early 1970s ) = = = = 
 With the end of most original Canadian comic book publishing in 1947 , Canada 's superheroes disappeared , and the country entered a phase of foreign comic book domination . In the late 1940s , a crime comics scare hit the country when a pair of voracious comic book readers in Dawson Creek , British Columbia , shot at a random car while playing highwaymen , fatally wounding a passenger . When authorities discovered their taste for comic books , media attention focused on the emerging crime comics genre as an influence on juvenile delinquency . A bill to amend Section 207 of the Criminal Code was drafted , and passed unanimously , making it an offence to make , print , publish , distribute , sell , or own " any magazine , periodical or book which exclusively or substantially comprises matter depicting pictorially the commission of crimes , real or fictitious " , on 10 December 1949 . Comics publishers across Canada banded together to create the Comic Magazine Industry Association of Canada ( <unk> ) , a Canadian industry self @-@ censoring body similar to the American Comics Code Authority that would be formed a few years later in response to a similar crime comics scare in the U.S. 
 Superior Publishers , however , defied the ban , while also moving into the U.S. market . <unk> turned up the heat , and in 1953 a distributor was found guilty of distributing obscenities . Some of Superior 's titles found themselves in Fredric Wertham 's notorious and influential diatribe on the influence comics had on juvenile delinquency , Seduction of the Innocent , published in 1954 . The United States Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Delinquency , established in 1953 , had public hearings a few months later , and called upon Kamloops . BC Member of Parliament E. Davie Fulton , one of Superior publisher William Zimmerman 's most outspoken enemies , as a witness . The Comics Code Authority was soon formed , and Superior , like fellow American publisher EC Comics , saw their sales dwindle throughout 1955 . Prosecutions increased throughout Canada , with Superior successfully defending themselves in one , and another supposedly comics @-@ related murder was reported in Westville , Nova Scotia . Superior shut its doors in 1956 , and until the 1970s , English Canadian newsstand comic book publishing was no more , although a number of " giveaway " comics continued to be produced by Orville <unk> ' <unk> Productions and Owen McCarron 's Comic Book World , who produced the educational and cautionary comics for governments and corporations , aimed at kids and teens . 
 The crackdown was not aimed at comic strips , however , and several notable new ones appeared , like Lew Saw 's One @-@ Up , Winslow Mortimer 's Larry Brannon and Al Beaton 's <unk> . After Jimmy Frise 's death in 1948 , Juniper Junction was taken over by Doug Wright , " one of Canada 's best post @-@ war comic @-@ strip artists " . He would continue with the strip until 1968 , while also working on his own Nipper from 1949 . In 1967 , Nipper became Doug Wright 's Family when Wright moved from Montreal to Ontario , and the popular strip continued until 1980 . The Doug Wright Awards were inaugurated in his honour in 2005 . From 1948 to 1972 , James Simpkins ' cartoon Jasper the Bear appeared continuously in Maclean 's magazine . Jasper was hugely popular across Canada and was used , and is still today , as the symbol for Jasper National Park . 
 To express his anger at the US military 's nuclear tests in the Bikini Atoll in 1946 English @-@ born artist Laurence Hyde produced a wordless novel in 1951 called Southern Cross . In 118 silent pages , the book depicts atomic testing by the US military and its effects Polynesian island inhabitants . While it had no direct effect on comics at the time , it has come to be seen as a precursor to the Canadian graphic novel . 
 Early editorial cartooning lacked a local flavour , tending to be a pale imitation of American examples . It tended to be cheery , non @-@ confrontational , and supported good causes . Following the War it broke from typical American clichés and took on more of a savage bite , especially compared to the more allegorical tendencies of American editorial cartoons . At Le Devoir , Robert <unk> was the first to cartoon in this particularly Canadian idiom , and in 1963 organized an International Salon of Caricature and Cartoon in Montreal . <unk> was later followed by Duncan Macpherson at the Toronto Star , Leonard Norris at the Vancouver Sun and Ed McNally at the Montreal Star . These cartoonists frequently took political positions contrary to those of the papers in which they were published . Macpherson drew a cartoon of John Diefenbaker as Marie Antoinette saying " Let them eat cake " in response to the Prime Minister 's cancelling the Avro Arrow project , which historian Pierre Burton has called the beginning of Canadians ' disillusionment with Diefenbaker 's government . Macpherson in particular fought fiercely for editorial independence , challenging his editors and threatening to quit the Star if not given his way , which paved a new path for other cartoonists to follow . 
 In 1967 , Canada saw its first comic shop open its doors . Memory Lane in Toronto , established by George Henderson , inspired pioneering retailer Harry Kremer and Bill Johnson to open Now & Then Books in Kitchener , Ontario . Its newsletter , the Now and Then Times , published early work by the young Dave Sim in its inaugural issue in 1972 , and later employed him from 1976 to 1977 . 
 In the late 1960s , along with the countercultural movement , a new form of comic art appeared from the avant @-@ garde and literary scenes — underground comics ( or " comix " ) aimed at an adult audience . Early examples appeared in certain magazines , but an early precursor of Canadian underground comic books was <unk> , as a special issue of the Toronto avant @-@ garde literary magazine <unk> in 1967 . In 1969 , Canada saw its first true underground comics , with SFU <unk> and Snore Comix . These comix drew their inspiration from the American underground movement that exploded after the release of Robert Crumb 's Zap in early 1968 . Martin <unk> @-@ James produced an early graphic novel when he had Elephant released by Press <unk> in 1970 . The underground movement paralleled that of the US , in that it peaked from 1970 to 1972 with the peak of the counterculture , and witnessed a sharp decline afterward . Saskatoon , Saskatchewan 's Dave Geary and Vancouver , BC 's Rand Holmes were key figures , Holmes being the creator of the Harold <unk> comic strip . 
 Humour magazine <unk> Duddle , named after a famous euphemism by then @-@ Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau , was a short lived attempt at a Canadian Mad @-@ style satirical magazine . It was the first comic book of Canadian content to be available on newsstands since 1956 . Two of its contributors , Peter Evans and Stanley <unk> , would soon go on to bring superheroes back to Canada for the first time since the demise of Nelvana in 1947 , with Captain Canuck . 
 The fan press and fandom grew throughout this period , and was bolstered when Patrick Loubert and Michael Hirsh , the founders of the animation company Nelvana , published of The Great Canadian Comic Books in 1971 , a book @-@ length study of the Bell Features comics , and the touring of a related exhibition mounted by the National Gallery of Canada , Comic Art Traditions in Canada , 1941 @-@ 45 , which together served to introduce English @-@ Canadian comics creators and fans to their lost heritage . 
 Towards the middle of the 1970s , comics aimed at children gradually disappeared . The new breed of underground , alternative and independent comics was aimed at a more mature audience , which ran counter to the public 's perception , as well as to legal restrictions . The first wave of alternative comics in the seventies was largely made up of science fiction and fantasy comics , made by budding cartoonists like Gene Day , Dave Sim , Augustine Funnell , Jim Craig , Ken <unk> , Dean Motter , and Vincent <unk> . 
 = = = = New wave ( mid @-@ 1970s – 1980s ) = = = = 
 The mid @-@ 1970s saw the beginning of a new wave of Canadian comics , one in which the creators chose to remain in Canada , rather than seeking their fortunes south of the border . Richard Comely 's Captain Canuck appeared in July 1975 , the first appearance of a non @-@ satirical superhero in Canada since the 1940s . During the 1950s and 1960s , the idea of native comics seemed unattainable to Canadian kids , and the appearance of Captain Canuck gave these kids the optimism to make their own . This was followed up with James Waley 's more professional , newsstand @-@ distributed Orb , which featured a number of talents that would later take part in the North American comics scene . 
 The comics magazines showing up in Canada at the time suffered from promotion and distribution problems , however , getting most of their support from the fan press . Phil Seuling 's California @-@ based comics distributor Bud Plant was supportive of these underground and alternative comics , though , and helped get them into stores . Eventually , distributors like Bud Plant and the emergence of specialty comic shops would form a distribution network for small press comics that would thrive independently of the traditional newsstands . 
 The world of comic strips saw a number of works pop up . Ben Wicks was doing The Outsiders and Wicks , Jim Unger 's Herman debuted in 1975 , and Ted Martin 's Pavlov in 1979 . In 1978 , Lynn Johnston , living in Lynn Lake , Manitoba , began For Better or For Worse , which was noted for following the lives of the Patterson family as they grew older in real time , and dealt with real @-@ life issues . The strip based a number of its storylines on Johnston 's real @-@ life experiences with her own family , as well as social issues such as the midlife crisis , divorce , the coming out of a gay character , child abuse , and death . In 1985 , she became the first female cartoonist to win a Reuben Award , and the Friends of Lulu added her to the Women Cartoonists Hall of Fame in 2002 . The strip was very popular , appearing in over 2000 newspapers in 25 countries . 
 Editorial cartoonists held considerable sway between the 1950s through the 1970s . Former Prime Minister Joe Clark has been quoted that he lost votes in the election of 1980 due to political cartoons about him . They have also experienced the fear of censorship through the courts , or " libel chill " . In 1979 , Robert Bierman and the Victoria Times was the subject of a libel suit when he criticized the policies of William Vander <unk> , the British Columbia Minister of Human Resources , with a cartoon of the Minister pulling the wings off flies . When the courts ruled in Vander <unk> 's favour , newspapers across the nation ran their own versions of the cartoon in support , until the BC Court of Appeal reversed the ruling in 1980 , deeming the cartoon " fair comment " . It was later acquired by the National Archives of Canada . 
 Captain Canuck and Orb both folded by 1976 , but in Kitchener , Ontario in December 1977 , Dave Sim 's independent comic book Cerebus debuted , and would become the longest @-@ lived original Canadian comic book . Benefiting from distribution in the emerging comic shop market , it started as a Howard the Duck @-@ like parody of Barry Windsor @-@ Smith 's Conan the Barbarian comics . The story eventually grew to fit Sim 's expanding ambitions , both in content and technique , with its earth @-@ pig protagonist getting embroiled in politics , becoming prime minister of a powerful city @-@ state , then a Pope who ascends to the moon — all within the first third of its projected 300 @-@ issue run . Sim came to conceive the series as a self @-@ enclosed story , which itself would be divided into novels — or graphic novels , which were gaining in prominence in the North American comic book world in the 1980s and 1990s . While Sim and his partner Gerhard 's technical achievements impressed and influenced his peers , Sim also spoke out for creators ' rights , promoted his peers and up @-@ and @-@ coming creators , and fiercely promoted self @-@ publishing as an ideal . Americans Jeff Smith with Bone and Terry Moore with Strangers in Paradise took Sim 's cue , as did Canadian M <unk> ( Mark Oakley ) with his long @-@ running Thieves and Kings . Eddie Campbell took Sim 's personal advice to self @-@ publish the collected From Hell at the turn of the century . Sim also stirred considerable controversy , sometimes with the content of Cerebus , and sometimes with his editorials and personal interactions . 
 David Boswell was amongst those in the 1980s who made the jump from the fanzine world when he began self @-@ publishing Reid Fleming , World 's Toughest Milkman in 1980 . From out of the same scene , Bill Marks started publishing the anthology Vortex in Toronto in 1982 . Marks ' Vortex Comics expanded into publishing other comics . The publisher gained publicity for Mister X , which employed the talents of Dean Motter , Gilberto and Jaime Hernandez and , later , Torontonians Seth and Jeffrey Morgan . Most notably , Marks picked up Chester Brown 's Yummy Fur , a taboo @-@ breaking series which started in 1983 as a self @-@ published , photocopied minicomic . It had generated some buzz , and Vortex started publishing it professionally at the end of 1986 . Yummy Fur 's stories were a mix of genres , with the improvised , surreal Ed the Happy Clown , straight adaptations of the Gospels , and revealing , bare @-@ all autobiographical stories . Brown would become a major figure in Canadian comics . 
 As the content of comics matured throughout the 1980s , they became the subject of increasing scrutiny . In 1986 , Calgary comic shop Comic Legends was raided and charged with obscenity . In response , Derek McCulloch and Paul Stockton of Strawberry Jam Comics established the Comic Legends Legal Defense Fund to help retailers , distributors , publishers , and creators fight against obscenity charges . To raise funds , they published two True North anthologies of Canadian talent . 
 During this time , large numbers of Canadian artists were making waves in the American comic book market as well , such as John Byrne , Gene Day and his brother Dan , Jim Craig , Rand Holmes , Geof Isherwood , Ken <unk> , Dean Motter , George Freeman and Dave Ross . Byrne was particularly popular for his work on X @-@ Men , and also originated Alpha Flight , about a team of Canadian superheroes . 
 = = = = 1990s = = = = 
 In 1990 , Montreal @-@ based publisher Drawn and Quarterly began with an anthology title also named Drawn and Quarterly . It quickly picked up a number of other titles , such as Julie Doucet 's semi @-@ autobiographical , bilingual Dirty <unk> , which , like Yummy Fur , had started out as a minicomic ; Seth 's Palookaville ; illegal resident from the US Joe Matt 's Peepshow ; and Yummy Fur , which made the jump with its twenty @-@ fifth issue . At the time , an autobiographical comics trend took place . Brown , Seth and Matt in particular were thought of as a Toronto comics rat pack , depicting one another in their comics and doing signings and interviews together . 
 Drawn and Quarterly was at the forefront of the maturation comic books saw in the 1990s , publishing and promoting the works of adult @-@ oriented Canadian and international artists . The publisher avoided genres like superheroes , which publisher Chris Oliveros saw as stifling comics ' growth . These comics had artistic aspirations , and graphic novels became increasingly prominent , with Brown 's autobiographical The Playboy and I Never Liked You , and Seth 's faux @-@ autobiographical It 's a Good Life , If You Don 't Weaken garnering considerable attention . 
 Todd McFarlane from Calgary had been making waves since the late 1980s illustrating comics for DC and Marvel Comics , becoming a fan favourite writer / artist for Spider @-@ Man . He eventually left to co @-@ found the creator @-@ owned comics publishing collective Image Comics , where he debuted the enormously successful Spawn . Spawn holds the record for most copies sold of an independent comic , and was the most financially successful comics franchise of the decade . 
 = = = = 21st century = = = = 
 At the dawn of the 21st Century , the comics industry had changed considerably . The graphic novel had come into its own , and traditional comics sales dropped significantly . Louis Riel , who had been a major target of John Bengough 's caricatures in the early days of Confederation , was the protagonist in Chester Brown 's award @-@ winning , best @-@ selling " comic @-@ strip biography " . With his graphic novels and book collections , he gained a wider audience than he had with his serial comic books , and he abandoned serial comics entirely to focus on original graphic novels after Louis Riel . Greater appreciation of the artform was shown when Brown and Seth became recipients of grants from the Canada Council for the Arts . Dave Sim 's Cerebus completed its planned 26 @-@ year , 300 @-@ issue run in 2004 . 
 Foreign comics , especially Japanese , became quite successful in Canada , and stood out for gaining large numbers of female fans , who had traditionally stayed away from comic books . They also had a significant influence on artists such as Bryan Lee O 'Malley and his Scott Pilgrim series . Due to differing social norms , the content of these comics are sometimes censored or ran afoul of Canadian customs officials . Incidental nudity could be interpreted by them as child pornography and result in jail terms . 
 Drawn and Quarterly has become known as a house for art comics , translations of non @-@ English works , like Montrealer Michel Rabagliati 's Paul series , and archive editions of classic comics , such as Wright 's Little Nipper . The publisher has earned a reputation for the special attention they put into book design , and has played a pivotal rôle in shaping comics ' rise in artistic prominence , and in getting comics into mainstream book stores in both Canada and the US . D & Q publisher Chris Oliveros , along with Art Spiegelman , lobbied bookstores to include a section for graphic novels , which would be subdivided by subject . 
 Webcomics , such as Kate Beaton 's Hark ! A Vagrant , Ryan <unk> and Lar <unk> 's Looking for Group , and Karl <unk> 's The Abominable Charles Christopher , became an increasingly popular outlet for Canadian cartoonists . The popularity of Beaton 's work has led to it being published in book form , with Time magazine placing it in the top 10 fiction books of 2011 . 
 The comics community in Canada has grown , and has grown appreciative of its talent , celebrating it with awards such as the Doug Wrights and Joe <unk> , as well as with classy events such as the international Toronto Comic Arts Festival , which has been cosponsored by the Toronto Public Library since 2009 . 
 = = = French Canada = = = 
 The comics of Québec , also known as " BDQ " ( bande dessinée québécoise ) , have followed a different path than those of English Canada . While newspapers tend to populate their funny pages with syndicated American comic strips , in general comics there have followed Franco @-@ Belgian comics , with The Adventures of Tintin and Asterix being particularly popular and influential . Comics also tend to be printed in the comic album format that is popular in Europe . Aside from humorous parodies , there is no superhero tradition in Québec comics . 
 = = = = Early history ( 1790s – 1960s ) = = = = 
 Québec comics have alternately flourished and languished , seeing several brief periods of intense activity followed by long periods of inundation with foreign content . Comics first appeared in the humour pages of newspapers in the 19th century , following the trends coming from Europe . In the late 19th Century , Henri Julien published two books of political caricatures , L ’ album <unk> du journal Le <unk> , after which the number of cartoonists began to increase in newspapers in Québec City and Montreal . 1904 saw , in the newspaper La Patrie , the publication of Les Aventures de Timothée ( The Adventures of Timothée ) by <unk> Bourgeois . This is said to be the first French @-@ language comic to feature speech balloons . Joseph <unk> 's comic @-@ strip adaptation of Le Père <unk> ( Father <unk> ) also debuted in 1904 , in La Presse , a popular strip that would last until 1957 . 
 Raoul Barré had the first comic strip to appear in a Québec daily newspaper in 1902 , called " Pour un dîner de Noël " ( " For a Christmas Dinner " ) . In 1912 , he created a strip called <unk> Hotel for the New York @-@ based McClure Syndicate , which he brought to La Patrie in French the next year . Soon after he moved into animation , becoming an innovative pioneer in the field . 
 Québécois cartoonists would propose a number of strips to compete with the American strips that dominated the Sundays and dailies . The native Québec presence on those pages would become more dominant after 1940 , however , with the introduction of the War Exchange Conservation Act , which restricted the import of foreign strips . Albert Chartier created the comical character Onésime in 1943 , a strip that would have the longest run of any in Québec . After World War II , during the Great Darkness , comics publication became dominated with religious comics , most of which were imported from the US . Native Québec comics did flourish for a brief period between 1955 and 1960 , however , but were soon replaced again with American content , while also facing competition from the new Franco @-@ Belgian publications , which appeared in full @-@ colour , and by the mid @-@ 1960s had put the local Catholic publications out of business . 
 = = = = Springtime of BDQ ( 1970s – present ) = = = = 
 The revolutionary 1960s and the Quiet Revolution in <unk> saw a new vigour in BDQ . What Georges Raby called the Spring of Québécois comics ( printemps de la BD québécoise ) is said to have begun in 1968 with the creation of the group <unk> , who published in La Presse and Dimanche @-@ Magazine . Jacques Hurtubise ( <unk> ) , Réal Godbout , Gilles Thibault , and Jacques Boivin were particularly notable cartoonists , and numerous short @-@ lived publications with strange names appeared , like Ma ® de in Québec and L <unk> illustré . The comics no longer focused on younger audiences , instead seeking confrontation or experimenting with graphics , drawing influence from French comics for mature audiences like those published in Pilote magazine , as well as translations of American <unk> , translations of which were published in the journal <unk> . During the 1970s , BDQ were sometimes called " <unk> " , bande dessinée <unk> . 
 In 1979 , Jacques Hurtubise , Pierre Huet and Hélène Fleury would establish the long @-@ lived , satirical Croc , which published many leading talents of the era , many of whom were able to launch their careers through the magazine 's help . Croc begat another magazine , Titanic , dedicated to comic strips , and in 1987 , <unk> , a Mad @-@ like publication patterned after the French Hara @-@ Kiri , rose in competition with Croc . By the mid @-@ 1980s , a number of professional comics publishers began to flourish . 
 In Montreal in the 1980s and 1990s , in parallel to mainstream humour magazines , a healthy underground scene developed , and self @-@ published fanzines proliferated . Julie Doucet , Henriette Valium , Luc <unk> , Éric <unk> , Gavin McInnes and Siris were among the names that were discovered in the small press publications . 
 In the 21st Century , Michel Rabagliati and his semi @-@ autobiographical Paul series has seen Tintin @-@ like sales levels in Québec , and his books have been published in English by Drawn and Quarterly . 
 Around the turn of the century , the government of Québec mandated La Fondation du 9e art ( " The 9th Art Foundation " ) to promote francophone cartoonists in North America . There have also emerged events such as the Festival de la bande dessinée francophone de Québec in Québec City and la Zone internationale du <unk> art ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Publication , promotion and distribution = = 
 As in the US , large Canadian newspapers typically have a page of comic strips in their daily editions and a full @-@ colour Sunday comics section on Saturdays or Sundays . Editorial cartoonists are also common ; the Association of Canadian Editorial Cartoonists is a professional association founded in 1988 to promote their interests . 
 There are a number of English- and French @-@ language publishers active in Canadian comics . Drawn and Quarterly is a Montreal @-@ based English @-@ language publisher of arts comics , translations , and classic comic reprints . Founded by Chris Oliveros in 1990 , Drawn and Quarterly is one of the most influential publishers in alternative comics . Arcana Studio of British Columbia publishes a large number of titles , and Koyama Press joined the fray in 2007 . In French , Les 400 coups , Mécanique Générale , La Pastèque and the Québec arm of Glénat are amongst the active publishers . The small press has played an important rôle ; self @-@ publishing is a common means of putting out comics , largely influenced by the success of Dave Sim 's Cerebus . <unk> is another form that has remained popular since the 1980s , when Chester Brown and Julie Doucet got started by distributing self @-@ published photocopied comics . The minicomics scene has been spurred on by Broken Pencil , a magazine dedicated to promoting the zines . 
 A number of fan conventions are held throughout Canada , including the Central Canada Comic Con , Fan Expo Canada , Montreal <unk> , Paradise Comics Toronto Comicon , Ottawa <unk> , and Toronto Comicon . The Toronto Comic Arts Festival ( TCAF ) , modeled after European festivals such as Angoulême and the American Small Press Expo , has grown since 2003 , and since 2009 has enjoyed the support of the Toronto Public Library . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 A number of awards for Canadian comics and cartooning have appeared , especially since the beginning of the 21st Century . 
 The National Newspaper Awards was established in 1949 with a category for Editorial Cartooning honouring those that " embody an idea made clearly apparent , good drawing , and striking pictorial effect in the public interest " . The award 's first recipient was Jack Booth of the Globe and Mail . 
 The Bédélys Prize ( French : Prix Bédélys ) has been awarded to French @-@ language comics since 2000 . It comes with bursaries for the Prix Bédélys Québec ( for Best Book from Québec ) and Prix Bédélys Fanzine . 
 Since 2005 the Joe Shuster Awards have been handed out by the Canadian Comic Book Creator Awards Association , named after the Toronto @-@ born co @-@ creator of Superman . It is open to all Canadians , including those living abroad , as well as permanent residents , for comics in any language . Along with awards for Outstanding Cartoonist , Outstanding Writer , Outstanding Artist and others , it also features the Joe Shuster Hall of Fame , and the Harry Kremer Retailer Award , named after the founder of Canada 's oldest surviving comic shop . 
 The Doug Wright Awards also began in 2005 . Awards are given for Best Book , Best Emerging Talent , and since 2008 the Pigskin Peters Award for non @-@ narrative ( or nominally @-@ narrative ) comics ; Pigskin Peters was a character in Jimmy Frise 's Birdseye Center . The Doug Wright Awards also inducts cartoonists into Giants of the North : The Canadian Cartoonist Hall of Fame . 
 = = Academia = = 
 From the 1990s onward an increasing amount of literature on Canadian comics has appeared , in both official languages . Books such as Guardians of the North ( 1992 ) and Invaders from the North ( 2006 ) appeared by comics historian John Bell , who became senior archivist at Library and Archives Canada in Ottawa . American magazine Alter Ego ran a special issue on Canadian comics in 2004 . In French , Michel Viau wrote a book on francophone comics called BDQ : Répertoire des publications de bandes dessinées au Québec des origines à nos jours ( 2000 ) . Bart Beaty and Jeet Heer have been writing about comics academically and professionally , and regularly have articles educating the public on comics published in newspapers such as the National Post and the Boston Globe , as well as comics and literary magazines . Canadian feminist scholars such as Mary Louise Adams , Mona Gleason , and Janice Dickin McGinnis have done research into the anti @-@ crime comics campaigns of the late 1940s and 1950s , from the point of view of the moral panic and social and legal history of the era , and the sociology of sexuality . 
 = = = English = = = 
 Bell , John ( 1992 ) . Guardians of the North : The National Superhero in Canadian Comic @-@ Book Art . National Archives of Canada . ISBN 0 @-@ 662 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Bell , John ( 1986 ) . Canuck Comics : A Guide to Comic Books Published in Canada . Matrix Books . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 00 @-@ 7 . 
 Desbarats , Peter ; Mosher , Terry ( 1979 ) . The <unk> : A History of Canadian Political Cartooning . McClelland and Stewart . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7710 @-@ 2686 @-@ 7 . 
 Hirsh , Michael ; Loubert , Patrick ( 1971 ) . The Great Canadian Comic Books . Peter Martin Associates . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 065 @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Dan ( 1986 ) . An Introduction to Canadian Comic Books : A Bibliography and Price Guide to Canadian Comic Books , 1941 @-@ 1985 . Aurora Books . 
 = = = French = = = 
 Dubois , B. ( 1996 ) . Bande dessinée québécoise : <unk> <unk> à <unk> ( in French ) . <unk> : éditions <unk> 
 Falardeau , Mira ( 1994 ) . La Bande dessinée au Québec ( in French ) . Boréal . 
 Falardeau , Mira ( 2008 ) . Histoire de la bande dessinée au Québec ( in French ) . Montreal : VLB <unk> , collection Études <unk> . 
 Giguère , Michel ( 2005 ) . La bande dessinée , populaire et <unk> ( in French ) . <unk> de <unk> du programme de <unk> <unk> ALQ . 
 Viau , Michel ( 1999 ) . BDQ : Répertoire des publications de bandes dessinées au Québec des origines à nos jours ( in French ) . Éditions Mille @-@ Îles . ISBN 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 38 @-@ 0 . 
 Viau , Michel ( 2007 ) . " Grande <unk> et petits <unk> , la <unk> de la BDQ " . <unk> Un ( in French ) . Mécanique Générale . 
 = The Goldberg Variation ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " The Goldberg Variation " is the sixth episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on December 12 , 1999 . It was written by Jeffrey Bell , directed by Thomas J. Wright , and featured guest appearances by Willie Garson and Shia LaBeouf . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " The Goldberg Variation " earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 8 , being watched by 14 @.@ 49 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a mysterious man named Henry Weems , who appears to be the luckiest man in the world . The title is a dual reference to Rube Goldberg machines and the Goldberg Variations by Johann Sebastian Bach . 
 Bell 's original draft of the episode opened with a man falling thirty @-@ thousand feet from an airplane and walking away unharmed . Due to budgetary reasons , the intro was later changed to a man falling out of a building . Willie Garson — who had appeared in the third season episode " The Walk " — was cast as Henry Weems , breaking a " long @-@ standing rule " on the show to not recast previous actors . The first cut of the episode was four minutes under @-@ time , and so various insert shots and new scenes had to be filmed in order to compensate . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Chicago , a man by the name of Henry Weems wins $ 100 @,@ 000 playing poker against a mobster named Joe Cutrona , though Weems appears ignorant of the basic rules of poker . Suspecting that Weems cheated , Cutrona attempts to kill him by throwing him off the 29th story of the building they are in . After Weems lands in an access hatch to a basement , he stands right back up and walks away , completely uninjured . Two agents in a car stationed outside witness the event and eventually tell Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who promptly take the case . Mulder initially believes the man has the ability to cure himself , but Scully thinks he may just be very lucky by landing in a pile of laundry that was right under the access hatch . 
 The agents track down Weems , a handyman at an apartment building . He refuses to testify against Cutrona . Weems has a fascination with Rube Goldberg machines . As such , his apartment is filled with them . After meeting with Weems , Scully concludes that there is no X @-@ File , but Mulder believes that his luck is the X @-@ File in question . As the agents begin to leave the complex , one of Cutrona 's enforcers comes to kill Weems . However , the assassin dies in an improbable cascade of events reminiscent of a Rube Goldberg machine : after being distracted when Mulder buzzes the intercom ( when he forgot the car keys ) , he accidentally shoots a lamp that knocks over an ironing board , then trips over the ironing board and ends up getting strangled in a fan . The two agents rush back up stairs and find Weems unscathed . Weems notes he was also the sole survivor of a commuter jet crash that killed 20 people in December 1989 , where he was placed in Seat 13 of Flight 7 : lucky numbers . 
 Weems picks up a lottery ticket and wins $ 100 @,@ 000 but learns that it would take 12 months to get the money , so he throws the ticket away . A man picks the ticket out of the trash and is then hit by a truck after Weems warned him ( to no avail ) that " something bad will happen . " Later , Mulder comes to question Weems again and another one of Cutrona 's enforcers comes to kill Weems but his bullet ricochets off Weems ' pocket knife , barely grazes Mulder 's arm , and hits and kills the enforcer . Weems confesses that he 's been trying to find a way to get $ 100 @,@ 000 to pay for an expensive medical treatment for the serious illness of a boy in his apartment building named Richie ( Shia LaBeouf ) . Weems attempts at getting the money , however , have brought him above the radar . Later , after Weems is hit by a car , it appears that Henry 's lucky streak has reached its end . Cutrona kidnaps Richie 's mom , Maggie , to stop Henry from testifying against him . Weems turns himself in to Cutrona so he would let Maggie go ; instead , they plan to kill him . As they are about to execute Weems in the basement ( where Maggie is also being held ) , Cutrona and his mobster partner , Dominic , are killed in a bizarre turn of events , whereas Weems and Maggie are unharmed as Mulder arrives with backup . In the end , it turns out by surprise that Cutrona is an organ donor and a perfect match for Richie , who gets the treatment and lives . Weems then activates a toy Goldberg machine that he made for Richie earlier . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode 's title is a pun . It refers to both cartoonist Rube Goldberg , who was famous for his drawings of incredibly complex machines made out of everyday objects that performed rudimentary tasks , as well as the harpsichord piece , the " Goldberg Variations " , by Johann Sebastian Bach . The elaborate contraptions Henry Weems created are physical examples of such machines . Episode writer Jeffrey Bell noted that he wanted the episode to function " as a Rube Goldberg device " and so he wrote the story to revolve around the ideas of good luck and bad luck . Originally , the episode 's opening scene was to have featured Weems falling thirty thousand feet from an airplane and walking away unscathed . Although Bell 's pitch was met with enthusiasm , many writers and producers for the show were cautious , because they realized the episode would have several humorous moments . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz explained : " The episode had a lot of humorous moments that we were afraid of doing because as many people who like the funny ones hate the funny ones . " Eventually , the episode was green @-@ lighted , but pushed to later in the season because , according to Spotnitz , " we wanted to scare the hell out of everybody during the first few episodes . " 
 Bell began crafting his script , adding a mafia @-@ related sub @-@ plot and replacing the airplane drop with a fall from a building , for budgetary reasons . The biggest hurdle for the episode , however , was crafting the Rube Goldberg machine . However , because Bell had " extra time " to write his script , the art department was given a head start on crafting the contraption . Gillian Anderson later explained that working with the machines required a lot of patience , because multiple takes had to be filmed in order to make sure everything went as planned . Rick Millikan , the show 's casting director , broke a " long @-@ standing rule " on the show and re @-@ cast Willie Garson — who had appeared in the third season episode " The Walk " — as Henry Weems . Millikan noted that Garson was " literally the best person for the job . " 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 After the episode was finished filming , the footage entered into a long period of editing . Series creator Chris Carter noted that the episode " wasn 't cutting together well and that there were things that just didn 't work . " Once the resultant footage was reworked into an acceptable episode , it was four minutes under time . In order to compensate for this , additional inserts of the Rube Goldberg Machine were filmed as well as a scene featuring Mulder and Scully discussing the episode 's back @-@ story . The latter , which was filmed several months after the rest of the episode , required Anderson to wear a wig because her hair style had substantially changed . 
 When the episode was finally finished and aired , it was highly enjoyed by The X @-@ Files cast and crew . Carter called the entry " tight , funny , touching , and quirky . " Series writer Vince Gilligan was impressed with the episode , and noted that the episode represented the seventh season of the show as whole . He explained : " The seventh season , for my money , was one of our best because we took more storytelling risks than in previous years . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Goldberg Variation " first aired in the United States on December 12 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 , with a 13 share , meaning that roughly 8 @.@ 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 13 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 14 @.@ 49 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on April 23 , 2000 and received 0 @.@ 78 million viewers , making it the fifth most watched episode that week . 
 The episode received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a largely positive review . He favorably compared the episode to the sixth season episode " The Rain King " and noted that " ' The Rain King ' [ written by Jeff Bell ] was quite simply one of the joys of season six . So it hardly came as a surprise to me that I enjoyed Bell 's ' The Goldberg Variation " entry for [ season seven ] . It was cute , light @-@ hearted , and a little kooky , with a happy ending to boot . " Den of Geek writer Juliette Harrisson named the episode the " finest stand @-@ alone episode " of Season Seven and wrote , " Since ' The X @-@ Files ’ roots are in horror , feel @-@ good episodes are few and far between , and something to be treasured when they appear . The Goldberg Variation is the perfect feel @-@ good X @-@ Files episode ; not too soppy , not too harsh , but just the right mix of ludicrous gangster deaths and saving the cute kid . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . She called the episode a " charmer " and praised Willie Garson 's characterization of Harry Weems . Kenneth Silber from Space.com wrote positively of the episode , writing , " ' The Goldberg Variation ' is a clever , witty standout from the recent middling run of X @-@ Files episodes . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " and called it a " fun " entry that shows off the series ' " emotional palette " . He felt that the episode successfully managed to convey a " clever and whimsical " feel , but that the conceit of a " good man " as the monster of the episode does not make it particularly scary . All @-@ in @-@ all , he felt that it " all works out in the end " . 
 Other reviews were more mixed . Rich Rosell from Digitally Obsessed awarded the episode 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and noted that despite the episode being " Funny stuff , " it was ultimately " a little uneven overall . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five . Despite calling the episode " a likeable piece of work " , the two explained that the story itself was fine , but that the episode 's set piece did not work with the plot . Shearman and Pearson , however , ultimately concluded that the premise was " such a well @-@ meaning little bauble that you want to applaud it for its intent if nothing else . " 
 = Eagle ( British comics ) = 
 Eagle was a seminal British children 's British comics periodical , first published from 1950 to 1969 , and then in a relaunched format from 1982 to 1994 . It was founded by Marcus Morris , an Anglican vicar from Lancashire . Morris edited a Southport parish magazine called The Anvil , but felt that the church was not communicating its message effectively . Simultaneously disillusioned with contemporary children 's literature , he and Anvil artist Frank Hampson created a dummy comic based on Christian values . Morris solicited the idea to several Fleet Street publishers , with little success , until Hulton Press took it on . 
 Following a huge publicity campaign , the first issue of Eagle was released in April 1950 . Revolutionary in its presentation and content , it was enormously successful ; the first issue sold about 900 @,@ 000 copies . Featured in colour on the front cover was its most recognisable story , Dan Dare , Pilot of the Future , created by Hampson with meticulous attention to detail . Other popular stories included Riders of the Range and P.C. 49 . Eagle also contained news and sport sections , and educational cutaway diagrams of sophisticated machinery . A members club was created , and a range of related merchandise was licensed for sale . 
 Amidst a takeover of the periodical 's publisher and a series of acrimonious disputes , Morris left in 1959 ; Hampson followed shortly thereafter . Although Eagle continued in various forms , a perceived lowering of editorial standards preceded plummeting sales , and it was eventually subsumed by its rival , Lion , in 1969 . Eagle was relaunched in 1982 and ran for over 500 issues before being dropped by its publisher in 1994 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Eagle was founded by John Marcus <unk> Morris ( 1915 – 1989 ) . Morris was born in the Lancashire town of Preston , and in 1918 moved to Southport . He graduated from Brasenose College , Oxford with a second @-@ class degree in Literae Humaniores , and at Wycliffe Hall gained a second in theology in 1939 . He became a priest the following year , and served as a chaplain in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve from 1941 to 1943 . 
 In 1945 he became vicar of St. James ' Church in Birkdale . Morris had long felt that the Anglican church was not publicising its message effectively enough ; four years earlier he had written an unpublished article , intended for the Yarmouth Mercury and entitled Christian Hypocrisy , in which he questioned the difference that the Christian church had made to society in general . Morris also felt that the church was completely out of touch with the people whom it was supposed to represent . He gradually expanded the parish magazine — printed on four pages of cheap paper — into The Anvil , a widely circulated Christian magazine based on Lilliput . Morris managed to employ several notable contributors on Anvil , such as C. S. Lewis , and Harold Macmillan . In 1948 he employed young artist Frank Hampson , a war veteran who had enrolled at the Southport School of Arts and Crafts , where he was described by his tutor as an " outstanding draughtsman ' prepared to go to endless trouble to get a thing right ' " . He worked as the illustrator on Anvil , and later became the full @-@ time artist for Interim , a Christian publicity society formed during a conference of diocesan editors , with ambitions to produce a strip cartoon magazine aimed at children . 
 Children 's comics such as The Rover , The Hotspur , Schoolgirls ' Own , The Magnet and Adventure usually contained a mixture of adventure stories , presented as text rather than strip cartoons , and some British boys were buying American horror comics produced for <unk> Morris was impressed by the high standard of artwork in the US magazines , but disgusted by their content , which he described as " deplorable , <unk> over @-@ violent and obscene , often with undue emphasis on the supernatural and magical as a way of solving problems . " He realised that a market existed for a children 's comics periodical which featured action stories in cartoon form , but which also would convey to children the standards and morals he advocated . Morris was instrumental in launching the short @-@ lived Society for Christian Publicity , formed to take control of The Anvil and to perhaps produce further Christian publications , and in January 1949 the Daily Mirror published an optimistic piece about the rumoured publication by the Society of a " new children 's comic " . This intrigued local journalist Norman Price , and the following month he met Morris , and helped him express his desire to see such a magazine by co @-@ writing with him " Comics that bring horror to the nursery " , published in the Sunday Despatch . Morris 's article provoked a strong reaction from its readers ; letters of support flooded into his home . 
 Morris envisioned a character called Lex Christian , " a tough , fighting parson in the slums of the East End of London " , whose adventures would be told in strip cartoon form , illustrated by Hampson . The idea gained the support of Terence Horsley , editor of the Sunday Empire News , but Horsley was killed in a gliding accident shortly thereafter . Morris met Hampson and proposed instead an entirely new children 's publication . Hampson was enthusiastic about the idea , and in May that year the two began work on a dummy of it . Lex Christian became Chaplain Dan Dare of the Inter @-@ Planet Patrol , and featured on the cover . On the inside , two pages of Secret City featured a character named Jimmy Swift , and on the back page was a religious story about Saint Paul . Short strips included Joe from Strawberry Farm , and Ernie , Always Unlucky . Other features included Morris 's Editor 's Letter , as well as a range of news articles . Three photocopies of the dummy were made , each hand @-@ coloured by Hampson . 
 By then deeply in debt from the publication of The Anvil and the production costs of the dummy , Morris formed Anvil Productions Ltd . Its prospectus declared " The Company proposes to publish a new children 's coloured ' comic ' paper , which will be of a much higher and more mature quality than anything published in England and in appearance and format will be modelled more on the American comic papers which are so far in advance of our own . " Initially he sought to keep the project under his control , but his escalating debts forced him to try to sell the idea . To that end , he made several trips to London , where — armed with the dummy — he pitched his idea to several Fleet Street publishers . He met John Myers at Hulton Press , who referred him to Montague Haydon at Amalgamated Press . He then met Neville Pearson at George Newnes , Ltd . , whose executives claimed that the publication was " not an economic proposition " . The US comics <unk> <unk> was next , followed by Mike Wardell of the Sporting Record . Neither The Times nor The Daily Telegraph were interested , and at The Sunday Times the personal assistant to Gomer Berry , 1st Viscount Kemsley , presumed that Morris was asking for a charitable donation . In autumn 1949 however , Hulton Press contacted Morris with the instruction " definitely interested do not approach any other publisher " . 
 = = = 1950 – 1969 = = = 
 In October that year Morris sold The Anvil — by then selling about 3 @,@ 560 copies monthly — for £ 1 @,@ 250 , plus a £ 200 annual contract to continue as editor . Morris wanted to produce a comic the pages of which would be filled with role models whose behaviour and moral outlook he felt was socially desirable . Foreigners would not be depicted as either enemies or villains , and at least one child in any group of children would be from an ethnic minority . Religious values would not be imposed upon the reader , although their underlying moral tones would be made obvious on each page . These were innovative but somewhat risky ideas , as nothing similar existed in the market , and Hulton therefore commissioned extensive research into the new comic , which by then , inspired by the design of her church lectern , had been christened Eagle by Hampson 's wife . Layout and typography were designed by Morris 's friend , Ruari McLean , assisted by Charles Green , and faced with an initial print run of 1 million copies , Aintree printer Eric <unk> designed and built a new ten @-@ unit rotogravure machine in about twelve weeks . The comic was heavily publicised before its release ; copies were mailed direct to several hundred thousand people who worked with children , and a " Hunt the Eagle " scheme was launched , whereby large papier @-@ mâché golden eagles were set on top of several Humber Hawk cars , and toured across the UK . Those who spotted an eagle were offered tokens worth 3d , which could be exchanged at newsagents for a free copy of Eagle . 
 Despite its relatively high price , the comic was an immediate success ; released on 14 April 1950 , and despite government paper quotas , the first issue sold about 900 @,@ 000 copies . Eight of its twenty pages were presented in four @-@ colour rotogravure . Eagle was designed to entertain and educate its readers ; although a typical issue might contain such characters as Cavendish Brown , Harris Tweed , Jack O 'Lantern , Storm Nelson and Luck of the Legion , it also included a special news section , a sports page , and school stories . Each issue also featured a centre @-@ spread full @-@ colour cutaway illustration of a piece of machinery — the first detailed the inner workings of the British Rail 18000 locomotive . Such high quality strips as Riders of the Range and P.C. 49 helped ensure a weekly circulation of almost a million copies , but it was the adventures of Dan Dare , Pilot of the Future , which most captivated readers . Created by Hampson — now a full @-@ time staff artist with his own team — Dan Dare was the UK 's first science @-@ fiction comic strip of any significance . Readers were thrilled by the square @-@ jawed British spaceman 's weekly exploits , and his struggles with The Mekon . 
 While Morris ( who by now had resigned from St James ) edited the magazine from Hulton 's premises at Shoe Lane in London , the comic was created in a converted bakery in the <unk> district of Southport . The building was described by Eagle artist Greta Tomlinson as " very basic , a flagstone floor and a tin roof ; there was cold running water in the corner . It was freezing cold in the winter and boiling hot in the summer " . Working to a tight schedule , Hampson created each Dan Dare episode first in pencil , and then in ink and colour . He and his team of artists posed for photographs , in the positions drawn in his pencil sketches ( Hampson usually posed for Dan Dare ) . These photographs were combined with the rough sketches , and his colleagues then worked on the strip while he tackled the opening frame of each week 's story . His drawings of the technology Dan Dare employed were meticulous , and were based on a large body of research and reference material , as well as space ship models , plaster heads , mocked @-@ up space suits , and a complete model of a space station . He also wrote the dialogue for several of the comic 's pages . Hampson was assisted in his work by expert consultants , among them Arthur C. Clarke ( then an aspiring young science fiction writer ) . Scriptwriters included Anglican priest Chad Varah ( founder of Samaritans ) . Varah also accompanied Morris on tours of Cathedrals often filled with Eagle readers keen to meet the comic 's creators . Peter Ling and Macdonald Hastings were contributors , as was Harris Tweed 's creator John Ryan , who was also responsible for Captain Pugwash , printed in the first 19 issues . 
 Children were encouraged to submit their good deeds to the comic ; those that had their stories printed were called <unk> , a not @-@ so @-@ subtle dig at the " spivs " who made fun of them . The best of these stories were awarded the title of " <unk> of the Month " , or " <unk> of the Year " . Readers were also invited to join an Eagle club . Upon payment of a subscription , members would be given a gilt Eagle badge , a rulebook , and a list of privileges . The club proved extremely popular , attracting within months a membership of about 100 @,@ 000 , but it also served as a research tool for Hulton ; questionnaires were sent to a random selection of members , asking each to rate certain aspects of the comic . Eagle 's production costs were funded partly by advertising revenue , although advertisers were required to integrate their designs so as to match the comic 's high standards . Another of Hampson 's strips , Tommy Walls , was the first commercial cartoon in any comic , and an obvious advertisement for Wall 's ice cream . Eagle also spawned a large range of merchandise , which included toothpaste , pyjamas , and toy ray guns . Several annuals were printed ; the first was announced in a September 1951 issue , in Morris 's regular letter to his readers . 
 Eagle became immensely popular with people of all ages and walks of life . Copies brought into school regularly found their way into the hands of staff , who enjoyed them almost as much as the children they taught . The Lancet reported on one doctor who read Eagle on his rounds . It was sent to soldiers in Korea , to refugee camps , and was praised by Geoffrey Grigson on the BBC Home Service . Wolf Mankowitz proclaimed Dan Dare a " Hero of Our Time " , and the Earl of Jellicoe was reported to have read the comic in the library of Westminster Palace . Lord Mountbatten supposedly placed a subscription order for his nephew , Prince Charles , and on one occasion rang Hulton to complain that the comic had not arrived ; a replacement was quickly despatched . Years later Morris sent the prince a copy of The Best of Eagle ( 1977 ) ; Charles replied and thanked him for the " fond memories " . The comic was not universally popular , however , as it was quickly banned in South Africa . 
 Despite settling some of his debts , Morris once again found himself in financial trouble , with unexpected tax bills and arguments with Hulton over payments . In 1955 he sold the copyright of his signature to Hulton for £ 7 @,@ 250 ( a portion of which was a loan ) . 45 % of his £ 5 @,@ 000 per annum salary was paid to the <unk> . With only one other profit @-@ making magazine ( Farmers Weekly ) , Hulton sought to curb Eagle 's costs , complaining about the use of taxis , expensive stationery , electricity and telephone bills , restaurant bills , and staff expenses . At their 1957 AGM Hulton 's Chairman reported a fall in profits , from £ 298 @,@ 000 to £ 36 @,@ 000 , blaming reduced revenue from another of their magazines , Picture Post , and increased production costs . Several of Morris 's friends later left the company , and following a short period of internal turmoil Morris gave up the editor 's chair in 1959 . The following year Eagle was taken over by Odhams Press . Hampson 's studio ( by then in Epsom ) was disbanded , and following creative differences he retired from the comic . His duties on Dan Dare were taken up by Frank Bellamy , described by Morris as " a most fastidious artist and scrupulous draftsman , and like Hampson at his best , often consumed with anxiety . " With Keith Watson and Don Harley , the three worked from a studio in Fleet Street . The front cover was redesigned , the Eagle name appearing across the top of the page rather than in one corner , coinciding with a new @-@ look Dare . Many readers found Bellamy 's changes to Dare ( made at the behest of Eagle 's publisher ) objectionable . Bellamy was succeeded by Harley , who in 1962 was followed by Watson , who had returned from a short stint working on Eagle 's rival , Lion . Watson stopped drawing Dan Dare in 1967 , and was succeeded by Bruce Cornwell . Following Hampson 's departure , the emphasis on Dan Dare 's exploration of the Solar System had changed instead to include interstellar travel . Continuity became strained , and production on Dan Dare ceased in 1967 , when it was replaced by reprints from earlier editions . 
 Eagle continued to be published through the 1960s , under a succession of editors ( Morris was succeeded by his deputy , Clifford Makins ) . Regular changes in emphasis , including an increasing number of features on contemporary music and sport , were not enough to ensure the comic 's continued survival . Although in 1961 its circulation was still about 500 @,@ 000 , under IPC , then Eagle 's owners , the comic suffered a drastic fall in quality . The centre spreads were replaced with the historically inaccurate Last of The Saxon Kings , and letters of complaint poured in to the comic . Within months the comic 's circulation fell to 150 @,@ 000 , and continued to drop . By 1966 it was in decline . IPC continued production until the comic 's last issue , on 26 April 1969 . Nine issues short of its 1,000th edition , the comic was merged with its rival , IPC 's Lion . 
 = = = 1982 – 1994 = = = 
 A modified Dan Dare was briefly featured in IPC Media 's 2000 AD ( 1977 – 1979 ) . The public reaction to this , along with news of a planned television series , persuaded IPC 's comic arm Fleetway to relaunch Eagle in 1982 , as a weekly pulp comic . The original Dan Dare was no longer a feature of the comic , his eponymous great @-@ great grandson taking on the mantle of space explorer instead . Drawn by Gerry Embleton , and later Ian Kennedy , and set 200 years after the original story , the first story @-@ arc featured the return of Dan Dare 's earliest nemesis , The Mekon . IPC were unable to recreate the popularity of the original strip , and in 1989 the original Dan Dare returned to the comic , in a six @-@ part story illustrated by original Eagle artist Keith Watson . 
 In an attempt to emulate the success that Fleetway had had with girls ' magazines , the relaunched Eagle initially contained a large number of photo stories such as <unk> , Sgt. Streetwise and <unk> , but this style was soon replaced by the more traditional comic @-@ strip format . Along with IPC 's entire comics line , Eagle was sold to Robert Maxwell in 1987 . Although not as successful as its predecessor , over 500 issues were published . A change to a monthly anthology caused by falling sales was a portent of the comic 's future . Toward the end of its life issues contained reprints of earlier work , alongside new Dan Dare stories written by Tom Tully and illustrated by David Pugh . The relaunched Eagle was dropped in 1994 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Eagle inspired several imitators , such as Valiant , Tiger , and Lion ( which featured a Dan Dare clone , " Captain Condor " ) but such adventure tales were less palatable for girls . Female characters like Dan Dare 's Professor Peabody ( one of only two female main characters in the strip ) , were generally given less important roles than the men , and as a result a trend developed toward producing comics aimed specifically at either boys or girls . Girl , a sister title to Eagle , appeared in November 1951 , and featured youthful capers in boarding schools , and tales of equestrian adventure . Later comics such as Jackie , descended from contemporary women 's magazines , were more cosmopolitan in flavour . Girl was followed in 1953 by Robin , which was aimed at younger children , and in March 1954 by Swift , for older readers . 
 Eagle 's previously unheard @-@ of circulation figures helped define the content of most comics produced during the 1950s , including war . In contrast to other , earlier publications , Eagle attempted to educate the reader with factual , text @-@ based historical stories , such as the life of Winston Churchill , as presented in " The Happy Warrior . " A detailed account of the Second World War was given , while one strip lambasted German paratroopers , who on seeing British infantry below them , shouted " Donner und Blitzen ! Der Englander ! " During the mid @-@ 1950s however , comics began sensationalising their covers with war imagery , and Eagle followed suit in the 1960s . 
 Morris went on to become editorial director of the National Magazine Company , and later its managing director and editor @-@ in @-@ chief . He launched Cosmopolitan in the UK , and with Condé Nast he formed <unk> , one of the UK 's largest media distribution companies . He was appointed OBE in 1983 , retired the following year , and died in March 1989 . Despite his later work however , he is best remembered as the founder of Eagle . His memorial service at St Bride 's Church in Fleet Street was filled to overflowing . 
 Hampson was embittered by his departure from Eagle . Although he created Dan Dare , he and Morris had signed contracts which made the space adventurer the copyright of its publisher . This made it difficult for him to get hold of his original artwork , and excluded him from any profits Hulton made from the huge range of Dan Dare and Eagle merchandise it licensed . He called Odhams , the comic 's owner after 1960 , " <unk> " . Hampson later worked on various advertising commissions , and illustrated seven Ladybird books . He recovered from cancer to become a graphics technician at Ewell Technical College , and in 1975 at the Lucca comics convention was declared as the best writer and illustrator of strip cartoons since the end of the Second World War . At the 1976 Comics 101 British comics convention he was given the Ally Sloper Award , as the best British strip cartoon artist . He died at Epsom in July 1985 . His original Dan Dare drawings now command high prices , and have inspired a range of modern artists ; 
 Gerald Scarfe and David Hockney were first published in Eagle . X @-@ Men comic scriptwriter Chris Claremont read and enjoyed Eagle , and cites Hampson 's work as influential on his career . Watchmen co @-@ creator Dave Gibbons has also praised Hampson 's work , and the author Tim Rice , in his foreword to Living with Eagles ( 1998 ) , cites the stories printed in Eagle as helping " me in my story @-@ telling efforts through musicals many years on . " Professor Stephen Hawking , when asked about the influence Dan Dare had on him , replied : " Why am I in cosmology ? " , and the entertainer Kenny Everett chose an Eagle Annual as his book on Desert Island Discs . 
 The comic industry 's Eagle Awards , first presented in the late 1970s , are named after Eagle , and a fan club , the Eagle Society , regularly publishes the quarterly Eagle Times . 
 = = Related publications = = 
 = Veloz and Yolanda = 
 Frank Veloz ( 1902 – 1981 ) and Yolanda Casazza ( 1911 – 1995 ) were a self @-@ taught American ballroom dance team , husband and wife , who became stars in the 1930s and 1940s . They were among the highest paid dance acts during this period . They performed on stage in productions such as Hot @-@ Cha ! , which ran for 119 shows on Broadway in 1932 . They also appeared in popular films such as Under the Pampas Moon ( 1935 ) , The Pride of the Yankees ( 1942 ) , Honeymoon Lodge ( 1943 ) , Brazil ( 1944 ) and The Thrill of Brazil ( 1946 ) , the latter of which is credited as being of major importance to the growth in popularity of Samba in America . 
 Veloz and Yolanda specialized in Latin ballroom dance styles , and opened their own chain of dance studios , where many middle @-@ class people learned the art of ballroom dancing . The studios closed down in the mid @-@ 1950s as new forms of dance became popular . Veloz and Yolanda did much to legitimize ballroom dance as a performance art and invented the " Cobra Tango " , a dance which interpreted a fight between a snake and a tiger . A full @-@ length ballet written by their son Guy Veloz , An American Tango , is based on their life story . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Frank Veloz was born in Washington , D.C. in 1902 to a Spanish father and a Dutch mother . Yolanda Bianca was born in 1911 . One of six sisters , Yolanda was from an Italian family . They met at a high school sorority dance in the Collegiate Club on 84th street , Manhattan ; Yolanda was sixteen and a student at Washington Irving High School while Veloz was an office boy . They danced in public dance contests , at first without success , but then won forty competitions , with prizes of US $ 5 or US $ 10 . In 1927 , they won the New York City and State Championship . After this they lost their amateur status and could no longer enter the competitions . 
 At first , Veloz and Yolanda struggled as a professional team . Many of their engagements turned into disasters . Veloz and Yolanda featured in the 1927 Broadway show Artists and Models , starring Ted Lewis and Jack Pearl . In 1929 they were in Pleasure Bound , another revue , with Aileen Stanley , Jack Pearl and Phil Baker . The New York Times critic Brooks Atkinson described Pleasure Bound as a " rough @-@ and @-@ ready " revue , but called the act of Frank Veloz and Yolanda Casazza a has @-@ to @-@ be @-@ seen " centrifugal dance spinning feminine heels in the air " . The couple married in 1929 and soon began arguing over each other 's mistakes , even considering divorce . 
 = = Star performers = = 
 In the 1930s , Veloz and Yolanda performed at first in small night clubs in New York , and later at expensive supper clubs . They appeared as specialty dancers in the Broadway musical comedy Hot @-@ Cha ! which ran for 119 performances at the Ziegfeld Theatre between 8 March and 18 June 1932 . They got their break when they were performing at the Everglades in Manhattan and were spotted by the Shubert brothers . This led to a highly successful career on the stage , in films and in supper clubs . Veloz and Yolanda choreographed the dance sequences in the film Rumba ( Paramount , 1935 ) starring George Raft , and in some sequences Veloz doubled for Raft . The film Under the Pampas Moon ( Fox , 1935 ) starring Warner Baxter featured tango . Rita <unk> , later to achieve fame as Rita Hayworth , performed an exuberant blend of flamenco and tango . The high point of the movie was a performance of a " cobra @-@ tango " by Veloz and Yolanda . 
 As the leading ballroom dance team in the United States , Veloz and Yolanda made US $ 8 @,@ 500 in one week in Chicago in 1939 . They appeared on the cover of Life magazine on 30 October 1939 , which called them , " The greatest dance couple in America . " They were the first to give a recital of ballroom dance at Carnegie Hall They appeared at the Chicago Palmer House and then at the Cocoanut Grove in Hollywood . Veloz and Yolanda moved to Southern California in the 1940s . The Cocoanut Grove performances led to movie contracts , including Honeymoon Lodge , Cavalcade of Dance , The Pride of the Yankees , and The Thrill of Brazil . Samuel Goldwyn had insisted on having a nightclub sequence with Veloz and Yolanda in The Pride of the Yankees to give some interest for women in what was otherwise a baseball movie . They performed in Dancing with the Stars at the Hollywood Bowl in 1942 , 1944 and 1946 . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 Both Frank and Yolanda were Christian Scientists . Yolanda always carried a knitted bag with her that held the Bible and Science and Health . She attended the same Christian Science church as Ginger Rogers for many years . Off stage , she was quiet and modest , and wore plain clothes , saying that " pretty " clothes were for her performances . Her stage dresses , all designed by Frank , were exquisite . Their first child , Frank Jr . , was born in 1940 . They had four children in all , called the " million dollar babies " because of the amount of income the couple lost while Yolanda was pregnant and then nursing a newborn . Two of these children died in their twenties . 
 In 1938 , Veloz and Yolanda published a dance manual , Tango and Rumba : The Dances of Today and Tomorrow ( New York : Harper & Brothers ) , co @-@ written with Willard Hall . They hosted a TV show , The Veloz and Yolanda Hour , for several years . They opened a nightclub in Florida , The Iris . From the 1940s , the Veloz and Yolanda Dance Studios gave lessons in ballroom dancing for twelve hours each day , with the slogan " Walk In – Dance Out " . The studios taught the <unk> , Waltz , Fox Trot , Smooth Swing , Tango , Samba and Mambo . With each style , the student had to learn a series of steps or combinations . They would progress through the grades of " ruby " and " emerald " to the ultimate " diamond " level . 
 In 1949 , when Yolanda was pregnant , Frank Veloz danced with Jean Davi ( born Jean Phelps ) on the first Academy of Television Arts & Sciences awards . Jean was a Hollywood Lindy dancer who trained in ballroom dancing at one of the Veloz and Yolanda dance schools . After Yolanda retired , Jean became Frank 's partner in stage and TV performances . 
 When the fashion for ballroom dancing declined , replaced by new forms of dance , the Veloz and Yolanda schools began to close . The marriage broke up in the mid @-@ 1950s . In 1956 Yolanda sued Veloz for maintenance , accusing him of infidelity with Jean Davi , his dancing partner . The suit was dismissed the next year . In 1962 Veloz , now aged sixty , sued for divorce on the basis of extreme cruelty by his wife . Yolanda , aged fifty , was to have custody of their minor children . Their children were Nicholas , 21 ; Anthony , 18 ; Yolanda , 16 and Guy , 12 . Frank later married his former dance partner , Jean , twenty years his younger . 
 Frank Veloz died in 1981 . Yolanda Casazza died in 1995 . A full @-@ length ballet written by their son Guy Veloz , An American Tango , is based on their life story . 
 = = Style and influence = = 
 Veloz and Yolanda did much to legitimize ballroom dance as a performance art . Veloz and Yolanda were interested in the way that animals move and were said to have studied horses to learn change of stride and tempo . They created the " Cobra Tango " , a dance that interpreted a fight between a snake and a tiger . Veloz and Yolanda were known in particular for their interpretations of Latin Dance . With the Columbia film The Thrill of Brazil they made the Samba popular in America . Their signature dance was the " Yolanda Tango " , written by Frank , with which they ended their dance performances . William <unk> and Elizabeth Talbot @-@ Martin said this dance epitomized their style and performance . They wrote , " There was one lift that was truly spectacular – Frank would pick up Yolanda , spin her with her head down , then throw her out where she landed on one knee in a low lunge , back leg extended . They never did any thing acrobatic , but this lift was spectacular . " 
 For Your Pleasure , a " dance vaudeville " featuring Veloz and Yolanda , opened at New York 's Mansfield Theater on 5 February 1943 and ran for eleven performances . They performed five dances , with Yolanda in a different gown for each . After seeing the show George Jean Nathan said , " ... it is my notion that this Veloz and Yolanda team is merely of the current average skill , not nearly so good as the De Marcos , that is , if it is Renée and not the present Sally who serves as Tony 's partner , yet somewhat better than some of the couples publicized in the floor shows . However The Billboard said of the show : 
 <unk> is their trademark , and inventiveness of routines , excellent musical arrangements and impeccable grooming are the other attributes that make them outstanding . Avoiding aerial lifts , they depend for effectiveness on an effortless grace , the suggestion of the perfectly mated pair , and an apparent <unk> [ sic ] enjoyment of their work . 
 = = Films = = 
 Veloz and Yolanda performed as dancers in : 
 1934 Many Happy Returns Specialty Dancers 
 1935 Under the Pampas Moon Café Dancers - The Cobra Tango ( as Veloz and Yolanda ) 
 1937 Champagne Waltz ( as Veloz & Yolanda ) 
 1942 The Pride of the Yankees ( Goldwyn ) Specialty Dancers 
 1943 Cavalcade of Dance ( Warner Bros. Short ) 
 1943 Honeymoon Lodge ( Universal ) Dancers 
 1944 Brazil Veloz and Yolanda 
 1946 The Thrill of Brazil ( Columbia ) 
 = Neverwinter Nights 2 : Storm of Zehir = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 : Storm of Zehir is an expansion pack for the role @-@ playing video game Neverwinter Nights 2 , developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by Atari . It was released in late 2008 in North America , Europe , and Australia . Like previous entries in the Neverwinter Nights series , Storm of Zehir is based on the paper and pencil fantasy role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons , and uses the game 's 3 @.@ 5 edition ruleset . 
 Storm of Zehir was inspired by older video games like the Baldur 's Gate and Icewind Dale franchises . The storyline foreshadows the events of the fourth edition of Dungeons & Dragons and follows the adventures of a group of merchants in the Samarach and Sword Coast areas of the Forgotten Realms campaign setting . 
 Storm of Zehir received mixed reviews from critics . Reviewers were pleased with new features introduced in the game , like more options for party customization and an overland map , but were not impressed with the game 's storyline and technical achievements . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Storm of Zehir is an expansion of Neverwinter Nights 2 and continues the formula of a role @-@ playing video game played from an overhead third @-@ person perspective . Players first create a character along the lines of the Dungeons & Dragons 3 @.@ 5 rules by selecting a variety of traits , such as a race , class , and feats . New character creation options include the yuan @-@ ti pureblood and gray orc races , the swashbuckler class , and the hellfire warlock and <unk> of Kelemvor prestige classes . The rest of the player 's party can also be created , unlike Neverwinter Nights 2 , but pre @-@ made characters are available if the player is not interested in complete customization . The party can then explore several regions on the Forgotten Realms continent of Faerûn . The game provides an overland map that is used to move between different areas like towns and dungeons . While on the map , characters can use various skills to identify treasure , monsters , and other points of interest , such as side quests and secret locations . The party can rest while on the map , but doing so puts them at risk of random encounters in the form of wandering monsters . 
 In combat , players have access to a variety of abilities and magic spells , based on the makeup of the party . Storm of Zehir uses the dice @-@ based d20 System of Dungeons & Dragons and each action requires a random number generated by a die roll . The player can control a character individually by selecting specific actions to be taken against enemies , or allow the game 's artificial intelligence to fight by using a pre @-@ selected set of behaviors for each character . Defeating monsters and completing quests bestows experience points on the party , which are used to gain levels and become more powerful . 
 The player character can engage in other activities outside of combat , such as completing quests and interacting with non @-@ player characters . While in conversation with other characters , the player character can influence them by using several skills , such as " <unk> " or " Diplomacy " . The entire party can assist in this process if they have the appropriate skills . Characters can create weapons , armor , and other goods with raw materials through a system of skill @-@ based crafting . Storm of Zehir also includes a regional economy whereby players can establish trading outposts in various towns and create caravan routes between them , providing merchandise to consumers along each route . The caravans can be personally observed and managed by the player , such as providing security if attacked by bandits . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot events and characters are described , below , using in @-@ universe tone . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Like other games in the Neverwinter Nights series , Storm of Zehir takes place in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting , on the continent of Faerûn on the planet Abeir @-@ Toril . It is set mostly in the Samarach and Sword Coast regions , with visits to locations featured in previous games such as Crossroad Keep and the city of Neverwinter . Since the Shadow War depicted in Neverwinter Nights 2 and the subsequent disappearance of the game 's protagonist , the Knight – Captain , Neverwinter and the surrounding area have been declining economically . Several merchant companies have been attempting to establish a foothold in the region , with limited success . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Storm of Zehir 's story begins with the player character escorting a ship called the Vigilant , sailing from the Sword Coast to Samarach . Halfling captain <unk> <unk> quickly advises the party to go below decks in anticipation of an impending storm . The violent storm , coupled with a possible act of sabotage , culminates in the Vigilant becoming shipwrecked on the shores of the xenophobic nation of Samarach . The captain is missing , but the party quickly sets to work organizing the survivors , such as finding defensible positions nearby and salvaging equipment from the wreckage . Before long , a tribe of goblins discovers the group , and their leader issues a challenge in an unknown language . One of the other passengers of the Vigilant , the bard <unk> " Volo " <unk> , claims to speak the goblin tongue but inadvertently insults the goblins and instigates a battle . After the goblins are defeated , a group of humans approaches and arrests the party on suspicion of treachery , escorting them to the Open Palm market in the nearby city of <unk> . There , a local merchant named Sa 'Sani intervenes on the party 's behalf , revealing herself to be the recipient of the goods traveling aboard the waylaid Vigilant . She subsequently recruits the party to investigate the ship 's demise and the whereabouts of Captain <unk> . 
 After rescuing the captain from goblins , investigating the wreckage of the Vigilant , and recovering some of Sa 'Sani 's goods , the merchant offers the characters employment in her trading corporation . The party undertakes various missions throughout Samarach for her , establishing trade routes through the jungles of Chult and protecting caravans along them . As the group continues to expand their trading operation , they eventually discover a large plot involving followers of the new yuan @-@ ti god , Zehir . They learn that the yuan @-@ ti , evil serpentine humanoids , have been infiltrating human settlements from their temples in the jungles of Chult and posing as merchants . After Sa 'Sani commits an act of murder at Crossroad Keep , the party learns that she is a yuan @-@ ti priestess of <unk> who has adopted this guise . The characters are given the option of aiding Sa 'Sani against a powerful yuan @-@ ti House Se <unk> that shifted its attention to the new god , Zehir . In order to stop the House Se <unk> 's plot to conquer Sword Coast , the party has to infiltrate the House 's stronghold , the Temple of the World Serpent , and assassinate N <unk> , the high priest , and a powerful being called the " Herald of Zehir " , which is a gift from the God himself . Afterwards , the party has the opportunity to slay Sa 'Sani as well . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Storm of Zehir began during the end of development of Neverwinter Nights 2 's first expansion , Mask of the Betrayer , and was initially referred to as " <unk> " by its designers . The game was formally announced by Atari in June 2008 . It would be developed by Obsidian Entertainment , creators of Neverwinter Nights 2 and Mask of the Betrayer , and was given a release date of the fourth quarter of 2008 . Despite being released after the fourth edition of Dungeons & Dragons , Storm of Zehir would continue to use the 3 @.@ 5 edition rules . The design team for Storm of Zehir was smaller than that of Mask of the Betrayer and was given a shorter development period . 
 Like Neverwinter Nights 2 , Obsidian was inspired by older role @-@ playing video games for Storm of Zehir , such as Fallout and the Baldur 's Gate series . Assistant producer Rob McGinnis said " [ The game ] plays more like a classic CRPG " . The game was intended to be " more authentic " to pencil and paper Dungeons & Dragons by offering players a light @-@ hearted approach to adventuring and a focus on exploration . The designers included a party system they felt was more teamwork @-@ oriented , such as the ability to custom @-@ make the entire party and allowing party members to collaborate on social interactions . The game 's programmers were instructed to include the ability to change party members whenever the player wished . 
 Storm of Zehir 's storyline occurs concurrently with Mask of the Betrayer , which was set in the Rashemen region of Faerûn . The story was shaped by lead designer Tony Evans and written by Obsidian designer Annie Carlson . The team leads decided to create an adventure that they considered more in line with the roots of Dungeons & Dragons by departing from the more serious , epic stories presented in Neverwinter Nights 2 and Mask of the Betrayer . Evans said " This direction for the title can be seen throughout - finding random ( and not random ) goodies while searching the overland map , the addition of the Swashbuckler class , the variety of personalities in the cohorts ... " The game 's music was composed with this in mind ; Evans wanted themes that would portray the feel of a " light @-@ hearted adventure " . Audio director Alexander Brandon collaborated with composers of games like the Heroes of Might and Magic series and Primal , as well as " rookie composers " from Rogue Dao Studios . Brandon had the option of using a live orchestra , but decided against it to include more music in the game . 
 Obsidian implemented an overland map feature to allow players the opportunity to explore the areas of the game in great detail . Designer Nathaniel Chapman said " Furthermore , it provided an opportunity to increase the effectiveness of various skills that , frankly , were underutilized in previous Neverwinter Nights titles " . Obsidian created the map with a design philosophy centered on " interstitial space " . Chapman explains : 
 " It 's essentially the term for the space that exists between the things you are mainly concerned with in your study . So , if you ’ re interested in looking at cells in the body , the goo that surrounds the cells is referred to as interstitial space . If you 're designing a building , the space between each floor is interstitial space . That , in a way , is the space that Overland Maps in games like Fallout , Baldur 's Gate , Final Fantasy , <unk> , and , of course , Storm of Zehir are conveying - those monster @-@ filled roads , boundless plains and spooky forests you travel through on your way to meet interesting people ( and possibly kill and loot them ) . " 
 The map 's first prototype was inspired by the map seen in the Indiana Jones films . It behaved similarly to normal gameplay , and Obsidian decided to revamp it to create a " more dynamic and reactive interstitial space " . Characters would be able to avoid monsters by having a high enough Survival skill and could find hidden items and locations with high Search skills . Groups of adventuring NPCs could be observed and interacted with by players , including helping them fight aggressive monsters . Trade caravans created within the game 's economic subplot are visible and the player can actively protect their own investments . The overland map feature was created with the modding community in mind , and players using the Neverwinter Nights 2 toolset can modify the map 's options on an individual basis . 
 Storm of Zehir was ready for mass production on November 1 , 2008 and was released on November 18 , 2008 in North America , November 21 in Europe , and December 11 in Australia . It was also made available for download on digital distribution service Direct2Drive . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Storm of Zehir received mixed reviews . Critics were generally pleased with the departure from previous games in the series in terms of open @-@ ended gameplay and its similarities to " old school " role @-@ playing video games , but they criticized the game 's story and frequency of random encounters . It was a runner @-@ up in the RPG category for IGN 's Best of E3 Awards at the Electronic Entertainment Expo video game convention in 2008 . 
 Reviewers were in favor of Storm of Zehir 's focus on exploration and the ability to postpone or ignore the game 's main storyline , and they compared the gameplay to older role @-@ playing video games such as Icewind Dale II and Fallout . GameZone 's reviewer said " This is a game that harkens back to the good old days of adventure D & D video @-@ gaming " , and IGN said " this feels like an homage to the old school D & D games of the past " . The ability to handcraft an entire party instead of just the main character was welcomed , with GameSpot 's reviewer noting " Rather than playing as a solo hero chosen for some great destiny , you roll up a party of four average joes just like you did way back when in D & D classics like the Baldur 's Gate and Icewind Dale franchises , " ( It should be noted that Baldur 's Gate did not actually contain the ability to create the entire party in single player mode ; however , in multiplayer , this was possible ) and IGN saying " There 's a strange kind of nerd joy when it comes to creating a D & D party " . Reviewers also appreciated the " Party Conversation System " , which allows typically underutilized social skills to be used by the entire party during conversation . GameSpy said " It 's a terrific convention in which the game responds not to one but to every member of an adventuring party . [ Characters ] have the option to interject some special comment into a conversation that might open up otherwise unavailable avenues " . Reviewers were grateful that the time @-@ based , " spirit @-@ eating " gameplay mechanic of Mask of the Betrayer was not included . 
 Reviewers generally praised Storm of Zehir 's use of the Dungeons & Dragons 3 @.@ 5 edition rules with the exception of GameSpy , who expressed skepticism of the ruleset in a preview of the game . The game 's handling of character death was not well received , despite being more faithful to the pencil and paper version than previous Dungeons & Dragons video games . Unlike Neverwinter Nights 2 and Mask of the Betrayer where defeated characters would be automatically revived after a battle , Storm of Zehir requires a powerful spell or a " Coin of <unk> " to resurrect dead allies . Reviewers considered this requirement unforgiving ; GameSpy said " This merely forces the player to troop back to town through a zillion meaningless random encounters . This may be " realistic " ( whatever that means in a world where players fight against newborn gods and sentient snakes ) , but it 's simply not fun . Baldur 's Gate had this all worked out over a decade ago . Why do we need to re @-@ invent the wheel ? " 
 Critics gave the game 's technical achievements a lukewarm reception . Several reviewers described the Electron engine as aging ; IGN Australia said " The two year @-@ old engine is surprisingly sluggish for something that looks dated . The simplistic Overhead Map adds nothing to the visual attractiveness , but this isn 't a bad @-@ looking game " . GameZone referred to the graphics as " serviceable " , and IGN said " The world map is a bit ugly , but otherwise Storm of Zehir looks slightly better than its predecessors " . Critics widely panned the voice acting , but praised the music . 
 The focal point of criticism was Storm of Zehir 's story . Critics considered its focus on trade and economics shallow compared to the epic adventures presented in Neverwinter Nights 2 and Mask of the Betrayer . GameSpy referred to the storyline as a " boringly generic adventure " , and GameSpot said " The quests reflect this mundane storyline . You run a lot of lame errands to kill specific monsters and recover lost or stolen merchandise , and you clean out a bunch of formulaic dungeons , caves , graveyards , and the like " . Other complaints included the presence of random encounters on the overland map , which were considered excessive , as well as long load times . 
 = Washington Doctrine of Unstable Alliances = 
 The Washington Doctrine of Unstable Alliances , sometimes called the " caution against entangling alliances " , is a contemporary term used to describe an early realist United States foreign policy guiding its interaction with other nations . According to the policy , the United States should consider external alliances as temporary measures of convenience and freely abandon them when national interest dictates . It has been cited as a rare example of an explicit policy endorsement of what , in international relations , is known as <unk> des alliances ( " reversal of alliances " ) : a state abandoning an ally for an alliance with a recent enemy , sometimes against the former ally . 
 The policy was promulgated by Thomas Jefferson in 1801 , in reference to a 1792 address by George Washington . Despite its enduring influence on U.S. foreign @-@ policy discussions , Washington said privately that the view on which his pronouncements were based would probably be irrelevant in 20 years due to a changing geopolitical situation . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 By 1792 , the end of George Washington 's eighth year as president of the United States , the United States ' strategic position was dire . Interstate rivalries , violent insurrections ( such as the Whiskey Rebellion ) , and solidifying opposition to the national government in the form of the Anti @-@ Federalist Party combined with its dependence on trade with Europe to weaken the new nation . During this time , the country 's increasingly @-@ brittle government was held together almost entirely by Washington 's charismatic authority . 
 Receiving counsel from Alexander Hamilton , who cautioned the president that " we forget how little we can annoy " , Washington became convinced that the United States could not further antagonize Great Britain ; he feared the possibility of British @-@ imposed commercial isolation , which would precipitate an economic catastrophe that would " overturn the constitution and put into an overwhelming majority the anti @-@ national forces " . At the same time , radical government elements led by Thomas Jefferson had all but declared their support for U.S. aid to the beleaguered French First Republic ( then at war with the United Kingdom ) . The Anglophile Hamilton , Jefferson mused , was " panic @-@ struck if we refuse our breach to every kick which Great Britain may choose to give it " . 
 In his valedictory Farewell Address , in which Washington announced his decision to step down from the presidency ( due in part to his increasing weariness with public life ) , he included a short passage defending his policy of ignoring French requests for American assistance . In an attempt to keep his remarks apolitical , Washington defended his policy by framing it as generic guidance for the future and did not mention the French by name : 
 The great rule of conduct for us , in regard to foreign nations , is in extending our commercial relations , to have with them as little political connection as possible . Europe has a set of primary interests , which to us have none , or a very remote relation . Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies the causes of which are essentially foreign to our concerns . Hence , therefore , it must be unwise in us to implicate ourselves , by artificial ties , in the ordinary vicissitudes of her politics , or the ordinary combinations and collisions of her friendships or enmities ... it is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world ; so far , I mean , as we are now at liberty to do it ; for let me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing engagements . 
 However , in private correspondence about his address Washington wrote that the geopolitical situation inspiring his advice would disappear in " not ... probably more than twenty years " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The rise of Napoleon Bonaparte in France muted the " revolutionary romanticism " of Thomas Jefferson and his Democratic @-@ Republican Party by the time he became president in 1800 . Jefferson came to see the war between France and Britain as a battle between the " tyrant of the land " and the " tyrant of the ocean " , perceiving each state 's military objective as the moral equivalent of the other . ( The president was denounced by the 14 @-@ year @-@ old William Cullen Bryant , who called him " Napoleon 's slave " and a " willing vassal to imperious France " . ) Jefferson 's developing view of international politics led him to observe that the United States should retreat from intercession in European affairs ( for which he had been a lukewarm advocate ) and pursue a more @-@ modest , less @-@ committed course . He believed that American commercial power would allow it to pursue an independent course unfettered by conventional diplomacy , writing to a protégé : 
 The day is within my time as well as yours , when we may say by what laws other nations treat us on the sea . And we will say it . In the meantime , we wish to let every treaty we have drop off without renewal . We call in our diplomatic missions , barely keeping up those to the more important nations . 
 Outlined by Jefferson in his 1801 inaugural address , the Washington Doctrine of Unstable Alliances asserted that the U.S. should consider its external military alliances temporary arrangements of convenience and freely abandon ( or reverse ) them as indicated by the national interest . Citing Washington 's Farewell Address as his inspiration , Jefferson described the doctrine as " peace , commerce , and honest friendship with all nations — entangling alliances with none . " 
 The results of this policy during Jefferson 's presidency have been generally criticized . According to historian Doron Ben @-@ Atar , " Jefferson gambled [ that ] commerce could be used as an instrument for forcing the belligerent nations to do America justice and to respect the republic 's honor " . The Embargo Act of 1807 , which virtually sealed the U.S. off from the outside world , has been cited as the most dramatic example of the failure of Jefferson 's " inflated assessment " of American power — a failure the president never fully grasped , and which helped lead the nation into the War of 1812 . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Washington Doctrine of Unstable Alliances is a rare example of a policy endorsement of what is known in international relations as <unk> des alliances ( " reversal of alliances " ) : a state abandons an ally for an alliance with a recent enemy , possibly in opposition to the former ally . The Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact between the Soviet Union and Germany has been cited as an example . 
 Despite Washington 's private view that his advice should only be followed short @-@ term ( until the geopolitical situation stabilized ) , the doctrine has endured as a central argument for American non @-@ interventionism . It would be 165 years after the 1778 Treaty of Alliance with France before the U.S. would negotiate the nation 's second permanent military alliance , during World War II . In the interim , the United States engaged in transient alliances of convenience ( as with Sweden during the Barbary Wars and the European powers during the Boxer Rebellion ) . After the U.S. Congress enacted the 1941 Lend @-@ Lease program , Senator Arthur <unk> said : " We have torn up 150 years of traditional foreign policy . We have tossed Washington 's farewell address into the discard . " 
 According to a critical 1898 New York Times editorial , " The policy ... suggested by Jefferson in his first inaugural address has been so faithfully maintained during the century which has since intervened that many of our people regard it as a policy as fixed as the stars in their courses " . American economist Steven Rosefielde noted the doctrine 's influence on current U.S. policy : " Our nation seeks coalitions and alliances with other nations for tactical purposes when at war , and reserves our overall strategy @-@ making to ourselves . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The phrase " entangling alliances , " which forms the basis of the Washington Doctrine of Unstable Alliances , has been misattributed in the popular press to Washington rather than Jefferson . A 2011 post on the conservative website Breitbart was entitled " George Washington Said to Avoid <unk> Alliances " , and the Independent American Party website attributed Jefferson 's " honest friendship with all nations , entangling alliances with none " to Washington . 
 = Raiders of the Lost Ark = 
 Raiders of the Lost Ark ( later marketed as Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark ) is a 1981 American action adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg , with a screenplay written by Lawrence Kasdan , from a story by George Lucas and Philip Kaufman . It was produced by Frank Marshall for Lucasfilm Ltd . , with Lucas and Howard Kazanjian as executive producers . Starring Harrison Ford , it was the first installment in the Indiana Jones film franchise to be released , though it is the second in internal chronological order . It pits Indiana Jones ( Ford ) against a group of Nazis who are searching for the Ark of the Covenant , which Adolf Hitler believes will make his army invincible . The film co @-@ stars Karen Allen as Indiana 's former lover , Marion Ravenwood ; Paul Freeman as Indiana 's nemesis , French archaeologist René Belloq ; John Rhys @-@ Davies as Indiana 's sidekick , Sallah ; Ronald Lacey as Gestapo agent Arnold Toht ; and Denholm Elliott as Indiana 's colleague , Marcus Brody . 
 The film originated from Lucas ' desire to create a modern version of the serials of the 1930s and 1940s . Production was based at Elstree Studios , England ; but filming also took place in La Rochelle , France , Tunisia , Hawaii , and California from June to September 1980 . 
 Released on June 12 , 1981 , Raiders of the Lost Ark became the year 's top @-@ grossing film and remains one of the highest @-@ grossing films ever made . It was nominated for nine Academy Awards in 1982 , including Best Picture , and won four for Best Art Direction , Film Editing , Sound , and Visual Effects with a fifth Academy Award : a Special Achievement Award for Sound Effects Editing . The film 's critical and popular success led to three additional films , Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom ( 1984 ) , Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade ( 1989 ) , and Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull ( 2008 ) , with a fifth slated for 2019 ; the television series The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles ( 1992 – 1996 ) , and 15 video games as of 2009 . In 1999 , the film was included in the U.S. Library of Congress ' National Film Registry as having been deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 Raiders of the Lost Ark is often ranked as one of the greatest films of all time , both in the action @-@ adventure genre , and in general . The film also ranks # 2 on Empire 's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1936 , archaeologist Indiana Jones braves an ancient booby @-@ trapped temple in Peru and retrieves a golden idol . He is confronted by rival archaeologist René Belloq and the indigenous <unk> people . Surrounded and outnumbered , Indy surrenders the idol to Belloq and escapes aboard a waiting floatplane . 
 Jones returns to his teaching position at Marshall College , where he is interviewed by two Army Intelligence agents . They inform him that the Nazis are searching for his old mentor , Abner Ravenwood , under whom Jones studied at the University of Chicago . The Nazis know that Ravenwood is the leading expert on the ancient city of Tanis in Egypt , and that he possesses the headpiece of the Staff of Ra . Jones deduces that the Nazis are searching for the Ark of the Covenant ; the Nazis believe that if they acquire the Ark their armies will become invincible . The Staff of Ra is the key to finding the Well of Souls , a secret chamber in which the Ark is buried . 
 The agents authorize Jones to recover the Ark to prevent the Nazis from obtaining it . He travels to Nepal and discovers that Abner has died , and the headpiece is in the possession of Ravenwood 's daughter Marion . Jones visits Marion at her tavern , where she reveals her bitter feelings toward him from a previous romantic affair . She physically rebuffs his offer to buy the headpiece , and Jones leaves . Shortly after , a group of thugs arrive with their Nazi commander , Arnold Toht . Toht threatens Marion to get the headpiece , but when Jones returns to the bar to fight the Nazis and save Marion , her bar is accidentally set on fire ; during the fight , the headpiece ends up in the fire and Toht severely burns his hand trying to take the hot headpiece , and flees the tavern screaming . Indy and Marion escape with the headpiece , and Marion decides to accompany Indy in his search for the Ark so he can repay his debt to her . 
 The pair travels to Cairo , where they meet up with Indy 's friend Sallah , a skilled excavator . Sallah informs them that Belloq and the Nazis are digging for the Well of Souls with a replica of the headpiece ( created from the scar on Toht 's hand ) . They quickly realize the Nazi headpiece is incomplete and that the Nazis are digging in the wrong place . The Nazis kidnap Marion and it appears to Jones that she is killed in an exploding truck . After a confrontation with Belloq in a local bar , Indy and Sallah infiltrate the Nazi dig site and use their staff to correctly locate the Ark . Indy discovers Marion is alive , bound and gagged in a tent , but does not release her for fear of blowing his cover . Indy , Sallah , and a small group of diggers unearth the Well of Souls and acquire the Ark . Belloq and Nazi officer Colonel Dietrich arrive , seize the Ark from Jones , throwing Marion into the Well of Souls with him before sealing it back up . Jones and Marion escape to a local airstrip , where Jones has a fistfight with a Nazi mechanic and destroys the flying wing that was to transport the Ark to Berlin . The panicked Nazis remove the Ark in a truck and set off for Cairo , but Jones catches them and retakes it . He makes arrangements to take the Ark to London aboard a tramp steamer . 
 The next day , a Nazi U @-@ boat appears and intercepts the ship . Belloq and Dietrich seize the Ark and Marion but cannot locate Jones , who stows away aboard the boat and travels with them to an island in the Aegean Sea . Once there , Belloq plans to test the power of the Ark before presenting it to Hitler . Jones reveals himself and threatens to destroy the Ark with a <unk> , but Belloq calls his bluff and Jones surrenders rather than destroy such an important historical artifact . The Nazis take Indy and Marion to an area where the Ark will be opened and tie them to a post to observe . Belloq performs a ceremonial opening of the Ark , which appears to contain nothing but sand . Suddenly , angelic ghost @-@ like beings emerge from the Ark . Indy cautions Marion to keep her eyes closed and not to observe what happens next . Belloq and the others look on in astonishment as the apparitions are suddenly revealed to be angels of death . A vortex of flame forms above the Ark and shoots bolts of fiery energy into the gathered Nazi soldiers , killing them all . As Belloq , Toht and Dietrich all scream in terror , the Ark turns its fury on them : Dietrich 's head shrivels up , Toht 's face is melted off his skull and Belloq 's head explodes . Flames then engulf the remains of the doomed assembly , save for Indy and Marion , and the pillar of fire rises into the sky . The Ark 's lid is blasted high into the air before dropping back down onto the Ark and sealing it . Jones and Marion find their ropes burned off and embrace . 
 In Washington , D.C. , the Army Intelligence agents inform Jones and Marcus Brody that the Ark is someplace safe and will be studied by " top men " . The Ark is shown being stored in a giant government warehouse among countless similar crates . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Harrison Ford stars as Indiana Jones , an archaeology professor who often embarks on perilous adventures to obtain rare artifacts . Jones claims that he has no belief in the supernatural , only to have his skepticism challenged when he discovers the Ark . Spielberg suggested casting Ford as Jones , but Lucas objected , stating that he did not want Ford to become his " Bobby De Niro " or " that guy I put in all my movies " - a reference to Martin Scorsese , who often worked with Robert De Niro . Desiring a lesser known actor , Lucas persuaded Spielberg to help him search for a new talent . Among the actors who auditioned were Tim Matheson , Peter Coyote , John Shea , and Tom Selleck . Selleck was originally offered the role , but became unavailable for the part because of his commitment to the television series Magnum , <unk> .. In June 1980 , three weeks away from filming , Spielberg persuaded Lucas to cast Ford after producers Frank Marshall and Kathleen Kennedy were impressed by his performance as Han Solo in The Empire Strikes Back . 
 Paul Freeman as Dr. René Belloq , Jones ' nemesis . Belloq is also an archaeologist after the Ark , but he is working for the Nazis . He intends to harness the Ark 's power himself before Hitler can , but he is killed by the Ark 's supernatural powers . Spielberg cast Freeman after seeing him in Death of a Princess . 
 Karen Allen as Marion Ravenwood , a spirited , tough former lover of Indiana 's . She is the daughter of Abner Ravenwood , Indiana Jones ' mentor , and owns a bar in Nepal . Allen was cast after auditioning with Matheson and John Shea . Spielberg was interested in her , as he had seen her performance in National Lampoon 's Animal House . Sean Young had previously auditioned for the part , while Debra Winger turned it down . 
 John Rhys @-@ Davies as Sallah , " the best digger in Cairo " , who has been hired by the Nazis to help them excavate Tanis . He is an old friend of Indiana Jones , and agrees to help him obtain the Ark , although he fears disturbing it . Spielberg initially approached Danny DeVito to play Sallah , but he could not play the part due to scheduling conflicts . Spielberg cast Rhys @-@ Davies after seeing his performance in Shogun . 
 Ronald Lacey as Major Arnold Toht , an interrogator for the Gestapo , who tries to torture Marion Ravenwood for the headpiece of the Staff of Ra . He is killed by the Ark 's supernatural powers . Lacey was cast as he reminded Spielberg of Peter Lorre . Spielberg had originally offered the role to Roman Polanski , who was intrigued at the opportunity to work with Spielberg but decided to turn down the role because he wouldn 't be able to make the trip to Tunisia . Klaus Kinski was also offered the role , but he hated the script , calling it " <unk> shitty " . 
 Denholm Elliott as Dr. Marcus Brody , a museum curator , who buys the artifacts Indiana obtains for display in his museum . The U.S. government agents approach him with regard to the Ark 's recovery , and he sets up a meeting between them and Indiana Jones . Spielberg hired Elliott as he was a big fan of the actor , who had performed in some of his favorite British and American films . 
 Wolf Kahler as Colonel Dietrich , a ruthless Nazi officer leading the operation to secure the Ark . He is killed by the Ark 's supernatural powers . 
 Alfred Molina , in his film debut , as <unk> , one of Jones ' guides through the South American jungle . He betrays Jones and steals the golden idol , but is killed by traps before he can leave the temple . 
 George Harris as Simon Katanga , captain of the Bantu Wind . 
 Anthony Higgins as Major <unk> , Dietrich 's right @-@ hand @-@ man . 
 Vic <unk> as Barranca and the Monkey Man 
 Don Fellows as Colonel Musgrove 
 William Hootkins as Major Eaton 
 Producer Frank Marshall played a pilot in the airplane fight sequence . The stunt team was ill , so he took the role instead . The result was three days in a hot cockpit , which he joked was over " 140 degrees " . Pat Roach plays the Nazi mechanic with whom Jones brawls in this sequence , as well as a massive <unk> who battles Jones in Marion 's bar . He had the rare opportunity to be killed twice in one film . Special @-@ effects supervisor Dennis Muren made a cameo as a Nazi spy on the seaplane Jones takes from San Francisco to Manila . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1973 , George Lucas wrote The Adventures of Indiana Smith . Like Star Wars , which he also wrote , it was an opportunity to create a modern version of the film serials of the 1930s and 1940s . Lucas discussed the concept with Philip Kaufman , who worked with him for several weeks and came up with the Ark of the Covenant as the plot device . Kaufman was told about the Ark by his dentist when he was a child . The project stalled when Clint Eastwood hired Kaufman to direct The Outlaw Josey Wales . Lucas shelved the idea , deciding to concentrate on his outer space adventure that would become Star Wars . In late May 1977 , Lucas was in Hawaii , trying to escape the enormous success of Star Wars . Friend and colleague Steven Spielberg was also there , on vacation from work on Close Encounters of the Third Kind . While building a sand castle at the Mauna Kea Beach Hotel , Spielberg expressed an interest in directing a James Bond film . Lucas convinced his friend Spielberg that he had conceived a character " better than James Bond " and explained the concept of Raiders of the Lost Ark . Spielberg loved it , calling it " a James Bond film without the hardware " , although he told Lucas that the surname ' Smith ' was not right for the character . Lucas replied , " OK . What about ' Jones ' ? " Indiana was the name of Lucas ' Alaskan Malamute , whose habit of riding in the passenger seat as Lucas drove was also the inspiration for Star Wars ' Chewbacca . Spielberg was at first reluctant to sign on , as Lucas had told him that he would want Spielberg for an entire trilogy , and Spielberg did not want to work on two more scripts . Lucas told him , however , that he already had the next two movies written , so Spielberg agreed . But when the time came for the first sequel , it was revealed that Lucas had nothing written for either sequel . 
 The following year , Lucas focused on developing Raiders and the Star Wars sequel The Empire Strikes Back , during which Lawrence Kasdan and Frank Marshall joined the project as screenwriter and producer respectively . Between January 23 – 27 , 1978 , for nine hours a day , Lucas , Kasdan , and Spielberg discussed the story and visual ideas . Spielberg came up with Jones being chased by a boulder , which was inspired by Carl Barks ' Uncle Scrooge comic " The Seven Cities of Cibola " . Lucas later acknowledged that the idea for the idol mechanism in the opening scene and deadly traps later in the film were inspired by several Uncle Scrooge comics . Lucas came up with a submarine , a monkey giving the Hitler salute , and Marion punching Jones in Nepal . Kasdan used a 100 @-@ page transcript of their conversations for his first script draft , which he worked on for six months . Ultimately , some of their ideas were too grand and had to be cut : a mine chase , an escape in Shanghai using a rolling gong as a shield , and a jump from an airplane in a raft , all of which made it into the prequel , Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom . 
 Spielberg and Lucas disagreed on the character : although Spielberg saw him as a Bondian playboy , Lucas felt the character 's academic and adventurer elements made him complex enough . Spielberg had a darker vision of Jones , interpreting him as an alcoholic similar to Humphrey Bogart 's character Fred C. Dobbs in The Treasure of the Sierra Madre ( 1948 ) . This characterization fell away during the later drafts , though elements survive in Jones 's reaction when he believes Marion to be dead . Costume designer Deborah Nadoolman credits Secret of the Incas ( 1954 ) , starring Charlton Heston , as an influence on the development of the character , noting that the crew watched the film together several times . Nadoolman based the look of Ford 's costume on that of Heston 's , and observed that Indiana is a " kinder and gentler " Harry Steele . 
 Initially , the film was rejected by every major studio in Hollywood , mostly due to the $ 20 million budget and the deal Lucas was offering . Eventually Paramount agreed to finance the film , with Lucas negotiating a five @-@ picture deal . By April 1980 , Kasdan 's fifth draft was produced , and production was getting ready to shoot at Elstree Studios , with Lucas trying to keep costs down . With four illustrators , Raiders of the Lost Ark was Spielberg 's most storyboarded film of his career to date , further helping the film economically . He and Lucas agreed on a tight schedule to keep costs down and to follow the " quick and dirty " feel of the old Saturday matinée serials . Special effects were done using puppets , miniature models , animation , and camera trickery . " We didn 't do 30 or 40 takes ; usually only four . It was like silent <unk> only what you need , no waste " , Spielberg said . " Had I had more time and money , it would have turned out a pretentious movie . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on June 23 , 1980 , at La Rochelle , France , with scenes involving the Nazi submarine , which had been rented from the production of Das Boot . The U @-@ boat pen was a real one from World War II . The crew moved to Elstree Studios for the Well of Souls scenes , the opening sequence temple interiors and Marion Ravenwood 's bar . The Well of Souls scene required 7 @,@ 000 snakes . The only venomous snakes were the cobras , but one crew member was bitten on set by a python . The bulk of the snakes numbers were made up with giant but harmless legless lizards known as <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) which occur from the Balkan Peninsula of southeastern Europe to Central Asia . Growing to 1 @.@ 3 m they are the largest legless lizards in the world and are often mistaken for snakes despite some very obvious differences such as the presence of eyelids and external ear openings , which are both absent from all snakes , and a notched rather than forked tongue . In the finished film , during the scene in which Indiana comes face @-@ to @-@ face with the cobra , a reflection in glass screen that protected Ford from the snake was seen , an issue that was corrected in the 2003 digitally @-@ enhanced re @-@ release . Unlike Indiana , neither Ford nor Spielberg has a fear of snakes , but Spielberg said that seeing all the snakes on the set writhing around made him " want to puke " . 
 The opening scene in the Peruvian jungle was filmed on the island of Kauai , one of the islands of Hawaii , to where Spielberg would return for Jurassic Park . The " temple " location is on the <unk> River , on the <unk> Ranch , south from <unk> Highway on the east coast , just south of Lihue , the island 's main town . <unk> is a working cattle ranch , not generally open to the public . The Peruvian section ( but actually filmed in Hawaii ) featured live tarantulas of a Mexican species ( Brachypelma ) on Harrison ford and Alfred Molina , and are harmless to humans , and in fact of a species which are commonly kept as exotic pets . A fiberglass boulder 22 feet ( 7 m ) in diameter was made for the scene where Indiana escapes from the temple ; Spielberg was so impressed by production designer Norman Reynolds ' realization of his idea that he gave the boulder a more prominent role in the film and told Reynolds to let the boulder roll another 50 feet ( 15 m ) . 
 The scenes set in Egypt were filmed in Tunisia , and the canyon where Indiana threatens to blow up the Ark was shot in Sidi <unk> , just outside Tozeur . The canyon location had been used for the Tatooine scenes from 1977 's Star Wars ( many of the location crew members were the same for both films ) where R2 @-@ D2 was attacked by <unk> . The Tanis scenes were filmed in nearby <unk> , a harsh place due to heat and disease . Several cast and crew members fell ill and Rhys @-@ Davies defecated in his costume during one shot . Spielberg averted disease by eating only canned foods from England , but did not like the area and quickly condensed the scheduled six @-@ week shoot to four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half weeks . Much was improvised : the scene where Marion puts on her dress and attempts to leave Belloq 's tent was improvised as was the entire plane fight . During that scene 's shooting , a wheel went over Ford 's knee and tore his left leg 's cruciate ligament , but he refused local medical help and simply put ice on it . 
 The fight scenes in the town were filmed in Kairouan , while Ford was suffering from dysentery . Stuntman Terry Richards had practiced for weeks with his sword to create the scripted fight scene , choreographing a fight between the swordsman and Jones 's whip . However , after filming the initial shots of the scene , after lunch due to Ford 's dysentery , Ford and Spielberg agreed to cut the scene down to a gunshot , with Ford saying to Spielberg " Let 's just shoot the sucker " . It was later voted in a No.5 on Playboy magazine 's list of best all time scenes . Most of the truck chase was shot by second unit director Michael D. Moore following Spielberg 's storyboards , including Indiana being dragged by the truck ( performed by stuntman Terry Leonard ) , in tribute to a famous Yakima Canutt stunt . Spielberg then filmed all the shots with Ford himself in and around the truck cab . Lucas directed a few other second unit shots , in particular the monkey giving the Nazi salute . 
 The interior staircase set in Washington , D.C. was filmed in San Francisco 's City Hall . The University of the Pacific 's campus in Stockton , California , stood in for the exterior of the college where Jones works , while his classroom and the hall where he meets the American intelligence agents was filmed at the Royal Masonic School for Girls in Rickmansworth , Hertfordshire , England , which was again used in The Last Crusade . His home exteriors were filmed in San Rafael , California . Opening sequence exteriors were filmed in Kauai , Hawaii , with Spielberg wrapping in September in 73 days , finishing under schedule in contrast to his previous film , 1941 . The Washington , D.C. coda , although it appeared in the script 's early drafts , was not included in early edits but was added later when it was realized that there was no resolution to Jones 's relationship with Marion . Shots of the Douglas DC @-@ 3 Jones flies on to Nepal were taken from Lost Horizon , and a street scene was from a shot in The Hindenburg . Filming of Jones boarding a Boeing Clipper flying @-@ boat was complicated by the lack of a surviving aircraft . Eventually , a post @-@ war British Short Solent flying @-@ boat formerly owned by Howard Hughes was located in California and substituted . 
 = = = Visual effects and sound design = = = 
 The special visual effects for Raiders were provided by Industrial Light & Magic and include : a matte shot to establish the Pan Am flying boat in the water and miniature work to show the plane taking off and flying , superimposed over a map ; animation effects for the beam in the Tanis map room ; and a miniature car and passengers superimposed over a matte painting for a shot of a Nazi car being forced off a cliff . The bulk of effects shots were featured in the climactic sequence wherein the Ark of the Covenant ( which was designed by Brian Muir and Keith Short ) is opened and God 's wrath is unleashed . This sequence featured animation , a woman to portray a beautiful spirit 's face , rod puppet spirits moved through water to convey a sense of floating , a matte painting of the island , and cloud tank effects to portray clouds . The melting of Toht 's head was done by exposing a gelatine and plaster model of Ronald Lacey 's head to a heat lamp with an under cranked camera , while Dietrich 's crushed head was a hollow model from which air was withdrawn . When the film was originally submitted to the Motion Picture Association of America , it received an R rating because of the scene in which Belloq 's head explodes . The filmmakers were able to receive a PG rating when they added a veil of fire over the exploding head scene . ( PG @-@ 13 rating was not created until 1984 . ) The firestorm that cleanses the canyon at the finish was a miniature canyon filmed upside down . 
 Ben Burtt , the sound effects supervisor , made extensive use of traditional foley work in yet another of the production 's throwbacks to days of the Republic serials . He selected a .30 @-@ 30 Winchester rifle for the sound of Jones ' pistol . Sound effects artists struck leather jackets and baseball gloves with a baseball bat to create a variety of punching noises and body blows . For the snakes in the Well of Souls sequence , fingers running through cheese casserole and sponges sliding over cement were used for the slithering noises . The sliding lid on a toilet cistern provided the sound for the opening of the Ark , and the sound of the boulder in the opening is a car rolling down a gravel driveway in neutral . Burtt also used , as he did in many of his films , the ubiquitous Wilhelm scream when a Nazi falls from a truck . In addition to his use of such time @-@ honored foley work , Burtt also demonstrated the modern expertise honed during his award @-@ winning work on Star Wars . He employed a synthesizer for the sounds of the Ark , and mixed dolphins ' and sea lions ' screams for those of the spirits within . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 John Williams composed the score for Raiders of the Lost Ark , which was the only score in the series performed by the London Symphony Orchestra , the same orchestra that performed the scores for the Star Wars saga . The score most notably features the well @-@ known " Raiders March " . This piece came to symbolize Indiana Jones and was later used in the scores for the other three films . Williams originally wrote two different candidates for Jones 's theme , but Spielberg enjoyed them so much that he insisted that both be used together in what became the " Raiders March " . The alternately eerie and apocalyptic theme for the Ark of the Covenant is also heard frequently in the score , with a more romantic melody representing Marion and , more broadly , her relationship with Jones . The score as a whole received an Oscar nomination for Best Original Score , but lost to the score to Chariots of Fire composed by Vangelis . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 The only video game based exclusively on the film is Raiders of the Lost Ark , released in 1982 by Atari for their Atari 2600 console . The first third of the video game Indiana Jones ' Greatest Adventures , released in 1994 by JVC for Nintendo 's Super Nintendo Entertainment System , is based entirely on the film . Several of the film 's sequences are reproduced ( the boulder run and the showdown with the Cairo Swordsman among them ) ; however , several inconsistencies with the film are present in the game , such as Nazi soldiers and bats being present in the Well of Souls sequence , for example . The game was developed by LucasArts and Factor 5 . In the 1999 game Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine , a bonus level brings Jones back to the Peruvian temple of the film 's opening scene . In 2008 , to coincide with the release of Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , Lego released the Lego Indiana Jones line — which included building sets based on Raiders of the Lost Ark — and LucasArts published a video game based on the toyline , Lego Indiana Jones : The Original Adventures , which was developed by Traveller 's Tales . 
 Marvel Comics published a comic book adaptation of the film by writer Walt Simonson and artists John Buscema and Klaus Janson . It was published as Marvel Super Special # 18 and as a three @-@ issue limited series . This was followed with the comic book series The Further Adventures of Indiana Jones which was published monthly from January 1983 through March 1986 . 
 In 1981 , Kenner released a 12 @-@ inch ( 30 cm ) doll of Indiana Jones , and the following year they released nine action figures of the film 's characters , three playsets , as well as toys of the Nazi truck and Jones ' horse . They also released a board game . In 1984 , miniature metal versions of the characters were released for a role playing game , The Adventures of Indiana Jones , and in 1995 Micro Machines released die @-@ cast toys of the film 's vehicles . Hasbro released action figures based on the film , ranging from 3 to 12 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 to 30 @.@ 5 cm ) , to coincide with Kingdom of the Crystal Skull on May 1 , 2008 . Later in 2008 , and in 2011 , two high @-@ end sixth scale ( 1 : 6 ) collectible action figures were released by Sideshow Collectibles , and Hot Toys , Ltd. respectively . A novelization by Ryder Windham was released in April 2008 by Scholastic to tie in with the release of Kingdom of the Crystal Skull . A previous novelization by Scottish author Campbell Armstrong ( under the pseudonym Campbell Black ) was concurrently released with the film in 1981 . A book about the making of the film was also released , written by Derek Taylor . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on VHS , Betamax and <unk> in pan and scan only , and on laserdisc in both pan and scan and widescreen . For its 1999 VHS re @-@ issue , the film was remastered in THX and made available in widescreen . The outer package was retitled Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark for consistency with the film 's prequel and sequel . The subsequent DVD release in 2003 features this title as well . The title in the film itself remains unchanged , even in the restored DVD print . In the DVD , two subtle digital revisions were added . First , a connecting rod from the giant boulder to an offscreen guidance track in the opening scene was removed from behind the running Harrison Ford ; second , a reflection in the glass partition separating Ford from the cobra in the Well of Souls was removed . Shortly before the theatrical release of " Kingdom of the Crystal Skull " , Raiders ( along with The Temple of Doom and The Last Crusade ) was re @-@ released on DVD with additional extra features not included on the previous set on May 13 , 2008 . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc in September 2012 . Previously , only Kingdom of the Crystal Skull had been available on Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Raiders of the Lost Ark opened at # 14 and grossed $ 1 @,@ 673 @,@ 731 from 267 theaters ( $ 6 @,@ 269 theater average ) during its opening weekend . In total , the IMAX release grossed $ 3 @,@ 125 @,@ 613 domestically . The film , made on an $ 18 million budget , grossed $ 384 million worldwide throughout its theatrical releases . In North America , it was by some distance the highest @-@ grossing film of 1981 , and remains one of the top twenty @-@ five highest @-@ grossing films ever made when adjusted for inflation . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold more than 70 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film was subsequently nominated for nine Academy Awards , including Best Picture , in 1982 and won four ( Best Sound , Best Film Editing , Best Visual Effects , and Best Art Direction @-@ Set Decoration ( Norman Reynolds , Leslie Dilley , and Michael D. Ford ) . It also received a Special Achievement Award for Sound Effects Editing . It won numerous other awards , including a Grammy Award and Best Picture at the People 's Choice Awards . Spielberg was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award . 
 The film was acclaimed by critics and audiences alike . In his review for The New York Times , Vincent Canby praised the film , calling it , " one of the most deliriously funny , ingenious and stylish American adventure movies ever made . " Roger Ebert in his review for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote , " Two things , however , make Raiders of the Lost Ark more than just a technological triumph : its sense of humor and the droll style of its characters [ ... ] We find ourselves laughing in surprise , in relief , in incredulity at the movie 's ability to pile one incident upon another in an inexhaustible series of inventions . " He later added it to his list of " Great Movies " . Rolling Stone said the film was " the ultimate Saturday action matinee – a film so funny and exciting it can be enjoyed any day of the week . " Bruce Williamson of Playboy claimed : " There 's more excitement in the first ten minutes of Raiders than any movie I have seen all year . By the time the explosive misadventures end , any movie @-@ goer worth his salt ought to be exhausted . " Stephen <unk> of Variety also praised the film . Yet , making an observation that would revisit the franchise with its next film , he felt that the film was surprisingly violent and bloody for a PG @-@ rated film . 
 There were some dissenting voices : Sight & Sound described it as an " expensively gift @-@ wrapped Saturday afternoon pot @-@ boiler " , and New Hollywood champion Pauline Kael , who once contended that she only got " really rough " on large films that were destined to be hits but were nonetheless " atrocious " , found the film to be a " machine @-@ tooled adventure " from a pair of creators who " think just like the marketing division " . ( Lucas later named a villain , played by Raiders Nazi strongman Pat Roach , in his 1988 fantasy film Willow after Kael . ) The film is considered to be a classic of the action and adventure genres by many contemporary critics , and carries a 96 % " Certified Fresh " rating on Rotten Tomatoes , as well as a 85 % rating on Metacritic , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 American Film Institute 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies — No. 60 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills — No. 10 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 Indiana Jones — No. 2 Hero 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " Snakes ! Why did it have to be snakes ? " — Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores — Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) — No. 66 
 = = Impact = = 
 Following the success of Raiders , a prequel , The Temple of Doom , and two sequels , The Last Crusade and Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , were produced , with a third sequel set for release in 2019 . A television series , entitled The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles , was also spun off from this film , and details the character 's early years . Numerous other books , comics , and video games have also been produced . 
 In 1998 , the American Film Institute placed the film at number 60 on its top 100 films of the first century of cinema . In 2007 , AFI updated the list and placed it at number 66 . They also named it as the 10th most thrilling film , and named Indiana Jones as the second greatest hero . In 1999 , the film was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the U.S. Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry . Indiana Jones has become an icon , being listed as Entertainment Weekly 's third favorite action hero , while noting " some of the greatest action scenes ever filmed are strung together like pearls " in this film . 
 An amateur , near shot @-@ for @-@ shot remake was made by Chris <unk> , Eric Zala , and Jayson Lamb , then children in Ocean Springs , Mississippi . It took the boys seven years to finish , from 1982 to 1989 . After production of the film , called Raiders of the Lost Ark : The Adaptation , it was shelved and forgotten until 2003 , where it was discovered by Eli Roth and acclaimed by Spielberg himself , who congratulated the boys on their hard work and said he looked forward to seeing their names on the big screen . Scott Rudin and Paramount Pictures purchased the trio 's life rights with the goal of producing a film based on their adventures making their remake . 
 In 2014 , film director Steven Soderbergh published an experimental black @-@ and @-@ white version of the film , with the original soundtrack and dialogue replaced by an electronic soundtrack . Soderbergh said his intention was to encourage viewers to focus on Spielberg 's extraordinary staging and editing : " This filmmaker forgot more about staging by the time he made his first feature than I know to this day . " 
 Assessing the film 's legacy in 1997 , Bernard Weinraub , film critic for The New York Times , which had initially reviewed the film as " deliriously funny , ingenious , and stylish " , maintained that " the decline in the traditional family G @-@ rated film , for ' general ' audiences , probably began " with the appearance of Raiders of the Lost Ark . " Whether by accident or design , " found Weinraub , " the filmmakers made a comic nonstop action film intended mostly for adults but also for children . " Eight years later , in 2005 , viewers of Channel 4 in the U.K. rated the film as the 20th @-@ best family film of all time , with Spielberg taking best over @-@ all director honors . 
 On Empire magazine 's list of the 500 Greatest Movies of All Time , Raiders ranked second , beaten only by The Godfather . 
 In conjunction with the Blu @-@ ray release , a limited one @-@ week release in IMAX theaters was announced for September 7 , 2012 . Steven Spielberg and sound designer Ben Burtt supervised the format conversion . No special effects or other visual elements were altered , but the audio was enhanced for surround sound . 
 = = = 2012 replica mystery = = = 
 In December 2012 , the University of Chicago 's admissions department received a package in the mail addressed to Henry Walton Jones , Jr . , Indiana Jones ' full name . The address on the stamped package was listed for a hall that was the former home of the university 's geology and geography department . Inside the manila envelope was a detailed replica journal similar to the one Jones used in the movie , as well as postcards and pictures of Marion Ravenwood . The admissions department posted pictures of the contents on its Internet blog , looking for any information about the package . It was discovered that the package was part of a set to be shipped from Guam to Italy that had been sold on eBay . The package with the journal had fallen out in transit and a postal worker had sent it to the university , as it had a complete address and postage , which turned out to be fake . All contents were from a Guam " prop replicator " who sells them all over the world . The university will display its replica in the main lobby of the Oriental Institute . 
 = = = Fortress of Kuelap = = = 
 In the opening jungle scene , Indy retrieves the Golden Idol and the famed action of the boulder chase and pursuit by the deadly Hovitos ( fictional descendants of the <unk> ) commences . An ancient structure called Kuelap may have inspired the booby @-@ trapped temple . The novelization of the film explains that Jones was looking for the Temple of the <unk> Warriors in the Andes of Northern Peru . The <unk> , which means “ People of the Clouds " , were an actual South American people , and have left behind scores of ruins ; most notably Kuelap , “ The Fortress of the Clouds " . The fortress of Kuelap remains with its long , high walls ( 600 meters in length , 110 meters in width , and 19 meters high ) and remnants of more than four hundred buildings . Radiocarbon dating indicates the site was constructed as early as the 6th century AD and was used throughout the pre @-@ Columbian period . Similar to the temple seen in the film , the entryway to Kuelap is long and very narrow . Archaeologists believe the entrance was designed this way so that it could be easily defended , as only one person could fit through the entrance at a time . Many <unk> grave sites and mummies have also been located amongst the ruins of Kuelap . 
 = K @-@ 44 ( Kansas highway ) = 
 K @-@ 44 is a state highway in the U.S. state of Kansas . It begins at K @-@ 2 in Anthony and passes through Harper and Sumner counties in the south @-@ central portion of the state , ending at K @-@ 49 north of Caldwell . The highway is 24 @.@ 674 miles ( 39 @.@ 709 km ) long , and it was designated around 1932 . Its alignment has not undergone a major change since then . 
 = = Route description = = 
 K @-@ 44 begins at a junction with K @-@ 2 in Anthony , the county seat of Harper County ; within the city limits of Anthony , K @-@ 44 is known as Main Street . From its western terminus , the route heads east as a two @-@ lane road , coming to another highway junction , the northern terminus of K @-@ 179 , approximately 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) east of K @-@ 2 . K @-@ 44 then leaves Anthony , continuing east through hilly farmland in eastern Harper County , before crossing into Sumner County approximately thirteen miles ( 21 km ) east of Anthony . The highway crosses the <unk> River north of Caldwell . Just east of the river crossing , the route curves slightly to the southeast and comes to an intersection with K @-@ 49 , where it ends . 
 K @-@ 44 is maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation ( KDOT ) . In 2013 , KDOT measured traffic counts in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) on K @-@ 44 ranging from a high of 729 vehicles in Anthony to a low of 313 vehicles in western Sumner County . 
 = = History = = 
 K @-@ 44 first appeared on the 1932 Kansas state highway map . Its alignment when it was designated is identical to that which it follows today ; however , the road was not yet paved . This did not happen until sometime between 1948 and 1950 , and the highway has not been majorly modified since then . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Jack Charlton = 
 John " Jack " Charlton , OBE , DL ( born 8 May 1935 ) is an English former footballer and manager . He was part of the England team that won the 1966 World Cup . He is the elder brother of former Manchester United forward Bobby Charlton , who was also a teammate in England 's World Cup final victory . He spent his entire club career with Leeds United from 1950 to 1973 , helping the club to the Second Division title ( 1963 – 64 ) , First Division title ( 1968 – 69 ) , FA Cup ( 1972 ) , League Cup ( 1968 ) , Charity Shield ( 1969 ) , Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup ( 1968 and 1971 ) , as well as one other promotion from the Second Division ( 1955 – 56 ) and five second @-@ place finishes in the First Division , two FA Cup final defeats and one Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup final defeat . His 629 league and 762 total competitive appearances are club records . In 2006 , Leeds United supporters voted Charlton into the club 's greatest ever XI . 
 Called up to the England team days before his 30th birthday , Charlton went on to score six goals in 35 international games and to appear in two World Cups and one European Championship . He played in the World Cup final victory over West Germany in 1966 , and also helped England to finish third in Euro 1968 and to win four British Home Championship tournaments . He was named FWA Footballer of the Year in 1967 . 
 After retiring as a player he worked as a manager , and led Middlesbrough to the Second Division title in 1973 – 74 , winning the Manager of the Year award in his first season as a manager . He kept Boro as a stable top @-@ flight club before he resigned in April 1977 . He took charge of Sheffield Wednesday in October 1977 , and led the club to promotion out of the Third Division in 1979 – 80 . He left the Owls in May 1983 , and went on to serve Middlesbrough as caretaker @-@ manager at the end of the 1983 – 84 season . He worked as Newcastle United manager for the 1984 – 85 season . He took charge of the Republic of Ireland national team in February 1986 , and led them to their first ever World Cup in 1990 , where they reached the quarter @-@ finals . He also led the nation to successful qualification to Euro 1988 and the 1994 World Cup . He resigned in January 1996 and went into retirement . He is married with three children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born into a footballing family in Ashington , Northumberland on 8 May 1935 , Charlton was initially overshadowed by his younger brother Bobby , who was taken on by Manchester United while Jack was doing his National Service with the Household Cavalry . His uncles were Jack Milburn ( Leeds United and Bradford City ) , George Milburn ( Leeds United and Chesterfield ) , Jim Milburn ( Leeds United and Bradford Park Avenue ) and Stan Milburn ( Chesterfield , Leicester City and Rochdale ) , and legendary Newcastle United and England footballer Jackie Milburn was his mother 's cousin . 
 The economy of the village of Ashington was based entirely around coal mining , and though his family had a strong footballing pedigree , his father was a miner . The eldest of four brothers – Bobby , Gordon and Tommy – the tight finances of the family meant that all four siblings shared the same bed . His father , Bob , had no interest in football , but his mother , Cissie , played football with her children and later coached the local schools team . As a teenager she took them to watch Ashington and Newcastle United play , and Charlton remained a lifelong Newcastle supporter . 
 At the age of 15 he was an offered a trial at Leeds United , where his uncle Jim was left back , but turned it down and instead joined his father in the mines . He worked in the mines for a short time but handed in his notice after finding out just how difficult and unpleasant it was to work deep underground . He applied to join the police and reconsidered the offer from Leeds United . His trial game for Leeds clashed with his police interview , and Charlton chose to play in the game ; the trial was a success and he joined the ground staff at Elland Road . 
 " This part of the world produced its fair share of footballers , and nobody was particularly impressed if a lad went away to play professional football . In fact we never used to say going away to play football , we just used to say ' going away ' . " 
 = = Club career = = 
 Charlton played for Leeds United 's youth team in the Northern Intermediate League and then for the third team in the Yorkshire League ; playing in the physically demanding Yorkshire League at the age of 16 impressed the club 's management , and he was soon promoted to the reserve team . Manager Raich Carter handed him his first professional contract when Charlton turned 17 . He made his debut on 25 April 1953 against Doncaster Rovers , taking John Charles ' place at centre @-@ half after Charles was moved up to centre @-@ forward . As he had not been given any specific instructions before the game Charlton asked Carter what he was expected to do in the match ; Carter replied " See how fast their centre forward can limp " . It was the final Second Division game of the 1952 – 53 season , and ended in a 1 – 1 draw . He then had to serve two years National Service with the Household Cavalry , and captained the Horse Guards to victory in the Cavalry Cup in Hanover . His National Service limited his contribution to Leeds , and he made only one appearance in the 1954 – 55 season . 
 Charlton returned to the first team in September 1955 , and kept his place for the rest of the 1955 – 56 season , helping the " Whites " to win promotion into the First Division after finishing second to Sheffield Wednesday . He was dropped in the second half of the 1956 – 57 campaign , partly due to his habit of partying late at night and losing focus on his football . He regained his place in the 1957 – 58 season , and stopped his partying lifestyle as he settled down to married life . In October 1957 he was picked to represent the Football League in a game against the League of Ireland . 
 Leeds struggled after Raich Carter left the club in 1958 , and Willis Edwards and then Bill Lambton took charge in the 1958 – 59 season as Leeds finished nine points above the relegation zone . Jack Taylor was appointed manager , and failed to keep Leeds out of the relegation zone by the end of the 1959 – 60 campaign . During this time Charlton began taking his coaching badges , and took part in the Football Association 's coaching courses at Lilleshall . 
 Leeds finished just five points above the Second Division relegation zone in the 1960 – 61 season and Taylor resigned ; his replacement , Don Revie , was promoted from the United first team , and initially he was not fond of Charlton . Revie played Charlton up front at the start of the 1961 – 62 season , but he soon moved him back to centre @-@ half after he proved ineffective as a centre @-@ forward . He soon became frustrated and difficult to manage , feeling in limbo playing for a club seemingly going nowhere whilst his younger brother was enjoying great success at Manchester United . Revie told Charlton that he was prepared to let him go in 1962 , but never actually transfer listed him . Liverpool manager Bill Shankly failed to meet the £ 30 @,@ 000 Leeds demanded for Charlton and though Manchester United manager Matt Busby was initially willing to pay the fee he eventually decided to instead try an untested youngster at centre @-@ half . During these discussions Charlton refused to sign a new contract at Leeds , but felt frustrated by Busby 's hesitance and so signed a new contract with Leeds whilst making a promise to Revie to be more professional in his approach . 
 The 1962 – 63 season was the beginning of a new era for Leeds United as Revie began to mould the team and the club into his own liking . In a game against Swansea Town in September , Revie dropped many senior players and played Charlton in a young new defensive line @-@ up : Gary Sprake ( goalkeeper ) , Paul Reaney ( right @-@ back ) , Norman Hunter and Charlton ( centre @-@ back ) , and Rod Johnson ( left @-@ back ) . With the exception of Johnson , this defensive line @-@ up would remain consistent for much of the rest of the decade . Charlton took charge of the defence that day , and insisted upon a zonal marking system ; Revie agreed to allow Charlton to become the key organiser in defence . Aided by new midfield signing Johnny Giles , the " Peacocks " put in a strong promotion challenge and finished fifth , before securing promotion as champions in the 1963 – 64 campaign , topping the table two points ahead of Sunderland . Other players that began to make their mark on the first team included Billy Bremner , Paul Madeley and Peter Lorimer , who would all remain with Leeds right up until the end of the 1970s . 
 Leeds made an immediate impact on their first season back in the top flight , however the team gained a reputation for rough play , and Charlton admitted in his autobiography that " the way we achieved that success made me feel uncomfortable " . They went 25 games unbeaten before losing to Manchester United at Elland Road – their title race meant that the two clubs built up an intense rivalry . Leeds needed a win in their final game of the season to secure the title but could only manage a 3 – 3 draw with Birmingham City at St Andrew 's – Charlton scored the equalising goal on 86 minutes but they could not push on for a winner . They gained some measure of revenge over Man United by beating them 1 – 0 in the replay of the FA Cup semi @-@ finals . Leeds met Liverpool in the final at Wembley , and the game went into extra @-@ time after a goalless draw . Roger Hunt opened the scoring three minutes into extra @-@ time , but seven minutes later Charlton headed on a cross for Bremner to volley into the net for the equaliser ; with seven minutes left Ian St. John scored for Liverpool to win the game 2 – 1 . 
 United again competed for honours in the 1965 – 66 season , finishing second to Liverpool in the league and reaching the semi @-@ finals of the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup . It was the club 's first season in European competition , and they beat Italian side Torino , East German club SC Leipzig , Spanish club Valencia and Hungarian outfit Újpest , before they were beaten 3 – 1 by Spanish side Real Zaragoza at Elland Road in a tiebreaker game following a 2 – 2 aggregate draw . Charlton caused controversy against Valencia after he and defender <unk> began fighting after <unk> kicked Charlton in an off the ball incident – Charlton never actually struck the Spaniard , who hid behind his teammates . 
 The 1966 – 67 season proved frustrating for United , despite the introduction of another club great in the form of Eddie Gray . Leeds finished fourth , five points behind champions Manchester United , and exited the FA Cup at the semi @-@ finals after defeat to Chelsea . They made progress in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , beating DWS ( Netherlands ) , Valencia , Bologna ( Italy ) and Kilmarnock ( Scotland ) to reach the final , where they were beaten 2 – 0 on aggregate by Yugoslavian outfit Dinamo Zagreb . At the end of the season he was named as the Footballer of the Year , succeeding his brother who had won it the previous year . During the award ceremony he told a number of amusing stories and won a standing ovation from the crowd , this started him on a successful sideline as an after @-@ dinner speaker . 
 Charlton developed a new ploy for the 1967 – 68 season by standing next to the goalkeeper during corners to prevent him from coming out to collect the ball ; this created havoc for opposition defences and is still a frequently used tactic in the modern era . However , for the second successive season Leeds finished fourth and exited the FA Cup at the semi @-@ finals , this time losing 1 – 0 to Everton at Old Trafford . They finally won major honours though by beating Arsenal 1 – 0 in the final of the League Cup ; Terry Cooper scored the only goal of the game despite allegations that Charlton pushed goalkeeper Jim Furnell in the build up to the goal . Leeds then went on to lift the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup after beating CA Spora Luxembourg , FK Partizan ( Yugoslavia ) , Hibernian ( Scotland ) , Rangers ( Scotland ) and Dundee ( Scotland ) to reach the final with Hungarian club Ferencvárosi . They won 1 – 0 at Elland Road and drew 0 – 0 in Budapest to claim their first European trophy . 
 Charlton helped Leeds to their first ever Football League title in 1968 – 69 , as they lost just two games to finish six points clear of second @-@ place Liverpool . They secured the title with a goalless draw at Anfield on 28 April , and Charlton later recalled the Liverpool supporters affectionately called him " big dirty giraffe " and that manager Bill Shankly went into the Leeds dressing room after the match to tell them they were " worthy champions " . 
 United opened the 1969 – 70 campaign by winning the Charity Shield with a 2 – 1 win over Manchester City , and went on to face realistic possibility of winning the treble – the league , FA Cup and European Cup . However they missed out on all three trophies as the games built up towards the end of the season , and the league title was the first to slip out of their hands as Everton went on to build an insurmountable lead . They then bowed out of the European Cup after a 3 – 1 aggregate defeat to Celtic , including a 2 – 1 loss at Hampden Park in front of a UEFA record crowd of 136 @,@ 505 . They took two replays to overcome Manchester United in the FA Cup semi @-@ finals ( Bremner scored the only goal in 300 minutes of football ) , but lost 2 – 1 in the replayed final to Chelsea after the original 2 – 2 draw , in which Charlton opened the scoring . Charlton took responsibility for Peter Osgood 's goal in the replay as he was distracted from marking duties as he was trying to get revenge on a Chelsea player who had kicked him . 
 Charlton caused controversy early in the 1970 – 71 season as in an October appearance on the Tyne Tees football programme , he said he 'd once had a " little black book " of names of players whom he intended to hurt or exact some form of revenge upon during his playing days . He was tried by the Football Association and was found not guilty of any wrongdoing after arguing that the press had misquoted him . He admitted that though he never actually had a book of names he had a short list of names in his head of players who had made nasty tackles on him and that he intended to put in a hard but fair challenge on those players if he got the opportunity in the course of a game . Leeds ended the season in second place yet again , as Arsenal overtook them with a late series of 1 – 0 wins despite Leeds beating Arsenal in the penultimate game of the season after Charlton scored the winning goal . The final tally of 64 points was a record high for a second @-@ placed team . In the last ever season of the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup they beat Sarpsborg FK ( Norway ) , Dynamo Dresden ( Germany ) , Sparta Prague ( Czechoslovakia ) , Vitória ( Portugal ) and Liverpool to secure a place in the final against Italian club Juventus . They drew 2 – 2 at the Stadio Olimpico and 1 – 1 at Elland Road to win the cup on the away goals rule . They had the opportunity to win the cup permanently , but lost 2 – 1 to Barcelona at Camp Nou in the trophy play @-@ off game . 
 Leeds finished second in the 1971 – 72 season for the third successive time , this time ending up just one point behind champions Derby County after losing to Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux on the final day of the season . However Charlton managed to complete his list of domestic honours as Leeds beat Arsenal 1 – 0 in the FA Cup final ; he kept Charlie George to a very quiet game as Leeds successfully defended their slender lead . 
 Charlton was limited to 25 appearances in the 1972 – 73 campaign and suffered an injury in the FA Cup semi @-@ final against Wolves which ended his season . After failing to regain his fitness for the final , he announced his retirement . Madeley played in his place but Gordon McQueen had been signed as his long @-@ term replacement . He played his testimonial against Celtic , and was given £ 28 @,@ 000 of the £ 40 @,@ 000 matchday takings . 
 = = International career = = 
 With Charlton approaching his 30th birthday , he was called up by Alf Ramsey to play for England against Scotland at Wembley on 10 April 1965 . The game ended 2 – 2 despite England being forced to end the game with nine men after picking up two injuries ; he assisted his brother Bobby for England 's first goal . Ramsey later said that he picked Charlton to play alongside Bobby Moore as he was a conservative player able to provide cover to the more skilful Moore , who could get caught out if he made a rare mistake . The defence remained relatively constant in the build up to the 1966 FIFA World Cup : Gordon Banks ( goalkeeper ) , Ray Wilson ( left @-@ back ) , Charlton and Moore ( centre @-@ backs ) , and George Cohen ( right @-@ back ) . After playing in a 1 – 0 win over Hungary the following month , Charlton joined England for a tour of Europe as they drew 1 – 1 with Yugoslavia and beat West Germany 1 – 0 and Sweden 2 – 1 . He played in a 0 – 0 draw with Wales and a 2 – 1 win over Northern Ireland to help England win the British Home Championship , though sandwiched between these two games was a 3 – 2 defeat to Austria – the first of only two occasions he was on the losing side in an England shirt . He played all nine England games in 1965 , the final one being a 2 – 0 win over Spain at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium . 
 England opened the year of 1966 on 5 January with a 1 – 1 draw with Poland at Goodison Park ; Ramsey 's managerial ability was demonstrated during the game as the equalising goal came from Bobby Moore , who was allowed to surge forward as Charlton covered the gap he left behind in defence . Charlton played in six of the next seven international victories as England prepared for the World Cup . The run started with impressive victories over West Germany and then Scotland in front of 133 @,@ 000 fans at Hampden Park . He scored his first international goal with a deflected shot on 26 June , as England recorded a 3 – 0 victory over Finland at the Helsinki Olympic Stadium . He missed the match against Norway but returned to action with a headed goal in a 2 – 0 win over Denmark at Idrætsparken . 
 England drew 0 – 0 in their opening group game of the World Cup against Uruguay after the South Americans came to play for a draw . They then beat Mexico 2 – 0 after a " tremendous goal " from Bobby Charlton opened up the game shortly before the half @-@ time whistle . England beat France 2 – 0 in the final group game , with Charlton assisting Roger Hunt after heading the ball onto the post . England eliminated Argentina in the quarter finals with a 1 – 0 win – their efforts were greatly aided after Argentine centre @-@ half Antonio <unk> was sent off for dissent , after which Argentina stopped attacking the ball and concentrated of holding out for a draw with their aggressive defending . England 's opponents in the semi @-@ finals were Portugal , who had giant centre @-@ forward José Augusto Torres to compete with Charlton for aerial balls . Late in the game Charlton gave away a penalty by sticking out a hand to stop Torres from scoring ; Eusébio scored the penalty but was largely contained by Nobby Stiles , and England won the game 2 – 1 after two goals from Bobby Charlton . 
 West Germany awaited in the final at Wembley , and they took the lead through Helmut Haller on 12 minutes ; Charlton felt that he could have blocked the shot but at the time he believed that Banks had it covered , though it was Wilson who was at fault for allowing Haller the chance to shoot . England came back and took the lead , but with only a few minutes left in the game Charlton gave away a free kick after fouling Uwe Seeler whilst competing for an aerial ball ; Wolfgang Weber scored the equalising goal from a goalmouth scramble created from the free kick . Geoff Hurst scored two goals in extra @-@ time to win the game 4 – 2 . 
 After the World Cup England lost the annual Home Championship to Scotland after a 3 – 2 defeat in April 1967 , Charlton scored for the second successive international game running after also finding the net against Wales the previous November . He injured his foot during the game as he broke two sesamoid bones in his big toe . As his career went on he began to miss England games with niggling injuries so as to avoid friendly games in favour of playing important matches for Leeds ; Brian <unk> would take his place in the England team during Charlton 's absences . He was named in the squad for UEFA Euro 1968 , but did not feature in either of England 's games . He won five caps in 1969 , helping England to a memorable 5 – 0 win over France and scoring in a 1 – 0 win over Portugal from a corner taken by his brother Bobby . 
 In the summer of 1970 , Ramsey named Charlton in his squad of 22 for the 1970 World Cup in Mexico . However , he favoured <unk> over Charlton and only picked Charlton for his 35th and final England game in the 1 – 0 group win over Czechoslovakia at the Estadio Jalisco . England lost in the quarter finals to West Germany , and on the flight home , Charlton asked Ramsey not to be considered for international duty again . Charlton agonised over how to break the news to Ramsey , and eventually said : " Great times ... absolute privilege ... getting older ... slowing down ... not sure I am up to it any more ... time to step down . " Ramsey listened , then agreed with him . " Yes , I had reached that conclusion myself . " 
 = = Management career = = 
 = = = Middlesbrough = = = 
 He was offered the job as manager of Second Division club Middlesbrough on his 38th birthday in 1973 . He declined to be interviewed for the position , and instead handed the club a list of responsibilities he expected to take , which if agreed to would give him total control of the running of the club . He refused a contract , and would never sign a contract throughout his managerial career . He took a salary of £ 10 @,@ 000 a year despite the chairman being willing to pay a lot more ; his only stipulations were a gentleman 's agreement that he would not be sacked , assurances that he would have no interference from the board in team affairs , and three days off a week for fishing and shooting . He decided to first repaint Ayresome Park and to publicise the upcoming league campaign so as to generate higher attendance figures . 
 Charlton took advice from Celtic manager Jock Stein , who allowed him to sign right @-@ sided midfielder Bobby Murdoch on a free transfer . Besides Murdoch the club already had ten players who Charlton moulded into a championship winning side : Jim Platt ( goalkeeper ) , John Craggs ( right @-@ back ) , Stuart Boam and Willie Maddren ( centre @-@ backs ) , Frank <unk> ( left @-@ back ) , David Armstrong ( left midfield ) , Graeme Souness ( central midfield ) , Alan Foggon ( attacking midfield ) , John <unk> and David Mills ( forwards ) . Some of these players were already settled at the club and in their positions , whilst Charlton had to work with some of the other players . He moved Souness from left midfield to central midfield to compensate for his lack of pace and coached him to play the ball forward rather than side to side as was his instinct . Foggon was played in a new role which Charlton created to break the offside trap set by opposition defenders , an extremely fast player he was instructed to run behind defenders and latch on to the long ball to find himself one @-@ on @-@ one with the goalkeeper . 
 The " Boro " secured promotion with seven games still to play of the 1973 – 74 season , and Charlton actually told his team to settle for a point away at Luton Town so they could win the title at home but his players ignored his instruction to concede a goal and the title was secured with a 1 – 0 win at Kenilworth Road . They won the title by a 15 @-@ point margin ( at the time only two points were awarded for a win ) ; in contrast promoted Carlisle United ( 3rd ) finished only 15 points ahead of Crystal Palace ( 20th ) , who were relegated . He was named Manager of the Year , the first time that a manager outside of the top @-@ flight had been given such an honour . 
 He continued to manage and change every aspect of the club , and took the decision to disassemble the club 's scouting network to instead focus on local talent in Northumberland and Durham . His only major new signing of the 1974 – 75 season was Terry Cooper , a former Leeds United teammate . They adapted well to the First Division , finishing in seventh place , but would have finished fourth and qualified for Europe had Derby County not scored a last second goal against them on the last day of the season . 
 Building for the 1975 – 76 campaign he signed Phil Boersma from Liverpool to replace Murdoch , but Boersma never settled at the club and was frequently injured . They finished in 13th place , and went on to win the Anglo @-@ Scottish Cup with a 1 – 0 win over Fulham . They also reached the semi @-@ finals of the League Cup , and took a 1 – 0 lead over Manchester City into the second leg at Maine Road , where they were soundly beaten 4 – 0 . However teams had begun to learn how to combat Charlton 's attack strategy and left their centre @-@ backs on the outside of the penalty box to neutralise the threat of Foggon . Despite the team 's steady progress the club 's board voted to sack Charlton in July 1976 after becoming increasingly concerned that he was overstepping his authority in negotiating business deals on behalf of the club and choosing the club 's strip . However , the club chairman overruled the decision and Charlton remained in charge . 
 With <unk> coming to the end of his career Charlton tried to sign David Cross as a replacement but refused to go above £ 80 @,@ 000 and Cross instead went to West Ham United for £ 120 @,@ 000 . Middlesbrough finished the 1976 – 77 campaign in 12th place and Charlton left the club at the end of the season on the belief that four years was an optimum time with one group of players and that he had reached his peak with them – he later regretted his decision and stated that he could have led the club to a league title if he had stayed and signed two more top quality players . He applied for the job of England manager after Don Revie quit the role and after Brian Clough was ruled out by the Football Association but did not receive a reply to his application , and he vowed never to apply for another job again and instead wait until he was approached . 
 = = = Sheffield Wednesday = = = 
 In October 1977 , he replaced Len Ashurst as manager at Sheffield Wednesday , who were then bottom of the Third Division . He appointed as his assistant Maurice Setters , who had experience managing at that level but had effectively ruled himself out of another management job after taking Doncaster Rovers to court for unfair dismissal . The two agreed that while the standard of football in the division was low the work rates were high and so the best way to make progress would be to play long balls into the opposition penalty area whilst recruiting big defenders to avoid being caught out by opposition teams with similar tactics . He took the " Owls " to mid @-@ table safety with a 14th @-@ place finish in the 1977 – 78 season , though they did suffer embarrassment by being knocked out of the FA Cup by Northern Premier League side Wigan Athletic . 
 His priority in summer 1978 was to find a target man for Tommy Tynan to play alongside and he found it in 6 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) Andrew McCulloch , who arrived from Brentford for a £ 70 @,@ 000 fee . He signed Terry Curran as a winger but eventually moved him up front to play alongside McCulloch . He sold goalkeeper Chris Turner to Sunderland and replaced him with the bigger Bob Bolder . He further raised the average height of the team by signing uncompromising centre @-@ half Mick Pickering from Southampton . The team failed to advance in the league , finishing the 1978 – 79 season again in 14th spot . They did make their mark on the FA Cup in the Third Round by taking eventual winners Arsenal to four replays before they eventually succumbed to a 2 – 0 defeat . 
 Charlton 's major acquisition for the 1979 – 80 campaign was signing Yugoslavia international midfielder Ante <unk> for a £ 200 @,@ 0000 fee from FK <unk> Podgorica . <unk> proved unable to handle the British winter but otherwise added flair to the team in fairer weather . Wednesday went on to secure promotion with a third @-@ place finish and Curran finished as the division 's top @-@ scorer . 
 As the 1980 – 81 season came around Wednesday had young talent such as Mark Smith , Kevin Taylor , Peter Shirtliff and Mel <unk> breaking into the first team . The club were comfortable in the Second Division , finishing in tenth position . 
 Wednesday pushed for promotion in the 1981 – 82 season but ended just one place and one point outside the promotion places and would have actually been promoted under the old two points for a win system that was replaced by the three points for a win system at the beginning of the campaign . 
 In building for the 1982 – 83 campaign , Charlton signed experienced defender Mick Lyons from Everton and by Christmas Wednesday were top of the table . The club had a limited squad and successful cup runs took their toll , as did injuries to McCulloch and Brian Hornsby as they drifted down to sixth place by the close of the season . They reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup , losing 2 – 1 to Brighton & Hove Albion at Highbury with key player Gary Megson out injured . Charlton announced his departure from Hillsborough in May 1983 despite pleas from the directors for him to stay . 
 In March 1984 , Malcolm Allison left Middlesbrough and Charlton agreed to manage the club until the end of the 1983 – 84 to help steer the club away from the Second Division relegation zone . He was unpaid except for expenses and only took the job as a favour to his friend Mike McCullagh , who was the club 's chairman . He kept " Boro " safely in 17th place , seven points clear of the relegation zone . 
 = = = Newcastle United = = = 
 Charlton was appointed manager of Newcastle United in June 1984 after being persuaded to take the job by Jackie Milburn . Arthur Cox had left the club after leading the " Magpies " to the First Division and key player Kevin Keegan announced his retirement . His first action was to release Terry McDermott from his contract , who refused to agree to Charlton 's offer of a new contract . He had little money to spend in preparation for the 1984 – 85 season , though he did have young talents in Chris Waddle and Peter Beardsley . He signed midfielder Gary Megson and big striker George Reilly . The " Toon " finished safely in 14th place , and a teenage Paul Gascoigne was on the verge of breaking into the first team . 
 Charlton resigned at the end of pre @-@ season training for the 1985 – 86 campaign after fans at St James ' Park started calling for his dismissal after the club failed to secure the signing of Eric Gates , who instead joined Lawrie McMenemy at Sunderland . 
 = = = Republic of Ireland = = = 
 Charlton was approached by the FAI to manage the Republic of Ireland in December 1985 . He was the first foreigner to be appointed to the role . In May 1986 , Ireland won the Iceland Triangular Tournament at <unk> , in Iceland 's capital of Reykjavík , with a 2 – 1 victory over Iceland and a 1 – 0 win over Czechoslovakia . By this time Charlton had developed his tactics , which were based on the traditional British 4 – 4 – 2 system , as opposed to the continental approach of using deep @-@ lying midfielders , as he noted that most of the Ireland international players plied their trade in England . Crucially he instructed all members of his team to pressure opposition players and in particular force ball @-@ playing defenders into mistakes . 
 Qualification for Euro 1988 meant winning a group containing Bulgaria , Luxembourg and Scotland . The campaign opened with Belgium at the Heysel Stadium , and though Ireland contained danger man Nico <unk> , they had to settle for a 2 – 2 draw after conceding twice from corner @-@ kicks ; Frank Stapleton and Liam Brady scored the goals for Ireland . They then dominated Scotland at Lansdowne Road , but failed to find the net and instead drew 0 – 0 . In the return fixture at Hampden Park Mark Lawrenson scored an early goal and another clean sheet won the Irish their first win of qualification . The campaign faltered with a 2 – 1 loss in Bulgaria , though Charlton was furious with referee Carlos Silva Valente as he felt that both of <unk> Tanev 's goals should not have counted as <unk> <unk> allegedly pushed Mick McCarthy in the build @-@ up to the first and he felt that <unk> was outside the penalty box when he was fouled by Kevin Moran – Valente instead gave a penalty . They picked up another point after a 0 – 0 draw with Belgium in Dublin . Despite not particularly impressing Ireland then picked up six points with two victories over Luxembourg . They ended the campaign with a 2 – 0 home win over Bulgaria , Paul McGrath and Kevin Moran the scorers , though Liam Brady ( an ever @-@ present in qualification ) picked up a two match suspension after lashing out late in the game after being kicked by a Bulgarian . Despite the victory the Irish had to rely on a favour from the Scots in order to qualify , who duly obliged with a 1 – 0 victory in Sofia to keep Bulgaria one point behind Ireland in the table . 
 The build up to Euro 1988 in West Germany was far from ideal , as key player Mark Lawrenson was forced to retire after injuring his Achilles tendon , Liam Brady picked up a serious knee injury and Mark Kelly was also injured . The first match of the tournament was against England at the <unk> , and Charlton reasoned that the threat posed by English wingers Chris Waddle and John Barnes could be nullified by allowing the English defence to feel comfortable on the ball without allowing them a pass ; this made the build @-@ up play slow and <unk> . His game @-@ plan worked and Ireland claimed a 1 – 0 win after Ray Houghton secured an early lead . He then compensated for a series of injuries by playing Ronnie Whelan and Kevin Sheedy in central midfield , and was rewarded with a great performance and a good point in a 1 – 1 draw with the Soviet Union at the <unk> , Whelan scoring the goal . To qualify they only needed a point against the Netherlands at the <unk> , and Charlton devised a time @-@ wasting plan with goalkeeper Packie Bonner that he was forced to abandon after referee Horst <unk> was less than impressed . Ireland lost the game 1 – 0 after Wim Kieft scored an 82nd @-@ minute goal . England and Ireland were eliminated whilst Netherlands and the Soviet Union qualified – both teams would go on to contest the final . 
 Qualification for the 1990 World Cup required Charlton to mastermind a top two finish in a group consisting of Spain , Hungary , Northern Ireland and Malta . The campaign started on hostile ground at Belfast 's Windsor Park , and he had stand @-@ in goalkeeper Gerry Peyton to thank for the point gained from a goalless draw with Northern Ireland . A series of injuries left only a skeleton squad to face Spain at the Estadio Benito <unk> , leaving a recall for defender David O 'Leary , and Ireland were well beaten 2 – 0 . They then left Budapest 's <unk> with a point from another goalless draw , though they were criticised for not taking all three points after dominating the game . The next four fixtures would be played at Lansdowne Road , and all four games ended in victory . First they beat Spain 1 – 0 after an own goal from Míchel , then they overcame Malta and Hungary with 2 – 0 wins , before beating Northern Ireland 3 – 0 . Qualification for Ireland 's first World Cup was assured at the Ta ' Qali National Stadium after John Aldridge scored both goals in another 2 – 0 victory . 
 Ireland 's group opponents in Italia ' 90 were England , Egypt and the Netherlands . Charlton felt that England 's four @-@ man midfield of Waddle , Barnes , Bryan Robson and Paul Gascoigne did not offer enough protection to the back four , and he was proved correct when Kevin Sheedy cancelled out Gary Lineker 's opener to secure a 1 – 1 draw in the group opener at the Stadio Sant 'Elia . A poor performance against a negative Egyptian side at the Stadio La Favorita meant that neither side scored a goal in a dour draw . They ended the group with a 1 – 1 draw with the Dutch , Niall Quinn cancelling out Ruud Gullit 's opener in the 71st minute , after which both sides settled for a stalemate as a draw meant that both qualified ahead of Egypt . Ireland then defeated Romania in the Second Round match at the Stadio Luigi Ferraris which went to penalties after a 0 – 0 draw , before the whole team had a meeting Pope John Paul II at the Vatican . Ireland eventually went out to the hosts , Italy , 1 – 0 in the quarter @-@ finals at the Stadio Olimpico . A lapse of concentration meant that Italy 's Salvatore Schillaci scored on 38 minutes , and Ireland failed to build up enough chances to find the equalising goal . After returning to Dublin over 500 @,@ 000 people turned out to welcome the team back . 
 Qualification for Euro 92 in Sweden left Ireland facing a group of England , Poland and Turkey . They opened in style with a 5 – 0 home win over the Turks and then drew 1 – 1 home and away with the English ; Ireland were the better team than England in both encounters and Charlton said that they " twice let them off the hook " after Houghton missed easy chances in both games . A 0 – 0 draw at home with Poland followed , and they were then leading 3 – 1 in the return fixture in Poznań but conceded two late goals to end the match at 3 – 3 . Ireland beat Turkey 3 – 1 in Istanbul despite the intimidating atmosphere of the İnönü Stadium , but were denied a place in the tournament as England scored a late equalizing goal in Poland to secure the point that would take them above Ireland in the group . 
 In order to qualify for the 1994 World Cup in the United States , Ireland had to finish first or second in a seven team group of Spain , Denmark , Northern Ireland , Lithuania , Latvia , and Albania . Lithuania , Latvia and Albania proved to be little threat to the Irish , and both home and away fixtures against these three teams earned Ireland the maximum two points . The two most difficult fixtures – Denmark and Spain away – ended in goalless draws , and John Aldridge had a goal disallowed for offside against the Spanish which even Spain manager Javier Clemente said should have stood . Ireland then beat Northern Ireland 3 – 0 at home before settling for a 1 – 1 draw with Denmark . The qualification campaign was then derailed in the opening 26 minutes of the home tie with Spain as the Spanish took a three @-@ goal lead ; the game ended 3 – 1 , with John Sheridan 's late consolation eventually proving crucial at the end of the campaign . The final game was in Belfast against Northern Ireland during a tense period of The Troubles . Jimmy Quinn put Northern Ireland into the lead on 74 minutes , but four minutes later Alan McLoughlin scored the equalising goal to allow the Republic of Ireland to secure second place in the group due to their superior goals scored tally over Denmark . When Quinn scored Northern Ireland assistant manager Jimmy Nicholl shouted " Up yours ! " to his counterpart Maurice Setters ( Charlton 's assistant ) ; in response to this Charlton approached Northern Ireland manager Billy Bingham at the final whistle and told him " Up yours too , Billy " . 
 In the build up to the World Cup Charlton gave out first caps to Gary Kelly , Phil Babb and Jason McAteer ; he had difficulty convincing McAteer to join Ireland as he first had to turn down an approach by the FA to play for the England under @-@ 21s . He scheduled difficult matches before the tournament and Ireland picked up positive results by beating both the Netherlands and Germany away from home . Ireland opened the group stage of the tournament by beating Italy 1 – 0 at the Giants Stadium , Ray Houghton scoring the winning goal on 11 minutes . They then fell to a 2 – 1 defeat to Mexico at the Florida Citrus Bowl Stadium , during which Charlton had a pitch @-@ side argument with an official who was preventing substitute John Aldridge ( who went on to score the consolation goal ) from taking the pitch minutes after his teammate Tommy Coyne had left the pitch and sat down on the bench . For his arguing , Charlton was suspended by FIFA for the final group game against Norway , and had to watch from the commentary box as Ireland qualified with a 0 – 0 draw . They faced the Netherlands in the Round of 16 ; Dennis Bergkamp put the Dutch ahead on 11 minutes after Marc Overmars took advantage of a mistake by Terry Phelan , and Wim Jonk scored the second and final goal of the game from 30 yards after Packie Bonner fluffed an otherwise routine save . For his achievements Charlton was awarded the Freedom of the City of Dublin in 1994 by Lord Mayor Tomás Mac Giolla , the first Englishman to be given the honour since 1854 . 
 Ireland failed to qualify for Euro 96 , despite a strong start to the group , when they won their opening three games , including a 4 – 0 win against Northern Ireland . The Republic 's next game was also against Northern Ireland , although the result was a 1 – 1 draw . From that point onwards the Republic stuttered badly as injuries struck down key players such as Roy Keane , Andy Townsend , John Sheridan and Steve Staunton . After beating the highly fancied Portugal , the Irish then endured an embarrassing 0 – 0 draw to Liechtenstein ( this was Liechtenstein 's only point in their ten matches ) , before losing twice to Austria , on both occasions by three goals to one . Although they defeated Latvia , Ireland needed to beat Portugal in Lisbon to qualify outright , but lost 3 – 0 . They finished second in the group , ahead of Northern Ireland on goal difference , but as the worst performing runners @-@ up they had to win a play @-@ off game at Anfield against the Netherlands ; Ireland lost 2 – 0 after a brace from Patrick Kluivert . Charlton resigned shortly after the game . 
 " In my heart of hearts , I knew I 'd wrung as much as I could out of the squad I 'd got – that some of my older players had given me all they had to give . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Charlton married Pat Kemp on 6 January 1958 , and his brother Bobby acted as his best man . They have three children : John ( born in January 1959 ) , Deborah ( born 1961 ) and Peter , who was born just after Charlton senior played in the 1966 World Cup final . During the 1960s he ran two clothes shops in Leeds , and he also later operated the souvenir shop at Elland Road . Charlton is a keen amateur fisherman and also takes part in field sports . 
 He was appointed an OBE in 1974 . In 1996 he was awarded honorary Irish citizenship . The honour amounts to full Irish citizenship ; it is the highest honour the Irish state gives and is rarely granted . In 1994 , he was made a Freeman of the city of Dublin , and was given a honorary doctorate by the University of Limerick . In 1997 , he was appointed a Deputy Lieutenant of Northumberland . Charlton was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2005 in recognition of his contribution to the English game . There is a life @-@ size statue of him at Cork Airport in Ireland , representing him sitting in his fishing gear and displaying a salmon . 
 He revealed in his 1996 autobiography that he had a strained relationship with his brother Bobby . Though the pair had different personalities , Jack felt that Bobby began to drift away from the Charlton family following his marriage to Norma , who did not get along with their mother . Bobby did not see his mother after 1992 until her death on 25 March 1996 as a result of the feud , though he and Norma did attend her funeral . Though the two brothers remained distant , Jack presented Bobby with his BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award on 14 December 2008 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = As a player = = = 
 = = = As a manager = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Player = = = 
 Leeds United 
 Football League First Division champion : 1968 – 69 ; runner @-@ up 1964 – 65 , 1965 – 66 , 1969 – 70 , 1970 – 71 , 1971 – 72 
 Football League Second Division champion : 1963 – 64 ; runner @-@ up 1955 – 56 
 FA Cup winner : 1972 ; runner @-@ up 1965 , 1970 
 Football League Cup winner : 1968 
 FA Charity Shield winner : 1969 
 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup winner : 1968 , 1971 ; runner @-@ up 1967 
 England 
 British Home Championship winner : 1964 – 65 , 1965 – 66 , 1967 – 68 , 1968 – 69 ; runner @-@ up 1966 – 67 
 FIFA World Cup winner : 1966 
 UEFA European Championship third @-@ place : 1968 
 Individual 
 FWA Footballer of the Year winner : 1967 
 English Football Hall of Fame : 2005 
 PFA Team of the Century ( 1907 @-@ 1976 ) : 2007 
 = = = Manager = = = 
 Middlesbrough 
 Football League Second Division winner : 1973 – 74 
 Anglo @-@ Scottish Cup winner : 1976 
 Sheffield Wednesday 
 Football League Third Division third @-@ place promotion : 1979 – 80 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Iceland Triangular Tournament winner : 1986 
 Individual 
 English Manager of the Year winner : 1974 
 Philips Sports Manager of the Year : 1987 , 1988 , 1989 , 1993 
 = Vénus de Quinipily = 
 The Vénus de Quinipily ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> də <unk> ] , Breton : Ar <unk> <unk> / Groah <unk> , English : The Iron Lady ) is an ancient statue of uncertain origins , located southeast of Baud , Morbihan , Brittany , in north – western France . It is approximately 2 @.@ 2 metres ( 7 @.@ 2 ft ) in height and carved from granite . The statue represents a naked woman and stands in front of a fountain on a 2 @.@ 75 m high granite pedestal . The large basin beneath the statue is also carved out of a single granite block . It is believed that the statue may be of Greek , Roman or Egyptian origin . There is similar uncertainty about its subject ; it may be a Celtic deity , the Roman Mother goddess Cybele , or an Egyptian Isis statue . 
 It was originally erected at the site of a former Roman camp in Castennec in <unk> @-@ les @-@ Eaux , a commune in the Morbihan department in Brittany . It was the centre of superstitious rites in Brittany for centuries and became an object of a pagan veneration . At the request of the Bishop of Vannes , the statue was thrown into the Blavet river twice ; first in 1661 and then again in 1670 , but recovered both times , first in 1664 and then in 1695 by Pierre de Lannion , the Lord of Blavet Quinipily . In 1701 , the statue was substantially altered and placed in its present position at Quinipily where a garden has been created to showpiece the ancient monument . 
 The statue is classified under Monument historique – a National Heritage Site of France on August 24 , 1993 . The heritage protection was made applicable from November 18 , 1943 . It is indexed in the Base Mérimée – a database of architectural heritage maintained by the French Ministry of Culture . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The origins of the Vénus de Quinipily are uncertain , but it is believed to have been sculpted around 49 BC . It was originally erected at the site of a former Roman camp in Castennec in <unk> @-@ les @-@ Eaux , a commune in the Morbihan department in Brittany in northwestern France . Various origins of the statue have been proposed , including Greek , Roman or Egyptian ; a Celtic deity , the Roman Mother goddess Cybele , or an Egyptian Isis statue . It has also been proposed that the statue did not survive its restoration in 1696 by Pierre de Lannion , the Lord of Blavet Quinipily , and that he secretly replaced it with a new one . According to the French archaeologist Monsieur de <unk> , the statue was built by Moorish soldiers in the Roman army . 
 = = = Names = = = 
 During the seventeenth century , the statue was worshiped by pregnant women and had various names in the Breton language such as Er <unk> <unk> , the " Cowardly Old Woman " , or as the " Good Woman " , Groah @-@ <unk> , la <unk> , or la <unk> . The color of the stone from which it was carved also inspired the name <unk> <unk> – The Iron Woman . The statue has also been called Groah <unk> ( The Old Guardian ) . It is said that as the statue stood in the Roman guard house , it was called as <unk> @-@ ar @-@ <unk> , the Old Woman ( or Witch ) of the Guard @-@ House . The inscriptions on the pedestal say that it is called the Venus <unk> <unk> . The inscriptions also claim that after the Romans conquered Gaul , it was dedicated to Venus Victrix . According to <unk> , however , the statue could never have been meant to represent a Venus . 
 = = = Related superstitions and rites = = = 
 The statue was an object of superstitious rites in Brittany for centuries . It was believed that sick people would be cured by touching the statue . Childless people would often pay a visit to the statue in the hope of producing offspring . It is said that during seventeenth century " foul " , " indecent and obscene " rites were also practiced at the statue , and that many couples performed " erotic " acts near the statue . The statue was also credited with being a sorcerer who would help those who approached her with dignity but would avenge herself on those who neglected to treat her with due honour . 
 The rituals performed at the statue by pregnant women involved walking round three times , reciting charms and touching one 's abdomen . Women would also carry a band which would either be touched to the statue and then tied around their waist , or half of the band would be tied to the statue while the remaining half would be kept on the woman 's body until the child was born . After the childbirth , the basin in front of the statue was used by women to bathe in . The rites performed in the honour of the statue were said to be similar to those performed by Phoenicians in the worship of their Venus . 
 = = = Demolition and restoration = = = 
 As the statue became an object of a pagan veneration , missionaries and the Bishop of Vannes Charles de Rosmadec asked Claude de Lannion , Lord of Blavet Quinipily , to destroy the statue . In 1661 , Lannion ordered the statue to be thrown into the Blavet river . Abundant rain destroyed the harvest soon after , which peasantry and devotees interpreted as an act of anger by their insulted idol . In 1664 , the statue was drawn from the river and restored to its original location . 
 In 1670 , Rosmadec approached Claude de Lannion again and requested him to break the statue into pieces . Lannion ordered this to be done . However , the workmen , for fear of the peasants and devotees , only mutilated one of her breasts and one arm and again threw the statue into the same river . Soon after this , Claude de Lannion fell from his horse and died , which devotees considered as " a judgement from heaven for his having consented to destroy the idol . " The statue remained in the river for 25 years until Bishop Rosmadec decided to root out paganism in his diocese and asked Pierre de Lannion , son of Claude de Lannion , to destroy the statue . As Pierre was an antiquarian , he pulled the statue up from the river in 1695 but did not destroy it . The events associated with the demolition and restoration became a local cause célèbre . 
 = = = Modification and ownership = = = 
 In 1696 , Pierre de Lannion transported the statue to his château at Quinipily . It is said that it took forty yoke of oxen to drag the statue and the large granite basin there . Soldiers posted along the route from Castennec to Quinipily came to blows with peasants furious at the loss of their idol . Residents of Castennec protested against the " abduction " of the statue and with the help of Duke of Rohan sued Lannion to regain the possession . However , in 1701 , the court confirmed the ownership as Lannion 's by virtue of his saving it from the river . Supposedly , Pierre damaged the statue during the restoration and secretly replaced it with a new one on a pedestal . 
 = = Design = = 
 The seven @-@ foot tall " Venus " statue represents a naked woman standing in front of a huge but dilapidated fountain on a nine foot high granite pedestal . Her arms are wrapped around her belly , and the lower part of the body consists of straight legs placed slightly apart . The breasts are damaged , and the hair is straight . The statue wears two bands as her only ornamentation . The first band is tied around head whereas the other is around the neck , with the ends hanging down in front of the body , reaching down to the thighs , and broad enough to cover the genital area . 
 The statue wears a fillet with three large letters ; either " I. I. T. " , " I. T. T. " , " J. I. T. " or " L. I. T. " engraved on it . These letters may have been engraved when Pierre de Lannion re @-@ chiseled the statue and may have originally read " <unk> " , the Greek goddess of childbirth . It is also speculated that these letters were carved later by one of the young Roman officers to amuse himself by carving his initials on the forehead . The fingers and toes of " Venus " are represented by lines and the facial expression has distinct similarities to those of Egyptian idols . 
 The large cistern beneath the statue is carved out of a single granite block , filled with water . It is believed that Pierre de Lannion was " deceived " by the nature of the worship paid to the statue , thus he placed the statue above a pedestal with Latin inscriptions , one on each side of it . It is believed that the design has oriental influences , but it may not be a Gallo @-@ Roman design . 
 The statue was classified under Monument historique – a National Heritage Site of France on August 24 , 1993 with the identification number <unk> . The heritage protection was made applicable from November 18 , 1943 . It is indexed in the Base Mérimée – a database of architectural heritage maintained by the French Ministry of Culture , under the reference <unk> . 
 = Manuel Erotikos Komnenos = 
 Manuel Erotikos Komnenos ( Greek : <unk> <unk> Κομνηνός ; 955 / 960 – ca . 1020 ) was a Byzantine military leader under Basil II , and the first fully documented ancestor of the Komnenos dynasty . His origin and parentage is obscure . He is only mentioned in the sources as leading the defence of Nicaea in 978 against the rebel Bardas Skleros , and as an imperial envoy to him 11 years later . He had three children , late in life . The eldest , Isaac , became emperor in 1057 – 1059 , and the youngest , John , was the progenitor of the Komnenian dynasty as the father of Alexios I Komnenos . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Nothing is known of Manuel 's early life . From the fact that he was militarily active in 978 , and given that he was able to have children as late as ca . 1015 , a date of birth of ca . 955 / 960 has been suggested and generally accepted by modern scholars . His parents ' identity is obscure : as Manuel 's own firstborn son was named Isaac ( <unk> ) , the Greek scholar Konstantinos Varzos considered it likely that his father had the same name , since according to Greek custom the eldest male child is named after its paternal grandfather . Nothing is known otherwise about his life and career . According to Varzos , Manuel inherited his surname of " Komnenos " from his father , while his equally obscure mother was an unnamed lady of the Erotikos family , possibly related to the 11th @-@ century rebel Theophilos Erotikos . The French scholar Jean @-@ Claude Cheynet , on the other hand , proposed that Manuel was a member of the Erotikos family , and that he was the first to have changed the surname to Komnenos . Modern scholarship commonly accepts Michael <unk> ' comment that the family originated from the village of <unk> in Thrace . Varzos also considers Manuel a brother of the protospatharios Nikephoros Komnenos , who was named governor of the Armenian region of Vaspurakan soon after its annexation in 1021 , but although possible , such a relationship cannot be proven . 
 Manuel is mentioned for the first time in 978 , when he led the defence of Nicaea against the rebel general Bardas Skleros , who had risen up against Emperor Basil II ( reigned 976 – 1025 ) . Although his great @-@ granddaughter , the princess Anna Komnene , claims in her Alexiad that he had been named strategos autokrator ( commander @-@ in @-@ chief ) of the East and sent with full powers to deal with the revolt , it is far more likely that he was merely a local commander . Manuel maintained the city 's defence with some success , even though the besiegers managed to undermine and collapse one of its towers , until the lack of food became acute . At that point Manuel was able to fool Skleros , by pretending that he had mountains of wheat and was considering joining him , into allowing him and the inhabitants to depart freely for Constantinople . Manuel re @-@ appears in 989 , when he was sent as an envoy to Skleros , who had once more risen in revolt against Basil II , to persuade him to surrender . Manuel was successful in his task , and the elderly rebel ended his revolt and gave himself up on 11 October . The titles by which he is recorded were patrikios , anthypatos , and <unk> . 
 Manuel owned lands in the region of modern Kastamonu in Paphlagonia , inherited after his death by his eldest son , and which became the stronghold of the family in the 11th century . Manuel Erotikos Komnenos died probably around 1020 . At that time , his children were still young , so he entrusted them to the care of Emperor Basil II . 
 = = Family = = 
 Manuel 's wife is virtually unknown . She was likely named Maria , as were two of her granddaughters , and probably died ca . 1015 . They had two sons and one daughter : 
 Isaac I Komnenos ( ca . 1007 – 1061 ) , married Catherine of Bulgaria , daughter of the last Bulgarian Tsar , and a distinguished general . He became emperor in 1057 at the head of a cabal of Anatolian generals , but resigned in 1059 and retired to a monastery . 
 an unnamed daughter ( born ca . 1012 ) , married Michael Dokeianos , who served as Catepan of Italy and was killed by the Pechenegs in 1050 . 
 John Komnenos ( ca . 1015 – 12 July 1067 ) , married Anna <unk> , and served during his brother 's reign as Domestic of the Schools . He fathered several children who also became senior military leaders . His third son , Alexios I Komnenos , became emperor in 1081 , founding the Komnenian dynasty . 
 = Armageddon ( 2006 ) = 
 Armageddon ( 2006 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by Activision 's Call of Duty 3 , which took place on December 17 , 2006 , at the Richmond Coliseum in Richmond , Virginia . The event starred wrestlers from the SmackDown ! brand . 
 The main event was a tag team match , in which the team of Batista and John Cena defeated the team of King Booker and Finlay . Two featured bouts were scheduled on the undercard , including The Undertaker versus Mr. Kennedy , in a match where the objective was to place an opponent in a hearse located on the entrance stage and drive them out of the arena , which Undertaker won . The other match was an Inferno match featuring wrestlers attempting to set the opponent on fire with flames surrounding the ring . Kane defeated Montel Vontavious Porter . 
 The event grossed over $ 423 @,@ 500 in ticket sales from an attendance of 8 @,@ 200 . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the WWE Tag Team Championship match a nine out of ten stars , the highest match rating . The event was released on DVD on January 16 , 2007 by Sony Music Entertainment . The DVD reached second on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart for recreational sports during the week of February 18 , 2007 , and it dropped to the tenth spot the following week . 
 = = Background = = 
 Armageddon ( 2006 ) was the seventh annual Armageddon event . Eight professional wrestling matches , were featured on the event 's card . 
 The leading staged rivalry written into the event was between Batista and King Booker . At Survivor Series , WWE 's November pay @-@ per @-@ view event , Batista defeated Booker to win the World Heavyweight Championship . On the December 1 , 2006 episode of SmackDown ! , one of WWE 's primary television programs , King Booker and Finlay both demanded a match against Batista for the World Heavyweight Championship . General Manager Theodore Long , a portrayed match maker and rules enforcer , announced that Booker and Finlay would instead form a tag team to compete against Batista and a partner of his choice at Armageddon . Later that night , Batista announced that his partner would be WWE Champion John Cena , a member of the Raw brand . The following week on an episode of SmackDown ! , Batista defeated Finlay by disqualification after Booker interfered on Finlay 's behalf . On the December 15 episode of SmackDown ! , Cena defeated Finlay after lifting Finlay up on his shoulders and slamming him to the mat , a move that Cena dubbed the FU . 
 The secondary rivalry was between The Undertaker and Mr. Kennedy . On the September 8 , 2006 episode of SmackDown ! , Kennedy announced that he was looking for a new opponent , one that he had never faced before . Long informed Kennedy that he knew a SmackDown ! superstar that had never faced Kennedy , The Undertaker . A match was made between the two for No Mercy , in which Kennedy defeated Undertaker by disqualification . At Survivor Series , Kennedy once again defeated Undertaker in a First Blood match . On the December 1 episode of SmackDown ! , Undertaker fought Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) in a match where neither wrestler won . During the match , MVP was scripted to attempt escaping from the ring , but Kennedy caught him during the process and tried to throw him back into the ring . MVP instead threw Kennedy in . Undertaker then kicked Kennedy in the face , and Kane attacked MVP at ringside . The following week as Kennedy was in the ring , the hearse , appearing to have nobody in the driver 's seat , drove into the arena ; suddenly , The Undertaker appeared from the back of the hearse , as Kennedy sprung from the ring . Later that night , Kane defeated Kennedy by disqualification after MVP interfered on Kennedy 's behalf . On the December 15 episode of SmackDown ! , The Undertaker and Kane teamed together to face Kennedy and MVP in a tag team match , which ended in neither team winning . Kennedy knocked Kane down in the aisle and jumped into the driver 's seat of the hearse that had been at ringside for the match , and threatened to run him over with it however the Undertaker appeared in the passenger side seat scaring Kennedy off . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match to air live was between Kane and MVP in an Inferno match . The only way to win an Inferno match is by throwing one 's opponent into a fire that surrounds the ring on all four sides . This match was the first time that the Inferno match had been used on pay @-@ per @-@ view in more than seven years . At the start of the match , MVP attempted to leave the ring , but was unable to as the flames surrounding the ring prevented him . Kane kicked MVP in the head and threw him into the ring corner . MVP escaped the ring and was unable to go past the fire , so he returned to the ring and was continuously knocked down by Kane . The finish of the match saw Kane grab MVP and force him backwards into the fire . MVP 's costume caught on fire as he ran to the entrance ramp . MVP fell to the floor as WWE workers put out the flames with fire extinguishers . 
 The following match featured Paul London and Brian Kendrick , William Regal and Dave Taylor , MNM ( Joey Mercury , and Johnny Nitro ) , and The Hardys ( Matt and Jeff ) in a four @-@ team ladder match for the WWE Tag Team Championship . In this match , the only way to win and capture the titles was by climbing a ladder and releasing the championship belts that were suspended above the ring . Towards the end of the match , while MNM and The Hardys were out of the ring , Regal and Taylor attempted to climb the ladder , but Kendrick managed to knock the pair off . Kendrick fought off Regal and Taylor as London climbed the ladder and captured the titles to win the match for his team and retain the championships . During the match , Mercury suffered a legitimate nose injury after being hit by a ladder . 
 I happened to be looking up , so it hit me in the throat . But Mercury was looking straight at it and it hit him square in the nose and the orbital bone . It really could have been any one of us . I was just lucky that the ladder hit him first . 
 I 'll always remember [ the match ] for what we did to Joey Mercury 's face . After the seesaw , I remember hearing him yell , " I 'm bleeding , " and it was like someone went to a sink and turned the faucet on . It was gruesome . 
 The third match was a standard wrestling match between The Boogeyman and The Miz . The Boogeyman controlled the majority of the match and eventually won by pinfall after a Falling Chokebomb . 
 The next match featured Chris Benoit versus Chavo Guerrero ( accompanied by Vickie Guerrero ) for the United States Championship . Before the bell rang to start the match , Chavo tried to attack Benoit , but as the match began , Benoit retaliated by rushing and hitting Guerrero with his forearm , a move called the clothesline . Benoit and Guerrero wrestled inconclusively until Benoit covered Chavo to try to pin him . Chavo managed to place his foot on top of the bottom rope , which forced Benoit to break the pin per official wrestling match rules . While Guerrero was lying on his stomach , Benoit held Guerrero 's face back and legs back , stretching his body , and made Chavo tapped out to retain the championship and win the match . 
 The fifth match was the encounter of Gregory Helms and Jimmy Wang Yang for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship . Helms performed a swinging neckbreaker on Yang , a move where Helms grabbed Yang 's neck under his armpit and turned around to slam him onto the mat . Yang retaliated , but Helms quickly moved back into the power position and pinned Yang to retain the championship . Helms was bleeding from the mouth as he left the ring . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The following match was a Last Ride match between The Undertaker and Mr. Kennedy , where the only way to win was by throwing one 's opponent into a hearse and driving it out of the arena . During the beginning of the match , The Undertaker tossed Kennedy into steel steps on the side of the ring and then onto the commentator 's announcing table . The Undertaker then threw Kennedy into the ring apron , which is the apron covering the area under the ring . Kennedy and The Undertaker wrestled inconclusively until The Undertaker tossed Kennedy on top of the roof of the hearse . The Undertaker then grabbed and lifted Kennedy by the throat and slammed him down onto the roof of the car . After that , The Undertaker grabbed Kennedy and gave him a Tombstone Piledriver onto the roof of the hearse . As he was still in control of the match , The Undertaker threw Kennedy into the hearse and drove it out of the arena to win the match . 
 After the Last Ride match , Jillian Hall , Layla El , Ashley Massaro , and Kristal Marshall all took part in a " Naughty or Nice " contest , a lingerie contest , where the Diva with the loudest fan reaction would win . The host of the contest was Santa Claus ( portrayed by Big Dick Johnson , otherwise Christopher <unk> ) . Johnson declared all four of the Divas as the winners and proceeded to take off his Santa costume and dance to music being played in the arena . 
 The main event was the tag team match between John Cena and Batista versus the team of King Booker and Finlay . Batista wrestled the match with his left arm taped up due to a previous injury . Both teams wrestlers inconclusively until Cena grabbed Finlay 's face and bent it back , stretching Finlay 's body , a submission move that Cena dubbed the STFU . Finlay broke the submission hold , and The Little Bastard ran into the ring . Little Bastard attempted to kick Cena , but accidentally kicked himself in his head when Cena moved out of the way . Then , Booker tried to kick Batista , but Batista moved out of the way , and Booker accidentally hit Finlay . Batista then lifted and sat Booker onto his shoulders and slammed him down onto the mat , a move he dubbed the Batista Bomb . Batista pinned Booker to earn the victory for his team . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On the December 22 , 2006 episode of SmackDown ! , King Booker and Finlay demanded a rematch against Batista and John Cena . General Manager Theodore Long informed the pair that they would instead be facing Kane and The Undertaker later that night in a match , which Kane and The Undertaker won . At the Royal Rumble , the Royal Rumble match was held , where the winner is the final person left in the ring after the other twenty nine wrestlers are eliminated by being thrown over the top ring rope . The Undertaker won the Royal Rumble match to earn a title shot at WrestleMania 23 . At WrestleMania , he defeated Batista to win the World Heavyweight Championship and maintain his WrestleMania undefeated streak . 
 Chris Benoit continued to feud with Chavo Guerrero over the WWE United States Championship . On the December 22 , 2006 episode of SmackDown ! , Benoit defeated Guerrero in a rematch for the title , with Vickie Guerrero accompanying Chavo to ringside . Benoit won the match by disqualification when Vickie hit Benoit in the head with the championship belt . On the January 12 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! , Mr. Kennedy defeated Chris Benoit in a standard match , with help from Chavo Guerrero . The following week , Benoit defeated Chavo yet again with the championship on the line . 
 The feuds between Kane and Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) , and The Undertaker and Mr. Kennedy did not continue after the event . On the January 5 , 2007 , episode of SmackDown ! , Kennedy set the time to beat in the " Beat the Clock " sprint , a tournament based on the time wrestlers win matches , to become the new number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship . On the January 12 episode of SmackDown ! , Kennedy won the " Beat the Clock " sprint by preventing The Undertaker from winning his match and from beating Kennedy 's time . At the Royal Rumble , Batista defeated Kennedy to retain the title . The feuds between Gregory Helms and Jimmy Wang Yang , and The Boogeyman and The Miz also did not continue , as Helms was put into a rivalry with The Boogeyman . Yang was put into a temporary rivalry with Tatanka . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Richmond Coliseum has a maximum capacity of 13 @,@ 000 , but that was reduced for the 2006 Armageddon . The event grossed over $ 423 @,@ 500 in ticket sales from an attendance of 8 @,@ 200 . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the WWE Tag Team Championship match a nine out of ten stars , the highest match rating . The United States Championship , Cruiserweight Championship , and Last Ride matches all received seven out of ten stars . The main event match received a five and a half stars out of ten rating . 
 The event was released on DVD on January 16 , 2007 , by Sony Music Entertainment . The DVD reached second on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart for recreational sports during the week of February 18 , 2007 , and it dropped to the tenth spot the following week . It remained on the chart 's " top ten " for two consecutive weeks until the week of March 4 , 2007 , when it ranked 17th . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Pest of the West = 
 " Pest of the West " is the 16th episode of the fifth season and the 96th overall episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . In this episode , SpongeBob finds that he is a distant relative of SpongeBuck SquarePants , a sheriff from Bikini Bottom 's past who helped save the citizens from the quickest whip draw in town , the evil Dead Eye Plankton . It was written by Luke Brookshier , Tom King , Steven Banks and Richard Pursel , with Andrew Overtoom and Tom Yasumi serving as animation directors . Brookshier and King also functioned as storyboard directors . 
 Pest of the West originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on April 11 , 2008 , and became available on DVD four days later . It included the song " Idiot Friends , " written by Tom Kenny and Andy Paley , which was later released on the album called SpongeBob 's Greatest Hits in 2009 . Upon release , the episode garnered a total of 6 @.@ 1 million viewers , and was met with positive reviews from media critics . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 At the Krusty Krab , SpongeBob discovers that his friend Patrick Star had a famous relative named Patrick Revere , ( A parody of Paul Revere ) , who warned Bikini Bottom of vicious man @-@ eating mollusks during the 17th century . Later , <unk> , Spongebob 's boss , reveals that he also had a famous <unk> great @-@ great <unk> Krabs , who invented " The Spendthrift Bill Fold System , " a booby trap that baits its victims with a dollar bill . Disappointed , he walks into the park where he observes a statue covered in poop and runs into Sandy , who reveals that her great aunt named Rosie Cheeks was the first squirrel to discover oil in Texas . Feeling sorry for SpongeBob , Sandy takes him to a library . SpongeBob learns that he is the great @-@ great @-@ great grandson of a Western hero called SpongeBuck SquarePants . Sandy begins to tell SpongeBob the story of SpongeBuck . 
 In the story , SpongeBuck SquarePants takes a train to a town named Dead Eye Gulch . He goes to The Dead Eye Funeral and Ice Cream Parlor , and later goes to a western saloon called the Krusty <unk> . There he meets William Krabs , ( Mr. Krabs ' ancestor ) , Hopalong Tentacles , ( Squidward 's ancestor , a parody of Hopalong Cassidy ) , and <unk> Puff , ( Mrs. Puff 's ancestor ) . Later , Pecos Patrick Star , ( Patrick 's ancestor , a parody of Pecos Bill ) arrives and warns everybody that the town 's villain , Dead Eye Plankton , would arrive and sing a song called " Dead Eye . " Dead Eye Plankton then arrives , and challenges SpongeBuck to a duel at high noon . SpongeBuck gets kicked away to a desert and there he meets Pecos Patrick Star . Pecos Patrick tells SpongeBuck that he must smack Dead Eye Plankton several times to defeat him . When they get back into town , SpongeBuck meets Dead Eye Plankton and the two proceed to have a western duel . SpongeBuck then accidentally steps on Dead Eye , defeating him . The next scene shows William Krabs profiting by having the people of Dead Eye Gulch step on Dead Eye Plankton in exchange for one dollar . Eventually , the people build a golden statue of SpongeBuck to show their gratitude . SpongeBuck says that if he ever has a great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ great grandson , he wanted him to say he was proud of his grandfather . 
 After hearing the story the two friends go back to the park and SpongeBob cleans the poop @-@ covered statue , which is actually a statue of SpongeBuck . The Episode concludes with Spongebob saying that someday people will know the name SpongeBob SquarePants . In the epilogue , SpongeBuck and Pecos Patrick sing " Idiot Friends . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Pest of the West " was a special episode written by Luke Brookshier , Tom King , Steven Banks and Richard Pursel , with Andrew Overtoom and Tom Yasumi serving as animation directors . Brookshier and King also functioned as storyboard directors . Brown Johnson , president of animation for Nickelodeon and MTVN Kids and Family Group , said " SpongeBob consistently finds new ways to delight our audience [ ... ] , and this special is just another example of how the creative team can put SpongeBob in any setting and deliver funny , unforgettable classic moments . " 
 To promote the episode , Nickelodeon released short @-@ form videos of the special including a two @-@ minute preview clip , song clips and an instant replay of the special following its premiere on TurboNick , the network 's broadband video service on Nick.com. Following its premiere , " Pest of the West " was streamed on video on demand and became available for purchase through downloads on various Nickelodeon partner video distribution platforms . Nickelodeon also launched an online page for the episode located on " <unk> / pest " , where it featured a new game of the week , and a " name generator " . 
 " Pest of the West " is the first episode in the series that the crew used Wacom Cintiqs for the drawings , instead of pencils . Series background designer Kenny Pittenger said that " the only real difference between the way we draw now and the way we drew then is that we abandoned pencil and paper during the fifth season . " The crew began the shift while they were working on the episode . Pittenger said that " it was while we were working on ' Pest of the West ' , one of the half @-@ hour specials , that we made the switch … did you notice ? " The shift to Wacom Cintiqs let the designers and animators draw on computer screen and make immediate changes or undo mistakes . Pittenger said " Many neo @-@ Luddites — er … I mean , many of my cohorts — don 't like working on them , but I find them useful . There 's no substitute for the immediacy of drawing on a piece of paper , of course , but digital nautical nonsense is still pretty fun . " 
 The song featured in the episode 's epilogue , " Idiot Friends " , was written by Tom Kenny , SpongeBob 's voice actor , and Andy Paley . In 2009 , the song was released on the album called SpongeBob 's Greatest Hits , alongside 16 other tracks . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Pest of the West " features cultural references from various Western films . Aspects of the musical cues used in the high noon duel between SpongeBuck and Dead Eye Plankton was from Sergio Leone 's 1968 Spaghetti Western film Once Upon a Time in the West , complete with Ennio Morricone 's harmonica riff used for the Charles Bronson character . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Pest of the West " first aired with a TV @-@ Y7 parental rating . The premiere marked the fourth Nickelodeon telecast in 2008 to move to the top of basic cable among total viewers , as well as handily ranking as number @-@ one on broadcast and cable television among kids 2 @-@ 11 , 6 @-@ 11 and teens 9 @-@ 14 . A total of 6 @.@ 1 million viewers tuned into the half @-@ hour " Pest of the West " special . 
 The episode received positive reviews from media critics . Paul Mavis of the DVD Talk said the episode is " a real treat for fans of westerns and spaghetti westerns " because " the writers play off time @-@ honored genre clichés so well . " Mavis lauded Plankton 's appearance in the episode , saying " Plankton reaches insane levels of hilarity here , brandishing a whip like Lash LaRue and cracking it at the ' <unk> ' that get in his way . " He also praised Plankton 's voice actor , Mr. Lawrence , on his role , writing " It 's a terrific vocal performance by [ Mr. ] Doug Lawrence ( made even more funny during the town 's ritualized squashing of villain Dead @-@ Eye , as he screams grotesquely off @-@ camera ) . " 
 Lesley Aeschliman of Yahoo ! Voices praised the " going back in time " element of the episode , comparing it to " Dunces and Dragons " . Russ <unk> of Blogcritics was positive towards the DVD , saying " You won 't be disappointed . " 
 Roy Hrab of the DVD Verdict was negative towards the DVD , saying " adults will be disappointed further , but , more importantly , I think kids ( except for the very young ) will be less then [ sic ] impressed . Without question , the energy and imagination level of the show has dropped precipitously . " He criticized the featured song , " Idiot Friends " , saying it was " extremely idiotic ( and not in a funny way ) . " Mike McGuire of Napster , on the song " Idiot Friends " , said " [ It ] illustrate [ s ] SpongeBob 's dedication to total absurdity , irreverence and harmlessly off @-@ color gags . " 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 On April 15 , 2008 , Nickelodeon and Paramount Home Entertainment released the episode on the DVD of the same name . The DVD featured six other episodes , including " The Krusty Plate " , " Pat No Pay " , " The Inmates of Summer " , " To Save a Squirrel " , " 20 @,@ 000 Patties Under the Sea " and " The Battle of Bikini Bottom . " Bonus features include a " Pest of the West " original animatic and four " Pest of the West " shorts . It also became available in the SpongeBob SquarePants : Season 5 , Vol . 2 DVD on November 18 , 2008 . On September 22 , 2009 , " Pest of the West " was released in the SpongeBob SquarePants : The First 100 Episodes DVD , alongside all the episodes of seasons one through five . 
 In 2013 , Nickelodeon released a tie @-@ in book based on the episode called Pest of the West . The book was illustrated by Caleb Meurer , published by Random House , and was released on January 8 . 
 = Ormulum = 
 The Ormulum or <unk> is a twelfth @-@ century work of biblical exegesis , written by a monk named Orm ( or <unk> ) and consisting of just under 19 @,@ 000 lines of early Middle English verse . Because of the unique phonetic orthography adopted by its author , the work preserves many details of English pronunciation existing at a time when the language was in flux after the Norman conquest of England . Consequently , it is invaluable to philologists in tracing the development of the language . 
 After a preface and dedication , the work consists of homilies <unk> the biblical texts set for the mass throughout the liturgical year ; it was intended to be consulted as the texts changed , and is agreed to be tedious and repetitive when read straight through . Only about a fifth of the promised material is in the single manuscript of the work to survive , which is in the Bodleian Library in Oxford . 
 Orm was concerned with priests ' ability to speak the vernacular , and developed an idiosyncratic spelling system to guide his readers in the pronunciation of the vowels . He used a strict poetic metre to ensure that readers know which syllables are to be stressed . Modern scholars use these two features to reconstruct Middle English as Orm spoke it ( Burchfield 1987 , p . 280 ) . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Unusually for work of the period , the Ormulum is neither anonymous nor untitled . The author names himself at the end of the dedication : 
 At the start of the preface , the author identifies himself again , using a different spelling of his name , and gives the work a title : 
 The name " Orm " derives from Old Norse , meaning worm , serpent or dragon . With the suffix of " <unk> " for " man " ( hence " <unk> " ) , it was a common name throughout the Danelaw area of England . The meter probably dictated the choice between each of the two forms of the name . The title of the poem , " Ormulum " , is modeled after the Latin word speculum ( " mirror " ) ( Matthew 2004 , p . 936 ) , so popular in the title of medieval Latin non @-@ fiction works that the term speculum literature is used for the genre . 
 The Danish name is not unexpected ; the language of the Ormulum , an East Midlands dialect , is stringently of the Danelaw ( Bennett and Smithers 1982 , pp. 174 – 75 ) . It includes numerous Old Norse phrases ( particularly doublets , where an English and Old Norse term are co @-@ joined ) , but there are very few Old French influences on Orm 's language ( Bennett 1986 , p . 33 ) . Another — likely previous — East Midlands work , the Peterborough Chronicle , shows a great deal of French influence . The linguistic contrast between it and the work of Orm demonstrates both the sluggishness of the Norman influence in the formerly Danish areas of England and the assimilation of Old Norse features into early Middle English ( Bennett 1986 , pp. 259 – 63 ) . 
 According to the work 's dedication , Orm wrote it at the behest of Brother Walter , who was his brother both <unk> þe <unk> kinde ( biologically ) and as a fellow canon of an Augustinian order ( Matthew 2004 , p . 936 ) . With this information , and the evidence of the dialect of the text , it is possible to propose a place of origin with reasonable certainty . While some scholars , among them Henry Bradley , have regarded the likely origin as <unk> Priory in north Lincolnshire ( Bennett and Smithers 1982 , pp. 174 – 75 ) , as of the mid @-@ 1990s it became widely accepted that Orm wrote in the Bourne Abbey in Bourne , Lincolnshire ( Treharne 2000 , p . 273 ) . Two additional pieces of evidence support this conjecture : firstly , Arrouaisian canons established the abbey in 1138 , and secondly , the work includes dedicatory prayers to Peter and Paul , the patrons of Bourne Abbey ( Parkes 1983 , pp. 115 – 27 ) . The Arrouaisian rule was largely that of Augustine , so that its houses often are loosely referred to as Augustinian ( Jack , George , in Matthew and Harrison 2004 , pp. 936 – 37 ; Parkes 1983 , pp. 115 – 27 ) . 
 Scholars cannot pinpoint the exact date of composition . Orm wrote his book over a period of decades and the manuscript shows signs of multiple corrections through time ( Burchfield 1987 , p . 280 ) . Since it is apparently an autograph , with two of the three hands in the text generally believed by scholars to be Orm 's own , the date of the manuscript and the date of composition would have been the same . On the evidence of the third hand ( that of a collaborator who entered the <unk> at the head of each homily ) it is thought that the manuscript was finished circa 1180 , but Orm may have begun the work as early as 1150 ( Parkes 1983 , pp. 115 – 27 ) . The text has few topical references to specific events that could be used to identify the period of composition more precisely . 
 = = Manuscript = = 
 Only one copy of the Ormulum exists , as Bodleian Library MS Junius 1 ( Burchfield 1987 , p . 280 ) . In its current state , the manuscript is incomplete : the book 's table of contents claims that there were 242 homilies , but only 32 remain ( Matthew 2004 , p . 936 ) . It seems likely that the work was never finished on the scale planned when the table of contents was written , but much of the discrepancy was probably caused by the loss of gatherings from the manuscript . There is no doubt that such losses have occurred even in modern times , as the Dutch antiquarian Jan van Vliet , one of its seventeenth @-@ century owners , copied out passages that are not in the present text ( Jack , George , in Matthew and Harrison 2004 , pp. 936 – 37 ) . The amount of redaction in the text , plus the loss of possible gatherings , led J. A. W. Bennett to comment that " only about one fifth survives , and that in the ugliest of manuscripts " ( Bennett 1986 , p . 30 ) . 
 The parchment used in the manuscript is of the lowest quality , and the text is written <unk> , with an eye to economical use of space ; it is laid out in continuous lines like prose , with words and lines close together , and with various additions and corrections , new exegesis , and allegorical readings , crammed into the corners of the margins ( as can be seen in the reproduction above ) . Robert Burchfield argues that these indications " suggest that it was a ' workshop ' draft which the author intended to have <unk> by a professional scribe " ( Burchfield 1987 , p . 280 ) . 
 It seems curious that a text so obviously written with the expectation that it would be widely copied should exist in only one manuscript and that , apparently , a draft . Treharne has taken this as suggesting that it is not only modern readers who have found the work tedious ( Treharne 2000 , p . 273 ) . Orm , however , says in the preface that he wishes Walter to remove any wording that he finds clumsy or incorrect ( quoted in Bennett and Smithers 1982 , pp. 175 – 76 ) . 
 The provenance of the manuscript before the seventeenth century is unclear . From a signature on the flyleaf we know that it was in van Vliet 's collection in 1659 . It was auctioned in 1666 , after his death , and probably was purchased by Franciscus Junius , from whose library it came to the Bodleian as part of the Junius donation ( Holt 1878 , pp. liv – <unk> ) . 
 = = Contents and style = = 
 The Ormulum consists of 18 @,@ 956 lines of metrical verse , explaining Christian teaching on each of the texts used in the mass throughout the church calendar ( Treharne 2000 , p . 273 ) . As such , it is the first new homily cycle in English since the works of Ælfric of Eynsham ( c . 990 ) . The motivation was to provide an accessible English text for the benefit of the less educated , which might include some clergy who found it difficult to understand the Latin of the Vulgate , and the parishioners who in most cases would not understand spoken Latin at all ( Treharne 2000 , p . 273 ) . 
 Each homily begins with a paraphrase of a Gospel reading ( important when the laity did not understand Latin ) , followed by exegesis ( Bennett and Smithers 1982 , pp. 174 – 75 ) . The theological content is derivative ; Orm closely follows Bede 's exegesis of Luke , the <unk> in <unk> , and the Glossa Ordinaria of the Bible . Thus , he reads each verse primarily allegorically rather than literally ( Jack , George , in Matthew and Harrison 2004 , pp. 936 – 37 ) . Rather than identify individual sources , Orm refers frequently to " ðe boc " and to the " holy book " ( Bennett 1986 , p . 31 ) . Bennett has speculated that the Acts of the Apostles , Glossa Ordinaria , and Bede were bound together in a large Vulgate Bible in the abbey so that Orm truly was getting all of his material from a source that was , to him , a single book . ( Bennett 1986 , p . 31 ) . 
 Although the sermons have been deemed " of little literary or theological value " ( Burchfield 1987 , p . 280 ) and though Orm has been said to possess " only one rhetorical device " , that of repetition ( Bennett 1986 , p . 32 ) , the Ormulum never was intended as a book in the modern sense , but rather as a companion to the liturgy . Priests would read , and congregations hear , only a day 's entry at a time . The tedium that many experience when attempting to read the Ormulum today would not exist for persons hearing only a single homily each day . Furthermore , although Orm 's poetry is , perhaps , <unk> , the homilies were meant for easy recitation or chanting , not for aesthetic appreciation ; everything from the overly strict meter to the orthography might function only to aid oratory ( Bennett and Smithers 1982 , pp. 174 – 75 ) . 
 Although earlier metrical homilies , such as those of Ælfric and Wulfstan , were based on the rules of Old English poetry , they took sufficient liberties with meter to be readable as prose . Orm does not follow their example . Rather , he adopts a " jog @-@ trot <unk> " for his rhythm , based on the Latin iambic <unk> , and writes continuously , neither dividing his work into stanzas nor rhyming his lines , again following Latin poetry ( Bennett 1986 , p . 31 ) . The work is unusual in that no critic ever has stepped forward to defend it on literary grounds . Indeed , Orm was humble about his oeuvre : he admits in the preface that he frequently has padded the lines to fill out the meter , " to help those who read it " , and urges his brother Walter to edit the poetry to make it more meet ( Treharne 2000 , pp. 274 – 75 ) . 
 A brief sample may help to illustrate the style of the work . This passage explains the background to the Nativity : 
 = = Orthography = = 
 Rather than conspicuous literary merit , the chief scholarly value of the Ormulum derives from Orm 's idiosyncratic orthographical system ( Treharne 2000 , p . 273 ) . He states that since he dislikes the way that people are mispronouncing English , he will spell words exactly as they are pronounced , and describes a system whereby vowel length and value are indicated unambiguously ( Bennett 1986 , pp. 31 – 32 ) . 
 Orm 's chief innovation was to employ doubled consonants to show that the preceding vowel is short and single consonants when the vowel is long ( Treharne 2000 , p . 273 ) . For syllables that ended in vowels , he used accent marks to indicate length . In addition to this , he used two distinct letter forms for g , using the old yogh for [ d ͡ ʒ ] and [ j ] , and the new g for [ ɡ ] ( Jack , George , in Matthew and Harrison 2004 , pp. 936 – 37 ) . His devotion to precise spelling was meticulous ; for example , having originally used eo and e inconsistently for words such as " <unk> " and " <unk> , " which had been spelled with eo in Old English , at line 13 @,@ 000 he changed his mind and went back to change all eo spellings , replacing them solely with e alone ( ben and knew ) , to reflect the pronunciation ( Matthew 2004 , p . 936 ; Jack , George , in Matthew and Harrison 2004 , pp. 936 – 37 ) . 
 The combination of this system with the rigid meter , and the stress patterns this implies , provides enough information to reconstruct his pronunciation with some precision ; making the reasonable assumption that Orm 's pronunciation was in no way unusual , this permits scholars of history of English to develop an exceptionally precise snapshot of exactly how Middle English was pronounced in the Midlands in the second half of the twelfth century ( Matthew 2004 , p . 936 ) . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Orm 's book has a number of innovations that make it valuable . As Bennett points out , Orm 's adaptation of a classical meter with fixed stress patterns anticipates future English poets , who would do much the same when encountering foreign language <unk> ( Bennett 1986 , p . 31 ) . The Ormulum is also the only specimen of the homiletic tradition in England between Ælfric and the fourteenth century , as well as being the last example of the Old English verse homily . It also demonstrates what would become Received Standard English two centuries before Geoffrey Chaucer ( Burchfield 1987 , p . 280 ) . Further , Orm was concerned with the laity . He sought to make the Gospel comprehensible to the congregation , and he did this perhaps forty years before the Fourth Council of the Lateran of 1215 " spurred the clergy as a whole into action " ( Bennett 1986 , p . 33 ) . At the same time , Orm 's idiosyncrasies and attempted orthographic reform make his work vital for understanding Middle English . The Ormulum is , with the <unk> Wisse and the <unk> of <unk> , one of the three crucial texts that have enabled philologists to document the transformation of Old English into Middle English ( Burchfield 1987 , p . 280 ) . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 A. ^ Quotations are from Holt ( 1878 ) . The dedication and preface are both numbered separately from the main body of the poem . 
 = Iftah Ya Simsim = 
 Iftah Ya Simsim ( Arabic : <unk> يا سمسم ; meaning " Open Sesame " ) is the first international co @-@ production of the American children 's television series Sesame Street created in the Arab world . It premiered in Kuwait in 1979 , was broadcast in 22 Arabic @-@ speaking countries and ran until 1990 , when the Gulf War ended production . The program continued to be well @-@ known decades after it went off the air . In 2010 , talks between Arab organizations and governments planned to revive the show . In 1978 , educators , mass media officers , and social planners agreed to adopt Sesame Street as a feasible and economical solution for the low attendance in preschools and illiteracy that plagued the region . They approached the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) , the producers of the American show , and purchased the rights to create an Arab version for US $ 2 @.@ 5 million . 
 A few months after its premiere , Iftah Ya Simsim became one of the most popular and successful programs for children in many Arab states . Critics called it " one of the most successful pan @-@ Arab collaborations of educators , creators , writers and artists from the Middle East " . The show inspired many studies , which demonstrated that children benefited from watching it . It has been said that when Iraqi invaders stormed the set during the Gulf War in 1990 , they took away not just videos of the show but some of the Muppet costumes as " prisoners of war " , some of which have never been returned . 
 In 2010 , efforts began to revive the show for a new generation of young viewers in the Arab world . In late 2013 , fifteen writers and producers from Bidaya Media attended training about its educational methodology and production techniques from the staff of the American show in New York . Iftah Ya Simsim was in pre @-@ production in March 2014 , and the first phase of auditions took place in April 2014 . The new series debuted on September 1 , 2015 . 
 = = Background = = 
