 A few months after the 1969 debut of Sesame Street on PBS in the US , producers from several countries all around the world approached the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW , later the Sesame Workshop , or " the Workshop " ) , the organization responsible for the show 's production , to create and produce versions of Sesame Street in their countries . Co @-@ creator Joan Ganz Cooney was approached by German public television officials about a year after the US version debuted . Many years later , Cooney recalled , " To be frank , I was really surprised , because we thought we were creating the quintessential American show . We thought the Muppets were quintessentially American , and it turns out they 're the most international characters ever created " . She hired former CBS executive Mike Dann , who left commercial television to become her assistant , as a CTW vice @-@ president . One of Dann 's tasks was to field offers to produce versions of Sesame Street in other countries . By summer 1970 , he had made the first international agreements for what the CTW came to call " co @-@ productions " . 
 As of 2006 , there were 20 active co @-@ productions . In 2001 , CTW vice @-@ president Charlotte Cole estimated that there were over 120 million viewers of all international versions of Sesame Street , and by the show 's 40th anniversary in 2009 , they were seen in more than 140 countries . Doreen Carvajal of The New York Times reported that income from the co @-@ productions accounted for US $ 96 million in 1994 . Cole stated , " Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) can be regarded as the single largest informal educator of young children in the world " . Studies conducted on the effects of several co @-@ productions found that viewers of these shows gain basic skills from watching them . 
 Kuwait 's 1980 census , conducted shortly after the original show 's premiere , showed that 48 % of its citizens were " either totally illiterate or ... barely [ able to ] read or write " . Several studies in Kuwait showed that parents ' illiteracy adversely affected their children 's educational and social development . Half of Kuwaitis who lived in the rural areas of the country were illiterate . Literacy rates for women and girls were worse : UNESCO reported in 2005 that they " account for two thirds of the region 's illiterates " . In 2000 , before the revived show aired , the Arab region had some of the world 's lowest adult literacy rates , at a little over 62 % , which was well below the world average of 84 % and in developing countries ( almost 76 @.@ 5 % ) . The Kuwaiti 1980 census also showed that even though Kindergarten was free for its citizens , 30 % of children aged 3 to 5 attended ; the number was much lower for the 12 million preschoolers in the Arab world , at about 2 % . Girls attended school less commonly than boys in Arab countries . 
 In 1976 , the Arab fund for Social and Economic Development held a series of workshops and seminars , attended by educators , mass media officers , and social planners , about preschool education in the region . The participants agreed to adopt Sesame Street as a feasible and economical solution for the low attendance in preschools and illiteracy and , with funding from the Arab Gulf States Joint Program Production Institution , movement was made to create a co @-@ production for the children of Kuwait and for the Arab world . This program , called Iftah Ya Simsim ( " Open Sesame " ) premiered in Kuwait in 1979 and ran until 1990 , when the Gulf War stopped production . It was broadcast in 22 Arab countries , and continued to be well @-@ known decades after it went off the air . In June 2010 , the Sesame Workshop and the Arab Bureau of Education for the Gulf States ( ABEGS ) , a regional Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) organization dedicated to education , research , and development , agreed to bring back the show . 
 = = Original production = = 
 Iftah Ya Simsim was the first children 's educational TV program of its kind in the Arab world and the first Sesame Street co @-@ production in the region . It was the first co @-@ production to use Modern Standard Arabic ( MSA ) . Its development was similar to that of the American version of Sesame Street in the late 1960s . The GCC considered creating a co @-@ production for many years , so consultations were held among its member countries regarding how to do so . Many of the early co @-@ productions were simple , dubbed versions with local language voice @-@ overs and instructional cutaways , but the GCC wanted to create their own original version . 
 They established the Joint Program Production Institute ( JPPI ) to work with the CTW to create a Sesame Street co @-@ production in addition to creating several children 's TV shows . The JPPI formed a team , which visited the CTW in New York to negotiate the production of 130 30 @-@ minute programs , purchasing the rights to create an Arab version for US $ 2 @.@ 5 million , and bringing in experts from throughout the Arab world " to introduce an all encompassing Arabic curriculum that would teach and cultivate Arab values and culture " . 
 According to researcher Ibrahim Al @-@ Khulaifi , there were three stages in the production of the show . The first stage was pre @-@ production research , which identified basic education needs for children under the age of six . The second stage involved the creation of a pilot reel to test children on the show 's effects and for review by educators , sociologists , psychologists , and other experts , who were invited to a seminar . Finally , the series was filmed and aired . Research began in August 1977 ; the team was led by an educator and included a linguist and a psychologist , all of whom were on the faculty of Kuwait University . The show was tested on different socioeconomic groups of children , between the ages of three and six , in kindergartens and preschools in four representative cities from Arab countries . The team proposed curriculum goals based upon the research and , during a seminar , Arab and CTW educators agreed on ten final goals . 
 Iftah Ya Simsim emphasized scientific thinking and the effects of technology on society . It sought to provide children with experiences that enriched their knowledge about their environment and improved their reasoning , through teaching them mathematical and geometric concepts . The show introduced its viewers to Arab history by citing important events , such as showing castles that were the center of historic battles . Geography was highlighted , especially the location of countries and their cities and capitals , which had the secondary effect of helping children increase their feelings of belonging and feeling proud of their Arab heritage . Children 's social awareness , especially their comprehension of social roles and their functions , was also emphasized . 
 Unlike the American show , Iftah Ya Simsim covered the topic of spirituality because of the importance of religion in Arab culture , so the producers ' goals included teaching children about Islamic principles , positive social behavior , personal manners , and the importance of traits like honesty , respect for parents , loyalty , and social interaction . According to researchers Misbah Al @-@ Khayr and Hashim Al @-@ Samira 'i , the program reinforced " the values and ethics that are derived from the teaching of orthodox Islam ... to help children develop a sound moral vision on the basis of which they will build their family relationships , and which will reinforce the values of cooperation , love , and justice " . 
 The producers wanted to present the characteristics of the Arabic language and its alphabet . Because pre @-@ production research showed that , although many dialects are spoken in the region , 90 % of Arab children were able to understand Modern Standard Arabic ( MSA ) , it was chosen as the show 's language . Linguist Kees Versteegh stated that the language used in Iftah Ya Simsim was " based on an explicit didactic and linguistic concept " . The show 's developers decided to use specific aspects of the language . Despite the absence of case endings in the dialects spoken by many of its users , the producers used them and other indispensable features of MSA . They also spelled out what features should be used sparingly , like passive verb forms , and what features they wanted to completely avoid , such as some prepositions . According to Versteegh , " These principles have been followed rather closely " . Children who appeared on the show made few grammatical errors in MSA , and although colloquialisms were used rarely , there was an informal quality in their conversations and speech patterns . Versteegh postulated that it was due to the use of intonation patterns and interjections , instead of the use of grammatical and lexical items from the vernacular use of the language . He also said that Iftah Ya Simsim proved that it was " possible to use an informal register of Modern Standard Arabic " . Versteegh reported that although the show was criticized in some Arab countries , Egypt in particular , for containing too many colloquialisms , he thought the criticism was biased and that " the selection of lexical items in any pan @-@ Arabic programme will probably never satisfy everybody " . 
 New Muppets were created , inspired by cultural traditions in the Arab world , from the shadow puppets of Syria to the puppets of Egypt , some of the oldest puppets in the world . Characters from the American show , like the Cookie Monster , Bert and Ernie , Grover , and Kermit , were transposed into Arabic versions : <unk> , Bader and Anees , <unk> , and Kamil . The show 's version of the Count kept his distinctive laugh and accent when speaking MSA . 
 New characters were created , including a camel named Nu 'man ( <unk> ) drawn from Arabic history and tradition , the green and yellow parrot <unk> ( <unk> ) , a lavender @-@ colored monster with a long nose named <unk> , and a large purple ribbon @-@ wearing cat called Abla . 
 The show focused on Arab heritage , like the wedding rituals of countries in the region , and included Arab poems and songs . Iftah Ya Simsim premiered in Kuwait in September 1979 , and was broadcast in all Arabic @-@ speaking countries excluding Egypt . The show 's opening consisted of a catchy tune that became beloved of its young viewers . As the song played , the opening footage showed children across the Arab world running past familiar landmarks like the Pyramids and playing in playgrounds and ancient alleyways before running into a white fort that had its gates open wide . The show 's set consisted of an intricately traditional Arabian neighborhood called <unk> <unk> ( 20th Street ) . 
 Iftah Ya Simsim ran until 1990 , when the Gulf War brought it to an end . According to <unk> Ghazal of The National , " Such was its popularity that it is said the Iraq invaders stormed the set ... taking away not just videos of the show but some of the Muppet costumes as prisoners of war . It is said that the Nu 'man costume , as well as Cookie Monster were never found or returned to Kuwait " . 
 = = = Legacy and influence = = = 
 According to researcher Ibrahim Al @-@ Khulaifi , " In a few months , Iftah Ya Simsim became one of the most popular and successful programs for children in many Arab states " . Critics called it " one of the most successful pan @-@ Arab collaborations of educators , creators , writers and artists from the Middle East " . The show continued to trigger nostalgia in its fans , some of whom watched its reruns well into the 1990s . <unk> Ghazal of The National asserts that other co @-@ productions made in the region could not compare to Iftah Ya Simsim , which used actors and children from the region , known as <unk> , in their roles . Ghazal also stated , " No Arabic children 's television show was as popular and influential in the Middle East in the 1980s as Iftah Ya Sim Sim ... That 's because it offered an alternative way of learning that hardly existed in the Arab world at the time , just as Sesame Street had previously done in the West " . 
 Iftah Ya Simsim inspired " a flood of studies " , from scientific research to doctoral or masters theses submitted to Arab , European , and American universities . No studies were conducted during the show 's first five years , largely due to lack of government cooperation and unsuccessful attempts marred by subjects dropping out of the studies . In 1981 , however , the JPPI invited children from Arab countries to Kuwait to access how they assimilated the program . Their attitudes about the show were assessed by education , social , and media specialists , who found that most viewers had benefited from watching it . Parents reported that their children 's language use and ability improved , and the JPPI received many letters of appreciation and was commended for their efforts in producing the show . In 1984 , in one of the first studies conducted researching the show 's effects on its young viewers , Ibrahim Al @-@ Khulaifi compared the relationship between the viewing behavior by the Kuwaiti preschooler of Iftah Ya Simsim and certain developmental and environmental variables . He found that variables such as socioeconomic status , parental education ( especially that of the mother ) , sex , age , year in school , birth order , and family attitudes about the show influenced the frequency of viewing . 
 Misbah Al @-@ Khayr and Hashim Al @-@ Samira 'i , in an article from the 1995 book Children in the Muslim Middle East , reported on a study that sought to evaluate the influence of Iftah Ya Simsim on its Baghdad viewers ' knowledge about language , general information , mathematics , science , and moral principles . The study found that 85 % of all children residing in Baghdad had watched it and that they interacted with and were attached to many of its characters , who exposed viewers to the accents of the region . The most popular segments were those that contained cartoons , songs , and puppets . The show 's viewers demonstrated an increase in their understanding and knowledge in all areas , especially information about their social and natural environment . 
 = = Revival = = 
 In 2010 , the Sesame Workshop and the Arab Bureau of Education for the Gulf States ( ABEGS ) , which recognized " the deep love for the program " felt throughout the Arab world , started talks about relaunching Iftah Ya Simsim . Pre @-@ production research and preparation , like the process it took to bring the American version and the original Arab co @-@ production , took two years . The ABEGS and the Sesame Workshop signed an agreement to bring it back to Arab television , with content suitable for a new generation of children . The show was the first educational initiative sponsored by the Mubadala Development Company , the investment vehicle of the Abu Dhabi government . The initiative sought to relaunch the old series " with a new vision and content suitable for children of today " . Abdel @-@ Mohsen Al <unk> , CEO of the joint production program for GCC @-@ JPPI and who produced other co @-@ productions in the region during the 1980s , considered Iftah Ya Simsim as more than a TV show , but as an educational initiative . The production company Bidaya Media was chosen to produce the show ; in 2013 , the company was housed at <unk> , the United Arab Emirates version of public television . The show was supported by organizations all over the world ; <unk> Al @-@ <unk> , Iftah Ya Simsim 's representative at the GCC , stated , " It is a public / private sector partnership and we will need the support of all to extend the communication channels and continue producing more educational products " . 
 A seminar was held in 2011 to design the show 's curriculum and educational framework , and was attended by over 80 education and media experts . The seminar , also attended by ABEGS representatives , was sponsored by the GCC Joint Program Production Institution ( GCC @-@ JPPI ) and Saudi Basic Industries Corporation ( <unk> ) , a manufacturing company based in Riyadh and one of the private corporations that sponsored the new show . The participants took into consideration the educational changes that had occurred in the region in the previous 20 years , including a more diverse and complicated world and a need for more creativity to educate young children . The seminar focused on the education needs of children throughout the Arab world , the possible effects of the show 's return , and how to provide educational resources and technology to children in the 21st century . The seminar participants recommended the creation of an advisory council , consisting of education experts and media professionals , as well as expanding to new media forms other than TV , and including important Arab celebrities as guests on the show , all components that the American show used . 
 Other curriculum topics chosen during the seminar included Arabic culture and heritage , school readiness , health and wellness , and female education . The seminar participants decided to use MSA , like the producers had done for the original show , citing an even greater need to expose children to the Arabic language . The National , for example , stated , " At a time when Arab children are increasingly deviating from their language and culture because of programming from nations like the United States and India , initiatives like this will help to reverse the trend " . Abdulla Al <unk> , the new show 's creative director , agreed : " We are losing our language , and so through Iftah Ya Simsim , we can revive the language in such a way that a child learns proper Arabic in a fun way " . As with the original , outreach was an important part of the new show . Even before the show aired , four characters from the original toured the region , educating young children and their families about road and car safety . The cast and crew took a break from filming for a few months for " constant live events " to interact with their young viewers . Books , DVDs , CDs , online material and outreach programs for children , parents , and teachers were produced . 
 In late 2013 , fifteen writers and producers from Bidaya Media attended training about its education methodology and production techniques from the staff of the American show in New York . The Saudi Gazette reported that Iftah Ya Simsim was in pre @-@ production in March 2014 , and that the first phase of auditions took place in April 2014 , after , according to Al @-@ <unk> , a year of designing the show , " with input from child development experts , educators and cultural consultants " . A casting call for a competitive search of performers specializing in puppeteering , voice , singing , and movement was sent to universities , theaters , and cultural centers in Abu Dhabi , where it was filmed , and through social media . They cast Arabic @-@ speaking performers , although no prior acting experience was required . Dina al Saleh , a puppeteer from Alam Simsim , the Egyptian co @-@ production , screened the first group of candidates , and then the final cast of seven puppeteers were chosen after ten days of workshops , which the Saudi Gazette called " " master level training " with Marty Robinson and other Sesame Workshop puppeteers from New York . According to an editorial in The National , the new version of the show was significant because it encouraged Emiratis and other Arabs to become more involved in filmmaking and , more importantly , it focused on " locally relevant Arabic @-@ language content that will seek to educate present and future generations " . 
 Jordanian comedian , actor , writer , and voice over artist <unk> Khawaldeh , who was involved in the Jordanian co @-@ production Hikayat Simsim in 2009 , was chosen to perform the Muppet character Gargur , the show 's version of the American character Grover . In addition to puppetry , Khawaldeh performed the voice of six other characters and wrote for the show . According to entertainment reporter Arwad <unk> , Khalwaldeh 's performance as Gargur sounded similar to Frank Oz 's Grover , but Khalwaldeh brought his own nuance to the role . Khalwaldeh called the part " the highlight of my career and a once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ lifetime opportunity " . He also stated , " Iftah Ya Simsim complements every one of my accomplishments in the field of children 's work in Jordan , including theatre work , storytelling , dubbing , presenting children 's TV programmes and writing . This project incorporates all those genres under its hat and crowns them like the cherry on top " . Khalwaldeh said that being cast in the show inspired him to consider his future projects more carefully . Emirati musician Taha Al Ajami , who was a fan of the original show , created music for the new version . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 After a 25 @-@ year hiatus the show was relaunched in September 2015 appearing on nine regional stations with Abu Dhabi Al <unk> TV and Sharjah TV among them . At the time of the re @-@ launch the show was expected to reach 45 million viewers . The production is a collaboration between the Abu Dhabi Education Council , <unk> , the Arab Bureau of Education for the Gulf States and <unk> Media . Along with live shows at schools , the show interacts with fans by means of Facebook , a Youtube channel , and Instagram accounts . The show announced its focus on regional traditions , culture , values , customs , and manners with the characters speaking in classical Arabic . 
 It was also announced that the much loved character No 'man the camel and the bird muppet <unk> were returning to the new run . They were to be joined by new muppets that would " include Shams , a quick witted 6 year old girl who is full of energy and loves to express herself , as well as cute Gargur , a special resident on Iftah Ya Simsim who provides his trademark zaniness , comic chaos and a unique perspective on the world . " It was announced that puppeteers Abdullah <unk> , Asma <unk> , <unk> Khawaldeh , Maher <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Michel <unk> would be working on the show . Also announced were actors appearing on the show with the muppets ; Abdulla <unk> ( in the role of Rashid ) and Fatma Al <unk> ( as Amal ) . The educational content of the show is directed by the Educational Advisory Committee and the representatives of the Arab Bureau of Education for the Gulf States ( ABEGS ) . 
 = United States Bicentennial coinage = 
 The United States Bicentennial coinage was a set of circulating commemorative coins , consisting of a quarter , half dollar and dollar struck by the United States Mint in 1975 and 1976 . Regardless of when struck , each coin bears the double date 1776 – 1976 on the normal obverses for the Washington quarter , Kennedy half dollar and Eisenhower dollar . No coins dated 1975 of any of the three denominations were minted . 
 Given past abuses in the system , the Mint advocated against the issuance of commemorative coins starting in the 1950s . Beginning in 1971 , members of Congress introduced bills to authorize coins to honor the United States Bicentennial , which would occur in 1976 . The Mint , through its director , Mary Brooks , initially opposed such proposals , but later supported them , and Congress passed legislation requiring the temporary redesign of the reverse of the quarter , half dollar and dollar . 
 A nationwide competition resulted in designs of a Colonial drummer for the quarter , Independence Hall for the half dollar and the Liberty Bell superimposed against the moon for the dollar . All three coins remain common today due to the quantity struck . Circulation pieces were in copper nickel ; Congress also mandated 45 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 part @-@ silver pieces be struck for collectors . The Mint sold over half of the part @-@ silver coins before melting the remainder after withdrawing them from sale in 1986 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Commemorative coins had been struck for a number of events and anniversaries by the United States Mint since 1892 . Organizations would get Congress to authorize a coin and would be allowed to buy up the issue , selling it to the public at a premium . The final issue among these commemoratives , half dollars honoring Booker T. Washington and George Washington Carver were struck over a number of years , and were discontinued in 1954 . Originally priced at $ 3 @.@ 50 , they were repeatedly discounted ; many could not be sold at a premium and entered circulation . The promoter of these issues , S.J. Phillips , mishandled the distribution and lost $ 140 @,@ 000 . The negative publicity caused the Department of the Treasury , of which the Mint is a part , to oppose subsequent commemorative coin proposals , and until the 1970s , Congress passed none . 
 In 1966 , Congress established the American Revolutionary Bicentennial Commission ( ARBC ) to plan and coordinate activities connected with the 1976 bicentennial of American Independence ( " the Bicentennial " ) . In February 1970 , the ARBC established a Coins and Medals Advisory Committee . The committee 's initial report , in July 1970 , called for the production of a commemorative half dollar for the Bicentennial . In December 1970 , the committee called for special designs for all denominations of US coinage for the Bicentennial ; the ARBC endorsed this position the following month . The Treasury , however , opposed the change , following its longstanding position against commemorative coins . Several proposals for Bicentennial coins were introduced in Congress in 1971 and 1972 , but did not pass . 
 Mint Director Mary Brooks had attended the Advisory Committee meetings . At one meeting , she supported having a 1776 – 1976 double date on circulating coins to mark the anniversary in 1976 , although accommodating two dates on the obverse would involve production difficulties . However , in a newspaper interview she termed the idea of changing the six circulating coins ( cent through dollar ) " a disaster " . She felt if any Bicentennial coin was issued , it should be non @-@ circulating , perhaps a half cent or a gold piece . Brooks believed that such a coin would not disrupt the Mint in the production of coins for circulation . During 1972 , however , she retreated from that position , and by the end of the year had persuaded Treasury Secretary George Shultz to support a Bicentennial coin bill . 
 = = Authorization = = 
 In January 1973 , Texas Representative Richard C. White introduced legislation for commemorative dollars and half dollars . Oregon Senator Mark Hatfield also put forward a bill , calling for a $ 25 gold piece . On March 2 , 1973 , the Treasury announced its support for Bicentennial coin legislation for design changes to the reverses of the circulating dollars and half dollars , and sent proposed legislation to Congress three days later . Hearings before a subcommittee in the House of Representatives were held on May 2 , 1973 . Brooks testified , supporting the limited redesign in the bill , but opposing a more extensive coin redesign . Separately from the Bicentennial matter , she asked for authority to strike US coins at the West Point Bullion Depository , where space was available to install older coinage presses . Brooks deprecated the Hatfield proposal , stating that the coin would have to be .667 pure or less to avoid hoarding . 
 As a result of the hearings , several additional bills were introduced , and additional hearings were held before a Senate subcommittee on June 6 . Brooks testified again , and responding to criticism that only the two least popular denominations were to be changed , indicated her support for a Bicentennial quarter as well . On June 13 , a bill , S. 1141 which provided for a circulating Bicentennial quarter , half dollar and dollar , gave permission for coins to be struck at West Point and allowed for 40 % silver clad versions of the new coins for collectors was reported favorably by the Senate Banking Committee . It passed the Senate on July 13 . However , amendments authorizing US citizens to own gold , and to implement the Hatfield proposal were attached to the bill . A similar bill passed the House of Representatives on September 12 , differing from the Senate bill in lacking any provision relating to gold , and in not authorizing silver versions of the new coins . 
 Members of the two houses met in a conference committee on September 19 in a session described by onlookers as " fairly hot and heavy " . The resulting bill had no gold provisions , but authorized changes to the reverses of the quarter , half dollar and dollar for the Bicentennial . The obverses of the three coins would not change , but would bear the double date 1776 – 1976 . By the terms of the statute , all coins minted to be issued after July 4 , 1975 and before January 1 , 1977 would bear the Bicentennial dates and designs . Congress directed the Mint to strike 45 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 silver clad coins ( that is , 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sets ) , and the Mint received the requested authority to strike coins at West Point . Circulation quarters , half dollars and dollars would continue to be of copper nickel bonded to an internal layer of copper , that is , copper nickel clad . The modified bill passed both houses of Congress on October 4 , 1973 , and the bill was signed into law by President Richard Nixon on October 18 . Hatfield 's measure , along with similar legislation from other senators , was reintroduced in 1975 , but died in committee , as did legislation seeking a Bicentennial two @-@ cent piece and a bill seeking a coin honoring Abigail Adams and Susan B. Anthony . The extra production at West Point was key to overcoming a shortage of cents in 1974 , and permitted the Mint greater flexibility as it geared up to strike the Bicentennial pieces . 
 = = Competition = = 
 On October 23 , 1973 , the Department of the Treasury announced a competition for the three reverse designs . Any US citizen could submit one drawing , or photograph of a plaster model 10 inches ( 250 mm ) in diameter . Submissions were to include the legend " quarter dollar " . Treasury Secretary Shultz , advised by a panel of judges , would decide which design would be used for which denomination — the inscription would be changed to half dollar and one dollar for the higher denominations . Additionally , the reverses were to bear the name of the country and the motto " e pluribus unum " , as required by law . 
 At Director Brooks ' request , the National Sculpture Society selected the five judges for the competition . The judges were society President Robert Weinman ( son of Adolph Weinman , who had designed the Mercury dime and Walking Liberty half dollar ) , Connecticut sculptor Adlai S. Hardin , former Mint Chief Engraver Gilroy Roberts , Julius <unk> of the Medallic Art Company , and Elvira <unk> @-@ <unk> , curator in the Division of Numismatics , Smithsonian Institution . 
 The deadline was originally December 14 , 1973 , but was extended to January 9 , 1974 because of the energy crisis and Christmas mail delays . Brooks traveled more than 7 @,@ 000 miles ( 11 @,@ 000 km ) to publicize the competition . By the deadline , the Mint had received 15 @,@ 000 inquiries and 884 entries . Members of the panel and any person employed by the US government as a sculptor were ineligible to enter . The prize for each of the three winners was $ 5 @,@ 000 . The judging was originally supposed to take place at West Point ; with the delay , it took place instead at the Philadelphia Mint . 
 From the entries , the judges selected twelve semifinalist designs ; the sculptor submitting each received a prize of $ 750 . The competitors were to place their work on plaster models , if that had not already been done , and were offered assistance in making the models . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 The twelve remaining designs were released by the Treasury for public comment in early 1974 . Two of the proposed coins featured sailing ships , two featured Independence Hall in Philadelphia , where the Declaration of Independence was signed , and three depicted the moon or lunar spacecraft . Another depicted the Liberty Bell superimposed on an atomic symbol . According to numismatist Michael Marotta in his 2001 article on the Bicentennial coins , " the numismatic community 's reaction to the entries was predictable : everyone complained by writing letters to the editor " . 
 From the twelve , the judges selected six finalists for review by the National Bicentennial Coin Design Competition Committee , consisting of Brooks , Representative Wright Patman , Senator John Sparkman , Commission of Fine Arts Secretary Charles H. Atherton and Eric P. Newman , chairman of the ARBC 's coins and medals advisory committee . After receiving the committee 's recommendations , Secretary Shultz selected the winners and on March 6 , 1974 , Brooks went on the Today show to announce them . Jack L. Ahr 's design featuring a colonial drummer , with a torch of victory surrounded by thirteen stars ( representing the original states ) was selected for the quarter . Seth Huntington 's image of Independence Hall was selected for the half dollar while Dennis R. Williams ' superimposition of the Liberty Bell against the moon was successful for the dollar . Ahr owned a commercial art firm and Huntington was head artist for Brown and Bigelow , a Minneapolis publishing firm . Williams , at age 22 the youngest person to design a US coin , was an art student who had originally created his design for a class assignment . No change would be made to the obverses of the coins , except for the double dating . 
 Ahr was accused of copying his drummer from a 1973 stamp by the stamp 's designer , William A. Smith ; he denied it . According to numismatic historian Walter Breen , " both obviously derive from Archibald Willard 's 1876 painting Spirit of ' 76 , " a painting which numismatic author David L. Ganz suggests that both undoubtedly saw sometime in their lives . Ahr , however , stated that his son had been the model for the drummer . Brooks , in a letter to Smith , stated that the design for the quarter was " sufficiently original " to impress the National Sculpture Society . Weinman later deprecated the winning designs : 
 I really don 't think what we got was a great bargain . Nothing we selected was a real winner that I 'd fight to the death for . In terms of what we had to work with , though , I think we did the best we could . 
 On April 24 , 1974 , the three winning designers were brought to Washington , D.C. After a tour of the White House and meetings with the congressional committees which considered the coin bills , they went to the Treasury Building and received their $ 5 @,@ 000 checks from the new Treasury Secretary , William E. Simon , who jokingly asked them if they wanted to invest their awards in savings bonds . 
 Mint Chief Engraver Frank Gasparro made minor changes to all three reverse designs . Gasparro simplified the quarter design , altered the drum for the sake of authenticity , changed the lettering and modified the expression on the drummer 's face . He made slight changes to Independence Hall on the half dollar and altered the shape of the Liberty Bell and of the lettering on the dollar , simplifying the features visible on the moon . Ahr later stated that he would have liked more time to finalize his design , wishing to clarify the features of the drummer 's face . The initials of the designer were added to the design by the Mint . All three agreed that Gasparro 's changes improved their designs . 
 = = Production = = 
 On August 12 , 1974 , the three designers were at the Philadelphia Mint , where they ceremonially operated the presses to strike the first coins bearing their designs . These prototypes were exhibited under armed guard at the American Numismatic Association convention in Florida the next day . They differ from all other Bicentennial coins in that they were struck in silver proof without mint mark ; other silver proof coins bear an " S " mint mark as struck at the San Francisco Assay Office ( as the San Francisco Mint was then known ) . Coins struck at Denver bear a " D " on the obverse ; pieces lacking a mint mark were struck at Philadelphia . Sets of these prototypes were presented to President Gerald Ford , Counselor to the President Anne Armstrong and Director John Warner of the American Revolutionary Bicentennial Administration ( the successor to the ARBC ) . All other first strikes were melted , with copies not even kept for the National Numismatic Collection . 
 The Mint believed that if it was required to strike 1975 quarters , half dollars and dollars , not enough could be struck before it had to begin the Bicentennial issues to prevent the 1975 pieces from becoming collector 's items . This risked coin shortages at a time when the Mint was seeking to build a surplus of quarters . Mint officials returned to Congress to seek amending legislation . President Ford signed a bill on December 26 , 1974 that made several noncontroversial changes to law , including provisions to allow the Mint to keep striking 1974 @-@ dated pieces until it began striking the Bicentennial coins . By terms of the amending legislation , the commemorative coins could not be issued until after July 4 , 1975 . 
 On November 15 , 1974 , the Mint began taking orders for the silver clad pieces , at a price of $ 15 for proof sets and $ 9 for uncirculated , with a deadline for orders of January 31 , 1975 . Uncirculated coins are like those newly released into circulation ; proof coins have a mirror finish . Buyers were initially limited to five sets per person . On January 19 , 1975 , Brooks announced that the silver proof set price was cut to $ 12 , and the order limit was waived . Buyers who had paid the higher price were sent refunds by check . Brooks stated that the price reduction was because of production efficiencies , the benefit of which she wished to pass along to the public . Numismatic columnist Ed Reiter noted , though , that the reduction came amidst protests from the numismatic community that the price was too high . Coin dealer <unk> Skelton suggested in 1977 that the initial high price for the sets followed by the reduction , together with the large mintage of silver sets made the public suspicious and contributed to lagging sales . On August 20 , 1975 , the price for the uncirculated silver sets was reduced to $ 7 when bulk purchases of 50 or more were made . A bank in Taiwan ordered 250 @,@ 000 sets at this price . 
 The first Bicentennial coins to be produced that were intended for the public were dollars , struck during February 1975 . The first for collectors were struck at San Francisco on April 23 , 1975 . The San Francisco Assay Office struck the 45 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 silver coins first , producing eleven million sets in uncirculated and four million in proof , then began the base metal pieces . Once striking began , the Mint found that the copper nickel dollar was striking indistinctly , a problem not seen with the silver pieces . The Mint modified the dies ; the most noticeable change is that the revised issue , or Type II as it came to be known , have narrower , sharper lettering on the reverse . All silver pieces ( struck only at San Francisco ) are Type I ; all three mints struck both Type I and Type II copper nickel pieces . All dollars included in 1975 proof sets are Type I ; all those included in 1976 proof sets are Type II . Bicentennial coins for collectors were not delivered until after July 4 , 1975 . The Bicentennial pieces , in base metal , were included in 1975 proof sets and mint sets together with 1975 @-@ dated cents , nickels and dimes . 
 The new coins first entered circulation on July 7 , 1975 , when the half dollar was released in conjunction with ceremonies in Minneapolis , Huntington 's hometown . The quarter followed in September and the dollar in October , each also with ceremonies to mark the issuance . The pieces were struck in numbers exceeding those needed for circulation ; a Mint spokesman stated , " The theory in striking them was to have enough available so as many Americans as possible would have an opportunity to have a coinage commemoration of the Bicentennial year . They 're <unk> . " 
 In 1977 , the Mint returned to the old reverse designs for the quarter , half dollar and dollar . Sales by mid @-@ 1977 had dropped off considerably , to perhaps 300 sets a week , with one Mint official describing the sales against the massive unsold quantities as " a drop in the bucket " . By 1979 , the Mint anticipated an eventual sellout for the silver proof set , but admitted that with massive quantities unsold , there was no realistic possibility of selling all uncirculated silver sets . On September 17 , 1979 , faced with a spike in silver prices , Mint Director Stella B. Hackel announced that the sets were being removed from sale . They were returned to sale in August 1980 , at increased prices of $ 20 in proof and $ 15 in uncirculated . In September 1981 , the Mint , citing a decline in the price of silver , reduced the price of the sets to $ 15 in proof and $ 12 in uncirculated . A limit of 100 sets per person was set on proof sales , with none on uncirculated . A large number of sets were melted by the government in 1982 . Reagan administration Mint Director Donna Pope later stated , " Sales of 1776 – 1976 regular @-@ issue Bicentennial coins went on and on , seemingly forever . " On December 31 , 1986 , the remaining Bicentennial uncirculated silver sets were removed from sale . At the time , it was announced that proof sets had already sold out when coins went off sale . However , Marotta , writing in 2001 , stated that when sales ceased , 400 @,@ 000 proof sets and 200 @,@ 000 uncirculated sets remained in inventory . 
 Due to the large quantities struck , Bicentennial coins remain inexpensive . A set of three silver coins contains <unk> troy ounces of the precious metal . In a 1996 statistical study , T.V. Buttrey found that about 750 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 of the circulation quarters , more than a third , had been hoarded and did not circulate . Coin dealer Marcel <unk> suggested in 1977 of the silver sets , " There were just too many sold , and I think it will take a long time before they have any real value . Maybe by the Tricentennial . " 
 The total coinage by striking mint is shown below : 
 = <unk> = 
 The boobrie is a mythological shapeshifting entity inhabiting the lochs of the west coast of Scotland . It commonly adopts the appearance of a gigantic water bird resembling a cormorant or great northern diver , but it can also materialise in the form of various other mythological creatures such as a water bull . 
 A generally malevolent entity , the boobrie typically preys on livestock being transported on ships , but it is also fond of otters , of which it consumes a considerable number . In its manifestation as a water horse the creature is able to gallop across the top of lochs as if on solid ground . During the summer months it is seen infrequently as a large insect , sucking the blood of horses . 
 Folklorist Campbell of Islay has speculated that descriptions of the boobrie may be based on sightings of the great auk . The bellowing sound made by the boobrie , more like a bull than a bird , may have its origin in the strange call of the common bittern , which was a rare visitor to Scotland . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 <unk> may derive from <unk> , meaning cow giver or cow bestowing . Edward Dwelly , a Scottish lexicographer , lists tarbh @-@ boidhre as " Monster , demon " and " God capable of changing himself into many forms " ; tarbh @-@ <unk> is given as a northern counties variation . The simpler component of tarbh as a single word is defined by Dwelly as " bull . " <unk> of the tale have used several differing spellings of the second component , some even adopting inconsistent variations throughout their own renditions . George Henderson for instance , a folklorist and Celtic scholar , used five alternatives : bo <unk> ; boidhre ; bo @-@ <unk> ; <unk> ; and <unk> . Spelling variations employed by other writers include <unk> ; <unk> ; <unk> ; boidhre ; <unk> ; and <unk> . 
 = = Folk beliefs = = 
 = = = Description and common attributes = = = 
 Investigation into folklore , especially Celtic oral traditions , began in the 19th @-@ century , and several " bizarre " and less familiar beasts were identified , including the boobrie . It is a generally malevolent entity , with the ability to materialise in the form of various mythical creatures . It commonly preys on animals being transported on ships , preferably calves , but will also happily eat lambs and sheep , carrying its prey away to the deepest water before consuming it . It is also extremely fond of otters , which it consumes in large quantities . 
 In its favoured bird manifestation the boobrie resembles a gigantic great northern diver or cormorant , but with white markings . According to folklorist Campbell of Islay , a detailed account of its dimensions provided by an authoritative source claims that it is " larger than seventeen of the biggest eagles put together " . It has a strong black beak about 11 inches ( 280 mm ) wide and 17 inches ( 430 mm ) in length , the final 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of which taper like that of an eagle . The creature 's neck is almost 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) long with a girth of a little under 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) . Short black powerful legs lead to webbed feet with gigantic claws . An imprint of a boobrie 's foot left in some lakeside mud equalled " the span of a large wide @-@ spreading pair of red deer 's horns " . It bellows noisily with displeasure , sounding more like a bull than a bird . The design of its wings is more conducive to swimming rather than for flight . Its evil powers when in the form of a bird were said by Campbell of Islay to have " terrified a minister out of his propriety " . The boobrie 's insatiable appetite for livestock posed a threat to local farmers , as they relied on their animals as a means of providing income and food . 
 Although sea lochs are the <unk> ' natural home they will shelter on land in overgrown heather . Accounts are inconsistent as to the extent of the boobrie 's habitat . Campbell of Islay claims that it is specific to the lochs of Argyllshire , as does Emeritus Professor of English James MacKillop . The writers Katharine Briggs and Patricia Monaghan on the other hand consider the creature 's range to be the broader Scottish Highlands , although Briggs does sometimes specify Argyllshire . Campbell of Islay 's undated manuscript notes the boobrie had not been seen for several years probably due to the widespread burning of heather in the area of its habitat . 
 = = = = Alternative manifestations = = = = 
 When manifested as a water horse the creature is able to gallop across the top of lochs ; the beating noise of the creature 's hooves on the water is the same as if it were galloping on solid ground . 
 Henderson reproduced parts of Campbell of Islay 's manuscripts when writing Survivals in belief among the Celts ( 1911 ) . Among them is a story listed as " boobrie as tarbh uisge " . The tale starts by detailing how a man named Eachann fed a colossal black bull when he discovered it writhing in pain and possibly close to death at the side of Loch nan <unk> , on the west coast of Argyll . Some months later , Phemie , Eachann 's girlfriend , is occasionally disturbed by elusive shadows she senses on the loch , which make her think of Murdoch , her former paramour . While she sat dreaming of Eachann one evening when staying at a <unk> near the loch , she sensed the flicker of a shadow behind her , except this time it was Murdoch . He promptly overpowered her by enveloping her in a blanket and tying her hands . At that point , a water bull came to Phemie 's rescue by knocking Murdoch to the ground . The bull then knelt down allowing Phemie to get on its back , before transporting her at the speed of light back to the home of her mother . The bull disappeared never to be seen again but a " voice was heard in the air calling out loudly " . The verse heard was in Gaelic , and translates as : 
 It is then asserted that the tale " reveals the persistence in folk @-@ belief of the idea of transformation , the boobrie being the abode of a spirit " . 
 The boobrie can also manifest itself in the form of a large insect that sucks the blood of horses . Henderson refers to it as a " big striped brown <unk> or ear @-@ wig " with " lots of tentacles or feelers " . It was infrequently seen in this form , usually only at the height of the summer , during August and September . 
 = = = Capture and hunting = = = 
 A farmer and his son were ploughing a field on the Isle of Mull using a team of four horses beside Loch <unk> , but work stalled after one of the horses lost a shoe and was unable to continue . Noticing a horse grazing nearby they decided to try using it as a replacement . Once harnessed to the wooden plough the horse appeared to be familiar with the task , and initially worked steadily . As it began to work towards an area closest to the loch , it became restless and the farmer gently used a whip to encourage the animal to continue . It reacted by immediately transforming into a gigantic boobrie , giving out a loud bellow and diving into the loch , pulling the plough and the other three horses with it . The frightened farmer and his son watched as the creature swam to the centre of the loch then dived underwater , taking the other horses and plough with it . Seven hours later there was still no sign of the three horses . 
 In a story transcribed by John Campbell of <unk> , a hunter attempted to shoot a boobrie after he spotted it in its bird @-@ like manifestation on a sea loch one chilly February day . The man paddled into the loch until the water was up to his shoulders , but when he was about 85 yards ( 78 m ) from the creature it dived under the water . The hunter maintained his position for forty @-@ five minutes before returning to the shore , where he remained for a further six hours waiting unsuccessfully for the boobrie to resurface . No clear indication is given of the loch 's whereabouts . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Campbell of Islay speculates that the boobrie may have originated from sightings of the great auk . He noted he had been told stories of the creature by various people , and regarded it as having " a real existence in the popular mind " . He considered the tale of the boobrie in its water horse manifestation resembled the Norse myth of " the ploughing of the Asa " . Referring to Forbes ' 1905 dictionary of " Gaelic names of beasts " in which <unk> is defined as a common bittern , and a detailed description given by scholar James Logie Robertson of the bull o ' the bog ( an alternative name for a bittern ) in The Scotsman in 1908 , Henderson hypothesises that the boobrie may stem from the bittern . Referring to the bittern 's " strangely weird sound " and highlighting its " weird hollow cry " during the night and throughout the evening , he describes it as resembling quietly bellowing cattle , particularly during the bird 's breeding season . Records indicate that the bird was rare in Scotland but had been sighted in the first decade of the 20th century , although catching sight of a bittern was believed to be a harbinger of death or disaster . 
 = Greek mythology = 
 Greek mythology is the body of myths and teachings that belong to the ancient Greeks , concerning their gods and heroes , the nature of the world , and the origins and significance of their own cult and ritual practices . It was a part of the religion in ancient Greece . Modern scholars refer to and study the myths in an attempt to shed light on the religious and political institutions of Ancient Greece and its civilization , and to gain understanding of the nature of myth @-@ making itself . 
 Greek mythology is explicitly embodied in a large collection of narratives , and implicitly in Greek representational arts , such as vase @-@ paintings and votive gifts . Greek myth attempts to explain the origins of the world , and details the lives and adventures of a wide variety of gods , goddesses , heroes , heroines and mythological creatures . These accounts initially were disseminated in an oral @-@ poetic tradition ; today the Greek myths are known primarily from Greek literature . The oldest known Greek literary sources , Homer 's epic poems Iliad and Odyssey , focus on the Trojan War and its aftermath . Two poems by Homer 's near contemporary Hesiod , the Theogony and the Works and Days , contain accounts of the genesis of the world , the succession of divine rulers , the succession of human ages , the origin of human woes , and the origin of sacrificial practices . Myths are also preserved in the Homeric Hymns , in fragments of epic poems of the Epic Cycle , in lyric poems , in the works of the tragedians and comedians of the fifth century BC , in writings of scholars and poets of the Hellenistic Age , and in texts from the time of the Roman Empire by writers such as Plutarch and Pausanias . 
 Archaeological findings provide a principal source of detail about Greek mythology , with gods and heroes featured prominently in the decoration of many artifacts . Geometric designs on pottery of the eighth century BC depict scenes from the Trojan cycle as well as the adventures of Heracles . In the succeeding Archaic , Classical , and Hellenistic periods , Homeric and various other mythological scenes appear , supplementing the existing literary evidence . Greek mythology has had an extensive influence on the culture , arts , and literature of Western civilization and remains part of Western heritage and language . Poets and artists from ancient times to the present have derived inspiration from Greek mythology and have discovered contemporary significance and relevance in the themes . 
 = = = Literary sources = = = 
 Mythical narration plays an important role in nearly every genre of Greek literature . Nevertheless , the only general <unk> handbook to survive from Greek antiquity was the Library of Pseudo @-@ Apollodorus . This work attempts to reconcile the contradictory tales of the poets and provides a grand summary of traditional Greek mythology and heroic legends . Apollodorus of Athens lived from c . 180 – 125 BC and wrote on many of these topics . His writings may have formed the basis for the collection ; however the " Library " discusses events that occurred long after his death , hence the name Pseudo @-@ Apollodorus . 
 Among the earliest literary sources are Homer 's two epic poems , the Iliad and the Odyssey . Other poets completed the " epic cycle " , but these later and lesser poems now are lost almost entirely . Despite their traditional name , the " Homeric Hymns " have no direct connection with Homer . They are choral hymns from the earlier part of the so @-@ called Lyric age . Hesiod , a possible contemporary with Homer , offers in his Theogony ( Origin of the Gods ) the fullest account of the earliest Greek myths , dealing with the creation of the world ; the origin of the gods , Titans , and Giants ; as well as elaborate genealogies , folktales , and etiological myths . Hesiod 's Works and Days , a didactic poem about farming life , also includes the myths of Prometheus , Pandora , and the Five Ages . The poet gives advice on the best way to succeed in a dangerous world , rendered yet more dangerous by its gods . 
 Lyrical poets often took their subjects from myth , but their treatment became gradually less narrative and more allusive . Greek lyric poets including Pindar , <unk> , Simonides , and bucolic poets such as Theocritus and Bion , relate individual mythological incidents . Additionally , myth was central to classical Athenian drama . The tragic playwrights Aeschylus , Sophocles , and Euripides took most of their plots from myths of the age of heroes and the Trojan War . Many of the great tragic stories ( e.g. Agamemnon and his children , Oedipus , Jason , Medea , etc . ) took on their classic form in these tragedies . The comic playwright Aristophanes also used myths , in The Birds and The Frogs . 
 Historians Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus , and geographers Pausanias and Strabo , who traveled throughout the Greek world and noted the stories they heard , supplied numerous local myths and legends , often giving little @-@ known alternative versions . Herodotus in particular , searched the various traditions presented him and found the historical or mythological roots in the confrontation between Greece and the East . Herodotus attempted to reconcile origins and the blending of differing cultural concepts . 
 The poetry of the Hellenistic and Roman ages was primarily composed as a literary rather than cultic exercise . Nevertheless , it contains many important details that would otherwise be lost . This category includes the works of : 
 The Roman poets Ovid , Statius , Valerius Flaccus , Seneca and Virgil with Servius 's commentary . 
 The Greek poets of the Late Antique period : Nonnus , Antoninus Liberalis , and Quintus <unk> . 
 The Greek poets of the Hellenistic period : Apollonius of Rhodes , Callimachus , Pseudo @-@ Eratosthenes , and Parthenius . 
 Prose writers from the same periods who make reference to myths include Apuleius , Petronius , <unk> , and Heliodorus . Two other important non @-@ poetical sources are the Fabulae and Astronomica of the Roman writer styled as Pseudo @-@ Hyginus , the Imagines of Philostratus the Elder and Philostratus the Younger , and the Descriptions of <unk> . 
 Finally , a number of Byzantine Greek writers provide important details of myth , much derived from earlier now lost Greek works . These preservers of myth include <unk> , Hesychius , the author of the Suda , John Tzetzes , and Eustathius . They often treat mythology from a Christian moralizing perspective . 
 = = = Archaeological sources = = = 
 The discovery of the Mycenaean civilization by the German amateur archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in the nineteenth century , and the discovery of the Minoan civilization in Crete by the British archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans in the twentieth century , helped to explain many existing questions about Homer 's epics and provided archaeological evidence for many of the mythological details about gods and heroes . Unfortunately , the evidence about myths and rituals at Mycenaean and Minoan sites is entirely monumental , as the Linear B script ( an ancient form of Greek found in both Crete and mainland Greece ) was used mainly to record inventories , although certain names of gods and heroes have been tentatively identified . 
 Geometric designs on pottery of the eighth century BC depict scenes from the Trojan cycle , as well as the adventures of Heracles . These visual representations of myths are important for two reasons . Firstly , many Greek myths are attested on vases earlier than in literary sources : of the twelve labors of Heracles , for example , only the Cerberus adventure occurs in a contemporary literary text . Secondly , visual sources sometimes represent myths or mythical scenes that are not attested in any extant literary source . In some cases , the first known representation of a myth in geometric art predates its first known representation in late archaic poetry , by several centuries . In the Archaic ( c . 750 – c . 500 BC ) , Classical ( c . 480 – 323 BC ) , and Hellenistic ( 323 – 146 BC ) periods , Homeric and various other mythological scenes appear , supplementing the existing literary evidence . 
 = = Survey of mythic history = = 
 Greek mythology has changed over time to accommodate the evolution of their culture , of which mythology , both overtly and in its unspoken assumptions , is an index of the changes . In Greek mythology 's surviving literary forms , as found mostly at the end of the progressive changes , it is inherently political , as Gilbert Cuthbertson has argued . 
 The earlier inhabitants of the Balkan Peninsula were an agricultural people who , using Animism , assigned a spirit to every aspect of nature . Eventually , these vague spirits assumed human forms and entered the local mythology as gods . When tribes from the north of the Balkan Peninsula invaded , they brought with them a new pantheon of gods , based on conquest , force , prowess in battle , and violent heroism . Other older gods of the agricultural world fused with those of the more powerful invaders or else faded into insignificance . 
 After the middle of the Archaic period , myths about relationships between male gods and male heroes became more and more frequent , indicating the parallel development of pedagogic pederasty ( eros <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , thought to have been introduced around 630 BC . By the end of the fifth century BC , poets had assigned at least one eromenos , an adolescent boy who was their sexual companion , to every important god except Ares and to many legendary figures . Previously existing myths , such as those of Achilles and Patroclus , also then were cast in a pederastic light . Alexandrian poets at first , then more generally literary mythographers in the early Roman Empire , often <unk> stories of Greek mythological characters in this fashion . 
 The achievement of epic poetry was to create story @-@ cycles and , as a result , to develop a new sense of mythological chronology . Thus Greek mythology unfolds as a phase in the development of the world and of humans . While self @-@ contradictions in these stories make an absolute timeline impossible , an approximate chronology may be discerned . The resulting mythological " history of the world " may be divided into three or four broader periods : 
 The myths of origin or age of gods ( <unk> , " births of gods " ) : myths about the origins of the world , the gods , and the human race . 
 The age when gods and mortals mingled freely : stories of the early interactions between gods , demigods , and mortals . 
 The age of heroes ( heroic age ) , where divine activity was more limited . The last and greatest of the heroic legends is the story of the Trojan War and after ( which is regarded by some researchers as a separate fourth period ) . 
 While the age of gods often has been of more interest to contemporary students of myth , the Greek authors of the archaic and classical eras had a clear preference for the age of heroes , establishing a chronology and record of human accomplishments after the questions of how the world came into being were explained . For example , the heroic Iliad and Odyssey dwarfed the divine @-@ focused Theogony and Homeric Hymns in both size and popularity . Under the influence of Homer the " hero cult " leads to a restructuring in spiritual life , expressed in the separation of the realm of the gods from the realm of the dead ( heroes ) , of the Chthonic from the Olympian . In the Works and Days , Hesiod makes use of a scheme of Four Ages of Man ( or Races ) : Golden , Silver , Bronze , and Iron . These races or ages are separate creations of the gods , the Golden Age belonging to the reign of Cronos , the subsequent races the creation of Zeus . The presence of evil was explained by the myth of Pandora , when all of the best of human capabilities , save hope , had been spilled out of her overturned jar . In Metamorphoses , Ovid follows Hesiod 's concept of the four ages . 
 = = = Origins of the world and the gods = = = 
 " Myths of origin " or " creation myths " represent an attempt to explain the beginnings of the universe in human language . The most widely accepted version at the time , although a philosophical account of the beginning of things , is reported by Hesiod , in his Theogony . He begins with Chaos , a yawning nothingness . Out of the void emerged Gaia ( the Earth ) and some other primary divine beings : Eros ( Love ) , the Abyss ( the Tartarus ) , and the Erebus . Without male assistance , Gaia gave birth to Uranus ( the Sky ) who then fertilized her . From that union were born first the Titans — six males : <unk> , <unk> , Cronus , Hyperion , Iapetus , and Oceanus ; and six females : <unk> , Phoebe , Rhea , Theia , Themis , and Tethys . After Cronus was born , Gaia and Uranus decreed no more Titans were to be born . They were followed by the one @-@ eyed Cyclopes and the Hecatonchires or Hundred @-@ Handed Ones , who were both thrown into Tartarus by Uranus . This made Gaia furious . Cronus ( " the wily , youngest and most terrible of Gaia 's children " ) , was convinced by Gaia to castrate his father . He did this , and became the ruler of the Titans with his sister @-@ wife Rhea as his consort , and the other Titans became his court . 
 A motif of father @-@ against @-@ son conflict was repeated when Cronus was confronted by his son , Zeus . Because Cronus had betrayed his father , he feared that his offspring would do the same , and so each time Rhea gave birth , he snatched up the child and ate it . Rhea hated this and tricked him by hiding Zeus and wrapping a stone in a baby 's blanket , which Cronus ate . When Zeus was full grown , he fed Cronus a drugged drink which caused him to vomit , throwing up Rhea 's other children and the stone , which had been sitting in Cronus 's stomach all along . Zeus then challenged Cronus to war for the kingship of the gods . At last , with the help of the Cyclopes ( whom Zeus freed from Tartarus ) , Zeus and his siblings were victorious , while Cronus and the Titans were hurled down to imprisonment in Tartarus . 
 Zeus was plagued by the same concern and , after a prophecy that the offspring of his first wife , Metis , would give birth to a god " greater than he " — Zeus swallowed her . She was already pregnant with Athena , however , and she burst forth from his head — fully @-@ grown and dressed for war . 
 The earliest Greek thought about poetry considered the <unk> to be the prototypical poetic genre — the prototypical mythos — and imputed almost magical powers to it . Orpheus , the archetypal poet , also was the archetypal singer of <unk> , which he uses to calm seas and storms in Apollonius ' Argonautica , and to move the stony hearts of the underworld gods in his descent to Hades . When Hermes invents the lyre in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes , the first thing he does is sing about the birth of the gods . Hesiod 's Theogony is not only the fullest surviving account of the gods , but also the fullest surviving account of the archaic poet 's function , with its long preliminary invocation to the Muses . Theogony also was the subject of many lost poems , including those attributed to Orpheus , Musaeus , <unk> , <unk> , and other legendary seers , which were used in private ritual purifications and mystery @-@ rites . There are indications that Plato was familiar with some version of the Orphic <unk> . A silence would have been expected about religious rites and beliefs , however , and that nature of the culture would not have been reported by members of the society while the beliefs were held . After they ceased to become religious beliefs , few would have known the rites and rituals . Allusions often existed , however , to aspects that were quite public . 
 Images existed on pottery and religious artwork that were interpreted and more likely , misinterpreted in many diverse myths and tales . A few fragments of these works survive in quotations by Neoplatonist philosophers and recently unearthed papyrus scraps . One of these scraps , the <unk> Papyrus now proves that at least in the fifth century BC a <unk> @-@ <unk> poem of Orpheus was in existence . 
 The first philosophical cosmologists reacted against , or sometimes built upon , popular mythical conceptions that had existed in the Greek world for some time . Some of these popular conceptions can be gleaned from the poetry of Homer and Hesiod . In Homer , the Earth was viewed as a flat disk afloat on the river of Oceanus and overlooked by a hemispherical sky with sun , moon , and stars . The Sun ( Helios ) traversed the heavens as a charioteer and sailed around the Earth in a golden bowl at night . Sun , earth , heaven , rivers , and winds could be addressed in prayers and called to witness oaths . Natural fissures were popularly regarded as entrances to the subterranean house of Hades and his predecessors , home of the dead . Influences from other cultures always afforded new themes . 
 = = = = Greek pantheon = = = = 
 According to Classical @-@ era mythology , after the overthrow of the Titans , the new pantheon of gods and goddesses was confirmed . Among the principal Greek gods were the Olympians , residing on Mount Olympus under the eye of Zeus . ( The limitation of their number to twelve seems to have been a comparatively modern idea . ) Besides the Olympians , the Greeks worshipped various gods of the countryside , the satyr @-@ god Pan , Nymphs ( spirits of rivers ) , Naiads ( who dwelled in springs ) , Dryads ( who were spirits of the trees ) , Nereids ( who inhabited the sea ) , river gods , Satyrs , and others . In addition , there were the dark powers of the underworld , such as the Erinyes ( or Furies ) , said to pursue those guilty of crimes against blood @-@ relatives . In order to honor the Ancient Greek pantheon , poets composed the Homeric Hymns ( a group of thirty @-@ three songs ) . Gregory Nagy regards " the larger Homeric Hymns as simple preludes ( compared with Theogony ) , each of which invokes one god " . 
 The gods of Greek mythology are described as having essentially corporeal but ideal bodies . According to Walter Burkert , the defining characteristic of Greek anthropomorphism is that " the Greek gods are persons , not abstractions , ideas or concepts " . Regardless of their underlying forms , the Ancient Greek gods have many fantastic abilities ; most significantly , the gods are not affected by disease , and can be wounded only under highly unusual circumstances . The Greeks considered immortality as the distinctive characteristic of their gods ; this immortality , as well as unfading youth , was insured by the constant use of nectar and ambrosia , by which the divine blood was renewed in their veins . 
 Each god descends from his or her own genealogy , pursues differing interests , has a certain area of expertise , and is governed by a unique personality ; however , these descriptions arise from a multiplicity of archaic local variants , which do not always agree with one another . When these gods are called upon in poetry , prayer or cult , they are referred to by a combination of their name and epithets , that identify them by these distinctions from other manifestations of themselves ( e.g. , Apollo <unk> is " Apollo , [ as ] leader of the Muses " ) . Alternatively the epithet may identify a particular and localized aspect of the god , sometimes thought to be already ancient during the classical epoch of Greece . 
 Most gods were associated with specific aspects of life . For example , Aphrodite was the goddess of love and beauty , Ares was the god of war , Hades the ruler of the underworld , and Athena the goddess of wisdom and courage . Some gods , such as Apollo and Dionysus , revealed complex personalities and mixtures of functions , while others , such as Hestia ( literally " hearth " ) and Helios ( literally " sun " ) , were little more than personifications . The most impressive temples tended to be dedicated to a limited number of gods , who were the focus of large pan @-@ Hellenic cults . It was , however , common for individual regions and villages to devote their own cults to minor gods . Many cities also honored the more well @-@ known gods with unusual local rites and associated strange myths with them that were unknown elsewhere . During the heroic age , the cult of heroes ( or demi @-@ gods ) supplemented that of the gods . 
 = = = Age of gods and mortals = = = 
 Bridging the age when gods lived alone and the age when divine interference in human affairs was limited was a transitional age in which gods and mortals moved together . These were the early days of the world when the groups mingled more freely than they did later . Most of these tales were later told by Ovid 's Metamorphoses and they are often divided into two thematic groups : tales of love , and tales of punishment . 
 Tales of love often involve incest , or the seduction or rape of a mortal woman by a male god , resulting in heroic offspring . The stories generally suggest that relationships between gods and mortals are something to avoid ; even consenting relationships rarely have happy endings . In a few cases , a female divinity mates with a mortal man , as in the Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite , where the goddess lies with Anchises to produce Aeneas . 
 The second type ( tales of punishment ) involves the appropriation or invention of some important cultural artifact , as when Prometheus steals fire from the gods , when Tantalus steals nectar and ambrosia from Zeus ' table and gives it to his own subjects — revealing to them the secrets of the gods , when Prometheus or Lycaon invents sacrifice , when Demeter teaches agriculture and the Mysteries to <unk> , or when Marsyas invents the aulos and enters into a musical contest with Apollo . Ian Morris considers Prometheus ' adventures as " a place between the history of the gods and that of man " . An anonymous papyrus fragment , dated to the third century , vividly portrays Dionysus ' punishment of the king of Thrace , Lycurgus , whose recognition of the new god came too late , resulting in horrific penalties that extended into the afterlife . The story of the arrival of Dionysus to establish his cult in Thrace was also the subject of an <unk> trilogy . In another tragedy , Euripides ' The Bacchae , the king of Thebes , Pentheus , is punished by Dionysus , because he disrespected the god and spied on his <unk> , the female worshippers of the god . 
 In another story , based on an old folktale @-@ motif , and echoing a similar theme , Demeter was searching for her daughter , Persephone , having taken the form of an old woman called <unk> , and received a hospitable welcome from Celeus , the King of Eleusis in Attica . As a gift to Celeus , because of his hospitality , Demeter planned to make his son <unk> a god , but she was unable to complete the ritual because his mother <unk> walked in and saw her son in the fire and screamed in fright , which angered Demeter , who lamented that foolish mortals do not understand the concept and ritual . 
 = = = Heroic age = = = 
 The age in which the heroes lived is known as the heroic age . The epic and genealogical poetry created cycles of stories clustered around particular heroes or events and established the family relationships between the heroes of different stories ; they thus arranged the stories in sequence . According to Ken Dowden , " There is even a saga effect : We can follow the fates of some families in successive generations " . 
 After the rise of the hero cult , gods and heroes constitute the sacral sphere and are invoked together in oaths and prayers which are addressed to them . Burkert notes that " the roster of heroes , again in contrast to the gods , is never given fixed and final form . Great gods are no longer born , but new heroes can always be raised up from the army of the dead . " Another important difference between the hero cult and the cult of gods is that the hero becomes the centre of local group identity . 
 The monumental events of Heracles are regarded as the dawn of the age of heroes . To the Heroic Age are also ascribed three great events : the <unk> expedition , the Theban Cycle and the Trojan War . 
 = = = = Heracles and the Heracleidae = = = = 
 Some scholars believe that behind Heracles ' complicated mythology there was probably a real man , perhaps a chieftain @-@ vassal of the kingdom of Argos . Some scholars suggest the story of Heracles is an allegory for the sun 's yearly passage through the twelve constellations of the zodiac . Others point to earlier myths from other cultures , showing the story of Heracles as a local adaptation of hero myths already well established . Traditionally , Heracles was the son of Zeus and Alcmene , granddaughter of Perseus . His fantastic solitary exploits , with their many folk @-@ tale themes , provided much material for popular legend . According to Burkert , " He is portrayed as a sacrificer , mentioned as a founder of altars , and imagined as a voracious eater himself ; it is in this role that he appears in comedy , while his tragic end provided much material for tragedy — Heracles is regarded by Thalia <unk> as " a play of great significance in examination of other <unk> dramas " . In art and literature Heracles was represented as an enormously strong man of moderate height ; his characteristic weapon was the bow but frequently also the club . Vase paintings demonstrate the unparalleled popularity of Heracles , his fight with the lion being depicted many hundreds of times . 
 Heracles also entered Etruscan and Roman mythology and cult , and the exclamation " <unk> " became as familiar to the Romans as " <unk> " was to the Greeks . In Italy he was worshipped as a god of merchants and traders , although others also prayed to him for his characteristic gifts of good luck or rescue from danger . 
 Heracles attained the highest social prestige through his appointment as official ancestor of the Dorian kings . This probably served as a legitimation for the Dorian migrations into the Peloponnese . Hyllus , the eponymous hero of one Dorian <unk> , became the son of Heracles and one of the Heracleidae or <unk> ( the numerous descendants of Heracles , especially the descendants of Hyllus — other Heracleidae included <unk> , Lamos , Manto , <unk> , Tlepolemus , and Telephus ) . These <unk> conquered the Peloponnesian kingdoms of Mycenae , Sparta and Argos , claiming , according to legend , a right to rule them through their ancestor . Their rise to dominance is frequently called the " Dorian invasion " . The Lydian and later the Macedonian kings , as rulers of the same rank , also became Heracleidae . 
 Other members of this earliest generation of heroes such as Perseus , Deucalion , Theseus and Bellerophon , have many traits in common with Heracles . Like him , their exploits are solitary , fantastic and border on fairy tale , as they slay monsters such as the Chimera and Medusa . Bellerophon 's adventures are commonplace types , similar to the adventures of Heracles and Theseus . Sending a hero to his presumed death is also a recurrent theme of this early heroic tradition , used in the cases of Perseus and Bellerophon . 
 = = = = Argonauts = = = = 
 The only surviving Hellenistic epic , the Argonautica of Apollonius of Rhodes ( epic poet , scholar , and director of the Library of Alexandria ) tells the myth of the voyage of Jason and the Argonauts to retrieve the Golden Fleece from the mythical land of Colchis . In the Argonautica , Jason is impelled on his quest by king Pelias , who receives a prophecy that a man with one sandal would be his nemesis . Jason loses a sandal in a river , arrives at the court of Pelias , and the epic is set in motion . Nearly every member of the next generation of heroes , as well as Heracles , went with Jason in the ship Argo to fetch the Golden Fleece . This generation also included Theseus , who went to Crete to slay the Minotaur ; Atalanta , the female heroine , and Meleager , who once had an epic cycle of his own to rival the Iliad and Odyssey . Pindar , Apollonius and the Bibliotheca endeavor to give full lists of the Argonauts . 
 Although Apollonius wrote his poem in the 3rd century BC , the composition of the story of the Argonauts is earlier than Odyssey , which shows familiarity with the exploits of Jason ( the wandering of Odysseus may have been partly founded on it ) . In ancient times the expedition was regarded as a historical fact , an incident in the opening up of the Black Sea to Greek commerce and colonization . It was also extremely popular , forming a cycle to which a number of local legends became attached . The story of Medea , in particular , caught the imagination of the tragic poets . 
 = = = = House of Atreus and Theban Cycle = = = = 
 In between the Argo and the Trojan War , there was a generation known chiefly for its horrific crimes . This includes the doings of Atreus and <unk> at Argos . Behind the myth of the house of Atreus ( one of the two principal heroic dynasties with the house of <unk> ) lies the problem of the devolution of power and of the mode of accession to sovereignty . The twins Atreus and <unk> with their descendants played the leading role in the tragedy of the devolution of power in Mycenae . 
 The Theban Cycle deals with events associated especially with Cadmus , the city 's founder , and later with the doings of Laius and Oedipus at Thebes ; a series of stories that lead to the eventual pillage of that city at the hands of the Seven Against Thebes and Epigoni . ( It is not known whether the Seven Against Thebes figured in early epic . ) As far as Oedipus is concerned , early epic accounts seem to have him continuing to rule at Thebes after the revelation that <unk> was his mother , and subsequently marrying a second wife who becomes the mother of his children — markedly different from the tale known to us through tragedy ( e.g. Sophocles ' Oedipus the King ) and later mythological accounts . 
 = = = = Trojan War and aftermath = = = = 
 Greek mythology culminates in the Trojan War , fought between Greece and Troy , and its aftermath . In Homer 's works , such as the Iliad , the chief stories have already taken shape and substance , and individual themes were elaborated later , especially in Greek drama . The Trojan War also elicited great interest in the Roman culture because of the story of Aeneas , a Trojan hero whose journey from Troy led to the founding of the city that would one day become Rome , as recounted in Virgil 's Aeneid ( Book II of Virgil 's Aeneid contains the best @-@ known account of the sack of Troy ) . Finally there are two pseudo @-@ chronicles written in Latin that passed under the names of Dictys <unk> and Dares <unk> . 
 The Trojan War cycle , a collection of epic poems , starts with the events leading up to the war : Eris and the golden apple of <unk> , the Judgement of Paris , the abduction of Helen , the sacrifice of Iphigenia at Aulis . To recover Helen , the Greeks launched a great expedition under the overall command of Menelaus ' brother , Agamemnon , king of Argos or Mycenae , but the Trojans refused to return Helen . The Iliad , which is set in the tenth year of the war , tells of the quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles , who was the finest Greek warrior , and the consequent deaths in battle of Achilles ' beloved comrade Patroclus and Priam 's eldest son , Hector . After Hector 's death the Trojans were joined by two exotic allies , Penthesilea , queen of the Amazons , and Memnon , king of the Ethiopians and son of the dawn @-@ goddess Eos . Achilles killed both of these , but Paris then managed to kill Achilles with an arrow in the heel . Achilles ' heel was the only part of his body which was not invulnerable to damage by human weaponry . Before they could take Troy , the Greeks had to steal from the citadel the wooden image of Pallas Athena ( the Palladium ) . Finally , with Athena 's help , they built the Trojan Horse . Despite the warnings of Priam 's daughter Cassandra , the Trojans were persuaded by <unk> , a Greek who feigned desertion , to take the horse inside the walls of Troy as an offering to Athena ; the priest <unk> , who tried to have the horse destroyed , was killed by sea @-@ serpents . At night the Greek fleet returned , and the Greeks from the horse opened the gates of Troy . In the total sack that followed , Priam and his remaining sons were slaughtered ; the Trojan women passed into slavery in various cities of Greece . The adventurous homeward voyages of the Greek leaders ( including the wanderings of Odysseus and Aeneas ( the Aeneid ) , and the murder of Agamemnon ) were told in two epics , the Returns ( the lost <unk> ) and Homer 's Odyssey . The Trojan cycle also includes the adventures of the children of the Trojan generation ( e.g. , Orestes and Telemachus ) . 
 The Trojan War provided a variety of themes and became a main source of inspiration for Ancient Greek artists ( e.g. metopes on the Parthenon depicting the sack of Troy ) ; this artistic preference for themes deriving from the Trojan Cycle indicates its importance to the Ancient Greek civilization . The same mythological cycle also inspired a series of posterior European literary writings . For instance , Trojan Medieval European writers , unacquainted with Homer at first hand , found in the Troy legend a rich source of heroic and romantic storytelling and a convenient framework into which to fit their own courtly and chivalric ideals . Twelfth @-@ century authors , such as Benoît de Sainte @-@ Maure ( Roman de Troie [ Romance of Troy , 1154 – 60 ] ) and Joseph of Exeter ( De Bello <unk> [ On the Trojan War , 1183 ] ) describe the war while rewriting the standard version they found in Dictys and Dares . They thus follow Horace 's advice and Virgil 's example : they rewrite a poem of Troy instead of telling something completely new . 
 Some of the more famous heroes noted for their inclusion in the Trojan War were : 
 On the Trojan side : 
 Aeneas 
 Hector 
 Paris 
 On the Greek side : 
 Ajax ( there were two <unk> ) 
 Achilles 
 King Agamemnon 
 Menelaus 
 Odysseus 
 = = Greek and Roman conceptions of myth = = 
 Mythology was at the heart of everyday life in Ancient Greece . Greeks regarded mythology as a part of their history . They used myth to explain natural phenomena , cultural variations , traditional enmities and friendships . It was a source of pride to be able to trace the descent of one 's leaders from a mythological hero or a god . Few ever doubted that there was truth behind the account of the Trojan War in the Iliad and Odyssey . According to Victor Davis Hanson , a military historian , columnist , political essayist and former classics professor , and John Heath , a classics professor , the profound knowledge of the Homeric epos was deemed by the Greeks the basis of their acculturation . Homer was the " education of Greece " ( <unk> <unk> ) , and his poetry " the Book " . 
 = = = Philosophy and myth = = = 
 After the rise of philosophy , history , prose and rationalism in the late 5th century BC , the fate of myth became uncertain , and mythological genealogies gave place to a conception of history which tried to exclude the supernatural ( such as the <unk> history ) . While poets and dramatists were reworking the myths , Greek historians and philosophers were beginning to criticize them . 
 A few radical philosophers like Xenophanes of Colophon were already beginning to label the poets ' tales as blasphemous lies in the 6th century BC ; Xenophanes had complained that Homer and Hesiod attributed to the gods " all that is shameful and disgraceful among men ; they steal , commit adultery , and deceive one another " . This line of thought found its most sweeping expression in Plato 's Republic and Laws . Plato created his own allegorical myths ( such as the vision of Er in the Republic ) , attacked the traditional tales of the gods ' tricks , thefts and <unk> as immoral , and objected to their central role in literature . Plato 's criticism was the first serious challenge to the Homeric mythological tradition , referring to the myths as " old wives ' chatter " . For his part Aristotle criticized the Pre @-@ <unk> quasi @-@ mythical philosophical approach and underscored that " Hesiod and the theological writers were concerned only with what seemed plausible to themselves , and had no respect for us ... But it is not worth taking seriously writers who show off in the mythical style ; as for those who do proceed by proving their assertions , we must cross @-@ examine them " . 
 Nevertheless , even Plato did not manage to wean himself and his society from the influence of myth ; his own characterization for Socrates is based on the traditional Homeric and tragic patterns , used by the philosopher to praise the righteous life of his teacher : 
 But perhaps someone might say : " Are you then not ashamed , Socrates , of having followed such a pursuit , that you are now in danger of being put to death as a result ? " But I should make to him a just reply : " You do not speak well , Sir , if you think a man in whom there is even a little merit ought to consider danger of life or death , and not rather regard this only , when he does things , whether the things he does are right or wrong and the acts of a good or a bad man . For according to your argument all the demigods would be bad who died at Troy , including the son of Thetis , who so despised danger , in comparison with enduring any disgrace , that when his mother ( and she was a goddess ) said to him , as he was eager to slay Hector , something like this , I believe , 
 My son , if you avenge the death of your friend Patroclus and kill Hector , you yourself shall die ; for straightway , after Hector , is death appointed unto you . ( Hom . Il . 18 @.@ 96 ) 
 he , when he heard this , made light of death and danger , and feared much more to live as a coward and not to avenge his friends , and said , 
 <unk> may I die , after doing vengeance upon the wrongdoer , that I may not stay here , jeered at beside the curved ships , a burden of the earth . 
 Hanson and Heath estimate that Plato 's rejection of the Homeric tradition was not favorably received by the grassroots Greek civilization . The old myths were kept alive in local cults ; they continued to influence poetry and to form the main subject of painting and sculpture . 
 More sportingly , the 5th century BC tragedian Euripides often played with the old traditions , mocking them , and through the voice of his characters injecting notes of doubt . Yet the subjects of his plays were taken , without exception , from myth . Many of these plays were written in answer to a predecessor 's version of the same or similar myth . Euripides mainly <unk> the myths about the gods and begins his critique with an objection similar to the one previously expressed by Xenocrates : the gods , as traditionally represented , are far too crassly anthropomorphic . 
 = = = Hellenistic and Roman rationalism = = = 
 During the Hellenistic period , mythology took on the prestige of elite knowledge that marks its possessors as belonging to a certain class . At the same time , the skeptical turn of the Classical age became even more pronounced . Greek mythographer Euhemerus established the tradition of seeking an actual historical basis for mythical beings and events . Although his original work ( Sacred Scriptures ) is lost , much is known about it from what is recorded by Diodorus and Lactantius . 
 <unk> hermeneutics of myth became even more popular under the Roman Empire , thanks to the physicalist theories of Stoic and Epicurean philosophy . Stoics presented explanations of the gods and heroes as physical phenomena , while the <unk> rationalized them as historical figures . At the same time , the Stoics and the Neoplatonists promoted the moral significations of the mythological tradition , often based on Greek etymologies . Through his Epicurean message , Lucretius had sought to expel superstitious fears from the minds of his fellow @-@ citizens . Livy , too , is skeptical about the mythological tradition and claims that he does not intend to pass judgement on such legends ( <unk> ) . The challenge for Romans with a strong and apologetic sense of religious tradition was to defend that tradition while conceding that it was often a breeding @-@ ground for superstition . The antiquarian Varro , who regarded religion as a human institution with great importance for the preservation of good in society , devoted rigorous study to the origins of religious cults . In his <unk> Rerum <unk> ( which has not survived , but Augustine 's City of God indicates its general approach ) Varro argues that whereas the superstitious man fears the gods , the truly religious person venerates them as parents . According to Varro , there have been three accounts of deities in the Roman society : the mythical account created by poets for theatre and entertainment , the civil account used by people for veneration as well as by the city , and the natural account created by the philosophers . The best state is , adds Varro , where the civil theology combines the poetic mythical account with the philosopher 's . 
 Roman Academic Cotta ridicules both literal and allegorical acceptance of myth , declaring roundly that myths have no place in philosophy . Cicero is also generally disdainful of myth , but , like Varro , he is emphatic in his support for the state religion and its institutions . It is difficult to know how far down the social scale this rationalism extended . Cicero asserts that no one ( not even old women and boys ) is so foolish as to believe in the terrors of Hades or the existence of <unk> , centaurs or other composite creatures , but , on the other hand , the orator elsewhere complains of the superstitious and credulous character of the people . De Natura Deorum is the most comprehensive summary of Cicero 's line of thought . 
 = = = <unk> trends = = = 
 In Ancient Roman times , a new Roman mythology was born through <unk> of numerous Greek and other foreign gods . This occurred because the Romans had little mythology of their own and inheritance of the Greek mythological tradition caused the major Roman gods to adopt characteristics of their Greek equivalents . The gods Zeus and Jupiter are an example of this mythological overlap . In addition to the combination of the two mythological traditions , the association of the Romans with eastern religions led to further <unk> . For instance , the cult of Sun was introduced in Rome after Aurelian 's successful campaigns in Syria . The Asiatic divinities Mithras ( that is to say , the Sun ) and Ba 'al were combined with Apollo and Helios into one Sol Invictus , with <unk> rites and compound attributes . Apollo might be increasingly identified in religion with Helios or even Dionysus , but texts retelling his myths seldom reflected such developments . The traditional literary mythology was increasingly dissociated from actual religious practice . The worship of Sol as special protector of the emperors and of the empire remained the chief imperial religion until it was replaced by Christianity . 
 The surviving 2nd @-@ century collection of Orphic Hymns ( second century AD ) and the Saturnalia of Macrobius Ambrosius Theodosius ( fifth century ) are influenced by the theories of rationalism and the <unk> trends as well . The Orphic Hymns are a set of pre @-@ classical poetic compositions , attributed to Orpheus , himself the subject of a renowned myth . In reality , these poems were probably composed by several different poets , and contain a rich set of clues about prehistoric European mythology . The stated purpose of the Saturnalia is to transmit the Hellenic culture Macrobius has derived from his reading , even though much of his treatment of gods is colored by Egyptian and North African mythology and theology ( which also affect the interpretation of Virgil ) . In Saturnalia reappear <unk> comments influenced by the <unk> , the Stoics and the Neoplatonists . 
 = = Modern interpretations = = 
 The genesis of modern understanding of Greek mythology is regarded by some scholars as a double reaction at the end of the eighteenth century against " the traditional attitude of Christian animosity " , in which the Christian reinterpretation of myth as a " lie " or fable had been retained . In Germany , by about 1795 , there was a growing interest in Homer and Greek mythology . In Göttingen , Johann Matthias Gesner began to revive Greek studies , while his successor , Christian Gottlob Heyne , worked with Johann Joachim Winckelmann , and laid the foundations for mythological research both in Germany and elsewhere . 
 = = = Comparative and psychoanalytic approaches = = = 
 The development of comparative philology in the 19th century , together with ethnological discoveries in the 20th century , established the science of myth . Since the Romantics , all study of myth has been comparative . Wilhelm <unk> , James Frazer , and Stith Thompson employed the comparative approach to collect and classify the themes of folklore and mythology . In 1871 Edward Burnett <unk> published his Primitive Culture , in which he applied the comparative method and tried to explain the origin and evolution of religion . <unk> 's procedure of drawing together material culture , ritual and myth of widely separated cultures influenced both Carl Jung and Joseph Campbell . Max Müller applied the new science of comparative mythology to the study of myth , in which he detected the distorted remains of Aryan nature worship . Bronisław Malinowski emphasized the ways myth fulfills common social functions . Claude Lévi @-@ Strauss and other structuralists have compared the formal relations and patterns in myths throughout the world . 
 Sigmund Freud introduced a <unk> and biological conception of man and a view of myth as an expression of repressed ideas . Dream interpretation is the basis of Freudian myth interpretation and Freud 's concept of <unk> recognizes the importance of contextual relationships for the interpretation of any individual element in a dream . This suggestion would find an important point of <unk> between the structuralist and psychoanalytic approaches to myth in Freud 's thought . Carl Jung extended the <unk> , psychological approach with his theory of the " collective unconscious " and the archetypes ( inherited " archaic " patterns ) , often encoded in myth , that arise out of it . According to Jung , " myth @-@ forming structural elements must be present in the unconscious psyche " . Comparing Jung 's methodology with Joseph Campbell 's theory , Robert A. Segal concludes that " to interpret a myth Campbell simply identifies the archetypes in it . An interpretation of the Odyssey , for example , would show how Odysseus 's life conforms to a heroic pattern . Jung , by contrast , considers the identification of archetypes merely the first step in the interpretation of a myth " . Karl Kerényi , one of the founders of modern studies in Greek mythology , gave up his early views of myth , in order to apply Jung 's theories of archetypes to Greek myth . 
 = = = Origin theories = = = 
 Max Müller attempted to understand an Indo @-@ European religious form by tracing it back to its Indo @-@ European ( or , in Müller 's time , " Aryan " ) " original " manifestation . In 1891 , he claimed that " the most important discovery which has been made during the nineteenth century with respect to the ancient history of mankind ... was this sample equation : Sanskrit <unk> @-@ <unk> 
 = Greek Zeus = 
 Latin Jupiter = Old Norse Tyr " . The question of Greek mythology 's place in Indo @-@ European studies has generated much scholarship since Müller 's time . For example , philologist Georges Dumézil draws a comparison between the Greek Uranus and the Sanskrit Varuna , although there is no hint that he believes them to be originally connected . In other cases , close parallels in character and function suggest a common heritage , yet lack of linguistic evidence makes it difficult to prove , as in the case of the Greek Moirai and the Norns of Norse mythology . 
 Archaeology and <unk> , on the other hand , have revealed that the Greeks were also inspired by some of the civilizations of Asia Minor and the Near East . Adonis seems to be the Greek counterpart — more clearly in cult than in myth — of a Near Eastern " dying god " . Cybele is rooted in Anatolian culture while much of Aphrodite 's iconography may spring from Semitic goddesses . There are also possible parallels between the earliest divine generations ( Chaos and its children ) and Tiamat in the Enuma Elish . According to Meyer Reinhold , " near Eastern <unk> concepts , involving divine succession through violence and generational conflicts for power , found their way ... into Greek mythology " . In addition to Indo @-@ European and Near Eastern origins , some scholars have speculated on the debts of Greek mythology to the pre @-@ Hellenic societies : Crete , Mycenae , Pylos , Thebes and Orchomenus . Historians of religion were fascinated by a number of apparently ancient configurations of myth connected with Crete ( the god as bull , Zeus and Europa , Pasiphaë who yields to the bull and gives birth to the Minotaur etc . ) Martin P. Nilsson concluded that all great classical Greek myths were tied to <unk> centres and were anchored in prehistoric times . Nevertheless , according to Burkert , the iconography of the Cretan Palace Period has provided almost no confirmation for these theories . 
 = = Motifs in Western art and literature = = 
 The widespread adoption of Christianity did not curb the popularity of the myths . With the rediscovery of classical antiquity in the Renaissance , the poetry of Ovid became a major influence on the imagination of poets , dramatists , musicians and artists . From the early years of Renaissance , artists such as Leonardo da Vinci , Michelangelo , and Raphael , portrayed the Pagan subjects of Greek mythology alongside more conventional Christian themes . Through the medium of Latin and the works of Ovid , Greek myth influenced medieval and Renaissance poets such as Petrarch , Boccaccio and Dante in Italy . 
 In Northern Europe , Greek mythology never took the same hold of the visual arts , but its effect was very obvious on literature . The English imagination was fired by Greek mythology starting with Chaucer and John Milton and continuing through Shakespeare to Robert Bridges in the 20th century . Racine in France and Goethe in Germany revived Greek drama , reworking the ancient myths . Although during the Enlightenment of the 18th century reaction against Greek myth spread throughout Europe , the myths continued to provide an important source of raw material for dramatists , including those who wrote the libretti for many of Handel 's and Mozart 's operas . By the end of the 18th century , Romanticism initiated a surge of enthusiasm for all things Greek , including Greek mythology . In Britain , new translations of Greek tragedies and Homer inspired contemporary poets ( such as Alfred Lord Tennyson , Keats , Byron and Shelley ) and painters ( such as Lord Leighton and Lawrence Alma @-@ Tadema ) . Christoph Gluck , Richard Strauss , Jacques Offenbach and many others set Greek mythological themes to music . American authors of the 19th century , such as Thomas Bulfinch and Nathaniel Hawthorne , held that the study of the classical myths was essential to the understanding of English and American literature . In more recent times , classical themes have been reinterpreted by dramatists Jean Anouilh , Jean Cocteau , and Jean <unk> in France , Eugene O 'Neill in America , and T. S. Eliot in Britain and by novelists such as James Joyce and André Gide . 
 = Our Children , Ourselves = 
 " Our Children , Ourselves " is the 12th episode of the second season of the American television comedy series , Modern Family and the 36th overall episode of the series . Executive producers Dan O 'Shannon & Bill Wrubel wrote the episode , and Adam Shankman directed it . The episode originally aired on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on January 12 , 2011 . It featured guest star Mary Lynn Rajskub as Mitchell 's ex @-@ girlfriend . 
 In this episode , the dedication of Alex to learning makes Phil and Claire question themselves . Gloria tries to meet new friends . Mitchell runs into an ex @-@ girlfriend while out with his current boyfriend , Cameron . 
 " Our Children , Ourselves " received generally positive reviews from television critics with many praising the " twist ending " to Mitchell and Cameron 's storyline . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by 11 @.@ 12 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 10 percent share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic and became the second highest @-@ rated ABC program of the original week it aired after Grey 's Anatomy . 
 Sarah Hyland does not appear in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the Dunphy house , Phil ( Ty Burrell ) and Claire ( Julie Bowen ) become worried that Alex ( Ariel Winter ) is studying too much . The two attempt to get her to take a break and eventually have to force her to do so . Alex eventually gets the second @-@ highest grade in the class , behind a classmate named Sanjay Patel . Alex believes this is due to the fact that Sanjay has a doctor and a professor for parents , while she must do her best with what she was given . This statement offends Phil and Claire , with Claire starting to think they are holding their children back . 
 Later when they go to the movies , they run into Sanjay 's parents who are there to see a French movie . Phil and Claire decide to follow them to encourage their kids . Midway through the movie Phil leaves to watch <unk> 3D , the film they originally intended to see , since they both are fans of cheesy horror films involving monsters . Phil has fun at his movie while Claire falls asleep at the highly acclaimed French one . After waking her up , Phil tells her that Alex still had one of the highest grades in the class , and dumb parents do not have kids that smart . Claire is reassured and they leave for home after seeing that the " bright Dr. Patel " cannot validate his parking ticket . 
 Mitchell ( Jesse Tyler Ferguson ) and Cameron ( Eric Stonestreet ) bump into Mitchell 's ex @-@ girlfriend , Tracy ( Mary Lynn Rajskub ) at a mall . Mitchell suggest hanging out , but she decides against it . Later , they see Tracy with what appears to be an eight @-@ year @-@ old red @-@ headed child ( seen only from behind ) , whose approximate age would match the last time Tracy and Mitchell saw each other ( and the only time Mitchell had sex with a woman ) . Mitchell tells this to Cameron at dinner , making him anxious . He eventually agrees with Mitchell that they should meet the child , who they are sure is his son . However , they then realize that he actually is a dwarf man ( Mark <unk> ) and Tracy 's husband . The situation becomes more awkward when he opens his present from Mitchell and Cameron , a " Little Slugger " baseball glove . 
 Meanwhile , the Hoffmans , a couple that Gloria ( Sofía Vergara ) and Jay ( Ed O 'Neill ) Pritchett met on a vacation , come to visit them much to Jay 's openly ( and Gloria 's more discreet ) chagrin . He eventually tells them his true feelings not knowing that they were spending the night at their house . The couple decides to leave in a cab , as Gloria comes down to apologize they give her a copy of Gabriel García Márquez 's " One hundred years of solitude " that they had signed by the author specially for her , so she convinces them to stay by telling them that Jay 's " mind is going away " . In the morning , Jay decides to apologize to the Hoffmans ; however , during his apology he drinks from a prank glass that Manny gave him , ending in him being covered in orange juice . The Hoffmans leave believing that Jay is mad and admiring Gloria for enduring such a situation . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Our Children , Ourselves " was written by executive producers , Dan O 'Shannon and Bill Wrubel . The episode was also directed by Adam Shankman . This episode was the second script collaboration by O 'Shannon and Wrubel , who co @-@ wrote the episode " Airport 2010 " . " Our Children , Ourselves " was filmed on October 13 , and October 15 , 2010 . 
 In October 2010 , TV Guide reported that Mary Lynn Rajskub had been cast as Mitchell 's ex @-@ girlfriend . She filmed her appearance on October 13 , 2010 . Rajskub later said in an interview on Lopez Tonight that she had gone through the same experience : " I had this guy , I think I was in 7th or 8th grade ... we had this make out session [ ... ] he pulled away abruptly and I never saw him again . Then 20 years later he <unk> me . Totally gay " . 
 The episode aired on ABC in the United States on January 12 , 2011 . When the episode aired , the airtime was pushed 20 minutes later than its usual time slot due to Barack Obama 's speech about the 2011 Tucson shooting . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Our Children , Ourselves " was seen by an estimated 11 @.@ 12 million households and received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 10 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 2 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This made it the highest @-@ rated program on Wednesday , according to the Nielsen Media Research . The episode received a drop from the previous episode , " Slow Down Your Neighbors " , possibly because of the 20 @-@ minute delay in its starting time . Despite this , the episode became the second highest @-@ rated ABC show after Grey 's Anatomy and the finished seventh in the ratings the week it premiered . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews , with many praising the ending to Mitchell and Cameron 's storyline . 
 TV Squad writer Joel Keller gave the episode a positive review , writing that it had " funny moments " , but pointed out that " all of them left me wanting some more information to round things out . " 
 John Teti of The A.V. Club called it " not a very good episode " and mainly criticized the Delgado – Pritchett storyline , comparing it to " every episode of Three ’ s Company ever . " Teti ultimately gave the episode a C + . 
 Rachael Maddux of New York praised the episode for letting the characters " out of their primly landscaped domiciles to interact with the other batty folks of the world " . 
 Matt Roush of TV <unk> that the episode 's story lines were " all winners " . Joyce Eng and <unk> Stanhope , also from TV Guide , later named the conclusion to Mitchell and Cameron 's storyline the best moment of the week , January 6 to January 13 , 2011 . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Lesley Savage commented that while the episode wasn 't a good follow up to " Slow Down Your Neighbors " , the ending to the Pritchett @-@ Tucker storyline was " pretty darn funny , and possibly a little un @-@ PC " . 
 James Poniewozik of Time wrote that while the plot came " straight out of the Wacky Misunderstanding School of <unk> " it was still a satisfying episode calling Phil and Claire 's storyline " the most amusing storyline " . 
 = Kenneth Dewar = 
 Vice @-@ Admiral Kenneth Gilbert Balmain Dewar , CBE , RN ( 21 September 1879 – 8 September 1964 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy . After specialising as a gunnery officer , Dewar became a staff officer and a controversial student of naval tactics before seeing extensive service during the First World War . He served in the Dardanelles Campaign and commanded a monitor in home waters before serving at the Admiralty for more than four years of staff duty . After the war ended he became embroiled in the controversy surrounding the consequences of the Battle of Jutland . Despite this , he held a variety of commands during the 1920s . 
 In 1928 he was at the heart of the " Royal Oak Mutiny " , when as Captain of the battleship Royal Oak he forwarded his executive officer 's letter of complaint about their immediate superior , Rear @-@ Admiral Collard , to higher authority . This came in the wake of a series of incidents aboard ship . All three men were ordered back to Britain , and Dewar and his executive officer requested Courts @-@ martial so that they might defend themselves . The trials were held in Gibraltar and garnered widespread media coverage . 
 Dewar , though found partially guilty , survived with a severe reprimand . His executive officer was found guilty and resigned , while Collard was compelled to resign his commission for provoking the situation . Having then commanded successively the two oldest capital ships in the fleet , Dewar retired on promotion to Rear @-@ Admiral . His memoirs , published as The Navy from Within in 1939 , were a vitriolic indictment of the Navy 's practices . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Dewar was born in Queensferry on 21 September 1879 , the son of Dr. James and Mrs. Flora Dewar . In July , 1893 he was nominated as a naval cadet , passed the entrance examination and joined the training ship Britannia , where he studied for two years . Two of his brothers joined the navy ; Alfred Charles ( born 1876 ) who was promoted to Captain on the Retired List and was appointed Head of the Historical Section of the Naval Staff , and Alan Ramsay ( born 1887 ) who achieved Flag Rank in 1938 . Dewar performed so well in Britannia , that upon graduation , he was appointed Midshipman straight away , which normally required a year 's service at sea and passing an examination . He joined the protected cruiser Hawke on 20 August 1895 . The following year he was appointed to the battleship Magnificent on 30 October 1896 . Promoted Acting Sub @-@ Lieutenant , Dewar was confirmed in that rank and promoted to Lieutenant on 8 March 1900 . Upon promotion he was posted to the Devonport destroyer Osprey on 15 March . On 12 June he was appointed to the torpedo @-@ boat destroyer <unk> . 
 = = = Gunnery officer = = = 
 Following this period at sea , Lieutenant Dewar was selected to specialise in gunnery duties . His time training at HMS Excellent , the gunnery school at Portsmouth , coincided with that of the captaincy of Percy Scott , the renowned gunnery expert . His performance on the two @-@ year course was so impressive that on graduation he was given command of a ship . From 21 July 1903 , Dewar was Lieutenant and Commander of the Chatham @-@ based destroyer Mermaid . 
 Dewar became the gunnery officer of the armoured cruiser Kent on 24 August 1905 , where he remained until 1908 . Dewar 's dedication and standard of training became evident when his ship led the Fleet in battle practice firings and <unk> 's @-@ test . He was reassigned to Excellent on 19 January 1908 for instruction duties . Soon he was sent to sea again , being made gunnery officer of the battleship Prince George on 8 February 1908 . He rejoined Excellent on 22 December that year . On 11 June 1909 Dewar was " lent " as gunnery officer to the protected cruiser Spartiate for the annual fleet manœuvres . Once the manœuvres were finished , Dewar was made assistant to the Inspector of Target Practice , an important gunnery position at the Admiralty on 17 July . In the same year , he was asked to lecture on the Imperial Japanese Navy , which he had previously had experience of , at the Royal Naval War College at Portsmouth . During his talk , he exhibited an unpalatable forthrightness by saying that the Royal Navy needed more intellectual officers like Togo Heihachiro , implying that there was a dearth of such officers . The President of the College , Lewis Bayly , abruptly terminated his lecture . 
 On 1 January 1910 , Dewar was once more given sea duty as First Lieutenant and Gunnery Officer ( referred to as " 1st and G " ) of Dreadnought . Dreadnought was still one of the most prestigious postings in the fleet despite the growing number of newer dreadnought battleships and battle cruisers entering service . It was Dewar 's misfortune during this service to be taken in by the Dreadnought hoax on 10 February , in which he escorted a party of practical jokers , that included Virginia Woolf , pretending to be Abyssinian royalty on an official visit to the battleship . However , Dewar befriended the captain , Herbert Richmond , who acted both as a friend and a mentor to him in the following years . With Richmond 's encouragement , Dewar began a thorough study of naval tactics and strategy which would later continue at the Royal Naval War College . 
 = = = Promotion to commander = = = 
 Dewar was reappointed to Dreadnought on 28 March 1911 , was promoted Commander on 22 June and on 14 December he was appointed for duty at the Royal Naval War College , Portsmouth as an instructor . The next year he was selected to join the newly formed War Staff at the Admiralty , created on First lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill 's orders in 1912 . He was consequently reappointed for duty at the War College on 2 April 1912 . On 4 March 1913 it was announced that Commander Dewar had been awarded the Gold Medal and Trench @-@ Gascoigne prize by the Royal United Service Institution for his winning essay on the question " What is the war value of oversea commerce ? How did it affect our naval policy in the past and how does it in the present day ? " The final chapter of the paper was suppressed from publication by the Admiralty ; in it Dewar advocated a " distant " blockade in a war with Germany at a time ( 1912 ) when the Royal Navy was still contemplating a " close " blockade of the German coastline . In the event a distant blockade was imposed . Dewar was then and remained unsympathetic to the removal of his concluding chapter ; 
 Dewar 's reputation as an intellectual within the navy was confirmed when in 1912 , he became one of the founder members of The Naval Review , an independent journal of Royal Navy officers . That year Richmond had formed a " Naval Society " with a dozen friends , Dewar among them . After Richmond went abroad on active service , Dewar decided that instead of being a society of purely discussion , it ought publish a journal , to which end he " raised subscriptions for the first issue from some forty or fifty officers of all ranks " . 
 In 1914 Dewar was appointed commander ( second @-@ in @-@ command ) of the battleship Prince of Wales , then flagship of the 5th Battle Squadron in the 2nd Fleet ( Home Fleets ) . On 28 July , Dewar married Gertrude Margaret Stapleton @-@ Bretherton , the sister of Evelyn , Princess Blücher , in a service at St. Bartholomew 's Church in Rainhill on Merseyside . The service was conducted by the Archbishop of Liverpool and the Bishop of Portsmouth . Dewar 's best man was the Honourable Reginald Plunkett , who later became known as Reginald Plunkett @-@ Ernle @-@ Erle @-@ Drax , and would go on to achieve high rank in the navy . Dewar and Gertrude had one son together , Kenneth Malcolm J. Dewar . 
 = = First World War = = 
 In August 1914 Britain went to war with Germany , and later that year with the Ottoman Empire ( modern @-@ day Turkey ) . Prince of Wales remained in the 5th Battle Squadron until 1915 , when with a number of other pre @-@ dreadnoughts she was sent to the Eastern Mediterranean to support the Gallipoli landings , the goal of which was to capture the strategically important Dardanelles Straits , take Constantinople and knock the Ottoman Empire out of the war . As second @-@ in @-@ command of Prince of Wales , Dewar was present for part of the naval operations in the Dardanelles Campaign against the Turkish positions . Following aborted attempts to lend heavy @-@ gunfire support to the troops at ANZAC Cove , Dewar wrote an unofficial memo to the Rear @-@ Admiral commanding the Eastern Mediterranean Squadron , with suggestions for the employment of indirect fire to attack Turkish targets . Dewar heard nothing of his proposals , and it was not until November , 1915 that indirect fire was used with good effect by the bulged cruiser Edgar . Following the campaign , in October Dewar was given command of HM Gunnery School , Devonport . It was an important position as large numbers of Reserve and Volunteer Reserve officers either re @-@ qualified or qualified in gunnery duties . After a year Dewar returned to sea in command of the Abercrombie class monitor Roberts , and joined the Dover Patrol in August , 1916 . 
 In response to the German battle cruiser raids on the British coast , a visible response was called for to quell public anxiety . On 27 May 1916 Roberts arrived at <unk> to act as a guard ship for the port of Yarmouth , in effect acting as a coastal defence battery . Roberts fulfilled such duties at Tyneside and in the Thames Estuary for the rest of the war . Once again Dewar was rotated back to shore , and was appointed to the Operations Division of the Naval Staff under first the Jellicoe , and then the Wemyss Boards of Admiralty . Dewar was promoted to the rank of Captain on 30 June 1918 in the Half @-@ Yearly lists and then became Assistant Director of Plans in the Plans Division . On 17 October 1919 he was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) " for valuable services at the Peace Conference , Paris . " 
 = = Post @-@ war commands = = 
 = = = Jutland controversy = = = 
 While still at the Admiralty , Dewar became embroiled with the controversies surrounding the aftermath of the Battle of Jutland . The manner in which the battle had been fought had come under criticism , with a line drawn between those who supported Sir John Jellicoe , who had commanded the Grand Fleet at the battle ; and those who fell @-@ in behind his then @-@ subordinate , and successor , Sir David Beatty . Dewar followed the Beatty school of thought espoused by his former Captain , Herbert Richmond , that the battle had been lost by the staid admirals of the battleship squadrons . In November , 1920 he and his brother Captain Alfred Dewar ( retired ) were entrusted with compiling the Naval Staff Appreciation of the battle , which was completed in January , 1922 . The two brothers had produced a body of work which favoured Beatty , for whom the <unk> ' " capacity for original thinking and literary talents always held an appeal . " Even Richmond , who intensely disliked Jellicoe , and was a confidant of Beatty , agreed with the Committee on Imperial Defence 's official naval historian , Sir Julian Corbett who wrote that Dewar 's " facts were , I found , very loose . " 
 The Appreciation , which had originally been intended for distribution around the Royal Navy , was deemed so full of " far @-@ reaching and astringent criticism of Jellicoe " and of new and therefore irrelevant tactical theory that Beatty and his Board of Admiralty were compelled to decide against its publication . Indeed , Admirals Roger Keyes and Ernle Chatfield were moved to write to Beatty that if published the Appreciation " would rend the service to its foundations " . The final straw had been the very public heckling of Dewar when he lectured from his Appreciation to the twenty students of the Senior Officers ' War Course at the Royal Naval College , Greenwich . It was decided to <unk> the existing document , which had been removed from circulation and release it . It was published as The Narrative of the Battle of Jutland in 1924 . 
 All copies of the original Appreciation were ordered destroyed in 1928 and before the " Narrative " had been published Dewar and his brother had already been barred access to the original . However , he continued to have a major impact on the historiography of the Battle of Jutland by serving throughout the 1920s as Winston Churchill 's naval consultant on submarine @-@ warfare . Churchill wrote an anti @-@ Jellicoe tract in his World Crisis , Volume III which in large measure shared Dewar 's views on tactics and even some diagrams . Although Dewar would later become a supporter of the Labour Party , after Churchill was passed over for a cabinet position in 1931 Dewar wrote to him on 16 November , " I am very sorry to see that you are not in the new Cabinet . I had hoped you would go to the Admiralty and do very necessary work for the Navy . " 
 = = = Sea duty = = = 
 After four years of duty at the Admiralty , Dewar returned to sea in 1922 . He was fortunate after the " Geddes Axe " ( the systematic contraction of the Naval Service to a size substantially smaller than its pre @-@ war level ) and his controversial tenure at the Admiralty that he was still considered worthy of sea duty , the qualification for promotion to flag rank . He was appointed on 9 May to command the C class cruiser Calcutta , flagship on the North America and West Indies Station . In 1923 Dewar was given command of Calcutta 's sister @-@ ship on the same station , HMS Cape Town . While on the station he had occasion to act as Flag Captain to the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief on the station , pay calls on cities as diverse as Halifax , Nova Scotia , Quebec City and Boston while cruising the Eastern Seaboard of North America . During the U.S. blockade of the Mexican port of Tampico in 1924 Dewar and Cape Town cancelled their planned cruise of the Caribbean to adequately represent the British government at Vera Cruz , proceeding there on 4 January . 
 On 15 May 1924 Dewar was relieved in command of Cape Town by Captain G.H. Knowles , DSO . On 2 May 1925 he returned to the Admiralty as Deputy Director of Naval Intelligence . After two years in the position he was relieved in June , 1927 and given , from 15 October command of the battleship Royal Oak , flagship of the Rear @-@ Admiral in the 1st Battle Squadron , Mediterranean Fleet . The Rear @-@ Admiral , 1st Battle Squadron was Bernard St. George Collard . 
 = = " The Royal Oak Mutiny " = = 
 As Flag Captain to Admiral Collard , Dewar was technically Collard 's chief staff officer as well as captain of the Royal Oak . A good working relationship between Dewar and the second @-@ in @-@ command of the battle squadron was necessary . Notwithstanding , Collard on occasion acted imperiously and tactlessly on his flagship , causing friction with Dewar and his executive officer , Commander Henry Martin Daniel , DSO . At a dance on the quarterdeck on 12 January 1928 , Collard openly lambasted Royal Marine Bandmaster , Percy Barnacle , and allegedly said " I won 't have a bugger like that in my ship " in the presence of ship 's officers and guests . Dewar and Daniel accused Collard of " vindictive fault @-@ finding " and openly humiliating and insulting them before their crew , referring to an incident involving Collard 's disembarkation from the ship on 5 March where the admiral had openly said that he was " fed up with the ship " ; Collard countercharged the two with failing to follow orders and treating him " worse than a midshipman " . 
 Dewar and Daniel , feeling that morale was sinking due to these public displays , wrote letters of complaint which were given to Collard on 10 March , on the eve of a major exercise . Collard forwarded the letters to his superior , Vice @-@ Admiral Sir John Kelly ; he immediately passed them on to the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Admiral Sir Roger Keyes . On realising that the relationship between the two and their Flag Officer had irretrievably broken down , Keyes ordered the exercise postponed by fifteen hours and ordered a Court of Inquiry to be convened . As a consequence , Collard was ordered to strike his flag in Royal Oak and Dewar and Daniel were ordered back to Britain . The Admiralty was informed of the bare facts on the 12th and Keyes proceeded to sea with the Mediterranean Fleet for the exercise as planned . The press picked up on the story worldwide , describing the affair — with some hyperbole — as a " mutiny " . Public attention reached such proportions as to raise the concerns of the King , who summoned First Lord of the Admiralty William Bridgeman for an explanation . 
 Having arrived back in England , Dewar and Daniel gave their version of events at the Admiralty , and put in writing requests for reinstatement in their positions in Royal Oak , or trial by Court @-@ martial . Having received Keyes ' full dispatch on 16 March , the Board of Admiralty resolved that Dewar and Daniel should undergo trial by Court @-@ martial as soon as possible at Gibraltar , where Royal Oak was due to be berthed . Consequently Dewar and Commander Daniel departed Southampton in the P & O liner Malwa with their counsel , Mr. Day Kimball , and their wives , on the 24th and reached Gibraltar in the evening of the 27th . The two officers were immediately attached to the Gibraltar base ship , HMS Cormorant in accordance with naval custom . It was arranged that Daniel would face Court @-@ martial first , on 30 March , and Dewar 's would follow at its conclusion . 
 The Courts @-@ martial were held publicly in hangar " A " of the aircraft carrier Eagle . Because ten Captains from the fleet sat as members of the Court , the departure of the Mediterranean Fleet was delayed until the end of the proceedings . Out of four charges which Daniel faced , two related to writing an allegedly subversive letter ( the complaint ) and the latter two to publicly reading it out to officers of Royal Oak . Dewar consequently faced the charge of having forwarded said subversive letter . The court found Daniel " guilty " on all four charges in the afternoon of 3 April and dismissed him from his ship and ordered him to be severely reprimanded . 
 Dewar 's own Court @-@ martial began on 4 April . The Court trying him was composed of five Rear @-@ Admirals and eight Captains . Dewar pleaded " not guilty to two charges of accepting and forwarding a letter subversive of discipline and contrary to King 's Regulations and Admiralty Instructions " . Dewar had the opportunity of cross @-@ examining Rear @-@ Admiral Collard over the incident of the dance and the disembarkation . Collard admitted to saying certain things but refused to say that he had used improper words and not in earshot of anyone other than the Captain . 
 In his defence , Dewar attacked one of the charges against him , namely that of contravening Article 11 of King 's Regulations ; he declared the charge invalid because his actions did not " bring him into contempt " , and from witness testimony he portrayed himself as having acted in the best interests of his ships , his actions against Rear @-@ Admiral Collard having been made out of a sense of duty and loyalty and not malice . Discounting one charge , he said , meant that the first had to fail as well . 
 The Court reached its verdict on 5 April . The first charge was found proven , the second unproven , and Dewar was therefore acquitted of acting against regulations . However , despite his spotless record , when the Court sentenced him he was dismissed HMS Cormorant , and severely reprimanded — a potentially career @-@ destroying result . However , there was some popular support for his continued service in the navy . Questions were asked in the House of Commons as to whether Dewar or Daniel would be found new positions . The First Lord , Bridgeman , stated that they would be found positions in the Navy as soon as vacancies arose . Dewar 's career was reprieved for the time being . Daniel however resigned from the service , and following an unsuccessful attempt at a career in journalism , disappeared into obscurity in South Africa . 
 = = Post @-@ Royal Oak = = 
 Dewar was once more given duty at sea . However , he was to be relegated to second @-@ rate commands for a man of his seniority . Much to the surprise of many , on 25 September 1928 it was announced that from 5 November Dewar would be given command of the battle cruiser Tiger , the oldest of her type still in service and engaged primarily in training . However , it demonstrated the Admiralty 's continued albeit conditional faith in him . He commanded Tiger until he was given command of HMS Iron Duke the following year . On 29 May 1929 he was made a naval aide @-@ de @-@ camp ( ADC ) to King George V. However , Dewar 's time in the Navy was drawing to a close . On 4 August he was finally promoted to Rear @-@ Admiral , and the following day he was retired . Promotion to flag rank also saw the end of his duty as ADC to the King . On the day of his promotion he was also granted the Good Service pension of £ 150 per annum . 
 = = = Standing for Parliament = = = 
 In the 1931 General Election , Dewar stood as a Labour party candidate in Portsmouth North , where he lost against the incumbent by 14 @,@ 149 votes . Once more however Dewar was unable to escape controversy , having put up posters around the naval city which raised indignation among many sailors and officers . 
 The posters , which Dewar himself called " propaganda sheets " , were titled " Admiral Dewar 's Election News " , and carried the statement " The British Navy at Jutland in 1916 beat the ex @-@ Kaiser ; and at Invergordon in 1931 it beat Mr. Montagu Norman " , and featured prominently a depiction of the former Kaiser of Germany in civilian clothing in front of a sea battle , with the Governor of the Bank of England , Montagu Norman , looking on . A notice beneath the picture read : 
 The ex @-@ Kaiser tried to force German Kultur on the world . This attempt cost millions of human lives . Mr. Montagu Norman is the British head of the international financial system which tried to impose the pre @-@ War gold parity on Britain . The attempt devastated British industry and brought desolation into thousands of working @-@ class homes . 
 Dewar was accused of comparing Jutland to the Invergordon Mutiny , which rankled with many servicemen who had fought at Jutland but had taken no part in the 1931 mutiny in Northern Scotland . He claimed in his defence – a statement issued to the press on 29 October 1931 – that he had had nothing to do with the design or production of the poster , which had been published by the National Cooperative Publishing Society . Later , however , Dewar wrote , " I deeply regret that this picture should ever have been associated with my name . " At this point he had already lost at the polls by a substantial margin , the election having taken place on the 27 October . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 As part of Navy Week in 1933 on 5 August , Dewar was invited to open a naval paintings exhibition at the Ilford Galleries in London . He took the opportunity to praise the Washington Naval Conference and its successor , and to criticise the size of the Treaty battleship . On the Retired List of the Royal Navy , he was promoted to the rank of Vice @-@ Admiral ( <unk> . ) on 31 July 1934 . 
 In early 1939 Dewar 's memoirs were published . Entitled The Navy from Within he recounted his life story , while at the same time criticising severely the manner in which the Royal Navy trained its officers , blaming defects in said training for the naval failure at Gallipoli . However , his account was criticised as being far too harsh and at points hypocritical , for after condemning the naval system of training he then makes many mentions of naval officers who he himself considered to be excellent . In a letter to The Times , Dewar complained that their reviewer was taking far too much issue with the author , which as the reviewer pointed out , " a review of an autobiography must necessarily deal largely with the author himself " . Responding to a review of The Navy from Within in The Naval Review which questioned the prominence of " The Royal Oak Affair " in the book , Dewar responded by stating ; 
 Dewar , despite the attached stigma of the mutiny and criticism of his memoirs , was still held in high regard by many , and as war approached he wrote a number of letters to The Times criticising the cost of the Air Raid Precautions network , which attracted much support in the " Letters " pages in that newspaper . During the Second World War he returned to the Admiralty , working under his brother Alfred in the Historical Section of the Training and Staff Duties Division . After the war ended , Dewar would win one final victory when he sued the author and publisher of a book on Admiral Keyes for libel in 1953 . In the book written by Brigadier @-@ General Aspinall Oglander was a letter from Keyes to the King 's private secretary , Lord Stamfordham in which Keyes accused Dewar of having made contact with the press in his defence . Dewar denied this and the High Court of Justice agreed with him , finding in his favour . The solicitors acting on behalf of Aspinall @-@ Oglander and the publishers , Hogarth Press Ltd . , agreed to apologise in court and paid Dewar damages and expenses . 
 In 1957 he returned to his earlier theme on the failings of officer training , in a three @-@ part exposition on the Dardanelles Campaign for The Naval Review , the journal he had helped found over forty years previously . In the concluding article , published in October , 1957 , Dewar wrote that the failure of the Navy to adequately support the Army at Gallipoli " is to be found in the system of training officers which consciously or unconsciously suppressed independent thought and suggestions from subordinates . " Despite his later close association with Churchill , he criticised the former First Lord 's unrealistic expectations and also Lord Fisher 's inability to rein him in for want of a naval staff ; and Admiral of the Fleet ( at the time Commodore ) Roger Keyes for actively trying to gain support for forcing the straits again instead of acting as chief of staff and only advising the Naval Commander at the Dardanelles . 
 Dewar was given the last rites on 8 September 1964 and died at his home in Worthing , Sussex . He was buried at St Bartholomew 's Church , Rainhill , Merseyside on 12 September . 
 = King of the Hill ( The Simpsons ) = 
 " King of the Hill " is the twenty @-@ third episode in the ninth season of the American animated television series The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 3 , 1998 . It was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Steven Dean Moore , and guest stars Brendan Fraser and Steven Weber . The episode sees Homer trying to climb a large mountain to impress Bart after he humiliates him at a church picnic with his lack of fitness . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After his obesity embarrasses Bart at a church picnic , Homer attempts to lose weight . He soon discovers Power Sauce , an energy bar which he starts to eat regularly . 
 At a gym , Homer meets Rainier Wolfcastle who becomes his fitness coach . In two months , Homer is healthier and reveals what he has been doing to his family . At the gym , Rainier is being asked by two Power Sauce representatives to climb the tallest mountain in Springfield , " The <unk> " , as a publicity stunt . When Rainier refuses , Homer takes on the challenge . 
 He is aided by two Sherpas as guides , who were instructed to drag Homer up the mountain as he sleeps . During one of these nights , Homer wakes up to discover that he is being secretly dragged , and fires the two Sherpas . Homer soon makes it to the summit and plants a flagpole . Rejoining the crowd , Bart is proud of Homer . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was pitched and written by John Swartzwelder . The writing staff had to find a new angle for Homer 's weight problems , as the idea had been used several times before . This was emphasized in this episode when Marge does not seem to care that Homer is going to try to lose weight again . 
 In the scenes where the Sherpas were speaking , the show staff went to great lengths to find translations . Originally , the producers of the film adaption of the book Into Thin Air were contacted to help . The film producers were shocked at the trouble the Simpsons staff were going to , and replied that they had simply made up translations in the film . The staff then had to consult various experts by telephone . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The mountain Homer must climb , the <unk> , is a reference to the mountain Matterhorn , which is located in the Swiss Alps . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " King of the Hill " finished 23rd in ratings for the week of April 27 – May 4 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 , equivalent to approximately 9 @.@ 2 million viewing households . It was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , King of the Hill , and Ally McBeal . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought well of the episode , stating : " A quite charming little adventure in which , in an effort to impress Bart , Homer undertakes a dangerous adventure and comes through successfully . It 's nice because just for once , to all intents and purposes , Homer actually succeeds in something . " 
 = Scout ( Scouting ) = 
 A Scout ( in some countries a Boy Scout , Girl Scout or Pathfinder ) is a boy or a girl , usually 10 ( AS in Australia ) – 18 years of age , participating in the worldwide Scouting movement . Because of the large age and development span , many Scouting associations have split this age group into a junior and a senior section . Scouts are organized into troops averaging 20 – 30 Scouts under the guidance of one or more Scout Leaders . Troops subdivide into patrols of about six Scouts and engage in outdoor and special interest activities . Troops may affiliate with local , national , and international organizations . Some national Scouting associations have special interest programs such as Air Scouts , Sea Scouts , outdoor high adventure , Scouting bands , and rider Scouts . Some troops , especially in Europe , have been co @-@ educational since the 1970s , allowing boys and girls to work together as Scouts . 
 = = Foundation = = 
 Robert Baden @-@ Powell founded the Boy Scouts as an organization in 1908 , a few months after the first Scout encampment at Brownsea Island Scout camp in 1907 . Baden @-@ Powell got the idea from his experiences with the British Army in South Africa . To advance his ideas , Baden @-@ Powell wrote Scouting for Boys for boy readership , which describes the Scout method of outdoor activities aiming at developing character , citizenship , and personal fitness qualities among youth . Many boys joined Scouting activities , resulting in the movement growing rapidly to become the world 's largest youth organization . 
 The Scout program is designed to develop youths who have a high degree of self @-@ reliance , initiative , courage , helpfulness , integrity , sportsmanship , and resourcefulness . Scouts should be helpful ; understand their society , heritage , and culture ; have respect for the rights of others ; and be positive leader @-@ citizens . 
 Over time , the Scout program has been reviewed and updated in many of the countries where it is run , and special interest programs developed such as Air Scouts , Sea Scouts , outdoor high adventure , Scouting bands , and rider Scouts , but the same core values and principles as Baden @-@ Powell originally envisaged still apply . 
 = = = Age groups and sections = = = 
 Originally , the Scout program was aimed at 11- to 16 @-@ year @-@ old boys . However , the younger brothers of Scouts started to attend Troop meetings , and so the Wolf Cub section was started . It was also evident that young girls wanted to participate in similar activities , but the Edwardian values at the time would not allow young boys and girls to " rough and tumble " together , causing the Guide Movement to be created . 
 While most Scouts may join a troop after finishing Cub Scouts , this is not required . As Scouts get older , they often seek more challenging and diverse activities . He may later join another affiliated program for older children , such as Exploring , Venturing , or Rovering . 
 = = Activities = = 
 A Scout learns the cornerstones of the Scout method , Scout Promise , and Scout Law . These are designed to instill character , citizenship , personal fitness , and leadership in boys through a structured program of outdoor activities . Common ways to implement the Scout method include spending time together in small groups with shared experiences , rituals , and activities , as well as emphasizing good citizenship and decision @-@ making that are age @-@ level appropriate . Cultivating a love and appreciation of the outdoors and outdoor activities are key elements . Primary activities include camping , woodcraft , first aid , aquatics , hiking , backpacking , and sports . 
 Scouts are known throughout the world for performing acts of public good and sometimes acts of heroism . For example , a Scout foiled a 2008 assassination attempt on Maldives ' President <unk> Abdul <unk> by " grabbing an attacker 's knife as the man leapt from a crowd and lunged at the leader " . The Scout , Ibrahim <unk> , a male member of the co @-@ educational The Scout Association of Maldives , sustained minor injuries during the intervention . 
 = = = Fellowship = = = 
 Camping most often occurs on a unit level , such as in the troop , but there are periodic <unk> and jamborees . <unk> are events where units from a local area camp together for a weekend . These often occur a couple times a year and usually have a theme , such as pioneering . Jamborees are large events on a national or international level held every four years where thousands of Scouts camp together for one to two weeks . Activities at these events include games , Scoutcraft competitions , patch trading , aquatics , woodcarving , archery , and rifle and shotgun shooting . 
 For many Scouts , the highlight of the year is spending at least a week in the summer as part of an outdoor activity . This can be a long event such as camping , hiking , sailing , canoeing , or kayaking with the unit or a summer camp operated on a council , state , or provincial level . Scouts attending a summer camp , generally one week during the summer , work on merit badges , advancement , and perfecting Scoutcraft skills . Some summer camps operate specialty programs , such as sailing , backpacking , canoeing and whitewater , caving , and fishing . 
 = = = Personal progression = = = 
 A large part , compared to younger and older sections , of the activities are related to personal progression . All Scouting organizations have an advancement program , whereby the Scout learns Scoutcraft , community service , leadership , and explores areas of interest to him . This Badge system or Personal Progressive Scheme is based on two complementary elements : 
 Proficiency ( Merit ) badges , which are intended to encourage the Scout to learn a subject which could be his work or hobby , so cover many different types of activities , not always related to Scouting . 
 Class badges or Progress system , which symbolize increasingly difficult levels or successive stages . 
 Most Scouting associations have a highest badge that require mastering Scoutcraft , leadership , and performing community service . Only a small percentage of Scouts attain them . 
 = = Unit affiliation = = 
 = = = Troop = = = 
 The troop is the fundamental unit of the Scouts . This is the group a Scout joins and via which he participates in Scouting activities , such as camping , backpacking , and canoeing . The troop leadership , youth and adult , organizes and provides support for these activities . It may include as few as a half @-@ dozen Scouts , or as many as seventy or more . Troops usually meet weekly . 
 = = = Patrol = = = 
 Each troop is divided into patrols of around five to ten Scouts . A patrol 's independence from the troop varies among troops and between activities . For instance , a troop typically holds ordinary meetings as a unit . Patrols ' autonomy becomes more visible at <unk> , where each patrol may set up its own area for cooking and camping . However , on a high adventure trip which only a small part of the troop attends , divisions between patrols may disappear entirely . Patrols may hold meetings and even excursions separately from the rest of the troop , but this is more common in some troops than in others . Each patrol has a Patrol Leader ( PL ) and Patrol Second ( PS ) , or Assistant Patrol Leader ( APL ) . Some troops mix older and younger Scouts in the same patrols , so that the older Scouts can teach the younger ones more effectively , other troops group Scouts by age , so that the members of one patrol have more in common . 
 = = = Group = = = 
 In most countries a local organisation , a " Scout Group " , combines different sections together into a single body . Scout Groups can consist of any number of sections of the different Age Groups in Scouting and Guiding . Scout Groups can be single sex or have boys and girls in separate and / or co @-@ ed sections depending on the group and the national organization . In some countries , the different sections are independent of each other , although they might be sponsored or chartered by the same organisation , such as a church . 
 = = Uniforms = = 
 The Scout uniform is a specific characteristic of Scouting , and is worn at most events . The original uniform , which has created a familiar image in the public eye and had a very military appearance , consisted of a khaki button @-@ up shirt , shorts , and a broad @-@ brimmed campaign hat . 
 Uniforms have become much more functional and colorful since the beginning and are now frequently blue , orange , red , or green , and shorts are replaced by long trousers in areas where the culture calls for modesty , and in colder weather . T @-@ shirts and other more casual wear have also replaced the more formal button @-@ up uniforms in many Scouting regions . 
 To show the unity of all Scouts , the World Membership Badge ( World Crest ) or another badge with a fleur @-@ de @-@ lis is a part of all uniforms . <unk> and <unk> ( slides ) are still quite common , but some Scouting associations do not use them . Patches for leadership positions , ranks , special achievements , <unk> animals , colors or names , <unk> or <unk> numbers or names , and country or regional affiliation are standard . 
 = California sea lion = 
 The California sea lion ( Zalophus californianus ) is a coastal eared seal native to western North America . It is one of five species of sea lion . Its natural habitat ranges from southeast Alaska to central Mexico , including the Gulf of California . Sea lions are sexually dimorphic , males are larger than females , and have a thicker neck and protruding crest . They mainly haul @-@ out on sandy or rocky beaches , but they also frequent manmade environments such as marinas and wharves . Sea lions feed on a number of species of fish and squid , and are preyed on by Orcas and white sharks . 
 California sea lions have a polygynous breeding pattern . From May to August , males establish territories and try to attract females with which to mate . Females are free to move in between territories , and are not coerced by males . Mothers nurse their pups in between foraging trips . Sea lions communicate with numerous vocalizations , notably with barks and mother @-@ pup contact calls . Outside of their breeding season , sea lions spend much of their time at sea , but they come to shore to molt . 
 Sea lions are particularly intelligent , can be trained to perform various tasks and display limited fear of humans if accustomed to them . Because of this , California sea lions are a popular choice for public display in zoos , circuses and <unk> , and are trained by the United States Navy for certain military operations . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) lists the species as Least Concern due to its abundance . Predation by California sea lions on threatened or endangered salmon species at Bonneville Dam has resulted in more than 50 of them being killed by state officials . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The California sea lion was described by René Primevère Lesson , a French naturalist , in 1828 . It is grouped with other sea lions and fur seals in the family Otariidae . Otariids , also known as eared seals , differ from true seals in having external ear flaps , and proportionately larger foreflippers and pectoral muscles . Along with the Galapagos sea lion and the extinct Japanese sea lion , the California sea lion belongs to the genus Zalophus , which derives from the Greek words za , meaning " intensive , " and <unk> , meaning " crest . " This refers to the protruding sagittal crest of the males , which distinguishes members of the genus . 
 Traditionally , the Galapagos sea lion and Japanese sea lion were classified as subspecies of the California sea lion . However , a genetic study in 2007 found that all three are in fact separate species . The lineages of the California and Japanese sea lion appear to have split off 2 @.@ 2 million years ago during the Pliocene . The California sea lion differs from the Galapagos sea lion in its greater sexual dimorphism . The Steller sea lion is the closest extant relative of the Zalophus sea lions , being a sister taxon . 
 = = Appearance , physiology , and movement = = 
 Being sexually dimorphic , California sea lions differ in size , shape , and coloration between the sexes . Males are typically around 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) long and weigh up to 350 kg ( 770 lb ) , while females are typically around 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) and weigh up to 100 kg ( 220 lb ) . Females and juveniles have a tawny brown pelage , although they may be temporarily light gray or silver after molting . The pelage of adult males can be anywhere from light brown to black , but is typically dark brown . The face of adult males may also be light tan in some areas . Pups have a black or dark brown pelage at birth . Although the species has a slender build , adult males have robust necks , chests , and shoulders . Adult males also have a protruding crest which gives them a " high , domed forehead " ; it is tufted with white hairs . They also have manes , which are less developed than those of adult male South American and Steller sea lions . Both sexes have long , narrow muzzles . 
 As an otariid , the California sea lion relies on its foreflippers to propel itself when swimming . This form of aquatic locomotion , along with its streamlined body , effectively reduces drag underwater . Its <unk> movement is not continuous ; the animal glides in between each stroke . The flexibility of its spine allows the sea lion to bend its neck backwards far enough to reach its hindflippers . This allows the animal to make dorsal turns and maintain a streamlined posture . When moving on land , the sea lion is able to turn its hindflippers forward and walk on all fours . It moves the foreflippers in a transverse , rather than a sagittal , fashion . In addition , it relies on movements of its head and neck more than its hindflippers for terrestrial locomotion . Sea lions may travel at speeds of around 10 @.@ 8 km / h ( 6 @.@ 7 mph ) , and can dive at depths of 274 m ( 899 ft ) and for up to 9 @.@ 9 minutes , though most dives are typically 80 m ( 260 ft ) and last less than 3 minutes . 
 Sea lions have color vision , though it is limited to the blue @-@ green area of the color spectrum . This is likely an adaptation for living in marine coastal habitats . Sea lions have fairly acute underwater hearing , with a hearing range of 0 @.@ 4 – 32 kHz . Sea lions rely on their whiskers or vibrissae for touch and detection of vibrations underwater . Compared to the harbor seal , the California sea lion 's vibrissae are smoother and less specialized and thus perform less when following hydrodynamic trails , although they still perform well . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Range and habitat = = = 
 The California sea lion ranges along the western coast and islands of North America , from southeast Alaska to central Mexico . Mitochondrial DNA sequences in 2009 have identified five distinct California sea lion populations : the U.S. or Pacific Temperate stock , the Western Baja California or Pacific Tropical stock , and the Southern , Central , and Northern Gulf of California stocks . The U.S. stock breeds mainly in the Channel Islands , although some breeding sites may be established in northern California , and females are now commonly found there . The Western Baja California stock mainly breeds near Punta Eugenia and at Isla Santa Margarita . The above @-@ mentioned stocks are separated by the Ensenada Front . The stocks of the Gulf of California live in the shallow waters of the north ( Northern stock ) , the tidal islands near the center ( Central stock ) , and the mouth of the bay ( Southern stock ) . The stock status of the sea lions at the deep waters of the central bay has not been analyzed . 
 During the breeding season , sea lions gather on both sandy and rocky shores . On warm days , they lie closer to the water . At night or in cool weather , they travel farther inland or to higher elevations . Non @-@ breeding individuals may gather at marinas , wharves , or even navigational buoys . California sea lions can also live in fresh water for periods of time , such as near the Bonneville Dam in the Columbia River . In 2004 a healthy sea lion was found sitting on a road in Merced County , California , almost a hundred miles upstream from the San Francisco Bay and half a mile from the San Joaquin River . 
 = = = Diet and predation = = = 
 California sea lions feed on a wide variety of seafood , mainly squid and fish , and sometimes clams . Commonly eaten fish and squid species include salmon , hake , Pacific whiting , anchovy , herring , rockfish , lamprey , dogfish , and market squid . They mostly forage near mainland coastlines , the continental shelf , and seamounts . They may also search along the ocean bottom . California sea lions may eat alone or in small to large groups , depending on the amount of food available . They sometimes cooperate with other predators , such as dolphins , porpoises , and seabirds , when hunting large schools of fish . Sea lions sometimes follow dolphins and exploit their hunting efforts . Adult females feed between 10 – 100 km ( 6 @.@ 2 – 62 @.@ 1 mi ) from shore . Males may forage as far as 450 km ( 280 mi ) from shore when water temperatures rise . They also have learned to feed on steelhead and salmon below fish ladders at Bonneville Dam and at other locations where fish must queue in order to pass through dams and locks that block their passage . 
 Sea lions are preyed on by killer whales and large sharks . At Monterey Bay , California sea lions appear to be the more common food items for transient mammal @-@ eating killer whale pods . The sea lions may respond to the dorsal fin of a killer whale and remain vigilant , even when encountering resident fish @-@ eating pods . Sea lions are also common prey for white sharks . They have been found with scars made by attacks from both white sharks and shortfin mako sharks . Sharks attack sea lions by ambushing them while they are resting at the surface . Sea lions that are attacked in the hindquarters are more likely to survive and make it to the shore . 
 = = Life history = = 
 = = = Reproductive behavior and parenting = = = 
 California sea lions breed gregariously between May and August , when they arrive at their breeding rookeries . When establishing a territory , the males will try to increase their chances of reproducing by staying on the rookery for as long as possible . During this time , they will fast , relying on a thick layer of fat called blubber for energy . Size and patience allow a male to defend his territory more effectively ; the bigger the male , the more blubber he can store and the longer he can wait . A male sea lion usually keeps his territory for around 27 days . Females have long parturition intervals , and thus the males do not establish their territories until after the females give birth . Most fights occur during this time . After this , the males rely on ritualized displays ( vocalizations , head @-@ shaking , stares , bluff lunges , and so on ) to maintain their territorial boundaries . Since temperatures can reach over 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) during this time , males must include water within their territories . Some territories are mostly underwater , particularly those near steep cliffs . Sea lions that fail to establish a territory are driven out to sea or gather at a nearby beach . 
 Before mating begins , females gather into " milling " groups of 2 – 20 individuals . The females in these groups will mount each other as well as the males . These groups begin to disintegrate as the females begin to mate . The territorial and mating system of the California sea lion has been described as similar to a lek system , as females appear to choose their mates while moving though different territories . They avoid males that are too aggressive or energetic . Males are usually unable to prevent females from leaving their territories , particularly in water . Mating may occur outside the rookeries , between non @-@ territorial males and females , as the latter move to and from the mating site . In some rookeries , copulation may be monopolized by a few males , while at others , a single male may sire no more than four pups . 
 Female California sea lions have a 12 @-@ month reproductive cycle , consisting of a 9 @-@ month actual gestation and a 3 @-@ month delayed implantation of the fertilized egg before giving birth in June or July . <unk> intervals are particularly long for this species , being 21 days for sea lions off California and more than 30 days for sea lions in the Gulf of California . Females remain with their pups on shore for 10 days and nurse them . After this , females will go on foraging trips lasting as long as three days , returning to nurse their pups for up to a day . Pups left on shore tend to gather in nurseries to socialize and play . When returning from a trip , females call their pups with distinctive calls to which the pups will reply in kind . A mother and pup can distinguish each other 's calls from those of other mothers and pups . At first , reunions largely depend on the efforts of the mothers . However , as pups get older , they get more involved in reunions . Older pups may sometimes join their mothers during their foraging trips . Adult male California sea lions play no role in raising pups , but they do take more interest in them than adult males of other otariid species ; they have even been observed to help shield swimming pups from predators . Pups are weaned by a year but can continue to suckle for another year . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 California sea lions communicate with a range of vocalizations . The most commonly used one is their characteristic bark . Territorial males are the loudest and most continuous callers , and barks are produced constantly during the peak of the breeding season . Sea lions bark especially rapidly when excited . The barks of territorial and non @-@ territorial males sound similar , although those of the former are deeper . Males may bark when threatening other males or during courtship . The only other vocalization made by territorial males is a " prolonged hoarse grunt sound " made when an individual is startled by a human . This vocalization is also made by groups of non @-@ reproductive males . 
 Female sea lions are less vocal . Their barks , high @-@ pitched and shorter than those made by males , are used in aggressive situations . Other aggressive vocalizations given by females include the " squeal " , the " belch " , and the " growl " . The sound a female sea lion gives when calling her pups is called a " pup @-@ attraction call " , described as " loud " and " brawling " . Pups respond with a " mother @-@ response call " , which is similar in structure . Pups will also bleat or bark when playing or in distress . California sea lions can produce vocalizations underwater . These include " <unk> " sounds , barks , <unk> , and clicks . 
 = = = <unk> activities = = = 
 Outside of the breeding season , males migrate to the northern ends of the species range to feed , while females forage near the breeding rookeries . Sea lions can stay at sea for as long as two weeks at a time . They make continuous dives , returning to the surface to rest . Sea lions may travel alone or in groups while at sea and haul @-@ out between each sea trip . Adult females and juveniles molt in autumn and winter ; adult males molt in January and February . Gulf of California sea lions do not migrate ; they stay in the Gulf year @-@ round . 
 = = Intelligence and trainability = = 
 Marine biologist Ronald J. Schusterman and his research associates have studied sea lions ' cognitive ability . They have discovered that sea lions are able to recognize relationships between stimuli based on similar functions or connections made with their peers , rather than only the stimuli 's common features . Sea lions have demonstrated the ability to understand simple syntax and commands when taught an artificial sign language . However , the sea lions rarely used the signs semantically or logically . In 2011 , a California sea lion named " Ronan " was recorded bobbing her head in synchronization to musical rhythms . This " rhythmic entrainment " was previously seen only in humans , parrots and other birds possessing vocal mimicry . 
 Because of their intelligence and trainability , California sea lions have been used by circuses and marine mammal parks to perform various tricks such as throwing and catching balls on their noses , running up ladders , or honking horns in a musical fashion . Trainers reward their animals with fish , which motivates them to perform . For ball balancing , trainers toss a ball at a sea lion so it may accidentally balance it or hold the ball on its nose , thereby gaining an understanding of what to do . A sea lion may go through a year of training before performing a trick for the public . However , its memory allows it to perform a trick even after three months of resting . Some organizations , such as the Humane Society of the United States and World Animal Protection , object to using sea lions and other marine mammals for entertainment , claiming the tricks are " exaggerated variations of their natural behaviors " and distract the audience from the animal 's unnatural environment . Less entertainment @-@ oriented zoos may still encourage animal play by throwing fish at animals in different directions and providing play equipment . 
 The California sea lion is used in military applications by the U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program , including detecting naval mines and enemy divers . In the Persian Gulf , the animals can swim behind divers approaching a US naval ship and attach a clamp with a rope to the diver 's leg . Navy officials say the sea lions can do this in seconds , before the enemy realizes what happened . Organizations like PETA believe that such operations put the animals in danger . However , the Navy insists that the sea lions are removed once their mission is complete . 
 = = Status = = 
 The IUCN lists the California sea lion as Least Concern due to " its large and increasing population size . " The estimated population is 238 @,@ 000 – 241 @,@ 000 for the U.S. or Pacific Temperate stock , 75 @,@ 000 – 85 @,@ 000 for the Western Baja California or Pacific Tropical stock , and 31 @,@ 393 for the population in the Gulf of California . Off the Pacific coast of the United States , sea lions are so numerous that they are close to carrying capacity , while the Gulf of California population declined by 20 % by 2008 . Sea lions may be killed when in conflict with fishermen , by poaching , and by entanglements in man @-@ made garbage . They are also threatened by pollutants like DDT and PCB which accumulate in the marine food chain . 
 In the United States , the California sea lion is protected on the federal Marine Mammal Protection Act ( MMPA ) , passed in 1972 , which outlaws hunting , killing , capture , and harassment of the animal . In 1994 an amendment to the Act allowed for the possibility of limited lethal removal of pinnipeds preying on endangered salmonids should the level of predation be documented to have a significant adverse impact on the decline or recovery of ESA @-@ listed salmonids . Applications have been granted for removal of several individual sea lions at Ballard Locks and at the Bonneville Dam , where up to 92 sea lions can be killed each year for a 5 @-@ year period . Critics have objected to the killing of the sea lions , pointing out that the level of mortality permitted as a result of recreational and commercial fisheries in the river and as part of the operation of hydroelectric dams pose a greater threat to the salmon . 
 These animals exploit more man @-@ made environments like docks for haul @-@ out sites . Many docks are not designed to withstand the weight of several resting sea lions which cause major tilting and other problems . Wildlife managers have used various methods to control the animals and some city officials have redesigned docks so they can better withstand them . 
 = = = 2015 Californian shore sea lions pups crisis = = = 
 In January and February 2015 , 1450 malnourished or sick sea lion pups have been found on the coast of California , and estimations give a higher number of dead pups . NOAA has pointed the cause to unprecedentedly warm PDO in the North American west coast as a result of a failed attempt at El Niño , which has reduced the abundance of anchovies , sardines and mackerel , principal components of the sea lion diet just in the pups nursery season . Pups are leaving the rookeries in search of food long before they are capable of hunting fish , the outcome are pups really malnourished washed out on the shores , these conditions lead some of these pups to death if not rescued on time . These " unusual warm waters " affect the abundance of same species of fish and sea food , which have their effects in mammals and birds , a similar event has occurred by the end of 2014 with the unusual mass dead of <unk> auklet just in the period the chicks start to fledge . 
 = Briarcliff Manor Public Library = 
 The Briarcliff Manor Public Library is the public library serving Briarcliff Manor , New York . Located on the edge of the Walter W. Law Memorial Park on Library Road , it is a member of Westchester Library System . It is staffed by a director and eleven employees , including reference and youth librarians , and is governed by a seven @-@ member board , with a liaison to the village board . The library offers computer classes , book discussion groups , young adult programs , a children 's room and a local history collection . The library also houses the Briarcliff Manor @-@ Scarborough Historical Society and offices for the Briarcliff Manor Recreation Department . Adjoining the library is the village 's former train station , which housed the library from 1959 to 2009 , and was renovated and reopened as the William J. Vescio Community Center on May 30 , 2016 . 
 The library was founded in 1914 in the Briarcliff Community Center . From the building 's destruction in 1929 and over the next thirty years , the library was without a permanent location , and was moved between sites including public school buildings and the village recreation center . In 1959 , the library purchased the former Briarcliff Manor station of the New York and Putnam Railroad . After renovations in the 1980s and 90s , a significant expansion was funded and completed in the late 2000s , where the library is housed today . In 1981 , the trackbed which ran alongside the building became part of a 48 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 77 @-@ kilometre ) rail trail , consisting of the South County , North County , and Putnam County Trailways . The biking , running , and walking trail stretches from the Bronx north to Brewster . 
 = = History = = 
 The Briarcliff Manor Free Library was founded by Edward S. Arnold in 1914 at the Briarcliff Community Center ( also referred to as " the Club " ) . The building was built as a public school in 1898 at the current Pleasantville Road southbound ramp to NY Route 9A . World War I slowed its expansion , though progress resumed in 1921 . This was achieved largely due to the efforts of Amy Bookwalter , at a time when the Library Board consisted entirely of women . On March 8 – 13 of that year , the Briarcliff Free Library was officially opened , and on September 22 , 1921 , the library was registered with the New York State library system . 
 On September 1 , 1922 , the Club 's library funds were transferred to the Library Committee , and the village government donated US $ 500 ( $ 7 @,@ 100 today ) to the library in 1924 . At that time , it had 1 @,@ 900 volumes , which became 23 @,@ 000 by 1926 , around 6 @,@ 000 in 1939 , and by 1952 , 8 @,@ 000 volumes . In 1988 , the library 's collections had grown to 25 @,@ 000 . 
 In its early years , the Briarcliff library received donations from the village Sunday school and the Club . In July 1928 , the library moved from the community club building ( which was sold to the Westchester Parkway Commission ) to the tower room of the former Briarcliff Farms office building , the present branch of the International Union of Operating Engineers . On March 18 , 1930 , after invitation from the Briarcliff Board of Education , the library was relocated again . It moved to a large room on the main floor of Briarcliff 's high school extension to its Law Park grade school building . In August 1949 , the school required more classroom space ; the village board then provided two rooms on the second floor of its recreation building on Old Route 100 near the village downtown . On March 18 , 1952 , the New York State Board of Regents granted the library a provisional charter ; that year its registration numbered 503 . Also in 1952 , the village semicentennial history book notes the need for a permanent home for the library . 
 Around 1939 , the library received an efficiency rating of 93 percent from the Library Division of the New York State Education Department . In 1944 , the library obtained its highest efficiency rating , 98 @.@ 3 percent , from the Library Extension Division of the University of the State of New York . The 1952 appropriation for the library was $ 1 @,@ 800 ( $ 16 @,@ 000 today ) ; its expenditures were $ 1 @,@ 875 @.@ 86 ( $ 17 @,@ 100 today ) in 1951 . 
 On January 20 , 1959 , the library moved to its fifth location , the former Briarcliff Manor station on the New York City & Northern Railroad ( later the New York and Putnam Railroad ) . The station was built in 1906 by village founder Walter W. Law in the Tudor style , as a replacement for a smaller station , moved to nearby Millwood . The railroad 's Putnam Division was discontinued in 1958 , freeing up use of the building for the library . The library spent $ 12 @,@ 500 ( $ 101 @,@ 500 today ) to purchase the building and an additional $ 6 @,@ 500 ( $ 52 @,@ 800 today ) for renovations ; it raised $ 14 @,@ 000 ( $ 113 @,@ 600 today ) from village residents , with the rest funded by the Library Board . In 1959 , the library received its absolute charter , and received a charter in 1964 to become a public library : the Briarcliff Manor Public Library . In the 1980s and 90s , videocassettes were increasing in popularity ; The New York Times reported in 1990 that the library had experienced a significant increase in its circulation , with over 5 @,@ 435 circulated in that year , compared to 2 @,@ 864 in 1989 . In 1985 , the library and the Briarcliff Lodge were among 60 sites given historical markers by Westchester County Tricentennial Commission . 
 The library , which had 3 @,@ 200 square feet ( 300 m2 ) , was determined to be too small ; other significant problems included no wireless capacity and poor shelving and lighting . In 1980 , a large interior renovation took place . Former mayor Chester L. Fisher and his wife led a $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 143 @,@ 600 today ) fundraising effort , and collected $ 50 @,@ 072 . Construction started in March 1980 and included interior painting , new shelves , cabinets , and carpeting for the main room , a mezzanine on the south side , a relocated checkout desk and remodeled children 's room , and a vestibule in the main entrance designed to match the original building . In 1981 the first section of the Putnam Division trackbed was repurposed for a trailway ; the section ran from the library south to New York Route 117 . The 48 @-@ mile biking , running , and walking trail was completed in 2014 , and consists of the South County , North County , and Putnam County Trailways . It stretches from Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx north to <unk> 1995 village residents held a referendum for a new library of 10 @,@ 600 square feet ( 980 m2 ) ; it failed by 13 votes , from the 871 cast . From 1997 to 1999 , major renovations took place both on the building 's interior and exterior . In the early 2000s , plans began for an expansion . A modular building was set up in 2004 as the children 's room . In 2006 , a $ 4 million bond resolution ( $ 4 @.@ 7 million today ) was passed for a two @-@ story , 6 @,@ 600 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 610 @-@ square @-@ metre ) addition , which began construction in summer 2007 and opened February 19 , 2009 . The original station building was renovated to become a village community center , which was in development since as late as 2013 and held a cost of $ 1 @.@ 8 million . Mayor Lori Sullivan and former mayor William J. Vescio presided over the center 's opening and dedication to Vescio on May 30 , 2016 . 
 = = Location and architecture = = 
 The Briarcliff Manor Public Library is located on the eastern edge of the Walter W. Law Memorial Park on Library Road , and has a large parking lot accessible from Library Road . 
 The current structure consists of the 1906 former train station on the south end and an extension completed in 2009 on the north side . The exterior was designed in the Tudor Revival style , although The New York Times observed the building as " pseudo @-@ medieval " . When active as a train station , the timbering was painted a shade of green used for other New York Central stations . The 2007 addition has the same half @-@ timber and stucco exterior of the original building . 
 The station 's interior was decorated with flowers , oriental rugs on the terrazzo floor , and tables and chairs in the Mission style . During the library 's occupation from 1959 to 2009 , the building housed a main reading room , children 's room , and vestibule and second @-@ story balcony ( both added in 1980 ) . The community center opening in 2016 in the same space holds a meeting room and kitchen on the first floor and an oculus opening on the full @-@ length second floor , which is intended for presentations , exhibits , reading , studying , and computer usage . The community center also has a backup generator for use as an emergency broadcast and warming and cooling center . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The Briarcliff library is open seven days per week , except in August when it is closed each Sunday . The library hosts four computer workstations and eight laptops , and has its own WiFi network . It is a member of the Westchester Library System . The Friends of the Briarcliff Manor Public Library is an organization through which community members may support the library . 
 The library 's director oversees two and three @-@ quarters full @-@ time and eight part @-@ time employees , including reference and youth librarians . It is governed by a seven @-@ member board , with a liaison to the village board . Services include computer classes , book discussion groups , young adult programs , a children 's room and a local history collection . Library spending constitutes about four percent of the village budget . 
 = = Organizations = = 
 = = = Briarcliff Manor @-@ Scarborough Historical Society = = = 
 The Briarcliff Manor @-@ Scarborough Historical Society ( BMSHS ) is a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) not @-@ for @-@ profit organization dedicated to local preservation , research , and education . In March 1974 , after the village mayor appointed twelve people for a 75th anniversary committee , the committee began by forming the Briarcliff Manor @-@ Scarborough Historical Society ; it received its provisional charter around that time . The historical society published an updated village history ( A Village Between Two Rivers : Briarcliff Manor ) in 1977 , marking the 75th anniversary of the village . The organization has since published several books , including a comprehensive history of the village . The publication , The Changing Landscape , a History of Briarcliff Manor @-@ Scarborough , was written by Mary Cheever , wife of novelist John Cheever . The historical society was initially located at the since @-@ demolished Briarcliff Middle School building ; it later moved to the second floor of a realty building on Pleasantville Road , and moved back to the school building after it was leased by Pace University . On March 21 , 2010 , the BMSHS was given a permanent location at the Eileen O 'Connor Weber Historical Center , established as part of the library 's expansion finished in 2009 . The current president , Karen Smith , heads a board of trustees , members of which have three @-@ year terms with a required year recess between terms . 
 Members of the historical society joined the nine @-@ member Centennial Committee in 2002 to organize events for Briarcliff Manor 's centennial . The Centennial Committee and BMSHS helped organize several events for the village 's 2002 centennial celebration , including the Centennial Variety Show at the Briarcliff High School auditorium in a sold @-@ out two @-@ night run on April 26 – 27 , 2002 . The two @-@ act show consisted of interpretations of village life by village organizations and a revue of Briarcliff Manor history in skits and songs . Other society @-@ sponsored events have included tours of homes and churches , bus tours , Hudson River cruises on historic boats such as the M / V Commander ( built in 1917 and listed on the national and state registers of historic places ) , dances , antique @-@ car exhibits , day trips to historic points of interest , art exhibits and events with authors and elected officials . 
 = = = Briarcliff Manor Recreation Department = = = 
 The library houses the village recreation department , which has four staff and a six @-@ member advisory committee , and provides recreation programming for the village . The department has operated the recreation center on Macy Road since 1980 , and also runs a youth center on Van Lu Van Road . 
 = Beautiful Garbage = 
 Beautiful Garbage ( stylized as <unk> ) is the third studio album by American @-@ Scottish alternative rock band Garbage , released on September 27 , 2001 by Mushroom Records . Marking a departure from the sound Garbage had established on their first two albums , Beautiful Garbage was written and recorded over the course of a year , during which time lead singer Shirley Manson chronicled their efforts weekly online , becoming one of the first high @-@ profile musicians to keep an Internet blog . The album is marked by expanding on the musical variety , with stronger melodies , more direct lyrics , and sounds that mix rock with electronica , new wave , hip hop , and girl groups . The album 's title is taken directly from a lyric in the song " Celebrity Skin " by Hole . 
 Released three weeks after the September 11 attacks , the album suffered from lack of promotion , mixed reaction from critics , and the failure of its lead single " Androgyny " to achieve high chart positions . Despite faltering in major markets , Beautiful Garbage debuted at number 13 on the Billboard 200 , while topping the albums chart in Australia and peaking within the top 10 in multiple European countries . It was named one of Rolling Stone 's " Top 10 Albums of the Year " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The origins of Beautiful Garbage came from a three @-@ day September 1999 recording session during Garbage 's world tour in support of their second album Version 2 @.@ 0 . The sessions resulted in " Silence Is Golden " and " Til the Day I Die " , which were written for a proposed B @-@ sides album . Both songs were loose and organic , contrasting the very dense layered production that featured on Version 2 @.@ 0 . " Silence Is Golden " in particular had been written with an odd structure for a Garbage song : a 6 / 8 shuffle that progressed to a straight 4 / 4 beat . 
 The sale of the band 's North American independent record label Almo Sounds to Universal Music Group in early 2000 put the B @-@ sides album on hold ; Garbage decided to simply start work on recording their third album instead . Garbage began writing and recording the album at their own Smart Studios in Madison , Wisconsin in April of that year . " The only vision we had was that we wanted it to sound different , " recalled guitarist Duke Erikson about the influence that the two new tracks had cast , adding that the band wished to evolve the chemistry that the band had developed from touring the previous two years . 
 = = Composition = = 
 More diverse than their first two studio albums , musically more melodic and lyrically more direct , Beautiful Garbage featured electronica fused with contemporary hip hop , with influences coming from 1980s new wave to 1960s girl groups . Garbage acknowledged the broad span of sounds and styles , which included Prince , The Rolling Stones , Blondie , and Phil Spector . Regarding the melancholic lyrics , Manson stated they happened because after two years touring " we were very isolated and removed from our lives " , so when writing the lyrics , " I felt an overwhelming sense that I need to reinvest in my ' relations ' " . 
 Drummer Butch Vig stated that the album is a " much simpler record than Version 2 @.@ 0 " : " All of the songs sort of came from us playing live downstairs [ in Smart Studios ] with guitar , bass and drums ... That was the only conscious decision we made – to make the songs simpler . Some of the songs are still layered in spots ; compared to the last record , there 're about half as many tracks . As far as sounds go , it 's basically drums , bass , some heavy guitars and Shirley singing . " Erikson agreed that a more organic sound and simplistic approach with respect to production is embodied by the final mix of the album . " A lot of songs took shape in just a few hours as opposed to a few months with the last record . [ ... ] Some of the songs obviously took a long time , or we wouldn 't have been in the studio for a full year . But a lot of them happened very quickly . ' Silence Is Golden ' we recorded basically in three days and it was done . ' So Like a Rose , ' for the most part , was recorded in three hours . I think we spent a lot of time just trying to resist adding stuff to [ the new album ] . Because that was our tendency on the other two records . ” On the lyrical content of the songs , Vig remarked that " [ Manson 's lyrics ] aren 't specifically responses to the industry , but they could be read that way . Shirley has said that , for example , ' Shut Your Mouth ' is about all the bullshit that 's out there , but it 's also a sort of note to self to keep your mouth shut , because she says she 's the biggest , most opinionated loudmouth of anyone around . So they work on multiple levels . " 
 Garbage decided the best way to start writing the album was to set up their recording equipment , guitars , keyboards , drum kit and a sampler and " jam " as a group . Their improvisation led the inspiration of a few songs such as " Shut Your Mouth " , where the band played for three hours while Manson spontaneously composed melody and lyrics , while " Breaking Up the Girl " came from both Erikson and Vig strumming acoustic guitars in the studio lounge . The band felt that it was foremost that the new songs worked on an emotional level with Manson 's vocals and lyrics . The initial sessions ultimately led to around 32 song ideas to develop further . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Smart Studios had upgraded their mixing console to a Trident A @-@ Range model , which the band used extensively . The band tracked directly onto analogue tape using a Studer tape machine , which was then dumped into Pro Tools digital audio workstation . Overdubs and mixing were carried out in Pro Tools . 
 Vig kept the drums and percussion simpler than before . Percussive tracks were recorded through a thirty @-@ year @-@ old Roger Meyer compressor to color the sound ( Vig : " It 's really saturated and distorted , but in a very musical way " ) . Some tracks however were fairly scrutinized : an instrumental break in " Til the Day I Die " incorporated reverse tape effects . Vig was not satisfied with his " swing " on a 6 / 8 groove written for a falsetto vocal Manson had recorded on " Can 't Cry These Tears " , so he recruited Matt Chamberlain to play the part . The recorded sequence incorporated Chamberlain 's contribution , some of Vig 's performance and some light programming . Chamberlain also performed a " chopped @-@ up " drum pattern for " Cup of Coffee " and a " <unk> ' funk groove " on " Confidence " . 
 Much of the recorded guitar work was heavily processed , the band using a Line 6 Pod for melodic parts and embellishments : for example , for the middle eight of " So Like a Rose " , Erikson played a Les Paul with an E @-@ bow through the Pod , while the synth @-@ like intro to " Parade " was created by layering an acoustic guitar part with a clean electric guitar . A tremolo effect on " Can 't Cry These Tears " was inspired by 1960s production techniques . The amp modelers were used to pre @-@ effect the recording prior to Pro Tools , in order to prevent phasing . For electric guitar recording , the band utilized cabinet miking – four microphones recorded the output of a Marshall amplifier . Acoustics were recorded using a single Blue Bottle microphone . Daniel Shulman , who had performed bass guitar on Version 2 @.@ 0 and the band 's two world tours , spent two separate weeks laying down bass parts . Shulman was given freedom by the band to come up with parts and be creative , creating new basslines on the verses of " Androgyny " and " Nobody Loves You " . Shulman revisited " Silence Is Golden " , breaking up the straight eighths of the coda to make it more interesting . 
 Due to Manson 's growing confidence and technical skill , the band decided that her vocals did not require much treatment ; " Shirley was singing so much better , and she was coming up with melodies that were longer and had more range to them ... there wasn 't any point in doing a lot with it . On something like ' Nobody Loves You ' she sings really low on the verse , almost at the bottom of her range , and then and the end she 's singing three and a half octaves higher , almost in falsetto , as the song turns into a big wall of sound " , Vig remarked . Manson 's original guide vocals were used in the final mixes of several songs ; the vocal on " So Like a Rose " was recorded on the first take . On some songs , however , Manson 's vocal was subject to Pro Tools plug @-@ ins and post effects . " Til the Day Die " featured a digital " scratch " <unk> , created by printing her vocal to DAT and using whatever edited passes sounded good . On " Can 't Cry These Tears " , the four vocal parts were triple @-@ tracked using different mikes , while a guitar riff was matched to her voice for a section of " Breaking Up the Girl " . On " Cherry Lips " , her entire vocal was sped up and heavily EQ 'd . On slower songs such as " Drive You Home " , Garbage were not overly concerned with phrasing and pitch , giving it " a rawer quality " . Manson improved on her guitar skills and played more guitar in the studio and live on stage for the eventual tour . 
 Garbage finished recording Beautiful Garbage at the end of April 2001 , and spent a month completing the final mix ( some songs had gone through as many as 40 rough mixes ) . Final EQ , compressing and sequencing on the album was handled by Scott Hull of Classic Sound in New York . Despite running a competition on their website to name the album , Manson 's own working title , inspired by a lyric in Hole 's " Celebrity Skin " , won out . The album artwork came from Garbage 's wish for it to be " something organic " ; The band came up with the fractured rose idea , thinking that it worked well with the album title . Garbage contracted London @-@ based designers Me Company to create the visuals . 
 = = Release = = 
 <unk> the worldwide release , on September 27 , Beautiful Garbage was released in Japan through Sony Music featuring two exclusive bonus tracks : " Begging Bone " , the B @-@ side of " Androgyny " , and " The World Is Not Enough " , their James Bond theme from the film of the same name . In Australia and New Zealand , the album was released by their label FMR . 
 On October 1 , 2001 , Beautiful Garbage was released worldwide , with the North American release the following day . Mushroom Records issued the album on five formats within the United Kingdom : a standard edition CD , a limited edition specially packaged CD ( in a fold @-@ out rose shaped holder and plastic slipcase ) , double LP , cassette and MiniDisc . Mushroom licensed the album to PIAS Recordings for release in Western Europe and through their distributor Playground Music in Scandinavia ; PIAS pressed their own standard CD , ' rose @-@ pack ' CD and double LP formats for the continent . In the United States , Almo Sounds and Interscope Records released Beautiful Garbage on CD , double LP and cassette . Interscope 's parent company Universal Music Group released the album in Canada . 
 = = = Beautiful Garbage mixer = = = 
 The CD formats of Beautiful Garbage contained an enhanced element which users could access and remix four tracks from the album : " Shut Your Mouth " , " Androgyny " , " Breaking Up the Girl " and " Cherry Lips " . Created in conjunction with Sonic Foundry , using a customized version of their drag @-@ and @-@ drop ACID Pro music sequencer software , the remixes utilized samples and loops taken directly from the album masters . The enhanced section could be accessed when the user was online ; a simplified version of the software featuring only " Androgyny " loops was accessible when the user was offline . 
 Interscope Records and Sonic Foundry launched a competition in November 2001 , in which fans were invited to remix " Androgyny " by downloading free ACID Xpress software . Entrants could then upload their work to a specially created website ( <unk> ) to stream their mixes online . The winner received copies of Sonic Foundry 's audio software – ACID Pro , Sound Forge , and Vegas Audio – and five loop libraries . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Garbage marked the release of Beautiful Garbage by performing an in @-@ store set in Chicago 's Virgin Megastore on October 2 , 2001 . Garbage began touring the album as the opening act on the third leg of U2 's Elevation Tour from October 12 in Notre Dame , Indiana , into Canada and through to October 24 in New York City . Before last show , Vig collapsed from the effects of food poisoning and contracting hepatitis A. Rather than cancelling the scheduled shows , Garbage recruited Matt Chamberlain to replace Vig for the remainder of the year . Garbage performed a series of underplayed headlining shows in Europe during November , beginning in Trondheim , Norway and ending in London , England , on November 14 . Garbage then returned to North America for the final Elevation tour Southern State shows , from Kansas City , Missouri on November 27 through to the last show in Miami , Florida on December 2 . At the last show , U2 drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. played drums on " Only Happy When It Rains " . Garbage wrapped up 2001 by performing at the Not So Silent Night radio festival in Los Angeles , California . 
 The Beautiful Garbage tour started in earnest in January 2002 in New Zealand and Australia , when Garbage joined the Big Day Out festival . In between the festival shows , Garbage headlined two concerts in Melbourne and Sydney . Garbage then spent ten days in Japan , performing four headline shows in Osaka and Tokyo . 
 Garbage launched a headline UK tour on April 1 , 2002 in Portsmouth , a run that included an acoustic performance in Edinburgh and headlining MTV 's 5 Night Stand . The band were supported on the UK dates by Kelli Ali . Beyond the UK , the run extended to a number of shows in Cologne , Amsterdam and Bourges . On April 19 , Garbage returned to play a six @-@ week itinerary of North American dates . Beginning in Toronto , the tour was routed down the Eastern Coast of America , over to the Midwest and then onto the West Coast . The jaunt ended with two night stint in Los Angeles . Garbage were supported by Abandoned Pools and on some shows , by White Stripes ; during the tour , Vig was taken ill ( later diagnosed as Bell 's Palsy ) and was replaced again by Matt Chamberlain . Garbage wrapped the North American tour dates on June 6 in Mexico City . 
 A month @-@ long European trek began June 10 in Madrid , covering major festivals including Glastonbury and Roskilde . Matt Walker stood in for Vig for the rest of the summer . Garbage performed two shows in Nice and Lyon supporting Red Hot Chili Peppers , and a further two headlining French shows in Lille and Paris with Mercury Rev as support . The European leg ended at <unk> Rock in Spain on July 12 . Throughout the run , Manson was dogged by vocal problems , leading to the cancellation of a few festival appearances . After a six @-@ week break , Garbage returned to the United Kingdom to perform their last European shows of the year – two intimate club gigs in London . 
 With Vig rejoining the ranks following his recovery period , Garbage headed to Australia to perform at the four date M @-@ One festival across the country at the beginning of October . They then joined No Doubt , who were promoting their Rock Steady album , to co @-@ headline a trek around the United States ; support came from The Distillers . Kicking off on October 15 in West Kingston , Rhode Island , the tour was routed down the Eastern Seaboard , and into Southern States before heading to the Pacific Northwest region and onto the American Southwest . The tour ended on November 27 in Long Beach , California . Garbage went on to perform one further show , in Hell , Grand Cayman . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Beautiful Garbage received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Both Rolling Stone 's US and Australian editions named Beautiful Garbage as one of their critics " Top 10 Albums of the Year " . 
 Tom <unk> of Isthmus wrote that the significant " sonic tweaking and abundant sampling " of Version 2 @.@ 0 is discarded as the songs are supported primarily by " bass , drum , and guitar configurations " . Observing a musical theme , it is " the band 's abandonment of digitally manipulated perfection in favor of rawer guitars and more immediate vocal performances . " He added that , overall , the album is " far less commercially accommodating than any of the band 's previous work . It embraces no particular sound or style . It comes across with ideas and commentary that challenge rather than coerce , and the playing lacks the burnished , artificial quality that 's characteristic of so much youth @-@ oriented music these days . " Peter Robinson of the NME wrote that the album was a " departure from the sound Garbage had established on their first two records " ; It is " marked by expanding on the musical variety , with stronger melodies , more direct lyrics , and sounds that mix rock with hip hop , electronica , new wave , and girl groups . " Sound on Sound described the band 's approach to recording guitars as " distinctive " , observing the " distorted crunches cheek @-@ by @-@ jowl with delicate acoustics and treated sounds which are almost unrecognizable . " Michael Paoletta of Billboard noted that audiences expecting " more of the same [ Version 2 @.@ 0 ] are in for a wonderful surprise . " The band eschews " disco @-@ infused electronica foundations for more straight @-@ up rock <unk> " . " Modern tales for modern times , sung by the vocally versatile Manson , make for one of the year 's best . " Q described it as " sharp , seductive music from a band at their peak . " Uncut called it " their most accomplished and convincing album yet . " 
 AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine commented that Garbage 's penchant for absorbing elements from various genres , skillfully crafting them together is more evident in this album , in how they " approximate contemporary R & B with the sultry ' Androgyny ' , or the Minneapolis new wave bubblegum funk of ' Cherry Lips ( Go Baby Go ! ) , ' or the bluesy PJ Harvey strut of ' Silence Is Golden . ' " This penchant is enhanced by an " unabashedly pop coating , an element that Garbage clearly revel in , as well as should the listener . " He described it " every bit as enticingly postmodern as their other albums , and it sounds distinctly Garbage " and although the fusion elements are perceptible , " they seem less like magpies , more themselves , which means Beautiful Garbage is a more consistent record . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly observed Manson 's continued " aggressive bite " complemented by " throbbing tracks like ' Till the Day I Die ' and ' Shut Your Mouth ' " , as well as exposing " tender aspects " in " heartfelt " and " subdued " songs like ' Cup of Coffee ' and ' So Like a Rose ' . He noted however that the band 's " experiments with sonic expansion yield more mixed results " ; " They thaw their sound by adding elements of trip @-@ hop , which works for ' Cup of Coffee ' and the first single , ' Androgyny ' ... But on a record that 's more self @-@ consciously varied than 1998 's Version 2 @.@ 0 other attempts are gimmicky and less successful " ... Still , there 's just enough to salvage from <unk> . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Beautiful Garbage debuted at number 13 on the US Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 73 @,@ 000 copies . It also debuted atop Billboard 's Top Electronic Albums chart , spending seven consecutive weeks at the top position . As of August 2008 , the album had sold 405 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The album peaked at number six on the Canadian Albums Chart , and on October 12 , 2001 , it was certified gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) . 
 In the United Kingdom , Beautiful Garbage sold 25 @,@ 173 units to debut at number six on the UK Albums Chart . The British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified the album gold on October 19 , 2001 , and by July 2007 , it had sold 121 @,@ 397 copies in the UK . It was commercially successful across the rest of Europe , reaching the top five in Finland , France , and Ireland , and the top 10 in Austria , Belgium , Germany , Italy , Norway , Spain , and Switzerland . 
 The album debuted at number one on the Australian ARIA Albums Chart and received a platinum certification from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . In New Zealand , it debuted at number two on the RIANZ Albums Chart and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . By December 2001 , Beautiful Garbage had sold nearly 1 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Garbage , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Beautiful Garbage . 
 Garbage – production , art direction 
 Billy Bush – engineering 
 Matt Chamberlain – drums ( on " Can 't Cry These Tears " and " Cup of Coffee " ) 
 Scott Hull – mastering 
 Me Company – design 
 Warwick Saint – photography 
 Daniel Shulman – bass 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Southgate , West Sussex = 
 Southgate is one of the 13 residential neighbourhoods in Crawley , a town and borough in West Sussex , England . Crawley was planned and laid out as a New Town after the Second World War , based on the principle of self @-@ contained neighbourhoods surrounding a town centre of civic and commercial buildings . Southgate was one of the four in the " inner ring " closest to the town centre , and was intended to be the largest of the nine designed in the original master plan . It was built in two stages between the 1950s and the 1970s , but retains some older buildings from before the New Town era and has " significant areas of pre @-@ New Town character " . 
 The area was settled by pre @-@ Roman people , and industrial and other artefacts from that era were found during construction of the neighbourhood . In the 19th century , after Crawley was connected to the national railway network , housing developed south of the line around the Brighton Road , which divides the modern neighbourhood in two . New Town @-@ era expansion produced a large residential area with a high proportion of terraced houses and a range of schools , places of worship and community facilities ; but some historic buildings and areas of open space remain , including an award @-@ winning park . The population at the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 was 8 @,@ 016 . 
 = = History = = 
 In the century before the Romans arrived in Britain , the area now covered by West Sussex was ruled by the Atrebates , a Belgic tribe led by <unk> . They were found to have been present in the area now covered by Southgate when building work took place in 1969 . The Southgate West development was underway on land covered by Hogs Hill Farm , which occupied a ridge of land between the Horsham and Brighton Roads . Land clearance revealed two ditches filled with debris such as bones and pieces of pottery . The next year , a large house on Horsham Road was demolished to make way for a new road of houses ; the builders discovered similar pits , and the remains were identified as pre @-@ Roman using carbon dating techniques . The remains of crucibles , slag and other ironworking materials were also discovered ; these were confirmed as being from the same era , the 2nd and 1st centuries BC . It was later confirmed that the Hogs Hill Farm remains dated from the Roman era , meaning that the ironmaking and pottery @-@ producing activities of the Atrebates were continued by their conquerors . By the time the excavations and investigation finished , evidence of three iron bloomeries , a small flint mine , roof tiles ( possibly from a building on the site ) and many pieces of pottery had been found and catalogued . 
 These discoveries confirmed for the first time the existence of Iron Age , pre @-@ Roman ironmaking and industrial development in the area of northern Sussex now occupied by Crawley . Despite this , investigation and analysis were initially discouraged . The Commission for the New Towns , responsible for the town 's development at that stage , did not want building work to be delayed , and tried to prevent archaeologists , other professionals , enthusiasts and the general public alike visiting the Hogs Hill Farm site and searching for remains . Workers on the site were expressly forbidden from doing so , although the first discovery had in fact been made by one . By the time the second site was developed in 1970 , attitudes had changed , and professional groups were involved from the beginning . 
 Crawley began to develop slowly from the 13th century , when it was granted a royal charter for a market . Its ecclesiastical parish , centred on St John the Baptist 's Church , was tiny in comparison to neighbouring Worth and Ifield . The parish had an unusual shape : very narrow , long from north to south , and gradually widening to the north until it met the county boundary with Surrey . This directed development northwards along the High Street , part of the ancient London to Brighton road which had provided the impetus for development to begin . The road was partly turnpiked after an Act of Parliament in 1696 , and became fully turnpiked in 1770 . By this time the distinction between the name " London Road " ( the section north of the church ) and " Brighton Road " ( southwards ) had been made ; and <unk> were built north and south of the town : these became known as the North Gate and South Gate . 
 Crawley was connected to the railway network in 1848 when a line was built from Three Bridges to Horsham . It crossed the High Street at a level crossing at the south end of the built @-@ up area . The provision of fast , regular trains to London and other destinations stimulated residential and commercial development , especially around the station . South of the line , around the Brighton Road , there was plenty of land for building ; in the second half of the 19th century , two building firms — the most important in Crawley 's pre @-@ New Town history — exploited it by building two areas of housing which still exist today , forming the northernmost part of the Southgate neighbourhood . Richard Cook set up a building firm next to the railway line soon after its completion ; in the early 1870s he built some streets of mainly terraced houses west of Brighton Road . Confusingly in the context of Crawley 's later history , this area was called " New Town " , a name which persisted for many years ; it had no connection with the later establishment of the New Town of Crawley under the New Towns Act 1946 , the name being merely a coincidence . Based around Springfield Road and West Street , at the junction of which was Cook 's yard , the " New Town " area had 43 houses in 1875 . In the early 1880s , James Longley established his building company nearby , which by 1909 had built an estate of houses east of the Brighton Road . The roads East Park and Malthouse Road had a mixture of terraced cottages , semi @-@ detached houses , detached houses and large villas , all built from red brick . Large houses were also built down both sides of the Brighton Road . Goffs Park Road , between the Brighton and Horsham Roads , began to be built up in 1895 , and saw more residential development in the interwar period . 
 Apart from these residential buildings , farms and their associated land , there was little else in the area now known as Southgate until Crawley Development Corporation started building the neighbourhood in the 1950s . Some shops , a corn merchant 's premises and a brewery were built near the level crossing in the late 19th century . Crawley 's first permanent cinema , the Imperial , was established nearby in 1911 , replacing a temporary structure ; it burnt down in 1928 but was rebuilt , only to be superseded by a larger building in the town centre in the 1930s . It has been a car dealership since the 1940s . Further down the Brighton Road , near the Hogs Hill Farm where Iron Age remains were later found , the Half Moon Inn and Hotel was built in the late 19th century , and rebuilt in 1890 . To the west , Goffs Park was established as a parkland and recreational area by the early 20th century . It covers more than 50 acres ( 20 ha ) , and its recreational features now include play areas for children , playing fields , sports pitches , lakes , a golf course and a miniature railway . 
 During World War II , the Crawley area was hit by about 50 high explosive bombs and 2 @,@ 000 incendiary bombs . The attack which caused the greatest loss of life happened on 10 July 1944 , when Southgate 's Victorian streets were hit by two V @-@ 1 flying bombs . One landed in Malthouse Road and did not detonate , but another destroyed 15 houses , killed seven people and injured 44 more when it exploded at the junction of Oak Road and West Street . 
 = = = New Town era = = = 
 Crawley was designated as a New Town in January 1947 after the New Towns Act 1946 identified it as a suitable site for one . A Development Corporation was formed , led by the architect Thomas Bennett , and planner Anthony Minoprio provided a master plan for the town 's development . He proposed a double ring of nine neighbourhoods surrounding an extended town centre . Southgate was to form the southern part of the inner ring , between the town centre and the southern section of the planned Crawley ring road ( which already existed , formed by Crawley and Southgate Avenues ) . Its built @-@ up area , excluding Goffs Park — which would lie within the neighbourhood 's northwest corner — was to be 138 hectares ( 340 acres ) . 
 The development was intended to take place in two stages : Southgate East , east of the Brighton Road , was to have been built in the early 1950s , and land west of Brighton Road ( Southgate West ) was to be reserved for expansion of the neighbourhood in the early 1960s . Both stages were delayed : the Development Corporation did not finalise their plan for Southgate East until 1954 , several years after building should have started . Work was eventually carried out between 1955 and 1957 , making Southgate the seventh neighbourhood to be started . 
 Southgate West suffered even longer delays , partly because of problems with the planned construction processes . Work should have started in 1961 but had to wait until 1968 ; plans were not submitted until 1966 . The archaeological discoveries in 1969 and 1970 caused further delays , and Southgate West was not complete until 1972 . 
 The master plan proposed that a neighbourhood centre , consisting of community centre , public house , school , church and shopping parade , should be an integral part of each neighbourhood . Initially the Development Corporation provided temporary community centre buildings ; West Sussex County Council provided a permanent facility in 1974 . A shopping parade was built on Wakehurst Drive in Southgate East in the mid @-@ 1950s ; the Development Corporation tried to provide some architectural diversity between the neighbourhoods , and as such it was designed as an arcade . St Mary 's Church was built opposite the parade in 1958 ; and infant and junior schools were provided in both halves of the neighbourhood . 
 In the early 21st century , commercial development spread along Southgate Avenue south of the railway line : a series of seven @-@ storey office blocks were built . The Arora International Hotel Gatwick / Crawley also stands nearby . 
 = = Location within Crawley = = 
 Southgate is south of the Northgate neighbourhood ( which includes Crawley town centre ) and West Green ; the Arun Valley railway line forms the boundary . <unk> Green lies to the west , Broadfield is to the southwest , Tilgate is to the south and Furnace Green shares a small border to the east . These are separated from Southgate by the A23 ( Crawley Avenue ) — part of the Crawley bypass built in the 1930s — and the <unk> Southgate Avenue . The <unk> Brighton Road , part of the original turnpike , coaching route and later main road from London to Brighton , runs through the heart of Southgate from north to south . The neighbourhood is roughly pentagonal and covers 181 hectares ( 450 acres ) . 
 When the New Town was planned , each neighbourhood was allocated a colour , which appears on street name signs together with the neighbourhood 's name . Southgate 's colour is dark brown . 
 = = Governance = = 
 When Crawley Urban District was formed in May 1956 , it was divided into eight wards whose boundaries were identical with those of eight of the extant and planned neighbourhoods . By 1983 , nine years after the district became a borough , the town had thirteen wards . This position remained the same until an electoral review in 2002 , which created two new wards . Throughout these changes , Southgate 's ward boundaries remained the same , and they are still coterminous with those of the neighbourhood . The ward elects three councillors . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The neighbourhood is coterminous with the administrative ward of the same name , which is one of the fifteen wards in Crawley . These divisions are used for collecting census and other statistical and demographic data . Southgate 's population of 8 @,@ 106 at the time of the 2001 United Kingdom Census made it Crawley 's fifth most populous neighbourhood . Based on its 181 @-@ hectare ( 450 @-@ acre ) area , its population density was 44 @.@ 75 inhabitants per hectare ( 18 @.@ 11 / acre ) — more than twice as high as the 22 @.@ 18 inhabitants per hectare ( 8 @.@ 98 / acre ) density for Crawley overall . 
 At the census date there were 3 @,@ 421 households , of which 2 @,@ 317 ( 68 % ) were owned by the occupier , 756 ( 22 % ) were rented from Crawley Borough Council or another public @-@ sector landlord , 274 ( 8 % ) were rented privately and 74 ( 2 % ) were occupied rent @-@ free . These proportions are almost identical to the housing tenure mix of Crawley as a whole . The relatively high population density is partly explained by the relatively high proportion of residents who live in purpose @-@ built flats or <unk> of various types : 16 % compared to the Crawley figure of 11 % . Many low @-@ rise blocks of flats were built in Southgate West in the 1970s — in particular the extensive <unk> Heights development of three @-@ storey blocks . The most prevalent housing type in Southgate , in which 52 % of residents live , is the terraced house . The proportion is about ⅔ in Southgate West . 
 According to the census , 90 @.@ 6 % of Southgate residents were White , 6 @.@ 3 % were Asian or Asian @-@ British , 0 @.@ 8 % were Black or Black @-@ British , 1 @.@ 5 % were mixed @-@ race and 0 @.@ 7 % were from another ethnic background . The proportion of white people was slightly higher , and that of Asian people slightly lower , than in Crawley overall ; other proportions were comparable to Crawley as a whole . Southgate 's age profile at the census date was older than that of Crawley as a whole , in common with the other inner neighbourhoods : 1 @,@ 609 residents ( 19 @.@ 8 % ) were under 18 years old , 4 @,@ 853 ( 59 @.@ 9 % ) were between 18 and 64 years old , and 1 @,@ 644 ( 20 @.@ 3 % ) were 65 years old or older . The corresponding figures for Crawley were 23 @,@ 748 ( 23 @.@ 8 % ) , 61 @,@ 338 ( 61 @.@ 5 % ) and 14 @,@ 658 ( 14 @.@ 7 % ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Modern Southgate is primarily residential , and the area was mostly undeveloped before the New Town was created . Nevertheless , some commercial and industrial development existed around the Brighton Road and railway line , and farming provided employment . Two sets of local shops serve the modern neighbourhood , but its proximity to Crawley town centre and main transport routes mean that , as intended in Anthony Minoprio 's masterplan , residents travel outside Southgate for most of their employment and shopping requirements . 
 In common with other areas around Crawley , the land to the south was held by several large farms . Malthouse Farm had its own small @-@ scale brickworks as well ; Hilltop Farm was at the highest point in the area , 315 feet ( 96 m ) above sea level ; and Hogs Hill Farm , named after the herds of pigs farmed there , stood on a ridge east of the Brighton Road . 
 Crawley 's two main building firms had their yards and works in the Victorian streets near the railway line . Richard Cook 's firm , which built the houses and streets of the 19th @-@ century " New Town " development , was founded in 1861 and was based at the corner of two of the new streets . The works included a brickyard ; poor drainage led to soil and dirty water from it polluting the surrounding area . The Crawley and Ifield Vigilance Committee , an amateur pressure group , demanded improvements for several years , and proper drains were eventually laid . Cook and Sons ' advertisements revealed the range of products manufactured : the works made bricks , tiles , pipes and pottery , and his team of labourers carried out all types of building and contracting work . James Longley and Sons became the most famous business in Crawley and one of its largest : in 1898 more than 700 people worked for it . Longley moved his small firm from Turners Hill in 1881 when he bought Malthouse Farm and its brickworks . Expansion was rapid , and they received commissions for Christ 's Hospital school near Horsham , the King Edward VII sanatorium in Midhurst , <unk> Hospital in Chichester , the choir stalls in Westminster Abbey and almost every railway station owned by the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway . Longley and Sons , which soon became Longley and Company , quickly became one of southeast England 's main building firms ; but it was nearly ruined on 20 March 1924 when the joinery and timber works , all stock inside it and sixty machines were destroyed by fire . The firm recovered , though , and was able to tender for a wide range of contracts in the New Town era , including Hazelwick School , much of the Manor Royal industrial estate , Crawley fire station , the Queen 's Square shopping area and Crawley College 's tower block extension . 
 Neither building firm survives . Cook 's lasted into the New Town era but wound down after that ; their work survives in the streets of Southgate and at St Peter 's Church in West Green , a school in <unk> , the churchyard of St Margaret 's Church , Ifield and elsewhere . Longley and Company ceased trading in 2000 , and the works and associated buildings were demolished soon afterwards to make way for housing and a hotel . The Arora International Hotel Gatwick / Crawley , which has conference facilities , a large health and fitness suite and restaurant , was built on the site at the end of East Park in 2001 . The 4 @-@ star hotel has 432 bedrooms . 
 = = Public buildings and facilities = = 
 St Mary 's Church is the Anglican parish church of Southgate . The churches in the Broadfield , Furnace Green and Tilgate neighbourhoods are linked to it as daughter churches . Architects Henry Braddock and D.F. Martin @-@ Smith designed it in 1958 . The concrete and glass structure has a small flèche on top of a bell tower , and has an adjoining hall which can be opened out to increase the capacity of the church . It is on Wakehurst Drive opposite the main shopping parade . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints has a meetinghouse on Horsham Road ; it was designed by the chief architect of the town , Sir Thomas Bennett , and built in 1964 on land provided by Crawley Development Corporation . ChristChurch ( formerly Gateway Church International ) on Brewer Road is a non @-@ denominational church associated with the New Covenant Ministries International movement ; its <unk> building has a semicircular roof . 
 St Wilfrid 's Catholic School is a 900 @-@ pupil voluntary aided secondary school , which opened in 1952 in the former Oakwood House next to Goffs Park . It was extended several times and became a comprehensive in 1967 . Former pupils include Robert Smith of rock band The Cure . A Roman Catholic primary school , St Francis of Assisi School , is located on Southgate Drive . Southgate Primary School was formed in 2004 from a merger between a first school and a middle school on the same site . The school is now a 400 pupil fast @-@ growing school . These had in turn been formed from the original Southgate County Infant and Junior School , opened in 1956 . Residential development in Southgate West resulted in the opening of first and middle schools there , in 1969 and 1970 respectively ; these closed in 2004 and were replaced by Hilltop Primary School . 
 The Development Corporation set up a sub @-@ committee in 1953 to decide how public houses should be provided in the New Town neighbourhoods . The <unk> pub was built shortly afterwards next to the shopping parade . Elsewhere , Goffs Manor pub and restaurant is near Goffs Park , and the Half Moon remains on the Brighton Road . As at July 2014 , The Half Moon is closed for refurbishment and is due to reopen in August 2014 as the New Moon . 
 St. Catherine 's Hospice , a charity which provides hospice care to patients throughout West Sussex and Surrey , is based on Malthouse Road in the 19th @-@ century part of Southgate . Crawley 's new skatepark was built on playing fields at Southgate Avenue in 2007 . 
 = = Heritage = = 
 Two of the 100 listed buildings and structures in the Borough of Crawley are in Southgate . Goffs Manor , in Goffs Park , is a Grade II @-@ listed 16th @-@ century farmhouse which is now a restaurant and pub . Before its conversion , actor Peter Vaughan owned and lived in it . The building is timber @-@ framed , as many Crawley houses of the time were , although little of this is now visible . The upper floor is hung with red tiles . The roof is made of slabs of Horsham Stone . An original open fireplace remains inside . The signal box next to the level crossing on Crawley High Street , another Grade II @-@ listed building , is just on the Southgate side of the railway line . It was built in about 1860 and has a hipped roof . 
 Crawley Borough Council has designated a conservation area around the level crossing on Brighton Road . Part of this falls within Southgate 's boundaries . Elsewhere , Goffs Park Road has been given the status of an Area of Special Environmental Quality . Goffs Park itself was given a Green Flag Award in July 2008 in recognition of its high standards . 
 There were 59 locally listed buildings in Crawley as of 2010 ; seven are in Southgate . Crawley Museum is based in Goffs Park House in Goffs Park , although in March 2010 plans were announced to move it elsewhere in the town — possibly to Tree House , a vacant council @-@ owned listed building in the town centre . Goffs Park House was designed in 1882 by architect William Buck and built by a Horsham @-@ based firm on behalf of banker Edwin Henty . The red @-@ brick , Bath stone and sandstone building combines the Queen Anne Revival and Vernacular styles . Its large grounds have become Goffs Park . Nightingale House on the Brighton Road dates from 1901 and was originally a bank branch . Its " striking corner turret " , oriel windows and detailed treatment of the ground @-@ floor elevation make it a local landmark . The four villas at 108 – 122 Malthouse Road , forming eight semi @-@ detached houses , are of a similar date and retain most of their original features such as carved timber porches and stained glass panelling . The local building firm James Longley & Company built them . Goffs Park Road was developed with large houses in the early 20th century , and Park Lodge and Masons Hall ( now offices ) are two examples . Park Lodge has been considerably altered but retains the character of a " late Victorian red @-@ brick villa " ; Masons Hall is later ( 1905 ) and " rather eccentric " , resembling a Tuscan villa and featuring a campanile @-@ style projection at one corner . Nearby , 49 Brighton Road , a large detached villa , is an example of Richard Cook 's late @-@ 19th @-@ century housing in the " New Town " area of Southgate . It has red @-@ brick walls with ornate mouldings , timber @-@ framed gables and original sash windows . St Mary 's Church is also on the local list . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Metrobus , which operates most local bus services in Crawley , serves several stops in Southgate on route 1 . Longer @-@ distance route 23 runs via the Horsham Road to Worthing and Horsham . The nearest railway station is Crawley , which has a rear entrance on East Park Road in the north of the neighbourhood . 
 Levels of vehicle ownership , as measured by the 2001 census , are lower than in Crawley as a whole . At the census date , the mean number of vehicles per household was 1 @.@ 09 ( the overall Crawley figure was 1 @.@ 21 ) , and 25 @.@ 4 % of households had no transport of their own , compared to 20 @.@ 4 % in Crawley overall . 
 = Maryland Route 313 = 
 Maryland Route 313 ( MD 313 ) is a state highway located on the Eastern Shore of Maryland in the United States . The 75 @.@ 72 @-@ mile ( 121 @.@ 86 km ) route runs from U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) in Mardela Springs , Wicomico County north to MD 213 and MD 290 in Galena , Kent County . It is predominantly a rural two @-@ lane road that runs through agricultural areas a short distance west of the Delaware border , with the exception of a four @-@ lane divided bypass of Denton shared with MD 404 . MD 313 serves many communities , including Sharptown , Eldorado , Federalsburg , Denton , Greensboro , Goldsboro , Barclay , Sudlersville , Millington , and Massey . The route intersects many major roads , including MD 54 in Mardela Springs , MD 404 in the Denton area , MD 302 in Barclay , MD 300 in Sudlersville , and US 301 near Massey . 
 The designation MD 313 was first used in 1927 for the road running from Eldorado to Galena , while the portion south to Mardela Springs was designated a part of US 213 . By 1933 , the route was extended to Mardela Springs following a realignment of US 213 . MD 313 was rerouted to bypass Ingleside in 1949 and Greensboro in 1950 . The route was moved to its current alignment between Federalsburg and Denton in 1954 , replacing what had been briefly designated MD 322 between Federalsburg and Andersontown . The former alignment is now Auction Road and American Corner Road ( formerly designated MD 630 ) and MD 16 . The route bypassed Federalsburg in 1964 . MD 313 was moved to a one @-@ way pair in Denton along with MD 404 in 1972 . In 1987 , MD 313 and MD 404 were moved onto the four @-@ lane divided bypass of the town . The original routing of MD 313 in Denton is designated MD 619 . The divided highway in the Denton area was extended further south in the early 2000s . The remaining two @-@ lane portions of MD 313 that are concurrent with MD 404 are slated to be upgraded to a four @-@ lane divided highway to provide relief to beach traffic along MD 404 , a part of the main route between the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the Delaware Beaches . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 313 runs through rural areas of woods and farms on the Eastern Shore of Maryland , generally a short distance west of the Delaware border . The route heads through five counties in Maryland from south to north : Wicomico , Dorchester , Caroline , Queen Anne 's , and Kent . It connects several towns including Mardela Springs and Sharptown in Wicomico County , Eldorado in Dorchester County , Federalsburg , Denton , Greensboro and Goldsboro in Caroline County , Barclay and Sudlersville in Queen Anne 's County , and Millington and Galena in Kent County . MD 313 is a part of the National Highway System along its concurrency with MD 404 from Andersontown to Denton . 
 = = = Wicomico County = = = 
 MD 313 begins at an intersection with US 50 in Mardela Springs , Wicomico County , where the route heads east past residences along Delmar Road , a two @-@ lane undivided road . A short distance past US 50 , the route turns north onto Sharptown Road , with MD 54 continuing east on Delmar Road toward the Delaware @-@ Maryland state border town of Delmar . The route continues north past more residences before it leaves Mardela Springs and heads into farmland a short distance west of the Delaware border . It continues through a mix of woods and farms with some residences before reaching Sharptown . Here , the road intersects unsigned MD <unk> ( <unk> Road ) . MD 313 bypasses Sharptown to the south and intersects MD 348 ( Laurel Road ) . Past this intersection , the route turns north and runs along the eastern edge of the town before crossing over the Nanticoke River . 
 = = = Dorchester County = = = 
 Upon crossing the Nanticoke River , MD 313 enters Dorchester County and heads northwest through wooded areas before continuing into a mix of woodland and farmland . It turns west before heading northwest again and reaching the town of Eldorado . Here , the route intersects the eastern terminus of MD 14 ( Rhodesdale Eldorado Road ) . At this intersection , MD 313 makes a right turn to head north on Eldorado Road . The route leaves Eldorado and it continues through farmland with some patches of woods . It intersects MD 392 ( <unk> Reliance Road ) in <unk> and passes more farming areas with intermittent residences before coming to an intersection with MD 577 ( Reliance Road ) on the Caroline County border in Allens Corner . 
 = = = Caroline County = = = 
 At the MD 577 intersection , MD 313 runs northwest along the border of Caroline and Dorchester counties as Reliance Road . The route heads toward the town of Federalsburg , passing through a mix of agricultural and residential areas . The route then leaves the border line and enters Caroline County , intersecting MD 318 ( Federalsburg Highway ) and making a left turn to form a concurrency with that route . The two routes bypass Federalsburg to the south , crossing over Marshyhope Creek . After crossing the creek , the road intersects MD 308 ( South Main Street ) . The road passes an industrial park before turning north into wooded areas and crossing the Maryland & Delaware Railroad 's Seaford Line . After the railroad crossing , MD 313 and MD 318 intersect MD 307 ( Williamsburg Road ) at a roundabout located in the southwestern corner of Federalsburg . A short distance later , MD 318 splits from MD 313 by heading west on Preston Road while MD 315 continues east into Federalsburg on Bloomingdale Avenue . Past this intersection , MD 313 continues north on the Federalsburg Highway , leaving the Federalsburg area and heading into a mix of woodland and farmland . 
 In Andersontown , MD 313 intersects MD 16 and MD 404 ( Shore Highway ) , which constitutes a part of the main route between the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the Delaware beaches . Here , the route makes a left turn onto that road , forming a three @-@ route concurrency . At this point , the Shore Highway heads northwest through a mix of woods and farms with some homes before widening to a four @-@ lane divided highway . Upon widening into a divided highway , MD 16 splits from MD 313 and MD 404 at an intersection and heads west on Harmony Road . Past this intersection , MD 313 crosses over Watts Creek and heads north through farmland , passing <unk> State Park . 
 The road heads into commercial areas in the southern part of Denton . The road turns northeast into woods and intersects the eastern terminus of MD 404 Bus . ( Franklin Street / Gay Street ) at an at @-@ grade intersection . Past this intersection , MD 313 and MD 404 become a limited @-@ access road and head north , passing residential neighborhoods and woodland along the eastern side of Denton . The road turns to the west and comes to a diamond interchange . Here MD 313 splits from MD 404 by heading north on two @-@ lane undivided Greensboro Road and MD 619 , while the former routing of MD 313 in Denton heads south into Denton on Sixth Street . 
 The route heads through farmland before passing residences and intersecting the western terminus of MD 317 ( Burrsville Road ) in Oil City . Past MD 317 , the road continues through mostly wooded areas with some residences and farmland . It reaches the town of Greensboro , where MD 313 intersects MD 314 ( Whiteleysburg Road ) . The route crosses the Choptank River past MD 314 , and continues to the intersection with the eastern terminus of MD 480 ( Ridgely Road ) just north of Greensboro . The road continues north through agricultural areas before entering Goldsboro , where the route becomes Old Town Road . In Goldsboro , MD 313 intersects MD 311 ( Main Street ) and continues through residential areas before coming to an intersection with MD 287 ( Old Line Road ) . Here , the route makes a left turn to head west on Goldsboro Road . MD 313 leaves Goldsboro and heads into a mix of farmland and woodland . The road intersects unsigned MD 820 ( Castle Hall Road ) . Past this intersection , MD 313 turns to the northwest and intersects the northern terminus of MD 312 ( Oakland Road ) in Baltimore Corner , where it heads north through farm fields past that intersection . 
 = = = Queen Anne 's County = = = 
 MD 313 crosses Long Marsh Ditch into Queen Anne 's County and continues north through more farmland , before intersecting the eastern terminus of MD 19 ( Roberts Station Road ) in Ingleside . The route proceeds north , with a traffic count of 2 @,@ 270 vehicles at the Merrick Corner Road intersection , before reaching the town of Barclay . Here , the road passes residences and intersects MD 302 ( Church Street ) . Past this intersection , the road crosses the Centreville Branch of the Northern Line of the Maryland & Delaware Railroad before leaving Barclay and heading back into agricultural areas . The Maryland & Delaware Railroad line runs a short distance to the east of MD 313 before eventually running next to the road as it passes through a mix of farms , woods , and residences . The route enters Sudlersville , where it passes through residential areas in the town on Church Street , with the railroad line drawing farther to the east . In the center of town , the road intersects MD 300 ( Main Street ) . Past the MD 300 intersection , MD 313 intersects MD 837 ( Church Circle ) , an unsigned loop to westbound MD 300 . 
 Upon leaving Sudlersville , the route becomes Millington Road and heads north through farm fields with intermittent residences . MD 313 heads into forested areas as it runs a short distance to the east of US 301 . It leaves the woodland as it intersects the eastern terminus of MD 544 ( <unk> Road ) . The route heads northeast through a mix of agricultural and residential areas before turning east in a patch of woodland and passing more farm fields and residences . MD 313 turns northeast into wooded residential areas and enters Millington , where it becomes Sassafras Street . 
 = = = Kent County = = = 
 MD 313 crosses the Chester River into Kent County , where it continues north through Millington and crosses MD 291 ( Cypress Street ) . The road passes more residences before leaving Millington and becoming Millington Massey Road , which passes by farmland and some residences . MD 313 reaches Massey , where it passes by residences before coming to an intersection at the center of town where it makes a left turn onto Massey Galena Road . It is here that MD 299 heads north on Massey Road and MD 330 heads east on Massey Delaware Line Road . The route leaves Massey and heads west through farm fields , crossing the Chestertown Branch of the Northern Line of the Maryland & Delaware Railroad before heading northwest into forested areas . The route intersects the multi @-@ lane , divided US 301 ( Blue Star Memorial Highway ) at a superstreet intersection in which traffic on MD 313 cannot continue directly across US 301 and must use a U @-@ turn ramp in the median of that route . 
 Past the US 301 intersection , the route officially becomes MD <unk> , but is still signed as MD 313 . It heads west through farmland before turning north and intersecting MD 290 ( Chesterville Road ) . The two routes continue north together into Galena , where the road becomes Main Street . It passes residences before intersecting MD 213 ( Main Street ) in the center of town where MD 313 ends , MD 290 turns east on Cross Street , and MD 213 goes northbound on Main Street and southbound by going west on Cross Street . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1911 , what is now MD 313 was built as a state highway between Mardela Springs and Riverton , to the north of Federalsburg , and between south of Denton and Greensboro , with the portions between Riverton and Sharptown and Williston and Denton under contract . At this time , the state highway was under proposal between Sharptown and Eldorado , north of Federalsburg and Williston , and Greensboro and Ingleside . By 1915 , the state highway was completed between Riverton and Eldorado and south of Denton and Ingleside . The state road was finished to the north of Eldorado , between Federalsburg and Williston , to the north of Ingleside , to the south of Sudlersville , and from west of Massey to Galena by 1921 . At this time , the remainder of the state highway was under proposal between Eldorado and Galena . By 1923 , portions of the state highway were completed to the south of Federalsburg , between north of Ingleside and south of Sudlersville , and from north of Sudlersville to west of Massey . 
 MD 313 was designated in 1927 to run from US 213 in Eldorado north to US 213 in Galena . The route headed north from Eldorado to Federalsburg , where it continued northwest to Williston , northeast to Denton , north to Goldsboro , northwest to Ingleside , north to Massey , and northwest to Galena . All of MD 313 was state @-@ maintained except for two portions to the south of Federalsburg . At this time , the road between Mardela Springs and Eldorado was designated as part of US 213 , which ran from Ocean City to Elkton . By 1933 , the southern terminus of MD 313 was extended to US 213 in Mardela Springs when US 213 was rerouted to cross the Nanticoke River in Vienna . At this time , the missing state @-@ maintained segments south of Federalsburg were completed . By 1949 , the route was moved to a straight alignment bypassing Ingleside to the east , with the former routing becoming an extended MD 19 and St. Paul Road . In 1950 , MD 313 was rerouted to bypass Greensboro to the east . The former alignment through Greensboro became an extended MD 314 along Sunset Avenue and an extended MD 480 along Main Street . Construction on the modern alignment of MD 313 between Federalsburg and Andersontown began by 1950 ; MD 322 was assigned to the new highway by 1952 . In 1954 , MD 313 replaced MD 322 on the new highway from Federalsburg to Andersontown and continued concurrent with MD 404 between Andersontown and Denton . The former alignment became MD 630 along Auction Road and American Corner Road between Federalsburg and Bureau and was removed from a concurrency with MD 16 between Bureau and Denton . In 1964 , MD 313 was moved to a bypass to the south and west of Federalsburg along with MD 318 , with the former alignment through the town becoming Reliance Avenue and MD 315 . 
 In 1972 , MD 404 and MD 313 were relocated to a one @-@ way pair , eastbound Franklin Street and westbound Gay Street , through Denton . The routes previously headed south out of Denton on Sixth Street and Fifth Avenue . The former alignment along Sixth Street became MD 619 by 1978 . In the early 1980s , construction began to widen MD 313 / MD 404 to a divided highway around Denton . By 1985 , construction was underway for the four @-@ lane divided bypass of Denton between MD 404 west of Denton and MD 313 north of Denton . In 1987 , MD 313 and MD 404 were rerouted to bypass Denton along the newly completed four @-@ lane divided bypass . The former alignment of MD 313 through Denton became MD 404 Bus. along Franklin and Gay streets and MD 619 along Sixth Street . In 1987 , MD 313 was moved to a bypass to the north and east of Sharptown , having previously followed State Street through the town . A superstreet intersection was built at US 301 in 2000 , resulting in the northern terminus of MD 313 being officially moved to US 301 and the portion of the route between US 301 and MD 213 being designated MD <unk> . The divided highway portion of MD 313 / MD 404 in the Denton area was extended further in the 2000s from the south end of Denton to the Sennett Road intersection east of where MD 16 joins the route . This project received $ 3 million from the federal government in 2001 . The remaining two @-@ lane portions of MD 313 that are concurrent with MD 404 are slated to be widened into a four @-@ lane divided highway in order to provide relief to travelers driving to the ocean resorts along MD 404 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Pennsylvania Route 463 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 463 ( PA 463 ) is a 12 @.@ 9 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 20 @.@ 8 km ) route completely in Montgomery County , Pennsylvania . Its western terminus is at PA 63 ( Welsh Road ) in Hatfield Township and its eastern terminus is at PA 611 in Horsham . It runs through the northern suburban areas of Philadelphia and passes through the towns of Hatfield , Montgomeryville , and Horsham . The route intersects PA 309 , U.S. Route 202 Business ( US 202 Bus . ) , and US 202 in Montgomeryville and PA 152 in Prospectville . Through its length , the route carries the names Forty Foot Road , <unk> Road , and Horsham Road . PA 463 was designated in 1928 and fully paved by 1940 . In 2010 , a portion of the route in Montgomery Township was widened . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 463 begins an intersection with PA 63 on the border of Hatfield Township and Towamencin Township , heading northeast on four @-@ lane undivided Forty Foot Road into Hatfield Township . The road passes through commercial areas and farmland and narrows to two lanes . The route continues into residential areas with a few businesses and enters the borough of Hatfield , where it becomes West Broad Street . In Hatfield , the road continues northeast to the center of town . Here , PA 463 turns to the southeast on South Main Street and passes more residential and commercial development , crossing the Bethlehem Branch railroad line that is owned by SEPTA and operated by the Pennsylvania Northeastern Railroad . The road continues back into Hatfield Township and becomes <unk> Road . The route crosses SEPTA 's Lansdale / Doylestown Line near the Fortuna station and intersecting Broad Street in a commercial area . 
 Heading past more homes , PA 463 enters Montgomery Township at the Line Street intersection . It reaches the community of Montgomeryville , where PA 463 widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway and intersects PA 309 ( Bethlehem Pike ) and US 202 Bus . ( Doylestown Road ) at the Five Points intersection . 
 Past this intersection , the route takes on the name Horsham Road and passes near more businesses as it narrows into a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane and one travel lane in each direction . After crossing North Wales Road , the route carries five lanes total , with two travel lanes in each direction and a center left @-@ turn lane , as it heads into residential areas . The road passes through commercial areas past the Upper State Road intersection and crosses US 202 . Past Stump Road , PA 463 narrows to two lanes total and runs past residential areas and business parks . Farther southeast , the route becomes the border between Horsham Township to the southwest and Montgomery Township to the northeast . 
 Upon crossing Lower State Road , PA 463 fully enters Horsham Township and becomes a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane as it heads past housing subdivisions . The route loses the turning lane and continues southeast to PA 152 in the village of Prospectville . At this intersection , PA 463 gains a center left @-@ turn lane again and passes a few businesses before continuing past Deep Meadow Park and Kohler Park . The road intersects Keith Valley Road and passes near Samuel Carpenter Park . At the Babylon Road junction , the route becomes a five @-@ lane road and runs to the northeast of Hatboro @-@ Horsham Senior High School and past business parks before coming to Privet Road . At this point , PA 463 runs past the Horsham Air Guard Station to the northeast and homes and businesses to the southwest . The route reaches the edge of the air station property at the Maple Avenue intersection . PA 463 intersects Dresher Road , where the center left @-@ turn lane ends and the road becomes four lanes , reaching its eastern terminus at PA 611 in the community of Horsham . 
 = = History = = 
 When Pennsylvania first legislated routes in 1911 , present @-@ day PA 463 was not given a number . In 1928 , PA 463 was designated onto its current alignment from PA 63 in Hatfield Township to US 611 / PA 2 in Horsham . At this time , the route was paved between PA 63 and Hatfield . When first created , PA 463 intersected US 122 / US 309 / PA 12 / PA 52 in Montgomery Township and PA 152 in Horsham Township . By 1930 , PA 463 was paved in Horsham Township . At this time , it no longer intersected PA 12 and PA 52 and it now intersected PA 752 in Horsham Township . The remainder of PA 463 was paved by 1940 . Also by this time , US 122 became US 202 and PA 463 no longer intersected PA 752 , the first of several changes to the routes that intersected PA 463 . 
 In 1968 , the US 309 designation that the route intersected in Montgomeryville became PA 309 . The route at the eastern terminus of PA 463 changed from US 611 to PA 611 in 1972 . Construction began to widen the section of PA 463 between North Wales Road and General Hancock Boulevard into a five @-@ lane road as part of the 202 Parkway project in 2009 . The widening project was completed a year later . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Montgomery County . 
 = Dirk Nowitzki = 
 Dirk Werner Nowitzki ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) ( born June 19 , 1978 ) is a German professional basketball player for the Dallas Mavericks of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . An alumnus of Röntgen Gymnasium and the DJK Würzburg basketball club , Nowitzki was chosen as the ninth pick in the 1998 NBA draft by the Milwaukee Bucks and immediately traded to the Mavericks , where he has played since . Listed at 7 ft 0 in ( 2 @.@ 13 m ) , Nowitzki is considered one of the greatest power forwards in basketball history . 
 Nowitzki led the Mavericks to 15 NBA Playoffs ( 2001 – 2012 ; 2014 – 2016 ) , including the franchise 's first Finals appearance in 2006 and only championship in 2011 . He is a 13 @-@ time All @-@ Star , a 12 @-@ time All @-@ NBA Team member , and the first European player to start in an All @-@ Star Game as well as the first to receive the NBA Most Valuable Player Award ( 2007 ) . Nowitzki is the highest @-@ scoring foreign @-@ born player in NBA @-@ history , currently being ranked 6th in all @-@ time scoring with over 29 @,@ 000 regular @-@ season points . He is also one of seven players who achieved a 50 – 40 – 90 season ( 2007 ) . He is the first Maverick voted onto an All @-@ NBA Team and holds several all @-@ time Mavericks franchise records . Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar and Nowitzki are the only players to achieve four consecutive 30 @-@ point , 15 @-@ rebound post @-@ season games ( 2001 – 2002 ) . 
 Nowitzki led the German national basketball team to a bronze medal in the 2002 FIBA World Championship and silver in EuroBasket 2005 , and was the leading scorer and MVP in both tournaments . He was named the Euroscar European Basketball Player of the Year by the Italian sports newspaper Gazzetta dello Sport for five years running from 2002 to 2006 and again in 2011 . He was also named the Mister Europa European Player of the Year by the Italian sports magazine <unk> in 2005 , and the FIBA Europe Men 's Player of the Year twice in 2005 and 2011 . 
 On December 18 , 2011 , Nowitzki was named the 2011 German Sports Personality of the Year , the first basketball player to receive the award . On December 10 , 2012 , he became the first non @-@ American player to receive the Naismith Legacy Award . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in Würzburg , Germany , Nowitzki comes from an athletic family : his mother Helga Nowitzki ( née <unk> ) was a professional basketball player and his father Jörg @-@ Werner was a handball player who represented Germany at the highest international level . His older sister Silke Nowitzki , a local champion in track and field , also became a basketball player and now works for the NBA in International TV . 
 Nowitzki was a very tall child ; most of the time he stood above his peers by a foot or more . He initially played handball and tennis , but soon grew tired of being called a " freak " for his height and eventually turned to basketball . After joining the local DJK Würzburg , the 15 @-@ year @-@ old attracted the attention of former German international basketball player Holger Geschwindner , who spotted his talent immediately and offered to coach him individually two to three times per week . After getting both the approval of Nowitzki and his parents , Geschwindner put his student through an unorthodox training scheme : he emphasized shooting and passing exercises , and shunned weight training and tactical drills , because he felt it was " unnecessary friction " . Furthermore , Geschwindner encouraged Nowitzki to play a musical instrument and read literature to make him a more complete personality . 
 After a year , the coach was so impressed with Nowitzki 's progress that he advised him : " You must now decide whether you want to play against the best in the world or just stay a local hero in Germany . If you choose the latter , we will stop training immediately , because nobody can prevent that anymore . But if you want to play against the best , we have to train on a daily basis . " After pondering this lifetime decision for two days , Nowitzki agreed to enter the full @-@ time training schedule , choosing the path to his eventual international career . Geschwindner let him train seven days a week with DJK Würzburg players and future German internationals Robert Garrett , Marvin Willoughby and Demond Greene , and in the summer of 1994 , then 16 @-@ year @-@ old Nowitzki made the DJK squad . 
 = = DJK Würzburg ( 1994 – 1998 ) = = 
 When Nowitzki joined the team , DJK played in the Second Bundesliga , South Division . His first trainer was Pit Stahl , who played the tall teenager as an outside @-@ scoring forward rather than an inside @-@ scoring center to utilise his shooting skills . In the 1994 – 95 Second Bundesliga season , ambitious DJK finished as a disappointing sixth of 12 teams ; the rookie Nowitzki was often benched and struggled with bad school grades , which forced him to study rather than work on his game . In the next 1995 – 96 Second Bundesliga season , Nowitzki established himself as a starter next to Finnish star forward Martti <unk> and soon became a regular double @-@ digit scorer : after German national basketball coach Dirk <unk> saw him score 24 points in a DJK game , he stated that " Dirk Nowitzki is the greatest German basketball talent of the last 10 , maybe 15 years . " DJK finished second in the South Division , but could not earn promotion after losing , 86 – 62 , in the deciding match versus BG Ludwigsburg : in that game , Nowitzki scored only eight points . 
 In the 1996 – 97 Second Bundesliga season , the team 's top scorer <unk> left the team , and Geschwindner replaced Pit Stahl as head coach . Filling the void , Nowitzki averaged 19 @.@ 4 points per game and led DJK again to second place after the regular season , but could not help his team gain promotion . In the following 1997 – 98 Second Bundesliga season , Nowitzki finished his " Abitur " ( German A @-@ levels ) , but had to do compulsory military service in the Bundeswehr which lasted from September 1 , 1997 to June 30 , 1998 ; Nowitzki described this period as " a tough time at first ; we had no privileges and had to participate in all the drills ... later ( after finishing the tough " <unk> " , the most intensive initial part of the service ) it was much more relaxed . " Concerning basketball , the 18 @-@ year @-@ old , who had grown to 6 ft 11 in ( 2 @.@ 11 m ) tall , made progress , leading DJK to a 36 : 4 point total ( in Germany , a victory gives 2 : 0 points and a loss 0 : 2 ) and ending as leading scorer with 28 @.@ 2 points per game . In the promotion playoffs , DJK finally broke its hex , finishing at first place with 14 : 2 points and earning promotion to the next higher league ; Nowitzki scored 26 points in the deciding 95 – 88 win against Freiburg and was voted " German Basketballer of the Year " by the German <unk> magazine . 
 Abroad , Nowitzki 's progress was noticed . In 1996 , FC Barcelona <unk> wanted to sign him , but Nowitzki refused to move before finishing his Abitur . A year later , the teenager participated in the Nike " Hoop Heroes Tour " , where he played against NBA stars like Charles Barkley and Scottie Pippen . In a 30 @-@ minute show match , Nowitzki outplayed Barkley and even dunked on him , causing the latter to exclaim : " The boy is a genius . If he wants to enter the NBA , he can call me . " On March 29 , 1998 , Nowitzki was chosen to play in the Nike Hoop Summit , one of the premier talent watches in U.S. men 's basketball . In a match between the U.S. talents and the international talents , Nowitzki scored 33 points on 6 @-@ of @-@ 12 shooting , 14 rebounds and 3 steals for the internationals and outplayed future US NBA players Rashard Lewis and Al Harrington . He impressed with a combination of quickness , ball handling , and shooting range , and from that moment a multitude of European and NBA clubs wanted to recruit him . 
 = = Dallas Mavericks ( 1998 – present ) = = 
 = = = Difficult start ( 1998 – 99 ) = = = 
 After leading DJK Würzburg to promotion and with his Abitur and military service behind him , Nowitzki looked to the NBA for his future . Projected to be seventh pick in the 1998 NBA draft , he passed up many college offers and went directly into the NBA as a then @-@ still rare prep @-@ to @-@ pro player . In particular , Rick Pitino and Don Nelson , head coaches of the Boston Celtics and Dallas Mavericks respectively , were highly interested in acquiring him . After a 45 @-@ minute private workout with Pitino , where Nowitzki showcased his versatile shooting , rebounding and passing skills , the Boston coach immediately compared him to Celtics legend Larry Bird ; Pitino assured Nowitzki that he would draft him with the Celtics ' first @-@ round draft pick at # 10 . 
 However , Pitino 's plan was foiled by Nelson , whose team had the sixth pick . Nelson worked out draft day deals with the Milwaukee Bucks and the Phoenix Suns : the Mavericks wanted Nowitzki and Suns reserve point guard Steve Nash ; the Bucks desired muscular forward Robert Traylor , who was projected to be drafted before Nowitzki ; and the Suns had set their sights on forward Pat Garrity , who was projected as a low first round pick . In the draft , the Mavericks drafted Traylor with their sixth pick , and the Bucks selected Nowitzki with their ninth and Garrity with their nineteenth pick . The Mavericks then traded Traylor to the Bucks for Nowitzki and Garrity , and they in return traded the latter to Phoenix for Nash . 
 In retrospect , Don Nelson , who had once coached the Bucks , had an outstanding trade instinct , essentially trading future career underachievers Traylor and Garrity for two future NBA MVPs in Nowitzki and Nash ; in addition , the new recruits quickly became close friends . Nowitzki became only the fourth German player in NBA history , following pivots Uwe <unk> and Christian <unk> and All @-@ Star swingman Detlef Schrempf , who was a 35 @-@ year @-@ old veteran of the Seattle SuperSonics when his young compatriot arrived . Nowitzki finished his DJK career as the only Würzburg player to have ever made the NBA . 
 In Dallas , Nowitzki joined a franchise which had last made the playoffs in 1990 . Shooting guard Michael Finley captained the squad , supported by 7 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 29 m ) center Shawn Bradley , once a number two draft pick , and team scoring leader Cedric Ceballos , an ex @-@ Laker forward . Nowitzki experienced a rocky start : prior to the 1998 – 99 NBA season , NBA commissioner David Stern wanted to introduce a salary cap , causing the NBA players ' union to declare a strike , the combination putting the entire season in jeopardy . In limbo , Nowitzki returned to DJK Würzburg and played thirteen games before both sides worked out a late compromise deal that resulted in a shortened schedule of only 50 instead of 82 regular season games . 
 When the season finally started , Nowitzki struggled . Played as a power forward by coach Don Nelson , the 20 @-@ year @-@ old felt overpowered by the more athletic NBA forwards , was intimidated by the expectations as a number nine pick , and played bad defense , causing hecklers to taunt him as " Irk Nowitzki " , omitting the " D " which stands for " defense " in basketball slang . He only averaged 8 @.@ 2 points and 3 @.@ 4 rebounds in 20 @.@ 4 minutes of playing time . Looking back , Nowitzki said : " I was so frustrated I even contemplated going back to Germany . ... [ the jump from Second Bundesliga to the NBA ] was like jumping out of an airplane hoping the parachute would somehow open . " The Mavericks only won 19 of their 50 games and missed the playoffs , although Nowitzki completed the season with eight double @-@ digit scoring games out of the last twelve . 
 = = = " Big Three " ( 1999 – 2004 ) = = = 
 1999 – 2000 season 
 In the 1999 – 2000 NBA season , Don Nelson wanted to use Nowitzki as a point forward to make use of his passing skills . However , one of the most important moves was made off the hardwood : until then , the owner of the Mavericks was Ross Perot , Jr . , who had bought the franchise for $ 125 million , but had no plans of investing in players and admitted he knew little of basketball . On January 4 , 2000 , he sold the Mavericks to Internet billionaire Mark Cuban for $ 280 million . Cuban quickly invested into the Mavericks and restructured the franchise , attending every game at the sidelines , buying the team a $ 46 million six @-@ star Boeing 757 for traveling , and increasing franchise revenues to over $ 100 million . Nowitzki lauded Cuban : " He created the perfect environment ... we only have to go out and win . " As a result of Nelson 's tutelage , Cuban 's improvements and his own progress , Nowitzki significantly improved his averages . The second @-@ year pro now averaged 17 @.@ 5 points , 6 @.@ 5 rebounds and 2 @.@ 5 assists per game in 35 @.@ 8 minutes , had nine double @-@ double games , and scored a career @-@ high 32 points twice . He was voted runner @-@ up in the NBA Most Improved Player Award behind Jalen Rose , and made it into the NBA All @-@ Star Sophomore squad along with peers Paul Pierce and Vince Carter . In the traditional Rookie @-@ Sophomore match , he scored 17 points , grabbed six rebounds and dished out four assists in an overtime loss against the rookie team led by Steve Francis and Lamar Odom . The 7 @-@ foot @-@ 0 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 13 m ) Nowitzki also was chosen for the NBA All @-@ Star Three Point Shootout , becoming the tallest player ever to participate . After draining 15 shots in the first shootout , he entered the final round , where he finished as runner @-@ up to Jeff <unk> . While he improved on an individual level , the Mavericks missed the playoffs after a mediocre 40 – 42 season . 
 2000 – 01 season 
 In the 2000 – 01 NBA season , Nowitzki further improved his averages , recording 21 @.@ 8 points , 9 @.@ 2 rebounds and 2 @.@ 1 assists per game . Now playing the power forward position , he became the second player in NBA history after Robert Horry to score 100 3 @-@ pointers and 100 blocks in the regular season by registering 151 and 101 , respectively . As a sign of his growing importance , he joined team captain Finley as only one of two Mavericks to play and start in all 82 games and had 10 games in which he scored at least 30 points . Nowitzki became the first Maverick ever to be voted into the All @-@ NBA squads , making the Third Team . In addition , his best friend Nash became a valuable point guard , and with Finley scoring more than ever , pundits were calling this trio the " Big Three " of the Mavericks . 
 Posting a 53 – 29 record in the regular season , the Mavericks reached the playoffs for the first time since 1990 . As the fifth seed , they were paired against the Utah Jazz of all @-@ time assist leader John Stockton and second all @-@ time leading scorer Karl Malone . After losing the first two games , Nowitzki scored 33 points in Games 3 and 4 and helped to tie the series . In Game 5 , the Mavericks trailed the entire game until Calvin Booth made a lay @-@ up that put them ahead , 84 – 83 , with 9 @.@ 8 seconds left . Jazz players Bryon Russell and Malone missed last @-@ second shots and the Mavericks won , setting up a meeting with Texas rivals San Antonio Spurs . The Mavericks lost the first three games , and Nowitzki fell ill with flu and later lost a tooth after a collision with Spurs guard Terry Porter . After a Game 4 win , Nowitzki scored 42 points and 18 rebounds in Game 5 , but could not prevent a deciding 105 – 87 loss . While Sports Illustrated pointed out that the Mavericks shot badly during Game 5 , Nowitzki was lauded for scoring his playoff career @-@ high 42 points . Nowitzki said : " It 's a disappointment to end the season on a blowout . " 
 2001 – 02 season 
 Prior to the 2001 – 02 NBA season , Nowitzki signed a six @-@ year , $ 90 million contract extension , which made him the second highest @-@ paid German athlete after Formula One champion Michael Schumacher . He continued to improve , now averaging 23 @.@ 4 points , 9 @.@ 9 rebounds and 2 @.@ 4 assists per game , was voted into the All @-@ NBA Second Team and into his first All @-@ Star Game . He also had 13 games with at least 30 points and 10 rebounds , third behind Shaquille O 'Neal and Tim Duncan . Powered by new recruit Nick Van Exel , who became a high @-@ scoring sixth man , the Mavericks " Big Three " convincingly made the playoffs with a 57 – 25 record . 
 The Mavericks swept Kevin Garnett and the Minnesota Timberwolves in the first round of the 2002 NBA Playoffs 3 – 0 : Nowitzki outscored Garnett with 33 @.@ 3 points per game versus 24 @.@ 0 . In the second round , the Mavericks met the Sacramento Kings with rival power forward Chris Webber . After splitting the first two games , Kings coach Rick Adelman changed his defensive scheme : before , Webber had defended Nowitzki one @-@ on @-@ one , but now , the Kings coach ordered his smaller but quicker player Hedo Türkoğlu to cover Nowitzki . Türkoğlu would use his agility to play Nowitzki tightly , and if the taller Maverick tried to post up Türkoğlu , Webber would double team Nowitzki . In Game 3 in Dallas , the Mavericks lost , 125 – 119 ; Nowitzki scored only 19 points and said : " I simply could not pass Türkoğlu , and if I did , I ran into a double team and committed too many turnovers . " In Game 4 , more frustration awaited the German : the Mavericks gave away a 14 @-@ point lead , although the entire Kings starting frontcourt of center Vlade Divac and power forward Chris Webber ( both fouled out ) and small forward Peja Stojaković ( injury ) were eliminated in the closing stages of the game . Nowitzki missed two potentially game deciding jump shots , and the Mavericks lost , 115 – 113 , at home . In Game 5 , the demoralised Mavericks were no match for the spirited Kings , lost , 114 – 101 , and were eliminated again . Among others , nba.com remarked that the Kings defended better than the Mavericks : in those five games , the statisticians counted 115 Sacramento layups against the Mavericks , meaning the Kings averaged 23 uncontested baskets ( i.e. , 46 easy points ) per game . However , Nowitzki received a consolation award : the Gazzetta dello Sport voted him as " European Basketballer of the Year " , his 104 votes lifting him over second @-@ placed Dejan <unk> ( 54 ) and <unk> ( 50 ) . 
 2002 – 03 season 
 Before the 2002 – 03 NBA season , Don Nelson and Mark Cuban put more emphasis on defense in the training drills , specialising in a zone defense anchored by prolific <unk> Raef LaFrentz and Shawn Bradley . The Mavericks won their first eleven games , and Finley , Nash and Nowitzki were voted " Western Conference Players of the Month " in November 2002 . In that season , Nowitzki lifted his averages again , now scoring 25 @.@ 1 points , 9 @.@ 9 rebounds and 3 @.@ 0 assists per game . In addition , the German had 41 double @-@ double games , the seventh highest figure that season . By averaging 25 @.@ 1 , he became the first European to score 2 @,@ 000 points in a season . As a reward , he was voted into the All @-@ Star Game and the All @-@ NBA Second Team again , and was also runner @-@ up in the " German Athlete of the Year " election , only losing to ski jumper Sven Hannawald . He led the Mavericks to a franchise @-@ high 60 – 22 record , which earned them the third seed : as a result , the Mavericks had to play sixth seed Portland Trail Blazers in the 2003 NBA Playoffs . Now playing in a best @-@ of @-@ seven series instead of the former best @-@ of @-@ five , the Mavs quickly won the first three games , but then completely lost their rhythm and the next three . In Game 7 , Portland held the game close , but Nowitzki hit a clutch three to make it 100 – 94 with 1 : 21 left and the Mavs won 107 – 95 . " This was the most important basket of my career , " he later said , " I was not prepared to go on vacation that early . " He later added in an ESPN interview : " We had to be more physical in the paint and rebound the ball . We worked hard all season to get the home @-@ court advantage and we used that advantage today . " 
 In the next round , the Mavericks met the Kings again . After losing Game 1 at home 124 – 113 , Nowitzki ( 25 points ) and veteran sixth man Van Exel ( 36 ) led Dallas to a spectacular 132 – 110 Game 2 win in which the Mavericks scored 83 points in the first half . Helped by the fact that Kings star forward Chris Webber injured his meniscus , Nowitzki and Van Exel led the Mavericks to a 141 – 137 OT win in Game 3 , before dropping Game 4 99 – 83 , where Nowitzki only scored 11 points and was ejected after angrily kicking over a load of towels . After splitting the next two games , Nowitzki delivered a clutch performance in Game 7 , scoring 30 points , grabbing 19 rebounds and playing strong defense , and led the Mavericks to a series @-@ deciding 112 – 99 win . ESPN lauded Nowitzki as " Big D " , and after again winning a Game 7 , the German added : " We 've really learned how to close games out . " 
 In the Western Conference Finals , the Mavericks met the Spurs again . In Game 1 in San Antonio , Nowitzki scored 38 points on Duncan and led his team to a 113 – 110 win . In Game 2 , Duncan quickly put Nowitzki in foul trouble , and the Spurs equalised the series with a 132 – 110 win . In Game 3 , Nowitzki went up for a rebound and Spurs guard Manu Ginóbili collided with his knee , forcing him out of the series : without their top scorer , the Mavericks still fought valiantly and trailed , 3 – 2 , before Spurs guard Steve Kerr got hot from beyond the arc late in Game 6 to help San Antonio clinch the series with a 90 – 78 victory . Don Nelson later commented : " We were playing so well for so long and the bottom just dropped out ... We went cold at the wrong time . " Nowitzki took very little consolation in the fact that he again was voted " European Basketballer of the Year " and was named " Best European Basketballer " in a general survey of the NBA general managers . 
 2003 – 04 season 
 In the 2003 – 04 NBA season , Cuban and Nelson decided to add more offensive wing players to their squad . As a result , the Mavericks acquired two All @-@ Star forwards , namely Golden State Warriors All @-@ Star forward Antawn Jamison ( along with Danny Fortson , Jiri Welsch and Chris Mills , for Van Exel and role players ) and Antoine Walker ( Boston Celtics ) who came for center Raef LaFrentz . Basketball experts were wary about the latter trade , because it sent away the Mavericks starting center ; they argued it left a hole in the middle that the aging , injury @-@ prone backup pivot Shawn Bradley could not fill anymore . Unable to trade for a new center , Nelson decided to start the prolific rebounder Nowitzki at pivot , put Walker on Nowitzki 's usual power forward spot and played Jamison as a high @-@ scoring sixth man . To cope with his more physical role , Nowitzki put on 20 lb ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) of muscle mass over summer , sacrificed part of his agility , and put more emphasis on defense rather than scoring : as a result , his averages fell for the first time in his career , dropping to 21 @.@ 8 points , 8 @.@ 7 rebounds and 2 @.@ 7 assists per game , but he still led the Mavericks in scoring , rebounding , steals ( 1 @.@ 2 <unk> ) and blocks ( 1 @.@ 35 bpg ) . These figures earned him nominations for the All @-@ Star Game and the All @-@ NBA Third Team . Compiling a 52 – 30 record , the Mavericks met their familiar rivals the Sacramento Kings once again , but were eliminated in 5 . 
 = = = Franchise player ( 2004 – present ) = = = 
 2004 – 05 season 
 Before the 2004 – 05 NBA season , the Mavericks were re @-@ tooled again . Defensive center Erick Dampier was acquired from the Golden State Warriors , but Nowitzki 's close friend Steve Nash left Dallas and returned to the Phoenix Suns as a free agent . During the season , long @-@ time head coach Don Nelson resigned , and his assistant Avery Johnson took on coaching duties . In the midst of these changes , Nowitzki stepped up his game and averaged 26 @.@ 1 points a game ( a career high ) and 9 @.@ 7 rebounds , and his 1 @.@ 5 blocks and 3 @.@ 1 assists were also career numbers . In addition , Nowitzki scored at least 10 points in every game and was one of four players who registered at least 1 @.@ 2 steals and blocks per game . This was also his second 2 @,@ 000 @-@ point season ; his 26 @.@ 1 points scoring average set a new record by a European player . On December 2 , 2004 , Nowitzki scored 53 points in an overtime win against the Houston Rockets , a career best . As a reward , Nowitzki was voted to the All @-@ NBA First Team for the first time . He also placed third in the league 's MVP voting , behind Nash and Shaquille O 'Neal . By being elected to the All @-@ NBA First Team , Nowitzki became the first player who did not attend a United States high school or college to be on the All @-@ NBA First Team . 
 However , the Mavericks had a subpar 2005 NBA Playoffs campaign . In the first round , Dallas met Houston Rockets scoring champion Tracy McGrady and 7 – 6 center Yao Ming , and Nowitzki was expected to average high figures against unheralded forward Ryan Bowen : nba.com described Bowen as " overmatched " versus the German . Instead , Bowen limited Nowitzki to just 21 points in Game 1 and 26 points in Game 2 , where the latter hit 8 of 26 shots from the field . The Rockets took a 2 – 0 series lead before the Mavericks won three games in a row . After losing Game 6 , Dallas won Game 7 convincingly and won the series even though Nowitzki struggled with his shooting . In the Western Conference Semifinals , the Mavericks met the Phoenix Suns , the new club of Nash . They split the first four games , before the Suns won the last two games . In Game 6 , which the Mavericks lost in overtime , Nowitzki was again not at his best : he scored 28 points , but also sank only 9 of his 25 field goal attempts ; in addition , he was visibly irritated , repeatedly shouting at his teammates and missing all five of his shots in OT . 
 2005 – 06 season 
 Prior to the 2005 – 06 NBA season , veteran Mavericks captain Michael Finley was waived over the summer , and now Nowitzki was the last player remaining from the Mavericks ' " Big Three " of Nash , Finley , and himself . Nowitzki blossomed as the sole franchise player , averaging 26 @.@ 6 points , 9 @.@ 0 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 8 assists . Not only was this his third 2 @,@ 000 @-@ point season , but his scoring average of 26 @.@ 6 points was highest ever by a European . He improved his shooting percentage , setting personal season records in field goals ( 48 @.@ 0 % ) , three @-@ point shots ( 40 @.@ 6 % ) and free throws ( 90 @.@ 1 % ) . During the 2006 All @-@ Star Weekend in Houston , Nowitzki scored 18 points to defeat Seattle SuperSonics guard Ray Allen and Washington Wizards guard Gilbert Arenas in the Three @-@ Point Shootout contest . 
 Nowitzki paced Dallas to a 60 @-@ win season . The team finished with the third @-@ best record in the league , behind the defending champion San Antonio Spurs and defending Eastern Conference champion Detroit Pistons . As in the 2004 – 05 season , he finished third in the league 's MVP voting , this time behind Nash and LeBron James . He was again elected to the first team All @-@ NBA squad . Nowitzki confirmed his superstar status during the playoffs as he averaged 27 @.@ 0 points , 11 @.@ 7 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 9 assists . The Mavericks swept the Memphis Grizzlies , 4 – 0 , with Nowitzki scored a clutch three @-@ pointer in the closing seconds of Game 3 which tied the game and forced overtime . In the Western Conference Semifinals , the Mavericks played against the San Antonio Spurs again . After splitting the first six games , the Mavericks took a 20 @-@ point lead in Game 7 before Spur Manu Ginóbili broke a tie at 101 by hitting a 3 with 30 seconds left . On the next play , Nowitzki completed a three @-@ point play , which tied the game at 104 . In the end , the Mavericks won , 119 – 111 , and Nowitzki ended the game with 37 points and 15 rebounds . Nowitzki commented : " I don 't know how the ball went in . Manu hit my hand . It was a lucky bounce . " 
 The Mavericks advanced to the Western Conference Finals , where they again met the Suns . Nowitzki scored 50 points to lead the Mavericks to a victory in the crucial Game 5 with the series tied at 2 ; the Mavericks won the series in six games and faced the Miami Heat in the 2006 NBA Finals . A content Nowitzki commented : " We 've been a good road team all season long , we believed in each other . We went through some ups and downs this season , but the playoffs are all about showing heart and playing together . " Of Nowitzki 's performance , ESPN columnist Bill Simmons wrote , " Dirk is playing at a higher level than any forward since [ Larry ] Bird . " The Mavericks took an early 2 – 0 lead , but then gave away a late 15 @-@ point lead in a Game 3 loss and finally fell to a scoring onslaught by Heat Finals MVP Dwyane Wade : Wade scored at least 36 points in the next four games , all of which the Heat won . Nowitzki only made 20 of his last 55 shots in the final three games as the Mavericks lost the Finals series , 4 – 2 , to the Heat . The German was criticized by ESPN as " clearly ... not as his best this series " and remarked : " That was a tough loss ( in Game 3 ) and that really changed the whole momentum of the series . ... After that , they got confidence . They played a lot better afterwards . " 
 2006 – 07 MVP season 
 The 2006 – 07 season was the year Nowitzki was named the league 's Most Valuable Player . He shot a career @-@ best 50 @.@ 2 % from the field , and recorded averages of 24 @.@ 6 points , 8 @.@ 9 rebounds , and 3 @.@ 4 assists and led the Mavericks to a franchise @-@ high 67 wins , which meant Dallas earned the first seed of the 2007 NBA Playoffs . He averaged 50 % from the field , 40 % for three pointers , and 90 % from the free throw line becoming , at the time , only the fourth player in NBA history to join the 50 – 40 – 90 club . Nowitzki was touted as the overwhelming favorite for the Most Valuable Player award , and was expected to lead the Mavericks to an easy win against the eighth @-@ seed Golden State Warriors , despite the Warriors having won all three regular @-@ season meetings against Dallas . However , the Mavericks ended up losing to the Warriors in six games , marking the first time a # 8 seed had beaten the # 1 in a best @-@ of @-@ seven series in NBA history . In the clinching Game 6 , Nowitzki shot just 2 – 13 from the field for only eight points . Defended by Stephen Jackson , Nowitzki averaged nearly five points less than his regular @-@ season average in that series and shot 38 @.@ 3 % from the field as compared to 50 @.@ 2 % during the regular season . He described that loss as a low point in his career : " This series , I couldn 't put my stamp on it the way I wanted to . That 's why I 'm very disappointed . " In spite of this historic playoffs loss , Nowitzki was named the NBA 's regular @-@ season Most Valuable Player and beat his friend and back @-@ to @-@ back NBA MVP Nash with more than 100 votes . He also became the first European player in NBA history to receive the honor . 
 2007 – 08 season 
 The 2007 – 08 campaign saw another first @-@ round playoffs exit for Nowitzki and his Mavericks . Despite a mid @-@ season trade that sent veteran NBA All @-@ Star Jason Kidd to Dallas , the Mavericks finished seventh in a highly competitive Western Conference . Nowitzki averaged 23 @.@ 6 points , 8 @.@ 6 rebounds , and a career @-@ high 3 @.@ 5 assists for the season . In the playoffs , they faced rising star Chris Paul 's New Orleans Hornets , and were eliminated in five games . The playoff loss led to the firing of Avery Johnson as head coach and the eventual hiring of Rick Carlisle . The few positive highlights that season for Nowitzki were his first career triple @-@ double against the Milwaukee Bucks on February 6 , 2008 , with 29 points , 10 rebounds , and a career @-@ high 12 assists , and on March 8 , 2008 ( 34 points against the New Jersey Nets ) , when he surpassed Rolando Blackman with his <unk> point to become the Mavericks ' all @-@ time career points leader . 
 2008 – 09 season 
 The 2008 – 09 NBA season saw Nowitzki finish with averages of 25 @.@ 9 points , 8 @.@ 4 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 4 assists . He was fourth in the league in scoring , and garnered his fourth All @-@ NBA First Team selection . He also made the 2009 All @-@ Star game , his eighth appearance . Nowitzki led Dallas to a tight finish towards the playoffs , finishing 50 – 32 for the season ( 6th in the West ) , after a slow 2 – 7 start . In the playoffs , the German led Dallas to an upset win over long @-@ time rival San Antonio ( the third seed ) , winning the first @-@ round series , 4 – 1 . The Mavericks , however , fell short against the Denver Nuggets , 4 – 1 , in the second round , with Nowitzki averaging 34 @.@ 4 points , 11 @.@ 6 rebounds , and 4 assists in the series . 
 2009 – 10 season 
 The Mavericks finished the 2009 – 10 NBA season as the second seed for the 2010 NBA Playoffs — it was their 10th consecutive season with at least 50 regular season wins . Notable additions to the squad were multiple All @-@ Stars Shawn Marion and Caron Butler , with the latter coming in the second half of the season . On January 13 , 2010 , Nowitzki became the 34th player in NBA history — and the first European — to hit the 20 @,@ 000 @-@ point milestone , while ending the regular season with averages of 25 points , 7 @.@ 7 rebounds , 2 @.@ 7 assists , and 1 block . He was selected to the 2010 All @-@ Star Game , his ninth appearance . The Mavericks faced off against San Antonio once more in the first round of the playoffs , but for the third time in four seasons , they failed to progress to the next round . Nowitzki was the only consistent player throughout the series for the Mavericks , averaging 26 @.@ 7 points per outing , while Jason Terry , second @-@ leading scorer for the Mavericks , averaged 12 @.@ 7 points per game compared to his 16 @.@ 6 regular season . Despite being a free agent , on July 5 , 2010 , Nowitzki agreed to remain with Dallas by re @-@ signing to a four @-@ year , $ 80 million deal . 
 2010 – 11 championship season 
 The most significant change to the 2010 – 11 team roster was the arrival of Tyson Chandler via trade . Nowitzki was injured in the middle of the season , during which the Mavericks recorded their worst losing streak in over a decade . Nowitzki finished the regular season with averages of 23 points , 7 rebounds , and 3 assists . Despite missing 9 games , Nowitzki was selected to the 2011 All @-@ Star Game , his tenth appearance . The Mavericks concluded the regular season with 57 wins , seeding third behind the Spurs and Lakers for the 2011 NBA Playoffs . During the playoffs , despite their seeding , many predicted that Dallas would lose in the first round to Portland , and after blowing a 23 @-@ point fourth @-@ quarter lead in Game 4 to even the series at 2 – 2 , the Mavericks appeared ready for another postseason collapse . However , Dallas won the final two games to advance . They then swept the two @-@ time defending champion Lakers in the semifinals in Phil Jackson 's final year as an NBA coach . In the Conference Finals , they faced the Oklahoma City Thunder and their All @-@ NBA duo of Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook . In Game 1 , Nowitzki scored 48 points while shooting 12 / 15 from the field while setting an NBA record of 24 consecutive free throws made in a game as well as most free throws in a game without a miss . In Game 4 , with Dallas up , 2 – 1 , Nowitzki scored 40 points to rally his team from a 99 – 84 deficit in the fourth quarter with 5 minutes left and eventually win , 112 – 105 , in OT to take a 3 – 1 series lead . Dallas overcame another fourth @-@ quarter deficit in Game 5 to win the Western Conference Title . In the 2011 NBA Finals , Dallas once again faced the Heat , which had acquired All @-@ Stars LeBron James and Chris Bosh before the season began . During the Game 1 loss in Miami , he tore a tendon in his left middle finger ; however , MRIs were negative , and Nowitzki vowed that the injury would not be a factor . In Game 2 , he led a Dallas rally from an 88 – 73 fourth @-@ quarter deficit , capped by a driving left @-@ handed layup over Bosh to tie the series at 1 . Miami took a 2 – 1 series lead after Nowitzki missed a potential game @-@ tying shot at the end of Game 3 . Despite carrying a 101 ° F fever in Game 4 , he hit the winning basket to tie the series yet again at 2 , evoking comparisons to Michael Jordan 's " Flu Game " against Utah in the 1997 NBA Finals . Dallas went on to win the next two games , with Nowitzki scoring 10 fourth @-@ quarter points in the series @-@ clinching game in Miami , bringing the first championship to the franchise . In the series , Nowitzki scored 62 points total in the six fourth quarters , equaling the combined fourth @-@ quarter output of James and Wade . He was named Finals MVP , joining a list of 10 other players to have been an NBA champion , NBA Finals MVP , an NBA regular season MVP , and a ten @-@ time All @-@ Star . For the 2011 playoffs , Nowitzki averaged 27 @.@ 7 points , 8 @.@ 1 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 5 assists in 21 games . 
 2011 – 12 season 
 As Dallas celebrated their title , the NBA was in a lockout . It ended on December 8 , 2011 . The defending champions lost core players , such as DeShawn Stevenson , J.J. Barea , Peja Stojaković , and Tyson Chandler , while adding veteran all @-@ star Vince Carter , Lamar Odom , and <unk> West in free agency . The Mavericks played only two preseason games , which led to a slow start for Nowitzki . Soon , Nowitzki became the 98th player in NBA history to play in 1 @,@ 000 games . Nowitzki received his championship ring on January 25 , 2012 . After scoring his <unk> point , Nowitzki passed Robert Parish on the all @-@ time scoring list at # 20 . He then passed Charles Barkley for 19th , and scored his <unk> point on April 15 , 2012 against the Lakers . Nowitzki blocked a shot by the Celtics ' Avery Bradley , which was his 1,000th block . He became one of only 3 players in NBA history with at least 1 @,@ 000 3 @-@ pointers and blocks , joining Clifford Robinson and Rasheed Wallace . Nowitzki made his 11th straight All @-@ Star game appearance in Orlando . Nowitzki scored 31 points in the second half against Houston on April 18 , 2012 , including 21 in the fourth quarter . It marked the third @-@ highest scoring half by a Dallas player in franchise history . The 21 points in the fourth quarter also represented Nowitzki 's third @-@ highest scoring quarter of his career . Carrying the load of the Mavericks , Nowitzki led his team in scoring 45 times . On March 30 , he led the Mavs down from 15 points , including a game winner , against the Magic . Nowitzki 's streak of 11 seasons with 1 @,@ 500 points came to an end after scoring 1 @,@ 342 in the shortened NBA season . The Mavs clinched the seventh spot in the West , and were matched against the Oklahoma City Thunder in the 2012 NBA Playoffs . The Thunder swept the Mavs in 4 games . 
 2012 – 13 season 
 After failing to sign coveted free agents Deron Williams and Steve Nash , the Mavericks retooled their roster by letting go of Jason Kidd , Jason Terry and Brendan Haywood , and acquiring younger players such as O. J. Mayo , Darren Collison , as well as veteran big men Chris Kaman and Elton Brand . Nowitzki plans to play out the remainder of his 4 @-@ year , 80 million dollar contract that expires in 2014 . Nowitzki underwent knee surgery in October 2012 and missed the first 27 games of the season . He returned on December 23 , 2012 , in a game against San Antonio . 
 In January 2013 , <unk> and some of his teammates ( including Mayo , Brand , Kaman , Carter and then teammate <unk> Jones ) made a pact not to shave their beards until the team reached .500 . They were often called " The Beard Bros. " On April 14 , 2013 , after a fade away jumper in a game against the New Orleans Hornets , Nowitzki became the 17th player in NBA history to score 25 @,@ 000 points . The Mavs went on to win the game , climbing back up to .500 with a 40 – 40 record and Nowitzki shaved his beard . However the Mavericks missed the playoffs for the first time since Nowitzki 's second season , ending their 12 @-@ year playoff streak . 
 2013 – 14 season 
 At the start of the season , the Mavs let go of players they had signed the year before like O.J. Mayo , Chris Kaman , Elton Brand and Darren Collison to make room for the signing of shooting guard Monta Ellis and point guard Devin Harris . On November 12 , 2013 , in a 105 – 95 victory over the Washington Wizards , Nowitzki finished the game with 19 points and passed Jerry West on the NBA scoring list with 25 @,@ 197 points . On November 20 , 2013 , in a 123 – 120 victory over the Houston Rockets , Nowitzki finished the game with 35 points and passed Reggie Miller on the NBA scoring list with 25 @,@ 298 points . On December 23 , 2013 , in a 111 – 104 victory over the Houston Rockets , Nowitzki finished the game with 31 points and passed Alex English on the NBA scoring list with 25 @,@ 631 points . 
 On January 29 , 2014 , Nowitzki scored his 26 @,@ 000 point in a 115 – 117 loss to the Houston Rockets . In 35 minutes of play , he recorded 38 points , 17 rebounds and 3 assists . On March 12 , 2014 , in a 108 – 101 victory over the Utah Jazz , Nowitzki finished the game with 31 points and passed John Havlicek on the NBA scoring list with 26 @,@ 426 points . On April 8 , 2014 , Nowitzki scored his <unk> point , passing Oscar Robertson to move to the 10th position on the all @-@ time scoring list . Nowitzki led the Mavericks back to the Playoffs where they would face their in state rival San Antonio Spurs in the first round . Dallas lost the series in seven games and the Spurs went on to win the NBA championship . 
 2014 – 15 season 
 On July 15 , 2014 , Nowitzki re @-@ signed with the Mavericks to a reported three @-@ year , $ 25 million contract . He was also reunited with former championship teammate Tyson Chandler , who was traded to Dallas after a 3 @-@ year stint with New York . Also to come over from New York was point guard Raymond Felton . The Mavericks made big strides in the off @-@ season to put Dirk with some considerable talent , signing a rising small forward Chandler Parsons and veteran point guard Jameer Nelson . The Mavericks later signed former championship teammate J. J. Barea after the Timberwolves waived him . 
 On November 11 , 2014 , Nowitzki scored 23 points to surpass Hakeem Olajuwon as the highest @-@ scoring player born outside the United States , as the Mavericks came from 24 points down to defeat Sacramento 106 – 98 for their 21st straight regular @-@ season win at home against the Kings . Nowitzki hit a jumper from just inside the three @-@ point line early in the fourth quarter to pass Olajuwon at No. 9 , and he finished the night at 26 @,@ 953 career points . Six days later , Nowitzki became the fourth player in NBA history to eclipse 27 @,@ 000 career points with the same franchise , joining a prestigious group that includes Michael Jordan , Karl Malone and Kobe Bryant . On December 26 against the Los Angeles Lakers , Nowitzki passed Elvin Hayes for eighth place on the NBA 's all @-@ time scoring list . He went on to pass Moses Malone for seventh place on the NBA 's all @-@ time scoring list on January 5 , 2015 in a 96 – 88 overtime win over the Brooklyn Nets . He <unk> his 10,000th career rebound on March 24 against the San Antonio Spurs , and scored his <unk> career point on April 1 against the Oklahoma City Thunder . 
 The Mavericks finished the regular season as the No. 7 seed in the Western Conference with a record of 50 – 32 . They faced the Houston Rockets in the first round of the playoffs and lost the series in five games . 
 2015 – 16 season 
 On November 11 , 2015 , Nowitzki scored a season @-@ high 31 points in a 118 – 108 win over the Los Angeles Clippers . He also grabbed a team @-@ high 11 rebounds and passed former teammate Shawn Marion for 15th on the all @-@ time career rebounding list . On December 12 , in a loss to the Washington Wizards , he moved past Jason Richardson for 16th all @-@ time in three @-@ point shots made , finishing the game with 1 @,@ 609 career three @-@ pointers . On December 23 , Nowitzki moved past Shaquille O 'Neal into sixth place on the NBA 's career scoring list , then made the go @-@ ahead basket with 19 @.@ 2 seconds left in overtime to help the Mavericks defeat the Brooklyn Nets , 119 – 118 . On January 12 , in an overtime loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers , he became the 14th NBA player to reach 46 @,@ 000 career minutes . On January 18 , he tied a season high with 31 points and had 11 rebounds for his sixth double @-@ double of the season in a 118 – 113 overtime win over the Boston Celtics . On February 21 , he scored 18 points against the Philadelphia 76ers , becoming the sixth player in NBA history to reach 29 @,@ 000 career points . Three days later , he set a new season high with 33 points in a loss to the Oklahoma City Thunder . On March 20 , he set another season high mark with 40 points in a 132 – 120 overtime win over the Portland Trail Blazers . His 20th career 40 @-@ point game was his first since January 2014 , and the first by a 37 @-@ year @-@ old since Karl Malone in 2000 – 01 . On April 11 , in a win over the Utah Jazz that clinched the Mavericks a spot in the playoffs for the 15th time in 16 years , Nowitzki hit four three @-@ pointers , becoming the 15th player in NBA history with at least 1 @,@ 700 career triples . 
 In Game 4 of the Mavericks ' first @-@ round playoff series against the Oklahoma City Thunder , Nowitzki passed Elgin Baylor ( 3 @,@ 623 points ) for 15th on the NBA 's career playoff scoring list . 
 2016 – 17 season 
 On July 22 , 2016 , Nowitzki agreed to re @-@ sign with the Mavericks on a two @-@ year , $ 50 million contract . 
 = = International career = = 
 Nowitzki began playing for the German national basketball team in 1997 . In his debut tournament , the 1999 FIBA European championship , the 21 @-@ year @-@ old rookie emerged as the main German scorer , but Germany finished seventh and failed to qualify for the 2000 Olympic Games . In the 2001 FIBA European Championship , Nowitzki was top scorer with 28 @.@ 7 points per game , and narrowly lost the MVP vote to Serbian player Peja Stojaković . Germany reached the semifinals and were close to beating host nation Turkey , but Hedo <unk> hit a 3 @-@ point buzzer beater to tie it , and the Turks eventually won in overtime . Germany then lost 99 – 90 against Spain , and did not win a medal . However , with averages of 28 @.@ 7 points and 9 @.@ 1 rebounds , Nowitzki led the tournament in both statistics , and was voted to the All @-@ Star team . Back home , the German basketball team attracted up to 3 @.@ 7 million television viewers , a German basketball record at the time . 
 Nowitzki finally earned his first medal when he led Germany to a bronze medal in the 2002 World Championship . In the quarter @-@ finals against the Pau Gasol @-@ led Spain , Spain was up 52 – 46 after three quarters , but then Nowitzki scored 10 points in the last quarter and led Germany to a 70 – 62 win . In the semi @-@ finals , his team played against the Argentinian squad led by Manu Ginóbili , but despite leading , 74 – 69 , four minutes from the end and despite Argentina losing Ginobili to a foot injury , the South Americans won , 86 – 80 . However , the Germans won 117 – 94 against New Zealand in the consolation finals and won bronze , and tournament top scorer Nowitzki ( 24 @.@ 0 ppg ) was elected MVP . Back in Germany , over 4 million television viewers followed the games , an all @-@ time record in German basketball history . 
 The 2003 FIBA European Championship proved to be a major disappointment for Nowitzki and his German squad . In a preparation game , he suffered a foot injury after a collision with French player Florent <unk> ; as a result , Nowitzki played inconsistently and was also often target of hard fouls . In the decisive second round match against Italy ( only the winner was allowed to play the medal round ) , Germany lost , 86 – 84 , finished ninth and did not qualify for the 2004 Olympic Games . Nowitzki scored 22 @.@ 5 points per game ( third overall ) , but in general seemed to lack focus and dominance due to his injury . 
 In the 2005 FIBA European Championship , Nowitzki came back strong . He surprisingly led a depleted German squad into the Finals , beating title favorites Slovenia in the quarter @-@ finals and Spain in the semi @-@ finals on the way . Eurobasket pundits praised Nowitzki in both matches : against Slovenia ( 76 – 62 ) , the forward scored a game high 22 points and commented : " The Slovenians underestimated us . They said we were the team they wanted and that was wrong , you shouldn 't do that in the quarter @-@ finals . " Against Spain ( 74 – 73 ) , Nowitzki scored a game @-@ high 27 points and scored the decisive basket : down by one and with only a few seconds to go , he drove on Spanish forward Jorge Garbajosa , and hit a baseline jump shot over Garbajosa 's outstretched arms with 3 @.@ 9 seconds to go . The German later commented : " It was indescribable . Garbajosa kind of pushed me towards the baseline so I just went with it . " Despite losing the Finals , 78 – 62 , to the Greeks , Nowitzki was the tournament 's leading scorer ( 26 @.@ 7 ppg ) and second @-@ leading rebounder ( 10 @.@ 8 rpg ) and shot blocker ( 1 @.@ 8 bpg ) , and was voted Most Valuable Player of the tournament . When he was subbed out towards the end of the final , Nowitzki received standing ovation from the crowd , which he later recalled as " one of the best moments of [ his ] career " . In the 2006 FIBA World Championships , Nowitzki led the German team to an eighth place and commented : " It 's tough luck . But overall , finishing eighth in the world is not bad . " 
 In the 2007 FIBA European Championship , in which the top three teams automatically qualified for the 2008 Olympics , Nowitzki led Germany to a fifth place . He was the leading scorer with 24 @.@ 0 points per game . The fifth place meant that Germany fell short of direct qualification , but was allowed to participate in the 2008 Olympic Qualifying Tournament . Nowitzki led Germany into a decisive match against Puerto Rico for the last remaining slot . In that crucial match , he scored a game @-@ high 32 points and was vital for the 96 – 82 win which sent the German basketball team to their first Olympics since the 1992 Summer Olympics . Nowitzki was chosen to be the flag bearer for the German Olympic Team at the Opening Ceremony for the 2008 Olympics . Nowitzki led the German team to a tenth @-@ place finish , and averaged 17 @.@ 0 points , and 7 @.@ 6 rebounds for the tournament . In 2009 , Nowitzki skipped the 2009 FIBA European Championships . In July 2010 he said that he would skip the 2010 FIBA World Championship . 
 In Summer 2011 , Nowitzki played with Germany in the EuroBasket 2011 , where the team reached ninth place . In 2015 , Nowitzki captained Germany at the EuroBasket . They won only one game , and were eliminated in the group stage , on home soil . In January 2016 , Nowitzki officially announced his retirement from Germany 's national team . In his career with Germany 's senior men 's national team , he averaged 19 @.@ 8 points , 7 @.@ 3 rebounds , and 1 @.@ 6 assists per game . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Nowitzki is a versatile frontcourt player who mostly plays the power forward position , but has also played center and small forward throughout his career . An exceptional shooter for his size , Nowitzki has made 88 % of his free throws , nearly 50 % of his field goal attempts and nearly 40 % of his 3 @-@ point shots , and won the 2006 NBA All @-@ Star Three @-@ Point Shootout competition . In 2006 – 07 , Nowitzki became only the fifth member of the NBA 's 50 – 40 – 90 Club for players who shot 50 % or better from the field , 40 % or better on three @-@ pointers , and 90 % or better on free @-@ throws in a single season while achieving the NBA league minimum number of makes in each category . 
 Throughout Nowitzki 's career , he has responded to the increased pressure of the playoffs by increasing his productivity . As of the end of the 2013 – 14 season , he had averaged 22 @.@ 5 points and 8 @.@ 1 rebounds in the regular season . In the playoffs , he has averaged 25 @.@ 6 points and 10 @.@ 1 rebounds , which only Hakeem Olajuwon , Bob Pettit and Elgin Baylor have managed to do . In the most pressure packed games , such as playoff elimination games he averages 28 @.@ 8 points , 11 @.@ 8 rebounds . He has had 14 elimination games where he scored 30 or more points , which ties him with Jerry West for most all time . Of the top 100 elimination game performances in the last 20 years , Nowitzki has had the best performances in 8 of them , more than any other player in the NBA in that same time frame . 
 His shooting accuracy combined with his long seven @-@ foot frame and unique shooting mechanics , such as having a release point above his head , makes contesting his jump shots very difficult . Before the start of the 2011 NBA Finals , LeBron James called Nowitzki 's one @-@ legged fadeaway the second most unstoppable move ever , only behind Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar 's <unk> . Additionally , Nowitzki can put the ball down and drive with it from the perimeter , like few have been able to do with his size . NBA.com lauds his versatility by stating : " The 7 – 0 forward who at times mans the pivot can strike fear in an opponent when he corrals a rebound and leads the break or prepares to launch a three @-@ point bomb . " Charles Barkley says the best way to guard Nowitzki is to " get a cigarette and a blindfold " . Later on in his career , Nowitzki also developed an unorthodox post up game , often backing down his opponents from the free throw line or near the middle of the key , opening up the floor for multiple passing angles should a double team come his way . When defenses guard Nowitzki with one of their biggest men , who is then pulled out to the perimeter , the net effect is that while Nowitzki 's own statistics are actually compromised by being out of position to offensively rebound or make an easy close @-@ range basket , the rest of the team becomes more offensively potent with the defense having to be spread across the floor . Often , this creates mismatches that his teammates can exploit . The Mavericks system and international play exposed him to an open passing game , making him dangerous as a point forward and post playmaker as well . 
 Nowitzki averages just over one block per game and never made an All @-@ Defense Team . However , playing more around the perimeter took him out of position where a typical power forward would be detracted from his overall defensive stats . Despite rarely blocking shots , he is ranked 8th in active players for defensive win shares as of July 2014 . 
 Nowitzki is the 17th player in NBA history , and the first European , to hit the 25 @,@ 000 @-@ point milestone . Apart from being the Mavericks ' all @-@ time leader in points , rebounds , field goals , field goal attempts , 3 @-@ pointers , 3 @-@ point attempts , free throws , and free @-@ throw attempts , Nowitzki has made the NBA All @-@ Star games thirteen times and the All @-@ NBA Teams twelve times . He was voted NBA MVP of the 2006 – 07 NBA season , becoming the first European player to receive the honor , as well as the MVP of the 2011 NBA Finals . Other achievements include winning the 2006 NBA All @-@ Star Three @-@ Point Shootout , being voted European Basketballer of the Year five times in a row by La Gazzetta dello Sport , and being the leading scorer and MVP of the 2002 FIBA World Championship , and EuroBasket 2005 tournaments . 
 In 2013 , Michael Jordan called Nowitzki one of only four current players ( alongside LeBron James , Tim Duncan , and Kobe Bryant ) who could be nearly as successful in his era of basketball . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = NBA statistics = = = 
 Correct as of the 2015 – 16 regular season 
 = = = = Regular season = = = = 
 = = = = Playoffs = = = = 
 = = = = Triple @-@ doubles = = = = 
 = = = International statistics = = = 
 = = Career highlights = = 
 NBA 
 NBA Finals MVP : 2011 
 NBA Most Valuable Player : 2007 
 13 × NBA All @-@ Star : 2002 – 2012 , 2014 – 2015 
 12 × All @-@ NBA Team : 2001 – 2012 
 4 × First Team : 2005 – 2007 , 2009 
 5 × Second Team : 2002 – 2003 , 2008 , 2010 – 2011 
 3 × Third Team : 2001 , 2004 , 2012 
 Three @-@ Point Shootout Champion : 2006 
 NBA Shooting Stars champion : 2010 
 Ranked 6th in all @-@ time @-@ scoring 
 Ranked 8th in all @-@ time defensive @-@ rebounds 
 Ranked 2nd in all @-@ time NBA Finals free throw percentage 
 82 consecutive free throws made ( the third @-@ longest streak of all @-@ time ) 
 One of six players with at least 25 @,@ 000 points , 10 @,@ 000 rebounds , 3 @,@ 000 assists , 1 @,@ 000 steals and 1 @,@ 000 blocks 
 One of two players with 150 three @-@ pointers and 100 blocks in a single season : 2001 
 One of four players with an NBA Playoff career average of 25 ppg and 10 rpg ( 25 @.@ 3 ppg , 10 @.@ 0 rpg through 2016 postseason ) 
 One of seven members of the 50 – 40 – 90 club : 2007 
 One of three players to surpass the mark of 1 @,@ 000 in both three @-@ pointers and blocks for the career 
 One of ten players to surpass the marks of 25 @,@ 000 in points and 10 @,@ 000 in rebounds for the career 
 Holds the record for most free @-@ throws made in a single playoff season with 205 free @-@ throws made : 2006 
 Dallas Mavericks all @-@ time statistical leader in games , points , rebounds , field goals , three @-@ point field goals and free throws 
 German national basketball team 
 2002 FIBA World Championship : bronze medal , MVP , top scorer , all @-@ tournament team 
 EuroBasket 2005 : silver medal , MVP , top scorer , all @-@ tournament team 
 2006 FIBA World Championship , EuroBasket 2001 , EuroBasket 2007 : top scorer , all @-@ tournament team 
 Goldener <unk> ( golden honorary ring ) of the DBB ( German Basketball Federation ) : 2007 
 Second leading scorer ( 1052 points ) in the history of EuroBasket 
 Leading scorer in the history of the German national basketball team ( 3045 points in 153 international games ) 
 Member of the German national basketball team which was voted Outstanding German Team of the Year : 2005 
 Other achievements and highlights 
 German League MVP : 1999 
 6 × Euroscar : 2002 – 2006 , 2011 
 2 × FIBA Europe Men 's Player of the Year : 2005 , 2011 
 Mr. Europa : 2005 
 5 × All @-@ Europeans Player of the Year : 2005 – 2008 , 2011 
 German national flag bearer at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China 
 Best NBA Player ESPY Award : 2011 
 Best Male Athlete ESPY Award : 2011 
 Outstanding Team ESPY Award with the Dallas Mavericks : 2011 
 Sports Illustrated NBA All @-@ Decade Second Team ( 2000 – 2009 ) 
 Silbernes Lorbeerblatt : 2011 
 German Sports Personality of the Year : 2011 
 Ranked 55 in SLAM Magazine 's 500 greatest NBA @-@ players of all @-@ time list : 2011 
 Naismith Legacy Award : 2012 
 Magic Johnson Award : 2014 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nowitzki 's older sister , Silke Nowitzki , described Nowitzki as a confident but low @-@ key character , unspoiled by money and fame . He also enjoys reading and playing the saxophone . Nowitzki passed his Abitur examination at Röntgen Gymnasium Grammar School of Würzburg . He also founded the Dirk Nowitzki Foundation , a charity which aims at fighting poverty in Africa . 
 Nowitzki dated Sybille <unk> , a female basketball player from his local club DJK Würzburg . The relationship started in 1992 and lasted for 10 years before it eventually ended ; Nowitzki said , " At the end , we found out we developed in separate ways . ... It did not work anymore , but we are still good friends . " He added : " I surely want to start a family and have kids , but I cannot imagine it happening before I become 30 . " 
 In 2010 , Nowitzki met and began dating Jessica Olsson , sister of twin Swedish footballers Martin Olsson and Marcus Olsson . The couple got married on July 20 , 2012 , at Nowitzki 's home in Dallas . They have a daughter , born in July 2013 and a son , born in March 2015 . Though Nowitzki has considered acquiring U.S. citizenship , he remains a German national . 
 Nowitzki acknowledged close ties to his mentor Holger Geschwindner , whom he called his best friend . He is also good friends with his ex @-@ teammate Steve Nash . Nash said of playing with Nowitzki , " We were both joining a new club , living in a new city , we were both single and outsiders : this creates a bond . ... He made life easier for me and I for him . ... Our friendship was something solid in a very volatile world . " Nowitzki added , " He would have also become a good friend if we had met at the supermarket . " 
 = = Books = = 
 Nowitzki 's career has been chronicled in books . Dirk Nowitzki : German Wunderkind , written by German sports journalists Dino Reisner and Holger Sauer , was published in 2004 by <unk> Munich . The 160 @-@ page hardcover book follows Nowitzki 's beginnings in his native Würzburg , documents his entry and ascent in the NBA , and ends at the beginning of the 2004 – 05 NBA season . 
 In November 2011 the Würzburg local newspaper Main @-@ Post published a 216 @-@ page book written by its sports journalists Jürgen <unk> and Fabian <unk> : <unk> Er – Dirk Nowitzki – Aus Würzburg an die <unk> , ( Just Him – Dirk Nowitzki – From Würzburg to top of the world ) . Both <unk> and <unk> accompanied Nowitzki throughout his career , collecting interviews and photos used in the book . It looks back on the 2011 NBA Finals but also has a strong focus on Nowitzki 's relation to his hometown Würzburg and his career progression beginning there . It features insights from former coaches , family members , and friends . 
 = Alicia McCormack = 
 Alicia McCormack ( born 7 June 1983 in Helensburgh , New South Wales ) is an Australian water polo goalkeeper . Her playing career started at the age of fourteen with the Kirrawee High School water polo team , and today she plays for the Cronulla Water Polo Club in the National Water Polo League and is a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team . Although she did not play water polo in 2010 due to injury , McCormack has won gold medals at the 2006 Commonwealth Games and the 2006 FINA World Cup ; a silver medal at the 2007 FINA World Championships ; and bronze medals at the 2008 and 2012 Summer Olympics , 2005 FINA World League Super Finals , 2008 FINA World League Super Finals and 2009 FINA World League Super Finals . Currently working at the New South Wales Institute of Sport , McCormack is studying for a Bachelor of Primary Education . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McCormack was born on 7 June 1983 in Helensburgh , New South Wales . She is 168 cm ( 5 ft 6 in ) tall , weighs 73 kilograms ( 161 lb ) , is right handed and has a tattoo featuring the Olympic rings . 
 McCormack entered Helensburgh Public School in 1988 as a <unk> and later graduated from Kirrawee High School . She began a Bachelor of Primary Education while on scholarship at the New South Wales Institute of Sport ( <unk> ) . Her partner is a Navy clearance diver . 
 McCormack was at a barbecue attended by Prince William when he visited Sydney in 2010 . At the barbecue , people " .... were surprised by the amount of " royal " attention McCormack , the Australian goalkeeper and a member of the [ bronze ] <unk> winning team at the Beijing Olympics , received especially when Prince William was seen to bow to the amused McCormack at a barbecue . " 
 In 2010 , McCormack was working at the New South Wales Institute of Sport as the personal assistant to Charles Turner , the chief executive of the organisation . 
 = = Water polo = = 
 McCormack is a goalkeeper , and prefers to wear cap number thirteen . She started playing water polo when she was fourteen years old for the Kirrawee High School team . In 2000 , she represented New South Wales on the state junior team . She has a water polo scholarship from the New South Wales Institute of Sport . 
 = = = Club water polo = = = 
 McCormack plays her club water polo for the Cronulla Water Polo Club in the National Water Polo League , serving as the team 's head coach in 2010 when she was unable to play due to a shoulder injury . She returned to the playing roster in 2011 , while also serving as an assistant coach on the team . She continued her involvement with the club into the 2012 season – during which she helped the side to 8 – 4 and 7 – 4 wins in the first two games of the season . She took a break from the Cronulla team following their 18 February 2012 game in order to attend the national team training camp . 
 = = = Senior national team = = = 
 McCormack is a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team and played her first game with the senior team at the 2003 Holiday Cup in the United States . In 2005 , she was part of the side that won a bronze medal at the FINA World League Super Finals in Kirishi , Russia . That year , she was also part of the team that finished sixth at the FINA World Championships in Montreal , Canada . 
 In 2006 , McCormack won a gold medal at the Commonwealth Games in Perth , Western Australia . That year , she was also part of the Australian side that finished fourth at the FINA World League Super Finals in Cosenza , Italy . She was also part of the 2006 FINA World Cup team in Tianjin , China , that won a gold medal . In a 2007 Asia @-@ Oceania qualifier for the World League Super Finals , she made seventeen saves in a 19 @-@ 2 victory against Japan . She was part of the 2007 silver winning side at the FINA World Championship in Melbourne , Australia . She played in goal in the December 2007 series against New Zealand where Australian won the first two tests 18 – 1 and 17 – 1 . 
 McCormack was part of Australia 's Oceania Olympic qualification campaign in 2008 . In an 18 – 1 victory over New Zealand during the qualifiers , she made twelve saves . She was named to the team that competed in 2008 at the FINA world league preliminary round in Tianjin , China . In a 2008 Asia @-@ Oceania qualifier against China for the World League Super Finals , she played in the 11 – 9 win that went to a penalty shoot out . She helped the team win by making a two handed stop of a Chinese shot in the last minutes of the game . She competed in the FINA World League Super Finals in Tenerife , Spain , where Australia took home a bronze medal . She won a bronze medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics as a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team . Her team ended up in the bronze medal match after losing 8 – 9 to the United States in the semi finals and playing against Hungary for the bronze . Earlier in the Olympics , her team had tied the Hungarians . 
 In 2009 , McCormack was part of the Australian side that finished third at the FINA World <unk> Super Finals in Kirishi , Russia . She was also part of the team that finished sixth at the FINA World Championships in Rome , Italy , in 2009 . In April 2011 , she attended a training camp at the Australian Institute of Sport where the coach was " selecting a team for the major championships over winter . " She competed in a warm @-@ up match for the 2011 FINA World League against Italy in Ostia , Italy , in July that Australia won 12 – 11 . In February 2012 , she was named to the final training squad for the 2012 Summer Olympics . She attended training camp that started on 20 February 2012 at the Australian Institute of Sport . The team of seventeen players will be cut to thirteen before the team departs for the Olympic games , with the announcement being made on 13 June . She was part of the Stingers squad that competed in a five @-@ game test against Great Britain at the AIS in late February 2012 . This was the team 's first matches against Great Britain 's national team in six years . 
 At the 2012 Summer Olympics , she was part of the team that won bronze . 
 = Cnidaria = 
 Cnidaria ( / <unk> / ) is a phylum containing over 10 @,@ 000 species of animals found exclusively in aquatic ( freshwater and marine ) environments : they are predominantly marine species . Their distinguishing feature is cnidocytes , specialized cells that they use mainly for capturing prey . Their bodies consist of mesoglea , a non @-@ living jelly @-@ like substance , sandwiched between two layers of epithelium that are mostly one cell thick . They have two basic body forms : swimming medusae and sessile polyps , both of which are radially symmetrical with mouths surrounded by tentacles that bear cnidocytes . Both forms have a single orifice and body cavity that are used for digestion and respiration . Many cnidarian species produce colonies that are single organisms composed of medusa @-@ like or polyp @-@ like zooids , or both ( hence they are <unk> ) . Cnidarians ' activities are coordinated by a decentralized nerve net and simple receptors . Several free @-@ swimming species of Cubozoa and Scyphozoa possess balance @-@ sensing statocysts , and some have simple eyes . Not all cnidarians reproduce sexually , with many species having complex life cycles of asexual polyp stages and sexual medusae . Some , however , omit either the polyp or the medusa stage . 
 Cnidarians were formerly grouped with ctenophores in the phylum Coelenterata , but increasing awareness of their differences caused them to be placed in separate phyla . Cnidarians are classified into four main groups : the almost wholly sessile Anthozoa ( sea anemones , corals , sea pens ) ; swimming Scyphozoa ( jellyfish ) ; Cubozoa ( box jellies ) ; and Hydrozoa , a diverse group that includes all the freshwater cnidarians as well as many marine forms , and has both sessile members , such as Hydra , and colonial swimmers , such as the Portuguese Man o ' War . Staurozoa have recently been recognised as a class in their own right rather than a sub @-@ group of Scyphozoa , and there is debate about whether Myxozoa and <unk> are cnidarians or closer to bilaterians ( more complex animals ) . 
 Most cnidarians prey on organisms ranging in size from plankton to animals several times larger than themselves , but many obtain much of their nutrition from endosymbiotic algae , and a few are parasites . Many are preyed on by other animals including starfish , sea slugs , fish and turtles . Many scleractinian corals — which form the structural foundation for coral reefs — possess polyps that are filled with endosymbiotic algae . While reef @-@ forming corals are almost entirely restricted to warm and shallow marine waters , other cnidarians can be found at great depths , in polar regions , and in freshwater . 
 Fossil cnidarians have been found in rocks formed about 580 million years ago , and other fossils show that corals may have been present shortly before 490 million years ago and diversified a few million years later . Fossils of cnidarians that do not build mineralized structures are very rare . Scientists currently think that cnidarians , ctenophores and bilaterians are more closely related to calcareous sponges than these are to other sponges , and that anthozoans are the evolutionary " aunts " or " sisters " of other cnidarians , and the most closely related to bilaterians . 
 = = Distinguishing features = = 
 Cnidarians form an animal phylum that are more complex than sponges , about as complex as ctenophores ( comb jellies ) , and less complex than bilaterians , which include almost all other animals . However , both cnidarians and ctenophores are more complex than sponges as they have : cells bound by inter @-@ cell connections and carpet @-@ like basement membranes ; muscles ; nervous systems ; and some have sensory organs . Cnidarians are distinguished from all other animals by having cnidocytes that fire like harpoons and are used mainly to capture prey . In some species , cnidocytes can also be used as anchors . 
 Like sponges and ctenophores , cnidarians have two main layers of cells that sandwich a middle layer of jelly @-@ like material , which is called the mesoglea in cnidarians ; more complex animals have three main cell layers and no intermediate jelly @-@ like layer . Hence , cnidarians and ctenophores have traditionally been labelled diploblastic , along with sponges . However , both cnidarians and ctenophores have a type of muscle that , in more complex animals , arises from the middle cell layer . As a result , some recent text books classify ctenophores as triploblastic , and it has been suggested that cnidarians evolved from triploblastic ancestors . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Basic body forms = = = 
 Adult cnidarians appear as either swimming medusae or sessile polyps , and many hydrozoan species are known to alternate between the two forms . Both are radially symmetrical , like a wheel and a tube respectively . Since these animals have no heads , their ends are described as " oral " ( nearest the mouth ) and " aboral " ( furthest from the mouth ) . Most have fringes of tentacles equipped with cnidocytes around their edges , and medusae generally have an inner ring of tentacles around the mouth . Some hydroids may consist of colonies of zooids that serve different purposes , such as defense , reproduction and catching prey . The mesoglea of polyps is usually thin and often soft , but that of medusae is usually thick and springy , so that it returns to its original shape after muscles around the edge have contracted to squeeze water out , enabling medusae to swim by a sort of jet propulsion . 
 = = = Skeletons = = = 
 In medusae the only supporting structure is the mesoglea . Hydra and most sea anemones close their mouths when they are not feeding , and the water in the digestive cavity then acts as a hydrostatic skeleton , rather like a water @-@ filled balloon . Other polyps such as <unk> use columns of water @-@ filled cells for support . Sea pens stiffen the mesoglea with calcium carbonate spicules and tough fibrous proteins , rather like sponges . 
 In some colonial polyps , a chitinous <unk> gives support and some protection to the connecting sections and to the lower parts of individual polyps . Stony corals secrete massive calcium carbonate exoskeletons . A few polyps collect materials such as sand grains and shell fragments , which they attach to their outsides . Some colonial sea anemones stiffen the mesoglea with sediment particles . 
