 = = = Continental philosophy = = = 
 Philosophers in the continental philosophical tradition are not traditionally categorized as philosophers of science . However , they have much to say about science , some of which has anticipated themes in the analytical tradition . For example , Nietzsche advanced the thesis in his " The Genealogy of Morals " that the motive for search of truth in sciences is a kind of ascetic ideal . 
 In general , science in continental philosophy is viewed from a world @-@ historical perspective . One of the first philosophers who supported this view was Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel . Philosophers such as Pierre Duhem and Gaston Bachelard also wrote their works with this world @-@ historical approach to science , predating Kuhn by a generation or more . All of these approaches involve a historical and sociological turn to science , with a priority on lived experience ( a kind of <unk> " life @-@ world " ) , rather than a progress @-@ based or anti @-@ historical approach as done in the analytic tradition . This emphasis can be traced through Edmund Husserl 's phenomenology , the late works of Merleau @-@ Ponty ( Nature : Course Notes from the Collège de France , 1956 – 1960 ) , and Martin Heidegger 's hermeneutics . 
 The largest effect on the continental tradition with respect to science was Martin Heidegger 's critique of the theoretical attitude in general which of course includes the scientific attitude . For this reason the continental tradition has remained much more skeptical of the importance of science in human life and philosophical inquiry . Nonetheless , there have been a number of important works : especially a <unk> precursor , Alexandre Koyré . Another important development was that of Foucault 's analysis of the historical and scientific thought in The Order of Things and his study of power and corruption within the " science " of madness . Post @-@ Heideggerian authors contributing to the continental philosophy of science in the second half of the 20th century include Jürgen Habermas ( e.g. , " Truth and Justification " , 1998 ) , Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker ( " The Unity of Nature " , 1980 ) , and Wolfgang <unk> ( " <unk> und <unk> der <unk> und <unk> Philosophie " , 1973 – 1986 ) . 
 = = Other topics = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Analysis is the activity of breaking an observation or theory down into simpler concepts in order to understand it . <unk> can refer to one of several philosophical positions related to this approach . One type of reductionism is the belief that all fields of study are ultimately amenable to scientific explanation . Perhaps a historical event might be explained in sociological and psychological terms , which in turn might be described in terms of human physiology , which in turn might be described in terms of chemistry and physics . Daniel Dennett distinguishes legitimate reductionism from what he calls greedy reductionism , which denies real complexities and leaps too quickly to sweeping generalizations . 
 = = = Social accountability = = = 
 A broad issue affecting the neutrality of science concerns the areas which science chooses to explore , that is , what part of the world and man is studied by science . Philip Kitcher in his " Science , Truth , and Democracy " argues that scientific studies that attempt to show one segment of the population as being less intelligent , successful or emotionally backward compared to others have a political feedback effect which further excludes such groups from access to science . Thus such studies undermine the broad consensus required for good science by excluding certain people , and so proving themselves in the end to be unscientific . 
 = = Philosophy of particular sciences = = 
 There is no such thing as philosophy @-@ free science ; there is only science whose philosophical baggage is taken on board without examination . 
 In addition to addressing the general questions regarding science and induction , many philosophers of science are occupied by investigating foundational problems in particular sciences . They also examine the implications of particular sciences for broader philosophical questions . The late 20th and early 21st century has seen a rise in the number of practitioners of philosophy of a particular science . 
 = = = Philosophy of statistics = = = 
 The problem of induction discussed above is seen in another form in debates over the foundations of statistics . The standard approach to statistical hypothesis testing avoids claims about whether evidence supports a hypothesis or makes it more probable . Instead , the typical test yields a p @-@ value , which is the probability of the evidence being such as it is , under the assumption that the hypothesis being tested is true . If the p @-@ value is too low , the hypothesis is rejected , in a way analogous to falsification . In contrast , Bayesian inference seeks to assign probabilities to hypotheses . Related topics in philosophy of statistics include probability interpretations , <unk> , and the difference between correlation and causation . 
 = = = Philosophy of mathematics = = = 
 Philosophy of mathematics is concerned with the philosophical foundations and implications of mathematics . The central questions are whether numbers , triangles , and other mathematical entities exist independently of the human mind and what is the nature of mathematical propositions . Is asking whether " 1 + 1 = 2 " is true fundamentally different from asking whether a ball is red ? Was calculus invented or discovered ? A related question is whether learning mathematics requires experience or reason alone . What does it mean to prove a mathematical theorem and how does one know whether a mathematical proof is correct ? Philosophers of mathematics also aim to clarify the relationships between mathematics and logic , human capabilities such as intuition , and the material universe . 
 = = = Philosophy of physics = = = 
 Philosophy of physics is the study of the fundamental , philosophical questions underlying modern physics , the study of matter and energy and how they interact . The main questions concern the nature of space and time , atoms and atomism . Also included are the predictions of cosmology , the interpretation of quantum mechanics , the foundations of statistical mechanics , causality , determinism , and the nature of physical laws . Classically , several of these questions were studied as part of metaphysics ( for example , those about causality , determinism , and space and time ) . 
 = = = Philosophy of chemistry = = = 
 Philosophy of chemistry is the philosophical study of the methodology and content of the science of chemistry . It is explored by philosophers , chemists , and philosopher @-@ chemist teams . It includes research on general philosophy of science issues as applied to chemistry . For example , can all chemical phenomena be explained by quantum mechanics or is it not possible to reduce chemistry to physics ? For another example , chemists have discussed the philosophy of how theories are confirmed in the context of confirming reaction mechanisms . Determining reaction mechanisms is difficult because they cannot be observed directly . Chemists can use a number of indirect measures as evidence to rule out certain mechanisms , but they are often unsure if the remaining mechanism is correct because there are many other possible mechanisms that they have not tested or even thought of . Philosophers have also sought to clarify the meaning of chemical concepts which do not refer to specific physical entities , such as chemical bonds . 
 = = = Philosophy of biology = = = 
 Philosophy of biology deals with epistemological , metaphysical , and ethical issues in the biological and biomedical sciences . Although philosophers of science and philosophers generally have long been interested in biology ( e.g. , Aristotle , Descartes , Leibniz and even Kant ) , philosophy of biology only emerged as an independent field of philosophy in the 1960s and 1970s . Philosophers of science began to pay increasing attention to developments in biology , from the rise of the modern synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s to the discovery of the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) in 1953 to more recent advances in genetic engineering . Other key ideas such as the reduction of all life processes to biochemical reactions as well as the incorporation of psychology into a broader neuroscience are also addressed . Research in current philosophy of biology includes investigation of the foundations of evolutionary theory , and the role of viruses as persistent symbionts in host genomes . As a consequence the evolution of genetic content order is seen as the result of competent genome editors in contrast to former narratives in which error replication events ( mutations ) dominated . 
 = = = Philosophy of medicine = = = 
 Beyond medical ethics and bioethics , the philosophy of medicine is a branch of philosophy that includes the epistemology and ontology / metaphysics of medicine . Within the epistemology of medicine , evidence @-@ based medicine ( EBM ) ( or evidence @-@ based practice ( <unk> ) ) has attracted attention , most notably the roles of <unk> , blinding and placebo controls . Related to these areas of investigation , ontologies of specific interest to the philosophy of medicine include Cartesian dualism , the monogenetic conception of disease and the conceptualization of ' placebos ' and ' placebo effects ' . There is also a growing interest in the metaphysics of medicine , particularly the idea of causation . Philosophers of medicine might not only be interested in how medical knowledge is generated , but also in the nature of such phenomena . <unk> is of interest because the purpose of much medical research is to establish causal relationships , e.g. what causes disease , or what causes people to get better . 
 = = = Philosophy of psychology = = = 
 Philosophy of psychology refers to issues at the theoretical foundations of modern psychology . Some of these issues are epistemological concerns about the methodology of psychological investigation . For example , is the best method for studying psychology to focus only on the response of behavior to external stimuli or should psychologists focus on mental perception and thought processes ? If the latter , an important question is how the internal experiences of others can be measured . Self @-@ reports of feelings and beliefs may not be reliable because , even in cases in which there is no apparent incentive for subjects to intentionally deceive in their answers , self @-@ deception or selective memory may affect their responses . Then even in the case of accurate self @-@ reports , how can responses be compared across individuals ? Even if two individuals respond with the same answer on a Likert scale , they may be experiencing very different things . 
 Other issues in philosophy of psychology are philosophical questions about the nature of mind , brain , and cognition , and are perhaps more commonly thought of as part of cognitive science , or philosophy of mind . For example , are humans rational creatures ? Is there any sense in which they have free will , and how does that relate to the experience of making choices ? Philosophy of psychology also closely monitors contemporary work conducted in cognitive neuroscience , evolutionary psychology , and artificial intelligence , questioning what they can and cannot explain in psychology . 
 Philosophy of psychology is a relatively young field , because psychology only became a discipline of its own in the late 1800s . In particular , <unk> has just recently become its own field with the works of Paul Churchland and Patricia Churchland . Philosophy of mind , by contrast , has been a well @-@ established discipline since before psychology was a field of study at all . It is concerned with questions about the very nature of mind , the qualities of experience , and particular issues like the debate between dualism and monism . Another related field is philosophy of language . 
 = = = Philosophy of economics = = = 
 Philosophy of economics is the branch of philosophy which studies philosophical issues relating to economics . It can also be defined as the branch of economics which studies its own foundations and morality . It can be categorized into three central topics . The first concerns the definition and scope of economics and by what methods it should be studied and whether these methods rise to the level of epistemic reliability associated with the other special sciences . For example , is it possible to research economics in such a way that it is value @-@ free , establishing facts that are independent of the normative views of the researcher ? The second topic is the meaning and implications of rationality . For example , can buying lottery tickets ( increasing the riskiness of your income ) at the same time as buying insurance ( decreasing the riskiness of your income ) be rational ? The third topic is the normative evaluation of economic policies and outcomes . What criteria should be used to determine whether a given public policy is beneficial for society ? 
 = = = Philosophy of social science = = = 
 The philosophy of social science is the study of the logic and method of the social sciences , such as sociology , anthropology , and political science . Philosophers of social science are concerned with the differences and similarities between the social and the natural sciences , causal relationships between social phenomena , the possible existence of social laws , and the ontological significance of structure and agency . 
 The French philosopher , Auguste Comte ( 1798 – 1857 ) , established the epistemological perspective of positivism in The Course in Positivist Philosophy , a series of texts published between 1830 and 1842 . The first three volumes of the Course dealt chiefly with the physical sciences already in existence ( mathematics , astronomy , physics , chemistry , biology ) , whereas the latter two emphasised the inevitable coming of social science : " sociologie " . For Comte , the physical sciences had necessarily to arrive first , before humanity could adequately channel its efforts into the most challenging and complex " Queen science " of human society itself . Comte offers an evolutionary system proposing that society undergoes three phases in its quest for the truth according to a general ' law of three stages ' . These are ( 1 ) the theological , ( 2 ) the metaphysical , and ( 3 ) the positive . 
 Comte 's positivism established the initial philosophical foundations for formal sociology and social research . Durkheim , Marx , and Weber are more typically cited as the fathers of contemporary social science . In psychology , a <unk> approach has historically been favoured in <unk> . Positivism has also been espoused by ' technocrats ' who believe in the inevitability of social progress through science and technology . 
 The positivist perspective has been associated with ' scientism ' ; the view that the methods of the natural sciences may be applied to all areas of investigation , be it philosophical , social scientific , or otherwise . Among most social scientists and historians , orthodox positivism has long since lost popular support . Today , practitioners of both social and physical sciences instead take into account the distorting effect of observer bias and structural limitations . This scepticism has been facilitated by a general weakening of <unk> accounts of science by philosophers such as Thomas Kuhn , and new philosophical movements such as critical realism and <unk> . The philosopher @-@ sociologist Jürgen Habermas has critiqued pure instrumental rationality as meaning that scientific @-@ thinking becomes something akin to ideology itself . 
 = John Beilein = 
 John Patrick Beilein ( pronounced bee @-@ line ; born February 5 , 1953 ) is an American college basketball coach and current men 's basketball head coach at the University of Michigan . He is the 16th head coach of the Michigan Wolverines . The 2015 – 16 season is his ninth at Michigan . Beilein has won 665 career games at four @-@ year universities ( including games that were not at the Division I level ) and 732 games altogether , including those at the junior @-@ college level . He has previously coached the West Virginia Mountaineers ( 2002 – 2007 ) , Richmond Spiders ( 1997 – 2002 ) , Canisius College Golden Griffins ( 1992 – 1997 ) in Division I as well as Le Moyne College ( 1983 – 1992 ) , Nazareth College ( 1982 – 1983 ) and Erie Community College ( 1978 – 1982 ) . 
 Beilein is the only active collegiate coach to have achieved 20 @-@ win seasons at four different levels — junior college , NCAA Division III , NCAA Division II and NCAA Division I. Beilein is one of only six active Division I coaches with 700 or more career wins . He has been recognized as conference coach of the year five times : in 1981 at Erie Community College , in 1988 at LeMoyne , in 1994 at Canisius , in 1998 at Richmond , and in 2014 at Michigan . In addition , Beilein was the seventh of only ten coaches to have taken four different schools to the NCAA Division I Tournament . 
 Beilein 's first Division I head coaching position was at Canisius , a hometown school of which he had been a fan . He turned around the school 's losing program and helped it earn two National Invitation Tournament ( NIT ) and one NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Championship Tournament invitation in five years . Then at Richmond he reached the NIT twice in five years . In five years at West Virginia , his teams twice advanced several rounds in the NCAA tournament and twice went to the NIT , including one championship . At Michigan , the school reached the NCAA tournament for the first time in over a decade and five times in his first seven seasons as coach . He has a 17 – 10 record in the NCAA tournament , with one Final Four appearance , and a 13 – 6 record in the NIT . 
 = = Education = = 
 Beilein was raised in Burt , New York . He is the eighth of nine children of a millworker and an apple farmer . His mother 's cousins were the inspiration for Saving Private Ryan , and two of his uncles ( Tom and Joe Niland ) were lifelong basketball coaches in the Western New York area . Beilein attended <unk> High School in Lockport , New York . He went on to attend Wheeling College ( now Wheeling Jesuit University ) where he competed on the school 's basketball team from 1971 to 1975 and served as team captain during the 1974 – 75 season . He received a Bachelor of Arts degree in history in 1975 . After graduating , Beilein returned to Western New York where he began his coaching career at Newfane High School in 1975 . He remained there for three years . Beilein went on to earn a Master of Science degree in education from Niagara University in 1981 . 
 = = Early college coaching career = = 
 Beilein has never served as an assistant coach ; he has held head @-@ coaching positions throughout his career . He served as the coach of Erie Community College from 1978 to 1982 , Western New York 's Division III Nazareth College in Rochester , New York for the 1982 – 1983 school year , and Le Moyne College from 1983 to 1992 . Le Moyne was a Division II contestant in the Mideast Collegiate Conference ( MCC ) . Beilein first applied to coach Division I basketball at Canisius in 1987 , but he was not hired . During his time at Le Moyne , he held annual coaching clinics that welcomed coaches and athletes . Beilein was named the 1988 MCC Coach of the Year , when his team finished as Co @-@ League Champions with a 21 – 5 regular season record and number 14 national ranking . The team tied with Gannon University with an 8 – 2 conference record . Although it was Beilein 's third 20 @-@ win team at Le Moyne , they had never gone to the NCAA tournament before . The team captured the conference post @-@ season tournament after receiving a first round bye . As the number three seed , they faced the number one seeded California University of Pennsylvania in the NCAA Division II Eastern Regionals . They lost their first round game to fall to a 23 – 6 record , but won the consolation game against Kutztown University of Pennsylvania . 
 The MCC disbanded following the 1990 – 1991 season . In Beilein 's final season at Le Moyne , the team was an independent team unaffiliated with a conference . The team was scheduled to join the New England Collegiate Conference for the 1992 – 1993 season . After his first application for the job at Canisius , Beilein had tried to land other Division I jobs at schools such as Colgate University , where he had been a finalist in 1989 . In 1992 , he was finally hired to a Division I post at Canisius . 
 = = NCAA Division I coaching career = = 
 = = = Canisius = = = 
 During the 1991 – 92 season , Canisius compiled an 8 – 22 record prior to Beilein 's arrival . In 1992 , Beilein arrived at Canisius College as head coach for the 1992 – 93 season , and was able for the first time to hire assistant coaches . A Western New York native , he had grown up a Canisius basketball fan because his uncle , Joe Niland , had been a former player and coach there . At Canisius — his first Division I coaching position — Beilein reached the NCAA Tournament once and the NIT twice in his five seasons . 
 In his first two seasons at Canisius , Beilein turned a last place 1991 – 92 squad into a 1993 – 94 team that recorded the first undefeated home schedule ( 15 – 0 ) in the school 's modern era . The team entered the 1994 MAAC Tournament on a 15 @-@ game winning streak , and Beilein earned Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference Coach of the Year . Beilein 's number one seeded Canisius team lost in the second round semi @-@ final contest against Loyola University and thus failed to make the 1994 NCAA Tournament . Although Canisius failed to be invited to participate in the NCAA tournament , Canisius was invited , along with two other schools from the MAAC , to the NIT tournament , and it was matched up against a taller , more experienced Villanova team . The eventual 1994 NIT champion Villanova prevailed in a 103 – 79 victory over Canisius in the first round . 
 During the 1994 – 95 season , the Golden Griffins were led by the team 's first MAAC Player of the Year , senior Craig Wise . In the first round of the MAAC tournament , a pair of future Michigan Wolverine coaches opposed each other when Canisius met Loyola , coached by Brian Ellerbe . Canisius won and reached the MAAC semi @-@ final for the fifth time in six years . The team lost in the semis for the third straight season , and it continued its record of never having won the conference tournament . Canisius earned the team 's first post @-@ season victory in 32 years against Seton Hall . A pair of subsequent wins enabled Canisius to earn a trip to the semifinals of the 1995 NIT at Madison Square Garden . Canisius lost in the semifinals against Virginia Tech by a 71 – 59 despite a school postseason record 32 points from Wise . Canisius lost the consolation game against Penn State . The three wins and two losses enabled Beilein to even up his NIT career record at 3 – 3 . 
 In 1995 – 96 , the team also was led by a MAAC Player of the Year , Darrell Barley . Beilein coached the 16 – 10 ( 7 – 7 MAAC ) team to the conference tournament championship to earn a birth in the 1996 NCAA Tournament despite the absence of the injured Barley for the tournament . Canisius earned a thirteen seed and matchup against the fourth @-@ seeded Utah Utes in the team 's first NCAA Tournament appearance since 1957 . Utah defeated Canisius in the game , 72 – 43 . 
 In Beilein 's final season coaching Canisius , the Golden Griffins were the top defensive team in the MAAC . The team 's season ended in the conference tournament finals . After the 1996 – 97 season , Beilein interviewed with the University of Richmond . 
 = = = Richmond = = = 
 In 1997 , Beilein moved to become the coach of the Richmond Spiders . There , he compiled a 100 – 53 record in five seasons , recording a winning record each season , and again reached the NCAA tournament once , where his 14th @-@ seeded team upset third @-@ seeded and nationally ranked South Carolina . His teams also reached the NIT twice . 
 During the 1997 – 98 season , A third Beilein player was named conference player of the year in six seasons when <unk> Stevenson was named Colonial Athletic Association ( CAA ) Player of the Year . The 1997 – 98 Spiders posted its first winning season since 1993 . The Spiders entered the 1998 CAA tournament as the third seed in the nine @-@ team conference . The team won the tournament , earning the school a 1998 NCAA Tournament selection , its first NCAA tournament berth since 1991 . Beilein won his fourth Coach of the Year award that season . This one was for the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch Virginia Coach of the Year . Beilein was selected for the award over Charlie <unk> of William and Mary who beat Beilein for the CAA coach of the year award . During the NCAA Tournament , Richmond , which was seeded 14th upset the South Carolina team in the first round of the tournament . The Spiders lost their second game in the tournament to the Washington Huskies team . Beilein 's career NCAA tournament record was 1 – 2 . 
 Beilein relied on a nucleus that included two freshmen and two sophomores after two returning starters were removed from the team for disciplinary reason during the 1998 – 99 season . The team finished third in the CAA with a 15 – 11 ( 10 – 6 CAA ) record . However , they were upset in the 1999 CAA conference tournament by sixth @-@ seeded cross @-@ town rival Virginia Commonwealth . 
 Richmond again earned the third seed in the conference tournament over the course of the 1999 – 2000 season . In the 2000 CAA Conference tournament they ousted number @-@ six Old Dominion and number @-@ two James Madison . Then with the CAA conference 's automatic bid to the 2000 NCAA Tournament at stake , Richmond lost to fourth seeded UNC Wilmington in the championship game . 
 During the 2000 – 01 season , Richmond finished the regular season with a 21 – 6 record , finishing first in the CAA with a 12 – 4 record . The Spiders won ten of their final eleven games . However , since Richmond was going to change its athletic affiliation from the CAA to the Atlantic 10 the following season , it was ineligible for the 2001 CAA conference tournament . Only one team from the CAA had ever earned an at large bid to the NCAA tournament . The Spiders wound up playing in the 2001 NIT , where they defeated West Virginia before losing to Dayton . With one win and one loss Beilein stayed at .500 in the NIT , at 4 – 4 . At the end of the season , Beilein declined an offer to coach at Rutgers . The victory over West Virginia is credited with being a large part of why Beilein was eventually hired at West Virginia . 
 The following year during the 2001 – 02 season , Richmond finished in second place of the West Division of the 12 @-@ team Atlantic 10 Conference to earn a first @-@ round bye in the 2002 Atlantic 10 Tournament . In the tournament Richmond won its first two games to advance to the finals where it lost to Xavier . During the 2002 NIT , Richmond defeated Wagner , Montana State , and Minnesota before losing to Syracuse in the quarterfinals . This improved Beilein 's record to 7 – 5 in the NIT . 
 = = = West Virginia = = = 
 Dan Dakich was hired at West Virginia ( WVU ) of the Big East Conference and then quit 8 days later . In April 2002 , Beilein accepted the head coaching position at WVU . At WVU he posted a 104 – 60 record over five seasons . In the 2004 – 05 season , WVU went 24 – 11 and reached the " Elite Eight " ( fourth round ) of the NCAA tournament . The following year , WVU went 22 – 11 and reached the " Sweet Sixteen " ( third round ) . In 2006 – 07 , Beilein 's Mountaineers , despite losing about 80 % of their scoring from the previous season , went 27 – 9 and won the NIT championship . 
 Prior to 2009 , the Big East Tournament only included the top 12 teams . During the 2002 – 03 season , West Virginia qualified for the tournament in their final conference game of the season by beating Virginia Tech team to secure 6th place in the western division . The team had improved from 8 – 20 to finish the regular season at 14 – 14 ( 5 – 11 Big East ) under Beilein . The team lost in the first round of the 2003 Big East Tournament to Providence by a 73 – 50 margin to end their season . 
 Following the 2003 – 04 regular season , West Virginia qualified for the 2004 Big East Tournament as the number 10 seed . The team lost its first round match against Notre Dame team by a 65 – 64 margin on a three @-@ point shot with 15 seconds remaining . The team 's 15 – 13 record earned it an invitation to the 2004 NIT . In the first round of the tournament , the team traveled to play a 22 – 8 Kent State . Despite early foul trouble the team won 65 – 54 to advance to the second round . West Virginia defeated Rhode Island in the second game of the tournament by a 79 – 72 margin . The season ended with a 74 – 53 loss to Rutgers in the following game . Beilein 's career record in the NIT tournament was 8 – 6 after this tournament . 
 In 2004 – 05 , Beilein 's team entered the 2005 Big East Tournament with an 18 – 9 record as the eighth seed and as a team on the bubble for the 2005 NCAA Tournament . The team won its opening @-@ round game against number nine seed Providence 82 – 59 , its second @-@ round game against number one seed Boston College 78 – 72 , and its third @-@ round game against number four Villanova 78 – 72 . West Virginia lost the conference tournament finals to Syracuse 68 – 59 , but it earned a seven seed in the NCAA tournament against number ten seed Creighton of the Missouri Valley Conference . The loss gave Beilein his fifth loss in as many games against his mentor Syracuse coach Jim Boeheim , who had helped him acquire each of his first three Division I coaching positions . In the NCAA tournament , West Virginia beat Creighton 63 – 61 with a defensive stop and fast break dunk in the final five seconds . West Virginia then defeated the number two seed Wake Forest team led by Chris Paul in double overtime 111 – 105 . In the Sweet Sixteen round , West Virginia defeated Bobby Knight 's number six seeded Texas Tech 65 – 60 . In the elite eight round , they lost in overtime to Rick Pitino 's number four seeded Louisville , who were led by <unk> Dean and Larry O 'Bannon 93 – 85 @.@ with the three wins Beilein raised his career NCAA record to 4 – 3 . 
 During the 2005 – 06 season , West Virginia won its first eight Big East conference games and entered the top ten in the 2005 – 06 national rankings in February . It was the first time West Virginia had ranked in the top ten in the Coaches ' Poll which had been created in 1993 . They were the final unbeaten team in conference play . After the good start , the team lost four of its next five games to fall to 9 – 4 in conference play . They won their next two games to clinch a first @-@ round bye in the 2006 Big East Tournament . With seemingly little to play for , they lost their regular season finale to finish with a 20 – 9 ( 11 – 5 Big East ) regular season record . West Virginia lost its quarterfinal round game in the conference tournament to Pitt , and it earned a number six seed in the 2006 NCAA Tournament . West Virginia won its opening weekend games against number eleven seed Southern Illinois team and the number fourteen seed Northwestern State Demons basketball team by 64 – 46 and 67 – 54 margins , respectively . The team then West Virginia lost in the Sweet Sixteen round to the number two seed Texas Longhorns in a wild finish that saw West Virginia erase a five @-@ point deficit in the final fourteen seconds only to lose the game on a <unk> . The two wins helped Beilein raise his NCAA tournament record to 6 – 4 . 
 During the 2006 – 07 season , WVU finished the regular season with a 21 – 8 ( 9 – 7 Big East ) record to earn the number seven seed in the 2007 Big East Tournament . In the first round of the tournament , they defeated the number ten seed Providence 92 – 79 making a Big East Tournament record 17 three @-@ point shots . They lost to the second @-@ seeded Louisville Cardinals , 82 – 71 , in double overtime . Their 22 – 9 record earned them a top seed in the 32 @-@ team 2007 NIT . As the number one seed , West Virginia was able to play its first three games at home where it defeated the Delaware State Hornets 74 – 50 , UMass team 90 – 77 , and NC State 71 – 60 . Before West Virginia started play in the semifinals in New York , rumors started that Beilein would take the Michigan job after the season ended . In the semifinal contest against Mississippi State , they won 63 – 62 on a last @-@ minute shot by <unk> Nichols after recovering from a 14 @-@ point second @-@ half deficit . The day before the championship game , Beilein was announced as one of three finalists ( along with Kevin Stallings and Chris Lowery ) for the Michigan Wolverines ' head coaching job . In the championship game , WVU defeated Clemson 78 – 73 . The five wins raised Beilein 's NIT career record to 13 – 6 . 
 = = = Michigan = = = 
 On April 3 , 2007 , the University of Michigan announced that it had hired Beilein to fill its coaching vacancy . He replaced Tommy Amaker , who was fired after failing to reach the NCAA Tournament in his six seasons . Beilein inherited a Big Ten Conference team that was in the final year of a scholarship reduction due to the involvement of former players in the Ed Martin scandal , in which NCAA rules had been violated . The team struggled to a 10 – 22 ( 5 – 13 ) record during the 2007 – 08 season . 
 During the 2008 – 09 season , Beilein 's second at Michigan , the 2008 – 09 Wolverines enjoyed several important victories . On November 20 , the unranked Wolverines upset # 4 @-@ ranked UCLA , recording their first win over a top @-@ five team in eleven years . On December 6 , Michigan posted its second win of the season over a top @-@ five opponent in a rematch against # 4 ranked Duke . The Wolverines reached the top 25 in the national rankings on December 22 , its first appearance since the February 6 , 2006 . On February 26 , Michigan defeated the # 16 @-@ ranked Purdue team 87 – 78 , raising its record to 3 – 4 against ranked opponents on the season . At the conclusion of the 2008 – 09 Big Ten season , Michigan was given a seven seed in the 2009 Big Ten Tournament . A win over Iowa in the Big Ten Tournament on March 12 was the Wolverines ' twentieth of the season . With that win , Beilein had achieved a 20 @-@ win season at seven different schools , including four at the Division I level ( Canisius , Richmond , West Virginia , Michigan ) . Three days later , Beilein 's Wolverines earned a bid to the 2009 NCAA Tournament , the school 's first appearance in 11 years . There , tenth @-@ seeded Michigan defeated the seventh @-@ seeded Clemson Tigers 62 – 59 in the first round of the South Regional on March 19 . In the second round , Michigan lost to the Oklahoma Sooners 73 – 63 . 
 During the 2009 – 10 season , Michigan earned its first win against a ranked non @-@ conference opponent and its second consecutive win against a ranked opponent on January 17 when it defeated # 15 Connecticut . Beilein signed a contract extension in January , extending his original contract to 2016 . Michigan finished 15 – 17 and did not appear in the postseason . 
 The 2010 – 11 team , which did not have a senior on the roster , was not expected to be very successful , projected by the Detroit News to finish 10th in the 11 @-@ team conference . After starting the conference schedule with a 1 – 6 record the team won eight of its last 11 games , including two games against Michigan State ( its first season sweep against them in 14 years ) , to finish tied for fourth in the conference with a 9 – 9 record . The victory at Michigan State was Michigan 's first since 1997 . In the Big Ten Tournament , Michigan 's win over Illinois gave Beilein his second 20 @-@ win season at Michigan , in his 1,000th game as a head coach . As a # 8 seed in the 2011 NCAA Tournament , Michigan defeated Tennessee 75 – 45 , establishing two NCAA Tournament records : the largest victory margin by an eight seed , and becoming the first team to ever win a tournament game without making a free throw . Michigan won by its third @-@ largest margin in its NCAA tournament history ( second @-@ most if vacated games are excluded ) , and the game marked the ninth straight time that John Beilein led a team victory in its first game of a postseason tournament ( 5 NCAA and 4 NIT ) . In the next round the Wolverines lost to # 1 @-@ seeded Duke , 73 – 71 , missing a potential game @-@ tying shot in the final seconds . 
 The 2011 – 12 Wolverines began the season ranked in the top 25 , and remained there all season . The team recorded a win over 9th @-@ ranked Michigan State on Jan. 17 , 60 – 59 . It was Beilein 's third consecutive win over the Spartans and came nine days after Beilein recorded his first victory over Wisconsin , 59 – 41 . On February 18 , the Wolverines defeated another top @-@ 10 opponent , edging 6th @-@ ranked Ohio State , 56 – 51 . The win clinched Beilein 's first winning record in Big Ten play . On March 1 , Michigan won at Illinois for the first time since 1995 , ending a 13 @-@ game losing streak in Champaign . The Wolverines finished 24 – 10 overall and 13 – 5 in Big Ten play , winning a share of the regular @-@ season Big Ten championship for the first time since the 1985 – 86 team . 
 By helming the 2012 – 13 Wolverines , Beilein reached his sixth season with the same team for the first time . Beilein achieved several milestones with the 2012 – 13 Wolverines : 650th win as a college basketball head coach ( December 4 vs. Western Michigan ) , 100th win as head coach at Michigan ( December 8 vs. Arkansas ) , 400th Division I win as a head coach ( January 9 vs. Nebraska ) and his best career start ( December 15 vs. West Virginia ) . The 400th win came on a night when Michigan achieved its 16th straight victory which tied the school record for best start . Michigan went on to record its first 19 – 1 start to a season in school history . On January 28 , Michigan was ranked number one in the AP Poll with 51 of the 65 first place votes . It marked the first time Michigan ranked atop the AP Poll since the 1992 – 93 team did so on December 5 , 1992 . John Beilein was selected as an assistant coach for the 2013 World University Games . In the 2013 NCAA Tournament , fourth @-@ seeded Michigan defeated South Dakota State , 71 – 56 @.@ in its South Regional opening game , and in so doing the team matched Beilein 's career high with 27 wins . Michigan then surpassed this record , and continued to advance , by defeating fifth @-@ seeded Virginia Commonwealth , 78 – 53 and top @-@ seeded Kansas , 87 – 85 before beating third @-@ seeded Florida 79 – 59 to send Michigan to the Final Four for the first time since 1993 . In the 2013 Final Four , the Wolverines defeated East region champion Syracuse , 61 – 56 , to advance to the national championship game against Louisville , which they lost , 82 – 76 . During the following offseason , Bleacher Report named Beilein the most creative coach in college basketball . During the offseason , Beilein signed a second contract extension through the 2018 – 19 season . 
 The 2013 – 14 team was ranked in the top 10 to start the season , but lost four non @-@ conference games to fall out of the polls for the first time in over two seasons . Then , the team won three in a row against top @-@ 10 ranked conference opponents including a road victory over 3rd @-@ ranked Wisconsin en route to a 10 @-@ game winning streak . Beilein led Michigan to a 15 @-@ 3 conference record and won Michigan 's first outright regular season Big Ten championship since 1986 . The Wolverines earned a # 2 seed in the NCAA Tournament , where they lost in the Elite Eight to eventual runner @-@ up Kentucky . Beilein was one of ten finalists for the USBWA 's Henry Iba Award for Coach of the Year . He clinched his fourth career conference championship and second at Michigan on March 1 against Minnesota , and won the title outright three days later at Illinois . Following the regular season , Beilein was named Big Ten Coach of the Year by the media . On March 11 Beilein was named District V ( OH , IN , IL , MI , MN , WI ) Coach of the Year by the United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) . Beilein was named one of five finalists for the Naismith College Coach of the Year and one of fifteen finalists for the Jim Phelan Award . On March 22 in Michigan 's second game of the 2014 NCAA Tournament , against Texas , Beilein earned his 700th career win to advance to the Sweet 16 of the NCAA tournament for the second consecutive season . Beilein led Michigan on to beat the # 11 seed University of Tennessee before falling to # 8 seed Kentucky 75 @-@ 72 in the Elite Eight . 
 The 2014 – 15 team entered the season ranked number 23 in the Coaches ' Poll and number 24 in the AP Poll . The team struggled in the preconference schedule , losing four games in a row in December . In January , the team lost Caris LeVert and Derrick Walton to injuries in January and after a 6 – 3 conference start finished 8 – 10 in conference and 16 – 16 overall ( going 5 – 9 in games without LeVert and Walton ) . Prior to the 2015 – 16 season , Michigan extended Beilein 's contract through the 2020 – 21 season . 
 = = Coaching style = = 
 Beilein is known for his offensive system , which emphasizes constant motion , passing , disciplined teamwork , and precision shooting . The offense usually starts out with four players outside the three @-@ point arc , and one player at the top of the key ( though at times a post player may operate closer to the basket ) . From this formation , Beilein 's teams not only try to open up space for players to cut to the basket , but also are known for their high number of three @-@ point attempts . On defense , Beilein has become known for employing the 1 – 3 – 1 halfcourt zone defense , which is considered to be an unconventional zone defense – though he also regularly employs man @-@ to @-@ man and 2 @-@ 3 zone defenses . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Beilein married the former Kathleen Griffin in 1978 . The <unk> have three sons ( Patrick , who played for his father at WVU and is the current head basketball coach at Le Moyne College ; Mark , a former football player at Richmond and WVU grad who currently works for <unk> Steel ; and Andrew , a Michigan grad who currently works for the Business Roundtable in Washington , D.C. ) and a daughter ( <unk> Hendricks ) . Patrick , who was the 2002 Virginia Independent Schools Division I Player of the Year , had intended to play at Richmond with his father , and instead went to West Virginia when his father moved there . Patrick was a 2008 – 2009 season graduate assistant coach at University of Michigan . He has since held posts as assistant coach at Dartmouth , Director of Men 's Basketball Operations at Bradley University , and head coach of West Virginia Wesleyan College before his current role at Le Moyne . 
 When Patrick was a highly recruited high school basketball player , John was restricted by NCAA rules from some normal behaviors regarding his son , such as giving his son 's teammates a ride home from practice , talking with his son at a basketball camp or discussing his son 's abilities with news media , because the interactions of college coaches with recruits are restricted . The relevant NCAA rules for recruiting ( Bylaw article 13 ) are quite extensive . Beilein had to follow recruiting rules when visiting his son at a basketball camp . According to rule 13 @.@ 12 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 coaches wishing to attend a camp as observers must comply with appropriate recruiting contact and evaluation periods . According to 13 @.@ 02 @.@ 3 , a contact includes any face @-@ to @-@ face encounter between a prospective student @-@ athlete . . . and an institutional staff member or athletics representative during which any dialogue occurs in excess of an exchange of a greeting . In short , talking to coaches not employed by a camp is not allowed during the camp , which left Beilein unable to offer his son milk money . 
 = = Coaching tree = = 
 These former players and assistant coaches of Beilein later became head coaches at the collegiate or professional levels . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = = Junior college = = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 = Falkner Island Light = 
 Falkner Island Light , also known as the Faulkner Island Lighthouse , is a lighthouse in Connecticut , United States , on Falkner Island which is off Guilford Harbor on Long Island Sound . The lighthouse was constructed in 1802 and commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson . The lighthouse has had three keeper 's houses : the original house of 1802 was rebuilt in 1851 and then again in 1871 . The 1871 keeper 's house survived to 1976 , when it was destroyed by fire ; the Coast Guard repaired and automated the lighthouse two years later . A volunteer group , the Faulkner 's Light Brigade , has undertaken the restoration and preservation of the lighthouse since 1991 , completing the last major restoration work in March 2011 . Access to Falkner Island and the light is restricted during the nesting season of the roseate terns from May to August yearly . The Falkner Island Lighthouse , as the second oldest extant lighthouse in Connecticut , is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = Falkner Island = = 
 <unk> Island is a crescent @-@ shaped island located three and a half miles offshore of Guilford , Connecticut . The island has had several owners including Andrew Leete in the 1600s . In 1715 , Caleb and Ebenezer Stone purchased the island , which remained in the Stone family until 1801 . In 1800 , Noah Stone sold it to a distant relative , Medad Stone , for $ 158 @.@ 34 . On May 12 , 1801 , Medad Stone sold the island to the government for $ 325 . Joel Henderson , a historian , notes that Medad Stone and the government were likely openly communicating about the island . The United States Congress had appropriated $ 6000 in March 1801 for the lighthouse , prior to the government 's acquisition of the property . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Falkner Island Lighthouse was commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson in 1802 . It was constructed and completed by Abisha Woodward in 1802 . Woodward also built New London Harbor Light in 1801 and the Black Rock Harbor Light in 1808 . Falkner Island Lighthouse cost $ <unk> @.@ 62 to build , according to the United States government . The 46 ft ( 14 m ) octagonal tower was made of brownstone lined with brick , and it originally had a spiral wooden staircase that led outside to the lantern room . This staircase was an unusual and distinguishing characteristic of the Falkner Island Light . The original fixed light used twelve lamps and reflectors on two stacked tables . It was replaced in 1840 , at a cost of $ <unk> @.@ 00 , with a lantern that used nine lamps and sixteen @-@ inch reflectors . A 33 ft ( 10 m ) cast iron spiral staircase was installed in a major renovation in 1871 . 
 Originally , the keeper 's house had eight rooms , but it deteriorated and was rebuilt in 1858 . When rebuilt it was one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stories high and had three bedrooms , a kitchen , dining and sitting rooms . Construction quality was poor , allowing snow to enter the house during the winter through gaps in the walls and roof . In 1871 , it was rebuilt by the United States Coast Guard as a three @-@ story house , which remained until it was destroyed by fire on March 15 , 1976 . The fire also scorched the adjacent lighthouse . In the Spring 2002 edition of The Octagon , the keeper 's house was said to be a two @-@ story house with eleven rooms . 
 = = Service = = 
 During the War of 1812 , the British forces landed on the island and told the keeper 's wife , Thankful Stone , that they had nothing to fear as long as they kept the light burning . Later , the keeper , Solomon Stone , had to put the light out per order of the New London customs inspector . The British threatened to blow up the lighthouse , and Stone got an order to relight the lighthouse . In 1856 , the light was upgraded from the twelve lamps to a fourth @-@ order Fresnel lens . The light 's new characteristic was a fixed light with a flash every two seconds . Around 1976 , a GE 1000 @-@ watt bulb was used . When the lighthouse was repaired after the fire and automated in 1978 , a modern optic replaced the Fresnel lens . The lighthouse currently uses a VRB @-@ 25 lens . The lighthouse switched to solar power in 1988 . The light 's characteristic is a flash of white light every ten seconds . It continues to operate as a navigational aid to the nearby Intracoastal Waterway . 
 Falkner Island Light was chosen for fog @-@ signal experiments in 1865 and in 1902 . In 1865 , Joseph Henry of the Smithsonian Institution , the Chairman of the Lighthouse Board , set up bells and whistles and tested the distances they could be heard . In 1879 , a steam fog whistle was installed at the cost of $ 5000 . In 1902 , a air siren was installed and powered by two 16 ½ horsepower engines and used in an experiment in sound penetration . In 1934 , a Leslie @-@ <unk> trumpet was installed . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 After the fire in 1976 , vandals caused additional damage that resulted in the windows being bricked up and a steel door installed . Restoration and preservation of the light is done through the volunteer " Faulkner 's Light Brigade " , which formed in 1991 . In 1997 , Walter <unk> was selected by a Lighthouse Restoration Committee to perform the restoration of the lighthouse . Completed in 1999 , the restorations included painting the interior and exterior , replacing the door and a new entry deck made of Pau Lope wood . 
 The lighthouse has been threatened by erosion for decades . In the 1930s , as a response to the erosion , a breakwater was constructed to protect the boat landing area . In 1996 , the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation and the National Trust for Historic Preservation assisted the task of obtaining funding for a $ 4 @.@ 5 million erosion @-@ control project . The funds were approved in 1998 with the help of Connecticut Senators , Joseph Lieberman and Christopher Dodd and New Haven 's Congressional Representative Rosa DeLauro . In 2001 , the construction of a stone wall and creation of a buffer zone was completed . The second phase of the project calls for protective revetment on the south side of the island . 
 The 33 @-@ foot cast iron spiral staircase from 1871 was repaired and restored for the cost of $ 15 @,@ 724 . The work was done by Conservation Services and they uncovered and preserved the numbering of the stairs . In October 2010 , a major restoration project repainted the tower and lantern , installed ventilated steel doors , restored the original weathervane and repaired the 12 @-@ pane casement window on the west wall of the lighthouse . The work was completed in March 2011 after it was suspended due to poor weather in December 2010 ; the total cost was $ 121 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Importance = = 
 Falkner Island Light is the second oldest extant lighthouse in Connecticut and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on May 29 , 1990 . The Town of Guilford proclaimed that September 7 , 2002 , would be " Faulkner 's Island Light Day " to honor the 200th birthday of the lighthouse . Falkner Island Light is home to one of the world 's largest breeding colonies of the endangered roseate tern ; the nesting season is May through August . Access to Falkner Island and the light is restricted during the nesting season of the roseate terns . 
 = New York State Route 64 = 
 New York State Route 64 ( NY 64 ) is a north – south state highway in the Finger Lakes region of New York in the United States . Its southern terminus is at an intersection with NY 21 in the hamlet of Bristol Springs within the town of South Bristol , Ontario County . The northern terminus is at a junction with NY 96 and NY 252 in the village of Pittsford , Monroe County . NY 64 is a mostly two @-@ lane highway that primarily serves as a connector between the southeastern suburbs of the city of Rochester and the Canandaigua Lake area , home to Bristol Mountain Ski Resort . Near the midpoint of the route , NY 64 has an overlap with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) and NY 5 that takes the route through the village of Bloomfield . 
 The majority of what is now NY 64 was originally designated as part of Route 14 , an unsigned legislative route , by the New York State Legislature in 1908 . In the vicinity of Bloomfield , however , Route 14 initially followed what later became NY 20C in order to access Holcomb . The alignment of Route 14 through Bloomfield was modified in 1921 to use modern NY 64 instead . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the portion of Route 14 between Mendon and Pittsford became part of NY 15 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 15 was realigned to follow a new routing to the east while the Mendon – Pittsford segment of its former routing became the basis for NY 64 , a new route that extended southward over the post @-@ 1921 routing of legislative Route 14 to South Bristol . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 64 begins at an intersection with NY 21 on a ridge overlooking Canandaigua Lake in Bristol Springs , a hamlet of South Bristol . The route heads to the northwest as a two @-@ lane highway , running in the base of the Bristol Valley , a lowland created by a pair of imposing mountain ranges to the east and west that is home to the Bristol Mountain Ski Resort . At the hamlet of Bristol Center ( in the town of Bristol ) , roughly 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) from Bristol Springs , the western mountains give way to flat farmland while the eastern range continues on , although to a lesser extent and a lower elevation than before . The elevation of NY 64 remains virtually unchanged , however , as it progresses northward . 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from Bristol Center , the route meets US 20A . 
 US 20A joins NY 64 here , following the latter for about 4 miles ( 6 km ) , allowing US 20A to terminate at its parent , US 20 , here concurrent with NY 5 , at an intersection in East Bloomfield . At this point , NY 64 turns west onto US 20 and NY 5 . The three routes head westward across mostly open fields , meeting the southern terminus of NY 444 south of the former village of Holcomb . Past the junction , which once served as the eastern terminus of NY 20C , US 20 , NY 5 , and NY 64 continue into the village of Bloomfield before NY 64 breaks from NY 5 and US 20 and turns northward toward Rochester once again . 
 A mere 50 yards ( 46 m ) north of US 20 and NY 5 , NY 64 meets the west end of Bloomfield 's West Main Street at a rural intersection that was the western terminus of NY 20C . North of West Main Street , the highway curves to the northwest as it exits East Bloomfield and enters the adjacent town of West Bloomfield . In the northeast corner of the town , NY 64 passes through the hamlet of Ionia . Northwest of the community , the route breaks to the north , taking a due north alignment as it passes into Monroe County and becomes Mendon – Ionia Road . The road stays on a relatively straight path northward as it heads through the rural southern portion of the town of Mendon to the hamlet of Mendon , where NY 64 meets NY 251 in the center of the community . 
 On the opposite side of NY 251 , NY 64 becomes Pittsford – Mendon Road . Outside of the hamlet , the highway maintains a consistent northerly alignment as it runs through slightly more populated areas of the town of Mendon and passes over the New York State Thruway ( Interstate 90 or I @-@ 90 ) . The route enters the town of Pittsford a short distance north of the Thruway , at which time NY 64 becomes Mendon Road . Within Pittsford , NY 64 passes through increasingly more populated areas as it approaches the village of Pittsford . Directly south of the village , the highway enters an intersection with South Main Street , Stone Road and Mendon Center Road at a sharp angle . NY 253 once entered this junction on Mendon Center Road and followed NY 64 into Pittsford ; however , today , NY 64 continues alone onto South Main Street . The route ends just under 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) later at the junction of South Main Street and Jefferson Road , where it meets NY 96 and NY 252 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 14 , an unsigned legislative route that extended from Corning to Rochester via South Bristol and Pittsford . The majority of Route 14 south of Pittsford was routed on what is now NY 64 ; however , in the vicinity of Bloomfield , Route 14 broke from modern NY 64 and used what later became NY 20C to access Holcomb . At the same time , the portion of current NY 64 that overlaps with US 20 and NY 5 was included in Route 6 , a cross @-@ state highway connecting Albany to Buffalo . On March 1 , 1921 , Route 14 was altered to bypass Holcomb to the south on what is now NY 64 . 
 When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the portion of legislative Route 14 between Mendon and Pittsford became part of NY 15 , a route that mostly followed the current alignment of NY 96 from Owego to Rochester . Between Victor and Pittsford , however , NY 15 strayed from the modern routing of NY 96 and followed what is now NY 251 to Mendon . At the same time , the segment of legislative Route 6 in East Bloomfield became part of both NY 5 and NY 5A . The NY 5A designation was replaced along this stretch with NY 7 by 1926 , which in turn was replaced by US 20 in 1927 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 15 was realigned to bypass Mendon to the northeast by way of the current alignment of NY 96 between Victor and Pittsford . The former alignment of NY 15 from Pittsford to Mendon became part of NY 64 , a new route that extended south to South Bristol over the post @-@ 1921 routing of legislative Route 14 . The 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) portion of NY 64 between Vincent and South Bloomfield became part of US 20A c . 1939 , allowing the route to reconnect to US 20 at South Bloomfield . 
 NY 64 briefly extended north of the village of Pittsford during the 1950s and 1960s . In the mid @-@ 1950s , NY 96 was realigned onto the new Eastern Expressway from Bushnell 's Basin to NY 31F near East Rochester . From there , NY 96 followed modern NY 31F west to East Avenue , where it rejoined its original alignment . The portion of NY 96 's original surface routing between the village of Pittsford and what is now NY 31F became part of an extended NY 64 . A northwest extension of the freeway to what is now the Can of Worms was completed c . 1957 as a realignment of NY 96 , resulting in another extension of NY 64 along East Avenue to the eastern edge of Rochester . NY 64 and NY 96 were restored to their pre @-@ 1950s alignments c . 1961 when the Eastern Expressway was designated as I @-@ 490 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Rock N Roll McDonald 's = 
 The Rock N Roll McDonald 's ( formerly The Original Rock ' N Roll McDonald 's ) is a flagship McDonald 's restaurant located in Chicago , Illinois . It is one of the most famous McDonald 's locations in the world and was once the busiest in the United States . The restaurant / museum , located in the River North section of the Near North Side community area ( neighborhood ) of Chicago , a few city blocks west of the Magnificent Mile , has been a tourist attraction since it opened in 1983 . Its present building opened in 2005 . The restaurant has a maximum occupancy of 300 , which is about three times the standard patron seating capacity . The site has a rock and roll exhibit in a building adjacent to the restaurant and a small upstairs McDonald 's museum display . The building features the first two @-@ lane McDonald 's drive @-@ through , relatively luxurious decor , a café , flat screen televisions and a green roof . 
 = = Restaurant = = 
 The franchise has had a restaurant at the 600 N. Clark Street address since 1983 , but the new building was redeveloped and reopened on April 15 , 2005 as a bilevel flagship restaurant / museum with a two lane drive through . This is the first McDonald 's location with a two @-@ lane drive @-@ through . The reopening coincided with the 50th anniversary of the Des Plaines , Illinois restaurant which was opened by Ray Kroc on April 15 , 1955 . Rock N Roll McDonald 's is the location where the corporation kicked off its celebration of the 50th anniversary of the franchise . Among the celebrities in attendance were Colin Powell and Elton John . At the time of the 2004 demolition , the location was the 3rd busiest in the United States and 12th in the world . In the early 90s , it had been the busiest in the United States . It was expected to increase its sales revenue rankings from 3rd in the United States and 12th in the world with the renovation and redevelopment . 
 The restaurant is priced higher than other Chicago @-@ area McDonald 's , in order to subsidize the interior decor which includes numerous plasma display flat screen televisions and expensive Italian lighting . Its second floor includes a coffee bar serving lattes , gelato and <unk> and lounges that pay homage via museum display , music , and decor to every decade the chain has been in business . The 2nd floor McCafe is designed to compete with Starbucks by serving cappuccino , espresso , gelato and Italian pastries . The building features a pair of 60 foot arches and two stories worth of windows that weigh 800 pounds apiece . It has 10 cash register stations to complement its 300 patron capacity , which is about 3 times the normal McDonald 's capacity . The restaurant has three front walls of glass . 
 Franchisee Marilyn Wright and her husband Ralph Wright have operated 10 McDonald 's locations for the past 12 years . In addition to a perimeter of trees , the building has two green roof gardens on two levels . The lower one is visible from inside . However , the upper roof is only visible from surrounding high @-@ rise buildings . Neither accommodates customer access . The trash cans in this tourist mecca say thank you in ten languages . The restaurant has separate preparation lines for white meat and red meat in the giant kitchen . The demolished building faced Ohio Street , but the new building is rotated 180 degrees to face the Ontario Street tourist pedestrian strip . 
 The restaurant was sung about by the cult Chicago musician Wesley Willis in a song entitled " Rock N Roll McDonald 's " . The song was featured in the movie Super Size Me . 
 = = = Museum = = = 
 The south ( rear ) half of the upstairs portion has a series of displays of early McDonald 's photos , multimedia , and paraphernalia including the fast food giant 's striped polyester uniforms from the 60 's . Much of it is arranged by decade going back to the mid @-@ 1950s when McDonald 's first opened and is accompanied by pop culture artifacts such as pet rocks , early cell phones , and 8 @-@ track tape players . Downstairs there is a section on the first floor entitled " Chicago Firsts , " featuring events and organizations that originated in Chicago . 
 = = Neighborhood = = 
 The restaurant / museum , its rock and roll exhibit and its parking lot occupy the entire block bounded by West Ontario Street to the north , West Ohio Street to the south , North LaSalle Street to the west and North Clark Street to the east in the River North neighborhood of the Near North Side community area . The building is situated near several other theme restaurants . It is across the street ( Clark Street ) from the Hard Rock Cafe and the Rainforest Cafe . 
 = = Rock and roll exhibit = = 
 There is display of rock and roll memorabilia focusing mainly on Elvis Presley in an exhibit in a separate structure on the same lot . The exhibit includes a set of The Beatles statues reminiscent of their Abbey Road album cover . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Adlertag = 
 Adlertag ( " Eagle Day " ) was the first day of Unternehmen Adlerangriff ( " Operation Eagle Attack " ) , which was the codename of a military operation by Nazi Germany 's Luftwaffe ( German air force ) to destroy the British Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . By June 1940 , the Allies had been defeated in Western Europe and Scandinavia . Rather than come to terms with Germany , Britain rejected all overtures for a negotiated peace . 
 During the Battle of Britain , Hitler gave the German armed forces ( Wehrmacht ) a directive ( Directive No. 16 ) that ordered provisional preparations for invasion of Britain . This operation was codenamed Operation Sea Lion ( Unternehmen Seelöwe ) . Before this could be carried out , air superiority or air supremacy was required . The Luftwaffe was to destroy the RAF in order to prevent it from attacking the invasion fleet or providing protection for the Royal Navy 's Home Fleet which might attempt to prevent a landing by sea . On 1 August Hitler gave the Luftwaffe 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Reichsmarschall ( Empire Marshal ) Hermann Göring and the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe ( High Command of the Air Force ) a ( Directive No. 17 ) to launch the air assault . 
 The essential target was RAF Fighter Command . The service 's destruction would deny the British their air superiority asset . Throughout July and early August , the Germans made preparations for Adlertag . The date of the assault was postponed several times because of bad weather . Eventually , it was carried out on 13 August 1940 . The German attacks on 13 August inflicted significant damage and casualties on the ground , but , marred by poor intelligence and communication , they did not make a significant impression on Fighter Command 's ability to defend British air space . 
 Göring had promised Hitler that Adlertag and Adlerangriff would achieve the results required within days , or at worst weeks . It had meant to be the beginning of the end of RAF Fighter Command , but Adlertag and the following operations failed to destroy the RAF , or gain the necessary local air superiority . As a result , Operation Sea Lion was postponed indefinitely . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Strategic overview = = = 
 After the declaration of war on Nazi Germany by Britain and France in the aftermath of the German invasion of Poland , nine months of stalemate took place along the Western Front . After the Polish Campaign , in October 1939 , the planners of the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe ( Luftwaffe High Command ) and the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( Supreme Command of the Armed Forces ) turned their attentions to Western Europe . 
 The German offensive — named Unternehmen Gelb ( Operation Yellow ) , and also known as the Manstein Plan — began in the West on 10 May 1940 . The central campaign — the Battle of France — ended in Allied defeat and the destruction of the main French Army forces . The British Expeditionary Force escaped during the Battle of Dunkirk , but the Wehrmacht captured Paris on 14 June and overran ⅔ of France . The French surrendered on 25 June 1940 . 
 With Western Europe neutralised , the OKL and OKW turned their attention to Britain , which was now home to the Allied base of operations in Europe . Hitler hoped Britain would negotiate for an armistice , for which he was prepared to offer generous terms . The tentative offers made by Hitler were rejected by the Churchill coalition government . Hitler now ordered the Luftwaffe and Kriegsmarine to prepare for an amphibious assault of Britain , codenamed Operation Sealion . The Luftwaffe was to eliminate enemy air power and the Kriegsmarine was ordered to make all the necessary preparations for transporting the Heer ( Army ) across the English Channel . The Luftwaffe 's task came first . Once the RAF had been rendered impotent , Göring and Hitler hoped that an invasion would be unnecessary . If this proved not to be the case , the Luftwaffe would then support the army and prevent the Royal Navy interdicting German sea traffic . Göring named the offensive against the RAF as Operation Eagle Attack ( Adlerangriff ) . 
 = = = Background : early battles = = = 
 The losses of the spring campaign had weakened the Luftwaffe before the Battle of Britain . The service was forced to wait until it had reached acceptable levels before a main assault against the RAF could be made . Therefore , the first phase of the German air offensive took place over the English Channel . It rarely involved attacks against RAF airfields inland , but encouraged RAF units to engage in battle by attacking British Channel convoys . These operations would last from 10 July @-@ 8 August 1940 . The attacks against shipping were not successful ; only 24 @,@ 500 long tons ( 24 @,@ 900 t ) was sunk . Mine laying from aircraft had proved more profitable , sinking 38 @,@ 000 long tons ( 39 @,@ 000 t ) . The impact on Fighter Command was minimal . It had lost 74 fighter pilots killed or missing and 48 wounded in July , and its strength rose to 1 @,@ 429 by 3 August . By that date , it was only short of 124 pilots . 
 In the second phase of attacks , shipping , coastal airfields , radar and stations south of London were attacked during 8 – 18 August . The Luftwaffe gradually increased the frequency of attacks . German bombers also raided targets as far north as Liverpool during night hours . The first major raid inland and against RAF airfields came on 12 August . RAF Hawkinge , Lympne , Manston and radar stations at Pevensey , Rye and Dover were to be destroyed . Portsmouth docks were also targeted . The results of the raids were mixed . The Radar station at Ventnor was badly damaged and others targeted were also damaged , but not destroyed . All were in working order by the following morning . The attacks against the harbour and RAF stations had failed to destroy them . All were not in fully working order by the end of the day , but were back in action the following morning . Unknown to German intelligence , Lympne itself was not even an operational station . This sort of intelligence blunder contributed to the failure of Adlertag . 
 The Germans had not achieved a degree of success commensurate with their exertions . Nevertheless , in the belief they were having considerable effect on Fighter Command , they prepared to launch their all @-@ out assault on the RAF the following day . By 12 August , German air strength had reached acceptable levels . After bringing its serviceable rates up , the Luftwaffe began Adlertag with 71 percent of its bomber force , 85 percent of its Bf 109 units , and 83 percent of its Bf 110 units operational . 
 = = Luftwaffe preparations = = 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 Faulty intelligence was the component that was mostly responsible for the failure of Adlertag . While the gap between the British and Germans was not yet wide in this regard , the British were starting to gain a decisive lead in intelligence . The breaking of the Enigma machine and poor Luftwaffe signals discipline allowed the British easy access to German communications traffic . The impact of Ultra on the Battle of Britain is a matter of dispute , with Official Histories claiming there was no direct impact . Whatever the truth , Ultra , and the Y service in particular , gave the British an increasingly accurate picture of German order of battle deployments . 
 Joseph " <unk> " Schmid was commander of the Luftwaffe 's Military Intelligence Branch ( Abteilung 5 as Chief IC ) . Throughout this time , Schmid 's reports made a series of errors . In July 1940 , Schmid grossly overestimated the strengths of the Luftwaffe and underestimated the RAF . The most serious mistakes were made concerning radar , airfield identification , and production sites . Schmid asserted that the number of operational airfields in southern England were severely limited ; estimated that the British could produce only 180 – 330 fighters per month ( the true figure was 496 ) and that figure would decrease , indicating that the RAF could not sustain a long battle of attrition . Schmid also claimed the command at all levels was rigid and inflexible , with fighters being tied to home bases . In his list of omissions , Schmid failed to mention the RAF maintenance and organisation operations , which put back damaged aircraft with rapid effect . He anticipated a short battle . Crucially , Schmid failed to mention radar at all . 
 The lack of sustained and concentrated attacks on radar left it free to help direct the deployment of RAF units at opportune moments . Its continued warnings of incoming raids were a crucial benefit to Fighter Command . The Luftwaffe also had poor intelligence on the type of RAF airfields . It made repeated errors , often <unk> airfields as Fighter Command bases , which turned out to belong to RAF Coastal Command and RAF Bomber Command . On Adlertag , most of the targets on the Luftwaffe 's list — if destroyed — would not have impaired Fighter Command in the slightest . 
 = = = Targets and order of battle = = = 
 The following targets were chosen for attack on 13 August 1940 : 
 = = RAF preparations = = 
 = = = Detection = = = 
 The keystone of the British defence was the complex infrastructure of detection , command , and control that ran the battle . This was the " Dowding System " , after its chief architect , Air Chief Marshal Sir <unk> " Stuffy " Dowding , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of RAF Fighter Command . Dowding modernised a system created up from 1917 by Major General E B Ashmore . The core of Dowding 's system was implemented by Dowding himself : the use of Radio Direction Finding ( RDF or radar ) was at his behest , and its use , supplemented by information by the Royal Observer Corps ( ROC ) , was crucial to the RAF 's ability to efficiently intercept incoming enemy aircraft . The technology was named RDF with misleading intent - the vague description would disguise the full nature of the system to the enemy if its existence ever became known . 
 The first indications of incoming air raids were received by the Chain Home Radio Direction Finding ( RDF ) facilities , which were located along the coastlines of Britain . In most circumstances , RDF could pick up formations of Luftwaffe aircraft as they organised over their own airfields in northern France and Belgium . Once the raiding aircraft moved inland , the formations were also plotted by the ROC . The information from RDF and the Observer Corps were sent through to the main operations room of Fighter Command Headquarters at RAF Bentley Priory . The plots were assessed to determine whether they were " hostile " or " friendly " . If hostile , the information was sent to the main " operations room " , which was in a large underground bunker . 
 = = = Plotting raids = = = 
 Here , the course information of each raid was plotted by Women 's Auxiliary Air Force ( WAAF ) , who received information by telephone . Additional intelligence was provided by the Y Service radio posts , which monitored enemy radio communications , and the Ultra decoding centre based at Bletchley Park , which gave the RAF intelligence on the German order of battle . Colour @-@ coded counters representing each raid were placed on a large table , which had a map of Britain overlaid and squared off with a British Modified Grid . As the plots of the raiding aircraft moved , the counters were pushed across the map by magnetic " rakes " . This system enabled the main " Fighter Controller " and Dowding to see where each formation was heading , at what height , and in what strength . This allowed an estimate to be made of possible targets . The age of the information was denoted from the colour of the counter . The simplicity of the system meant that decisions could be made quickly . 
 = = = Communication and interception = = = 
 This information was simultaneously sent to the headquarters of each Group where it was cross @-@ checked through a filter room before being sent through to another operations room , housed in an underground bunker . Because Group had tactical control of the battle , the operations room was different in layout from the main Headquarters at Bentley Priory . The main map on the plotting table represented the Group command area and its associated airfields . Extensive radio and telephone equipment transmitted and received a constant flow of information from the various sector airfields as well as the Observer Corps , AA Command and the navy . The " Duty fighter controller " was the Group GOC 's personal representative and was tasked with controlling how and when each raid would be intercepted . If the telephone system failed engineers would be on site within minutes to repair the broken links . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = KG 2 raid = = = 
 On the morning of 13 August , the weather was bad and Göring ordered a postponement of raids . However , the Dornier Do 17s of KG 2 were not informed and took off at 04 : 50 for their target . They were to meet with their escorts from ZG 26 over the Channel . ZG 26 received the cancellation order , but II . , and III . / KG 2 did <unk> kg 2 had formed up by 05 : 10 , led by Geschwaderkommodore Johannes Fink . Part of the ZG 26 formation that had taken off — led by Oberstleutnant Joachim Huth — tried to warn the Dorniers of the cancellation . Unable to contact the bombers by radio , Huth tried to signal them by flying in front of them and performing aerobatics . Fink ignored him and flew <unk> kg 2 flew around the coast to his target , Eastchurch airfield on the Isle of Sheppey . Albert Kesselring had issued orders for bombers to abandon missions if their escorts did not show up , but Fink did not want to be accused on failing to obey orders and continued onward even though the Bf 110s turned back . The return leg would take KG 2 across No. 11 Group 's territory , which could have been disastrous without fighter escort . But owing to the Observer Corps misjudging the direction of the bombers , owing to low @-@ lying cloud , and the radar not picking up the direction of the German bombers , the WAAF plotted the course of the raid incorrectly and the RAF failed to prevent the target being attacked . 
 For an hour after dawn on 13 August , there were few German tracks upon the plot tables in operations rooms , and none at all in the central and eastern Channel . The first signs of concentration , however , came earlier than usual , for between 05 : 30 and 05 : 40 two formations of 30 or more aircraft were located in the Amiens area . For 30 minutes , they remained over land , but at 06 : 10 they began moving inland . The Observer Corps and radar tracked them and guided the RAF units to intercept . Unaware of the German intent , the controllers directed three full Squadrons and detachments of three others were alerted by 06 : 15 . No. 151 was protecting a convoy in the Thames , No. 111 was protecting RAF Hawkinge and No. 74 Squadron RAF was covering RAF Manston . Parts of No. 85 , No. 43 and No. 238 Squadron RAF were also airborne near London . By 06 : 25 , the German formations were well over the Channel . No. 238 was moved to cover their own base at RAF Warmwell . No. 257 Squadron RAF was also ordered to take off at 06 : 20 to patrol Canterbury . Not satisfied with the strength of the forces already airborne , controllers dispatched No. 601 , 213 , 64 and 87 Squadrons to intercept between 06 : 30 and 06 : 35 . The first combats began at 06 : 30 . 
 Owing to the mistake by the Observer Corps , and the Geschwader being missed approaching the eastern , instead of central Channel by radar , KG 2 hit the RAF <unk> kg 2 claimed 10 Spitfires destroyed on the ground . In fact , no Fighter Command fighters were lost . For some time afterward , this wrong claim convinced German intelligence that Eastchurch was a fighter station and the Luftwaffe would launch seven fruitless raids on it in the coming weeks . Added to this mistake was the failure to keep up pressure . Raids were spaced out , giving the field time to recover . The station was used by RAF Coastal Command , which lost five Bristol Blenheims in the attack and one Coastal Command Spitfire . However , severe damage was done to the infrastructure . Much equipment and ammunition was destroyed and 16 of the Command 's personnel were killed . RAF Eastchurch was back in operation by 16 : 00 . 
 Eventually the bombers were <unk> kg 2 lost five Do 17s in the attempt . Six Dorniers were also badly damaged . In return , accurate fire from the Dornier gunners shot down two Hurricanes from the attacking Squadrons ; No. 111 , No. 151 and No. 74 Squadron led by Adolph Malan . Malan himself shot down one Do 17 . Another source suggests the destruction of five Do 17s and another seven damaged . German manpower losses amounted to 11 killed in action and nine prisoners of war . 
 = = = Coastal airfields and ports = = = 
 Most units of Luftflotte 2 received the order to abandon morning operations , but some began their attacks aimed at airfields and ports in southern <unk> kg 76 abandoned its attack on Debden but struck at RAF Kenley and other airfields in Kent and Essex . Losses and results are unknown . KG 27 also abandoned most of its operations . III . / KG 27 did attempt to make it through to the Bristol docks , losing one He 111 to No. 87 Squadron RAF in the attempt . Little damage was done . 
 The cancellation order had not reached Luftflotte 3 HQ at all . Its commander , Hugo Sperrle ordered attacks to commence . At 05 : 00 , 20 Junkers Ju 88s of I. / KG 54 took off to bomb the Royal Aircraft Establishment 's airfield at ' RAF Farnborough ' ( RAE Farnborough ) . At 05 : 05 , 18 Ju 88s from II . / KG 54 took off for RAF Odiham . At 05 : 50 , 88 Junkers Ju 87s of StG 77 began heading for Portland Harbour . The raids were escorted by about 60 Bf 110s of Zerstörergeschwader 2 ( Destroyer Wing 2 ; ZG 2 ) , and V. / LG 1 and 173 Bf 109s from Jagdgeschwader 27 ( JG 27 ) , JG 53 and JG 3 , which all flew ahead of the bomber stream to clear the airspace of enemy fighters . StG 77 's target was obscured by cloud , but KG 54 continued to their target . RAF fighters from RAF Northolt , RAF Tangmere and RAF Middle Wallop intercepted . Four Ju 88s and one Bf 109 from JG 2 was shot down . The German fighters claimed six RAF fighters and the bombers another 14 . In reality , the bombers only damaged five . The Bf 109s destroyed only one and damaged another . Of the five RAF fighters damaged by the bombers , two were write @-@ offs . Of the 20 claimed , just three fighters were lost and three pilots were wounded . None were killed . 
 Further missions by II . / KG 54 to RAF Croydon were cancelled . I. / KG 54 struck at the Fleet Air Arm ( FAA ) base at Gosport . ZG 2 was supposed to provide escort during one these attacks , and in a breakdown of communications , arrived over the target without their Ju 88s , which had been ordered to stand down . One Bf 110 was shot down by No. 238 Squadron RAF . 
 At 11 : 10 , V. / LG 1 Bf 110s took off in advance of a raid by KG 54 , possibly to tempt RAF fighters into battle before the main assault , so the RAF would be out of position . The bomber 's mission was cancelled . The order did not reach V. / LG 1 who continued to their target area . The 23 Bf 110s continued to the target of Portland . They ran into No. 601 Squadron RAF Hurricanes and lost six Bf 110s destroyed and three damaged . Only one Hurricane was shot down and another damaged . A second source states only four Bf 110s were destroyed , whilst a third gives the loss of five destroyed and five damaged . The Zerstörergeschwader optimistically claimed 30 RAF fighters destroyed ( in reality RAF fighter losses in aerial combat amounted to 13 throughout the entire day ) , for a loss of 13 Bf 110s . The morning 's effort had been a fiasco . The attacks showed a serious German technical failure in air @-@ to @-@ air communication . 
 = = = Renewed attacks = = = 
 The official go @-@ ahead was given at 14 : 00 . At 15 : 30 , some 58 – 80 Ju 88s from I. , II . , and III . / LG 1 , escorted by 30 Bf 110s of V. / LG 1 , took off to bomb Boscombe Down and Worthy Down . RAF Andover was to be bombed as well , with the support of 52 Ju 87s from StG 1 and StG 2 who were to strike at RAF Warmwell and Yeovil . I. / JG 53 flew a fighter sweep ahead of the bombers from Poole to Lyme Regis in order to tempt the RAF into battle . I. / JG 53 made landfall at 16 : 00 . The sweep failed to attract and divert RAF squadrons . Instead , all it succeeded in doing was to alert the RAF defences a critical five minutes earlier . When the main wave of LG 1 and StG 2 arrived over the coast , they were greeted by 77 RAF fighters . 
 II . , and III . / JG 53 and III . / ZG 76 flew escort for the Ju 87s . ZG 2 and JG 27 flew escort for LG 1 . In response the whole of No. 10 Group RAF intercepted . One Staffel ( Squadron ) of II . / StG 2 was badly hit by No. 609 Squadron RAF ; six out of nine Ju 87s were shot down . StG 1 and 2 gave up on their original targets owing to cloud . Both headed for Portland . 
 I. / LG 1 abandoned Boscombe Down and bombed Southampton instead . No. 238 Squadron had been detailed to intercept , but the fighter escort was too strong and the bombers were not diverted from their course . Several warehouses were destroyed and a cold storage plant was also knocked out . All fires were under control by dusk . One III . / LG 1 dropped its bombs by RAF Middle Wallop Sector Station by mistake . Only Andover airfield was hit , and it was used for bomber operations , not fighters . III . / LG 1 lost two Ju 88s . The 13 Ju 88 Gruppen ( Groups ) had lost six destroyed and many damaged . They had escaped lightly . The bombing succeeded in destroying a bicycle factory , a furniture warehouse and a refrigerated meat depot . Luftwaffe intelligence had not identified the Southampton Spitfire factory — on the water front near the docks — as an important target . Poor intelligence suggested it was a bomber factory . Only later , in September , was it attacked and severely damaged . However , even then the Germans were unaware of the damage inflicted to Spitfire production . The factory would later be broken up and production dispersed . 
 = = = Ju 87 operations = = = 
 StG 77 was also in action , escorted by JG 27 Bf 109s . StG <unk> 52 Ju 87s were joined by 40 Ju 88s of KG 54 . Both formations were heading for No. 10 Group RAF 's airfields . StG 77 was targeting RAF Warmwell . The Geschwader failed to find its target , dropping its bombs at random . The other Ju 87 units had attracted much attention and StG 77 escaped unnoticed . 
 Erprobungsgruppe 210 were sent further east for an operation to attack targets near Southend . They took off at 15 : 15 and were escorted by ZG 76 . Unfortunately , they found unbroken cloud over Essex . No. 56 Squadron RAF intercepted , but Erprobungsgruppe 210 dropped their bombs over Canterbury . II . / StG 1 was sent to bomb airfields near Rochester . It failed to find the target and returned without incident . IV . / LG 1 — also with Ju 87s — was sent after RAF Detling . JG 26 went out on a fighter sweep to clear the skies in advance of the attack . JG 26 lost one Bf 109 over Folkestone from an unknown cause . The Ju 87s bombed the station and 40 Bf 109s strafed it , killing the commander . The operations block was hit , causing high casualties . The losses were disastrous for No. 53 Squadron RAF , which lost a number of Blenheims on the ground . The commander killed was Group Captain E P <unk> @-@ Davis . One Squadron Leader was killed — a <unk> Lowe — and a further two were wounded . One of the wounded men was a First World War ace Robert J. O. <unk> . The station 's casualties amounted to 24 killed and 42 wounded . However , Detling was not an RAF Fighter Command station and the attack did not affect No. 11 Group RAF in any way . 
 = = = South East raids = = = 
 I. , II . , and III . / KG 55 were also in action . III . / KG 55 bombed Heathrow Airport . Results are unknown and losses are <unk> kg 55 suffered heavy losses the previous day , so its operations seemed limited . On 12 August it lost 13 Heinkel He 111s and their crews . The next day , 14 August , they would lose their Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) Alois Stoeckl . 
 In the afternoon , a force of 80 Do 17s of KG 3 — escorted by JG 51 , JG 52 , JG 54 and 60 Bf 109s from JG 26 ( some 270 aircraft in all ) — headed for Eastchurch airfield and the Short Brothers factory at Rochester . III . / KG 3 broke away from the main formation and attacked Eastchurch while II . / KG 3 headed for Rochester . Significant damage was done to the factory producing the Short Stirling heavy bomber . The RAF 's No. 3 , No. 64 , No. 111 , No. 151 , No. 234 , No. 249 , No. 601 and No. 609 Squadrons intercepted . According to the account of JG 26 , the British fighters made little impression on the bombers . Three JG 51 Bf 109s were shot down in skirmishes with RAF fighters . 
 RAF Bomber Command also took part in the day 's fighting . Although Charles Portal — AOC ( Air Officer Commanding ) — had protested against the pointlessness of attacking airfields in Scandinavia , the Air Ministry insisted on such raids . No. 82 Squadron RAF sent 12 Bristol Blenheims to bomb KG 30 airfields at Aalborg , Denmark . One pilot turned back complaining of " fuel problems " and was court @-@ martialled . That bomber was the only one to return . The rest fell to AAA fire and fighters . Some 24 airmen were killed and nine were captured . 
 = = = Night raids = = = 
 As darkness fell at the close of Adlertag , Sperrle sent nine Kampfgruppe 100 ( Bombing Group 100 ) He 111s to conduct a strategic bombing raid against the Supermarine Spitfire factory at Castle Bromwich , Birmingham . Despite the group being a specialist night strike unit which had high expertise in night navigation , only four of the crews found their targets . The eleven 551 lb ( 250 kg ) bombs dropped were not sufficient to disrupt fighter production . Around five of the 11 fell inside the compound . Casualties were small as workers had gone to shelter . Serious damage was done only to offices and a tool room , while a gas main was fractured . Another group , led by Gruppenkommandeur Hauptmann ( Captain ) Friedrich <unk> , dispatched 15 He 111s from bases in Brittany across the Irish Sea to strike at the Short Brothers factory at Queen 's Island , Belfast Northern Ireland . Five Short Stirling aircraft were <unk> kg 27 also took part in the missions , and bombed Glasgow during the night although their specific target is unclear . Other bombers , commencing the night stage of Adlertag , resolutely flew the length and breadth of Great Britain , bombing Bristol , Cardiff , Swansea , Liverpool , Sheffield , Norwich , Edinburgh and Aberdeen . Very little damage was done , though some rail tracks were cut temporarily and around 100 casualties were suffered . It is unknown if any German aircraft were lost . One German airman was found wandering around the countryside in Balcombe , Somerset . No other traces of the aircraft or other crew members were found . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Effect of raids = = = 
 The Germans had maintained the attacks on airfields in south @-@ western England which they had started the previous day . On 12 August , most of the Kentish airfields had been attacked ; and on 13 August , the Germans concentrated on the second line airfields south of London . The concentration on Detling and Eastchurch was a failure , as both were Coastal Command stations and bore no relation to Fighter Command . The Germans may have reasoned that if bases such as Manston , Hawkinge and Lympne were neutralised through the attacks on 12 August , then Fighter Command may have had to move onto these airfields . In fact , the bombing of 12 August had failed to knock out these strips , and Adlertag had failed to destroy or render Detling or Eastchurch <unk> . Owing to poor intelligence , weather conditions , and RAF resistance , attacks on other targets had failed or been unsuccessful . 
 = = = Overclaiming = = = 
 Overclaiming in aerial warfare is not uncommon . During the Battle of Britain ( and , indeed , the rest of the Second World War ) , both sides claimed to have shot down and destroyed more enemy aircraft on the ground and in the air than they had in reality . RAF Fighter Command claimed 78 German aircraft shot down on 13 August 1940 . Another source states that official RAF claims amounted to 64 . Actual German losses amounted to 47 – 48 aircraft destroyed and 39 severely damaged . Conversely , the Luftwaffe claimed to have destroyed 70 Hawker Hurricanes and Spitfires in the air and a further 18 Blenheim bombers in the air alone . This was an exaggeration of 700 percent . Another 84 RAF fighters were claimed on the ground . Actual RAF losses in the air amounted to 13 fighters and 11 bombers , with 47 aircraft of various kinds on the ground . 
 = = = Battle of Britain = = = 
 The failure of Adlertag did not deter the Luftwaffe from continuing its campaign . The assault against RAF airfields continued throughout August and into September 1940 . The battles involved large numbers of aircraft and heavy losses on both sides . The Luftwaffe failed to develop any focused strategy for defeating RAF Fighter Command . At first , it attempted to destroy RAF bases , then switched to strategic bombing by day and night . It tried to achieve the destruction of several British industries at the same time , switching from bombing aircraft factories , to attacking supporting industries , import or distribution networks such as coastal ports . An attempt was even made against unrelated targets , such as destroying the morale of the British population . 
 The failure of the Luftwaffe to identify the radar chain and distinguish RAF fighter bases from those of other RAF commands undermined its ability to destroy the British fighter defences . The Luftwaffe underestimated British radar , and they had not realised its importance in the British operational system . To the contrary , OKL believed that the radar stations would benefit the German effort by sending RAF forces into large @-@ scale air battles for the Luftwaffe to decimate . The RAF aircraft industry supported the losses and its pilots were replaced sufficiently to limit the RAF ’ s decline in strength and deny the Germans victory . Conversely , the RAF were able to ensure the serviceability rates and aircrew numbers of the Luftwaffe declined in August – September . 
 Having failed to defeat the RAF , the Luftwaffe adopted a different and clearer strategy of strategic bombing known as The Blitz . However , as with the campaign against the RAF , the types of targets differed radically and no sustained pressure was put under any one type of British target . Disputes among the OKL staff revolved more around tactics than strategy . This method condemned the offensive over Britain to failure before it had even begun . The end result of the air campaign against Britain in 1940 and 1941 was a decisive failure to end the war . As Hitler committed Germany to ever increasing military adventures , the Wehrmacht became increasingly overstretched and was unable to cope with a multi @-@ front war . By 1944 , the Allies were ready to launch Operation Overlord , the invasion of Western Europe . The Battle of Britain ensured that the Western Allies had a base from which to launch the campaign and that there would be a Western Allied presence on the battlefield to meet the Soviet Red Army in central Europe at the end of the war in May 1945 . 
 = Enugu = 
 Enugu ( / <unk> / ay @-@ NOO @-@ goo ; Igbo : <unk> ) is the capital of Enugu State in Nigeria . It is located in southeastern Nigeria . The city had a population of 722 @,@ 664 according to the disputed 2006 Nigerian census and nearly 2 million according to 2015 estimates . The name Enugu is derived from the two Igbo words <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> ́ meaning " hill top " denoting the city 's hilly geography . The city was named after Enugwu Ngwo , under which coal was found . 
 Since the 17th century the location of present @-@ day Enugu has been inhabited by the Nike ( / <unk> / nee @-@ KAY ) subgroup of the Igbo people ; one of Enugu 's neighbourhoods still retains the village 's old name Ogui . In 1900 the Southern Nigeria Protectorate was established by the colonial administration of the British Empire . The discovery of coal by the colonialists led to the building of the Eastern Line railway to carry coal from the inland city to the port of Port Harcourt , a city created for this purpose located 151 miles ( 243 km ) south of what was called Enugu Coal Camp . Enugu was then renamed simply Enugu and developed as one of the few cities in West Africa created from European contact . By 1958 Enugu had over 8 @,@ 000 coal miners . As of 2005 there are no significant coal mining activities left in the city . 
 Enugu became the capital of the Eastern Region after Nigeria 's independence in 1960 ; a succession of territorial adjustments in 1967 , 1976 and 1991 led to Enugu becoming the capital of what is now Enugu State . On 30 May 1967 Enugu was declared the capital of the short @-@ lived Republic of Biafra ; for this Enugu is known as the " capital of Igboland . " After Enugu was captured by the Nigerian armed forces , the Biafran capital was moved to Umuahia . 
 Industries in the city include the urban market and bottling industries . Enugu has become a preferred filming location for directors of the Nigerian movie industry , dubbed " <unk> " . Enugu 's main airport is the Akanu Ibiam International Airport . The main educational establishment in the city is the Enugu campus of the University of Nigeria based in Nsukka , a town north of Enugu and in the same state . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The first settlement in the Enugu area was the small Nike village of Ogui , which was present since the era of the Atlantic Slave Trade . Nike in the Igbo language means " with strength or power . " It was through slave raiding that the Nike people acquired most of their lands , which were mostly unsettled . The Nike used slaves for a defence strategy , placing slave camps at the edge of their territories so that it was harder for an enemy to access the free born . The Nike people were allied to the Aro people who formed the Aro Confederacy ( 1690 — 1901 ) which was an Igbo organisation that controlled slave trading in the Enugu area . Along with the Aro people who came to trade from Arochukwu in the south were the Hausa people who came to trade from the north . The Hausa traders provided horses to the Nike which were used for rituals by the Igbo . Both the Aro and Hausa migrated back and forth to what is now the city of Enugu and were considered foreigners to the area . 
 = = = Industrialisation = = = 
 A British campaign to invade Arochukwu and open up the hinterland for British military and political rule was carried out in 1901 . A war between the British and Aro officially started on 1 December 1901 lasting till 24 March 1902 when the Aro were defeated . The Aro Confederacy ended and the rest of Aro dominated areas was added to The Colony and Protectorate of Southern Nigeria , declared in 1900 . Europeans first arrived in the Enugu area in 1903 when the British / Australian geologist Albert Ernest Kitson led an exploration of the Southern Nigeria Protectorate to search for especially valued mineral resources under the supervision of the Imperial Institute , London . By 1909 coal was found under the village of Enugwu Ngwo in the Udi and <unk> areas and by 1913 the coal was confirmed to be in quantities that would be viable commercially . By 1914 the colonial government had already merged the Northern and Southern Nigeria Protectorate to form the Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria . 
 In 1915 the British began talks with the indigenous people of the land that would become Enugu about its acquisition in order to lay the Eastern Line railway and to build a colliery . The first houses built in the area were in a temporary settlement consisting of Igbo traditional mud housing inhabited by a W.J. Leck and some other Europeans on Milliken Hill . Another settlement known as <unk> Alfred ( Igbo : Alfred 's Hill ) or " Alfred 's Camp " , inhabited by an Alfred <unk> ( a leader of indigenous labourers from Onitsha ) and his labourers , was located on a hillside . After the land acquisition by the British , Frederick Lugard , the Governor @-@ General of Nigeria at the time , named the colliery built at the bottom of the Udi Hills Enugu Coal Camp to distinguish it from Enugwu Ngwo which overlooks the city from atop a scarp on Enugu 's west . The first coal mine in the Enugu area was the Udi mine opened in 1915 which was shut down two years later and replaced with the Iva Valley mine . Enugu became a major coal mining area and the only significant one in West Africa . The Eastern Line railway connecting Enugu with Port Harcourt was completed in 1916 in order to export the coal through its seaport of which the city was created for this purpose . Enugu became one of the few cities in West Africa created out of contact with Europeans . By 1916 parts of Enugu reserved for Europeans were set up by the colonial government . The area now known as the Government Reserved Area ( GRA ) became the European Quarters located north of the Ogbete River ; alongside this was a section developed for African residents located south of the river . The built @-@ up area of Enugu comprised these two areas , and by 1917 the city officially gained township status . On the African side of the city a rapid influx of migrant workers sparked the development of squatter camps on the Udi Hills near the coal mines and the Iva Valley . 
 In 1938 Enugu became the administrative capital of the Eastern Region . The number of employed coal miners in Enugu grew from 6 @,@ 000 ( of mostly Udi men ) in 1948 to 8 @,@ 000 in 1958 . Enugu 's population rose sharply with its industrialisation ; the population of the city reached 62 @,@ 000 in 1952 . Mining in Enugu was sometimes turbulent , as demonstrated by the events of 18 November 1949 when 21 striking miners were shot and killed and 51 wounded by police under British governance . The massacre that came to be known as " The Iva Valley Shooting " fuelled nationalist or " <unk> " sentiments among most Nigerians , and especially amongst Eastern Nigerians . " <unk> " was a post World War II movement that was created out of admiration for Nnamdi Azikiwe who was a prominent nationalist of the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons ( <unk> ) . The shooting was right after a period of unrest when miners were angered by the belief that their full pay was being held back by the colliery management , a belief that was pushed by the nationalist press . Many of the <unk> tried to use the Iva Valley shooting to fuel their nationalistic agenda and push the British administration , who they viewed as imperialists , out of Nigeria . 
 = = = Independence , war , and after = = = 
 Enugu became a municipality in 1956 with <unk> <unk> its first mayor . After four years passed , Nigeria gained its independence in 1960 . On 27 May 1967 the Nigerian government divided the Western , Northern and Eastern Region into 12 states and Enugu was made the capital of the new East Central State . On 30 May 1967 Enugu was declared the capital of the short @-@ lived Republic of Biafra , the latter created out of the eastern Nigerian states of East Central , Cross River and Rivers . Biafra was declared because of Eastern Nigerian sentiment to separate from Nigeria after their members were involved in a series of ethnic clashes with other ethnic groups in other parts of the country . The main rivals of the mostly Igbo Eastern Nigerians were the Hausa / Fulani people of Northern Nigeria . The Nigerian Civil War ( 1967 — 1970 ) lead , Igbo from northern and western Nigeria to return to their " native " areas in eastern Nigeria and Enugu became a destination . Radio Biafra , alternatively the Voice of Biafra ( formerly the Eastern Nigerian Broadcasting Service ) , was based in Enugu ; it was from here that the Biafran leader , Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu , broadcast speeches and propaganda to <unk> and Nigeria . Because of the war , Enugu witnessed a decrease in the number of non @-@ Igbo , specifically non @-@ eastern Nigerian residents . On 4 October 1967 the Nigerian military bombarded Enugu with artillery just outside its boundaries before capturing it a week later , shortly after this Umuahia became the new capital of the republic . Years after the Republic of Biafra reverted to Nigeria , Enugu is still regarded as the " Capital of Igboland . " 
 Enugu resumed in 1970 as the capital of the East Central State after the republic was dissolved . On 3 February 1976 the East Central State was made into two new states , Imo and Anambra ; there were then 19 states in Nigeria ; Enugu was the capital of Anambra . On 27 August 1991 the military dictatorship of Ibrahim Babangida divided the old Anambra State into two new states , Enugu State and Anambra State . Enugu remained as the capital of the newly created Enugu State , while Awka became the capital of the new Anambra State . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Despite its name meaning hill top in the Igbo language , Enugu lies at the foot of an escarpment and not a hill . Enugu is located in the Cross River basin and the Benue trough and has the best developed coal in this area . Precambrian basement rock in this region is overlaid with sediments bearing coal from the Cretaceous and Tertiary age . Coal seams in the Enugu coal district measure between 1 and 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 and 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in thickness and the reserves have been estimated to be more than 300 million tonnes . Enugu 's hills at the extreme may reach an elevation of 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . Highlands surrounding Enugu for the most part are underlain by sandstone , while lowlands are underlain by shale . Much of the escarpment stretching from Enugu to Orlu has been ravaged by soil and gully erosion . Other geological features in Enugu include the Nike Lake near which the Nike Lake Hotel has been built . The Ekulu , <unk> , Ogbete , Aria , <unk> and <unk> rivers are the six largest rivers located in the city . The Ekulu River is the largest body of water in Enugu urban and its reservoir contributes to part of the city 's domestic water supply . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Enugu is located in a tropical rain forest zone with a derived savannah . The city has a tropical savanna climate ( Köppen : Aw ) . Enugu 's climate is humid and this humidity is at its highest between March and November . For the whole of Enugu State the mean daily temperature is 26 @.@ 7 ° C ( 80 @.@ 1 ° F ) . As in the rest of West Africa , the rainy season and dry season are the only weather periods that recur in Enugu . The average annual rainfall in Enugu is around 2 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 79 in ) , which arrives intermittently and becomes very heavy during the rainy season . Other weather conditions affecting the city include Harmattan , a dusty trade wind lasting a few weeks of December and January . Like the rest of Nigeria , Enugu is hot all year round . 
 = = = Cityscape and architecture = = = 
 The tallest building in Enugu 's Central Business District ( CBD ) is the African Continental Bank ( ACB ) tower with six stories . The tower was built in the late 50s for the African Continental Bank Limited which was founded by Nnamdi Azikiwe who became the first president of Nigeria after the country 's independence from the United Kingdom on October 1960 . The opening of the building took place on 30 April 1959 . Other tall buildings include the Hotel Presidential opened on August 1963 . The seven story building contains 100 rooms and is located in the Independence Layout . Hotel Presidential cost $ 2 @.@ 5 million to build and was commissioned by the government of what was then the Eastern Region to serve visiting businessmen , officials and tourists . In the middle of Enugu is the Michael Okpara Square , dedicated to the premier of the former Eastern Region Michael Okpara . Beside the square is located the Enugu State Government House , Enugu State House of Assembly and Enugu State Judiciary Complex . 
 Enugu 's coal mines are dotted around on the outskirts of the city , a majority of which are closed . The Colliery Camp mines are located in the Iva Valley which is near the neighbouring town of Ngwo and Hilltop of Enugu . The Iva Valley coal mine is accessed through the Iva Valley road linking Enugu with Ngwo . Other coal mines are located in the Ogbete and Coal Camp layouts ; these mines are located on the periphery of the city near the Iva Valley as well . 
 Architectural design in Enugu 's early years was in the hands of the British colonial administration ; Enugu 's architecture was consequently very European . English cottage housing and Victorian houses were used for housing Europeans and Nigerian colonial civil servants in the early 20th century until Europeans started trying to adapt their architecture to the tropical climate . Some other examples of these European styles are visible in churches of the colonial era , such as the Holy Ghost Cathedral with its Greco @-@ Roman stained glass windows depicting Europeans . Enugu 's roads were reflective of its British rule ; much of the city 's narrow roads in the GRA have been preserved dating back to the incorporation of the city itself . Low rent one bedroom flats in Enugu and other Nigerian cities are known as ' Face @-@ me @-@ I @-@ face @-@ you ' for the way a group of flats face each other and form a square where a compound entrance is lead into . 
 = = Government = = 
 Enugu city covers three local government areas : Enugu East , Enugu North and Enugu South . A Local Government Council exists for each of these seats that manages sectors including primary education and health ; an elected Executive Chairman and a group of elected Councillors form the Local Government Council that heads each Local Government Area . Enugu South is split between its rural and urban parts when electing an Executive Chairman . The Executive Chairmen include Paul <unk> for Enugu South Urban , Theresa <unk> for Enugu South Rural , Emeka <unk> for Enugu North , and Christopher <unk> for Enugu East ; these chairmen represent their LGA 's in the Enugu State House of Assembly . The Ministry of Lands , Survey and Town Planning ( at the state level ) and the Local Planning Authority ( at the local government level ) are responsible for the administration of urban lands and town planning . Government House , Enugu is where the government of the state is based . On the federal level , the city of Enugu is split between two congressional areas ; Enugu North / South represented by <unk> <unk> and Enugu East represented by Gilbert <unk> ; both representatives are in the People 's Democratic Party ( PDP ) as is Sunday <unk> <unk> , the governor of Enugu State . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2006 Nigerian census , the Enugu metropolitan area has an estimated population of 722 @,@ 664 . This estimate along with population estimates of other Nigerian cities have been disputed with accusations of population inflation and deflation in favour of the northern part of the country . The population of Enugu is predominantly Christian , as is the rest of southeastern Nigeria . Like the rest of Nigeria most people in Enugu speak Nigerian English alongside the dominant language in the region . In this case the dominant language is Igbo . Nigerian English , or pidgin ( a mix of English and indigenous words ) is often used because of ethnic diversity and sometimes because of the diversity of dialects in the Igbo language . In cultural and linguistic terms Enugu is within the Northern cluster of the Igbo region which includes other towns and cities like Awka and Nsukka . 
 The indigenous people of Enugu include the Ogui Nike who live in the areas surrounding Hotel Presidential , <unk> , Ama @-@ Igbo , <unk> and <unk> @-@ <unk> . Other groups include the <unk> people , who live mainly in the Achara Layout and Uwani areas . The Enugwu Ngwo people live in Hilltop on the west of the city with their farm lands sprawling all over the valley . Other Nike people live around the <unk> , Iji @-@ Nike , and <unk> areas of the city . Most of the non @-@ indigenous people of Enugu are migrants from other parts of the Igbo cultural area . After the majority Igbo , the Yoruba people are another significant ethnic group found present in Enugu ; other groups include the Hausa , <unk> , and Fulani people . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 Enugu 's crime rate rose in 2009 as kidnapping and armed robbery rates increased in southeastern Nigeria specifically between September and December . The Enugu State government sought to check the high kidnapping rates by passing a bill on February 2009 that made kidnapping by the use of a weapon a capital offence ; the bill was passed by the Enugu House of Assembly unanimously . 1 @,@ 088 arrests were made in the city between September and December 2009 ; 270 of these were in September , 303 were in October , 295 in November and 220 were in December . 477 of these detainees were accused of committing capital offences which included kidnapping . The motives of kidnappers in Enugu are primarily financial and some ransoms went into the millions of <unk> . The Chief Press Secretary to the Governor of Enugu State , Dan <unk> , had his ransom set as high as ₦ 500 million ( 3 @.@ 3 million US Dollars As of 26 June 2010 ) , dropping to ₦ 200 million and then ₦ 50 million before he was released without a ransom being paid because of the refusal of the government to negotiate with the kidnappers . Much of the crime in Enugu and the rest of Nigeria has been attributed to unemployment . 
 = = Culture = = 
 As a Northern Igbo city , Enugu shares cultural traits with its neighbouring towns . Two important Igbo traditional festivals take place in Enugu annually ; the Mmanwu festival and the New yam festival . The Mmanwu festival takes place in November and features various types of masquerades that each have a name . This festival is held at the Nnamdi Azikiwe Stadium as a parade of carnival @-@ like masquerades that are accompanied by music and it is supported by the Enugu Council of Arts and Culture . The second important Igbo festival , the New yam festival known as ' <unk> ji ' , is held between August and October marking the harvesting and feasting of the new yam . The yam is a root vegetable that is the staple crop and a cultural symbol for the Igbo people . Recently created festivals include the Enugu Festival of Arts which is managed by the Enugu Council of Arts and Culture . The festival highlights African culture and traditions and it is here that the Enugu Council of Arts and Culture included the Mmanwu parade as part of the events . The Enugu Festival of Arts was started in 1986 ; it has modernised the Mmanwu festival by transferring it from its traditional village surroundings to the urban setting of Enugu . Diana , Princess of Wales was a notable spectator of Enugu 's cultural shows when she visited the city in 1990 . 
 The tourism industry in Enugu , managed by the Enugu State Tourism Board ( <unk> ) , is small ; however , the state government recognises a variety of historic and recreational sites . These sites include places like the Udi Hills , from which the majority of Enugu city can be viewed . The Polo amusement park is a funfair that is among the first generation of public parks in the city ; other parks in the city include the <unk> Muhammed Park . Enugu 's former coal mines , <unk> and Okpara , are open to public visits . Some other spots include : The Institute of Management and Technology ( IMT ) Sculptural Garden and Art Gallery , the Eastern Region Parliamentary Building , the Old Government Lodge , and Enugu Golf course . Enugu Zoo is another attraction in the city . It is divided into the botanical garden and the zoological section . A National Museum is located near Enugu at its north , although it receives few visitors . It is managed by National Commission for Museums and Monuments ( <unk> ) . Other galleries include the Bona Gallery . 
 = = Entertainment = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Enugu rose as an important centre for Highlife music in Nigeria in the 1950s . The Igbo dominated version of the genre grew out of earlier " Igbo blues " or " palm wine music " and further spread in popularity to the Southern Cameroons where Enugu had considerable influence in arts and culture in towns such as Limbe , Tiko and Douala . Some prominent musicians with origins in Enugu include Sonny <unk> , an afrobeat musician who was born and raised in Enugu and joined his first band The <unk> that was based in the city in 1965 ; Celestine Ukwu joined Michael <unk> 's Enugu based Paradise Rhythm Orchestra in 1962 before creating his own band and had a recreational club in the city after the Nigeria Civil War ; other musicians include <unk> Idibia ; a Hip hop / R & B musician who partly grew up and studied music in the city . Other notable musicians originating from Enugu include rapper Phyno , <unk> and highlife musician Flavour N <unk> . 
 = = = Media and literature = = = 
 English @-@ language newspapers published and sold in Enugu include the Daily Star , Evening Star , The Renaissance and New Renaissance . One of the earliest newspapers published in Enugu was the Eastern Sentinel published by Nnamdi Azikiwe 's Zik Group in 1955 , but failed in 1960 . Among the city 's television and radio stations are the Nigerian Television Authority 's network affiliate ( NTA Enugu ) headquarters located at Independence Layout ; and the Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria ( <unk> ) network affiliate station ( Radio Enugu ) which broadcasts in English , Igbo , <unk> , <unk> and Tiv . Enugu State Broadcasting Service Television ( <unk> @-@ TV ) is a state owned television broadcasting company which offers 18 hours of continuous broadcasting on weekends . Enugu , after Lagos is the preferred city for shooting films in Nigeria and a film production centre in the East . In 2007 , Enugu hosted the first @-@ ever film festival in the state , the Enugu International Film Festival . Held at Hotel Presidential , the festival 's intent was to highlight Enugu as a " film making hub " in Africa including movie premiers and prizes for different film categories . 
 Some of Nigeria 's well @-@ known writers were born and have lived in the city of Enugu . Chinua Achebe , writer of Things Fall Apart lived in Enugu in 1958 , the year the book was published . He again moved to the city during the Nigerian Civil War after escaping Lagos with his family . It was at this time that he met and became friends with Nigerian poet Christopher Okigbo where they started the publishing house Citadel Press , among its titles How the Dog was Domesticated and How the Leopard Got His Claws . Okigbo lived in Enugu during the early months of the Nigerian Civil War . His home in Hilltop contained many of his unpublished writings which were mostly destroyed by bombing early in the war . Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie , writer of Half of a Yellow Sun , a winner of the Orange Prize for Fiction in 2007 , was born in Enugu in 1977 and grew up in Nsukka . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The Enugu Rangers , a first @-@ division professional league association football team , is Enugu 's home team that plays in the Nigerian Premier League and are based in the Nnamdi Azikiwe Stadium . Former Rangers players include Jay @-@ Jay Okocha and <unk> West . Enugu 's main sports centre is the Nnamdi Azikiwe Stadium , named after Nnamdi Azikiwe , the first president of Nigeria . The stadium remained the centre of sports for the whole of the Eastern Region until the Nigerian Civil War broke out . At the war 's end the stadium was refurbished . Enugu was a host for the 2009 FIFA U @-@ 17 World Cup games ( 24 October – 15 November ) alongside Calabar and five other Nigerian cities with matches taking place at the Nnamdi Azikiwe Stadium . Its hosting of the FIFA U @-@ 17 World Cup benefited Enugu through the renovation of the Nnamdi Azikiwe Stadium , having had such things as a new artificial surface laid . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Nicknamed the Coal City , Enugu 's economy in the early 20th century depended on coal mining in the Udi plateau ; this industry was the pushing force towards the city 's growth . The Nigerian Coal Corporation has been based in Enugu since its creation in 1950 where it controlled coal mining . With the creation of the Eastern Line , Enugu was connected with the sea via Port Harcourt to its south and later connected to the city of Kaduna to Enugu 's north . The Nigerian Civil War brought widespread devastation that forced a decline in coal production from damage or destruction of equipment . As of 2005 coal mining is no longer the major source of income and mines lay unused . Other minerals mined in Enugu include iron ore , limestone , fine clay , marble , and silica sand . 
 In Enugu most goods are sold in open markets or by street hawkers ; a significant number of street hawkers in Nigeria are children . As of 2003 , around 44 under @-@ 16 @-@ year @-@ olds ( equally boys and girls ) hawk on every street on every hour in Enugu . There are three main urban markets in Enugu : Ogbete Market , <unk> Market and New Market . New Market is a major market for the sale of <unk> . Ogbete market is patronised by merchants from all over the surrounding area , including merchants from cities like Onitsha , Aguleri , Abakaliki and Aba . In <unk> market non @-@ food goods are also sold . Brewing and soft @-@ drink bottling are among other industries in the city ; there is also a Mercedes assembly plant as well as the production and manufacturing of machinery , pottery , tiles , steel , cement , asbestos , petroleum , and pharmaceuticals . For a period of time <unk> Airlines had its head office on the grounds of Akanu Ibiam International Airport in Enugu . 
 The former Eastern Region was once famed for producing half the world 's total output of palm kernels . Since the Nigerian Civil War production has markedly declined largely because the plantations and processing equipment were either damaged or destroyed . The production of other important cash crops such as cocoa , groundnut and groundnut oil , rubber , cassava , cotton and cotton seed and timber tumbled after the civil war and the subsequent oil boom years . Consequently , the area called Enugu State as well as the rest of Nigeria , which was once a self @-@ sufficient net exporter in agricultural produce , must import food . 
 = = Education = = 
 Enugu has three main tertiary institutions : the Enugu State University of Science & Technology ( <unk> ) ; the University of Nigeria , Nsukka Campus ( UNN ) and Enugu Campus ( <unk> ) ; and the Institute of Management & Technology ( IMT ) . Another notable tertiary institution in Enugu State is the Federal Cooperative College , Oji River ( <unk> ) . The city is also home to Our Saviour Institute of Science and Technology , a polytechnic . Some notable secondary schools in Enugu include the College of the Immaculate Conception ( CIC ) built in 1940 , Holy Rosary College ( HRC ) built in 1943 , Colliery Comprehensive Secondary school , Queen 's Secondary School , Federal Government College , Royal Crown Academy , Nsukka and the University of Nigeria Secondary school . University Teaching Hospital ( UNTH ) Enugu , under the university of Nigeria , is another university located in the city . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 In Enugu , health care services can be obtained at several institutions including the <unk> ( Enugu State University of Science and Technology ) Teaching Hospital ; University of Nigeria , Enugu , Teaching Hospital ; Park Lane General Hospital in the GRA ; PMC ( <unk> Medical Center ) located on <unk> Avenue in Uwani ; Hansa Clinic on <unk> Street in Uwani ; Niger Foundation Hospital and Diagnostic Centre on Presidential Close in the Independence Layout ; and the <unk> Obi Ndi no n <unk> Hospital organization located on <unk> Street in the Trans @-@ Ekulu layout , among others . Some of the specialist hospitals in Enugu include the Psychiatric Hospital Enugu and the National Orthopaedic Hospital Enugu ( <unk> ) . 
 Many of the hospitals in Enugu are privately run . The UNTH and the National Orthopaedic Hospital are among some of the government controlled hospitals in the city . The medical equipment for the UNTH was upgraded in 2009 as well as parts of the hospital which were renovated in the same year . Most hospitals in the city suffer from a poor standard of medical facilities available to them ; many of the city 's citizens travel abroad for medical care . However , hospitals have been aided by foreign organisations and by Enugu 's community at home and abroad who have donated medicine and other medical equipment . The most developed government hospital in Enugu is the Park Lane Hospital . The governor has said that the state has bought some ambulance service vehicles in March 2010 . Enugu State has established free medical care for pregnant women and for all children under 5 years of age in the state . The child healthcare programme , founded under the District Health System ( DHS ) , was added to the states 2008 budget . Enugu State has a HIV / AIDS prevalence of 6 @.@ 5 % , one of the highest in the country . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Enugu is located on the narrow @-@ gauge Eastern Line railway linked to the city of Port Harcourt ; the Enugu train station is by the side of the National Stadium ; dating back to its coal @-@ mining origins , it is located on Ogui Street . The main forms of transportation in the city are taxi cabs and buses . Okada ( motorcycles ) , once served as public transportation in the city until the state government banned them from this use in April 2009 . Most transport enters and leaves the city through Enugu 's Ogbete Motor Park , <unk> Motor Park serves as a transport pick @-@ up point as well . Unregistered taxis are known as Kabu Kabu and are differentiated with registered ones through the lack of yellow paint on the unregistered vehicles . 
 In 2009 , Enugu introduced a taxi job scheme under ' Coal City Cabs ' to help in the eradication of poverty in the city . 200 registered Nissan Sunny taxis , provided by the state government ; and 200 registered Suzuki taxis , provided by the <unk> Pro @-@ Credit Micro Finance Bank , were given out on loan to unemployed citizens in the city who will operate as taxi drivers and will own the vehicles after payments are completed . 20 buses with the capacity for 82 passengers seated and standing were introduced as Coal City Shuttle buses on 13 March 2009 to run as public transport for Enugu urban . 
 The main airport in the state is the Akanu Ibiam International Airport which can be accessed by buses and taxis . Renovations began on 30 November 2009 to upgrade it to accommodate wide @-@ bodied aircraft . These plans include extending the 2 @,@ 400 @-@ metre ( 7 @,@ 900 ft ) runway by 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) to make it 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) long ; the runway will be widened from 45 to 60 metres ( 148 to 197 ft ) . It is estimated that the project will cost ₦ <unk> ( 27 @.@ 3 million US Dollars As of 26 June 2010 ) . 
 The A3 , or the Enugu @-@ Port Harcourt highway , was opened in the 1970s and links the two cities together by passing through Aba , a major urban settlement . The A3 goes further on past Enugu 's north to link to the city of Jos via <unk> . Two more highways , the <unk> from Benin City , Asaba and Onitsha to Enugu 's east and the <unk> from Abakaliki to Enugu 's west , makes Enugu the site of a major junction . 
 = The Tales of Beedle the Bard = 
 The Tales of Beedle the Bard is a book of children 's stories by British author J. K. Rowling . There is a storybook of the same name mentioned in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , the last book of the Harry Potter series . 
 The book was originally produced in a limited edition of only seven copies , each handwritten and illustrated by J. K. Rowling . One of them was offered for auction through Sotheby 's in late 2007 and was expected to sell for £ 50 @,@ 000 ( US $ 77 @,@ 000 , € 69 @,@ 000 ) ; ultimately it was bought for £ 1 @.@ 95 million ( $ 3 million , € 2 @.@ 7 million ) by Amazon , making the selling price the highest achieved at auction for a modern literary manuscript . The money earned at the auction of the book was donated to The Children 's Voice charity campaign . 
 The book was published for the general public on 4 December 2008 , with the proceeds going to the Children 's High Level Group . 
 = = In the Harry Potter series = = 
 The Tales of Beedle the Bard first appeared as a fictional book in J. K. Rowling 's 2007 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , the seventh and final novel of the Harry Potter series . The book is bequeathed to Hermione Granger by Albus Dumbledore , former headmaster of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . It is described as a popular collection of Wizarding children 's fairy tales , so that while Ron Weasley is familiar with the stories , Harry Potter and Hermione Granger had not previously heard of them due to their non @-@ magical upbringing . 
 The book Hermione receives in Dumbledore 's will is a copy of the original edition of the fictional book . It is described as an ancient @-@ looking small book with its binding " stained and peeling in places " . In the novel it is also said the book has a title on its cover , written in embossed runic symbols . 
 The book acts as the vehicle for introducing the Deathly Hallows . Above the story " The Tale of the Three Brothers " , Hermione Granger finds a strange symbol which later is revealed by Xenophilius Lovegood to be the symbol of the Hallows . The triangle from the symbol represents the Invisibility Cloak , the circle inside the triangle symbolises the Resurrection Stone , and the vertical line represents the Elder Wand . 
 These three objects are also mentioned in the story itself ( see below ) , and are said to belong to the Peverell brothers , who are later revealed as being both Voldemort 's and Harry Potter 's ancestors . Towards the end of the novel , Albus Dumbledore also confirms Harry 's connection to the <unk> , and states that the three brothers might in fact have been the creators of the Hallows . 
 The introduction ( written by Rowling ) to the publications released in December 2008 mentions that the fictional character Beedle the Bard was born in Yorkshire , lived in the 15th century , and had " an exceptionally luxuriant beard " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Rowling started writing the book soon after finishing work on the seventh Harry Potter novel . During an interview with her fandom she also stated that she used other books as a source of inspiration for the tales . More specifically , " The Tale of the Three Brothers " , the only story included entirely in The Deathly Hallows , was inspired by Geoffrey Chaucer 's " The Pardoner 's Tale " from The Canterbury Tales . 
 = = = Handmade edition = = = 
 Originally The Tales of Beedle the Bard had only been produced in a limited number of seven handmade copies , all handwritten and illustrated by the author herself . The books were bound in brown morocco leather , and decorated with hand @-@ chased silver ornaments and mounted semiprecious stones by silversmith and jeweller Hamilton & Inches of Edinburgh . Each of the silver pieces represents one of the five stories in the book . Rowling also asked that each of the seven copies be embellished using a different semiprecious stone . 
 Six of these original handwritten copies were uniquely dedicated and given by Rowling to six people who were most involved with the Harry Potter series . The recipients of these copies were not initially identified . Since then , two of these people have been named . One is Barry Cunningham , Rowling 's very first editor . Another is Arthur A. Levine , editor for Scholastic , the U.S. publisher of the Harry Potter books . Cunningham and Levine had lent their personal copies as part of Beedle the Bard exhibits in December 2008 . 
 Rowling also decided to create a seventh handwritten copy ( distinguished from the others by its <unk> <unk> ) to sell at auction in order to raise funds for The Children 's Voice charity campaign . 
 The idea came really because I wanted to thank six key people who have been very closely connected to the ' Harry Potter ' series , and these were people for whom a piece of jewellery wasn 't going to cut it . So I had the idea of writing them a book , a handwritten and illustrated book , just for these six people . And well , if I 'm doing six I really have to do seven , and the seventh book will be for this cause , which is so close to my heart . 
 = = = Auction = = = 
 The 157 @-@ page " Moonstone edition " of the book was first put on display prior to bidding on 26 November in New York and on 9 December in London . The book was auctioned 13 December 2007 , at Sotheby 's in London . The starting price was £ 30 @,@ 000 ( $ 62 @,@ 000 , € 46 @,@ 000 ) , and originally it was expected to sell for approximately £ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 103 @,@ 000 , € 80 @,@ 000 ) . The closing bid far exceeded all prior projections , as ultimately the book was purchased by a representative from London fine art dealers Hazlitt Gooden and Fox on behalf of Amazon , for a total of £ 1 @.@ 95 million ( $ 3 @.@ 98 million , € 2 @.@ 28 million ) . This was the highest purchase price for a modern literary manuscript at that date . The money earned at auction later was donated by Rowling to The Children 's Voice charity campaign . 
 Sotheby 's printed a forty @-@ eight @-@ page promotional catalogue for the auction . The catalogue featured illustrations from the book , as well as comments from J. K. Rowling on The Tales of Beedle the Bard . The catalogue was sold as a collector 's item , and the money from the sales also has been donated to The Children 's Voice . 
 = = = Public editions = = = 
 On 31 July 2008 , it was announced The Tales of Beedle the Bard would also be made available for the public , in both standard and collector 's editions . The book was published by Children 's High Level Group and printed and distributed by Bloomsbury , Scholastic , and Amazon.com. The decision was taken due to disappointment among Harry Potter fans after it had initially been announced a wide public release was not intended . 
 Similarly to Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them and Quidditch Through the Ages ( two other books mentioned in the Harry Potter novels that have also been printed ) the standard and collector 's editions of The Tales of Beedle the Bard feature commentary and footnotes from Albus Dumbledore , headmaster of Hogwarts and one of the main characters of the series . The standard edition also includes illustrations reproduced from the handwritten edition auctioned in December 2007 and the introduction by the author . The limited collector 's edition features ten illustrations by J.K. Rowling not included in the standard edition or the original handcrafted edition , as well as an exclusive reproduction of J.K. Rowling 's handwritten introduction , and other miscellaneous objects such as replica gemstones and an emerald ribbon . 
 The book , released on 4 December 2008 , was published in the United Kingdom and Canada by Bloomsbury , while the US edition was published by Scholastic , and the limited collector 's edition of the book , available in all three countries , by Amazon . The limited edition retailed for £ 50 ( $ 100 , € 100 ) , and around 100 @,@ 000 copies have been printed . The book has been translated into 28 languages . Profits from the sale of the book were offered to the Children 's High Level Group . Initial sale estimates were roughly £ 4 million ( $ 7 @.@ 6 million , € 4 @.@ 7 million ) ; as of January 2010 an estimated £ 11 million ( $ 17 million , € 13 million ) were generated from sales for the charity . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Rowling wrote five stories for the book . One , " The Warlock 's Hairy Heart " , is not mentioned in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows ; three others , " The Wizard and the Hopping Pot " , " The Fountain of Fair Fortune " , and " Babbitty <unk> and her <unk> Stump " , receive cursory attention . " The Tale of the Three Brothers " is the only story also included entirely in The Deathly Hallows . 
 = = = " The Wizard and the Hopping Pot " = = = 
 This story is about the legacy of an old man who , in his generosity , used his pot to brew magical potions and antidotes for other people when they needed his help . Upon his death , he leaves all his belongings to his only son , who has none of the virtues his father had . After his father 's death , the son finds the pot and a single slipper inside it together with a note from his father that reads , " In the fond hope , my son , that you will never need it " . 
 Bitter for having nothing left but a pot , the son closes the door on every person who asks for his help . Each time he does so , the pot takes on the symptoms of the ones who ask for help , it starts disturbing the son and prevents him from having any peace of mind . This continues until the son finally gives up and provides aid to the town . Upon doing this , the pot 's ailments are removed one by one and the son 's ordeal finally ends one day when the slipper he received from his father falls out of the pot ; he puts the slipper on the pot 's foot and the two walk off into the sunset . 
 = = = " The Fountain of Fair Fortune " = = = 
 In this story , there is a fountain where once per year , one person may bathe to have his or her problems answered . This is how three witches meet . The first witch , Asha , suffers from an incurable disease . The second , Altheda , endures poverty and powerlessness due to a robbery . The third , Amata , is distraught after being left by her beloved . The three witches decide to try to reach the fountain together but along the way , a knight , Sir Luckless , also joins them . 
 On their path to the fountain , they face three challenges . The first involves a giant worm that demands " proof of [ their ] pain " . The second , a steep slope where they have to bring the " fruit of their labours " . The third challenge , crossing a river , requires them to pay with " the treasure of [ their ] past " . Amata passes the challenge by using magic to withdraw the memories of her ex @-@ lover and drop them into the water . 
 At the fountain , Asha collapses from exhaustion . To save her , Altheda brews an invigorating potion that also cures Asha of her disease and need of the fountain . Altheda realises that her skills are a means to earn money , so she also no longer needs the fountain . Amata realises that washing away her regret for her lover removed her need as well . Sir Luckless bathes in the water , after which he flings himself at Amata 's feet and asks for " her hand and her heart " which she happily gives . Everyone gets an answer to his or her problem , unaware that the fountain held no magical power at all . 
 = = = " The Warlock 's Hairy Heart " = = = 
 The story is about a young and handsome warlock who decides to never fall in love , so he uses Dark Arts to prevent himself from doing so . His family , hoping he will change , does nothing . However , one day , he hears two servants whispering about him not having a wife , so he decides to find a talented , rich , and beautiful witch and marry her to gain everyone 's envy . 
 He meets that girl the next day . Though the girl is both " fascinated and repelled " , the warlock persuades her to come to a dinner feast at his castle . During the feast , she tells him that she needs to know he has a heart . The warlock shows her his beating hairy heart inside a crystal casket in his dungeon . The witch begs him to put it back inside himself . After the warlock does so , she embraces him . However , being disconnected from its body for so long , his heart has developed savage tastes as it has degenerated into an animalistic state . And so he is driven to take by force a truly human heart . He tears out the witch 's heart to replace his own , but finding that he cannot magic the hairy heart back out of his chest , he cuts it out with a dagger . Thus he and the maiden both die , with him holding both hearts in his hands . 
 = = = " Babbitty <unk> and her <unk> Stump " = = = 
 This story is about a king who wants to keep all magic to himself . To do this he needs to solve two problems : he must capture and imprison all of the sorcerers in the kingdom and he has to learn magic . He creates a " Brigade of Witch Hunters " and calls for an instructor in magic . Only a " cunning charlatan " with no magical ability responds . The charlatan proves himself with a few simple tricks and begins to ask for jewellery and money to continue teaching . However , Babbitty , the king 's washerwoman , laughs at the king one day as he attempts to do magic with an ordinary twig . This causes the king to demand the charlatan join him in a public demonstration of magic and warns that the charlatan will be beheaded if anyone laughs . The charlatan later witnesses Babbitty performing magic in her house . He threatens to expose her if she does not assist him . She agrees to hide and help the demonstration . 
 During the performance , the brigade captain asks the king to bring his dead hound back to life . Because Babbitty cannot use magic to raise the dead , the crowd thinks the previous acts were tricks . The charlatan exposes Babbitty , accusing her of blocking the spells . Babbitty flees into a forest and disappears at the base of an old tree . In desperation , the charlatan states that she has turned " into a crab apple " and has the tree cut down . 
 As the crowd departs , the stump starts cackling and makes the charlatan confess . The stump cackles again , demanding the king never hurt a wizard again , and build a statue of Babbitty on the stump to remind him of his foolishness . The king agrees and heads back to the palace . Afterwards , a " stout old rabbit " with a wand in its teeth hops out from a hole beneath the stump and leaves the kingdom . 
 = = = " The Tale of the Three Brothers " = = = 
 The story is about three brothers who , travelling together , reach a treacherous river . They make a magical bridge over the river . Halfway across the bridge , they meet the personification of Death who is angry for losing three potential victims . He pretends to be impressed by them and grants each a wish as a reward . The oldest brother asks for an unbeatable dueling wand , so Death gives him the Elder Wand . The middle brother asks for the ability to resurrect the dead , so Death gives him the Resurrection Stone . The youngest brother doesn 't trust Death and asks for a way to stop Death from following him , so Death reluctantly gives him his Cloak of Invisibility . Afterwards , the brothers go their separate ways . 
 The oldest brother , bragging about his powerful wand , is robbed of it and murdered while he is asleep . The middle brother uses his ability to bring back the woman he loved , who died before he could marry her . However , she is not fully alive and is full of sorrow . He kills himself to join her . As for the youngest brother , Death never manages to find him , as he stays hidden under his Cloak . Many years later , the brother removes his cloak and gives it to his son . Pleased with his achievements , he greets Death as an old friend and chooses to leave with him as equals . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sotheby 's deputy director Dr. Philip W. Errington described the handmade edition as " one of the most exciting pieces of children 's literature " to have passed through the auction house . After buying the book , Amazon also released a review , describing it as " an artifact pulled straight out of a novel " . 
 The Times reviewed the published book favourably , calling the tales " funny , sinister , wise and captivating " and likening them to the Brothers Grimm . The Telegraph reviewed it unfavourably , noting that they " would be unremarkable were it not for the body of work that lies behind it " and that there was " an element of padding to make it a respectable length " . 
 = = Live show = = 
 A live puppet show of The Fountain of Fair Fortune and The Tale of the Three Brothers is presented daily at the Diagon Alley expansion of The Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Universal Studios Florida . 
 = SM U @-@ 67 = 
 SM U @-@ 67 was a Type U 66 submarine or U @-@ boat for the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during the First World War . She had been laid down in November 1913 as U @-@ 8 the second boat of the U @-@ 7 class for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) but was sold to Germany , along with the others in her class , in November 1914 . 
 The submarine was ordered as U @-@ 8 from Germaniawerft of Kiel as the second of five boats of the U @-@ 7 class for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy became convinced that none of the submarines of the class could be delivered to the Adriatic via Gibraltar . As a consequence , the entire class , including U @-@ 8 , was sold to the German Imperial Navy in November 1914 . Under German control , the class became known as the U 66 type and the boats were renumbered ; U @-@ 8 became U @-@ 67 , and all were redesigned and reconstructed to German specifications . U @-@ 67 was launched in May 1915 and commissioned in August . As completed , she displaced 791 tonnes ( 779 long tons ) , surfaced , and 933 tonnes ( 918 long tons ) , submerged . The boat was 69 @.@ 50 metres ( 228 ft ) long and was armed with five torpedo tubes and a deck gun . 
 A part of the IV <unk> throughout the war , U @-@ 67 sank 18 ships with a combined gross register tonnage ( GRT ) of 39 @,@ 937 in thirteen war patrols . She also damaged three other ships of 14 @,@ 766 GRT . On 20 November 1918 , nine days after the Armistice , U @-@ 67 was surrendered to the British . She was broken up in 1921 at Fareham . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy had competitively evaluated three foreign submarine designs , it selected the Germaniawerft 506d design , also known as the Type UD , for its new U @-@ 7 class of five submarines . The Navy ordered five boats on 1 February 1913 . 
 The U @-@ 7 class was seen by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as an improved version of its U @-@ 3 class , which was also a Germaniawerft design . As designed for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , the boats were to displace 695 tonnes ( 684 long tons ) on the surface and 885 tonnes ( 871 long tons ) while submerged . The doubled @-@ hulled boats were to be 69 @.@ 50 metres ( 228 ft ) long overall with a beam of 6 @.@ 30 metres ( 20 ft 8 in ) and a draft of 3 @.@ 79 metres ( 12 ft 5 in ) . The Austrian specifications called for two shafts with twin diesel engines ( 2 @,@ 300 metric horsepower ( 2 @,@ 269 bhp ; 1 @,@ 692 kW ) total ) for surface running at up to 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) , and twin electric motors ( 1 @,@ 240 PS ( 1 @,@ 223 shp ; 912 kW ) total ) for a maximum of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) when submerged . The boats were designed with five 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes ; four located in the bow , one in the stern . The boats ' armament was to also include a single 6 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) L / 26 deck gun . 
 U @-@ 8 and sister boat U @-@ 7 were both laid down on 1 November 1913 , the first two boats of the class begun . Her construction was slated to be complete within 29 to 33 months . 
 Neither U @-@ 8 nor any of her sister boats were complete when World War I began in August 1914 . With the boats under construction at Kiel , the Austrians became convinced that it would be impossible to take delivery of the boats , which would need to be towed into the Mediterranean past Gibraltar , a British territory . As a result , U @-@ 8 and her four sisters were sold to the Imperial German Navy on 28 November 1914 . 
 U @-@ 8 was renumbered by the Germans as U @-@ 67 when her class was redesignated as the Type U 66 . The Imperial German Navy had the submarines redesigned and reconstructed to German standards , which increased the surface displacement by 96 tonnes ( 94 long tons ) and the submerged by 48 tonnes ( 47 long tons ) . The torpedo load was increased by a third , from 9 to 12 , and the deck gun was upgraded from the 6 @.@ 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) gun originally specified to an 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) one . 
 = = Service career = = 
 U @-@ 67 was launched on 15 May 1915 . On 4 August , SM U @-@ 67 was commissioned into the Imperial German Navy under the command of Korvettenkapitän Erich von Rosenberg @-@ Grusczyski . On 28 October 1915 , U @-@ 67 was assigned to the IV . U @-@ Halbflotille in which she remained for the duration of the war . 
 In March 1916 , Kapitänleutnant Hans Nieland replaced von Rosenberg @-@ Grusczyski as the captain of U @-@ 67 , and it was under his command that U @-@ 67 was most successful , sinking 18 ships with a combined a total of 39 @,@ 937 gross register tons ( GRT ) , while damaging a further three of 14 @,@ 766 tons . U @-@ 67 's most successful month was April 1917 , when she sank four ships of 15 @,@ 223 tons in a span of twelve days . 
 Nieland was succeeded as commander of U @-@ 67 by Oberleutnant zur See Helmuth von <unk> in December 1917 . Under his command during the last eleven months of the war , U @-@ 67 sank no more ships . During her service career under three commanders , U @-@ 67 had completed thirteen war patrols . She was surrendered to the British on 20 November 1918 , nine days after the Armistice , and broken up at Fareham in 1921 . 
 = = Ships sunk or damaged = = 
 = Monica Reyes = 
 Monica Julieta Reyes / <unk> / is a fictional character in the Fox science fiction @-@ supernatural television series The X @-@ Files . Monica Reyes is portrayed by Annabeth Gish . A Special Agent with the FBI , she works with her longtime friend and partner John Doggett in the X @-@ Files office , which is concerned with the investigation of paranormal cases , dubbed " X @-@ Files " . Introduced in the series ' eighth season , Reyes would become a main character throughout the entirety of its ninth season , before returning for a single @-@ episode guest appearance in the tenth season finale . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 Due to their decision to continue The X @-@ Files television series and try to appeal to a new generation of viewers , the production personnel knew from the beginning of season 8 that they were going to introduce another female character who would be a believer , as departing character Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) had been a believer . However , the writers wanted a different kind of believer character to contrast with the sceptical nature of John Doggett , who had already been established . The writers were required to create a character who was unlike any of the preconceived main characters that were a part of the series . This female character was initially named Karen Miller and then Jane Jones before the name " Monica Reyes " was decided upon , named after a friend of series creator Chris Carter 's acquaintance who had an art gallery in Vancouver . 
 When the role was being cast , actress Annabeth Gish received a call from her agent , who informed her that the producers of The X @-@ Files were looking for a new female character . Gish applied for the part , but her audition consisted of a meeting with writers Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz . Spotnitz considered Reyes to be like Mulder in her optimism , faith and enjoyment of being open to beliefs , while still being somewhat different as she was more spiritual and subscribed to a more New Age @-@ like view than Mulder had . Reyes was seen as different from both Mulder and the other main characters as she was somewhat more neurotic , scattered , and quirky . She smiled and laughed more than the other characters , having a nature that writer Frank Spotnitz felt was lighter , sunnier , brighter , warmer and more " overtly sexy " . 
 The character of Brad Follmer was created in season nine to provide a love interest for Reyes , as the writers believed the audience needed to know more about her . However , Follmer 's unresolved relationship with Reyes also served to heighten the conflict between Doggett and Follmer , as both men had feelings for her . Portraying actress Annabeth Gish was pleased that the relationship between her character and Scully was similar to that of two sisters , rather than Reyes serving as an antagonist to Scully . 
 The ninth season episode " Hellbound " , in which Reyes discovers that she was apparently reincarnated , began as an effort to give Reyes or Doggett a " drive " or sense of motivation , as they were seen by the writers as the successors to Mulder and Scully . According to the writer of the episode , David Amann , executive producer Frank Spotnitz was interested in giving Reyes " some darkness to play " and her past life was consequently written with sombre overtones . 
 = = Background = = 
 Monica Reyes was born and raised in Mexico City , Mexico , and speaks fluent Spanish . She studied folklore and mythology at Brown University , and has a master 's degree in Religious Studies . In 1990 , Reyes enrolled in the Federal Bureau of Investigation at Quantico , Virginia . Her first assignment in the FBI was serving on a special taskforce investigating Satanic ritual abuse . Reyes then served in the New York City field office , where she became romantically involved with special agent Brad Follmer despite the FBI 's strict anti @-@ fraternization rules . Reyes was the head investigator in the kidnapping of 7 year @-@ old Luke Doggett , son of then NYPD officer John Doggett . The boy was eventually found dead , but no suspect was ever apprehended . In 1999 , Monica Reyes transferred to the New Orleans field office . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 = = = Season 8 ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = 
 In 2001 , Reyes was contacted by Doggett , now an FBI agent assigned to X @-@ Files department , to assist in on a case involving the disappearances of several individuals who claimed to be alien abductees , as well as the disappearance of fellow agent Fox Mulder . Because of her background , Reyes considered that these believers may have simply formed a cult , but did not rule out the possibility of alien intervention . She stayed with the case until after Mulder was returned by his abductors , but returned to her field office soon after . 
 She later contacted Mulder , who was back to full health at the time , seeking help on a case she suspected had some link to the murder of Doggett 's son . However , as before , she soon returned to her own work . Reyes remained with the New Orleans field office until she was called upon to protect agent Dana Scully in May 2001 , driving her out to a remote location in Georgia so that the pregnant Scully might deliver her child out of harm 's way . Reyes helped deliver the child , and made a permanent move soon afterwards , becoming Doggett 's partner on The X @-@ Files . 
 = = = Season 9 ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Season nine sees Reyes join the X @-@ Files on a permanent basis , working with both John Doggett and Dana Scully . Following a year of investigating the paranormal , Doggett and Reyes were last seen in the New Mexico desert in 2002 , where they were warning Agents Mulder and Scully of the arrival of Knowle Rohrer , a Super Soldier linked to the alien colonists . They were fleeing the scene as black helicopters destroyed the <unk> <unk> where The Smoking Man had been living . The X @-@ Files office was closed shortly after the involvement of Walter Skinner and Alvin Kersh in Mulder 's escape was revealed ; Reyes still stayed with the FBI in some capacity for a time afterwards . 
 = = = Between seasons 9 and 10 = = = 
 Shortly after the closure of the X @-@ Files , Reyes was contacted by C.G.B. Spender ( the Cigarette Smoking Man ) , who had miraculously survived the confrontation in New Mexico , albeit with devastating major injuries . Spender offered to secure Reyes a place among the designated survivors of end @-@ times , in exchange for her assistance . Reyes departed the FBI shortly thereafter , electing to take Spender 's offer . She spent the next 14 years personally assisting the physically damaged Spender ( even lighting his cigarettes for him ) , but with the intent to halt the invasion from within the syndicate . 
 = = = Season 10 ( 2016 ) = = = 
 Following the widespread outbreak of a contagion , Dana Scully is contacted by Reyes , who claims to know how to develop a vaccine . During their meeting , Reyes reveals her arrangement with Spender . Scully implies that Monica was weak for accepting the deal , though Reyes ' information ultimately allows Scully to create , and administer , a vaccine to Agent Einstein — and , presumably , to the rest of humanity thereafter . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Monica Reyes has attracted mixed reviews from critics . Gish 's portrayal of the character has been described by Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker as " ferocious yet lissome " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , felt that Reyes ' introduction in " This Is Not Happening " was " rather forced " , finding her upbeat personality at odds with the tone of the series at that time ; Shearman and Pearson also felt that the overall use of the character in season nine was " lazy " , with her willingness to believe in anything compromising the tension of episodes such as " 4 @-@ D " or " Hellbound " . However , Shearman considered the character 's appearance in " Empedocles " to be " very clever " , while Gish 's acting in " 4 @-@ D " was described as " stand out " . Writing for The New York Times , Joyce Millman described Reyes and her partner Doggett as " the Diet Coke of Mulder and Scully " , referring to their secondary standing . Fellow New York Times writer Caryn James felt that Reyes and Doggett were " colorless " , and " a shadow " of their predecessors , noting that " where Scully and Mulder 's muted sexual attraction linked them to reality , Doggett and Reyes 's chemistry was nonexistent , even as platonic partners " . 
 = Black Arrow = 
 Black Arrow , officially capitalised BLACK ARROW , was a British satellite carrier rocket . Developed during the 1960s , it was used for four launches between 1969 and 1971 . Its final flight was the first and only successful orbital launch to be conducted by the United Kingdom , and placed the Prospero satellite into low Earth orbit . 
 Black Arrow originated from studies by the Royal Aircraft Establishment for carrier rockets based on the Black Knight rocket , with the project being authorised in 1964 . It was initially developed by Saunders @-@ Roe , and later Westland Aircraft as the result of a merger . 
 Black Arrow was a three @-@ stage rocket , fuelled by RP @-@ 1 paraffin ( kerosene ) and high test peroxide , a concentrated form of hydrogen peroxide . It was retired after only four launches in favour of using American Scout rockets , which the Ministry of Defence calculated to be cheaper than maintaining the Black Arrow programme . 
 = = Development = = 
 Black Arrow originated from a Royal Aircraft Establishment proposal for a rocket capable of placing a 317 @-@ pound ( 144 kg ) payload into low Earth orbit , in order to test systems designed for larger spacecraft . In the autumn of 1964 , the programme was authorised by Conservative Aviation Minister Julian Amery . Then , following a general election in October , the incoming Labour government put the project on hold to reduce expenditure . Following another election , the government approved the continuation of the programme with several modifications , including the reduction of the test programme from five to three launches . The first launch was set for 1968 . 
 Most of the technology and systems used on Black Arrow had already been developed or flight @-@ proven on the Black Knight rocket , or the Blue Steel missile . Black Arrow was designed to reuse as much technology from the earlier programmes as possible in order to reduce costs , and simplify the development process . Many senior staff of the Black Knight programme transferred directly to Black Arrow , including the Chief Missile Scientist , Roy <unk> , the Chief Design Engineer , Ray Wheeler and the Deputy Chief Engineer , John Underwood . 
 Initial development was conducted by Saunders @-@ Roe , which merged into Westland Aircraft in 1964 . Westland was subsequently the prime contractor for the Black Arrow , and assembled the first and second stages at East Cowes on the Isle of Wight . Bristol Siddeley produced the first and second stage engines at a factory in <unk> , Warwickshire . The engines were test fired at the factory before being shipped to the Isle of Wight , where they were integrated into the rocket and the first stage engines were fired again at High Down . Bristol Aerojet produced the third stage in Somerset , while the Explosives Research and Development Establishment produced its solid propellant in Waltham Abbey , Essex . The Rocket Propulsion Establishment , based in Westcott , Buckinghamshire , was responsible for the design and integration of the stage . 
 The name Black Arrow came from the Ministry of Supply policy of assigning designations consisting of a colour and a noun , unofficially known as Rainbow Codes , to research programmes conducted by the Armed Forces . 
 = = Vehicle = = 
 The first and second stages of the Black Arrow were fuelled by RP @-@ 1 paraffin ( kerosene ) , burnt using high test peroxide as an oxidiser . Due to the optimum mixture ratio being about 7 , a larger oxidiser tank was required compared to many contemporary launch systems . The oxidiser tanks were located below the fuel tanks , following the practice of putting the more dense <unk> at bottom in order to lower the centre of gravity and make the rocket easier to control . This arrangement had been pioneered by Germany and the United States , whereas the Soviet Union had placed oxidiser tanks above fuel tanks , making it easier for the lower tank to be filled first . 
 Thrust vectoring was used to provide attitude control on the first two stages . The eight first stage combustion chambers were arranged in pairs which could gimbal either way along one axis . Two of the pairs were arranged perpendicular to the other two , and when all four pairs were used together , they provided roll , pitch and yaw control . The second stage had two combustion chambers , which could gimbal along two axes , providing the same level of control . During a coast phase after second stage cut @-@ off , the rocket was controlled by a reaction control system . The third stage did not have an attitude control system , and was instead spin @-@ stabilised . 
 The first stage was powered by a single Gamma 8 engine , which burned for 127 seconds . The Gamma 8 was an eight @-@ chamber engine , derived from the Gamma 301 engine used on the Black Knight . It was 6 @.@ 9 metres ( 23 ft ) long , and had a diameter of 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) , the same diameter as the French Coralie . Coralie was used as the second stage of the Europa rocket , and the decision to give Black Arrow the same diameter as Coralie was taken in order to make it compatible with Blue Streak , which was used as the first stage of Europa . This would have allowed Black Arrow 's payload capacity to have been increased , and would also have allowed Britain to use the first stage of Black Arrow as a backup to the Coralie . For this reason , all dimensions in the original specification were given in imperial units except the first stage diameter , which was given in metres . 
 The first and second stages were connected by an <unk> structure containing four <unk> IB separation and <unk> motors , which separated and ignited seven seconds after the first stage had cut off . The <unk> separated from the second stage six seconds later . The second stage , which was 2 @.@ 9 metres ( 9 ft 6 in ) long and measured 1 @.@ 37 metres ( 4 ft 6 in ) in diameter , was powered by a two @-@ chamber Gamma 2 engine which ignited shortly after the separation motors , and continued to burn for 123 seconds . Three minutes after launch , during the second stage burn , the payload fairing separated . 
 About 257 seconds into the flight , the second stage cut off , and the rocket entered a coast phase to apogee . Immediately after cut @-@ off , the second stage attitude control system was pressurised . During the coast the correct orientation for third stage separation was maintained by means of the attitude control system . Towards the end of the coast period , the third stage was spun up to a rate of 3 hertz ( 180 rpm ) by means of six Imp rockets . Five seconds later , the third stage separated , and following ten more seconds of coasting , it ignited . The third stage was a <unk> solid rocket motor , which burned for 55 seconds . 
 Just over a minute after the third stage had burned out , the payload was released , and gas generators were used to push the spacecraft and spent upper stage apart . The delay between burnout and separation was intended to reduce the risk of <unk> between the upper stage and payload due to residual thrust . Despite this , following spacecraft separation on the R3 launch , the upper stage collided with the Prospero satellite , damaging one of the spacecraft 's communications antennae ; however the spacecraft was still able to successfully complete its mission . On the R3 launch , the ascent took 710 seconds ( 11 @.@ 8 min ) from liftoff to spacecraft separation . 
 Although none were ever built , several derivatives of Black Arrow were also proposed , as ways of increasing its payload capacity . One proposal added eight Raven solid rocket motors from the Skylark programme to the first stage as booster rockets . Another suggestion was to mount the entire rocket atop a Blue Streak missile , while a third proposal involved replacing the Gamma engines with the more powerful Larch . 
 = = Launches = = 
 Four Black Arrows were launched between 1969 and 1971 . The first two launches were demonstration flights , with battleship third stages and a boilerplate payload . On the first flight an electrical fault caused a pair of first stage combustion chambers to pivot back and forth . Before it cleared the launch pad , the rocket was rolling erratically , and about a minute later it began to disintegrate . After the first stage engine failed , and the rocket began to fall back to earth , it was destroyed by range safety . The second launch was successful . The first all @-@ up launch on 2 September 1970 was the third launch of the Black Arrow , and Britain 's first attempt to launch a satellite . The launch failed due to a leak in the second stage oxidiser pressurisation system , which caused it to cut out early . The third stage fired , but the rocket did not reach orbit , and re @-@ entered over the Gulf of Carpentaria . The fourth launch successfully orbited the Prospero satellite , making the United Kingdom the sixth nation to place a satellite into orbit by means of an indigenously developed carrier rocket . The satellite , also known as X @-@ 3 , was named Prospero after the character Prospero in Shakespeare 's The Tempest . The name was chosen as a reference to events in the play , in which Prospero , a sorcerer , gives up his powers . Prior to the cancellation of the Black Arrow programme , the satellite was to be named after Puck from A Midsummer Night 's Dream . 
 All four launches were conducted from Launch Area 5B at the Woomera Prohibited Area in Australia , which had previously been used as a test site for the Black Knight rocket . During the development programme , launch sites in Barbados , Uist and Norfolk were also considered . The launch sites at Uist and Norfolk were rejected because the former was too remote , while there was a risk that a rocket launched from the latter might drop spent stages on an oil rig in the North Sea . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 The Minister of State for Trade and Industry , Frederick Corfield , announced the cancellation of the Black Arrow project in the House of Commons on 29 July 1971 . As the R3 rocket had already been shipped to the launch site , the second stage having arrived three days earlier , permission was given for it to be launched . 
 The programme was cancelled on economic grounds , as the Ministry of Defence decided that it would be cheaper to use the American Scout rocket , which had a similar payload capacity , for future launches . Prior to the cancellation of Black Arrow , NASA had offered to launch British payloads for free ; however , this offer was withdrawn following the decision to cancel Black Arrow . 
 The final Black Arrow to be completed was R4 , which did not fly , and is preserved in the Science Museum , London , along with the flight spare for the Prospero satellite . A replica of the Black Arrow rocket stands in the Rocket Park at Woomera . In addition , the remains of the first stage of Black Arrow R3 were recovered from the Anna Creek cattle station and are displayed in the William Creek Memorial Park . 
 The launch facilities at Woomera were demolished within a year of the final flight , and half of the engineers who had worked on the programme were laid off . The X @-@ 4 satellite , which had been manifested for launch by Black Arrow R4 , was eventually launched on 9 March 1974 , by an American Scout D @-@ 1 rocket flying from Space Launch Complex 5 at the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California . 
 As of 2014 , the United Kingdom is the only country to have successfully developed and then abandoned a satellite launch capability . All other countries that have developed such a capability have retained it either through their own space programme or , in the case of France , through its involvement in the Ariane programme . 
 = Ngo Dinh Diem presidential visit to Australia = 
 The Ngo Dinh Diem presidential visit to Australia from 2 to 9 September 1957 was an official visit by the first president of the Republic of Vietnam . It was part of a year of travelling for Diem , who made official visits to the United States and other anti @-@ communist countries . As with his American trip , Diem was warmly and lavishly received during the height of the Cold War , garnering bipartisan praise from both the Liberal Party of Australia of Prime Minister Robert Menzies and the opposition Australian Labor Party ( ALP ) . 
 Diem addressed the Parliament of Australia and was made an honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George , one of the highest imperial honours that can be bestowed on a non @-@ British subject — at the time , Australians were also British subjects . Diem did not engage in substantive political discussions with the Australian leaders and he spent most of his time at public functions . He was universally extolled by the media , which praised him for what they perceived to be a successful , charismatic , democratic and righteous rule in South Vietnam , overlooking his authoritarianism , election fraud and other corrupt practices . The Australian Catholic leadership and media were particularly glowing towards the South Vietnamese head of state . A member of Vietnam 's Catholic minority and the brother of Vietnam 's leading archbishop , Diem had pursued policies in Vietnam favoring his co @-@ religionists . He exempted the Catholic Church from land redistribution , gave them more aid and job promotions , and allowed Catholic paramilitaries to attack Buddhists , who formed the religious majority . 
 Diem 's visit was a <unk> in relations between Australia and South Vietnam . Over time , Diem became unpopular with his foreign allies , who began to criticise his autocratic style and religious bias . By the time of his assassination , he had little support . Australia later sent troops to support South Vietnam in the anti @-@ communist fight , but the bipartisanship evaporated during the mid @-@ 1960s as the ALP began to sympathise with North Vietnam and opposition to the war grew . The ALP later withdrew support for and refused to accept refugees from South Vietnam after winning office , but on the return of the centre right Liberal @-@ National coalition to power in 1975 , Vietnamese refugees were allowed to resettle in Australia in large numbers . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1933 , the devoutly Catholic Diem was appointed Interior Minister of Vietnam , serving under Emperor Bảo Đại . However , a few months thereafter he resigned and became a private citizen because the French colonialists would not give Vietnam any meaningful autonomy . During World War II , Imperial Japan attacked Indochina and wrested control from France , but when they were defeated by the Allies in 1945 , a power vacuum was created . The communist @-@ dominated Viet Minh of Ho Chi Minh fought for Vietnamese independence , while the French attempted to regain control of their colony by creating the French Union @-@ allied State of Vietnam under Bảo Đại . A staunch anti @-@ communist nationalist , Diem opposed both and attempted to create his own movement , with little success . With both the French and the communists hostile to him , Diem felt unsafe and went into self @-@ imposed exile in 1950 . He spent the next four years in the United States and Europe enlisting support , particularly among Vatican officials and fellow Catholic politicians in America . The success of the effort was helped by the fact that his elder brother Ngo Dinh Thuc was the leading Catholic cleric in Vietnam and had studied with high @-@ ranking Vatican officials in Rome a few decades earlier . 
 In 1954 , the French lost the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the Geneva Conference was held to determine the future of French Indochina . The Viet Minh were given control of North Vietnam , while the State of Vietnam controlled the territory south of the 17th parallel . The Geneva agreements , which the State of Vietnam did not sign , called for reunification elections to be held in 1956 . Bảo Đại appointed Diem as his prime minister , hoping that he would be able to attract American aid as the French withdrew from Southeast Asia . Diem then deposed Bảo Đại in a fraudulent referendum and declared himself president of the newly proclaimed Republic of Vietnam . Diem received support from the U.S. and other anti @-@ communist countries in the midst of the Cold War . He refused to hold the national elections and asserted that Ho Chi Minh would rig the ballots in the north , although he had done so himself in deposing Bảo Đại . 
 = = Meetings and ceremonies = = 
 Diem arrived in the capital Canberra on 2 September 1957 ; his visit was the first by a foreign incumbent head of state to Australia . He had visited the US in May , and the visit to Australia was the second of three legs in a tour of anti @-@ communist countries in the Asia Pacific region ; Diem had visited Thailand in August and went on to South Korea after leaving Australia . The magnitude of the ceremonial welcome accorded to Diem was unseen since the visit in 1954 by Queen Elizabeth II . According to Peter Edwards , a military historian at the Australian War Memorial specialising in the Vietnam War , " Everywhere he was feted as a man of courage , faith and vision " , and he noted that Diem was received with " more ceremony and pageantry " than the visit of Queen Elizabeth II in 1954 . 
 Upon disembarking from his plane , Diem was photographed for The Age and described as a " small but striking figure in a royal blue silk frock coat , long white trousers and black mandarin hat " . He was greeted by the Governor @-@ General of Australia Sir William Slim and the Prime Minister of Australia Robert Menzies . He was given a 21 @-@ gun salute and a guard of honour by the Royal Australian Air Force , whose fighter jets flew overhead . Diem visited the Royal Military College Duntroon in Canberra , where he watched and addressed a parade of Australian cadets , who were training to become officers . Diem told the students that they were " comrades of the Free World " and that they would help to defend like @-@ minded countries . 
 The centrepiece of Diem 's visit was a speech to a joint sitting of the Parliament of Australia , with both the House of Representatives and the Senate in attendance . After the speech , Menzies called for three cheers for Diem at an official parliamentary luncheon . Doc Evatt , the leader of the opposition Australian Labor Party joined in , proclaiming that peace , stability and democracy had been achieved in South Vietnam . 
 The guard of honour and a 21 @-@ gun salute was repeated in Sydney and Melbourne , where large crowds cheered Diem 's arrival at the airport and the passing of his motorcade . The South Vietnamese leader was taken outside the capital cities for two days so that he could see the Snowy Mountains Scheme , a large hydroelectricity project in highland Victoria . 
 Diem spent little time on detailed defence and policy discussions with Australian officials during the trip , because of his extensive meetings with Catholic leaders . Although Diem had signalled his intentions to discuss defence relations during the visit , these did not materialise . At the end of the visit , Diem and Menzies released a bilateral statement , announcing that they would increase the magnitude of the Colombo Plan , a program under which Asian students could study abroad in Western nations . However , there was little detail in the announcements relating to anti @-@ communism , with only general expressions of Australian support . Diem had previously stated that if North Vietnam attacked the south , he would send the Army of the Republic of Vietnam to land in the Red River Delta in the north and retaliate . This was contrary to the air attack plans of the South East Asian Treaty Organization ( SEATO ) , which had vowed to defend the south under the provisions of the Manila Treaty . Despite the public statements of support , the Australian government never shared the details of the SEATO plans with Diem . 
 At the end of the visit , Menzies bestowed on Diem an honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George , one of the highest imperial honours that had been bestowed on someone who was not a British subject . Edwards said of the trip : " Australia had now associated Diem 's survival with its national interest , publicly and without restraint " , something that eventually extended to military support against the Vietnamese communists . 
 = = Media reception and support = = 
 The Australian media wrote uniformly glowing reports that heaped praise on Diem , and generally presented him as a courageous , selfless and wise leader . The Sydney Morning Herald described Diem as " One of the most remarkable men in the new Asia ... authoritarian in approach but liberal in principle " . The Age compared Diem favourably to Chiang Kai @-@ shek and Syngman Rhee , the Presidents of the Republic of China and South Korea respectively . The trio were the respective leaders of the anti @-@ communist halves of the three countries in Asia that had been divided along communist and anti @-@ communist lines . The Age opined that Diem was not " morally equivocal " but " incorruptible and intensely patriotic " compared to his anti @-@ communist counterparts , and " the type of Asian leader whose straight talk and courageous manner should be valued " . The Canberra Times noted that Diem 's visit coincided with that of Foreign Minister Richard Casey to Malaya for that country 's independence celebrations . Australia had supported Malaya 's successful fight against communism and the newspaper compared the two countries , predicting that they would succeed because " the leaders owe their authority to popular support " . Like the politicians , the press overlooked the negative aspects and reality of Diem 's rule , such as his authoritarianism . Although Diem was depicted as being extremely popular and democratic , he had made himself president when his brother rigged a 1955 referendum that allowed him to depose Bảo Đại ; Diem was subsequently credited with 133 % of the votes in Saigon . Diem 's family regime routinely engaged in corruption , ballot stuffing and arbitrary arrests of all opposition . The newspapers also failed to mention that the South Vietnamese economy was largely being propped up by the Commercial Import Program run by the United States and that land reform had failed . 
 The mainstream media depicted Diem as a friendly and charismatic leader who related well to the populace . The Herald showed photographs of the president eating cheese , and inspecting the foliage at the Botanic Gardens . Diem was depicted making friends with a young boy from a Collingwood public housing estate and having tea with South Vietnamese students studying abroad at the University of Melbourne , with the females wearing the traditional ao dai . In contrast , Diem was generally regarded as aloof and distant from the population , rarely heading outside the presidential palace to mingle with his people , and holding military processions in honour of his ascension to power in front of empty grandstands . 
 The strongest support for Diem came from the Australian Catholic media . Diem was a Catholic in a majority Buddhist country , and he had close religious links with the Vatican , who had helped him rise to power . He had stayed in a seminary run by Cardinal Francis Spellman in the United States in the early 1950s before his elevation to power . Diem 's elder brother Archbishop Ngo Dinh Thuc was the leading Catholic figure in Vietnam and a classmate of Spellman when the pair studied in Rome . Spellman was widely regarded as the most powerful Catholic figure in the United States and he helped to organise support for Diem among American politicians , particularly Catholics . In 1957 , Diem dedicated his country to the Virgin Mary and ruled on the basis of a Catholic doctrine known as <unk> . His younger brother Ngo Dinh Nhu ran the secret and autocratic Catholic Can Lao Party ( Personalist Labor Party ) , which provided a clandestine network of support and police @-@ state mechanisms to protect Diem 's rule . It counted many leading public servants and military officers among its members . Diem also maintained land policies that were preferential to the Roman Catholic Church , the largest property owner in the country . Their holdings were exempt from redistribution under land reform schemes , while the construction of Buddhist temples was restricted ; military and civil service promotions were given preferentially to Catholics . Some Catholic priests ran their own private armies and in some areas , forced conversions , looting , shelling and demolition of pagodas occurred . 
 The Catholic Weekly described Diem as " his nation 's saviour from Red onslaught ... an ardent patriot of great courage and moral integrity and an able intellectual " . The paper also praised Diem 's Catholic links , pointing out that Thuc was a former classmate of the current Archbishop of Sydney Norman Thomas Gilroy when they studied at the Vatican . 
 Diem 's achievements and support for Catholics were particularly praised by Bob Santamaria , the unofficial leader and guiding influence of the Democratic Labor Party ( DLP ) . The DLP had broken away from the Australian Labor Party ( ALP ) , the nation 's main centre @-@ left social democratic party . The split occurred in the 1950s during the McCarthyism scares , as the Catholic factions broke away to form the DLP on the basis that the ALP was too lenient towards communists . One of the reasons that Menzies strongly backed Diem was to gain further favour with the DLP and accentuate the divisions among his left wing opponents . 
 Diem 's visit prompted increased interest in Vietnam by Australian Catholics , particularly supporters of the DLP . Australian Catholics came to see South Vietnam as an anti @-@ communist and Vatican stronghold in Asia and as a result , became strong supporters of the Vietnam War . Harold Lalor , a Jesuit priest and leading confidant of Santamaria , had studied with Thuc in Rome . During the trip , Diem met with Gilroy , the first Australian cardinal , as well as Santamaria and Archbishop of Melbourne Daniel Mannix , both of whom praised him strongly . Mannix was one of the most powerful men in Australia during the era , and had great political influence . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The positive reception accorded to Diem in 1957 contrasted with increasingly negative Australian attitudes towards Vietnam . Over time , the media in both Australia and the United States began to pay more attention to Diem 's autocratic style and religious bias , especially after the eruption of the Buddhist crisis in 1963 , and the iconic self @-@ immolation of Thích Quảng Đức . After six months of civil unrest , Diem was deposed and assassinated in November 1963 , and by that time , little goodwill remained . With new leadership in Saigon , and an escalation in the war against the communists , Australia sent in ground troops — including conscripts — to support South Vietnam , but over time , the bipartisanship of the 1950s evaporated . The centre @-@ left ALP became more sympathetic to the communists and Labor leader Arthur Calwell stridently denounced South Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Cao Ky as a " fascist dictator " and a " butcher " ahead of his 1967 visit — at the time Ky was the chief of the Vietnam Air Force and headed a military junta . Despite the controversy leading up to the visit , Ky 's trip was a success . He dealt with the media effectively , despite hostile sentiment from some sections of the press and public . However , with the war becoming increasing destructive , and the death toll rising , opposition to the Vietnam War grew . Edwards and his deputy Jim Cairns led large anti @-@ war protests . Labor won the 1972 federal election on an anti @-@ war platform , and Whitlam withdrew Australian troops and recognised North Vietnam , which welcomed his electoral success . Whitlam later refused to accept South Vietnamese refugees following the fall of Saigon to the communists in April 1975 . The Liberals — led by Malcolm Fraser — condemned Whitlam , and after defeating Labor , allowed South Vietnamese refugees to settle in Australia in large numbers . 
 = 2012 – 13 Vancouver Canucks season = 
 The 2012 – 13 Vancouver Canucks season was the franchise 's 43rd season in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . The Canucks won their fifth straight Northwest Division title and finished third in the Western Conference . In the playoffs Vancouver was swept by the San Jose Sharks in the first round . Shortly after the Canucks ' playoff elimination , Head Coach Alain Vigneault was fired . 
 Prior to the beginning of the season the NHL 's collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) expired resulting in a lockout . The season was threatened with cancellation before the lockout ended , ultimately the length of the labor dispute resulted in the reduction of games from the standard 82 to a shortened 48 . Cory Schneider entered the season as the team 's new starting goaltender , while the Canucks attempted to trade incumbent Roberto Luongo . The two goaltenders battled for playing time early in the season resulting in a goaltender controversy . After a six @-@ game winning streak to start February the Canucks dealt with multiple injuries and suspensions resulting in the team slumping . In late March Schneider captured the starters job starting seven consecutive games helping the team to a second six @-@ game winning streak . Vancouver dueled the Minnesota Wild in the standings before pulling away in April and winning the division . Led by Henrik and Daniel Sedin the Canucks ' power play struggled dropping from fourth the previous season to twenty @-@ third , with the Sedin twins ' point production declining . Derek Roy was brought in through a trade to help deal with injuries at centre in the team 's only trade of the year . Schneider was injured late in the season and missed the first two games of the playoffs . Vancouver lost the fourth game of their playoff series on a controversial call on Daniel Sedin . 
 Three franchise records were set during the season . Henrik Sedin became the Canucks all @-@ time leading scorer , surpassing Markus Naslund . Alexandre Burrows scored six seconds into a game making it the fastest goal to start a game for Vancouver . Vigneault became the all @-@ time leader in games coached . As a way of celebrating 100 years of hockey in British Columbia , the Canucks wore a special patch on their jerseys with the logo of the Vancouver Millionaires , the first professional team in the city . They also wore replica jerseys of the Millionaires for one game . 
 = = Off @-@ season = = 
 Following an early exit from the 2012 Stanley Cup playoffs , the off @-@ season began with speculation that Head Coach Alain Vigneault might be fired . There were also rumors that General Manager ( GM ) Mike Gillis could be removed from his position . After an end of the year meeting with Team Owner Francesco Aquilini , Gillis was given a five @-@ year contract extension . Fifteen days after his new deal , Gillis signed Vigneault to a two @-@ year contract extension . 
 The Canucks announced that they would be celebrating 100 years of hockey in British Columbia during the season . To that end , they would wear a special patch on their jerseys with the logo of the Vancouver Millionaires , the first professional team in the city . They also would wear replica jerseys of the Millionaires for their March 16 game against the Detroit Red Wings . 
 After being replaced as starter for the final three playoff games , Roberto Luongo stated he would be willing to waive his no @-@ trade clause if asked . Following the re @-@ signing of Cory Schneider to a three @-@ year $ 12 million extension , trade rumors increased . It was later reported that Luongo wanted to be traded and that " it was time to move on . " Though as training camp approached , Luongo had not been traded . He indicated that he would have no issues returning to the Canucks . Gillis further stated that although he had received several " strong " offers , the Canucks were not having a " fire sale " for Luongo . Doug MacLean on Sportsnet 's Hockey Central reported that a deal was in place to send Luongo to the Toronto Maple Leafs . However , Luongo , believing the Florida Panthers , his preferred destination , were going to make a deal for him , refused to waive his no trade clause . Luongo later stated that he never turned down a trade . 
 = = = 2012 – 13 lockout = = = 
 Prior to the NHL 's collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) expiring in September , teams reassigned players on two @-@ way or entry @-@ level contracts to minor league affiliates . The Canucks assigned 27 players , including Chris Tanev , Eddie Lack , Zack Kassian and 2012 second @-@ round draft pick Alexandre Mallet to the Chicago Wolves , while first round pick Brendan <unk> was sent to his junior team , the Belleville Bulls . When the CBA expired on September 15 , the NHL enforced a lockout until a new agreement could be reached . Canucks management posted a message from the team to the fans stating that they would continue with community initiatives throughout the lockout , which they hoped would be resolved as soon as possible , and thanked fans for their loyalty and patience . They also reduced their employees work week to four days and instituted a 20 % pay reduction . 
 Four days into the lockout , the NHL cancelled all pre @-@ season games before September 30 , cutting the first four games from Vancouver 's schedule . A week later , with no further talks between the two sides , the remainder of the pre @-@ season was canceled . With no movement on a new deal , the NHL cancelled its first set of regular season games on October 4 . Games continued to be cancelled in blocks culminating in their cancellation through January 14 . As the lockout dragged on , NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman gave a self @-@ imposed a deadline of January 11 to agree to terms on a new CBA or the entire season would be cancelled . As the deadline approached , Bettman and the head of the National Hockey League Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) , Donald Fehr , engaged in a 16 @-@ hour negotiation session that produced a tentative agreement to end the lockout . Both sides ratified the deal and a memorandum of understanding was signed on January 12 . This officially ended the lockout and allowed training camps to open the following day . Due to the length of the lockout , the NHL announced a new scheduled for a shortened 48 @-@ game season after it ended . 
 = = = Training camp = = = 
 Under the prior CBA , players could not be traded until after the lockout was resolved , meaning Roberto Luongo could not be moved . Once a new CBA was reached , the trade rumors returned , including one that alleged Maple Leafs GM Brian Burke was fired in order to help facilitate a trade . For his part , Luongo reiterated that he was willing to remain with the Canucks for the shortened season , but did not want to remain long @-@ term . 
 With training camp starting on January 13 , 2013 , Vancouver recalled 12 players from the Wolves . They also bolstered their defence corp by signing NHL veterans Jim Vandermeer and Cam Barker to one @-@ year contracts . At the forward position , the Canucks were dealing with injuries to their second line . Centre Ryan Kesler , who was recovering from off @-@ season surgeries to his shoulder and wrist , would be unable to start the season ; it was unknown how long he would be out rehabbing the injuries . Winger David Booth was injured during the team 's physicals to start camp . After having an MRI done on his injury , it was announced that Booth would miss four to six weeks recovering . Alain Vigneault stated that he hoped to keep his third and fourth lines intact , leaving the possible replacements as , Andrew Ebbett , Jordan Schroeder and Zack Kassian . Schroeder was a first @-@ round draft pick for Vancouver in 2009 , but had never played in an NHL game . Ebbett a utility , journeyman forward played in 18 games for Vancouver in 2011 – 12 . While the second @-@ year Kassian produced only four goals in his rookie campaign . Vancouver elected to start the season with Ebbett and put Kassian on their second line . In order to keep defensive depth , the Canucks decided to keep nine defenceman . Schroeder was sent back to the minors in order to comply with the 23 @-@ man roster and because he would not need to clear waivers . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 = = = January = = = 
 After winning back to back Presidents ' Trophies in prior seasons the Canucks were projected as Stanley Cup contenders . The prediction was based on Vancouver 's team depth , the offense provided by Daniel and Henrik Sedin , the two @-@ way play of Kesler and Alexandre Burrows , plus the versatility of the Canuck 's top four defenceman . The Hockey News predicted that the Canucks would win the Northwest Division and finish as the second place team in the Western Conference . 
 Schneider began the year as the team 's starting goaltender . In his first game against the Anaheim Ducks , Schneider allowed five goals on 14 shots and was pulled midway through the second period . When Luongo entered the game he was given a standing ovation from the crowd . Luongo gave up another two goals as the Canucks lost 7 – 3 . In the post @-@ game interview , Schneider took the blame for the loss , saying , " It was unacceptable to play that way and to put my team in that situation and not even give them a chance to win . " He also stated he would work hard to fix the mistakes . While Luongo said of this ovation that it was " a fun moment . " The situation quickly led to a goalie controversy . Luongo made the start the following night against the Edmonton Oilers . According to Vigneault , he had already determined the starting assignments for the opening two games , and Schneider did not factor into Luongo 's start . In the game , Luongo allowed two goals after Vancouver had taken a 2 – 0 lead . The Canucks lost the game 3 – 2 in a shootout . Luongo failed to stop either of the two shooters he faced , while Vancouver did not score . After losing their first two games , Vancouver added to their forward depth recalling Jordan Schroeder from the AHL and assigning Jim Vandermeer to the Wolves . Schroeder took over the second line duties after Andrew Ebbett went pointless in the first two contests . 
 Schneider started Vancouver 's next game against the Calgary Flames . For the second @-@ straight game , Vancouver lost a two @-@ goal lead in a game which eventually went to a shootout . In contrast to his first start , Schneider had a strong game , making 34 saves by the end of overtime . In the shootout , he stopped four of the five shooters he faced , earning the Canucks their first win of the season . Two nights later , as they began their first road trip , the Canucks played a rematch with the Ducks in Anaheim . Schneider made the start and earned some redemption , stopping all 30 Anaheim shots , helping the Canucks to the 5 – 0 win and earning his fifth career shutout . Following the win , Schneider started the next game , a 4 – 1 loss to the San Jose Sharks . Luongo started the next four games , finishing off the month of January and beginning February . Vigneault joked that he was making his starting goaltender decisions based on coin tosses . He further noted that the two goaltenders were team guys and they would do what was asked of them and never complain . The coin became a running joke for Vigneault and the Canucks in general , as Ryan Kesler stated he flipped it before announcing his return from injury . 
 = = = February = = = 
 At forward , Kassian began the year on the top line with the Sedin twins . Kassian scored five goals in the first seven games of the season . Partway through the Canucks ' second game of February , Kassian was replaced on the top line by Alexandre Burrows . Kassian was dropped to the third line . Despite Kassian surpassing his goal total from his rookie season , the Sedins started the year with their lowest output in nearly ten years , combining for 14 points in the first 10 games . Coinciding with the line changes , Vancouver went on a six @-@ game winning streak between the end of January and their February 12 game . After the last game of their winning streak , the Canucks were expecting Kesler to return to line @-@ up . 
 As Kesler was returning from injury , Vancouver placed centre Manny Malhotra on injured reserve ( IR ) for the remainder of the season . In regards to the move , Gillis stated he felt Malhotra was vulnerable to serious injury because of an eye injury he suffered in 2011 . The decision was made despite Malhotra playing in 78 games in the 2011 – 12 season and nine games in 2013 . Gillis further noted that he had reservation about him playing in the previous season , but wanted to give Malhotra a chance to adapt . After watching him play , Gillis did not see the types of changes that would not put him at a higher risk of injury . Upon placing Malhotra on IR , Gillis called it the hardest thing he had done as a GM . NHL Deputy Commissioner Bill Daly released a statement on the situation , saying " the League is satisfied and has approved the team 's and player 's joint decision to discontinue the player 's participation in NHL games at this time on the basis of the player ’ s current medical condition and the risk of injury that such condition poses . " The Canucks also announced that Malhotra would remain with the team in some capacity , but would not return to the ice including in the playoffs . 
 Kesler played his first game of the season on February 15 against the Dallas Stars . The game was also witness to a piece of Canucks history as Henrik Sedin recorded two assists to pass Markus Naslund as the franchise 's all @-@ time leading scorer , with 757 points . After recording the record setting point , Sedin was given a standing ovation that carried on as play continued . After three minutes the play stopped , and Sedin saluted the crowd . During a commercial break , the Canucks ran a tribute video for the accomplishment , featuring congratulations from Naslund and Trevor Linden , the third @-@ leading scorer in team history . As for Kesler , he registered an assist and blocked three shots in over 17 minutes of ice time of the 4 – 3 loss . After experiencing some discomfort in his right foot , Kesler had X @-@ rays taken . The X @-@ rays were negative and he continued to play . 
 Four days after Kesler 's return , Jannik Hansen was involved in a controversial hit on the Chicago Blackhawks ' Marian Hossa . As both players went up for an airborne puck , Hansen struck Hossa in the back of the head with his forearm and elbow . Hossa then laid on the ice for a few minutes , during which time the training staff examined him before he was able to leave under his own power . Hansen was given a two @-@ minute minor for roughing and Hossa did not return to the game . Opinions of the hit varied with former NHL referee Kerry Fraser , stating that he did not believe that there was any deliberate or malicious intent , and that he would be surprised if Hansen received a suspension for the play . Meanwhile , former Blackhawks analyst Ed Olczyk stated , " there ’ s no doubt in my mind , once he didn ’ t play the puck , he had one thing in his mind , and that was to put his forearm or elbow in the back of the head of Marian Hossa , " and he would be surprised if Hansen was not suspended . Hossa returned to practice the following day . Hansen was suspended for one game due to what Brendan Shanahan called " the carelessness and force of which the blow was delivered . " 
 With Kesler back in the lineup , the Canucks were inconstant posting a 2 – 3 – 2 record . [ note 1 ] Kesler registered five points in the seven games , but was playing with the discomfort steaming from a blocked shot in his first game back against Dallas . He was given a CT scan for his peace of mind . The results of the scan revealed a fracture in his foot . Though no time table for his return was given , the expectation was that he would be out of the line @-@ up for four @-@ to @-@ six weeks . Late in the month , Kevin Bieksa suffered a groin injury in a game versus the Nashville Predators . He missed the next two games as Vancouver finished the month with back @-@ to @-@ back losses . After being reunited with Burrows , the Sedin twins registered a combined 18 points in the final six games of February , while Kassian tallied only three assists in the 11 games after his demotion . 
 = = = March = = = 
 Bieksa returned for the first game in the month of March , a 5 – 2 win over the Los Angeles Kings . During the game , he re @-@ aggravated the injury and was listed as day @-@ to @-@ day . With Bieksa and Kesler out , Vancouver slumped dropping three straight games going 0 – 1 – 2 . Entering their March 10 game against the Minnesota Wild , the lead for the Northwest Division was at stake . A regulation win for the Wild would give them the lead based on tie breakers . Vancouver lost the game 4 – 2 and dropped to sixth place in the Western Conference . The Canucks reclaimed the division lead two days later with a win over the Columbus Blue Jackets . In the March 16 game against Detroit , Alexandre Burrows set a franchise record when he scored six seconds into the game , making it the fastest goal to start a game in team history . Vancouver failed to capitalize on the early lead , losing the game 5 – 2 and falling back into a tie with the Wild . The Canucks re @-@ matched the Wild two days later with a chance to take sole possession of the division lead . Vancouver took the lead in the second scoring on the power play . The goal marked the first power play tally in 11 games , ending a 0 – 36 slump , the worst in franchise history . Much like the Detroit game , the Canucks failed to take advantage of the early lead and lost the game 3 – 1 and fell to seventh in the Conference . 
 Schneider started Vancouver 's next game and earned the win against the St. Louis Blues . The win marked the beginning of a six @-@ game winning streak with Schneider as the starting goaltender each game . He allowed a total of six goals during the steak and posted two shutouts . The wins put the Canucks back into first in the Northwest . In the second game of their winning streak , defenceman Alexander Edler collided with Phoenix Coyotes ' goaltender Mike Smith and was given a five @-@ minute major for charging . The following day , Edler was given a two @-@ game suspension for his actions . Also during the Canucks ' winning streak , they began to have injury problems . Booth suffered a leg injury that required surgery which ended his season . In 12 games played , Booth scored only a single goal into an empty net . Winger Dale Weise injured a shoulder . Kassian suffered a back injury , and Steve <unk> missed games due to an illness . With the forward corps depleted , defenceman Keith Ballard was moved to forward . He continued to play upfront until he suffered a broken foot . 
 In his seventh consecutive start , Schneider gave up two early goals to the Edmonton Oilers and was pulled in favor of Luongo . The goals were scored on Edmonton 's first two shots . Goals continued to come in quick succession as Taylor Hall scored his second goal , Edmonton 's third , 2 : 34 into the game , setting an Oilers franchise record for the fastest three goals to start a game . Hall set another Edmonton record minutes later when he completed the hat @-@ trick at 7 : 58 in the first . It marked the fastest hat @-@ trick to start a game , surpassing Wayne Gretzky 's previous record . Vancouver did not allow another goal , but failed to score , losing 4 – 0 . They were again passed by Minnesota for the division lead and finished March as the fourth @-@ placed team in the Western Conference . 
 = = = April = = = 
 In their first game of April , Vancouver attempted to improve its offensive production by re @-@ calling their 2011 first round draft choice , Nicklas Jensen , and forward Bill Sweatt . The recalls failed to produce , however , as the Canucks lost to the San Jose Sharks 3 – 2 . The following day , the Canucks acquired centre Derek Roy from the Dallas Stars for Kevin Connauton and a second @-@ round draft pick . The trade was believed to be an attempt to fill a hole at centre while Kesler was out with an injury . The expectation was that Roy would become the team 's third line center once Kesler returned to the line @-@ up , though the possibility of the two playing together was proposed . At the NHL trade deadline , Vancouver failed to trade Luongo . They were reportedly close to a deal with the Toronto Maple Leafs , which eventually fell through . In response to finding out that he would not be traded , Luongo stated , " My contract sucks — that 's what 's the problem , " and would " scrap it if I could now . " The Canucks felt they needed more size and grit in their line @-@ up and attempted to add some though trades . However , they missed out on acquiring <unk> Clowe and Raffi Torres . Clowe chose to waive his no @-@ trade clause to go to the New York Rangers so he could play in the Eastern Conference . The Coyotes traded Torres to the Sharks , as they considered San Jose 's third @-@ round pick more attractive than the Canucks ' third @-@ rounder . 
 In his first game as a Canuck , Roy tallied an assist helping Vancouver to a 4 – 0 win . The win moved the Canucks passed Minnesota for the division lead . The shutout marked Schneider 's fourth of the season , which doubled his career total . Two games later , Schneider registered his fifth shutout of the season in a 2 – 0 over the Coyotes , tying him for the League lead . The game also marked the return of Kesler , who scored the game @-@ winning goal . Minnesota slumped towards the end of the season and the Canucks won their fifth @-@ straight Northwest Division title with a 2 – 1 victory over the Blackhawks . In the game , Schneider suffered a groin injury and was unable to play the last two games of the season ; he was listed by the Canucks as day @-@ to @-@ day with a " body " injury . With Schneider out , the Canucks lost their final two regular season games . In their final loss , Vigneault rested many of his regulars , though he received criticism for playing Henrik Sedin for only 22 seconds . Furthermore , Sedin left the bench after his one shift . The Los Angeles Times ' Helene Elliott called it a cheap way of keeping Sedin 's ironman streak intact . For his part , Henrik Sedin told Vigneault that " he would be okay with sitting out the game " and to him the streak is just " a number in the paper . " Vigneault responded by telling Sedin that " he 's not going to be the one that breaks the streak , " and he gave him the choice to remain on the bench or return to the locker room . Sedin felt remaining on the bench would have been a further distraction and chose to leave . By season 's end , the Sedin twins ' point production dropped from the previous years . Henrik 's point points @-@ per @-@ game average was the lowest it had been since 2007 – 08 , while Daniel 's was his worst since 2003 – 04 . The <unk> ' power play also struggled throughout the year dropping from fourth in 2011 – 12 to 23rd in the League . 
 = = Playoffs = = 
 Vancouver entered the playoffs as the Western Conference 's third seed by virtue of winning the Northwest Division . As a result , they faced the sixth @-@ seeded San Jose Sharks . The series was a rematch of the 2011 Western Conference Finals , in which Vancouver defeated the Sharks in five games to advance to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals . However , the Sharks had won all three of the regular season games during the season . 
 With Schneider still injured , Luongo started the first game of the series . There was concern that Kesler would also be unable to play in Game 1 . When asked about Kesler , Vigneault joked , " We 've got him locked in a back room . We 're feeding him raw meat . The beast will be ready tonight . " Luongo started strong , holding the Sharks scoreless in the first period despite the Canucks being outshot 6 – 1 in the first 4 : 06 of the game . Vancouver took a 1 – 0 lead midway through the second , though San Jose tied the game shortly after and added two more goals in the third to win the game 3 – 1 . Luongo finished with 25 saves , Kesler played over 21 minutes , registering only two shots and finishing as a – 1 . Leading up to Game 2 , Kesler vowed to be better . It was also rumored he had the flu in Game 1 . Schneider was still unable to play , and there were concerns he would not be traveling with the team to San Jose for Game 3 . In Game 2 , the Canucks trailed 1 – 0 after two periods of play . In the third period , Kesler scored a power play goal to tie the game and six minutes later , capitalized on a Sharks turnover to put Vancouver up 2 – 1 . With Canucks leading late , San Jose pulled their goaltender for the extra attacker . With the net empty , Jannik Hansen had a chance to put the game away but missed the net . Shortly after with the play in Vancouver 's end , Henrik Sedin attempted to make a pass to the middle of the ice which resulted in a turnover . On the ensuing play , a Dan Boyle shot deflected off Alexander Edler and through the pads of Luongo . The puck stopped short of the goal line , but Patrick Marleau tapped the puck in to tie the game . In overtime , a blocked shot led to an odd man rush for the Sharks , resulting in Raffi Torres scoring the game @-@ winning goal . The loss put the Canucks down 2 – 0 in the series . Vancouver had never won a series after losing the first two games . 
 Schneider returned from injury to play in Game 3 after missing two weeks . After the first two periods , the Canucks trailed 2 – 1 . The Sharks scored quickly in the third period and by the 4 : 07 mark had scored three goals to make it a 5 – 1 game . After the fifth goal , Schneider was pulled and replaced by Luongo . Vancouver eventually lost the game 5 – 2 , with Schneider making 23 saves on 28 shots . Luongo stopped all 10 shots he faced . In the post @-@ game press conference , Schneider stated he felt good , but did not do enough to help out his teammates . Later , questions were raised about who would be the starter for Game 4 . Luongo stated he would be ready if asked to play , but also stated he would be supportive of Schneider if he was the starter . Sharks ' centre Joe Thornton stated that San Jose felt Luongo had played great in the first two games , and they were lucky not to have to face him in Game 3 . In Game 4 , Schneider made the start and after two periods , the Canucks trailed 2 – 1 . Midway through the third period , Vancouver had taken the lead , but late in the period , San Jose tied the game with a power play goal to force overtime . In the extra period , Daniel Sedin checked Tommy Wingels , which sent the Sharks winger 's head into the boards . Sedin was given a controversial boarding penalty on the play . On the ensuing power play , San Jose scored to win the game and complete the series sweep . After the goal was scored , Daniel voiced his opinion of the call to the referees and was given a game misconduct penalty for abusive language . When asked about the call after the game , he replied , " It 's the playoffs . It 's shoulder to shoulder , " and it was a bad call , though he further noted that the Canucks did not lose the series on the call . Brother Henrik noted that it was " a bullshit call " also pointing out that it was shoulder to shoulder . Referee Kelly Sutherland explained the call by stating he deemed it a violent shove into the boards where the player could not defend himself . For his part , Schneider made 43 saves on 47 shots in Game 4 , he stated that he was 100 % healthy and his groin injury was not a factor in his play . 
 = = Post @-@ season = = 
 At an end of the season press conference , GM Mike Gillis stated the Canucks would " hit the reset button on a number of different fronts . " Days later Vigneault was fired , along with assistant coaches , Rick Bowness and Newell Brown . Vigneault left as the all @-@ time winningest coach in Canucks history , while winning two Presidents ' Trophies and six Northwest Division titles . A month later , John Tortorella was hired as the new head coach . Tortorella had been fired by the New York Rangers earlier in the off @-@ season following a second round playoff loss to the Boston Bruins . 
 After the coaching situation had been settled , Gillis next turned his attention back to trading Luongo . The Canucks were hoping to make a deal at the 2013 NHL Entry Draft . As the draft approached , it was reported the Canucks were also shopping Schneider . Originally , it was believed the rumors were an attempt by Gillis to gain leverage for any potential Luongo deals . However , in a surprise move , Schneider was trade to the New Jersey Devils for the ninth overall pick in the draft , which Vancouver used to select Bo Horvat . Fans , as well as both Luongo and Schneider , were shocked by the news . Luongo stated , " I have to let this sink in and figure out what I 'm going to do . " While Schneider stated he was not sure what to say or think and he was speechless , adding , " it was nice to have resolution to the situation . " 
 = = Standings = = 
 = = = Divisional standings = = = 
 = = = Conference standings = = = 
 Divisions : CE – Central , NW – Northwest , PA – Pacific 
 bold – Qualified for playoffs , y – Won division , p – Won Presidents ' Trophy ( best record in NHL ) 
 = = Schedule and results = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = = Detailed records = = = 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 = = = Skaters = = = 
 = = = Goaltenders = = = 
 † Traded to Canucks mid @-@ season . Stats reflect time with Canucks only . ‡ Traded to another team mid @-@ season . Stats reflect time with Canucks only . 
 Bold / italics denotes franchise record 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = = = Milestones = = = 
 = = = Records = = = 
 = = Transactions = = 
 During the off @-@ season Vancouver signed defenceman Jason Garrison to a six @-@ year contract worth $ 27 @.@ 6 million . While the Canucks brought in Garrison , they lost longtime defenceman Sami Salo . The Canucks wanted to re @-@ sign Salo , though they were unwilling to sign him to a two @-@ year contract and offered only a one @-@ year deal . Salo chose to leave and signed a two @-@ year $ 7 @.@ 5 million contract with the Tampa Bay Lightning . It was believed that Garrison would step in and contribute to the power play and replace the departed Salo , who had performed a similar role . However , he struggled to adjust with his new team . He was taken off the power play unit and dropped to the third paring within the first month . After the injuries to Bieksa , Garrison was moved from left defenceman to the right side paring with Dan Hamhuis . The coaching staff came to consider this paring to be the best and most trusted . Garrison finished the season with eight goals and eight assists , scoring three goals and three assists on the power play , and registering a + 18 rating . His plus @-@ minus was second on the team and led all defenceman . 
 = = = Trades = = = 
 = Born to Make You Happy = 
 " Born to Make You Happy " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her debut studio album , ... Baby One More Time ( 1999 ) . It was released on December 6 , 1999 , by JIVE Records , as the fourth single from the album . Before recording the song , Spears had to ask the writers of the song , Andreas Carlsson and Kristian Lundin , to re @-@ write it , since it was a sexual song . The singer first recorded her vocals in March 1998 , and re @-@ recorded them later on the same year . The dance @-@ pop and teen pop song alludes to a relationship that a woman desires to correct , not quite understanding what went wrong , as she comes to realize that she was " born to make [ her lover ] happy " . 
 " Born to Make You Happy " received mixed reviews from critics , who praised it for being an early classic and a proficient single , despite considering the song as entirely unremarkable like other ballads on the album . The song was commercially successful worldwide , peaking at number one in Ireland , and reaching top five positions in Belgium , Europe , Finland , Germany , Netherlands , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland . In the United Kingdom , it also peaked at number one , and is Spears ' sixth best @-@ selling single in the country . An accompanying music video was directed by Billie Woodruff , and portrays Spears dreaming that she is with her lover , while she sings and dances during the majority of the video . Spears has performed " Born to Make You Happy " on four concert tours . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before recording her debut album , Spears had originally envisioned it in style of " Sheryl Crow music , but younger [ and ] more adult contemporary " . However , the singer agreed with her label 's appointment of producers , who had the objective to reach a teen public at the time . She flew to Cheiron Studios in Stockholm , Sweden , where half of the album was recorded from March to April 1998 , with producers Max Martin , Denniz Pop and Rami Yacoub , among others . " Born to Make You Happy " was written and produced by Kristian Lundin , and co @-@ written by Andreas Carlsson , and was the first work by the duo . Spears originally recorded the vocals for the song in March 1998 , at Battery Studios in New York City , New York . They were later re @-@ recorded in April 1998 at Cheiron Studios , and used on the album version , while the original vocals were used on the " Bonus Remix " of the song . It was also mixed at Cheiron Studios by Max Martin . Esbjörn Öhrwall played the guitar , while keyboards and programming was done by Lundin . Background vocals were provided by Carlsson and Nana Hedin . " Born to Make You Happy " was released as the fourth single from ... Baby One More Time on December 6 , 1999 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Born to Make You Happy " is a teen pop and dance @-@ pop song that lasts for four minutes and three seconds . The song is composed in the key of B minor and is set in time signature of common time , with a moderately slow tempo of 88 beats per minute . Spears vocal range spans over an octave , from F ♯ 3 to B4 . The song 's lyrics are about a relationship that a woman desires to correct , not quite understanding what went wrong , as she comes to realize that " I don 't know how to live without your love / I was born to make you happy " . The song has a basic sequence of Bm – G – D – A as its chord progression . 
 David Gauntlett , author of Media , gender , and identity : an introduction ( 2002 ) , noted that , despite wanting her lover next to her in the song , Spears ' " fans see her as assertive , strong and confident , and an example that young women can make it on their own " . The singer revealed in an interview with Rolling Stone , the writers had to re @-@ write the original lyrics of the song . " I asked them to change the words to ' Born to Make You Happy . ' It was a sexual song , " she revealed . " I said , ' This may be a little old for me . ' Because of the image thing , I don 't want to go over the top . If I come out being Miss Prima Donna , that wouldn 't be smart . I want to have a place to grow " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Born to Make You Happy " received mixed reviews from music critics . Kyle Anderson of MTV considered the song 's chorus more than " a little bit off @-@ putting , " saying the first lines of it " could be a sentiment that a lovelorn 16 @-@ year @-@ old can understand , but it also sounds like Spears is in training to be a geisha . " Craig MacInnis of Hamilton Spectator said " [ " Born to Make You Happy " ] verge on the sort of boy @-@ worshipping dreck that even Tiffany would have sniffed at . " Mike Ross of Edmond Sun said , as Spears emotes in the song , " the message behind the music is worse than mere sweet nothings . [ ... ] So much for Girl Power . " Amanda Murray of Sputnikmusic considered " Born to Make You Happy " a " proficient but entirely <unk> song , " while Andy Petch @-@ Jex of musicOMH considered the song an " early classic . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On January 29 , 2000 , " Born to Make You Happy " debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart . The song shipped over 200 @,@ 000 copies in the United Kingdom , earning a silver certification by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . " Born to Make You Happy " has sold over 325 @,@ 000 copies in the United Kingdom , according to The Official Charts Company . It is her sixth best @-@ selling single in the country . In Ireland , the song also entered the Irish Singles Chart at number one on January 20 , 2000 , while peaking at number two on the European chart . In Sweden , " Born to Make You Happy " debuted at number four on December 23 , 1999 , peaking at number two in the following week . The song has shipped over 30 @,@ 000 copies in the country , earning a platinum certification by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) . In Germany , the song earned a gold certification by The Federal Association of Music Industry ( <unk> ) , after peaking at number three on the charts . In France , " Born to Make You Happy " reached number nine , and was certified Silver by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) . 
 = = Music video = = 
 JIVE Records commissioned a music video for the song to be directed by Billie Woodruff . It was produced under Geneva Films , while the choreography was created by Wade Robson . The narrative of the video shows Spears dreaming as she sleeps in her room . As the dream begins , Spears is shown in a blue and silver futuristic room with several different levels , where she sings and walks around , and puts her feet on the wall while wearing a shiny silver outfit . MTV news reporter Ellen Thompson considered it the sexiest moment of the music video . As the video continues , Spears is seen on top of the apartment building she lives in , performing a dance segment in a red top and black skirt with a few backup dancers . The following scenes shows the singer wearing white clothes and singing in the room in which she is sleeping , while her love interest comes into her room to see her . Together , they start a pillow fight that shortly ends after Spears is shown again in her room still sleeping , however , now with a smile upon her face . A longer dance segment intercalates with all the scenes during the whole video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Born to Make You Happy " has been performed by Spears on four tours . On her first tour , ... Baby One More Time Tour , she sang the song seated on a staircase , while on her second tour , Crazy 2k Tour , the performance of the song included a full dance segment . On 2000s Oops ! ... I Did It Again World Tour , Spears performed " Born to Make You Happy " wearing pajamas and slippers , with a dance segment near the end . " Born to Make You Happy " was performed for the last time on Dream Within a Dream Tour , where Spears emerged from the middle of a giant musical box on the stage as a ballerina , to perform the song in a medley with " Lucky " and " Sometimes " , right after the performance of " Overprotected " . Spears also performed " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " and " Born to Make You Happy " on Disney Channel in Concert in 1999 . The performances were recorded and included on Spears ' first home video release , Time Out with Britney Spears . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Britney Spears – lead vocals 
 Kristian Lundin – songwriting , producer , keyboards , programming 
 Andreas Carlsson – songwriting , background vocals 
 Nana Hedin – background vocals 
 Esbjörn Öhrwall – bass , guitar 
 Max Martin – mixing 
 Michael Tucker – pro @-@ tools engineer 
 Reza Safina – assistant engineer 
 Tom Coyne – audio mastering 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Jan Dekert = 
 Jan Dekert or Jan <unk> ( 1738 – 4 October 1790 ) was a Polish merchant of German descent and political activist . Starting in the 1760s , he rose to become one of the most prominent merchants in the Polish capital of Warsaw . He was an activist arguing for more rights for the burghers in the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth while opposing Jewish merchants . As the representative of Warsaw , he was elected a deputy to the Sejms of 1784 and 1786 , as well as to the Great Sejm ( 1788 – 1892 ) . He was the mayor of Warsaw ( 1789 – 1790 ) , during which period he organized the Black Procession on 2 December 1789 ( a march of burghers who delivered a petition to the king ) . This was a major step towards the passing of the Free Royal Cities Act enfranchising burghers , as one of the reforms of the Great Sejm and part of the Constitution of the 3rd May , 1791 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 He was born in 1738 in the city of <unk> . The exact date , and information about his family are unknown , as any relevant documents have been lost . He likely had beyond basic education , and some sum of money when he left <unk> and traveled to Warsaw . 
 In December 1756 , Dekert was admitted to the Warsaw " youth " Confraternity of Merchants ( <unk> <unk> <unk> " <unk> " ) . He started out as a clerk in a cloth store of Kazimierz <unk> ( or <unk> ) , in whose house he also stayed . In April 1761 he married his patron 's daughter , Róża <unk> . By 1762 he had taken over the cloth store , moved from the " youth " Confraternity of Merchants to the " senior " ( " <unk> " ) one , and become a full citizen of Warsaw . Some time before 1786 , Róża died , and Dekert married Antonina <unk> ( <unk> ) . He had several children from his two marriages , among them Jan Dekert , future bishop of Warsaw . 
 Dekert 's rise to mayor began with his first official positions in the Warsaw merchant organizations in the 1760s . In the early 1760s he was among the steering group of the " youth " Confraternity , which he resigned in 1762 upon joining the " senior " one . There is some confusion regarding his exact positions and the dates he held them . According to Zienkowska , in 1767 he received a position ( <unk> ) in the magistrate of Warsaw . According to Jędruch , he became Alderman ( a position usually known in Polish as " <unk> " ) of Warsaw in 1769 , but this is contradicted by Zienkowska ; according to her , it was only in 1776 that he reached the rank of " <unk> " in the magistrate . He also served an elder ( " <unk> " ; Jędruch translates this as an alderman ) for the Confraternity of Merchants from 1771 to 1785 . 
 Along with his political career , Dekert 's business enterprise was growing . He gathered enough savings to become a cofounder of the Company of Woolen Manufacture in 1766 ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . In 1775 the Sejm granted him a request to buy landed estates ( a privilege usually restricted only to the nobility ) . In 1776 he leased the Tobacco Monopoly ( or Company ; <unk> <unk> ) from the Polish Treasury ; ten years later , in 1786 , he leased a theatre in Warsaw . 
 As the representative of Warsaw , he was elected a deputy to the Sejms of 1784 and 1786 , as well as to the Great Sejm ( 1788 – 1892 ) . In the meantime , in February 1789 , he was elected mayor of Warsaw ; he would be reelected in 1790 ( as a mayor of Warsaw , he succeeded Wojciech Lobert , and would in turn be succeeded by Józef Michał <unk> ) . During the Great Sejm , together with Hugo Kołłątaj , Dekert organized the confederation of 141 cities and towns and was at the forefront of demanding the representations and enfranchisement of the burghers in the Sejm ; notably , he helped organize the Black Procession on 2 December 1789 ( a march of burghers who delivered a petition to the king ) . The burghers demanded similar privileges to those held by the nobles ( szlachta ) . Their demands included the right to buy and own land estates , the right to be represented in the Polish parliament ( Sejm ) and reforms to the urban law . The procession influenced the Great Sejm to create a Commission for the Cities ( <unk> w <unk> <unk> ) tasked with addressing those concerns during the works on the new constitution . 
 He was a vocal critic of Jews , accusing them of unfair competition . 
 He spend much of his fortune on political activism , and was nearly bankrupt by the time of his death . In February 1790 , despite his objections , he was pressured , through general public demand , into reelection for a second ( yearly ) term of office as the mayor of Warsaw . It is likely that major reasons he preferred not to have been elected were his ailing business operations and his worsening health . He led his last public debate on 31 April 1790 , and withdrew from politics afterward . He died on 4 October 1790 in Warsaw . He was buried in St. John 's <unk> , and his large funeral was paid for by the City of Warsaw . 
 He died before the Free Royal Cities Act , enfranchising burghers , was passed in 1791 as one of the reforms of the Great Sejm , next to the Constitution of the 3rd May , 1791 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 His contemporary , poet Franciszek <unk> <unk> , called him the " leader of Polish burghers " . In 1896 a plaque dedicated to him in St. John 's <unk> proclaimed him " the first defender and representative of the burgher class in the Commonwealth " . 
 Jan Dekert is one of the characters in Jan Matejko 's painting of the " Adoption of the Polish Constitution of May 3 , 1791 " . 
 = Operation Copperhead = 
 Operation Copperhead was a small military deception operation run by the British during the Second World War . It formed part of Operation Bodyguard , the cover plan for the invasion of Normandy in 1944 , and was intended to mislead German intelligence as to the location of General Bernard Montgomery . The operation was conceived by Dudley Clarke in early 1944 after he watched the film Five Graves to Cairo . Following the war M. E. Clifton James wrote a book about the operation , I Was Monty 's Double . It was later adapted into a film , with James in the lead role . 
 The German high command expected Montgomery ( one of the best @-@ known Allied commanders ) to play a key role in any cross @-@ channel bridgehead . Clarke and the other deception planners reasoned that a high @-@ profile appearance outside the United Kingdom would suggest that an Allied invasion was not imminent . An appropriate look @-@ alike was found , M. E. Clifton James , who spent a short time with Montgomery to familiarise himself with the general 's mannerisms . On 26 May 1944 , James flew first to Gibraltar and then to Algiers , making appearances where the Allies knew German intelligence agents would spot him . He then flew secretly to Cairo and remained in hiding until Montgomery 's public appearance in Normandy following the invasion . 
 The operation did not appear to have any significant impact on German plans and was not reported high up the chain of command . It was executed some time before D @-@ Day , and in the midst of several other Allied deceptions . German intelligence might have suspected a trick , or not attributed much importance to the visit . 
 = = Background = = 
 In preparation for the 1944 invasion of Normandy , the Allied nations conducted a complex series of deceptions under the codename Bodyguard . The overall aim of the plan was to confuse the German high command as to the exact location and timing of the invasion . Significant time was spent constructing the First United States Army Group , a notional army to threaten Pas de Calais , along with political and visual deceptions to communicate a fictional Allied battle plan . Copperhead was a small portion of Bodyguard conceived by Dudley Clarke . Earlier in the war Clarke had pioneered the idea of strategic deception , forming a deception department in Cairo named ' A ' Force . Clarke and ' A ' Force were not officially in charge of Bodyguard planning ( a role that fell to the London Controlling Section ) , but because of the location of the deception the Cairo planners organised much of the operation . 
 On a visit to Naples in January 1944 Clarke had seen the film Five Graves to Cairo , in which actor Miles Mander makes a brief appearance as Bernard Montgomery . The film involves one character impersonating another and Clarke suggested attempting the same trick in real life . He proposed an operation to mislead German commanders as to Montgomery 's location in the days immediately before the Normandy landings ( codenamed Operation Neptune ) . 
 Montgomery was one of the most prominent Allied commanders and the German high command expected him to be present for any invasion of France . Clarke hoped Montgomery 's apparent presence in Gibraltar and Africa would lend support to the idea that the Allies might be planning landings in Southern France , as part of Operation Vendetta , rather than across the Channel . While in London , in February 1944 , Clarke , the London Controlling Section and Ops ( B ) drafted Copperhead in support of Vendetta . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Mander , the actor from Five Graves to Cairo , was located in Hollywood but found to be too tall in real life . Another look @-@ alike was identified but before he could be drafted into the operation he broke a leg in a motorbike accident . Eventually , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel J. V. B. Jervis @-@ Reid , head of Ops ( B ) , spotted a photograph of Meyrick Clifton James in the News Chronicle . James , an Australian , had spent 25 years as an actor before the war , and at the time was assigned to the Royal Army Pay Corps . Colonel David Niven , a well @-@ known British actor , was asked to contact James and offer him a screen test for future army films . When he arrived at the meeting , James was told his true role . 
 James was not a perfect stand @-@ in for Montgomery . He had lost a finger during the First World War , so a prosthetic had to be made . He had also never flown before , so the London Controlling Section 's Dennis Wheatley took James up for a test flight to make sure he did not suffer from air sickness . Finally , James both drank heavily and smoked cigars , while Montgomery was a teetotaler and disliked smoking . The deception planners were worried that James might be spotted drinking , spoiling the performance . Despite these hitches , and with Montgomery 's approval , the plan went forward . To get into character , James spent some time with the general , posing as a journalist , to study his mannerisms . 
 Allied deceivers used their double agent network to circulate the idea that Montgomery would command ground forces during the invasion . Then , on 26 May 1944 , James flew overnight from RAF Northolt to Gibraltar , where the Germans maintained an observation post overlooking the airport from across the Spanish border . The plane had to circle for an hour before landing to allow James , who had smuggled a bottle of gin onto the flight , to sober up . He then attended breakfast with the British governor , Sir Ralph Eastwood , before departing again for the airfield . The Allies had arranged for Ignacio Molina Pérez , a Spanish envoy known to be a German spy , to visit Government House . After observing James 's departure , Pérez hurriedly crossed the border to place a call to his German handler . 
 James then flew to Algiers , where he was publicly paraded through the airport and driven to meet General Maitland Wilson , ostensibly for a meeting to discuss operations against the south of France . Instead , he was moved quietly to a remote villa by ' A ' Force 's Rex Hamer . Rumours suggest this was because James had been spotted smoking and staggering around Algiers , so the deceivers decided to cut his appearances short . Whatever the reason , the next day , out of character , James was flown to Cairo . He was to remain hidden there until the public disclosure of Montgomery 's presence in France . Meanwhile , double agents in North Africa were used to extend the masquerade for a few more days , by hinting Montgomery was still in the region . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The impact of Copperhead is unclear . The visit was reported up the German chain of command , and some double agents later received requests for information about Montgomery 's movements . There is no indication that Montgomery 's appearance affected German views of the imminent invasion threat . Writing in 2011 , historian Joshua Levine attributes this to the fact that the deception was carried out ten days before D @-@ Day , arguing that there would be no reason for a flying visit to North Africa to preclude an imminent invasion . 
 Another factor was that , in early May 1944 , an uncontrolled agent based in Spain ( who sold fictional intelligence to the Germans ) had passed on details of a meeting in Gibraltar between several high @-@ ranking Allied officers . Documents found after the war indicate that the Germans found this information suspect , and may have treated Montgomery 's appearance as equally so . Although double agents received several urgent requests from the Abwehr about his whereabouts it does not appear that this information was passed on to the German command in France . According to captured enemy generals , German intelligence believed that it was Montgomery , though they still guessed that it was a feint . The Bodyguard deception had confused the German command as to Allied intentions and the apparent arrival of Montgomery in Gibraltar added little to the picture . 
 James did not enjoy the experience . Although he received equivalent pay ( £ 10 per day ) to Montgomery during the operation , it had been a stressful assignment . Following Montgomery 's public appearance on the Normandy beachhead , James flew back to England and resumed his role within the Pay Corps and was warned not to discuss the operation . Dennis Wheatley , in his memoirs , commented that he felt James had been treated " shabbily " for his efforts . 
 = = Later depictions = = 
 In 1954 James wrote an account of the operation , entitled I Was Monty 's Double ( published in the United States as The Counterfeit General ) . The British government made no attempt to stop publication , and in 1958 the book was adapted into a film of the same name . James starred , both as himself and Montgomery , alongside John Mills as an intelligence agent . 
 = Madeline Montalban = 
 Madeline Montalban ( born Madeline Sylvia Royals ; 8 January 1910 – 11 January 1982 ) was an English astrologer and ceremonial magician . She co @-@ founded the esoteric organisation known as the Order of the Morning Star ( OMS ) , through which she propagated her own form of Luciferianism . 
 Born in Blackpool , Lancashire , Montalban moved to London in the early 1930s , immersing herself in the city 's esoteric subculture , and influenced by Hermeticism she taught herself ceremonial magic . She associated with significant occultists , including Thelemites like Aleister Crowley and Kenneth Grant , and Wiccans like Gerald Gardner and Alex Sanders . From 1933 to 1953 she published articles on astrology and other esoteric topics in the magazine London Life , and from then until her death in the nationally syndicated magazine Prediction . These were accompanied by several booklets on astrology , released using a variety of different pseudonyms , including Dolores North , Madeline Alvarez and Nina del Luna . 
 In 1952 she met Nicholas Heron , with whom she entered into a relationship . After moving to Southsea in Essex , they founded the OMS as a correspondence course in 1956 , teaching subscribers their own magical rites . Viewing Lucifer as a benevolent angelic deity , she believed Luciferianism had its origins in ancient Babylon , and encouraged her followers to contact angelic beings associated with the planetary bodies to aid their spiritual development . After her relationship with Heron ended in 1964 , she returned to London , continuing to propagate the OMS . She settled in the St. Giles district , where she became known to the press as " The Witch of St. Giles " . She died of lung cancer in 1982 . 
 Having refused to publish her ideas in books , Montalban became largely forgotten following her death , although the OMS continued under new leadership . Her life and work was mentioned in various occult texts and historical studies of esotericism during subsequent decades ; a short biography by Julia Philips was published by the Atlantis Bookshop in 2012 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1910 – 1938 = = = 
 Madeline Sylvia Royals was born on 8 January 1910 in Blackpool , Lancashire . Little is known of her early life , which coincided with Britain 's involvement in the First World War , although she appears to have had a strained relationship with her parents . Her father , Willie Royals , was an insurance agent , while her mother , Marion Neruda Shaw , was a tailor 's daughter from Oldham . Willie and Marion had married on 28 June 1909 , followed by Madeline 's birth seven months later . In early life , Madeline was afflicted with polio , resulting in a lifelong withered leg and limp . Bedridden for the course of the illness , she read literature to entertain herself , enjoying the works of Edward Bulwer @-@ Lytton , H. Rider Haggard and E. T. A. Hoffman . She also read the Bible in her youth , becoming particularly enamored with the texts of the Old Testament , and was convinced that they contained secret messages , a theme that became a central tenet of her later Luciferian beliefs . 
 In the early 1930s , she left Blackpool , and moved south to London . Her reasons for doing so have never been satisfactorily explained , and she would offer multiple , contradictory accounts of her reasoning in later life . According to one account , her father sent her to study with the famed occultist and mystic Aleister Crowley , who had founded the religion of Thelema in 1904 ; Montalban 's biographer Julia Philips noted that while she met Crowley in London , this story remains implausible . Another of Montalban 's accounts held that she moved to the capital to work for the Daily Express newspaper ; this claim has never been corroborated , and one of the paper 's reporters at the time , Justine Glass , has claimed that she never remembered Montalban working there . Montalban often changed her stories , and informed later disciple Michael Howard that upon arrival in London , the Daily Express sent her to interview Crowley . According to this story , when she first visited him at his lodgings in Jermyn Street , he was suffering from an asthma attack , and having had experience with this ailment from a family member she was able to help him , earning his gratitude . They subsequently went to the expensive Café Royal in Regent Street , where after their lunch , he revealed that he was unable to pay , leaving Montalban to sort out payment . 
 Although her own accounts of the initial meeting are unreliable , Montalban met with Crowley , embracing the city 's occult scene . Having a deep interest in western esotericism , she read widely on the subject , and taught herself the practice of magic rather than seeking out the instruction of a teacher . She was particularly interested in astrology , and in 1933 wrote her first article on the subject for the magazine London Life , entitled " The Stars in the Heavens " . Her work continued to see publication in that magazine until 1953 , during which time she used different pseudonyms : Madeline Alvarez , Dolores del Castro , Michael Royals , Regina <unk> , Athene <unk> , Nina de Luna , and the best known , Madeline Montalban , which she created based upon the name of a film star whom she liked , the Mexican actor Ricardo Montalbán . 
 = = = Marriage and London Life : 1939 – 1951 = = = 
 By the end of the 1930s , Montalban was living on Grays Inn Road in the Borough of Holborn . In 1939 , she married fireman George Edward North in London . They had a daughter , Rosanna , but their relationship deteriorated and he left her for another woman . She later informed friends that during the Second World War , George had served in the Royal Navy while she served in the Women 's Royal Naval Service ( <unk> ) , although such claims have never been corroborated . Gerald Gardner , founder of Gardnerian Wicca – known for his unreliable stories – claimed that he met Montalban during the war , when she was wearing a <unk> uniform , and that at the time she was working as a " personal clairvoyant and psychic advisor " to Lord Louis Mountbatten . Various individuals who knew her would comment that she had in her possession a framed blurry picture of Mountbatten with an individual who looked like her . 
 She continued her publication of articles under an array of pseudonyms in London Life , and from February 1947 was responsible for a regular astrological column entitled " You and Your Stars " under the name of Nina del Luna . She also undertook other work , and in the late 1940s , Michael Houghton , proprietor of Bloomsbury 's esoteric @-@ themed Atlantis Bookshop , asked her to edit a manuscript of Gardner 's novel High Magic 's Aid , which was set in the Late Middle Ages and which featured practitioners of a Witch @-@ Cult ; Gardner later alleged that the book contained allusions to the ritual practices of the New Forest coven of Pagan Witches who had initiated him into their ranks in 1939 . Gardner incorrectly believed that Montalban " claimed to be a Witch ; but got <unk> [ sic ] wrong " although he credited her with having " a lively imagination . " Although initially seeming favourable to Gardner , by the mid @-@ 1960s she had become hostile towards him and his Gardnerian tradition , considering him to be " a ' dirty old man ' and sexual pervert . " She also expressed hostility to another prominent Pagan Witch of the period , Charles Cardell , although in the 1960s became friends with the two Witches at the forefront of the Alexandrian Wiccan tradition , Alex Sanders and his wife , Maxine Sanders , who adopted some of her Luciferian angelic practices . She personally despised being referred to as a " witch " , and was particularly angry when the esoteric magazine Man , Myth and Magic referred to her as " The Witch of St. Giles " , an area of Central London which she would later inhabit . 
 In his 1977 book Nightside of Eden , the Thelemite Kenneth Grant , then leader of the Typhonian OTO , told a story in which he claimed that both he and Gardner performed rituals in the St. Giles flat of a " Mrs. South " , probably a reference to Montalban , who often used the pseudonym of " Mrs North " . The truthfulness of Grant 's claims have been scrutinised by both Doreen Valiente and Julia Philips , who have pointed out multiple incorrect assertions with his account . 
 = = = Prediction and The Order of the Morning Star : 1952 – 1964 = = = 
 From August 1953 , Montalban ceased working for London Life , publishing her work in the magazine Prediction , one of the country 's best @-@ selling esoteric @-@ themed publications . Starting with a series on the uses of the tarot , in May 1960 she was employed to produce a regular astrological column for Prediction . Supplementing such esoteric endeavours , she penned a series of romantic short stories for publication in magazines . Throughout the 1950s she released a series of booklets under different pseudonyms that were devoted to astrology ; in one case , she published the same booklet under two separate titles and names , as Madeline Montalban 's Your Stars and Love and Madeline Alvarez 's Love and the Stars . She never wrote any books , instead preferring the shorter booklets and articles as mediums through which to propagate her views , and was critical of those books that taught the reader how to perform their own horoscopes , believing that they put professional astrologers out of business . 
 In 1952 she met Nicholas Heron , with whom she entered into a relationship . An engraver , photographer and former journalist for the Brighton Argus , he shared her interest in the occult , and together they developed a magical system based upon Luciferianism , the veneration of the deity Lucifer , or Lumiel , whom they considered to be a benevolent angelic deity . In 1956 , they founded the Order of the Morning Star , or Ordo Stella <unk> ( <unk> ) , propagating it through a correspondence course . The couple sent out lessons to those who paid the necessary fees over a series of weeks , eventually leading to the twelfth lesson , which contained The Book of Lumiel , a short work written by Montalban that documented her understanding of Lumiel , or Lucifer , and his involvement with humankind . The couple initially lived together in Torrington Place , London , from where they ran the course , but in 1961 moved to the coastal town of Southsea in Essex , where there was greater room for Heron 's engraving equipment . 
 She encouraged members of her OMS course to come and meet with her , and developed friendships with a number of them , blurring the distinction between teacher and pupil . Meetings of OMS members were informal , and rarely for ritual , with the majority of the organisation 's rites requiring solitary work . According to later members of her Order , Montalban 's basis was in Hermeticism , although she was heavily influenced by Mediaeval and Early Modern grimoires like the <unk> , Corpus <unk> , The <unk> of Pietro d <unk> , The Key of Solomon , The Book of <unk> , and Cornelius Agrippa 's Three Books of Occult Philosophy . Unlike the founders of several older ceremonial magic organisations , such as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn or the Fraternity of the Inner Light , she did not claim any authority from higher spiritual beings such as the <unk> masters or Secret Chiefs . She believed that the Luciferian religion had its origin among the Chaldean people of ancient Babylon in the Middle East , and believed that in a former life , the OMS 's members had been " initiates of the Babylonian and Ancient Egyptian priesthood " from where they had originally known each other . She considered herself the reincarnation of King Richard III , and was a member of the Richard III Society ; on one occasion , she visited the site of Richard 's death at the Battle of Bosworth with fellow OMS members , wearing a suit of armour . In March 1964 , Montalban broke from her relationship with Heron , and moved back to London . 
 = = = Later life : 1964 – 1982 = = = 
 From 1964 until 1966 she dwelt in a flat at 8 Holly Hill , Hampstead , which was owned by the husband of one of her OMS students , the Latvian exile and poet <unk> <unk> . After leaving Holly Hill , Montalban moved to a flat in the Queen Alexandra Mansions at 3 Grape Street in the St. Giles district of Holborn . Here , she was in close proximity to the two primary bookstores then catering to occult interests , Atlantis Bookshop and Watkins Bookshop , as well as to the British Museum . She offered one of the rooms in her flat to a young astrologer and musician , Rick Hayward , whom she had met in the summer of 1967 ; he joined the OMS , and in the last few months of Montalban 's life authored her astrological forecasts for Prediction . After her death , he continued publishing astrological prophecies in Prediction and Prediction Annual until summer 2012 . 
 In 1967 , Michael Howard , a young man interested in witchcraft and the occult wrote to Montalban after reading one of her articles in Prediction ; she invited him to visit her at her home . The two became friends , with Montalban believing that she could see the " Mark of Cain " in his aura . She invited him to become a student of the ONS , which he duly did . Over the coming year , he spent much of his time with her , and in 1968 they went on what she called a " magical mystery tour " to the West Country , visiting Stonehenge , Boscastle and Tintagel . In 1969 , he was initiated into Gardnerian Wicca , something she disapproved of , and their friendship subsequently " hit a stormy period " with the pair going " [ their ] own ways for several years . " 
 A lifelong smoker , Montalban developed lung cancer , causing her death on 11 January 1982 . The role of sorting out her financial affairs fell to her friend , Pat <unk> , who discovered that despite her emphasis on the magical attainment of material wealth , she owned no property and that her estate was worth less than £ 10 @,@ 000 . The copyright of her writings fell to her daughter , Rosanna , who entrusted the running of the OMS to two of Montalban 's initiates , married couple Jo Sheridan and Alfred Douglas , who were authorised as the exclusive publishers of her correspondence course . Sheridan – whose real name was Patricia Douglas – opened an alternative therapy centre in Islington , North London , in the 1980s , before retiring to Rye , East Sussex in 2002 , where she continued running the OMS correspondence course until her death in 2011 . 
 = = Personal life and magico @-@ religious beliefs = = 
 According to her biographer Julia Philips , Montalban had been described by her magical students as " tempestuous , generous , humorous , demanding , kind , capricious , talented , volatile , selfish , goodhearted , [ and ] dramatic " . Philips noted that she was a woman who made a " definite impression " in all those whom she encountered , but who equally could be quite shy and disliked being interviewed in anything other than print . Philips asserted that Montalban had a " mercurial personality " and could be kind and generous at one moment and fly into a violent temper the next . Several of her friends noted that she was prudish when it came to sexual matters . She would take great pleasure in causing arguments , particularly between a couple who were romantically involved . 
 Describing herself as a " pagan " , Montalban 's personal faith was Luciferian in basis , revolving around the veneration of Lucifer , or Lumiel , whom she considered to be a benevolent angelic being who had aided humanity 's development . Within her Order , she emphasised that her followers discover their own personal relationship with the angelic beings , including Lumiel . Montalban considered astrology to be a central part of her religious worldview , and always maintained that one could be a good magician only if they had mastered astrology . Her correspondence course focused around the seven planetary bodies that were known in the ancient world and the angelic beings that she associated with them : Michael ( Sun ) , Gabriel ( Moon ) , Samael ( Mars ) , Raphael ( Mercury ) , <unk> ( Jupiter ) , <unk> ( Venus ) and <unk> ( Saturn ) . Each of these beings was in turn associated with certain days , hours , minerals , plants , and animals , each of which could be used in the creation of talismans that invoked the angelic power . Montalban disliked the theatrical use of props and rites in ceremonial magic , such as that performed by the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , preferring a more simplistic use of ritual . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In his book on the history of Wicca , The Triumph of the Moon ( 1999 ) , historian Ronald Hutton of Bristol University noted that Montalban was " one of England 's most prominent occultists " of the 20th century . Michael Howard referred to Montalban 's teachings in his book on Luciferian mythology , The Book of Fallen Angels ( 2004 ) , with religious studies scholar Fredrik Gregorius noting that Howard played an " important [ role ] in furthering an interest " in Montalban 's ideas . 
 In 2012 , Neptune Press – the publishing arm of Bloomsbury 's Atlantis Bookshop – published a short biography of Montalban entitled Madeline Montalban : The Magus of St Giles , written by Anglo @-@ Australian Wiccan Julia Philips . Philips noted that for much of the project she found it difficult separating fact from fiction when it came to Montalban 's life , but that she had been able to nevertheless put together a biographical account , albeit an incomplete one , of " one of the truly great characters of English occultism . " 
 = Cranham = 
 Cranham is a residential suburb in northeast London , England , and part of the London Borough of Havering . It is located 17 @.@ 5 miles ( 28 km ) east @-@ northeast of Charing Cross and comprises an extensive built @-@ up area to the north and a low density conservation area to the south surrounded by open land . It was historically a rural village in the county of Essex and formed an ancient parish . It is peripheral to London , forming the eastern edge of the urban sprawl . The economic history of Cranham is characterised by a shift from agriculture to housing development . As part of the suburban growth of London in the 20th century , Cranham significantly increased in population , becoming part of Hornchurch Urban District in 1934 and has formed part of Greater London since 1965 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponomy = = = 
 Cranham is recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086 as <unk> and in 1201 as <unk> . It means ' spur of land frequented by crows ' and is formed from the Old English ' <unk> ' and ' <unk> ' . It contained two Anglo @-@ Saxon manors of Ockendon ( <unk> ) and Cranham ( <unk> ) . During the Middle Ages , and until around the 15th century , it was also known as Bishop 's Ockendon because a large part of its area was owned by the Bishop of London . 
 = = = Economic development = = = 
 The parish is recorded in 1086 as being heavily wooded , supporting an agrarian way of life . Forest clearance was well advanced by the 15th century , with an increase in population and arable land ; and there was a windmill in Cranham . Cranham lay on brick earth and this gave rise to the Cranham Brick and Tile Company which was in operation from 1900 to 1920 . Drury has suggested that early trade was with the nearby settlements of Romford and Hornchurch and with London via the River Thames at Rainham . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 Cranham formed an ancient parish of 1 @,@ 879 acres ( 7 @.@ 60 km2 ) in the Chafford hundred of Essex . The vestry met in the church until 1829 and then at the parish workhouse . In 1836 the parish was grouped for poor relief into the Romford Poor Law Union and for sanitary provision in 1875 into Romford rural sanitary district . The sanitary district became Romford Rural District from 1894 and a parish council was formed to replace the vestry . 
 The parish formed part of the London Traffic Area from 1924 and the London Passenger Transport Area from 1933 . To reflect the significantly increased population in the area , Romford Rural District was abolished in 1934 and Cranham was amalgamated with neighbouring parishes into Hornchurch Urban District . The parish council was abolished and Hornchurch Urban District Council became the local authority . There was a revision of boundaries with North Ockendon , which had been part of <unk> Rural District , absorbed into Cranham and a small area to the north , near Great Warley , transferred to Brentwood Urban District . 
 In 1965 Hornchurch Urban District was abolished and its former area was transferred from Essex to Greater London , to be combined with that of the Municipal Borough of Romford in order to form the present @-@ day London Borough of Havering . In 1993 the Greater London boundary , to the east of Cranham and north of the railway line , was locally realigned to the M25 motorway , returning some mostly unpopulated areas of open land to Essex and leaving North Ockendon as the only part of Greater London outside the bounds of the motorway . 
 = = = Urban development = = = 
 In the 17th and 18th centuries manorial homes , including Cranham Hall , became attractive properties for merchants from the City of London . Initial attempts to expand the suburban estates from Upminster in the early 20th century ran into problems because of the lack of water supply . In 1922 sewage works for Upminster and Cranham were opened in Great Warley . In the 1930s land was used to develop some council housing and following the sale of the Benyon estate the pace of new building quickened . Cranham 's location on the very edge of London 's urban sprawl is explained by the halting effect on suburban house building of the introduction of the Metropolitan Green Belt and World War II . Thereafter building took place within the area bounded by the Southend Arterial Road in the north and St Mary 's Lane in the south ; and there were 615 council houses built by 1971 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Cranham forms part of the Hornchurch and Upminster UK Parliament constituency , and is partly within the Havering wards of Upminster and Cranham . Together these form the Upminster Area Committee . The current MP is Angela Watkinson . Each ward elects three councillors to Havering London Borough Council . All six councillors elected in 2010 for the two wards were the Upminster and Cranham Residents ' Association candidates and the area is unusual in that the residents ' association is strongly active . From 1945 to 1974 Cranham formed part of the Hornchurch constituency and from 1974 to 2010 it formed part of the Upminster constituency . Cranham is within the Havering and Redbridge London Assembly constituency and the London European Parliament constituency . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Most of Cranham is located on the London Clay belt , with loam to the north and a gravel valley to the south . It rises to about 250 feet ( 76 m ) in the north and to below 50 feet ( 15 m ) in the south ; with a ridge running east to west upon which All Saints Church is located . Cranham forms a continuously built @-@ up area with Upminster to the west , with open fields separating it from Harold Wood in the north , Great Warley to the east and North Ockendon to the southeast . Franks Wood and Cranham Brickfields are designated a Site of Importance for Nature Conservation with a habitat of ancient woodland , coppices , ditches , scrub , tall herbs and neutral grassland . The community forest centre for the extensive Thames Chase is located in the open land to the south east . Cranham forms part of the Upminster post town in the <unk> postcode district . Climate data for Cranham is taken from the nearest weather station at Greenwich , around 12 miles ( 19 @.@ 3 km ) southwest of All Saints church : 
 = = Demography = = 
 Demographic data is produced by the Office for National Statistics for the wards of Cranham and Upminster . All of Cranham is contained within these wards , however they also cover the connected settlement of Upminster and the rural outlier of North Ockendon . In 2001 the population of Upminster ward was 12 @,@ 674 and Cranham ward was 12 @,@ 242 , giving a total population of 25 @,@ 098 . 80 @.@ 95 % in Upminster and 81 @.@ 73 % in Cranham report their religion as Christian , compared to 76 @.@ 13 % for Havering , 58 @.@ 23 % in London and 71 @.@ 74 % in England . 10 @.@ 08 % in Upminster and 10 @.@ 46 % in Cranham report having no religion , compared to 13 @.@ 18 % in Havering , 15 @.@ 76 % in London and 14 @.@ 59 % in England . With a black and minority ethnic population of 3 % in 2001 , Cranham and Upminster wards have the lowest Simpson index for ethnic diversity in London . The level of home ownership is atypically high compared to the rest of London and England , with over 90 % of housing tenure under owner @-@ occupation in both wards . 
 = = Economy = = 
 There are several short parades of shops ; the largest on Front Lane , dominated by a Tesco Express store . The nearest significant activity centre identified in the London Plan is the local district centre at Upminster . Within Havering , Upminster is identified as the nearest of seven main town centres . There are a number of commercial businesses centred around the A127 Southend Arterial Road including a wholesale butcher , mushroom cultivator , caravan sales , and a sports equipment supplier . There are a limited number of hospitality venues , including pubs and a popular tandoori restaurant . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Front Lane is the main road through Cranham and runs north to south , connecting with the A127 road in the north . Approximately 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) to the northeast it has a junction with the M25 motorway , which forms the outer ring road of London . Cranham is the location of the Upminster depot of the London Underground 's District line . The nearest London Underground station is at Upminster , approximately 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) to the west . The London @-@ Tilbury @-@ Southend Line of the National Rail network passes through the area in two places , with the nearest station also at Upminster . There are Transport for London bus service to Upminster , Hornchurch , Romford , and Ockendon station on routes 248 , 346 and 347 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 All Saints parish church was rebuilt in 1873 and is a grade II listed building . James Oglethorpe , the first governor of Georgia , now part of the United States of America , is buried with his wife at the centre of its chancel . The area around the church forms a conservation area . There is a second church called St Luke 's further north on Front Lane . Cranham Hall , the former manor house , is a grade II listed building . There are two community associations that are both registered charities . The Cranham Community Association operates a broad range of sporting , self @-@ improvement and hobby activities at Cranham Community Centre on Marlborough Gardens . Cranham Social Hall , with a capacity of 100 , is separately operated by the Front Lane Community Association , and provides a limited range of activities . The main cultural and entertainment facilities of the borough are located in Hornchurch and Romford . 
 = Thomas R. Cornelius = 
 Thomas Ramsey Cornelius ( November 16 , 1827 – June 24 , 1899 ) was a prominent American politician and soldier in the early history of Oregon . Born in Missouri , he moved to the Oregon Country with his family as a young man where he fought in the Cayuse War and Yakima Indian War against the Native Americans . He settled in Washington County near what later became Cornelius , named in his honor . 
 A Whig and later a Republican , he served in the Oregon Territorial Legislature , and following statehood , he served in the Oregon State Senate . In the Senate he served one term as the president of that chamber . He also built the Cornelius Pass Road that bears his name . He was the father of Benjamin P. Cornelius , who was also prominent in state politics . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cornelius was born in Missouri , on November 16 , 1827 , to Elizabeth and Benjamin Cornelius . In 1845 , Thomas and his family traveled over the Oregon Trail to the Oregon Country and set up a farm on the Tualatin Plains , north of what would become the community of Cornelius . After the Whitman Massacre in late 1847 , Thomas volunteered for the militia of the Oregon Provisional Government in 1848 . The militia prosecuted the Cayuse War in an attempt to punish those responsible for the killings at the Whitman Mission . 
 After gold was discovered in California , Cornelius journeyed there for a brief time , returning to the Oregon Territory in 1849 . The next year he married Florentine Wilkes , and they had six children together before she died in 1864 , including son Benjamin . The family would settle on 640 acres ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) of their Donation Land Claim near Cornelius . In 1855 , a second war against the Native Americans started east of the Cascade Mountains against the Yakima tribe . Cornelius volunteered again for the militia . For three months he led a company with the rank of captain before being elected as colonel after James W. Nesmith resigned his commission . Cornelius continued as colonel until the end of the war in 1856 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1856 , Cornelius was elected to upper chamber of the Oregon Territorial Legislature , called the Council . Serving as a Whig , he represented Washington , Columbia , and Multnomah counties in District 8 . He won re @-@ election to the Council in 1857 and again in 1858 to the final session of the territorial legislature . In 1859 , he continued holding office in the newly formed Oregon State Senate after Oregon entered the Union on February 14 , 1859 as the 33rd state . 
 In the Oregon Senate , Cornelius continued as a Republican representing Washington County and several other counties through the 1874 legislature . His service was interrupted by the American Civil War during 1862 session , when he was authorized by President Abraham Lincoln to raise a regiment of cavalry for federal service . He was chosen as colonel of the troops and they deployed to a military post at Walla Walla , Washington , where he assumed command . He resigned during the summer of 1862 and returned home . 
 During the 1866 legislature Cornelius was selected as President of the Oregon Senate . In 1886 , he won the Republican nomination for Governor of Oregon , but lost the general election to Sylvester Pennoyer . 
 = = Later life and family = = 
 After his first wife died in 1864 , Cornelius remarried in 1866 to Missouri A. Smith . In 1872 , he moved to Cornelius , which would be renamed after him , and opened a store . In addition to the store , Cornelius owned a total of 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 km2 ) , including covering three farms , a warehouse , and a sawmill . He built the Cornelius Pass Road that linked the Tualatin Valley to the Columbia River . Cornelius died on June 24 , 1899 , at the age of 71 . He was buried at the Cornelius Methodist Church Cemetery . 
 = Thirsty Merc = 
 Thirsty Merc are an Australian pop rock band formed in 2002 by Rai Thistlethwayte ( vocals , guitar , keyboards ) , Phil Stack ( bass guitar ) , Karl Robertson ( drums ) , and Matthew Baker ( guitar ) . In 2004 Baker was replaced by Sean Carey who was , in turn , replaced by Matt Smith in 2010 . Thirsty Merc have released one extended play , First Work ( September 2003 ) , and four studio albums : Thirsty Merc ( August 2004 ) , Slideshows ( April 2007 ) , Mousetrap Heart ( June 2010 ) and Shifting Gears ( September 2015 ) . The band have sold over 200 @,@ 000 albums , toured extensively around Australia , and received national radio airplay for their tracks . 
 In June 2005 Billboard 's Christie Eliezer felt their debut album showed " eclectic rock- , <unk> and jazz @-@ influenced pop [ that ] appealed to Australian radio programmers " . The work reached the top 20 on the ARIA Albums Chart and was certified platinum by ARIA for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 units by the end of 2005 . Slideshows peaked at No. 4 in Australia – their highest position . It reached No. 38 on the New Zealand Albums Chart , however Thirsty Merc had attained No. 29 in that market . The group were nominated for four ARIA Awards in 2005 and the Thistlethwayte @-@ written track , " 20 Good Reasons " , was nominated for Song of the Year at the APRA Music Awards of 2008 . From 2006 , their song " In the Summertime " was the opening theme for the Australian TV reality show , Bondi Rescue . 
 = = History = = 
 Three of the founding members of Thirsty Merc – Matthew Baker , Karl Robertson , and Phil Stack – had played together in various bands in Dubbo , a regional New South Wales city . In 1996 Drown was formed with Baker on guitar , Robertson on drums , Peter Jamieson on vocals , and Stack on bass guitar . By 1998 Baker , Jamieson and Stack had split to form Twenty Two and then moved to Sydney . In 2002 , Baker and Stack returned to Dubbo where Rai Thistlethwayte , from Sydney , as lead singer ( later also on guitar and keyboards ) and Stack worked as a live jazz duo and session musicians . They were joined by Baker and Robertson , and formed a pop rock band , initially called Thirsty ; soon after they moved to Sydney and were renamed , Thirsty Merc . The band 's name came from Thistlethwayte 's old Mercedes Benz , which was a gas @-@ guzzler . 
 In October 2006 Thistlethwayte described his jazz and R & B background to <unk> and the band 's sound as " rock Sinatra " where " [ t ] he outlook , I guess , is about being a young person in today 's society ... being an Australian in an American @-@ ised , Britain @-@ ised kind of world , where you 're trying to stay true to yourself " . Baker added " We contrived to make it not contrived ... Rai was all for originality in his own vision and so were we " . 
 A car accident on 22 September 2015 at Streatham , Victoria during a Thirsty Merc tour killed the band 's stage manager and injured drummer Mick Skelton . 
 = = = First Work = = = 
 Thirsty Merc 's first extended play , First Work , was released on 8 September 2003 by the band 's own label , Don 't Music and was distributed by Warner Music Australia . The five @-@ track CD was independently recorded during downtime at a studio where Thistlethwayte worked . The EP reached the top 100 on the ARIA Singles Chart ; and its lead single , " Wasting Time " , achieved radio airplay on national radio stations , Triple J and Nova . The self @-@ funded music video for the single was broadcast on Channel [ V ] , and became the ' ripe clip of the week ' . At the time of recording the EP they were without a label . After extensive gigging around Sydney 's pubs , representatives from Warner had signed the band in June 2003 , for the release of the EP and the follow up single , " <unk> Myself " , which was a reworked version of the EP track . It was issued in April 2004 and The Age 's Andrew Murfett declared that " this bitter tirade wrapped in melodic hooks has become one of the biggest local radio successes of the year " . 
 = = = Debut studio album = = = 
 On 16 August 2004 Thirsty Merc issued their debut studio album , the self @-@ titled , Thirsty Merc , which was co @-@ produced by the group with Lindsay Gravina ( The Living End , Magic Dirt ) . Also that month , prior to a national tour in support of its release , Baker left and was replaced on guitar by Sean Carey ( ex @-@ Midnight Swim ) , whom they had met when playing a support slot to his group at a Kings Cross venue , Club 77 . The album spent 48 weeks on the ARIA Albums Chart Top 50 , peaking at No. 15 , and launched the band in the Australian <unk> dB Magazine 's Kelly Parish observed " [ e ] ven though the band 's sound is predominantly rock , it has been influenced by more traditional flavours ... they have developed a very wide audience which embraces both the alternative and mainstream camps " . Thirsty Merc reached No. 29 on New Zealand 's RIANZ Albums Chart . It was recorded and mixed on 2 inch tape , and then further mixed by Gravina at his Birdland Studios . 
 Five singles were released from Thirsty Merc : " <unk> Myself " , " My Completeness " ( August 2004 ) , " Someday , Someday " ( December ) , " In the Summertime " ( April 2005 ) , and " When the Weather Is Fine " ( September ) . All five appeared in the ARIA Singles Chart top 50 , with the highest charting , " Someday , Someday " reaching No. 19 . Of these singles only " In the Summertime " reached the top 50 in New Zealand , where it peaked at No. 12 . In June 2005 Billboard 's Christie Eliezer felt the album showed " eclectic rock- , <unk> and jazz @-@ influenced pop [ that ] appealed to Australian radio programmers " . The album was due for United States and European release in early 2006 on Atlantic Records . 
 " In the Summertime " was nominated at the ARIA Music Awards of 2005 for " Best Video " , while " Someday , Someday " was nominated for " Single of the Year " , " Best Group " , and " Best Pop Release " . At the ceremony in October , the group performed " Someday , Someday " . In 2006 Carey described the group 's style to Jet Magazine , it was " Just be yourself " and " about being young and living in Australia . We ’ re not trying to be 50 Cent or anything , we ’ re all just boys from the country , just trying to move into the city and make our way " . He listed Evermore , Crowded House , Foo Fighters and Cold Chisel as his favourite bands . In February 2007 they supported Ozzy Osbourne on the Australian leg of his national tour . 
 = = = Slideshows = = = 
