 For the central section of the ceiling , Michelangelo has taken four episodes from the story of Adam and Eve as told in the first , second and third chapters of Genesis . In this sequence of three , two of the panels are large and one small . 
 In the first of the pictures , and one of the most widely recognised images in the history of painting , Michelangelo shows God reaching out to touch Adam , who , in the words of Vasari , is " a figure whose beauty , pose and contours are such that it seems to have been fashioned that very moment by the first and supreme creator rather than by the drawing and brush of a mortal man . " From beneath the sheltering arm of God , Eve looks out , a little apprehensively . The " glory " of God , represented by a dark shaded area around him , has the same anatomical geometry as a human brain . 
 The central scene , of God creating Eve from the side of the sleeping Adam has been taken in its composition directly from another Creation sequence , the relief panels that surround the door of the Basilica of San Petronio , Bologna by Jacopo della Quercia whose work Michelangelo had studied in his youth . 
 In the final panel of this sequence Michelangelo combines two contrasting scenes into one panel , that of Adam and Eve taking fruit from the forbidden tree , Eve trustingly taking it from the hand of the Serpent and Adam eagerly picking it for himself ; and their banishment from the Garden of Eden , where they have lived in the company of God , to the world outside where they have to fend for themselves and experience death . 
 = = = = Story of Noah = = = = 
 As with the first sequence of pictures , the three panels concerning Noah , taken from the sixth to ninth chapters of Genesis are thematic rather than chronological . In the first scene is shown the sacrifice of a sheep . Vasari , in writing about this scene mistakes it for the sacrifices by Cain and Abel , in which Abel 's sacrifice was acceptable to God and Cain 's was not . What this image almost certainly depicts is the sacrifice made by the family of Noah , after their safe deliverance from the Great Flood which destroyed the rest of Humankind . 
 The central , larger , scene shows the Great Flood . The Ark in which Noah 's family escaped floats at the rear of the picture while the rest of humanity tries frantically to scramble to some point of safety . This picture , which has a large number of figures , conforms the most closely to the format of the paintings that had been done around the walls . 
 The final scene is the story of Noah 's drunkenness . After the Flood , Noah tills the soil and grows vines . He is shown doing so , in the background of the picture . He becomes drunk and inadvertently exposes himself . His youngest son , Ham , brings his two brothers Shem and Japheth to see the sight but they discreetly cover their father with a cloak . Ham is later cursed by Noah and told that the descendants of Ham 's son Canaan will serve Shem and Japheth 's descendants forever . Taken together , these three pictures serve to show that Humankind had moved a long way from God 's perfect creation . However , it is through Shem and his descendants , the Israelites , that Salvation will come to the world . 
 Since Michelangelo executed the nine Biblical scenes in reverse chronological order , some analyses of the frescoes of the vault commence with the Drunkenness of Noah . Tolnay 's Neoplatonic interpretation sees the story of Noah at the beginning and the act of Creation by God as the conclusion of the process of <unk> and the return from physical to spiritual being . 
 = = = = Shields = = = = 
 Adjacent to the smaller Biblical scenes and supported by the Ignudi are ten circular parade shields , sometimes described as being painted to resemble bronze . Known examples are actually of lacquered and gilt wood . Each is decorated with a picture drawn from the Old Testament or the Book of Maccabees from the Apocrypha . 
 The subjects are the more gruesome or shameful of Biblical episodes , the only exception seeming to be that of Elijah being swept up to Heaven in a Chariot of Fire , leaving his mantel to fall on Elisha . However , Elijah 's role as a prophet was one marked by accusation and warnings to repent , and the purpose of his translation into Heaven was traditionally seen as so that he might stand before God to condemn Israel for its sins . In four of the five most highly finished " medallions " the space is crowded with figures in violent action , similar to Michelangelo 's cartoon for the Battle of Cascina . 
 The application of gold on the shields , in contrast to its absence on the rest of the ceiling , serves to link the ceiling to some extent with the frescoes around the walls . In the latter , gold leaf has been applied lavishly to many details and in some of the frescoes , notably those by Perugino , has been most expertly used not just to detail the robes but to highlight the folds by subtle graduation in the density of golden flecks . It is this technique that Michelangelo has picked up on and carried a step further , inspired also perhaps by the medallions that appear on a Roman triumphal arch in Botticelli 's episode from the Life of Moses , showing the Punishment of the Rebels . 
 The medallions represent : 
 Abraham about to sacrifice his son Isaac 
 The Destruction of the Statue of Baal 
 The worshippers of Baal being brutally slaughtered . 
 Uriah being beaten to death . 
 Nathan the priest condemning King David for murder and adultery . 
 King David 's traitorous son Absalom caught by his hair in a tree while trying to escape and beheaded by David 's troops . 
 Joab sneaking up on Abner to murder him 
 Joram being hurled from a chariot onto his head . 
 Elijah being carried up to Heaven 
 On one medallion the subject is either obliterated or incomplete . 
 Section references 
 = = = Twelve prophetic figures = = = 
 On the five pendentives along each side and the two at either end , Michelangelo painted the largest figures on the ceiling : twelve people who prophesied or represented some aspect of the Coming of Christ . Of those twelve , seven were Prophets of Israel and were male . The remaining five were prophets of the Classical World , called Sibyls and were female . The prophet Jonah is placed above the altar and Zechariah at the further end . The other male and female figures alternate down each side , each being identified by an inscription on a painted marble panel supported by a <unk> . 
 Jonah ( <unk> ) – above the altar 
 Jeremiah ( <unk> ) 
 Persian Sibyl ( <unk> ) 
 Ezekiel ( <unk> ) 
 Erythraean Sibyl . ( <unk> ) 
 Joel ( <unk> ) 
 Zechariah ( <unk> ) – above the main door of the chapel 
 Delphic Sibyl . ( <unk> ) 
 Isaiah ( <unk> ) 
 Cumaean Sibyl . ( <unk> ) 
 Daniel ( <unk> ) 
 Libyan Sibyl ( <unk> ) 
 = = = = Prophets = = = = 
 The seven prophets of Israel chosen for depiction on the ceiling include the four so @-@ called Major Prophets , Isaiah , Jeremiah , Ezekiel and Daniel . Of the remaining twelve possibilities among the Minor Prophets , the three represented are Joel , Zechariah and Jonah . Although the prophets Joel and Zechariah are considered " minor " because of the comparatively small number of pages that their prophecy occupies in the Bible , each one produced prophesies of profound significance . 
 They are often quoted , Joel for his " Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy , your elderly shall dream dreams and your youth shall see visions " . These words are significant for Michelangelo 's decorative scheme , where women take their place among men and the youthful Daniel sits across from the brooding Jeremiah with his long white beard . 
 Zechariah prophesied , " Behold ! Your King comes to you , humble and riding on a donkey " . His place in the chapel is directly above the door through which the Pope is carried in procession on Palm Sunday , the day on which Jesus fulfilled the prophecy by riding into Jerusalem on a donkey and being proclaimed King . 
 Jonah is of symbolic and prophetic significance , which was commonly perceived and had been represented in countless works of art including manuscripts and stained glass windows . Through his reluctance to obey God , he was swallowed by a " mighty fish " . He spent three days in its belly and was eventually spewed up on dry land where he went about God 's business . Jonah was thus seen as presaging Jesus , who having died by crucifixion , spent part of three days in a tomb and was raised on the third day . So , on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel , Jonah , with the " great fish " beside him and his eyes turned towards God the Creator , represents a " portent " of the Passion and Resurrection of Christ . The Jonah figure placed right over the altar activated the Passion motif . " When Perugino 's altar painting was removed and ... Last Judgement fresco came to cover the altar wall " , after at least twenty five years Michelangelo depicted Christ just below Jonah : not only for his role as precursor of Christ , Christianity and <unk> , but also because his powerful torsion of the body , bent backwards from the bust to the eyes and with his forefingers that now point the glorious Jesus to the characters of the ceiling , assumes a function of link between the Old and New Testament . 
 In Vasari 's description of the Prophets and Sibyls he is particularly high in his praise of the portrayal of Isaiah : " Anyone who studies this figure , copied so faithfully from nature , the true mother of the art of painting , will find a beautifully composed work capable of teaching in full measure all the precepts to be followed by a good painter . ” 
 = = = = Sibyls = = = = 
 The Sibyls were prophetic women who were resident at shrines or temples throughout the Classical World . The five depicted here are each said to have prophesied the birth of Christ . The Cumaean Sibyl , for example , is quoted by Virgil in his Fourth Eclogue as declaring that " a new progeny of Heaven " would bring about a return of the " Golden Age " . This was interpreted as referring to Jesus . 
 In Christian doctrine , Christ came not just to the Jews but also to the Gentiles . It was understood that , prior to the Birth of Christ , God prepared the world for his coming . To this purpose , God used Jews and Gentiles alike . Jesus would not have been born in Bethlehem ( where it had been prophesied that his birth would take place ) , except for the fact that the pagan Roman Emperor Augustus decreed that there should be a census . Likewise , when Jesus was born , the announcement of his birth was made to rich and to poor , to mighty and to humble , to Jew and to Gentile . The Three Wise Men ( the " Magi " of the Bible ) who sought out the infant King with precious gifts were pagan foreigners . 
 In the Church of Rome , where there was an increasing interest in the remains of the city 's pagan past , where scholars turned from reading Medieval Church Latin to Classical Latin and the philosophies of the Classical world were studied along with the writings of St Augustine , the presence , in the Sistine Chapel of five pagan prophets is not surprising . 
 It is not known why Michelangelo selected the five particular Sibyls that were depicted , given that , as with the Minor Prophets , there were ten or twelve possibilities . It is suggested by John O 'Malley that the choice was made for a wide geographic coverage , with the Sibyls coming from Africa , Asia , Greece and Ionia . 
 Vasari says of the Erythraean Sibyl " Many aspects of this figure are of exceptional loveliness : the expression of her face , her headdress and the arrangement of her draperies : and her arms , which are bared , are as beautiful as the rest . " 
 = = = Pendentives = = = 
 In each corner of the chapel is a triangular pendentive filling the space between the walls and the arch of the vault and forming the spandrel above the windows nearest the corners . On these curving shapes Michelangelo has painted four scenes from Biblical stories that are associated with the salvation of Israel by four great male and female heroes of the Jews : Moses , Esther , David and Judith . 
 The Brazen Serpent 
 The Punishment of Haman 
 David and Goliath 
 Judith and Holofernes 
 The first two stories were both seen in <unk> and Renaissance theology as prefiguring the Crucifixion of Jesus . In the story of the Brazen Serpent , the people of Israel become dissatisfied and grumble at God . As punishment they receive a plague of <unk> snakes . God offers the people relief by instructing Moses to make a snake of brass and set it up on a pole , the sight of which gives miraculous healing . Michelangelo chooses a crowded composition , depicting a dramatic mass of suffering men , women , and writhing snakes , separated from redeemed worshipers by the snake before an epiphanic light . 
 In the Book of Esther it is related that Haman , a public servant , plots to get Esther 's husband , the King of Persia , to slay all the Jewish people in his land . The King , who is going over his books during a sleepless night , realises something is amiss . Esther , discovering the plot , denounces Haman , and her husband orders his execution on a scaffold he has built . The King 's eunuchs promptly carry this out . Michelangelo shows Haman crucified with Esther looking at him from a doorway , the King giving orders in the background . 
 The other two stories , those of David and Judith , were often linked in Renaissance art , particularly by Florentine artists as they demonstrated the overthrow of tyrants , a popular subject in the Republic . In this image , the shepherd boy , David , has brought down the towering Goliath with his sling , but the giant is alive and is trying to rise as David forces his head down to chop it off . 
 The depiction of Judith and Holofernes has an equally gruesome detail . As Judith loads the enemy 's head onto a basket carried by her maid and covers it with a cloth , she looks towards the tent , apparently distracted by the limbs of the decapitated corpse flailing about . 
 There are obvious connections in the design of the Slaying of Holofernes and the Slaying of Haman at the opposite end of the chapel . Although in the Holofernes picture the figures are smaller and the space less filled , both have the triangular space divided into two zones by a vertical wall , allowing us to see what is happening on both sides of it . There are actually three scenes in the Haman picture because as well as seeing Haman punished , we see him at the table with Esther and the King and get a view of the King on his bed . Mordechai sits on the steps , making a link between the scenes . 
 While the Slaying of Goliath is a relatively simple composition with the two protagonists centrally placed and the only other figures being dimly seen observers , the Brazen Serpent picture is crowded with figures and separate incidents as the various individuals who have been attacked by snakes struggle and die or turn toward the icon that will save them . This is the most Mannerist of Michelangelo 's earlier compositions at the Sistine Chapel , picking up the theme of human distress begun in the Great Flood scene and carrying it forward into the torment of lost souls in the Last Judgement , which was later painted below . 
 = = = Ancestors of Christ = = = 
 = = = = Subject = = = = 
 Between the large pendentives that support the vault are windows , six on each side of the chapel . There were two more windows in each end of the chapel , now closed , and those above the High Altar covered by the Last Judgement . Above each window is an arched shape , referred to as a lunette and above eight of the lunettes at the sides of the chapel are triangular spandrels filling the spaces between the side pendentives and the vault , the other eight lunettes each being below one of the corner pendentives . 
 Michelangelo was commissioned to paint these areas as part of the work on the ceiling . The structures form visual bridges between the walls and the ceiling , and the figures which are painted on them are midway in size ( approximately 2 metres high ) between the very large prophets and the much smaller figures of Popes which had been painted to either side of each window in the 15th century . Michelangelo chose the Ancestors of Christ as the subject of these images , thus portraying Jesus ' physical lineage , while the papal portraits are his spiritual successors , according to Church doctrine . ( see gallery ) 
 Centrally placed above each window is a faux marble tablet with a decorative frame . On each is painted the names of the male line by which Jesus , through his Earthly father , Joseph , is descended from Abraham , according to the Gospel of Matthew . However , the genealogy is now incomplete , since the two lunettes of the windows in the Altar wall were destroyed by Michelangelo when he returned to the Sistine Chapel in 1537 to paint The Last Judgment . Only engravings , based on a drawing that has since been lost , remain of them . The sequence of tablets seems a little erratic as one plaque has four names , most have three or two , and two plaques have only one . Moreover , the progression moves from one side of the building to the other , but not consistently , and the figures the lunettes contain do not coincide closely with the listed names . These figures vaguely suggest various family relationships ; most lunettes contain one or more infants , and many depict a man and a woman , often sitting on opposing sides of the painted plaque that separates them . O 'Malley describes them as " simply representative figures , almost ciphers " . 
 There is also an indeterminate relationship between the figures in the spandrels and the lunettes beneath them . Because of the constraints of the triangular shape , in each spandrel the figures are seated on the ground . In six of the eight spandrels the compositions resemble traditional depictions of the Flight into Egypt . Of the two remaining , one shows a woman with shears trimming the neck of a garment she is making while her toddler looks on . The Biblical woman who is recorded as making a new garment for her child is Hannah , the mother of Samuel , whose child went to live in the temple , and indeed , the male figure in the background is wearing a distinctive hat that might suggest that of a priest . The other figure who differs from the rest is a young woman who sits staring out of the picture with prophetic intensity . Her open eyes have been closed in the restoration . 
 Section References 
 = = = = Treatment = = = = 
 Michelangelo 's depiction of the Genealogy of Jesus departs from an artistic tradition for this topic that was common in medieval times , especially in stained @-@ glass windows . This so @-@ called Jesse Tree shows Jesse lying prone and a tree growing from his side with the ancestors on each branch , in a visual treatment of a biblical verse . 
 The figures in the lunettes appear to be families , but in every case they are families that are divided . The figures in them are physically divided by the name tablet but they are also divided by a range of human emotions that turn them outward or in on themselves and sometimes towards their partner with jealousy , suspicion , rage or simply boredom . In them Michelangelo has portrayed the anger and unhappiness of the human condition , painting " the daily round of merely domestic life as if it were a curse " . In their constraining niches , the ancestors " sit , squat and wait " . Of the fourteen lunettes , the two that were probably painted first , the families of Eleazar and Mathan and of Jacob and Joseph are the most detailed . They become progressively broader towards the altar end , one of the last being painted in only two days . 
 The Eleazar and Mathan picture contains two figures with a wealth of costume detail that is not present in any other lunette . The female to the left has had as much care taken with her clothing as any of the Sibyls . Her skirt is turned back showing her linen petticoat and the garter that holds up her mauve stockings and cuts into the flesh . She has a reticule and her dress is laced up under the arms . On the other side of the tablet sits the only male figure among those on the lunettes who is intrinsically beautiful . This blonde young man , elegantly dressed in white shirt and pale green hose , with no jerkin but a red cloak , postures with an insipid and vain gesture , in contrast to the Ignudi which he closely resembles . 
 Prior to restoration , of all the paintings in the Sistine Chapel , the lunettes and spandrels were the dirtiest . Added to this , there has always been a problem of poor daytime visibility of the panels nearest the windows because of <unk> . Consequently , they were the least well known of all Michelangelo 's publicly accessible works . The recent restoration has made these masterly studies of human nature and inventive depiction of the human form known once more . 
 Section References 
 = = = Ignudi = = = 
 ( For images , see gallery ) 
 The Ignudi are the 20 athletic , nude males that Michelangelo painted as supporting figures at each corner of the five smaller narrative scenes that run along the centre of the ceiling . The figures hold or are draped with or lean on a variety of items which include pink ribbons , green bolsters and enormous garlands of acorns . 
 The Ignudi , although all seated , are less physically constrained than the Ancestors of Christ . While the pairs of the monochrome male and female figures above the spandrels are mirrors of each other , these Ignudi are all different . In the earliest paintings , they are paired , their poses being similar but with variation . These variations become greater with each pair until the postures of the final four bear no relation to each other whatsoever . 
 The meaning of these figures has never been clear . They are certainly in keeping with the Humanist acceptance of the classical Greek view that " the man is the measure of all things " . But Michelangelo knew the Bible well . He would have been well aware of the fact that although seraphim and cherubim are described as being winged creatures . They are described as looking like men . When Michelangelo later painted the altar wall of the chapel , he included a great number of angels , particularly in the lunettes which are decorated with scenes of angels carrying the symbols of the Passion . Other angels are employed sounding the trumpets which call forth the dead , displaying books in which the names of the saved and the damned are written and casting sinners down to Hell . In all , the Last Judgement contains more than forty angels , all closely resembling the Ignudi . It is reasonable to conclude that the Ignudi represent angels . If the Ignudi are indeed angels , they are the ever @-@ present attendants and messengers of God , impassively watching and waiting on the fate of Humankind . 
 Their painting demonstrates , more than any other figures on the ceiling , Michelangelo 's mastery of anatomy and foreshortening and his enormous powers of invention . In their reflection of classical antiquity they resonate with Pope Julius ' aspirations to lead Italy towards a new ' age of gold ' ; at the same time , they staked Michelangelo 's claim to greatness . However , a number of critics were angered by their presence and nudity , including Pope Adrian VI who wanted the ceiling stripped . 
 = = Stylistic analysis and artistic legacy = = 
 Michelangelo was the artistic heir to the great 15th @-@ century sculptors and painters of Florence . He learnt his trade first under the direction of a masterly fresco painter , Domenico Ghirlandaio , known for two great fresco cycles in the <unk> Chapel and <unk> Chapel , and for his contribution to the cycle of paintings on the walls of the Sistine Chapel . As a student Michelangelo studied and drew from the works of the two most renowned Florentine fresco painters of the early Renaissance , Giotto and Masaccio . Masaccio 's figures of Adam and Eve being expelled from the Garden of Eden had a profound effect on the depiction of the nude in general , and in particular on the use of the nude figure to convey human emotion . Helen Gardner says that in the hands of Michelangelo " the body is simply the manifestation of the soul , or of a state of mind and character " . 
 Michelangelo was also almost certainly influenced by the paintings of Luca Signorelli whose paintings , particularly the Death and Resurrection Cycle in Orvieto Cathedral contain a great number of nudes and inventive figurative compositions . In Bologna , Michelangelo saw the relief sculptures of Jacopo della Quercia around the doors of the cathedral . In Michelangelo 's depiction of the Creation of Eve the whole composition , the form of the figures and the relatively conservative concept of the relationship between Eve and her Creator adheres closely to Jacopo 's design . Other panels on the ceiling , most particularly the iconic Creation of Adam show " ... unprecedented invention " . 
 The ceiling of the Sistine Chapel was to have a profound effect upon other artists , even before it was completed . Vasari , in his Life of Raphael , tells us that Bramante , who had the keys to the chapel , let Raphael in to examine the paintings in Michelangelo 's absence . On seeing Michelangelo 's prophets , Raphael went back to the picture of the Prophet Isaiah that he was painting on a column in the Church of Sant 'Agostino and , according to Vasari , although it was finished , he scraped it off the wall and repainted it in a much more powerful manner , in imitation of Michelangelo . John O 'Malley points out that even earlier than the Isaiah is Raphael 's inclusion of the figure of Heraclitus in the School of Athens , a brooding figure similar to Michelangelo 's Jeremiah , but with the <unk> of Michelangelo himself , and leaning on a block of marble . 
 There was hardly a design element on the ceiling that was not subsequently imitated : the fictive architecture , the muscular anatomy , the foreshortening , the dynamic motion , the luminous colouration , the haunting expressions of the figures in the lunettes , the abundance of putti . Gabriele Bartz and Eberhard König have said of the Ignudi , " There is no image that has had a more lasting effect on following generations than this . Henceforth similar figures <unk> themselves in innumerable decorative works , be they painted , formed in stucco or even sculpted . " 
 Within Michelangelo 's own work , the chapel ceiling led to the later and more Mannerist painting of the Last Judgement in which the crowded compositions gave full rein to his inventiveness in painting contorted and foreshortened figures expressing despair or jubilation . Among the artists in whose work can be seen the direct influence of Michelangelo are Pontormo , Andrea del Sarto , Correggio , Tintoretto , Annibale <unk> , Paolo Veronese and El Greco . 
 In January 2007 , it was claimed that as many as 10 @,@ 000 visitors passed through the Vatican Museums in a day and that the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel is the biggest attraction . The Vatican , anxious at the possibility that the newly restored frescoes will suffer damage , announced plans to reduce visiting hours and raise the price in an attempt to discourage visitors . 
 Five hundred years earlier Vasari had said " The whole world came running when the vault was revealed , and the sight of it was enough to reduce them to stunned silence . " 
 = = Restoration = = 
 The frescoes of the Sistine Chapel were restored between June 1980 and December 1999 , with preliminary tests taking place in 1979 . 
 The first stage of restoration , the work upon Michelangelo ’ s lunettes , was achieved in October 1984 . The work then proceeded on the ceiling , completed December 1989 and from there to the Last Judgement . The restoration was unveiled by Pope John Paul II on 8 April 1994 . The restoration team comprised Gianluigi Colalucci , Maurizio Rossi , <unk> Bonetti , Bruno <unk> and others . The final stage was the restoration of the wall frescoes by Botticelli , Domenico Ghirlandaio , Perugino and others , This was unveiled on 11 December 1999 . 
 The colours , which now appear so fresh and spring @-@ like with pale pink , apple green , vivid yellow and sky blue against a background of warm pearly grey , were so discoloured by candle smoke as to make the pictures seem almost monochrome . The restoration has removed the filter of grime to reveal the colours again . However , the restoration was met with both praise and criticism . Critics assert that much original work by Michelangelo – in particular pentimenti , highlights and shadows , and other detailing painted a secco – was lost in the removal of various accretions . 
 = = Quotations = = 
 Vasari 
 " The work has proved a veritable beacon to our art , of inestimable benefit to all painters , restoring light to a world that for centuries had been plunged into darkness . Indeed , painters no longer need to seek for new inventions , novel attitudes , clothed figures , fresh ways of expression , different arrangements , or sublime subjects , for this work contains every perfection possible under those headings . " 
 Johann Wolfgang Goethe 
 " Without having seen the Sistine Chapel one can form no appreciable idea of what one man is capable of achieving . " 
 Waldemar Januszczak The art critic and television producer Waldemar Januszczak wrote that when the Sistine Chapel ceiling was recently cleaned , he " was able to persuade the man at the Vatican who was in charge of Japanese TV access to let me climb the scaffold while the cleaning was in progress . " 
 " I sneaked up there a few times . And under the bright , unforgiving lights of television , I was able to encounter the real Michelangelo . I was so close to him I could see the bristles from his brushes caught in the paint ; and the mucky <unk> he ’ d left along his margins . The first thing that impressed me was his speed . Michelangelo worked at Schumacher pace . Adam ’ s famous little penis was captured with a single brushstroke : a flick of the wrist , and the first man had his manhood . I also enjoyed his sense of humour , which , from close up , turned out to be refreshingly puerile . If you look closely at the angels who attend the scary prophetess on the Sistine ceiling known as the Cumaean Sibyl , you will see that one of them has stuck his thumb between his fingers in that mysteriously obscene gesture that visiting fans are still treated to today at Italian football matches . " 
 Gabriele Bartz and Eberhard König 
 " In a world where all experience was based in the glorious lost past of Antiquity , he made a new beginning . Michelangelo , more even than Raphael or Leonardo , embodies a standard of artistic genius which reveals a radically changed image of human beings and their potential ... " 
 Pope John Paul II 
 " It seems that Michelangelo , in his own way , allowed himself to be guided by the evocative words of the Book of Genesis which , as regards the creation of the human being , male and female , reveals : ' The man and his wife were both naked , yet they felt no shame ' . The Sistine Chapel is precisely – if one may say so – the sanctuary of the theology of the human body . In witnessing to the beauty of man created by God as male and female , it also expresses in a certain way , the hope of a world transfigured , the world inaugurated by the Risen Christ . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In many works , the painting of God and Adam are parodied . See The Creation of Adam for more . 
 In the film 2012 , the entire College of Cardinals are seen praying silently under the ceiling . The ceiling then starts to crack , commencing at the point where God 's and Adam 's fingers nearly touch , dividing the two . 
 In Life After People : The Series , the Sistine chapel is seen falling after 500 years . 
 Playwright Neil Simon 's quote about the Sistine <unk> " If no one took any risks , Michaelangelo would have painted the Sistine floor . " 
 The 1965 film The Agony and the Ecstasy features the story of Michelangelo and his travails in painting the Sistine Chapel . He is portrayed in the film by Charlton Heston . 
 In the 2009 film Angels & Demons and also in the 2000 book on which the film is based , the chapel is featured throughout the story . 
 = = = Reference images = = = 
 = = = Biblical sources = = = 
 = Lynn Davis ( singer ) = 
 Lynn Blythe Davis ( born July 12 , 1958 ) is an American singer , songwriter , musician , and record producer . She rose to prominence after joining The George Duke Band in 1977 . During her time with the band , she sang lead vocals on their one of their biggest hits ; " I Want You for Myself " , " Party Down " , and " Reach Out " . Under the guidance of Epic Records musician and mentor George Duke , Davis continued booking success by contributing background vocals and writing songs for many singers including Tracie Spencer , La Toya Jackson , Patrice Rushen , Anita Baker , and many other singers . 
 Davis 's musical genre has varied throughout her career including R & B , funk , soul , funk , adult contemporary , old skool , psychedelia , and pop . Her artistic influences include George Duke , Chaka Khan , Marvin Gaye , and Earth , Wind , and Fire . 
 Throughout her career , Davis has written songs and contributed background vocals for over 100 different singers and musical groups . Known for her wide , high @-@ reaching vocal range , she is recognized as one of the most successful and musical recorded session vocalists of the era . She has also been a back @-@ up singer for a number of famous artists , including Marvin Gaye , Stevie Wonder , and Toshinobu Kubota , as well as toured with Yanni for a short period of time , where her popularity has grown among worldwide audiences . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lynn Blythe Davis was born in Jamestown , California , to Adeline Davis ( née Livingston ) and Thomas Davis , a Baptist minister at a local church . Lynn attended Narbonne High School in Los Angeles , California , where she enrolled in dance classes . Her singing talent was discovered when she began performing in school talent shows . Lynn 's interest in music and performing continued after winning a school talent show at age sixteen along with her friends . After graduating high school at the age of 17 , she received a message from a friend to audition for The George Duke Band . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1977 @-@ 1987 : The George Duke Band = = = 
 At the age of 18 , Lynn began a professional singing career when she joined singer / musician George Duke and his band for his tour . During this time , The George Duke Band consisted of George Duke , Josie James , Sheila E. , Napoleon Murphy Brock , Louis Johnson , Byron Miller , and Leon " <unk> " Chancler . In 1978 , Lynn contributed background vocals on the title @-@ track album " No One Home " by Argentine composer / pianist Lalo Schifrin . In the same year , she contributed background vocals along with The George Duke Band on Flora Purim 's album Carry On . In 1979 , Lynn contributed background vocals on the songs " Summer <unk> ' " and " I Need You Now " , which were featured on George Duke 's album A Brazilian Love Affair . In mid @-@ 1979 , Lynn became the featured vocalist on the single " I Want You for Myself " , which was released on George Duke 's album Master of the Game . The single charted at number 23 on Billboard 's Hot R & B chart and on the Hot Dance Club Songs ' chart . In the same year , Lynn began providing background vocals for singer Patrice Rushen , whom she met during the recording sessions with Lalo Schifrin . The songs were featured on Rushen 's hit album <unk> . 
 In 1980 , Lynn began contributing background vocals for La Toya Jackson 's self @-@ titled debut album . In the same year , she also contributed background vocals and began writing songs for Patrice Rushen 's album Posh . Lynn also appears on the album as a guest and featured vocalist for " This Is All I Really Know " , a song she wrote for Rushen 's album . In 1981 , Lynn recorded a cover version of Earth , Wind , and Fire 's hit single After the Love Has Gone for Stanley <unk> 's album Tender <unk> . In the same year , she also contributed background vocals for Syreeta Wright 's album Set My Love in Motion and Greg Phillinganes 's album Significant Gains . In late 1981 , she recorded background vocals for Billy Preston & Syreeta Wright 's duet album Billy Preston & Syreeta . In 1982 , Lynn was featured on Jeffrey Osborne 's debut single " I Really Don 't Need No Light " , which appeared on his self @-@ titled debut album . Lynn also appears a background vocalist on his song " Ain 't Nothin ' Missin ' " and " Baby " , which also appear on his album . Later that year , Lynn once again provided background vocals and wrote songs for Patrice Rushen to appear on her hit album , Straight from the Heart . 
 In early 1983 , Lynn joined The Gene Dunlap Band . The band released their first album , entitled Tired of Being a Nice Guy . Lynn returned to the George Duke Band and they released their album Guardian Of The Light . Lynn later toured with the George Duke Band for their worldwide tour . During the tour , the George Duke Band recorded their live album Live in Tokyo , Japan 1983 , which was also released on DVD . Later that year , Lynn joined Marvin Gaye 's Midnight Love Tour as a backup vocalist . The tour also featured , fellow George Duke Band member , Sheila E. and her brother Peter Michael <unk> . Lynn continued to provide background vocals on Duke 's following <unk> : " Rendezvous " ( 1984 ) , " Super Keyboards " ( 1984 ) , " Thief in the Night " ( 1984 ) , and " George Duke " ( 1986 ) . 
 In 1985 , she recorded two songs that would appear on Rodney Franklin 's album Marathon ; " Stay On in the Groove " and a duet song " Love Is the Answer " with Darryl Coley . In 1986 , Lynn recorded two songs " The First Time " and " It 's Your Turn " , which were featured in the film Flying : Dream To Believe . In 1987 , George Duke formed a R & B group called " 101 North " , which Lynn was briefly apart of along with fellow George Duke Band members Josie James , Napoleon Murphy Brock , and Carl <unk> ( of Earth , Wind , and Fire ) . The group released their self @-@ titled debut album in August 1987 . 
 = = = 1987 @-@ 1995 : Touring with Toshinobu Kubota and Yanni = = = 
 In 1987 , Lynn was introduced to uprising Japanese singer Toshinobu Kubota , who was impressed with her stage performance during earlier tour with George Duke in 1983 . Later that year , Lynn re @-@ located to Japan and began recording regularly with Kubota and eventually became a backup singer for him during his " I Need Your Funky Thang Tour " . In the same year , Lynn met Japanese singer / musician Hiroshi Satoh . Satoh produced a song for Lynn called " Lady of the Nile " and a duet song with Satoh entitled " Together " , which appeared on his album Future File . 
 In 1988 , she was featured on Kubota 's single " Indigo Waltz " from his third album Such A Funky Thang ! . In 1988 , Lynn returned to America and co @-@ wrote as well as produce songs for Gary Taylor , Paul Jackson , Jr . , <unk> Jones , Anita Baker , Jeffrey Osborne , Evelyn " Champagne " King , Stacy Lattisaw , Howard Hewett , <unk> Williams , and many other singers . She also joined Chaka Khan for her European Tour . 
 In 1989 , Lynn appeared on Toshinobu Kubota 's single " Give You My Love " . The song peaked at number 3 on the Oricon Singles Chart , selling over 150 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . In 1990 , Lynn made a guest appearance Kubota 's fourth album Bonga Wanga , in which she sings background vocals on the lead single " Be Wannabe " . In the same year , Lynn and Toshinobu Kubota performed a live cover of Roberta Flack and Donny Hathaway 's single " The Closer I Get to You " on a Japan 's national music program . In 1991 , Lynn joined Toshinobu Kubota during his " Bonga Wanga Spring Tour " as a backup singer . After the conclusion of the tour , she parted ways with the singer . After returning to America , Lynn began providing background vocals and writing songs on many albums for Phil Perry , Diane Schuur , Tevin Campbell , Patti Austin , Aretha Franklin , Phyllis Hyman , and Peabo Bryson . 
 In 1992 , she began recording with Go West . She contributed background vocals on the lead single " Faithful " as well as " Tell Me " and " King of Wishful Thinking " for their album Indian Summer . She contributed background vocals for Kenny G 's album Breathless . In the same year , Lynn re @-@ joined long @-@ time friend George Duke and performed on his album , Snapshot . 
 In the summer of 1993 , Lynn was asked to tour with Greek @-@ American composer Yanni . Along with Darlene <unk> , she performed the song " Aria " during each concert . She continued to tour with Yanni throughout the end of 1995 , during end of his Yanni Live , The Symphony Concerts 1995 . The performances were recorded live and released on two of Yanni 's live DVD : Live at the Acropolis ( 1994 ) and Live at Royal Albert Hall ( 1995 ) . 
 = = = 1996 @-@ present : Later career = = = 
 In 1996 and 1997 , she contributed background vocals for albums that would be released by Eros Ramazzotti , Celine Dion , Vonda Shepard , and Puff Johnson . In 1998 , she was contributed background vocals for the Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey single " When You Believe " . In 2000 , she recorded with Elton John and Tim Rice for their collaboration album , The Road to El Dorado . 
 In 2001 , Davis appeared on Pat <unk> 's album Remote Control as a guest vocalist on the song " Love 's Own Time " . Davis would later go on to record music with Gerald Albright , Laura Pausini , Cerrone , Meat Loaf , The Mooney Suzuki , Frank McComb , and Lynne <unk> . 
 In 2008 , Davis reunited with George Duke and the original members of The George Duke Band to record " <unk> Treats " and " Mercy " for his album " <unk> Treats " . 
 In August 2013 , Davis briefly reunited with The George Duke Band at the George Duke Memorial Service . Along with her bandmates , she gave a brief commentary about her mentor George Duke . She also performed " Brazilian Love Affair " with The George Duke Band and Stanley Clarke . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Tours = = 
 1979 : George Duke Band Tour ( with George Duke ) 
 1982 : Midnight Love Tour ( with Marvin Gaye ) 
 1983 : Guardian of the Light Tour ( with George Duke ) 
 1984 : The Woman in Red Tour ( with Stevie Wonder ) 
 1986 @-@ 87 : George Duke Tour ( with George Duke ) 
 1988 : European Tour ( with Chaka Khan ) 
 1989 : I Need Your Funky Thang ! Tour ( with Toshinobu Kubota ) 
 1990 : Bonga Wanga Tour ( with Toshinobu Kubota ) 
 1993 @-@ 95 : Yanni Live , The Symphony Concerts ( with Yanni ) 
 = 1910 London to Manchester air race = 
 The 1910 London to Manchester air race took place between two aviators , each of whom attempted to win a heavier @-@ than @-@ air powered flight challenge between London and Manchester first proposed by the Daily Mail newspaper in 1906 . The £ 10 @,@ 000 prize was won in April 1910 by Frenchman Louis Paulhan . 
 The first to make the attempt was Claude Grahame @-@ White , an Englishman from Hampshire . He took off from London on 23 April 1910 , and made his first planned stop at Rugby . His biplane subsequently suffered engine problems , forcing him to land again , near Lichfield . High winds made it impossible for Grahame @-@ White to continue his journey , and his aeroplane suffered further damage on the ground when it was blown over . 
 While Grahame @-@ White 's aeroplane was being repaired in London , Paulhan took off late on 27 April , heading for Lichfield . A few hours later Grahame @-@ White was made aware of Paulhan 's departure , and immediately set off in pursuit . The next morning , after an unprecedented night @-@ time take @-@ off , he almost caught up with Paulhan , but his aeroplane was overweight and he was forced to concede defeat . Paulhan reached Manchester early on 28 April , winning the challenge . Both aviators celebrated his victory at a special luncheon held at the Savoy Hotel in London . 
 The event marked the first long @-@ distance aeroplane race in England , the first take @-@ off of a heavier @-@ than @-@ air machine at night , and the first powered flight into Manchester from outside the city . Paulhan repeated the journey in April 1950 , the fortieth anniversary of the original flight , this time as a passenger aboard a British jet fighter . 
 = = History = = 
 On 17 November 1906 the Daily Mail newspaper offered a £ 10 @,@ 000 prize for the first aviator to fly the 185 miles ( 298 km ) between London and Manchester , with no more than two stops , in under 24 hours . The challenge also specified that take @-@ off and landing were to be at locations no more than five miles from the newspaper 's offices in those cities . Powered flight was a relatively new invention , and the newspaper 's proprietors were keen to stimulate the industry 's growth ; in 1908 they offered £ 1 @,@ 000 for the first flight across the English channel ( won on 25 July 1909 by the French aviator Louis Blériot ) , and £ 1 @,@ 000 for the first circular one @-@ mile flight made by a British aviator in a British aeroplane ( won on 30 October 1909 by the English aviator John Moore @-@ Brabazon ) . In 1910 , two men accepted the newspaper 's 1906 challenge ; an Englishman , Claude Grahame @-@ White , and a Frenchman , Louis Paulhan . 
 Claude Grahame @-@ White was born in 1879 in Hampshire , England . He was educated at <unk> House School in Farnham , and later at Bedford Grammar School between 1892 and 1896 . Apprenticed to a local engineering firm , he later worked for his uncle Francis Willey , 1st Baron Barnby . He started his own motor vehicle business in Bradford , before travelling to South Africa to hunt big game . In 1909 , inspired by Blériot 's historic cross @-@ channel flight , he went to France to learn how to fly , and by the following January he became one of the first Englishmen to obtain an aviator 's certificate . He also started a flying school at Pau , which he moved to England later that year . 
 Isidore Auguste Marie Louis Paulhan , better known as Louis Paulhan , was born in 1883 in <unk> , in the south of France . After doing military service at the balloon school at <unk> @-@ Meudon he had worked as an assistant for Ferdinand Ferber before winning a Voisin biplane in an aircraft design competition . Paulhan taught himself to fly using this aircraft , and was awarded Aéro Club de France licence No. 10 on 17 July . Paulhan was no stranger to British audiences ; he competed in an early flight meeting in October 1909 at Blackpool , and shortly afterwards flew in an exhibition at the Brooklands motor racing circuit . Paulhan took part in many airshows , including several in the United States of America , and in Douai , where in July 1909 he set new records for altitude and flight duration . 
 = = = Grahame @-@ White 's first attempt = = = 
 Grahame @-@ White was the first to attempt the journey . He planned to take off at 5 : 00 am on 23 April 1910 , near the Plumes Hotel in the London suburb of Park Royal . A crowd of journalists and interested spectators assembled there from about 4 : 00 am , with more arriving by car , until about 200 – 300 were present . The Times described the sky as " clear and <unk> " , and the weather as " very cold , as there was a slight frost . " Grahame @-@ White arrived at about 4 : 30 am and began to prepare his Farman III biplane . The aeroplane was brought into the field from the yard it was stored in , and its seven @-@ cylinder 50 hp rotary engine was started . Once the engine warmed up , Grahame @-@ White took his seat . Several people wished him well , including his sister , mother and Henry Farman . He guided the biplane for about 30 – 60 yards across the frosted grass , and took off at about 5 : 12 am , before altering his direction to head for the start of the course — a gasometer at Wormwood Scrubs , within the required five @-@ mile radius of the Daily Mail office in London . 
 Cheered loudly by the thousands of spectators who anticipated his arrival , Grahame @-@ White flew across the starting point and turned north @-@ west toward Wembley . Standing on top of the gasometer , Harold Perrin , secretary of the Royal Aero Club , waved a flag to indicate the start of Grahame @-@ White 's attempt . By 5 : 35 am the aviator was over Watford , and at 6 : 15 am he flew over Leighton Buzzard . Crowds of cheering spectators were there to greet him as he flew above the line of the London and North Western Railway , at an altitude of about 400 feet ( 120 m ) . Meanwhile , Perrin and two mechanics from Gnome et Rhône ( who supplied the engine used on the Farman III ) boarded one of two cars , and were headed for Rugby . Along the way , one car took a short cut across a field and crashed into a ridge ; one occupant was seriously injured . 
 Grahame @-@ White made his first stop in Rugby just after 7 : 15 am . One of the cars that left London arrived about 10 minutes before he landed , and his mechanics attended to his aeroplane . News of his take @-@ off in London reached the area , and a large crowd gathered ; they were kept from the aeroplane by a group of boy scouts . Grahame @-@ White was taken to nearby <unk> Farm , where he drank coffee and ate biscuits , and told those present about his journey . " It was <unk> cold all the way ... and I was cold at the start . My eyes suffered towards the end , and my fingers were quite numbed . " Grahame @-@ White 's average speed was estimated at more than 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) ; a few of the vehicles following him from London did not arrive until some time after his descent . 
 He took off again at about 8 : 25 am , but was unable to reach his next scheduled stop at Crewe . About 30 miles outside Rugby a problem with the engine 's inlet valves forced him to land in a field at <unk> , four miles outside of Lichfield — about 115 miles into the 185 @-@ mile journey . On landing , he damaged a skid , and his mechanics were telegraphed for . While the necessary repairs were being made , Grahame @-@ White ate lunch and then slept for a few hours , looked after by his mother , who had arrived by car . Meanwhile , a large crowd of interested spectators gathered , and the farmer who owned the field charged them for admission . Soldiers from a nearby barracks kept the public from getting too close to the biplane . 
 As the sun fell the wind grew in strength , and at 7 : 00 pm Grahame @-@ White conceded that the high winds made any further progress impossible . He decided to try again at 3 : 00 am , hoping to reach Manchester by the 5 : 15 am deadline , but at 3 : 30 am he abandoned the attempt , and said that he would travel to Manchester and try again from there . He ordered the soldiers to peg the aeroplane down , but his instructions were ignored ; the next night it was blown over by strong winds and severely damaged . 
 = = = Paulhan 's attempt = = = 
 Grahame @-@ White 's biplane was returned to London , and on 25 April was being repaired at Wormwood Scrubs , in the Daily Mail 's hangar . Paulhan arrived at Dover from California , where he performed exhibition flights . Another competitor , Emile Dubonnet , also formally entered the contest , and was due to try a few days later . On 27 April 1910 Paulhan 's biplane ( a newer model than Grahame @-@ White 's ) was brought to Hendon , on the site of what is now the London branch of the Royal Air Force Museum . It was assembled in less than 11 hours , and at 5 : 21 pm that day Paulhan took off for Hampstead Cemetery , his official starting line . He arrived there ten minutes later , flew on to Harrow , and began to follow the route of the London and North Western Railway . The railway company prepared for the event by whitewashing the sleepers of the correct line for the competitors to follow . Paulhan was followed by a special train , on board which were Mme. Paulhan and Henry Farman . Other members of his party followed by car . 
 Grahame @-@ White attempted to make a test flight earlier that day , but the huge crowds hampered his efforts , and he was unable to take off . Having spent two days supervising the reconstruction of his aeroplane , he retired to a nearby hotel . At about 6 : 10 pm he was awakened with the news that Paulhan had begun his attempt , and he decided to set off in pursuit . This time he had no trouble clearing a space in the crowd . His biplane 's engine was started , and by 6 : 29 pm he passed the starting line . Almost an hour later he flew over Leighton Buzzard , just as Paulhan was passing over Rugby . As night approached , Grahame @-@ White landed his aeroplane in a field near the railway line at <unk> , in Northamptonshire . Fifteen minutes later , Paulhan reached Lichfield , where about 117 miles ( 188 km ) into his journey he ran out of fuel . He managed to land the biplane in a field near Trent Valley railway station . The aeroplane was pegged down , and Paulhan left with his colleagues to stay overnight at a nearby hotel . Grahame @-@ White meanwhile stayed at the house of a Dr. Ryan . Both aviators intended to restart at 3 : 00 am the following day . 
 Still about 60 miles ( 100 km ) behind the Frenchman , Grahame @-@ White made a historic decision ; he would make an unprecedented night flight . Guided by the headlamps of his party 's cars , he took off at 2 : 50 am . Within minutes of becoming airborne however , he almost crashed ; while he was leaning forward to make himself comfortable , his jacket brushed the engine ignition switch and he accidentally turned the engine off , but he quickly corrected his error and was able to continue . Using the lights of railway stations to guide his course through the pitch black night , within 40 minutes he reached Rugby , and at 3 : 50 am he passed Nuneaton . Despite making good progress , Grahame @-@ White was carrying a large load of fuel and oil , and his engine was not powerful enough to raise the aeroplane over the high ground before him . Disappointed , he landed at Polesworth , about 107 miles ( 172 km ) from London , and only 10 miles behind Paulhan . A few minutes later the Frenchman , unaware of Grahame @-@ White 's progress , resumed his journey . He passed Stafford at 4 : 45 am , Crewe at 5 : 20 am , and at 5 : 32 am he landed at <unk> Fields near Didsbury , within five miles of the Manchester office of the Daily Mail , thereby winning the contest . His party was taken by train to a civic reception , held by the Lord Mayor of Manchester . Grahame @-@ White was notified of Paulhan 's success , and reportedly shouted " Ladies and gentlemen , the £ 10 @,@ 000 prize has been won by Louis Paulhan , the finest aviator that the world has ever seen . Compared with him I am only a novice . Three cheers for Paulhan ! " He retired to bed , leaving his mechanics to repair his aeroplane , and later sent Paulhan a telegram , congratulating his rival on his achievement . Grahame @-@ White attempted to resume his journey to Manchester , and reached Tamworth , but he later abandoned the flight . 
 = = = Presentation = = = 
 Paulhan was presented with his prize — a golden casket containing a cheque for £ 10 @,@ 000 — on 30 April 1910 , during a luncheon at the Savoy Hotel in London . The event was presided over by the editor of the Daily Mail , Thomas Marlowe ( in lieu of Lord Northcliffe ) and attended by , among others , French ambassador Paul Cambon . Grahame @-@ White was given a consolation prize of an inscribed white @-@ silver bowl , filled with red and white roses . 
 I am in England for the second time , and I must say in no country that I have visited have I ever received a more cordial welcome . I believe sincerely that the victory I have won belongs of right to your brilliant and courageous compatriot Mr. Grahame @-@ White . [ Cheers . ] I am proud to have had him as my rival in this battle of the air . In the name of the aviators both of France and of all the other countries I offer my congratulations to the great English journal , the Daily Mail , which , by its magnificent prizes , has given an inestimable stimulus to the science of aviation , and has thus contributed more than any other agency to the conquest of the air . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The events of 27 – 28 April constituted the world 's first long @-@ distance air race , and also marked the first night @-@ time take @-@ off of a heavier @-@ than @-@ air machine ; Grahame @-@ White 's decision proved that night @-@ time take @-@ off , flight and navigation were possible , provided that the pilot was able to relate his position to the ground . Grahame @-@ White did this with the help of friends , one of whom shone his car 's headlamps onto the wall of a public house . Paulhan 's arrival in Didsbury was notable for being the first powered flight into Manchester from any point outside the city . His achievement is commemorated by a blue plaque , fixed to the front wall of 25 – 27 Paulhan Road , a pair of 1930s semi @-@ detached houses near the site of his landing . 
 Within weeks of Paulhan 's victory , the Daily Mail offered a new prize ; £ 10 @,@ 000 to the first aviator to cover a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 609 @-@ km ) circuit of Britain in a single day , with 11 compulsory stops at fixed intervals . The challenge was completed by M Beaumont on 26 July 1911 , in about 22 ½ hours . Paulhan and Grahame @-@ White competed again later in 1910 , for the newspaper 's prize of £ 1 @,@ 000 for the greatest aggregate cross @-@ country flight , which Paulhan won . 
 The flight 's 25th anniversary was celebrated at the Aero Club of France , in Paris , on 16 January 1936 . Present at the banquet were Paulhan and Grahame @-@ White , along with the French Air Minister Victor Denain , Prince George Valentin Bibescu ( President of the FAI ) , Harold Perrin , and a number of other notable dignitaries as well as early aviators and constructors such as Farman , Voisin , Breguet , Caudron , Bleriot and <unk> . 
 Although by then retired from flying , on 28 April 1950 — the fortieth anniversary of the 1910 flight — Paulhan repeated the journey from London to Manchester , this time as a passenger on board a Gloster Meteor T7 , the two @-@ seater training variant of the first British jet fighter . After travelling at 400 mph ( 644 km / h ) , the 67 @-@ year @-@ old Frenchman said " C 'était <unk> ... It was all I ever dreamed of in aviation — no propellers , no vibration . " The Daily Mail entertained him at the Royal Aero Club in London , where he was accompanied by his former rival , Claude Grahame @-@ White . 
 = Flag of Ohio = 
 The Ohio <unk> is the official flag of the U.S. state of Ohio . Ohio 's swallowtail flag is the only non @-@ rectangular U.S. state flag . Its red , white , and blue elements symbolize the state 's natural features and order of admission into the Union . A prominent disc in the flag 's triangular canton is suggestive of the state 's name . 
 The flag was designed in 1901 by John Eisenmann for the Pan @-@ American Exposition and adopted in 1902 . Before that , for nearly a century after statehood , Ohio had no legally authorized state flag . One unsuccessful proposal called for a design based on the state seal . 
 Ohio has adopted an official salute to the flag and a 17 @-@ step procedure for folding it . The Ohio flag has influenced a number of logos and municipal flags within the state . A scarlet @-@ colored gubernatorial flag is based on the state seal . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Ohio state flag 's design is defined in the Ohio Revised Code , section 5 @.@ 01 : 
 The flag of the state shall be burgee @-@ shaped . It shall have three red and two white horizontal stripes that represent the roads and waterways of the state . The union of the flag shall be seventeen five @-@ pointed stars , white in a blue triangular field that represents the state 's hills and valleys , the base of which shall be the staff end or vertical edge of the flag , and the apex of which shall be the center of the middle red stripe . The stars shall be grouped around a red disc superimposed upon a white circular " O. " The thirteen stars grouped around the " O " represent the original states of the United States and the four stars added to the peak of the triangle symbolize that Ohio was the seventeenth state admitted to the union . The " O " represents the " O " in " Ohio " and suggests the state 's nickname , the buckeye state . The proportional dimensions of the flag and of its various parts shall be according to the official design on file in the office of the secretary of state . ... 
 In addition to resembling the letter O and a buckeye nut , the flag 's annulus also represents " the original territory of Ohio " in the Northwest Territory . 
 Ohio 's flag is the only non @-@ rectangular U.S. state flag . It is a rare example of a non @-@ quadrilateral civil flag , another well @-@ known example being the flag of Nepal . According to vexillologist Whitney Smith , it may be loosely based upon cavalry flags of the Civil War and Spanish – American War . The flag has been officially defined as a " burgee " since 2002 , even though <unk> are typically used as maritime flags . Its shape , lack of text , and mirror symmetry allow it to be flown or hung in various orientations without affecting legibility . On account of the flag 's uncommon shape , foreign manufacturers have occasionally set the entire design against a white , rectangular field . 
 = = History = = 
 For nearly a century after statehood , Ohio had no legally authorized state flag . The state militia carried regimental colors based on the Stars and Stripes , with the addition of " a large eagle , with the number of the regiment and the prescribed number of stars above " . 
 = = = Arsenal flag = = = 
 By the early 1850s , Ohioans expressed interest in adopting a state flag , as several other states had already done . In late 1860 , <unk> . Mr. Gen. David L. Wood and <unk> Gen. Henry B. Carrington devised a flag consisting of the state seal upon a white field . They had it flown above the Ohio State Arsenal in Columbus , in hopes that it might someday become the state flag . On January 17 , 1861 , at a banquet organized by the Columbus Typographical Union Local # 5 , future U.S. President James A. Garfield gave a speech defending the national flag as the only flag Ohio 's soldiers would march to battle under . The generals , in attendance , were moved to set aside their proposal and hoist the Stars and Stripes in its place . Later that year , Wood and Carrington joined fellow Ohioans in battle under the 34 @-@ star Union flag , which would serve as the inspiration for a state banner decades later . 
 = = = Eisenmann 's guidon = = = 
 In 1901 , Cleveland architect John Eisenmann was commissioned to design an exhibition hall for his state at the Pan @-@ American Exposition in Buffalo , New York . He developed a distinctive flag to fly over each corner of the Ohio Building . The wool flags officially represented the Ohio Pan @-@ American Exposition Commission rather than the state . On July 18 , Governor George K. Nash visited the exposition , where he was presented with one of the flags , which is now held in the Ohio History Connection collections . Eisenmann secured a U.S. design patent for his design , which he described as " a triangular forked or swallow @-@ tailed flag corresponding to the shape generally known as a ' cavalry @-@ guidon ' or ' broad pennant . ' " 
 In 1902 , State Representative William S. McKinnon , a member of the Ohio Pan @-@ American Exposition Commission , introduced House Bill 213 designating Eisenmann 's design as the official flag . It became law on May 9 , making it the 20th U.S. state flag or banner . ( Eisenmann had assigned his patent , which had a term of three and a half years , to the State of Ohio on April 24 . ) 
 Because Eisenmann 's design deviated from the " seal on a bedsheet " design then nearly universal among state flags , the press looked overseas for precedents : the layout was likened to either the flag of Cuba or of the Philippines , while the red and white annulus was derided for its similarity to the sun on the Japanese flag . 
 Initially , Ohio 's flag was seldom used , in part due to the prevailing opinion that the Stars and Stripes should hold a monopoly on patriotic displays . Similar sentiment hindered the adoption of municipal flags in Cleveland and Cincinnati , to the extent that both were <unk> as mere " banners " for promotional purposes . In 1903 , it was reported that , among state politicians , only Governor Nash displayed the guidon . 
 In the century following its adoption , the guidon gained significant popularity , being flown not only by the state but frequently also by its residents and businesses . In 2001 , the North American Vexillological Association surveyed its members on the best design among the 72 official flags of the U.S. states and territories and Canadian provinces . Ohio 's ranked 15th . 
 = = Usage = = 
 = = = Salute = = = 
 In 2002 , the Ohio General Assembly commemorated the 100th anniversary of the state flag 's adoption by adopting a salute to the flag , to be recited after the Pledge of Allegiance : 
 I salute the flag of the state of Ohio and pledge to the Buckeye State respect and loyalty . 
 = = = Folding the flag = = = 
 A method of folding the flag of Ohio was created by Alex Weinstock , an Ohio Boy Scout , for his Eagle Scout service project . It requires two people . The procedure was passed by the 125th Ohio General Assembly as House Bill 552 and signed into law by Governor Bob Taft on February 15 , 2005 : 
 The general assembly hereby establishes a recommended procedure for the folding of the state flag by two people . The procedure is as follows : 
 With the flag unfolded , fold the flag in half lengthwise so that the points of the flag are aligned . Fold the flag in half lengthwise a second time to form a long strip with the red disc facing the ground . Next , fold the pointed end back onto itself to form a rectangle . These steps entail three folds . 
 Starting on the end formed by the fold of the pointed end back onto itself , fold two inches of the flag onto itself for a flag with a three @-@ foot hoist and a five @-@ foot fly , or another appropriate width of fold for a flag of a different size . Repeat the folds a total of fourteen times , alternating the folds in a fan @-@ like manner . 
 The result is a total of seventeen folds symbolizing that Ohio was the seventeenth state admitted to the Union . Finally , neatly and snugly wrap the remaining length of flag around the fan @-@ folds to form a compact rectangle . 
 Ohio is not the only state that has designated a folding procedure for its flag ; however , Ohio 's procedure takes on special importance due to the flag 's irregular shape . A flag vendor in Arkansas has described the procedure as " quite a challenge " . 
 = = = Derivations = = = 
 Ohio 's flag is regularly flown during football games by The Ohio State University Marching Band 's " JI @-@ Row " as the percussion section 's row mascot . The Columbus Blue Jackets logo and Cincinnati Bengals fan flag are both based on the state flag . 
 A number of municipalities and counties in Ohio have adopted pennants and swallowtails based on the state burgee . The city of Mentor and Adams County have flags that essentially replace the annulus with a seal and modify the pattern of stars in the triangular union . 
 = = Flag of the Governor = = 
 The flag of the Governor of Ohio consists of the Great Seal of Ohio encircled with 13 white stars on a scarlet field , with a five @-@ point star in each corner . Like the state flag , it has 17 stars in total . 
 The Adjutant General 's office adopted this design in 1905 to represent the Governor on official occasions . One such flag hangs in the Rutherford B. Hayes Center Library , a memorial to the 32nd Ohio Governor and 19th U.S. President . The design was officially recognized by the 96th General Assembly effective October 3 , 1945 : 
 It shall have a white star in each of the four corners on an oblong scarlet background with the official seal of the state of Ohio in the center surrounded by thirteen white stars . The proportional dimensions of the flag and of its various parts shall be according to a design approved by the adjutant general and in accordance with the governor 's flag used by the adjutant general 's office for over thirty years . 
 Since September 30 , 1963 , the flag has been defined in greater detail : 
 The flag of the governor of this state will be of scarlet wool bunting , six feet eight inches hoist by ten feet six inches fly . In each of the four corners will be a white five @-@ pointed star with one point upward . The centers of these stars will be twelve inches from the long edges and seventeen inches from the short edges of the flag . In the center of the flag will be a reproduction of the great seal of Ohio in proper colors , three feet in diameter , surrounded by thirteen white stars equally spaced with their centers on an imaginary circle four feet three inches in diameter . All stars shall be of such size that their points would lie on the circumference of an imaginary circle ten inches in diameter . 
 The Ohio Revised Code also specifies smaller versions of this design to be used as the governor 's naval flag and automobile flag . 
 = Four Freedoms ( Norman Rockwell ) = 
 The Four Freedoms is a series of four 1943 oil paintings by the American artist Norman Rockwell . The paintings — Freedom of Speech , Freedom of Worship , Freedom from Want , and Freedom from Fear — are each approximately 45 @.@ 75 inches ( 116 @.@ 2 cm ) × 35 @.@ 5 inches ( 90 cm ) , and are now in the Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge , Massachusetts . The four freedoms refer to President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's January 1941 Four Freedoms State of the Union address in which he identified essential human rights that should be universally protected . The theme was incorporated into the Atlantic Charter , and became part of the charter of the United Nations . The paintings were reproduced in The Saturday Evening Post over four consecutive weeks in 1943 , alongside essays by prominent thinkers of the day . They became the highlight of a touring exhibition sponsored by The Post and the U.S. Department of the Treasury . The exhibition and accompanying sales drives of war bonds raised over $ 132 million . 
 This series has been the cornerstone of retrospective art exhibits presenting the career of Rockwell , who was the most widely known and popular commercial artist of the mid @-@ 20th century , but did not achieve critical acclaim . These are his best @-@ known works , and by some accounts became the most widely distributed paintings . At one time they were commonly displayed in post offices , schools , clubs , railroad stations , and a variety of public and semi @-@ public buildings . 
 Critical review of these images , like most of Rockwell 's work , has not been entirely positive . Rockwell 's idyllic and nostalgic approach to regionalism made him a popular illustrator but a lightly regarded fine artist during his lifetime , a view still prevalent today . However , he has created an enduring niche in the social fabric with Freedom from Want , emblematic of what is now known as the " Norman Rockwell Thanksgiving " . 
 = = Franklin Delano Roosevelt 's speech = = 
 Throughout his political career Roosevelt championed the cause of human rights . In his annual State of the Union address to Congress of January 6 , 1941 , which was delivered at a time when Nazi Germany occupied much of Western Europe , he asked the American citizens to support war efforts in various ways . He stated his vision of a better future , founded upon four freedoms : " In the future days which we seek to make secure , we look forward to a world founded upon four essential human freedoms , " some traditional and some new ones : freedom of speech , freedom of worship , freedom from want , and freedom from fear . 
 Roosevelt 's January 6 State of the Union address became known as his " Four Freedoms Speech " , due to its conclusion that described the President 's vision of a worldwide extension of the American ideals of individual liberties summarized by these four freedoms . To put it another way , FDR 's speech was known for " identifying the objectives of the war and revealing his hopeful view of the postwar world . " The speech helped to awaken Congress and the nation to the dire war calling , articulate ideological aims of the necessary armed conflict and appeal to the universal American belief of freedom . Domestically , the Four Freedoms were not something that Roosevelt was able to achieve through simple legislation , although they provided a theme for American military participation in the war . Of the Four Freedoms , the only two described in the United States Constitution were freedom of speech and freedom of worship . 
 = = Rockwell and World War II = = 
 Between 1916 and his December 16 , 1963 Kennedy Memorial cover , Rockwell created 322 magazine covers for The Saturday Evening Post , which was once the most widely read American magazine . In a <unk> era where mass production magazine color illustration was the most popular form of media , Rockwell became a national name , and by the 1950s was rivaled only by Walt Disney for his familiarity to the public among visual artists . During World War I , Rockwell had taken a bit of a back seat to more established illustrators under The Post editorship of George Horace Lorimer , who had died in 1937 . Unfettered by Lorimer 's restrictions , Rockwell saw the opportunity to illustrate the Four Freedoms as the chance of a lifetime . 
 Rockwell 's covers highlighted the human aspect of the American war effort . The illustrations supported the effort by promoting war bonds , and encouraging women to work and men to enlist . They employed themes of patriotism , longing , shifting gender roles , reunion , love , work , community , and family . In his role as a magazine illustrator during times of war , Rockwell draws comparisons to Winslow Homer , an American Civil War illustrator for Harper 's Weekly . The four Rockwell paintings are thought to have influenced the adoption of Roosevelt 's Four Freedoms as a goal . 
 The Four Freedoms had become an important theme for Artists for Victory . The consortium was one of several artists ' organizations that provided the government with promotional artwork for the war . It also sponsored exhibits about global peace . 
 Rockwell was perceived as apolitical , but advocated " tolerance for differences , courtesy , kindness , and the freedoms that FDR articulated " . He believed FDR 's freedoms were worth fighting for , and he made numerous artistic contributions to the war efforts apart from the Four Freedoms . He is widely known for his idealized fictional wartime character Willie Gillis and his depiction of Rosie the Riveter . Some of his other war art is known by name , such as War News and Homecoming Soldier . He was responsible for encouraging individual monetary support of the war through posters like the 1943 <unk> the Homecoming . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Rockwell 's Four Freedoms — Freedom of Speech , Freedom of Worship , Freedom from Want , and Freedom from Fear — were first published on February 20 , February 27 , March 6 , and March 13 , 1943 along with commissioned essays from leading American writers and historians ( Booth Tarkington , Will Durant , Carlos Bulosan , and Stephen Vincent Benét , respectively ) . They measure 45 @.@ 75 inches ( 116 @.@ 2 cm ) × 35 @.@ 5 inches ( 90 cm ) except Freedom of Worship which measures 46 @.@ 0 inches ( 116 @.@ 8 cm ) × 35 @.@ 5 inches ( 90 cm ) . For all of his paintings , Rockwell used live models . In 1935 , Rockwell began using black @-@ and @-@ white photography of these live models extensively , although he did not publicly reveal he did so until 1940 . The use of photography expanded the possibilities for Rockwell who could ask models to pose in positions that they could only hold for brief periods of time . He could also produce works from new perspectives and the Four Freedoms represented " low vantage point of Freedom of Speech , to close @-@ up in Freedom of Worship , midrange in Freedom from Fear , and wide angle in Freedom from Want . " 
 In 1939 , Rockwell moved to Arlington , Vermont , which was an artist @-@ friendly community that had hosted Robert Frost , Rockwell Kent , and Dorothy Canfield Fisher . Of the move from New Rochelle , New York , Rockwell said " I was restless ... The town [ of New Rochelle ] seemed tinged with everything that happened to me " . In New Rochelle , he had both endured a divorce and run with a fast crowd . Artists John Atherton , Mead Schaeffer and George Hughes established residences in Arlington soon after Rockwell . The resident artists , Rockwell included , were mutually supportive and hired local citizens as their amateur models . Using photography and Arlington residents as models , Rockwell was able to capture what he referred to as " human @-@ looking humans " , who were generally working @-@ class people , in an hour or so rather than hire professional models for the entire day . Rockwell paid his models modestly . Rose Hoyt , who was engaged for a total of three photographic sessions for Freedom of Speech and Freedom of Worship , earned $ 15 ( $ 217 @.@ 24 in 2016 dollars ) for her sittings . 
 When the US entered the war in 1941 , it had three agencies responsible for war propaganda : The Office of Facts and Figures ( OFF ) , The Division of Information of the Office of Emergency Management ( OEM ) , and Office of Government Reports ( <unk> ) . The OFF was responsible for commissioned artwork and for assembling a corps of writers , led by Librarian of Congress Archibald MacLeish . By mid @-@ 1942 , the Office of War Information determined that despite the efforts of OFF in distributing pamphlets , posters , displays , and other media , only a third of the general public was familiar with Roosevelt 's Four Freedoms and at most one in fifty could enumerate them . The Four Freedoms had been a " campaign to educate Americans about participation in World War II " . 
 By 1942 , Rockwell had been illustrating professionally for thirty years and was having a successful career . Additionally , by mid @-@ 1942 Rockwell 's Gillis was becoming famous . Lorimer had been the editor of The Post from 1898 to 1936 . He was followed by Wesley W. Stout for five years . In early 1942 , Stout ran an article entitled " The Case Against the Jew " , which led to advertising and subscription cancellations . The Post was rumored to be in financial trouble in 1942 . Soon Stout was replaced by Hibbs who revamped the magazine . 
 On May 24 , 1942 , Rockwell was seeking approval for a poster design at The Pentagon because the Artists Guild had designated that he advocate for the U.S. Army Ordnance Department . Robert Patterson , who was then United States Undersecretary of War , suggested revisions . On the same day , he visited with Thomas Mabry of the Graphic Division of the War Department 's Office of Facts and Figures , which coordinated war @-@ themed posters and billboards . Mabry relayed the need for Four Freedoms artwork . Rockwell returned home pondering the Atlantic Charter , which had incorporated the Four Freedoms . 
 Rockwell remembered a scene of a local town meeting in which one person spoke out in lone dissent , but was given the floor , and was listened to respectfully , despite his solitary opposition . He was inspired to use this scene to illustrate Freedom of Speech , and Rockwell decided to use his Vermont neighbors as models for an inspirational set of posters depicting the themes laid out by Roosevelt the previous year in a Four Freedoms series . He spent three days making charcoal sketches of the series , which some sources describe as color sketches . Rockwell 's patriotic gesture was to travel to Washington , D.C. and volunteer his free services to the government for this cause . In mid @-@ June , accompanied by Schaeffer , he took four charcoal sketches to Washington , where they stayed at the Mayflower Hotel , as the two sought commissions to design war art . During the trip , Rockwell was asked by the Boy Scouts of America to continue his annual creation of a new painting for their annual calendar by publishing representative Orion Winford . He was unable to hold Patterson 's attention during their meeting , so he met with the new Office of War Information ( OWI ) , where he was told " The last war you illustrators did the posters . This war we 're going to use fine artists men , real artists . " 
 On his return trip to Vermont with Schaeffer on June 16 , they stopped in Philadelphia to meet with new Saturday Evening Post editor Ben Hibbs . Many accounts portray this visit as unplanned , but whether it was is unclear . Hibbs liked Rockwell 's Four Freedoms sketches , and he gave Rockwell two months to complete the works . A June 24 correspondence from The Post clarified that both Rockwell 's and Schaeffer 's series would be published . By June 26 , The Post 's art editor James Yates notified Rockwell of plans for a layout of paintings with an accompanying essay or accompanying essays by President Roosevelt . 
 Rockwell 's summer was full of distractions . At one point a Manhattan gastroenterologist prescribed a surgery of uncertain nature , though it was not performed . He had commissions for other magazines , and business complications regarding second reproduction rights . He also had his Boy Scout commitment . Under time constraints , Rockwell made every excuse to avoid all other distracting assignments . In October , The Post sent its art editor to Arlington to check on Rockwell 's progress . At about the same time , despite its Graphics Division chief 's , Francis Brennan 's outrage , the OWI began showing signs of renewed interest . In fact , after Rockwell was chosen the entire OWI Writers ' Division resigned . The press release associated with the resignation asserted that the OWI was dominated by " high @-@ pressure promoters who prefer slick salesmanship to honest information . These promoters would treat as stupid and reluctant customers the men and women of the United States . " There was further turmoil in the OWI from a faction supporting work by Ben Shahn ; Shahn 's work was not used in propaganda because it lacked general appeal . There were several artists who were commissioned to promote the war , including Jean <unk> , Gerard <unk> , Hugo Ballin , and Walter Russell . Russell created a Four Freedoms Monument that was eventually dedicated at Madison Square Garden in New York City . 
 The series took seven months to complete , and was finished by year end . Supposedly , Rockwell lost 10 pounds ( 4 @.@ 54 kg ) from the assignment . As Rockwell was completing the series , he was motivated by news of Allied setbacks , a fact that gives the work a sense of urgency . Models included a Mrs. Harrington who became the devout old woman in Freedom of Worship and a man named Jim Martin who appears in each painting in the series ( most prominently in Freedom from Fear ) . The intention was to remind America what they were fighting for : freedom of speech and worship , freedom from want and fear . All of the paintings used a muted palette and are devoid of the use of vermilion that Rockwell is known for . 
 Some sources published after Rockwell 's death question whether the government was truly as discouraging as Rockwell claimed . They cite an encouraging April 23 , 1943 correspondence with Thomas D. Mabry of the OWI ( a former Executive Director of the Museum of Modern Art ) . At the time , the three government propaganda agencies were disjointed until they were unified under the OWI on June 13 , 1942 by a Presidential Executive Order . Furthermore , the writers ' division , led by MacLeish , was under pressure for failing to deliver a message intelligible to people of varying intelligence . 
 Upon completion , Rockwell 's works were briefly exhibited at the West Arlington Grange before being delivered to The Post in Philadelphia . The series arrived in Philadelphia in January 1943 . Roosevelt was shown the paintings in early February , and The Post sought Roosevelt 's approval for the series of paintings and essays . Roosevelt responded with both a personal letter to Rockwell and an " official " letter of commendation to The Post dated February 10 . Roosevelt instructed The Post to have the OWI have the essays translated into foreign languages so that they could be presented to leaders at the United Nations . 
 The Freedoms were published in a series of four full @-@ color , full @-@ page editions , each accompanied by an essay of the same title . The panels were published in successive weeks in the order corresponding to Roosevelt 's speech : Freedom of Speech ( February 20 ) , Freedom of Worship ( February 27 ) , Freedom from Want ( March 6 ) , and Freedom from Fear ( March 13 ) . For the authors of the accompanying essays , Hibbs had numerous options given the number of regular contributors to The Post . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 When the series was published , The Saturday Evening Post received millions of reprint requests . They produced 25 @,@ 000 sets , including both the essays and full @-@ color reproductions of the paintings , sold at cost for $ 0 @.@ 25 ( $ 3 @.@ 42 in 2016 dollars ) . According to Rockwell , the OWI got involved and produced 2 @.@ 5 million sets of Four Freedoms posters only after the public demanded reprints . By the end of the war , 4 million posters had been printed . Both the Freedom from Fear and Freedom from Want posters had the leading caption " ours . . .to fight for " and the Freedom of Speech and Freedom of Worship had the leading caption " Buy War Bonds " and the word " Save " before the respective freedom . A 1946 lithograph version of the 1943 paintings exists showing all four paintings under the heading " ours . . .to fight for " . 
 The Four Freedoms were issued as posters by the United States Government Printing Office and as postage stamps by the United States Postal Service . They were used as commemorative covers for war bonds and postage stamps offered during the War Bond show . The stamps are not to be confused with the February 12 , 1943 one @-@ cent Four Freedoms Postage Stamp Issue by another artist . The Rockwell versions were issued in a set of four fifty @-@ cent stamps in 1994 , the 100th anniversary of Rockwell 's birth . Freedom from Want was included as the cover image of the 1946 book Norman Rockwell , Illustrator that was written when Rockwell was " at the height of his fame as America 's most popular illustrator " . By 1972 , this 1946 publication was in its seventh printing . Although the paintings were originally intimately connected to Roosevelt and the American cause in World War II , the paintings have now developed an independent iconic identity in textbooks and on ties as well as in the cultural and social fabric . By the end of the 20th century , 25 million people bought Rockwell 's Four Freedoms prints . 
 Rockwell noted that the series took an emotional toll on him , saying that the works were " serious paintings which sucked the energy right out of me like dredges , leaving me dazed and thoroughly weary . " His subsequent assignment was to produce the 1943 April Fools ' Day cover for The Post , which was much more relaxing . 
 Rockwell was solicited for a variety of works following the publication of the Four Freedoms . Massachusetts Representative Edith Nourse Rogers put forth a congressional resolution to declare a fifth freedom : " Freedom of Private Enterprise " . Bronx Inter @-@ Racial Conference chairman Roderick Stephens , requested Rockwell 's services to highlight the need for improved interracial relations in a series that would complement the original Four Freedoms . Rockwell and Stephens communicated , and , over the course of his career , Rockwell did contemplate and depict race relations in several works , but not as a series . 
 = = War Bond Drive = = 
 Between 1941 and 1946 , the United States Department of the Treasury conducted eight War Loan Drives to promote the sale of war bonds to finance America 's World War II efforts . The government used several forms of solicitation , advertising , and marketing , such as aircraft carrier exhibits . For the Seventh War Loan Drive , they used direct appeals from all five @-@ star generals and admirals ( George Marshall , Dwight Eisenhower , Douglas MacArthur , Jackson D. Arnold , Ernest King , Chester W. Nimitz , and William D. Leahy ) , and used a commemorative bond image of Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the Eighth War Loan Drive . The marketing attempts were quite varied even within a single War Loan Drive . 
 The War Bond Drives were viewed as key in boosting national morale by giving citizens the opportunity to support the war effort . They boosted patriotism and were a good marketing device for drumming up support . In fact , not only did celebrities help promote the bonds for free , but also , most air time and advertising space for the bonds was donated . The first War Loan Drive , known as " The Victory Loan Drive " , began in early 1942 . It was initiated by Roosevelt and United States Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau and raised $ 13 billion . Despite its success , only 35 % of Americans understood the objectives of the war . 
 Between January and April 1943 , The Post and the United States Department of the Treasury collaborated to plan the Second War Bond Drive tour featuring the Four Freedoms beginning at Hecht 's in Washington , D.C. Thousands of people volunteered to be part of the War Bond Drive and The Post used its resources to promote the tour . In 1943 , the Saturday Evening Post donated the Four Freedoms to the Second War Loan Drive . The OWI assumed the lead in marketing the Bond Drive . Using an all @-@ star celebrity roster and the Hollywood Writers Mobilization , they created a March 1943 radio dramatization via their " Free World Theater " . The OWI produced and distributed posters of the Four Freedoms to 400 @,@ 000 retailers via the Boy Scouts and began receiving 2 @,@ 000 daily poster requests . 
 The tour began on April 26 , 1943 at Hecht 's . Rockwell was present at the debut to make obligatory appearances in front of ambassadors and dignitaries and to sign autographs . In the subsequent days , he sketched people in the White House waiting room using charcoal . Due to strained relations with The Post , <unk> did not attend the debut . The show ran for eleven days in Washington , D.C. with a wide variety of celebratory festivities , such as hourly featured guests and entertainers , chorus performances , and military unit exhibitions . The second stop of the tour coincided with the 75th anniversary of Strawbridge and Clothier in Philadelphia . Bob Hope , Bing Crosby , and Durant were among the celebrities on hand . The tour arrived at New York City 's Rockefeller Center on June 4 with festivities that featured Kate Smith . The tour arrived in Boston on June 19 at Filene 's . Subsequent stops included Buffalo ( July 12 ) , Rochester , New York ( August 2 ) , and Pittsburgh ( September 8 ) . In the Midwest , the show stopped in Detroit ( September 27 ) , Cleveland ( October 25 ) and Chicago ( November 11 ) . Other stops in the Midwest and West included St. Louis ( December 16 ) , New Orleans ( January 16 , 1944 ) , Dallas ( January 27 ) , Los Angeles ( February 12 ) , Portland , Oregon ( March 27 ) , and Denver ( May 1 ) . 
 Bond purchasers received full @-@ color reproduction sets . During the 16 @-@ city tour , which included various celebrities , public officials , and entertainers , approximately 1 @.@ 2 million people throughout the United States viewed the paintings , which helped to raise $ 132 million ( $ 18 @.@ 533 million for the Second Loan Drive alone ) for the war effort though the sale of war bonds . According to The New Yorker in 1945 , the Four Freedoms " were received by the public with more enthusiasm , perhaps , than any other paintings in the history of American art " . Rockwell is widely credited with contributing to the success of the war effort . However , Rockwell only took part in the war bond tour when it was convenient for his other interests . He did not travel with the tour which lasted a year . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Rockwell is considered the " quintessential middlebrow American artist " . As an artist he is an illustrator rather than a fine arts painter . Although his style is painterly , his work is produced for the purpose of mass reproduction , and it is produced with the intent of delivering a common message to its viewers via a detailed narrative style . Furthermore , the vast majority of Rockwell 's work was viewed in reproduced format and almost none of his contemporaneous audience ever saw his original work . Also , Rockwell 's style of backwoods New England small @-@ town realism , known as regionalism , was sometimes viewed as out of step with the oncoming wave of abstract modern art . Some say his realism is so direct that he abstains from using artistic license . John <unk> , a New York Times art critic once referred to Rockwell as the " Rembrandt of Punkin ' Crick " for his aversion to the vices of big city life . Dave Hickey derided Rockwell for painting without inflection . Some critics also view his sentimental and nostalgic vision out of step with the harsh realities of American life , such as the Great Depression . Deborah Solomon views the works as being " based on lofty civic principles " , but rather than dealing with the warring patriots , they present themes with " civic and familial rituals " for " emblematic scenes " . 
 Post editor Hibbs said that the Four Freedoms were an " inspiration ... in the same way that the clock tower of old Independence Hall , which I can see from my office window , inspires me . " Roosevelt wrote to Rockwell " I think you have done a superb job in bringing home to the plain , everyday citizen the plain , everyday truths behind the Four Freedoms ... I congratulate you not alone on the execution but also for the spirit which impelled you to make this contribution to the common cause of a freer , happier world " . Roosevelt wrote to The Post , " This is the first pictorial representation I have seen of the staunchly American values contained in the rights of free speech and free worship and our goals of freedom from fear and want . " Roosevelt also wrote of the corresponding essays , " Their words should inspire all who read them with a deeper appreciation of the way of life we are striving to preserve . " 
 The Four Freedoms are perhaps Rockwell 's most famous work . Some have said that Rockwell 's Four Freedoms lack artistic maturity . Others have pointed to the universality of the Freedom of Religion as disconcerting to practitioners of particular faiths . Others complained that he idealized American life because by depicting wholesome , healthy , and happy sentiments Rockwell depicted the good that was remembered or wished for , but by avoiding misery , poverty , and social unrest , he failed to demonstrate command of the bad and the ugly parts of American life . Rockwell 's response to this criticism was , " I paint life as I would like it to be . " Rockwell made it known that he hoped these would be his masterpieces , but was disappointed . Nonetheless , he was satisfied with the public acceptance of the series and that the series was able to serve such a patriotic purpose . Laura Claridge feels he might have achieved his ambition if he had pursued the " quiet small scenes " he later became known for . 
 Although all four images were intended to promote patriotism in a time of war , Freedom from Want , which depicts an elderly couple serving a fat turkey to what looks like a table of happy and eager children and grandchildren has given the idyllic Norman Rockwell Thanksgiving work as important a place in the enduring marketplace of promoting family togetherness , peace and plenty as Hallmark at Christmas . Some say that the Four Freedoms were unable to live up to the role of " illustrating grandiose concepts with humble correlatives " because they are too loud . 
 The commercial success of the series was in part because each painting is considered to be a model of understandable art by the general public . The success of Rockwell 's depictions was due to his use of long @-@ standing American cultural values about unity and respect of certain institutions while using symbols that enabled a broad audience to identify with his images . This understandability made it one extreme on the scale of artistic complexity when comparing the series to contemporaneous art . It was diametrically opposed to abstract art and far removed from the intrigue of surrealism . 
 In 1999 , the High Museum of Art and the Norman Rockwell Museum produced the first comprehensive exhibition of Rockwell 's career that started at the High Museum on November 6 , 1999 , stopped at the Chicago Historical Society , Corcoran Gallery of Art , San Diego Museum of Art , Phoenix Art Museum , and Norman Rockwell Museum before concluding at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum on February 11 , 2002 . Although there has been a long history of Rockwell detractors , during this Norman Rockwell : Pictures for the American People touring exhibition attendance was record @-@ setting and critical reviews were quite favorable . The nostalgia seemed to cause a bit of revisionism in the art world , according to The New York Times which said , " What 's odd is the show 's enthusiastic reception by the art world , which in a <unk> of revisionism is falling all over itself to embrace what it once reviled : the comfy , folksy narrative visions of a self @-@ deprecating illustrator ... " 
 Some found Rockwell 's presentation somewhat patronizing , but most were satisfied . The New Yorker remarked two years later : " They were received by the public with more enthusiasm , perhaps , than any other paintings in the history of American Art " . Claridge notes that the series is an example in which the sum is greater than its parts . She notes the inspiration comes in part from their cumulative " heft " . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 Following the 1943 – 44 War Bond Show , the Four Freedoms toured the country further by train in a specially @-@ designed car . Through the 1950s the Four Freedoms hung in Hibbs ' offices at The Post . <unk> retired in 1961 and by the time The Post was discontinued in 1969 , Rockwell regained possession of the original paintings . Norman Rockwell bequeathed his personal collection in trust to the Norman Rockwell Museum in 1973 for the " advancement of art appreciation and art education " . This collection included the Four Freedoms paintings . The works remained on exhibit at " The Norman Rockwell Museum at The Old Corner House " for nearly 25 years . In 1993 , when the Rockwell Museum moved from its original location , the Four Freedoms were displayed in the new museum 's central gallery . As of 2014 , the Four Freedoms remain in the collection of the Museum . In 2011 , the Williamstown Art Conservation Center did some work on the Four Freedoms , including reducing exposure to various elements and preventing further wear . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 The Four Freedoms were widely exhibited as part of the sixteen @-@ city Second War Loan Drive in 1943 and have subsequently been part of other tours and exhibitions . They were a highlight of the first comprehensive Rockwell touring exhibition , entitled Norman Rockwell : Pictures for the American People , which was a seven @-@ city tour that ran from November 1999 until February 2002 . They returned to the Corcoran Gallery of Art , which had been part of the Pictures for the American People tour , for an exhibition in association with the National World War II Memorial grand opening in 2004 . In addition to being included in various tours , the Four Freedoms were the subject of a 144 @-@ page book in 1993 , the fiftieth anniversary of their production . 
 In addition to exhibitions of the Four Freedoms by Rockwell , there have been tribute exhibitions of works by other artists depicting these themes . For example , in 2008 at the Wolfsonian museum at Florida International University , 60 artists exhibited 80 works that represented their takes on the Four Freedoms . Other artists , such as Thomas Kinkade , have found individual inspiration in Rockwell 's patriotic works , resulting in their own works using different symbols to present similar themes . 
 = William Howard Taft = 
 William Howard Taft ( September 15 , 1857 – March 8 , 1930 ) served as the 27th President of the United States ( 1909 – 1913 ) and as the 10th Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court ( 1921 – 1930 ) , the only person to have held both offices . Taft was elected president in 1908 , the chosen successor of Theodore Roosevelt , but was defeated for re @-@ election by Woodrow Wilson in 1912 after Roosevelt split the Republican vote by running as a third @-@ party candidate . In 1921 , President Warren G. Harding appointed Taft chief justice , a position in which he served until a few weeks before his death . 
 Taft was born in Cincinnati in 1857 . His father Alphonso Taft was a U.S. Attorney General and Secretary of War . William Taft attended Yale and was a member of Skull and Bones secret society like his father , and after becoming a lawyer was appointed a judge while still in his twenties . He continued a rapid rise , being named Solicitor General and as a judge of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals . President William McKinley appointed Taft civilian governor of the Philippines . In 1904 , Roosevelt made him Secretary of War and he became Roosevelt 's hand @-@ picked successor . Taft declined repeated offers of appointment to the Supreme Court , believing his political work more important . 
 With Roosevelt 's help , Taft had little opposition for the Republican nomination for president in 1908 , and easily defeated William Jennings Bryan for the presidency that November . In the White House , he focused on the Far East more than European affairs , and repeatedly intervened to prop up or remove Latin American governments . Taft sought reductions to the tariff , then a major source of governmental income , but the resulting bill was heavily influenced by special interests . His administration was filled with conflict between the conservative wing of the Republican Party , with which Taft often sympathized , and the progressive wing , toward which Roosevelt moved more and more . Controversies over conservation and over antitrust cases filed by the Taft administration served to further separate the two men . Roosevelt challenged Taft for renomination in 1912 . Taft used his control of the party machinery to gain a bare majority of delegates , and Roosevelt bolted the party . The split left Taft with little chance of re @-@ election , and in Wilson 's victory won only Utah and Vermont . 
 After leaving office , Taft returned to Yale as a professor , continuing his political activity and working against war through the League to Enforce Peace . In 1921 , President Harding appointed Taft chief justice , an office he had long sought . Chief Justice Taft was a conservative on business issues , but under him , there were advances in individual rights . In poor health , he resigned in February 1930 . After his death the next month , he was buried at Arlington National Cemetery , the first president and first Supreme Court justice to be interred there . Taft is generally listed near the middle in historians ' rankings of U.S. presidents . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 William Howard Taft was born September 15 , 1857 , in Cincinnati , Ohio , to Alphonso Taft and Louise Torrey . The Taft family was not wealthy , living in a modest home in the suburb of Mount Auburn . Alphonso served as a judge , ambassador and in the cabinet , as War Secretary and Attorney General under Ulysses S. Grant . 
 William Taft was not seen as brilliant as a child , but was a hard worker ; the demanding parents pushed their five boys toward success , tolerating nothing less . He attended Woodward High School in Cincinnati . At Yale College , which he entered in 1874 , the heavyset , jovial Taft was popular . One classmate described him succeeding through hard work rather than being the smartest , with sterling integrity . In 1878 , Taft graduated , second in his class out of 121 . He attended Cincinnati Law School , and graduated with a Bachelor of Laws in 1880 . While in law school , he worked on The Cincinnati Commercial newspaper , edited by Murat Halstead . Taft was assigned to cover the local courts , and also spent time reading law in his father 's office ; both activities gave him practical knowledge of the law that was taught in no class . Shortly before graduating from law school , Taft went to the state capital of Columbus to take the bar examination and easily passed . 
 = = Rise in government ( 1880 – 1908 ) = = 
 = = = Ohio lawyer and judge = = = 
 After admission to the Ohio bar , Taft devoted himself to his job at the Commercial full @-@ time . Halstead was willing to take him on permanently at an increase in salary if he would give up the law , but Taft declined . In October 1880 , Taft was appointed assistant prosecutor for Hamilton County ( where Cincinnati is located ) , and took office the following January . Taft served for a year as assistant prosecutor , trying his share of routine cases . He resigned in January 1882 after President Chester A. Arthur appointed him Collector of Internal Revenue for Ohio 's First District , an area centered on Cincinnati . Taft refused to dismiss competent employees who were politically out of favor , and resigned effective in March 1883 , writing to Arthur that he wished to begin private practice in Cincinnati . In 1884 , Taft campaigned for the Republican candidate for president , Maine Senator James G. Blaine , who lost to New York Governor Grover Cleveland . 
 In 1887 , Taft , then aged 29 , was appointed to a vacancy on the Superior Court of Cincinnati by Governor Joseph B. Foraker . The appointment was good for just over a year , after which he would have to face the voters , and in April 1888 , he sought election for the first of three times in his lifetime , the other two being for the presidency . He was elected to a full five @-@ year term . Some two dozen of Taft 's opinions as a state judge survive , the most significant being Moores & Co. v. Bricklayers ' Union No. 1 ( 1889 ) if only because it was used against him when he ran for president in 1908 . The case involved bricklayers who refused to work for any firm that dealt with a company called Parker Brothers , with which they were in dispute . Taft ruled that the union 's action amounted to a secondary boycott , which was illegal . 
 It is not clear when Taft met Helen Herron ( often called Nellie ) , but it was no later than 1880 , when she mentioned in her diary receiving an invitation to a party from him . By 1884 , they were meeting regularly , and in 1885 , after an initial rejection , she agreed to marry him . The wedding took place at the Herron home on June 19 , 1886 . William Taft remained devoted to his wife throughout their almost 44 years of marriage . Nellie Taft pushed her husband much as his parents had , and she could be very frank with her criticisms . The couple had three children , of which the eldest , Robert , became a U.S. senator . 
 = = = Solicitor General = = = 
 There was a seat vacant on the U.S. Supreme Court in 1889 , and Governor Foraker suggested President Harrison appoint Taft to fill it . Taft was 32 and his professional goal was always a seat on the high court . He actively sought the appointment , writing to Foraker to urge the governor to press his case , while stating to others it was unlikely he would get it . Instead , in 1890 , Harrison appointed him Solicitor General of the United States . When Taft arrived in Washington in February 1890 , the office had been vacant two months , with the work piling up . He worked to eliminate the backlog , while simultaneously educating himself on federal law and procedure he had not needed as an Ohio state judge . 
 New York Senator William M. Evarts , a former Secretary of State , had been a classmate of Alphonso Taft at Yale . Evarts called to see his friend 's son as soon as Taft took office , and William and Nellie Taft were launched into Washington society . Nellie Taft was ambitious for herself and her husband , and was annoyed when the people he socialized with most were mainly Supreme Court justices , rather than the arbiters of Washington society such as Theodore Roosevelt , John Hay , Henry Cabot Lodge and their wives . 
 Although Taft was successful as Solicitor General , winning 15 of the 18 cases he argued before the Supreme Court , he was glad when in March 1891 , Congress created a new judgeship for each of the United States Courts of Appeal and Harrison appointed him to the Sixth Circuit , based in Cincinnati . In March 1892 , Taft resigned as Solicitor General to resume his judicial career . 
 = = = Federal judge = = = 
 Taft 's federal judgeship was a lifetime appointment , and one from which promotion to the Supreme Court might come . Taft 's older half @-@ brother Charles , successful in business , supplemented Taft 's government salary , allowing William and Nellie Taft and their family to live in comfort . Taft 's duties involved hearing trials in the circuit , which included Ohio , Michigan , Kentucky , and Tennessee , and participating with Supreme Court Justice John Marshall Harlan , the circuit justice , and judges of the Sixth Circuit in hearing appeals . Taft spent eight years of his life , from 1892 to 1900 , in personal and professional contentment . 
 According to historian Louis L. Gould , " while Taft shared the fears about social unrest that dominated the middle classes during the 1890s , he was not as conservative as his critics believed . He supported the right of labor to organize and strike , and he ruled against employers in several negligence cases . " Among these was Voight v. Baltimore & Ohio Southwestern Railway Co . Taft 's decision for a worker injured in a railway accident violated the contemporary doctrine of liberty of contract , and he was reversed by the Supreme Court . On the other hand , Taft 's opinion in United States v. Addyston Pipe and Steel Co. was upheld unanimously by the high court . Taft 's opinion , in which he held that a pipe manufacturers ' association had violated the Sherman Antitrust Act , was described by Henry Pringle , his biographer , as having " definitely and specifically revived " that legislation . 
 In 1896 , Taft became dean and Professor of Property at his alma mater , the Cincinnati Law School , a post that required him to prepare and give two hour @-@ long lectures each week . He was devoted to his law school , and was deeply committed to legal education , introducing the case system to the curriculum . As a federal judge , Taft could not involve himself with politics , but followed it closely , remaining a Republican supporter . He watched with some disbelief as the campaign of Ohio Governor William McKinley developed in 1894 and 1895 , writing " I cannot find anybody in Washington who wants him " . By March 1896 , Taft realized that McKinley would likely be nominated , and was lukewarm in his support . He landed solidly in McKinley 's camp after former Nebraska representative William Jennings Bryan in July stampeded the 1896 Democratic National Convention with his Cross of Gold speech . Bryan , both in that address and in his campaign , strongly advocated free silver , a policy that Taft saw as economic radicalism . Taft feared that people would hoard gold in anticipation of a Bryan victory , but he could do nothing but worry . McKinley was elected ; when a place on the Supreme Court opened in 1898 , the only one under McKinley , the president named Joseph McKenna . 
 = = = Philippine years = = = 
 In January 1900 , Taft was called to Washington to meet with McKinley . Taft hoped a Supreme Court appointment was in the works , but instead McKinley wanted to place Taft on the commission to organize a civilian government in the Philippines . The appointment would require Taft 's resignation from the bench ; the president assured him that if he fulfilled this task , McKinley would appoint him to the next vacancy on the high court . Taft accepted on condition he was made head of the commission , with responsibility for success or failure ; McKinley agreed , and Taft sailed for the islands in April 1900 . 
 Many Filipinos had responded to the American takeover with a fierce resistance , seeking independence for the islands , but U.S. forces , led by military governor General Arthur MacArthur , Jr. had the upper hand by 1900 . MacArthur felt the commission was a nuisance , and their mission a quixotic attempt to impose self @-@ government on a people unready for it . The general was forced to co @-@ operate with Taft , as McKinley had given the commission control over the islands ' military budget . The commission took executive power in the Philippines on September 1 , 1900 ; on July 4 , 1901 , Taft became civilian governor . MacArthur , until then the military governor , was relieved by General Adna Chaffee , who was designated only as commander of American forces . 
 Taft sought to make the Filipinos partners in a venture that would lead to their self @-@ government ; he saw independence as something far off . Many Americans in the Philippines viewed the locals as racial inferiors , but Taft wrote soon before his arrival , " we propose to banish this idea from their minds " . Taft did not impose segregation at official events , and treated the Filipinos as social equals . Nellie Taft recalled that " neither politics nor race should influence our hospitality in any way " . 
 McKinley was assassinated in September 1901 , and was succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt . Taft and Roosevelt had first become friends around 1890 while Taft was Solicitor General and Roosevelt a member of the Civil Service Commission . Taft had , after McKinley 's election , urged the appointment of Roosevelt as Assistant Secretary of the Navy , and watched as Roosevelt became a war hero , Governor of New York , and Vice President of the United States . They met again when Taft went to Washington in January 1902 to recuperate after two operations caused by an infection . There , Taft testified before the Senate Committee on the Philippines . Taft wanted to have Filipino farmers to have a stake in the new government through land ownership , but much of the arable land was held by Catholic religious orders , priests who were mostly Spanish , and were often resented by the Filipinos . Roosevelt had Taft go to Rome to negotiate with Pope Leo XIII , to purchase the lands and to arrange the withdrawal of the Spanish priests , with Americans replacing them and training locals as clergy . Taft did not succeed in resolving these issues on his visit to Rome , but an agreement on both points was made in 1903 . 
 In late 1902 , Taft had heard from Roosevelt that a seat on the Supreme Court would soon fall vacant on the resignation of Justice George Shiras , and Roosevelt desired that Taft fill it . Although this was Taft 's professional goal , he refused as he felt his work as governor was not yet done . One reason for Roosevelt 's action was his desire to neutralize a potential rival for the presidency : Taft 's success in the Philippines had not gone unnoticed in the American press . The following year , Roosevelt asked Taft to become Secretary of War . As the War Department was responsible for the Philippines , Taft would remain responsible for the islands , and Root was willing to postpone his departure until 1904 , allowing Taft time to wrap up his work in Manila . After consulting with his family , Taft agreed , and sailed for the United States in December 1903 . 
 = = = Secretary of War = = = 
 When Taft took office as Secretary of War in January 1904 , he was not called upon to spend much time administering the army , which the president was content to do himself — Roosevelt wanted him as a troubleshooter in difficult situations , as a legal adviser , and to be able to give campaign speeches as he sought election in his own right . Taft strongly defended Roosevelt 's record in his addresses , and wrote of the president 's successful but strenuous efforts to gain election , " I would not run for president if you guaranteed the office . It is awful to be afraid of one 's shadow . " 
 Between 1905 and 1907 , Taft came to terms with the likelihood he would be the next Republican nominee for president , though he did not plan to actively campaign for it . When Justice Henry B. Brown resigned in 1905 , Taft would not accept the seat although Roosevelt offered it , a position Taft held to when another seat opened in 1906 . Edith Roosevelt , the First Lady , disliked the growing closeness between the two men , feeling they were too much alike , and that the president did not gain much from the advice of someone who rarely contradicted him . 
 Alternatively , Taft wanted to be chief justice , and kept a close eye on the health of the aging incumbent , Melville Fuller , who turned 75 in 1908 . Taft believed Fuller likely to live many years . Roosevelt had indicated he was likely to appoint Taft if the opportunity came to fill the court 's center seat , but some considered Attorney General Philander Knox a better candidate . In any event , Fuller remained chief justice throughout Roosevelt 's presidency . 
 Through the 1903 Panamanian Revolution and the Hay @-@ Bunau @-@ Varilla Treaty , the United States had secured rights to build a canal in the Isthmus of Panama . Legislation authorizing construction did not specify which government department would be responsible , and Roosevelt designated the Department of War . Taft journeyed to Panama in 1904 , viewing the canal site and meeting with Panamanian officials . The Isthmian Canal Commission had trouble keeping a chief engineer , and when in February 1907 John D. Stevens submitted his resignation , Taft recommended an army engineer , George W. Goethals . Under Goethals , the project moved ahead smoothly . 
 Another colony lost by Spain in 1898 was Cuba , but as freedom for Cuba had been a major purpose of the war , it was not annexed by the U.S. , but was , after a period of occupation , given independence in 1902 . Election fraud and corruption followed , as did factional conflict . In September 1906 , President Tomás Estrada Palma asked for U.S. intervention . Taft traveled to Cuba with a small American force , and on September 29 , 1906 , under the terms of the Cuban – American Treaty of Relations of 1903 , declared himself Provisional Governor of Cuba , a post he held for two weeks before being succeeded by Charles Edward Magoon . In his time in Cuba , Taft worked to persuade Cubans that the U.S. intended stability , not occupation . 
 Taft remained involved in Philippine affairs . During Roosevelt 's election campaign in 1904 , he urged that Philippine agricultural products be admitted to the U.S. without duty . This caused growers of U.S. sugar and tobacco to complain to Roosevelt , who remonstrated with his Secretary of War . Taft expressed unwillingness to change his position , and threatened to resign ; Roosevelt hastily dropped the matter . Taft returned to the islands in 1905 , leading a delegation of congressmen , and again in 1907 , to open the first Philippine Assembly . 
 On both of his Philippine trips as Secretary of War , Taft went to Japan , and met with officials there . The meeting in July 1905 came a month before the conference which would end the Russo @-@ Japanese War with the Treaty of Portsmouth . Taft met with Japanese Prime Minister Katsura Tarō . After that meeting , the two signed a memorandum , with Japan indicating it had no desire to invade the Philippines , and the U.S. that it did not object to Japanese control of Korea . There were U.S. concerns about the number of Japanese laborers coming to the West Coast , and during Taft 's second visit , in September 1907 , Tadasu Hayashi , the foreign minister , informally agreed to issue fewer passports to them . 
 = = Presidential election of 1908 = = 
 = = = Gaining the nomination = = = 
 Roosevelt had served almost three and a half years of McKinley 's term . On the night of his own election in 1904 , Roosevelt publicly declared he would not run for re @-@ election in 1908 , a pledge he quickly regretted . But he felt bound by his word . Roosevelt believed Taft was his logical successor , although the War Secretary was initially reluctant to run . Roosevelt used his control of the party machinery to aid his heir apparent . On pain of loss of their jobs , political appointees were required to support Taft or remain silent . 
 A number of Republican politicians , such as Treasury Secretary George Cortelyou tested the waters for a run , but chose to stay out . New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes ran , but when he made a major policy speech , Roosevelt the same day sent a special message to Congress warning in strong terms against corporate corruption . The resulting coverage of the presidential message relegated Hughes to the back pages . Roosevelt reluctantly deterred repeated attempts to draft him for another term . 
 Assistant Postmaster General Frank H. Hitchcock resigned from his office in February 1908 to lead the Taft effort . In April , Taft made a speaking tour , traveling as far west as Omaha before being recalled to go to Panama and straighten out another contested election . At the 1908 Republican National Convention in Chicago in June , there was no serious opposition to him , and he gained a first @-@ ballot victory . Yet , Taft did not have things his own way : he had hoped his running mate would be a midwestern progressive like Iowa Senator Jonathan <unk> , but instead the convention named Congressman James S. Sherman of New York , a conservative . Taft resigned as Secretary of War on June 30 to devote his full @-@ time to the campaign . 
 = = = General election campaign = = = 
 Taft 's opponent in the general election was Bryan , the Democratic nominee for the third time in four presidential elections . As many of Roosevelt 's reforms stemmed from proposals by Bryan , the Democrat argued that he was the heir to Roosevelt 's mantle and that Taft was not . Corporate contributions to federal political campaigns had been outlawed by the 1907 Tillman Act , and Bryan proposed that contributions by officers and directors of corporations be similarly banned , or at least disclosed when made . Taft was only willing to see the contributions disclosed after the election , and tried to ensure that officers and directors of corporations litigating with the government were not among his contributors . 
 Taft began the campaign on the wrong foot , fueling the arguments of those who said he was not his own man by traveling to Roosevelt 's home at Sagamore Hill for advice on his acceptance speech , saying that he needed " the President 's judgment and criticism " . He for the most part supported Roosevelt 's policies . The candidate argued that labor had a right to organize , but not to boycott . <unk> interests , that is , capital , must also obey the law . Bryan wanted the railroads to be owned by the government , but Taft preferred that they remain in the private sector , with their maximum rates set by the Interstate Commerce Commission , subject to judicial review . Taft attributed blame for the recent recession , the Panic of 1907 , to stock speculation and other abuses , and felt some reform of the currency ( the U.S. was on the gold standard ) was needed to allow flexibility in the government 's response to poor economic times . Specific legislation on trusts was needed to supplement the Sherman Antitrust Act . The constitution should be amended to allow for an income tax , thus overruling decisions of the Supreme Court striking such a tax down . Roosevelt 's expansive use of executive power had been controversial ; Taft proposed to continue his policies , but place them on more solid legal underpinnings through the passage of legislation . 
 Taft upset some progressives by choosing Hitchcock as Chairman of the Republican National Committee ( RNC ) , placing him in charge of the presidential campaign . Hitchcock was quick to bring in men closely allied with big business . Taft took an August vacation in Hot Springs , Virginia , where he irritated political advisors by spending more time on golf than strategy . After seeing a newspaper photo of Taft taking a large swing at a golf ball , Roosevelt warned him against candid shots . 
 Roosevelt , frustrated by his own relative inaction , showered Taft with advice , fearing that the electorate would not appreciate Taft 's qualities , and that Bryan would win . Roosevelt 's supporters spread rumors that the president was in effect running Taft 's campaign . This annoyed Nellie Taft , who never trusted the Roosevelts . Nevertheless , Roosevelt supported the Republican nominee with such enthusiasm that humorists suggested " <unk> " stood for " Take advice from Theodore " . 
 Bryan urged a system of bank guarantees , so that depositors could be repaid if banks failed , but Taft opposed this , offering a postal savings system instead . The issue of prohibition of alcohol entered the campaign when in mid @-@ September , Carrie Nation called on Taft and demanded to know his views . Taft and Roosevelt had agreed the party platform would take no position on the matter , and Nation left indignant , to allege that Taft was irreligious and against temperance . Taft , at Roosevelt 's advice , ignored the issue . 
 In the end , Taft won by a comfortable margin . Taft defeated Bryan by 321 electoral votes to 162 ; however , he garnered just 51 @.@ 6 percent of the popular vote . Nellie Taft said regarding the campaign , " There was nothing to criticize , except his not knowing or caring about the way the game of politics is played . " Longtime White House usher Ike Hoover recalled that Taft came often to see Roosevelt during the campaign , but seldom between the election and Inauguration Day , March 4 , 1909 . 
 = = Presidency ( 1909 – 1913 ) = = 
 = = = Inauguration and appointments = = = 
 William Howard Taft was sworn in as president on March 4 , 1909 . Due to a winter storm that coated Washington with ice , Taft was inaugurated within the Senate Chamber rather than outside the Capitol as is customary . The new president stated in his inaugural address that he had been honored to have been " one of the advisers of my distinguished predecessor " and to have had a part " in the reforms he has initiated . I should be untrue to myself , to my promises , and to the declarations of the party platform on which I was elected if I did not make the maintenance and enforcement of those reforms a most important feature of my administration " . He pledged to make those reforms long @-@ lasting , ensuring that honest businessmen did not suffer uncertainty through change of policy . He spoke of the need for reduction of the 1897 Dingley Tariff , for antitrust reform , and for continued advancement of the Philippines toward full self @-@ government . Roosevelt left office with regret that his tenure in the position he enjoyed so much was over and , to keep out of Taft 's way , arranged for a year @-@ long hunting trip to Africa . 
 Soon after the Republican convention , Taft and Roosevelt had discussed which cabinet officers would stay on . Taft kept only Agriculture Secretary James Wilson and Postmaster General George von Lengerke Meyer ( who was shifted to the Navy Department ) . Others appointed to the Taft cabinet included Philander Knox , the new Secretary of State , and Franklin MacVeagh as Treasury Secretary . 
 Taft did not enjoy the easy relationship with the press that Roosevelt had , choosing not to offer himself for interviews or photo opportunities as often as his predecessor had . His administration marked a change in style from the charismatic leadership of Roosevelt to Taft 's quieter passion for the rule of law . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 = = = = Organization and principles = = = = 
 Taft made it a priority to restructure the State Department , noting , " it is organized on the basis of the needs of the government in 1800 instead of 1900 . " The Department was for the first time organized into geographical divisions , including desks for the Far East , Latin America and Western Europe . The department 's first in @-@ service training program was established , and appointees spent a month in Washington before going to their posts . Taft and Secretary of State Knox had a strong relationship , and the president listened to his counsel on matters foreign and domestic . According to Coletta , however , Knox was not a good diplomat , and had poor relations with the Senate , press , and many foreign leaders , especially those from Latin America . 
 There was broad agreement between Taft and Knox on major foreign policy goals . The U.S. would not interfere in European affairs . The U.S. would use force if necessary to enforce the Monroe Doctrine in the Americas . The defense of the Panama Canal , which was under construction throughout Taft 's term ( it opened in 1914 ) , guided U.S. policy in the Caribbean and in Central America . Previous administration had tried to defend American business interests overseas , but Taft went a step further and used the web of American diplomats and consuls abroad to promote trade . Such ties , Taft hoped , would promote world peace . Taft promoted arbitration treaties with Great Britain and France , but the Senate was not willing to yield to arbitrators its constitutional prerogative to approve treaties . 
 = = = = Tariffs and reciprocity = = = = 
 At the time of Taft 's presidency , protectionism through the use of tariffs was a fundamental position of the Republican Party . The Dingley Tariff had been enacted to protect American industry from foreign competition . The 1908 party platform had supported unspecified revisions to the Dingley Act , and Taft interpreted this to mean reductions . Taft called a special session of Congress to convene on March 15 , 1909 to deal with the tariff question . 
 Sereno E. Payne , chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee , had held hearings in late 1908 , and sponsored the resulting draft legislation . On balance , the bill reduced tariffs slightly , but when it passed the House in April 1909 and reached the Senate , the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee , Rhode Island Senator Nelson W. Aldrich , attached many amendments raising rates . This outraged progressives such as Wisconsin 's Robert M. La Follette , who urged Taft to say that the bill was not in accord with the party platform . Taft refused , angering them . Taft insisted that most imports from the Philippines be free of duty , and according to Anderson , showed effective leadership on a subject he was knowledgeable on and really cared about . 
 When opponents sought to modify the tariff bill to allow for an income tax , Taft opposed it on the ground that the Supreme Court would likely strike it down as unconstitutional , as it had before . Instead , they proposed a constitutional amendment , which passed both houses in early July , was sent to the states , and by 1913 was ratified as the Sixteenth Amendment . In the conference committee , Taft won some victories , such as limiting the tax on lumber . The conference report passed both houses , and Taft signed it on August 6 , 1909 . The Payne @-@ Aldrich tariff was immediately controversial . According to Coletta , " Taft had lost the initiative , and the wounds inflicted in the acrid tariff debate never healed " . 
 In Taft 's annual message sent to Congress in December 1910 , he urged a free trade accord for Canada . Britain at that time still handled Canada 's foreign relations , and Taft found the British and Canadian governments willing . Many in Canada opposed an accord , fearing the U.S. would dump it when convenient as it had the 1854 Elgin @-@ Marcy Treaty in 1866 , and American farm and fisheries interests were also opposed . After January 1911 talks with Canadian officials , Taft had the agreement , which was not a treaty , introduced into Congress and it passed in late July . The Canadian Parliament , led by Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier , had deadlocked over the issue . Canadians turned Laurier out of office in the September 1911 election . No cross @-@ border agreement was concluded , and the debate deepened divisions in the Republican Party . 
 = = = = Latin America = = = = 
 Taft and his Secretary of State , Philander Knox , instituted a policy of Dollar Diplomacy towards Latin America , believing U.S. investment would benefit all involved , while keeping European influence away from areas subject to the Monroe Doctrine . Although exports rose sharply during Taft 's administration , the policy was unpopular among Latin American states that did not wish to become financial protectorates of the United States , as well as in the U.S. Senate , many of whose members believed the U.S. should not interfere abroad . No foreign affairs controversy tested Taft 's statesmanship and commitment to peace more than the collapse of the Mexican regime and subsequent turmoil of the Mexican Revolution . 
 When Taft entered office , Mexico was increasingly restless under the grip of longtime dictator Porfirio Díaz and many Mexicans backed his opponent , Francisco Madero . There were a number of incidents in which Mexican rebels crossed the U.S. border to obtain horses and weapons ; Taft sought to prevent this by ordering the army to the border areas for maneuvers . Taft told his military aide , Archibald Butt , that " I am going to sit on the lid and it will take a great deal to pry me off " . He showed his support for Díaz by meeting with him at El Paso , Texas , and Ciudad Juárez , Mexico , the first meeting between a U.S. and a Mexican president and also the first time an American president visited Mexico . The day of the summit , Frederick Russell Burnham and a Texas Ranger captured and disarmed an assassin holding a palm pistol only a few feet of the two presidents . Before the election in Mexico , Díaz jailed opposition candidate Madero , whose supporters took up arms resulting in both the ousting of Díaz and a revolution that would continue for another ten years . In the U.S. ' s Arizona Territory , two citizens were killed and almost a dozen injured , some as a result of gunfire across the border . Taft would not be goaded into fighting and so instructed the territorial governor . 
 Nicaragua 's president , José Santos Zelaya , wanted to revoke commercial concessions granted to American companies , and American diplomats quietly favored rebel forces under Juan Estrada . Nicaragua was in debt to foreign powers , and the U.S. was unwilling that an alternate canal route fall into the hands of Europeans . Zelaya 's elected successor , José <unk> , could not put down the rebellion as U.S. forces interfered , and in August 1910 , the Estrada forces took Managua , the capital . The U.S. had Nicaragua accept a loan , and sent officials to ensure it was repaid from government revenues . The country remained unstable , and after another coup in 1911 and more disturbances in 1912 , Taft sent troops ; though most were soon withdrawn , some remained as late as 1933 . 
 Treaties among Panama , Colombia , and the United States to resolve disputes arising from the Panamanian Revolution of 1903 had been signed by the lame @-@ duck Roosevelt administration in early 1909 , and were approved by the Senate and also ratified by Panama . Colombia , however , declined to ratify the treaties , and after the 1912 elections , Knox offered $ 10 million to the Colombians ( later raised to $ 25 million ) . The Colombians felt the amount inadequate , and requested arbitration ; the matter was not settled under the Taft administration . 
 = = = = Far East = = = = 
 Due to his years in the Philippines , Taft was keenly interested as president in Far Eastern affairs . Taft considered relations with Europe relatively unimportant , but because of the potential for trade and investment , Taft ranked the post of minister to China as most important in the Foreign Service . Knox did not agree , and declined a suggestion that he go to Peking to view the facts on the ground . Taft replaced Roosevelt 's minister there , William W. Rockhill , as uninterested in the China trade , with William J. Calhoun , whom McKinley and Roosevelt had sent on several foreign missions . Knox did not listen to Calhoun on policy , and there were often conflicts . Taft and Knox tried unsuccessfully to extend John Hay 's Open Door Policy to Manchuria . 
 In 1898 , an American company had gained a concession for a railroad between Hankow and <unk> , but the Chinese revoked the agreement in 1904 after the company ( which was indemnified for the revocation ) breached the agreement by selling a majority stake outside the United States . The Chinese imperial government got the money for the indemnity from the British Hong Kong government , on condition British subjects would be favored if foreign capital was needed to build the railroad line , and in 1909 , a British @-@ led consortium began negotiations . This came to Knox 's attention in May of that year , and he demanded that U.S. banks be allowed to participate . Taft appealed personally to the Prince Regent , <unk> , Prince Chun , and was successful in gaining U.S. participation , though agreements were not signed until May 1911 . However , the Chinese decree authorizing the agreement also required the nationalization of local railroad companies in the affected provinces . Inadequate compensation was paid to the shareholders , and these grievances were among those which touched off the Chinese Revolution of 1911 . 
 After the revolution broke out , the revolt 's leaders chose Sun Yat Sen as provisional president of what became the Republic of China , overthrowing the Manchu Dynasty , Taft was reluctant to recognize the new government , although American public opinion was in favor of it . The U.S. House of Representatives in February 1912 passed a resolution supporting a Chinese republic , but Taft and Knox felt recognition should come as a concerted action by Western powers . Taft in his final annual message to Congress in December 1912 indicated that he was moving towards recognition once the republic was fully established , but by then he had been defeated for re @-@ election and he did not follow through . 
 Taft continued the policy against immigration from China and Japan as under Roosevelt . A revised treaty of friendship and navigation entered into by the U.S. and Japan in 1911 granted broad reciprocal rights to Japanese in America and Americans in Japan , but were premised on the continuation of the Gentlemen 's Agreement . There was objection on the West Coast when the treaty was submitted to the Senate , but Taft informed politicians that there was no change in immigration policy . 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 Taft was opposed to the traditional practice of rewarding wealthy supporters with key ambassadorial posts , preferring that diplomats not live in a lavish lifestyle and selecting men who , as Taft put it , would recognize an American when they saw one . High on his list for dismissal was the ambassador to France , Henry White , whom Taft knew and disliked from his visits to Europe . White 's ousting caused other career State Department employees to fear that their jobs might be lost to politics . Taft also wanted to replace the Roosevelt @-@ appointed ambassador in London , Whitelaw Reid , but Reid , owner of the New @-@ York Tribune , had backed Taft during the campaign , and both William and Nellie Taft enjoyed his gossipy reports . Reid remained in place until his 1912 death . 
 Taft was a supporter of settling international disputes by arbitration , and he negotiated treaties with Great Britain and with France providing that differences be arbitrated . These were signed in August 1911 . Neither Taft nor Knox ( a former senator ) consulted with members of the Senate during the negotiating process . By then many Republicans were opposed to Taft and the president felt that lobbying too hard for the treaties might cause their defeat . He made some speeches supporting the treaties in October , but the Senate added amendments Taft could not accept , killing the agreements . 
 Although no general arbitration treaty was entered into , Taft 's administration settled several disputes with Great Britain by peaceful means , often involving arbitration . These included a settlement of the boundary between Maine and New Brunswick , a long @-@ running dispute over seal hunting in the Bering Sea that also involved Japan , and a similar disagreement regarding fishing off Newfoundland . The sealing convention remained in force until abrogated by Japan in 1940 . 
 = = = Domestic policies and politics = = = 
 = = = = Antitrust = = = = 
 Taft continued and expanded Roosevelt 's efforts to break up business combinations through lawsuits brought under the Sherman Antitrust Act , bringing 70 cases in four years ( Roosevelt had brought 40 in seven years ) . Suits brought against the Standard Oil Company and the American Tobacco Company , initiated under Roosevelt , were decided in favor of the government by the Supreme Court in 1911 . In June 1911 , the Democrat @-@ controlled House of Representatives began hearings into United States Steel ( U.S. Steel ) . That company had been expanded under Roosevelt , who had supported its acquisition of the Tennessee Coal , Iron , and Railroad Company as a means of preventing the deepening of the Panic of 1907 , a decision the former president defended when testifying at the hearings . Taft , as Secretary of War , had praised the acquisitions . Historian Louis L. Gould suggested that Roosevelt was likely deceived into believing that U.S. Steel did not want to purchase the Tennessee company , but it was in fact a bargain . For Roosevelt , questioning the matter went to his personal honesty . 
 In October 1911 , Taft 's Justice Department brought suit against U.S. Steel , demanding that over a hundred of its subsidiaries be granted corporate independence , and naming as defendants many prominent business executives and financiers . The pleadings in the case had not been reviewed by Taft , and alleged that Roosevelt " had fostered monopoly , and had been duped by clever industrialists " . Roosevelt was offended by the references to him and his administration in the pleadings , and felt that Taft could not evade command responsibility by saying he did not know of them . 
 Taft sent a special message to Congress on the need for a revamped antitrust statute when it convened its regular session in December 1911 , but it took no action . Another antitrust case that had political repercussions for Taft was that brought against the International Harvester Company , the large manufacturer of farm equipment , in early 1912 . As Roosevelt 's administration had investigated International Harvester , but had taken no action ( a decision Taft had supported ) , the suit became caught up in Roosevelt 's challenge for the Republican presidential nomination . Supporters of Taft alleged that Roosevelt had acted improperly ; the former president blasted Taft for waiting three and a half years , and until he was under challenge , to reverse a decision he had supported . 
 = = = = Ballinger @-@ Pinchot affair = = = = 
 Roosevelt was an ardent conservationist , assisted in this by like @-@ minded appointees , including Interior Secretary James R. Garfield and Chief Forester Gifford Pinchot . Taft agreed with the need for conservation , but felt it should be accomplished by legislation rather than executive order . He did not retain Garfield , an Ohioan , as secretary , choosing instead a westerner , former Seattle mayor Richard A. Ballinger . Roosevelt was surprised at the replacement , believing that Taft had promised to keep Garfield , and this change was one of the events that caused Roosevelt to realize that Taft would choose different policies . 
 Roosevelt had withdrawn much land from the public domain , including some in Alaska thought rich in coal . In 1902 , Clarence Cunningham , an Idaho entrepreneur , had found coal deposits in Alaska , and made mining claims , and the government investigated their legality . This dragged on for the remainder of the Roosevelt administration , including during the year ( 1907 – 1908 ) when Ballinger served as head of the General Land Office . A special agent for the Land Office , Louis Glavis , investigated the Cunningham claims , and when Secretary Ballinger in 1909 approved them , Glavis broke governmental protocol by going outside the Interior Department to seek help from Pinchot . 
 In September 1909 , Glavis made his allegations public in a magazine article , disclosing that Ballinger had acted as an attorney for Cunningham between his two periods of government service . This violated conflict of interest rules forbidding a former government official from advocacy on a matter he had been responsible for . On September 13 , 1909 Taft dismissed Glavis from government service , relying on a report from Attorney General George W. Wickersham dated two days previously . Pinchot was determined to dramatize the issue by forcing his own dismissal , which Taft tried to avoid , fearing that it might cause a break with Roosevelt ( still overseas ) . Taft asked Elihu Root ( by then a senator ) to look into the matter , and Root urged the firing of Pinchot . 
 Taft had ordered government officials not to comment on the fracas . In January 1910 , Pinchot forced the issue by sending a letter to Iowa Senator <unk> alleging that but for the actions of the Forestry Service , Taft would have approved a fraudulent claim on public lands . According to Pringle , this " was an utterly improper appeal from an executive subordinate to the legislative branch of the government and an unhappy president prepared to separate Pinchot from public office " . Pinchot was dismissed , much to his delight , and he sailed for Europe to lay his case before Roosevelt . A congressional investigation followed , which cleared Ballinger by majority vote , but the administration was embarrassed when Glavis ' attorney , Louis D. Brandeis , proved that the Wickersham report had been backdated , which Taft belatedly admitted . The Ballinger @-@ Pinchot affair caused progressives and Roosevelt loyalists to feel that Taft had turned his back on Roosevelt 's agenda . 
 = = = = Civil rights = = = = 
 Taft announced in his inaugural address that he would not appoint African Americans to federal jobs , such as postmaster , where this would cause racial friction . This differed from Roosevelt , who would not remove or replace black officeholders with whom local whites would not deal . Termed Taft 's " Southern Policy " , this stance effectively invited white protests against black appointees . Taft followed through , removing most black office holders in the South , and made few appointments from that race in the North . 
 At the time Taft was inaugurated , the way forward for African Americans was debated by their leaders . Booker T. Washington felt that most blacks should be trained for industrial work , with only a few seeking higher education ; W.E.B. DuBois took a more militant stand for equality . Taft tended towards Washington 's approach . According to Coletta , Taft let the African @-@ American " be ' kept in his place ' ... He thus failed to see or follow the humanitarian mission historically associated with the Republican party , with the result that Negroes both North and South began to drift toward the Democratic party . " 
 A supporter of free immigration , Taft vetoed a bill passed by Congress and supported by labor unions that would have restricted unskilled laborers by imposing a literacy test . 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 Taft made six appointments to the Supreme Court , the most of any president except George Washington and Franklin D. Roosevelt . The death of Justice Rufus Peckham in October 1909 gave Taft his first opportunity . He chose an old friend and colleague from the Sixth Circuit , Horace H. Lurton of Georgia ; he had in vain urged Theodore Roosevelt to appoint Lurton to the high court . Attorney General Wickersham objected that Lurton , a former Confederate soldier and a Democrat , was aged 65 . Taft named Lurton anyway on December 13 , 1909 , and the Senate confirmed him by voice vote a week later . Lurton is still the oldest man to be made an associate justice . Lurie suggested that Taft , already beset by the tariff and conservation controversies , desired to perform an official act which gave him pleasure , especially since he thought Lurton deserved it . 
 Justice David Josiah Brewer 's death on March 28 , 1910 gave Taft a second opportunity to fill a seat on the high court ; he chose New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes . Taft told Hughes that should the chief justiceship fall vacant during his term , Hughes would be his likely choice for the center seat . The Senate quickly confirmed Hughes , but then Chief Justice Fuller died on July 4 , 1910 . Taft took five months to replace Fuller , and when he did , it was with Justice Edward Douglass White , who became the first associate justice to be promoted to chief justice . According to Lurie , Taft , who still had hopes of being chief justice , may have been more willing to appoint an older man than he ( White ) than a younger one ( Hughes ) , who might outlive him , as indeed Hughes did . To fill White 's seat as associate justice , Taft appointed Willis Van Devanter of Wyoming , a federal appeals judge . By the time Taft nominated White and Van Devanter in December 1910 , he had another seat to fill due to William Henry Moody 's retirement because of illness ; he named a Louisiana Democrat , Joseph R. Lamar , whom he had met while playing golf , and had subsequently learned had a good reputation as a judge . 
 With the death of Justice Harlan in October 1911 , Taft got to fill a sixth seat on the Supreme Court . After Secretary Knox declined appointment , Taft named Chancellor of New Jersey Mahlon Pitney , the last person appointed to the Supreme Court who did not attend law school . Pitney had a stronger anti @-@ labor record than Taft 's other appointments , and was the only one to meet opposition , winning confirmation by a Senate vote of 50 — 26 . 
 Taft appointed 13 judges to the federal courts of appeal and 38 to the United States district courts . Taft also appointed judges to various specialized courts , including the first five appointees each to the United States Commerce Court and the United States Court of Customs Appeals . The Commerce Court , created in 1910 , stemmed from a Taft proposal for a specialized court to hear appeals from the Interstate Commerce Commission . There was considerable opposition to its establishment , which only grew when one of its judges , Robert W. <unk> , was in 1912 impeached for corruption and removed by the Senate the following January . Taft vetoed a bill to abolish the court , but the respite was short @-@ lived as Wilson signed similar legislation in October 1913 . 
 = = = 1912 presidential campaign and election = = = 
 = = = = Moving apart from Roosevelt = = = = 
 During Roosevelt 's fifteen months beyond the Atlantic , from March 1909 to June 1910 , neither man wrote much to the other . Taft biographer Lurie suggested that each expected the other to make the first move to re @-@ establish their relationship on a new footing . Upon Roosevelt 's triumphant return , Taft invited him to stay at the White House . The former president declined , and in private letters to friends expressed dissatisfaction at Taft 's performance . Nevertheless , he wrote that he expected Taft to be renominated by the Republicans in 1912 , and did not speak of himself as a candidate . 
 Taft and Roosevelt met twice in 1910 ; the meetings , though outwardly cordial , did not display their former closeness . Roosevelt gave a series of speeches in the West in the late summer and early fall of 1910 . Roosevelt not only attacked the Supreme Court 's 1905 decision in Lochner v. New York , he accused the federal courts of undermining democracy , and called for them to be deprived of the power to rule legislation unconstitutional . This attack horrified Taft , who privately agreed that Lochner had been wrongly decided . Roosevelt called for " elimination of corporate expenditures for political purposes , physical valuation of railroad properties , regulation of industrial combinations , establishment of an export tariff commission , a graduated income tax " as well as " workmen 's compensation laws , state and national legislation to regulate the [ labor ] of women and children , and complete publicity of campaign expenditure " . According to John Murphy in his journal article on the breach between the two presidents , " As Roosevelt began to move to the left , Taft veered to the right . " 
 During the 1910 midterm election campaign , Roosevelt involved himself in New York politics , while Taft with donations and influence tried to secure the election of the Republican gubernatorial candidate in Ohio , former lieutenant governor Warren G. Harding . The Republicans suffered losses in the 1910 elections as the Democrats took control of the House and slashed the Republican majority in the Senate . In New Jersey , Democrat Woodrow Wilson was elected governor , and Harding lost his race in Ohio . 
 After the election , Roosevelt continued to promote progressive ideals , a New Nationalism , much to Taft 's dismay . Roosevelt attacked his successor 's administration , arguing that its guiding principles were not that of the party of Lincoln , but those of the Gilded Age . The feud continued on and off through 1911 , a year in which there were few elections of significance . Wisconsin Senator La Follette announced a presidential run as a Republican , and was backed by a convention of progressives . Roosevelt began to move into a position for a run in late 1911 , writing that the tradition that presidents not run for a third term only applied to consecutive terms . 
 Roosevelt was receiving many letters from supporters urging him to run , and Republican office @-@ holders were organizing on his behalf . <unk> on many policies by an unwilling Congress and courts in his full term in the White House , he saw manifestations of public support he believed would sweep him to the White House with a mandate for progressive policies that would brook no opposition . In February , Roosevelt announced he would accept the Republican nomination if it was offered to him . Taft felt that if he lost in November , it would be a repudiation of the party , but if he lost renomination , it would be a rejection of himself . He was reluctant to oppose Roosevelt , who helped make him president , but having become president , he was determined to be president , and that meant not standing aside to allow Roosevelt to gain another term . 
 = = = = Primaries and convention = = = = 
 As Roosevelt became more radical in his progressivism , Taft was hardened in his resolve to achieve re @-@ nomination , as he was convinced that the progressives threatened the very foundation of the government . One blow to Taft was the loss of Archibald Butt , one of the last links between the previous and present presidents , as Butt had formerly served Roosevelt . <unk> between his loyalties , Butt went to Europe on vacation in early 1912 . He sailed for home in April on the Titanic and died in its sinking , a death Taft found hard to accept as his body was not recovered . 
 Roosevelt dominated the primaries , winning 278 of the 362 delegates to the Republican National Convention in Chicago decided in that manner . Taft had control of the party machinery , and it came as no surprise that he gained the bulk of the delegates decided at district or state conventions . Taft did not have a majority , but was likely to have one once southern delegations committed to him . Roosevelt challenged the election of these delegates , but the RNC overruled most objections . Roosevelt 's sole remaining chance was with a friendly convention chairman , who might make rulings on the seating of delegates that favored his side . Taft followed custom and remained in Washington , but Roosevelt went to Chicago to run his campaign and told his supporters in a speech , " we stand at Armageddon , and we battle for the Lord " . 
 Taft had won over Root , who agreed to run for temporary chairman of the convention , and the delegates elected Root over Roosevelt 's candidate . The Roosevelt forces moved to substitute the delegates they supported for the ones they argued should not be seated . Root made a crucial ruling , that although the contested delegates could not vote on their own seating , they could vote on the other contested delegates , a ruling that assured Taft 's nomination , as the motion offered by the Roosevelt forces failed , 567 — 507 . As it became clear Roosevelt would bolt the party if not nominated , some Republicans sought a compromise candidate to avert the electoral disaster to come ; they were unsuccessful . Taft 's name was placed in nomination by Warren Harding , whose attempts to praise Taft and unify the party were met with angry interruptions from progressives . Taft was nominated on the first ballot , though most Roosevelt delegates refused to vote . 
 = = = = Campaign and defeat = = = = 
 Alleging Taft had stolen the nomination , Roosevelt and his followers formed the Progressive Party . Taft knew he would almost certainly be defeated , but concluded that through Roosevelt 's loss at Chicago the party had been preserved as " the defender of conservative government and conservative institutions . " He made his doomed run to preserve the Republican Party . Governor Woodrow Wilson was the Democratic nominee . Seeing Roosevelt as the greater electoral threat , Wilson spent little time attacking Taft , arguing that Roosevelt had been lukewarm in opposing the trusts during his presidency , and that Wilson was the true reformer . 
 Reverting to the pre @-@ Roosevelt custom that presidents seeking re @-@ election did not campaign , Taft spoke publicly only once , making his nomination acceptance speech on August 1 . He had difficulty in financing the campaign , as many industrialists had concluded he could not win , and would support Wilson to block Roosevelt . The president issued a confident statement in September after the Republicans narrowly won Vermont 's state elections in a three @-@ way fight , but had no illusions he would win his race . He had hoped to send his cabinet officers out on the campaign trail , but found them reluctant to go . Senator Root agreed to give a single speech for him . 
 Vice President Sherman had been renominated at Chicago ; seriously ill during the campaign , he died six days before the election , and was replaced on the ticket by the president of Columbia University , Nicholas Murray Butler . But few electors chose Taft and Butler , who won only Utah and Vermont , for a total of eight electoral votes . Roosevelt won 88 , and Wilson 435 . Wilson won though he had only a plurality of the popular vote and less of it than Taft and Roosevelt combined . Taft had hoped to better Roosevelt in the popular vote , but finished with just under 3 @.@ 5 million , over 600 @,@ 000 less than the former president . Taft was not on the ballot in California , due to the actions of local Progressives , nor in South Dakota . 
 = = Return to Yale ( 1913 – 1921 ) = = 
 With no pension or other compensation to expect from the government after leaving the White House , Taft contemplated a return to the practice of law , from which he had long been absent . Given that Taft had appointed many federal judges , including a majority of the Supreme Court , this would raise questions of conflict of interest at every federal court appearance and he was saved from this by an offer for him to become Kent Professor of Law and Legal History at Yale Law School . He accepted , and after a month 's vacation in Georgia , arrived in New Haven on April 1 , 1913 to a rapturous reception . As it was too late in the semester for him to give an academic course , he instead prepared eight lectures on " Questions of Modern Government " , which he delivered in May . He earned money with paid speeches and with articles for magazines , and would end his eight years out of office having increased his savings . While at Yale , he wrote the treatise , Our Chief Magistrate and His Powers ( 1916 ) . 
 Taft had been made president of the Lincoln Memorial Commission while still in office ; when Democrats proposed removing him for one of their party , he quipped that unlike losing the presidency , such a removal would hurt . The architect , Henry Bacon , wanted to use Colorado @-@ Yule marble , while southern Democrats urged using Georgia marble . Taft lobbied for the western stone , and the matter was submitted to the Commission of Fine Arts , which supported Taft and Bacon . The project went forward ; Taft would dedicate the Lincoln Memorial as chief justice in 1922 . In 1913 , Taft was elected to a one @-@ year term as president of the American Bar Association ( ABA ) , a trade group of lawyers . He removed opponents , such as Louis Brandeis and University of Pennsylvania Law School dean William Draper Lewis ( a supporter of the Progressive Party ) from committees . 
 Taft maintained a cordial relationship with Wilson . The former president privately criticized his successor on a number of issues , but made his views known publicly only on Philippine policy . Taft was appalled when , after Justice Lamar 's death in January 1916 , Wilson nominated Brandeis , whom the former president had never forgiven for his role in the Ballinger @-@ Pinchot affair . When hearings led to nothing discreditable about Brandeis , Taft intervened with a letter signed by himself and other former ABA presidents , stating that Brandeis was not fit to serve on the Supreme Court . Nevertheless , the Democratic @-@ controlled Senate confirmed Brandeis . Taft and Roosevelt remained embittered ; they met only once in the first three years of the Wilson presidency , at a funeral at Yale . They spoke only for a moment , politely but formally . 
 As president of the League to Enforce Peace , Taft hoped to prevent war through an international association of nations . With World War I raging in Europe , Taft sent Wilson a note of support for his foreign policy in 1915 . President Wilson accepted Taft 's invitation to address the league , and spoke in May 1916 of a postwar international organization that could prevent a repetition . Taft supported the effort to get Justice Hughes to resign from the bench and accept the Republican presidential nomination . Once this was done , Hughes tried to get Roosevelt and Taft to reconcile , as a united effort was needed to defeat Wilson . This occurred on October 3 in New York , but Roosevelt allowed only a handshake , and no words were exchanged . This was one of many difficulties for the Republicans in the campaign , and Wilson narrowly won re @-@ election . 
 When Wilson asked Congress to declare war on Germany in April 1917 , Taft was an enthusiastic supporter . Taft was chairman of the American Red Cross ' executive committee , occupying much of the former president 's time . He took leave from Yale to be co @-@ chairman of the National War Labor Board , tasked with assuring industrial peace . In February 1918 , the new RNC chairman , Will H. Hays , approached Taft seeking his reconciliation with Roosevelt . In May , Taft was in Chicago at the Blackstone Hotel , and when he heard that Roosevelt and his party were dining there , walked in on them . The two men embraced to the applause of the room , but the renewed relationship did not progress past outward friendliness before Roosevelt 's death in January 1919 . Taft later wrote , " Had he died in a hostile state of mind toward me , I would have mourned the fact all my life . I loved him always and cherish his memory . " 
 When Wilson proposed establishment of a League of Nations , with the League 's charter part of the Treaty of Versailles , Taft expressed public support . He was out of step with his party , whose senators were not inclined to confirm the treaty . Taft 's subsequent flip @-@ flop on the issue of whether reservations to the treaty were necessary angered both sides , destroying any remaining influence he had with the Wilson administration , and causing some Republicans to call him a Wilson supporter and a traitor to his party . The Senate refused to ratify the Versailles pact . 
 = = Chief Justice ( 1921 – 1930 ) = = 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 During the 1920 election campaign , Taft supported the Republican ticket , Harding ( by then a senator ) and Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge ; they were elected . Taft was among those asked to come to the president @-@ elect 's home in Marion , Ohio to advise him on appointments , and the two men conferred there on December 24 , 1920 . By Taft 's later account , after some conversation , Harding casually asked if Taft would accept appointment to the Supreme Court , for if Taft would , Harding would put him there . Taft had a condition for Harding : that having been president , and having appointed two of the present associate justices and opposed Brandeis , he could only accept the chief justiceship . Harding made no response , and Taft in a thank @-@ you note reiterated the condition and stated that Chief Justice White had often told him he was keeping the position for Taft until a Republican held the White House . In January 1921 , Taft heard through intermediaries that Harding planned to appoint him , if given the chance . 
 White by then was in failing health , but made no move to resign when Harding was sworn in on March 4 , 1921 . Taft called on the chief justice on March 26 , and found White ill , but still carrying on his work and not talking of retiring . White did not retire , dying in office on May 19 , 1921 . Taft issued a tribute to the man he had appointed to the center seat , and waited and worried if he would be White 's successor . Despite widespread speculation Taft would be the pick , Harding made no quick announcement . Taft was lobbying for himself behind the scenes , especially with the Ohio politicians who formed Harding 's inner circle . 
 It later emerged that Harding had also promised former Utah senator George Sutherland a seat on the Supreme Court , and was waiting in the expectation that another place would become vacant . Harding was also considering a proposal by Justice William R. Day to crown his career by being chief justice for six months before retiring . Taft felt , when he learned of this plan , that a short @-@ term appointment would not serve the office well , and that once confirmed by the Senate , the memory of Day would grow dim . After Harding rejected Day 's plan , Attorney General Harry Daugherty , who supported Taft 's candidacy , urged him to fill the vacancy , and he named Taft on June 30 , 1921 . The Senate confirmed Taft the same day , 61 – 4 , without any committee hearings and after a brief debate in executive session . Taft drew the objections of three progressive Republicans and one southern Democrat . When he was sworn in on July 11 , he became the first and to date only person to serve both as president and chief justice . 
 = = = Taft Court membership timeline = = = 
 McKinley appointment Theodore Roosevelt appointment Taft appointment Wilson appointment Harding appointment Coolidge appointment 
 = = = Jurisprudence = = = 
 = = = = Commerce Clause = = = = 
 The Supreme Court , under Taft , posted a conservative record in Commerce Clause jurisprudence . This had the practical effect of making it difficult for the federal government to regulate industry , and the Taft Court also scuttled many state laws . The few liberals on the court — Brandeis , Holmes , and ( from 1925 ) Harlan Fiske Stone — sometimes protested , believing orderly progress essential , but often joined in the majority opinion . 
 The White Court had , in 1918 , struck down an attempt by Congress to regulate child labor in Hammer v. <unk> . Congress thereafter attempted to end child labor by imposing a tax on certain corporations making use of it . That law was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1922 in Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co . , with Taft writing the court 's opinion for an 8 — 1 majority . He held that the tax was not intended to raise revenue , but rather was an attempt to regulate matters reserved to the states under the Tenth Amendment , and that allowing such taxation would eliminate the power of the states . One case in which Taft and his court upheld federal regulation was Stafford v. Wallace . Taft ruled for a 7 – 1 majority that the processing of animals in stockyards was so closely tied to interstate commerce as to bring it within the ambit of Congress 's power to regulate . 
 A case in which the Taft Court struck down regulation that generated a dissent from the chief justice was Adkins v. Children 's Hospital . Congress had decreed a minimum wage for women in the District of Columbia . A 5 – 3 majority of the Supreme Court struck it down . Justice Sutherland wrote for the majority that the recently ratified Nineteenth Amendment , guaranteeing women the vote , meant that the sexes were equal when it came to bargaining power over working conditions ; Taft , in dissent , deemed this unrealistic . Taft 's dissent in Adkins was rare both because he authored few dissents , and because it was one of the few times he took an expansive view of the police power of the government . 
 = = = = Powers of government = = = = 
 Taft in 1922 ruled for a unanimous court in Balzac v. Porto Rico . One of the Insular Cases , Balzac involved a Puerto Rico newspaper publisher who was prosecuted for libel but denied a jury trial , a Sixth Amendment protection under the constitution . Taft held that as Puerto Rico was not a territory designated for statehood , only such constitutional protections as Congress decreed would apply to its residents . 
 In 1926 , Taft wrote for a 6 – 3 majority in Myers v. United States that Congress could not require the president to get Senate approval before removing an appointee . Taft noted that there is no restriction of the president 's power to remove officials in the constitution . Although Myers involved the removal of a postmaster , Taft in his opinion found invalid the repealed Tenure of Office Act , for violation of which his presidential predecessor , Andrew Johnson , had been impeached , though acquitted by the Senate . Taft valued Myers as his most important opinion . 
 The following year , the court decided <unk> v. Daugherty . A congressional committee investigating possible complicity of former Attorney General Daugherty in the Teapot Dome scandal subpoenaed records from his brother , <unk> , who refused to provide them , alleging Congress had no power to obtain documents from him . Van Devanter ruled for a unanimous court against him , finding that Congress had the authority to conduct investigations as an auxiliary to its legislative function . 
 = = = = Individual rights = = = = 
 In 1925 , the Taft Court laid the groundwork for the incorporation of many of the guarantees of the Bill of Rights to be applied against the states through the Fourteenth Amendment . In Gitlow v. New York , the court by a 6 – 2 vote with Taft in the majority , upheld Gitlow 's conviction on criminal anarchy charges for advocating the overthrow of the government ; his defense was freedom of speech . Justice Edward T. Sanford wrote the court 's opinion , and both majority and minority ( Holmes , joined by Brandeis ) assumed that the First Amendment 's Free Speech and Free Press clauses were protected against infringement by the states . 
 Pierce v. Society of Sisters was a 1925 decision by the Taft Court striking down an Oregon law banning private schools . In a decision written by Justice James C. McReynolds , a unanimous court held that Oregon could regulate private schools , but could not eliminate them . The outcome supported the right of parents to control the education of their children , but also , since the lead plaintiff ( the society ) ran Catholic schools , struck a blow for religious freedom . 
 United States v. Lanza was one of a series of cases involving Prohibition . Lanza committed acts allegedly in violation of both state and federal law , and was first convicted in Washington state court , then prosecuted in federal district court . He alleged the second prosecution in violation of the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment . Taft , for a unanimous court , allowed the second prosecution , holding that the state and federal governments were dual sovereigns , each empowered to prosecute the conduct in question . 
 = = = Administration and political influence = = = 
 Taft exercised the power of his position to influence the decisions of his colleagues , urging unanimity and discouraging dissents . Alpheus Mason , in his article on Chief Justice Taft for the American Bar Association Journal , contrasted Taft 's expansive view of the role of the chief justice with the narrow view of presidential power he took while in that office . Taft saw nothing wrong with making his views on possible appointments to the court known to the White House , and was annoyed to be criticized in the press . He was initially a firm supporter of President Coolidge after Harding 's death in 1923 , but became disillusioned with Coolidge 's appointments to office and to the bench ; he had similar misgivings about Coolidge 's successor , Herbert Hoover . Taft advised the Republican presidents in office while he was chief justice to avoid " offside " appointments like Brandeis and Holmes . Nevertheless , by 1923 , Taft was writing of his liking for Brandeis , whom he deemed a hard worker , and Holmes walked to work with him until age and infirmity required an automobile . 
 Believing that the chief justice should be responsible for the federal courts , Taft felt that he should have an administrative staff to assist him , and the chief justice should be empowered to temporarily reassign judges . He also believed the federal courts had been ill @-@ run . Many of the lower courts had lengthy backlogs , as did the Supreme Court . Immediately on taking office , Taft made it a priority to confer with Attorney General Daugherty as to new legislation , and made his case before congressional hearings , in legal periodicals and in speeches across the country . When Congress convened in December 1921 , a bill was introduced for 24 new judges , to empower the chief justice to move judges temporarily to eliminate the delays , and to have him chair a body consisting of the senior appellate judge of each circuit . Congress objected to some aspects , requiring Taft to get the agreement of the senior judge of each involved circuit before assigning a judge , but it in September 1922 passed the bill , and the Judicial Conference of Senior Circuit Judges held its first meeting that December . 
 The Supreme Court 's docket was congested , swelled by war litigation and laws that allowed a party defeated in the circuit court of appeals to have the case decided by the Supreme Court if a constitutional question was involved . Taft believed an appeal should be usually be settled by the circuit court , with only cases of major import decided by the justices . He and other Supreme Court members proposed legislation to make most of the court 's docket discretionary , with a case getting full consideration by the justices only if they granted a writ of certiorari . To Taft 's frustration , Congress took three years to consider the matter . Taft and other members of the court lobbied for the bill in Congress , and the Judges ' Bill became law in February 1925 . By late the following year , Taft was able to show that the backlog was shrinking . 
 When Taft became chief justice , the court did not have its own building and met in the Capitol . Its offices were cluttered and overcrowded , but Fuller and White had been opposed to proposals to move the court to its own building . In 1925 , Taft began a fight to get the court a building , and two years later Congress appropriated money to purchase the land , on the south side of the Capitol . Cass Gilbert had prepared plans for the building , and was hired by the government as architect . Taft had hoped to live to see the court move into the new building , but it did not do so until 1935 , after Taft 's death . 
 = = Declining health and death = = 
 Taft is remembered as the heaviest president ; he was 5 feet 11 inches ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) tall and his weight peaked at 335 – 340 pounds ( 152 – 154 kg ) toward the end of his presidency , though this later decreased , and he weighed by 1929 just 244 pounds ( 111 kg ) . By the time Taft became chief justice , his health was starting to decline , and he carefully planned a fitness regimen , walking 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from his home to the Capitol each day . When he walked after work as well , he would usually go by way of Connecticut Avenue ; the crossing over Rock Creek he would often take was after his death named the Taft Bridge . 
 At Hoover 's inauguration on March 4 , 1929 , Taft recited part of the oath incorrectly , later writing , " my memory is not always accurate and one sometimes becomes a little uncertain " , misquoting again in that letter , differently . His health gradually declined over the near @-@ decade of his chief justiceship , and he wrote in 1929 , " I am older and slower and less acute and more confused . However , as long as things continue as they are , and I am able to answer to my place , I must stay on the court in order to prevent the Bolsheviki from getting control " . 
 Taft insisted on going to Cincinnati to attend the funeral of his brother Charles , who died on December 31 , 1929 ; the strain did not improve his own health . When the court reconvened on January 6 , 1930 , Taft had not returned to Washington , and two opinions were delivered by Van Devanter that Taft had drafted but had been unable to complete because of his illness . Taft went to Asheville , North Carolina for a rest , but by the end of January , he could barely speak and was suffering from hallucinations . Taft was afraid that Stone would be made chief justice ; he did not resign until he had secured assurances from Hoover that Hughes would be the choice . Returning to Washington after his resignation on February 3 , Taft had barely enough strength to sign a reply to a letter of tribute from the eight associate justices . He died at his home in Washington on March 8 , 1930 . 
 Three days following his death , on March 11 , he became the first president and first member of the Supreme Court to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery . James Earle Fraser sculpted his grave marker out of Stony Creek granite . 
 = = Legacy and historical view = = 
 Lurie argued that Taft did not receive the public credit for his policies that he should have . Few trusts had been broken up under Roosevelt ( although the lawsuits received much publicity ) . Taft , more quietly than his predecessor , filed many more cases than did Roosevelt , and rejected his predecessor 's contention that there was such a thing as a " good " trust . This lack of flair marred Taft 's presidency ; according to Lurie , Taft " was boring — honest , likable , but boring " . Scott <unk> for the National Constitution Center wrote that despite being " one of the most interesting , intellectual , and versatile presidents ... a chief justice of the United States , a wrestler at Yale , a reformer , a peace activist , and a baseball fan ... today , Taft is best remembered at the president who was so large that he got stuck in the White House bathtub , " a story that is not true . 
 Mason called Taft 's years in the White House " undistinguished " . Coletta deemed Taft to have had a solid record of bills passed by Congress , but felt he could have accomplished more with political skill . Anderson noted that Taft 's <unk> federal service was entirely in appointed posts , and that he had never run for an important executive or legislative position , which would have allowed him to develop the skills to manipulate public opinion , " the presidency is no place for on @-@ the @-@ job training " . According to Coletta , " in troubled times in which the people demanded progressive change , he saw the existing order as good . " 
 Inevitably linked with Roosevelt , Taft generally falls in the shadow of the flamboyant Rough Rider , who chose him to be president , and who took it away . Yet , a portrait of Taft as a victim of betrayal by his best friend is incomplete : as Coletta put it , " Was he a poor politician because he was victimized or because he lacked the foresight and imagination to notice the storm brewing in the political sky until it broke and swamped him ? " Adept at using the levers of power in a way his successor could not , Roosevelt generally got what was politically possible out of a situation . Taft was generally slow to act , and when he did , his actions often generated enemies , as in the Ballinger @-@ Pinchot affair . Roosevelt was able to secure positive coverage in the newspapers ; Taft had a judge 's reticence in talking to reporters , and , with no comment from the White House , hostile journalists would supply the want with a quote from a Taft opponent . And it was Roosevelt who engraved in public memory the image of Taft as a Buchanan @-@ like figure , with a narrow view of the presidency which made him unwilling to act for the public good . Anderson pointed out that Roosevelt 's Autobiography ( which placed this view in enduring form ) was published after both men had left the presidency ( in 1913 ) , was intended in part to justify Roosevelt 's splitting of the Republican Party , and contains not a single positive reference to the man Roosevelt had admired and hand @-@ picked as his successor . While Roosevelt was biased , he was not alone : every major newspaper reporter of that time who left reminiscences of Taft 's presidency was critical of him . Taft replied to his predecessor 's criticism with his constitutional treatise on the powers of the presidency . 
 Taft was convinced he would be vindicated by history . After he left office , he was estimated to be about in the middle of U.S. presidents by greatness , and subsequent rankings by historians have by and large sustained that verdict . Coletta noted that this places Taft in good company , with James Madison , John Quincy Adams and McKinley . Lurie catalogued progressive innovations that took place under Taft , and argued that historians have overlooked them because Taft was not an effective political writer or speaker . According to Gould , " the clichés about Taft 's weight , his <unk> in the White House , and his conservatism of thought and doctrine have an element of truth , but they fail to do justice to a shrewd commentator on the political scene , a man of consummate ambition , and a resourceful practitioner of the internal politics of his party . " Anderson deemed Taft 's success in becoming both president and chief justice " an astounding feat of inside judicial and Republican party politics , played out over years , the likes of which we are not likely to see again in American history " . 
 Taft has been rated among the greatest of the chief justices ; later Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia noted that this was " not so much on the basis of his opinions , perhaps because many of them ran counter to the ultimate sweep of history " . A successor as chief justice , Earl Warren , concurred : " In Taft 's case , the symbol , the tag , the label usually attached to him is ' conservative . ' It is certainly not of itself a term of opprobrium even when bandied by the critics , but its use is too often confused with ' reactionary . ' " Most commentators agree that as chief justice , Taft 's most significant contribution was his advocacy for reform of the high court , urging and ultimately gaining improvement in the court 's procedures and facilities . Mason cited enactment of the Judges ' Bill of 1925 as Taft 's major achievement on the court . According to Anderson , Taft as chief justice " was as aggressive in the pursuit of his agenda in the judicial realm as Theodore Roosevelt was in the presidential " . 
 The house in Cincinnati where Taft was born and lived as a boy is now the William Howard Taft National Historic Site . Taft 's son Robert was a significant political figure , becoming Senate Majority Leader and three times a major contender for the Republican nomination for president . A conservative , each time he was defeated by a candidate backed by the more liberal Eastern Establishment wing of the party . 
 Lurie concluded his account of William Taft 's career , 
 While the fabled cherry trees in Washington represent a suitable monument for Nellie Taft , there is no memorial to her husband , except perhaps the magnificent home for his Court — one for which he eagerly planned . But he died even before ground was broken for the structure . As he reacted to his overwhelming defeat for reelection in 1912 , Taft had written that " I must wait for years if I would be vindicated by the people ... I am content to wait . " Perhaps he has waited long enough . 
 = = Media = = 
 = Kung Fu Hustle = 
 Kung Fu Hustle is a 2004 Hong Kong @-@ Chinese martial arts action comedy film , directed , co @-@ produced and co @-@ written by Stephen Chow , who also stars in the lead role . The other producers were <unk> Po @-@ chu and Jeffrey Lau , and the screenplay was co @-@ written with Huo Xin , Chan Man @-@ <unk> , and Tsang Kan @-@ <unk> . Yuen Wah , Yuen Qiu , Danny Chan Kwok @-@ kwan , and Bruce Leung Siu @-@ lung co @-@ starred in prominent roles . 
 After the commercial success of Shaolin Soccer , its production company , Star Overseas , began to develop Kung Fu Hustle with Columbia Pictures Asia in 2002 . The film features a number of retired actors famous for 1970s Hong Kong action cinema , yet has been compared to contemporary and influential martial arts films such as Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon and Hero . The cartoon style of the film , accompanied by traditional Chinese music , is often cited as its most striking feature . 
 The film was released on 23 December 2004 in China and on 25 January 2005 in the United States . It received a 90 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes and 78 out of 100 at Metacritic . The film grossed US $ 17 million in North America and US $ 84 million in other regions . Kung Fu Hustle was the highest @-@ grossing film in the history of Hong Kong until it was surpassed by You Are the Apple of My Eye in 2011 . 
 The film was the all @-@ time tenth highest @-@ grossing foreign language film in the United States as well as the highest @-@ grossing foreign language film in the country in 2005 . Kung Fu Hustle won numerous awards , including six Hong Kong Film Awards and five Golden Horse Awards . 
 The film was re @-@ released in 3D in October 2014 across Asia and America , marking the tenth anniversary of the film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Shanghai during the 1930s , Sing and his friend Bone attempt to join the Deadly Axe Gang , which ruthlessly controls the city under the leadership of Brother Sum . Sing seeks to restore his confidence after being humiliated as a young boy while trying to protect a mute girl from bullies , due to the failure of the Buddhist Palm method he had learned from a pamphlet he bought from a beggar . Sing and Bone attempt to intimidate the residents of Pig Sty Alley but are chased off by its Landlady . Hearing of this , Sum orders Sing and Bone captured , while sending the Gang to reassert its authority in the wake of the humiliation . Three of the tenants , Coolie , Tailor , and Donut , reveal themselves to be martial arts masters , defeating more than fifty of the Gang . Fearing retribution , the Landlady evicts the three , but they encounter a pair of hired assassins who fight using a magical guqin that launches invisible blades . Coolie is beheaded , and Tailor and Donut are mortally wounded before the Landlady and her husband the Landlord reveal that they too are martial arts masters , having gone into self @-@ exile after the death of their son . The two defeat the assassins but Tailor and Donut die from their injuries . The Landlords temporarily evacuate the other tenants for their safety . 
 Meanwhile , Sing engineers their escape from their confinement , and Sum is impressed , offering them membership in the Gang if they can kill a person . Sing and Bone attempt to kill the Landlady , but their plan backfires , and Sing barely escapes from the Landlady 's wrath . Seeking safety in a traffic pulpit , Sing is surprised as his body rapidly heals from the injuries sustained in the escape , the pain causing him to strike the sides of the pulpit with kung @-@ fu @-@ like force . Later , he attempts to mug an ice cream vendor , who turns out to be the mute girl ; she offers him a lollipop but he knocks it away , humiliated at himself . After sending Bone away , blaming his failure on Bone , Sing accidentally meets the Axe Gang again , and he was told to see Sum . Sum wants Sing to use his escape skills to free the legendary fighter , the Beast , from a mental asylum to use against Pig Sty Alley , offering Sing membership in the Gang for doing so . The Beast turns out to be a middle @-@ aged , slovenly , and flippant man , but is quickly shown to be cold and ruthless . 
 When the Landlords arrive at the Axe Gang casino to settle the score , Sum sends the Beast to fight them . During the fight , he stabs both with hidden blades , weakening but not defeating them . Sum orders Sing to strike the Landlord to break the stalemate , but Sing has a change of heart and strikes the Beast instead . The Beast turns and pummels Sing until he is rescued by the Landlords and taken back to Pig Sty Alley . The Beast kills Sum for disrupting his fight , and then orders an all @-@ out assault on Pig Sty Alley . 
 Back at the Alley , Sing undergoes a transformation brought on by the Beast 's attack , fully healing himself and making him a kung @-@ fu master himself . He sees to the well @-@ being of the Landlords as the Gang arrives . Sing easily defeats the Gang and faces the Beast alone . The Beast uses his Toad style maneuvers to launch Sing high into the air . While aloft , Sing comes to peace with Buddha , and is able to use the Buddhist Palm method to subdue the Beast . The Beast accepts his defeat and asks Sing to be his master . 
 Sometime later , Sing and Bone have opened a candy store ; when Sing sees the ice cream vendor outside , he invites her in to share their childhood memories . Others like the Landlords enjoy the city without fear of the Axe Gang . The same beggar that had sold the pamphlet to Sing as a child is then shown attempting to sell another one to a young boy . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Stephen Chow as Sing , a loser in life who aspires to join the Axe Gang . 
 Danny Chan Kwok @-@ kwan as Brother Sum , leader of the Axe Gang . 
 Yuen Wah as the Landlord of Pig Sty Alley . He is also a master of <unk> . 
 Yuen Qiu as the Landlady of Pig Sty Alley . She is a master of the Lama Pai Lion 's Roar technique . 
 Bruce Leung Siu @-@ lung as the Beast , an old but incredibly strong kung fu master . He is rumoured to be the most dangerous person alive , though his skill is disguised by his unkempt appearance . 
 Xing Yu as the Coolie , a kung fu specialist specialising in <unk> <unk> Twelve Kicks technique of the Tam School . 
 Chiu Chi @-@ ling as Tailor , the tailor of Pig Sty Alley . He specialises in the art of Hung Ga Iron Fist technique , and he fights with iron rings on his arms . 
 Dong <unk> as Donut , a baker in Pig Sty Alley . He specialises in the Eight <unk> Staff . 
 Lam Chi @-@ chung as Bone , Sing 's sidekick . 
 Eva Huang as Fong , Sing 's mute love interest and childhood acquaintance . 
 Tin Kai @-@ Man as Brother Sum 's adviser . 
 Gar Hong @-@ hay and Fung Hak @-@ on as the <unk> , two killers hired by the Axe Gang . Their instrument is the guqin , or " Chinese harp " . 
 Lam Suet and Liang Hsiao as high @-@ ranking members of the Axe Gang . 
 Yuen Cheung @-@ yan as the Beggar , the man who sold Sing the Buddhist Palm manual . 
 Feng <unk> as the leader of the Crocodile Gang . He is killed by the Axe Gang at the start of the film . 
 Fung Min @-@ hun as 4 eyed clerk 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Kung Fu Hustle is a co @-@ production of the Beijing Film Studio and Hong Kong 's Star Overseas . After the success of his 2001 film , Shaolin Soccer , Chow was approached in 2002 by Columbia Pictures Film Production Asia , offering to collaborate with him on a project . Chow accepted the offer , and the project eventually became Kung Fu Hustle . Kung Fu Hustle was produced with a budget of US $ 20 million . 
 Chow was inspired to create the film by the martial arts films he watched as a child and by his childhood ambition to become a martial artist . A senior Hollywood executive said Chow was " forced to grind through four successive scripts " and " found it very laborious " . 
 Chow 's first priority was to design the main location of the film , " Pig Sty Alley " . Later in an interview Chow remarked that he had created the location from his childhood , basing the design on the crowded apartment complexes of Hong Kong where he had lived . The 1973 Shaw Brothers Studio film , The House of 72 Tenants , was another inspiration for Pig Sty Alley . Designing the Alley began in January 2003 and took four months to complete . Many of the props and furniture in the apartments were antiques from all over China . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Kung Fu Hustle features several prolific Hong Kong action cinema actors from the 1970s . Yuen Wah , a former student of the China Drama Academy Peking Opera School who appeared in over a hundred Hong Kong films and was a stunt double for Bruce Lee , played the Landlord of Pig Sty Alley . Wah considered starring in Kung Fu Hustle to be the peak of his career . In spite of the film 's success , he worried that nowadays fewer people practice martial arts . 
 Auditions for the role of the Landlady began in March 2003 . Yuen Qiu , who did not audition , was spotted during her friend 's screen test smoking a cigarette with a sarcastic expression on her face , which won her the part . Qiu , a student of Yu Jim @-@ <unk> , <unk> of the China Drama Academy , had appeared in the 1974 James Bond film The Man with the Golden Gun at the age of 18 . After a number of other small roles , she retired from films in the 1980s . Kung Fu Hustle was her first role in nineteen years . Qiu , in order to fulfill Chow 's vision for the role , gained weight for the role by eating midnight snacks everyday . 
 Bruce Leung , who played the Beast , was Stephen Chow 's childhood martial arts hero . Leung Siu Lung was a famous action film director and actor in the 1970s and 1980s , known as the " Third Dragon " after Bruce Lee and Jackie Chan . After becoming unpopular in the Taiwanese film market in the late 1980s following a visit to China , he switched to a career in business . Kung Fu Hustle was his return to the film industry after a fifteen @-@ year hiatus . He regarded Chow as a flexible director with high standards , and was particularly impressed by the first scene involving the Beast , which had to be reshot 28 times . 
 In addition to famous martial artists , Kung Fu Hustle features legends of Chinese cinema . Two famous Chinese directors appear in the film : Zhang <unk> , who plays Inspector Chan at the beginning of the film , and Feng <unk> , who plays the boss of the Crocodile Gang . 
 In casting Sing 's love interest Fong , Chow stated that he wanted an innocent looking girl for the role . Television actress Eva Huang , in her film debut , was chosen from over 8 @,@ 000 girls . When asked about his decision in casting her Chow said that he " just had a feeling about her " and said that he enjoyed working with new actors . She chose to have no dialogue in the film so that she could stand out only with her body gestures . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming took place in Shanghai from June 2003 to November 2003 . Two @-@ thirds of the time was spent shooting the fight sequences . Those scenes were initially choreographed by Sammo Hung , who quit after two months due to illness , tough outdoor conditions , interest in another project and arguments with the production crew . Hung was replaced by Yuen Woo @-@ ping , an action choreographer with experience ranging from 1960s Hong Kong action cinema to more recent films like Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon and The Matrix . Yuen promptly accepted the offer . Yuen drew on seemingly outdated wuxia fighting styles like the Deadly Melody and Buddhist Palm . He remarked that despite the comedic nature of the film , the shooting process was a serious matter due to the tight schedule . 
 Most of the special effects in the film , created by Hong Kong computer graphics company Centro Digital Pictures Limited , which had previously worked on films such as Shaolin Soccer and Kill Bill , included a combination of computer @-@ generated imagery and wire work . Centro Digital performed extensive tests on CGI scenes before filming started , and treatment of the preliminary shots began immediately afterwards . The CGI crew edited out wire effects and applied special effects in high resolution . Legendary martial arts mentioned in wuxia novels were depicted and exaggerated through CGI , but actual people were used for the final fight between Chow 's character and hundreds of axe @-@ wielding gangsters . After a final calibration of colour , data of the processed scenes was sent to the US for the production of the final version . A group of six people followed the production crew throughout the shooting . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The majority of the film 's original score was composed by Raymond Wong and performed by the Hong Kong Chinese Orchestra . The score imitates traditional Chinese music used in 1940s swordplay films . One of Wong 's works , Nothing <unk> , Nothing <unk> , provides a stark contrast between the villainous Axe Gang and the peaceful neighbourhood of Pig Sty Alley , depicted by a Chinese folk song , Fisherman 's Song of the East China Sea . Along with Wong 's compositions and various traditional Chinese songs , classical compositions are featured in the score , including excerpts from <unk> by Pablo de Sarasate and Sabre Dance by Aram Khachaturian . The song , <unk> <unk> Huo <unk> ( <unk> ; Only Want to Live One Day for You ) , is sung in the background by Eva Huang at the end of the film . Written by Liu Chia @-@ chang ( <unk> ) in the 1970s , it tells of a girl 's memories of a loved one , and her desire to live for him again . Kung Fu Hustle was nominated for Best Original Film Score at the 24th Hong Kong Film Awards . 
 Asian and American versions of the soundtrack were released . The Asian version of the soundtrack was released on 17 December 2004 by Sony Music Entertainment and has 33 tracks . The American version of the soundtrack was released on 29 March 2005 by Varèse Sarabande and has 19 tracks but has 14 tracks missing from the Asian release . 
 The soundtrack for the trailer was mastered at Epiphany Music and Recording , Inc. in Santa Rosa , California . 
 = = Releases = = 
 Kung Fu Hustle premiered at the 2004 Toronto International Film Festival . It was later released across East Asia including China , Hong Kong and Malaysia in December 2004 . The film was first shown in the US at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2005 , and then opened in a general release on 22 April 2005 after being shown in Los Angeles and New York for two weeks . 
 The North American DVD release was on 8 August 2005 . A Blu @-@ ray version of the DVD was released on 12 December 2006 by Sony Pictures . A UMD version of the film was released for the PlayStation Portable . The United States DVD releases was censored and cut in a number of scenes that featured a lot of blood or human excrement , a later release saw these edits removed . 
 In the United Kingdom the standard DVD was released 24 October 2005 , the same day a special edition was released with collect item which included playing cards , keyring , sweat band and an inflatable axe . On 8 April 2007 Sony Pictures Home Entertainment release a Blu @-@ ray version . 
 The Portuguese title of the film is <unk> , which sounds like Kung Fu and <unk> ( confusion ) . In the same way as <unk> , the Italian and Spanish titles were Kung @-@ fusion and Kung @-@ <unk> , puns of " confusion " . In France , the film is known as Crazy Kung Fu , and the Hungarian title is A <unk> <unk> , meaning The Land of Punches . 
 In Korea a Limited Collector 's Edition DVD was released which included a leather wallet , Stephen Chow 's Palm Figure with his signature , a photo album and Special Kung Fu 's Booklet with a Certificate of authenticity . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the film received a 90 % approval rating based on 182 reviews and an average rating of 7 @.@ 7 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads : " Kung Fu Hustle blends special effects , martial arts , and the Looney Toons to hilarious effect . " On Metacritic , the film received a score of 78 out of 100 based on 38 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " 
 Hong Kong director and film critic Gabriel Wong praised the film for its black comedy , special effects and nostalgia , citing the return of many retired kung fu actors from the 1970s . Film critic Roger Ebert 's description of the film ( " like Jackie Chan and Buster Keaton meet Quentin Tarantino and Bugs Bunny " ) was printed on the promotion posters for the film in the US . Other critics described it as a comedic version of Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon . Positive reviews generally gave credit to the elements of mo lei tau comedy present in the film . A number of reviewers viewed it as a computer @-@ enhanced Looney Tunes punch @-@ up . In a 2010 GQ interview , actor Bill Murray called Kung Fu Hustle " the supreme achievement of the modern age in terms of comedy " . 
 Much of the criticism for the film was directed at its lack of character development and a coherent plot . Las Vegas Weekly , for instance , criticized the film for not having enough of a central protagonist and character depth . Criticism was also directed towards the film 's cartoonish and childish humor . Richard Roeper gave it a negative review , saying he had " never been a fan of that over the top slapstick stuff " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Kung Fu Hustle opened in Hong Kong on 23 December 2004 , and earned HK $ 4 @,@ 990 @,@ 000 on its opening day . It stayed at the top of the box office for the rest of 2004 and for much of early 2005 , eventually grossing HK $ 61 @.@ 27 million . Its box office tally made it the highest @-@ grossing film in Hong Kong history , until it was beaten by You Are the Apple of My Eye in 2011 . 
 Kung Fu Hustle began a limited two @-@ week theatrical run in New York City and Los Angeles on 8 April 2005 before being widely released across North America on 22 April . In its first week of limited release in seven cinemas , it grossed US $ 269 @,@ 225 ( US $ 38 @,@ 461 per screen ) . When it was expanded to a wide release in 2 @,@ 503 cinemas , the largest number of cinemas ever for a foreign language film , it made a modest US $ 6 @,@ 749 @,@ 572 ( US $ 2 @,@ 696 per screen ) , eventually grossing a total of US $ 17 @,@ 108 @,@ 591 in 129 days . In total , Kung Fu Hustle had a worldwide gross of US $ 101 @,@ 104 @,@ 669 . While not a blockbuster , Kung Fu Hustle managed to become the highest @-@ grossing foreign language film in North America in 2005 and went on to gain a cult following on DVD . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The film was nominated for sixteen Hong Kong Film Awards , out of which winning : Best Picture , Best Action Choreography , Best Film Editing , Best Sound Effects , Best Supporting Actor and Best Visual Effects . Five more awards were later picked up at the Golden Horse Awards including an award for Best Director for Stephen Chow . In the United States Kung Fu Hustle was well received by various film critic associations winning awards for Best Foreign Language Film from Boston , Chicago , Las <unk> and Phoenix based critics. it was later nominated for six Satellite Awards and one MTV Movie Award for best fight scene . In the United Kingdom at 59th British Academy Film Awards the film was nominated for a BAFTA . 
 In 2011 , the Taipei Golden Horse Film Festival listed Kung Fu Hustle at number 48 in their list of " 100 Greatest Chinese @-@ Language Films " . The majority of the voters originated from Taiwan , and included film scholars , festival programmers , film directors , actors and producers . In 2014 , Time Out polled several film critics , directors , actors and stunt actors to list their top action films . Kung Fu Hustle was listed at 50th place on this list . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In 2005 , Chow announced that there would be a sequel to Kung Fu Hustle , although he had not settled on a female lead . " There will be a lot of new characters in the movie . We 'll need a lot of new actors . It 's possible that we 'll look for people abroad besides casting locals " . In January 2013 during an interview Chow admitted that plans for making Kung Fu Hustle 2 have been put on hold . " I was indeed in the midst of making the movie , but it is currently put on hold in view of other incoming projects " . Production of Kung Fu Hustle 2 was delayed while Chow filmed the science fiction adventure film <unk> . As a result , Kung Fu Hustle 2 was slated for a 2014 release . As of 2016 , there has yet to be any confirmed news of the sequel and Stephen is slated to complete another movie , Mermaid , before completing this one . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Online and mobile games = = = 
 In 2004 a promotional flash games was released by Sony Pictures Entertainment on their Japanese website . The game were created by Japanese game developer Point Zero and plays as a point and click beat ' em up . A side scrolling game designed for mobile phones was later released in 2006 by developer <unk> . 
 = = = MMO = = = 
 In 2007 Sony Online Entertainment announced that a massively multiplayer online 2D side @-@ scrolling fighter game based on the film was under development for the Chinese market . Two years later a preview of the game was featured at E3 where it received mixed reviews from critics with many comparing it to similar MMO games such as Guild Wars and Phantasy Star Online . 
 A North American release for PC and PS3 was planned for late 2009 however as of 2016 the game had not been released and is only available in Asia . 
 = Fight Club ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Fight Club " is the twentieth episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on May 7 , 2000 . It was written by series creator Chris Carter , directed by Paul Shapiro , and featured a guest appearance by Kathy Griffin . The episode plot serves as a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Fight Club " earned a Nielsen household rating of 6 @.@ 9 , being watched by 11 @.@ 70 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly negative reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully cross paths with a pair of doppelgangers whose close proximity yields unlimited mayhem . Splitting up , the agent tries to find out " why " and " what " they are doing . 
 " Fight Club " was inspired by a " long @-@ lost nugget " of a story that series creator Chris Carter had thought up a while back about " mis @-@ matched twins that had an almost nuclear reaction when they were around each other . " Steve Kiziak and Arlene Pileggi — David Duchovny 's stunt double and Mitch Pileggi 's wife , respectively — were chosen to play the Mulder and Scully look @-@ alikes at the start of the episode . " Fight Club " contained several scenes of intense action that necessitated the use of various stunt doubles and extras . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Kansas City , Kansas , two religious missionaries visit two women at two different homes in the same neighborhood who look exactly alike . The second woman yells at them to go away and the two men , inexplicably , get into a fight in the second woman 's front yard . Later , two FBI agents who look and sound remarkably similar to Mulder and Scully visit the first woman , Betty Templeton ( Kathy Griffin ) . Betty claims to have never seen the other woman before . The other woman then passes her by in a car and the two agents begin fighting each other , much like the missionaries . They are severely injured after the gruesome mauling . Both agents , who had worked together for seven years , said that they were possessed . Meanwhile , the other woman , Lulu Pfeiffer ( also Kathy Griffin ) , applies for a job at Koko 's Copies , but does not get it because she has had 17 jobs in 17 states in the past three years and moves around too much . She becomes aggravated and suddenly , all the copies become black . The other woman , Betty , goes to another job with the same name and same resume . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) begin to investigate the case . Later , in a bar , a man by the name of Bert Zupanic ( Randall " Tex " Cobb ) comes across Betty . Moments later , Lulu walks into the bar and an earthquake occurs that breaks all the glass in the bar . Lulu then runs out . Mulder finds out through a man named Argyle Saperstein ( Art Evans ) that Zupanic and one of the women are in a relationship and that Zupanic is a professional wrestler . Scully finds that for the past 12 years the women have followed each other across 17 states and left mayhem in their wake . Saperstein calls Zupanic and it is revealed that Zupanic owes Saperstein money . In addition , Betty and Bert have been in a relationship , but he has been having an affair with Lulu . A second earthquake occurs as Lulu prepares to walk in on Zupanic and Saperstein exchanging money . After Betty emerges from the bathroom , the two see each other and the glass in the building begins breaking . Zupanic is knocked unconscious and Saperstein takes the money and leaves . 
 Mulder and Scully decide to split up and interrogate the doppelgangers . Betty tells Mulder that Lulu is causing all of the problems and forcing her to leave , while Lulu tells Scully the same thing . Later , the two look @-@ alikes pass each other and a sewer grate blows open , sucking Mulder into the storm drain and sealing him in . Scully finds that the girls share the same father , a man by the name of Bob <unk> , who is in prison . <unk> is revealed to be mentally insane , and is always in a fit of rage . Eventually , Mulder finds his way out of the storm drain . At the prison , Scully meets a man that looks exactly like Bert Zupanic . Lulu and Betty meet at a stadium and everyone in the audience breaks into a fight . The other Bert Zupanic shows up and everyone stops fighting . The two <unk> see each other and a fight breaks out again . The episode ends with Mulder and Scully shown bruised and beaten . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The inspiration for " Fight Club " was a " long @-@ lost nugget " that series creator Chris Carter had thought up a while back . He explained , " I had this idea for a long time to do a story about mis @-@ matched twins that had an almost nuclear reaction when they were around each other . " Carter began to write the episode at the same time as the pilot for the X @-@ Files spin @-@ off , The Lone Gunmen . Because of the " insanity " in juggling two scripts at once , many more " crazy " elements made it into " Fight Club " . When executive producer Frank Spotnitz first looked at the script , he noted that " [ the episode ] had an odd tone . It felt like a wild show . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The casting for the episode was reportedly hectic . Rick Millikan , the show 's casting director , cast noted boxer @-@ turned @-@ actor Randall " Tex " Cobb as Bert Zupanic and comedian Kathy Griffin — who had previously starred in the NBC comedy Suddenly Susan — as the doppelgangers . Two real wrestlers , Gene <unk> and Rob Van Dam , were hired to play the parts of the bartender and Zupanic 's opponent , respectively . Near the beginning of the episode , two FBI agents who bear a striking resemblance , in both physical appearance and voice , to Mulder and Scully appear . These characters were played by Steve Kiziak and Arlene Pileggi . Kiziak had previously served as David Duchovny 's stunt double since the third season episode " 2Shy " . Pileggi is the wife of Mitch Pileggi , who portrayed Walter Skinner on the show . Duchovny and Anderson later dubbed their voices for the lines that the two look @-@ alike FBI agents say . 
 Jack McGee was cast as Bob <unk> — referred to colloquially as " Angry Bob " — the father of the half @-@ sisters with a severe anger issue . During rehearsals for his scene , McGee purposely kept his voice down to prevent a severe headache . He recalled , " I remember the director [ Paul Shapiro ] , he wanted me to scream during rehearsal , and I was , like , ' Look , you don ’ t understand : If I do this , I ’ m gonna have a headache in 30 fucking seconds . ' " The scenes were rehearsed about five or six times before the actual tape was filmed . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 First @-@ time X @-@ Files director Paul Shapiro was tasked with directing the episode . Many of the physical effects in the episode were coordinated by Danny <unk> , who noted that the episode contained several scenes featuring extensive stunt work . He explained , " during the bar explosions we had a room full of stunt people showered with broken glass . And we used stunt people for much of the missionary and special agent fights . " The final scene , featuring a stadium full of people attacking each other after the <unk> make an appearance , was filmed at the Grand Olympic Auditorium in Los Angeles . Several hundred extras were contacted via ads on the internet and in select publications . The scene took two days to completely film . The crowd supplemented sixteen stuntmen and over 200 cardboard cutouts to give the stadium a filled @-@ out feel . In order to create a mock fight , staff members gave the several hundred extras soft props to hit each other with . Producer Harry Bring later noted , " a few of [ the audience ] members got carried away and we had to tell them to settle down . " During the finished episode , a split screen was inserted as a way to enhance the scene and allow the viewer to " focus on various angles of action " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Fight Club " first aired in the United States on May 7 , 2000 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 9 , with an 11 share , meaning that roughly 6 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 11 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 11 @.@ 70 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on July 30 , 2000 and received 0 @.@ 67 million viewers , making it the third most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " They say everyone has a double out there somewhere . " 
 Critical reception to " Fight Club " was largely negative . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave the episode a " D – " ; he called it " dire stuff " and wrote that " there ’ s something rancid about forced quirk ; it ’ s rotten and smug " . Handlen both criticized Griffin 's inability to portray two separate characters , as well as Carter 's failure at writing a comedic script . He also felt that the " relentless self @-@ awareness isn ’ t amusing anymore " . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a scathing review . He wrote " If it is indeed true that somewhere out in this vast world we all have an identical twin , I have but one wish for mine . I sincerely hope he was spared the hour of torture that ' Fight Club ' imposed upon me . " Christina <unk> from 11th Hour Magazine opined that " Just when you thought The X @-@ Files couldn 't get a more grating guest star than Victoria Jackson , Chris Carter manages to top himself yet again with not one , but two , for the love of God , two Kathy Griffins in the Carter @-@ penned episode ' Fight Club . ' It 's a safe bet this disjointed , lame episode will probably not be easily confused with the far superior David Fincher movie of the same name . But then the current state of The X @-@ Files makes Elmo in Grouchland look like an Oscar contender . " 
 Kenneth Silber from Space.com was very negative towards the episode , saying , " This episode conveys a strong sense of a writer , director and actors merely going through the motions , collecting their sizable paychecks while running out the clock on the season and series . The plot is not compelling , the agents themselves seem not to take it seriously , and the doppelgangers around whom the action revolves are little more than ciphers . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . The two wrote , " ' Fight Club ' is a marker for a series that seems to want to die now , please . [ … ] it 's tonally one of the most atypical episodes the series ever made , conceived in spite and self @-@ loathing and sheer exhaustion . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it one star out of four . Vitaris criticized the use of Kathy Griffin and asserted , " the guest cast is one of the worst ever . [ … ] Griffin [ … ] simply is not up to the task ; she can not differentiate Betty and Lulu at all [ … ] and she reads every line as if she were still on her cancelled sitcom . " i09 reviewer Cyriaque Lama named " The Kathy Griffin Twins " the tenth " Most Ridiculous X @-@ Files Monsters of the Week " , and derided her performance as the Templeton twins . In 2016 , in a ranking of all episodes of the series from best to worst , Vulture.com named " Fight Club " the worst episode of the series . 
 Not all reviews were so negative . Rich Rosell from DigitallyObsessed.com awarded the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and noted that " There are some great visual moments in Fight Club , and Chris Carter reveals an almost Vince Gilligan @-@ side to him with his comic writing here . " 
 = Gone with the Wind ( film ) = 
 Gone with the Wind is a 1939 American epic @-@ historical romance film adapted from Margaret Mitchell 's 1936 novel Gone with the Wind . It was produced by David O. Selznick of Selznick International Pictures and directed by Victor Fleming . Set in the American South against the backdrop of the American Civil War and Reconstruction era , the film tells the story of Scarlett O 'Hara , the strong @-@ willed daughter of a Georgia plantation owner , from her romantic pursuit of Ashley Wilkes , who is married to his cousin , Melanie Hamilton , to her marriage to Rhett Butler . The leading roles are portrayed by Vivien Leigh ( Scarlett ) , Clark Gable ( Rhett ) , Leslie Howard ( Ashley ) , and Olivia de Havilland ( Melanie ) . 
 The production of the film was difficult from the start . Filming was delayed for two years due to Selznick 's determination to secure Gable for the role of Rhett Butler , and the " search for Scarlett " led to 1 @,@ 400 women being interviewed for the part . The original screenplay was written by Sidney Howard , but underwent many revisions by several writers in an attempt to get it down to a suitable length . The original director , George Cukor , was fired shortly after filming had begun and was replaced by Fleming , who in turn was briefly replaced by Sam Wood while Fleming took some time off due to exhaustion . 
 The film received positive reviews upon its release in December 1939 , although some reviewers found it dramatically lacking and bloated . The casting was widely praised and many reviewers found Leigh especially suited to her role as Scarlett . At the 12th Academy Awards , it received ten Academy Awards ( eight competitive , two honorary ) from thirteen nominations , including wins for Best Picture , Best Director ( Fleming ) , Best Adapted Screenplay ( posthumously awarded to Sidney Howard ) , Best Actress ( Leigh ) and Best Supporting Actress ( Hattie McDaniel , becoming the first African @-@ American to win an Academy Award ) . It set records for the total number of wins and nominations at the time . The film was immensely popular , becoming the highest @-@ earning film made up to that point , and retained the record for over a quarter of a century . When adjusted for monetary inflation , it is still the most successful film in box @-@ office history . 
 The film has been criticized as historical revisionism glorifying slavery , but nevertheless , it has been credited for triggering changes to the way African @-@ Americans are depicted on film . It was re @-@ released periodically throughout the 20th century and became ingrained in popular culture . The film is regarded as one of the greatest films of all time ; it has placed in the top ten of the American Film Institute 's list of top 100 American films since the list 's inception in 1998 , and in 1989 , the United States Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Part 1 
 On the eve of the American Civil War in 1861 , Scarlett O 'Hara lives at Tara , her family 's cotton plantation in Georgia , with her parents and two sisters . Scarlett learns that Ashley Wilkes — whom she secretly loves — is to be married to his cousin , Melanie Hamilton , and the engagement is to be announced the next day at a barbecue at Ashley 's home , the nearby plantation Twelve Oaks . 
 At the Twelve Oaks party , Scarlett secretly declares her feelings to Ashley , but he rebuffs her by responding that he and Melanie are more compatible . Scarlett is incensed when she discovers another guest , Rhett Butler , has overheard their conversation ; a smitten Rhett promises Scarlett he will keep her secret . The barbecue is disrupted by the declaration of war and the men rush to enlist . As Scarlett watches Ashley kiss Melanie goodbye , Melanie 's younger brother Charles proposes to her . Although she does not love him , Scarlett consents and they are married before he leaves to fight . 
 Scarlett is widowed when Charles dies from a bout of pneumonia and measles while serving in the Confederate Army . Scarlett 's mother sends her to the Hamilton home in Atlanta to cheer her up , although the O <unk> ' outspoken housemaid Mammy tells Scarlett she knows she is going there only to wait for Ashley 's return . Scarlett , who should not attend a party while in mourning , attends a charity bazaar in Atlanta with Melanie where she runs into Rhett again , now a blockade runner for the Confederacy . Celebrating a Confederate victory and to raise money for the Confederate war effort , gentlemen are invited to bid for ladies to dance with them . Rhett makes an inordinately large bid for Scarlett and , to the disapproval of the guests , she agrees to dance with him . 
 The tide of war turns against the Confederacy after the Battle of Gettysburg in which many of the men of Scarlett 's town are killed . Scarlett makes another unsuccessful appeal to Ashley while he is visiting on Christmas furlough , although they do share a private and passionate kiss in the parlor on Christmas Day , just before he returns to war . 
 Eight months later , as the city is besieged by the Union Army in the Atlanta Campaign , Scarlett and her young house servant Prissy must deliver Melanie 's baby without medical assistance after she goes into premature labor . Afterwards , Scarlett calls upon Rhett to take her home to Tara with Melanie , her baby , and Prissy ; he collects them in a horse and wagon , but once out of the city chooses to go off to fight , leaving Scarlett and the group to make their own way back to Tara . Upon her return home , Scarlett finds Tara deserted , except for her father , her sisters , and two servants : Mammy and Pork . Scarlett learns that her mother has just died of typhoid fever and her father has become incompetent . With Tara pillaged by Union troops and the fields untended , Scarlett vows she will do anything for the survival of her family and herself . 
 Part 2 
 As the O <unk> and their servants work in the cotton fields , Scarlett 's father is killed after he is thrown from his horse in an attempt to chase away a scalawag from his land . With the defeat of the Confederacy Ashley also returns , but finds he is of little help at Tara . When Scarlett begs him to run away with her , he confesses his desire for her and kisses her passionately , but says he cannot leave Melanie . Unable to pay the taxes on Tara implemented by Reconstructionists , Scarlett dupes her younger sister Suellen 's fiancé , the middle @-@ aged and wealthy mill owner Frank Kennedy , into marrying her , by saying Suellen got tired of waiting and married another beau . 
 Frank , Ashley , Rhett and several other accomplices make a night raid on a shanty town after Scarlett is attacked while driving through it alone , resulting in Frank 's death . With Frank 's funeral barely over , Rhett proposes to Scarlett and she accepts . They have a daughter whom Rhett names Bonnie Blue , but Scarlett , still pining for Ashley and chagrined at the perceived ruin of her figure , lets Rhett know that she wants no more children and that they will no longer share a bed . 
 One day at Frank 's mill , Scarlett and Ashley are seen embracing by Ashley 's sister , India , and harboring an intense dislike of Scarlett she eagerly spreads rumors . Later that evening , Rhett , having heard the rumors , forces Scarlett to attend a birthday party for Ashley ; incapable of believing anything bad of her beloved sister @-@ in @-@ law , Melanie stands by Scarlett 's side so that all know that she believes the gossip to be false . After returning home from the party , Scarlett finds Rhett downstairs drunk , and they argue about Ashley . Rhett kisses Scarlett against her will , stating his intent to have sex with her that night , and carries the struggling Scarlett to the bedroom . The next day , Rhett apologizes for his behavior and offers Scarlett a divorce , which she rejects , saying that it would be a disgrace . When Rhett returns from an extended trip to London Scarlett informs him that she is pregnant , but an argument ensues which results in her falling down a flight of stairs and suffering a miscarriage . As she is recovering , tragedy strikes when Bonnie dies while attempting to jump a fence with her pony . 
 Scarlett and Rhett visit Melanie , who has suffered complications arising from a new pregnancy , on her deathbed . As Scarlett consoles Ashley , Rhett returns to Tara ; realizing that Ashley only ever truly loved Melanie , Scarlett dashes after Rhett to find him preparing to leave for good . She pleads with him , telling him she realizes now that she has loved him all along and that she never really loved Ashley , but Rhett says that with Bonnie 's death went any chance of reconciliation . Scarlett begs him to stay but Rhett rebuffs her and walks out the door and into the early morning fog , leaving her weeping on the staircase and vowing to one day win back his love . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Despite receiving top @-@ billing in the opening credits , Gable — along with Leigh , Howard , and de Havilland who receive second , third and fourth billing respectively — has a relatively low placing in the cast list , due to its unusual structure . Rather than ordered by conventional billing , the cast is broken down into three sections : the Tara plantation , Twelve Oaks , and Atlanta . The cast 's names are ordered according to the social rank of the characters ; therefore Thomas Mitchell , who plays Gerald O 'Hara , leads the cast list as the head of the O 'Hara family , while Barbara O 'Neil as his wife receives the second credit and Vivien Leigh as the eldest daughter the third credit , despite having the most screen time . Similarly , Howard C. Hickman as John Wilkes is credited over Leslie Howard who plays his son , and Clark Gable , who plays only a visitor at Twelve Oaks , receives a relatively low credit in the cast list , despite being presented as the " star " of the film in all the promotional literature . Following the death of Mary Anderson — who played Maybelle Merriwether — in April 2014 , there are only two surviving credited cast members from the film : Olivia de Havilland who played Melanie Wilkes and Mickey Kuhn , who played her son Beau Wilkes . 
 = = Production = = 
 Before publication of the novel , several Hollywood executives and studios declined to create a film based on it , including Louis B. Mayer and Irving Thalberg at Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) , Pandro Berman at RKO Pictures , and David O. Selznick of Selznick International Pictures . Jack L. Warner liked the story , but Warner Bros. ' s biggest star Bette Davis was uninterested , and Darryl Zanuck of 20th Century @-@ Fox did not offer enough money . Selznick changed his mind after his story editor Kay Brown and business partner John Hay Whitney urged him to buy the film rights . In July 1936 — a month after it was published — Selznick bought the rights for $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The casting of the two lead roles became a complex , two @-@ year endeavor . For the role of Rhett Butler , Selznick wanted Clark Gable from the start , but Gable was under contract to MGM , who never loaned him to other studios . Gary Cooper was considered , but Samuel Goldwyn — to whom Cooper was under contract — refused to loan him out . Warner offered a package of Bette Davis , Errol Flynn , and Olivia de Havilland for lead roles in return for the distribution rights . By this time , Selznick was determined to get Gable and eventually struck a deal with MGM . Selznick 's father @-@ in @-@ law , MGM chief Louis B. Mayer , offered in August 1938 to provide Gable and $ 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 for half of the film 's budget but for a high price : Selznick would have to pay Gable 's weekly salary , and half the profits would go to MGM while Loew 's , Inc — MGM 's parent company — would release the film . 
 The arrangement to release through MGM meant delaying the start of production until the end of 1938 , when Selznick 's distribution deal with United Artists concluded . Selznick used the delay to continue to revise the script and , more importantly , build publicity for the film by searching for the role of Scarlett . Selznick began a nationwide casting call that interviewed 1 @,@ 400 unknowns . The effort cost $ 100 @,@ 000 and was useless for the film , but created " priceless " publicity . Early frontrunners included Miriam Hopkins and Tallulah Bankhead , who were regarded as possibilities by Selznick prior to the purchase of the film rights ; Joan Crawford , who was signed to MGM , was also considered as a potential pairing with Gable . After a deal was struck with MGM , Selznick held discussions with Norma Shearer — who was MGM 's top female star at the time — but she withdrew herself from consideration . Katharine Hepburn lobbied hard for the role with the support of her friend , George Cukor , who had been hired to direct , but she was vetoed by Selznick who felt she was not right for the part . 
 Many famous — or soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ famous — actresses were considered , but only thirty @-@ one women were actually screen @-@ tested for Scarlett including Ardis <unk> , Jean Arthur , Tallulah Bankhead , Diana Barrymore , Joan Bennett , Nancy Coleman , Frances Dee , Ellen Drew ( as Terry Ray ) , Paulette Goddard , Susan Hayward ( under her real name of Edythe <unk> ) , Vivien Leigh , Anita Louise , <unk> Stoddard , Margaret <unk> , Lana Turner and Linda Watkins . Although Margaret Mitchell refused to publicly name her choice , the actress who came closest to winning her approval was Miriam Hopkins , who Mitchell felt was just the right type of actress to play Scarlett as written in the book . However , Hopkins was in her mid @-@ thirties at the time and was considered too old for the part . Four actresses , including Jean Arthur and Joan Bennett , were still under consideration by December 1938 ; however , only two finalists , Paulette Goddard and Vivien Leigh , were tested in Technicolor , both on December 20 . Goddard almost won the role , but controversy over her marriage with Charlie Chaplin caused Selznick to change his mind . 
 Selznick had been quietly considering Vivien Leigh , a young English actress who was still little known in America , for the role of Scarlett since February 1938 when Selznick saw her in Fire Over England and A Yank at Oxford . Leigh 's American agent was the London representative of the Myron Selznick talent agency ( headed by David Selznick 's brother , one of the owners of Selznick International ) , and she had requested in February that her name be submitted for consideration as Scarlett . By the summer of 1938 the <unk> were negotiating with Alexander Korda , to whom Leigh was under contract , for her services later that year . Selznick 's brother arranged for them to meet for the first time on the night of December 10 , 1938 , when the burning of Atlanta was filmed . In a letter to his wife two days later , Selznick admitted that Leigh was " the Scarlett dark horse " , and after a series of screen tests , her casting was announced on January 13 , 1939 . Just before the shooting of the film , Selznick informed newspaper columnist Ed Sullivan : " Scarlett O 'Hara 's parents were French and Irish . <unk> , Miss Leigh 's parents are French and Irish . " 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Of original screenplay writer Sidney Howard , film historian Joanne <unk> writes , " reducing the intricacies of Gone with the Wind 's epic dimensions was a herculean task ... and Howard 's first submission was far too long , and would have required at least six hours of film ; ... [ producer ] Selznick wanted Howard to remain on the set to make revisions ... but Howard refused to leave New England [ and ] as a result , revisions were handled by a host of local writers " . Selznick dismissed director George Cukor three weeks into filming and sought out Victor Fleming , who was directing The Wizard of Oz at the time . Fleming was dissatisfied with the script , so Selznick brought in famed writer Ben Hecht to rewrite the entire screenplay within five days . Hecht returned to Howard 's original draft and by the end of the week had succeeded in revising the entire first half of the script . Selznick undertook rewriting the second half himself but fell behind schedule , so Howard returned to work on the script for one week , reworking several key scenes in part two . 
 " By the time of the film 's release in 1939 , there was some question as to who should receive screen credit , " writes <unk> . " But despite the number of writers and changes , the final script was remarkably close to Howard 's version . The fact that Howard 's name alone appears on the credits may have been as much a gesture to his memory as to his writing , for in 1939 Sidney Howard died at age 48 in a farm @-@ tractor accident , and before the movie 's premiere . " Selznick , in a memo written in October 1939 , discussed the film 's writing credits : " [ Y ] ou can say frankly that of the comparatively small amount of material in the picture which is not from the book , most is my own personally , and the only original lines of dialog which are not my own are a few from Sidney Howard and a few from Ben Hecht and a couple more from John Van Druten . <unk> I doubt that there are ten original words of [ Oliver ] Garrett 's in the whole script . As to construction , this is about eighty per cent my own , and the rest divided between Jo Swerling and Sidney Howard , with Hecht having contributed materially to the construction of one sequence . " 
 According to Hecht biographer , William <unk> , " At dawn on Sunday , February 20 , 1939 , David Selznick ... and director Victor Fleming shook Hecht awake to inform him he was on loan from MGM and must come with them immediately and go to work on Gone with the Wind , which Selznick had begun shooting five weeks before . It was costing Selznick $ 50 @,@ 000 each day the film was on hold waiting for a final screenplay rewrite and time was of the essence . Hecht was in the middle of working on the film At the Circus for the Marx Brothers . Recalling the episode in a letter to screenwriter friend Gene Fowler , he said he hadn 't read the novel but Selznick and director Fleming could not wait for him to read it . They would act out scenes based on Sidney Howard 's original script which needed to be rewritten in a hurry . Hecht wrote , " After each scene had been performed and discussed , I sat down at the typewriter and wrote it out . Selznick and Fleming , eager to continue with their acting , kept hurrying me . We worked in this fashion for seven days , putting in eighteen to twenty hours a day . Selznick refused to let us eat lunch , arguing that food would slow us up . He provided bananas and salted peanuts ... thus on the seventh day I had completed , unscathed , the first nine reels of the Civil War epic . " 
 <unk> writes , " It is impossible to determine exactly how much Hecht scripted ... In the official credits filed with the Screen Writers Guild , Sidney Howard was of course awarded the sole screen credit , but four other writers were appended ... Jo Swerling for contributing to the treatment , Oliver H. P. Garrett and Barbara Keon to screenplay construction , and Hecht , to dialogue ... " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began January 26 , 1939 , and ended on July 1 , with post @-@ production work continuing until November 11 , 1939 . Director George Cukor , with whom Selznick had a long working relationship , and who had spent almost two years in pre @-@ production on Gone with the Wind , was replaced after less than three weeks of shooting . Selznick and Cukor had already disagreed over the pace of filming and the script , but other explanations put Cukor 's departure down to Gable 's discomfort at working with him . Emanuel Levy , Cukor 's biographer , claimed that Clark Gable had worked Hollywood 's gay circuit as a hustler and that Cukor knew of his past , so Gable used his influence to have him discharged . Vivien Leigh and Olivia de Havilland learned of Cukor 's firing on the day the Atlanta bazaar scene was filmed , and the pair went to Selznick 's office in full costume and implored him to change his mind . Victor Fleming , who was directing The Wizard of Oz , was called in from MGM to complete the picture , although Cukor continued privately to coach Leigh and De Havilland . Another MGM director , Sam Wood , worked for two weeks in May when Fleming temporarily left the production due to exhaustion . Although some of Cukor 's scenes were later reshot , Selznick estimated that " three solid reels " of his work remained in the picture . As of the end of principal photography , Cukor had undertaken eighteen days of filming , Fleming ninety @-@ three , and Wood twenty @-@ four . 
 Cinematographer Lee Garmes began the production , but on March 11 , 1939 — after a month of shooting footage that Selznick and his associates regarded as " too dark " — was replaced with Ernest Haller , working with Technicolor cinematographer Ray <unk> . Garmes completed the first third of the film — mostly everything prior to Melanie having the baby — but did not receive a credit . Most of the filming was done on " the back forty " of Selznick International with all the location scenes being photographed in California , mostly in Los Angeles County or neighboring Ventura County . Tara , the fictional Southern plantation house , existed only as a plywood and papier @-@ mâché facade built on the Selznick studio lot . For the burning of Atlanta , new false facades were built in front of the Selznick backlot 's many old abandoned sets , and Selznick himself operated the controls for the explosives that burned them down . Sources at the time put the estimated production costs at $ 3 @.@ 85 million , making it the second most expensive film made up to that point , with only Ben @-@ Hur ( 1925 ) having cost more . 
 Although legend persists that the Hays Office fined Selznick $ 5 @,@ 000 for using the word " damn " in Butler 's exit line , in fact the Motion Picture Association board passed an amendment to the Production Code on November 1 , 1939 , that forbade use of the words " hell " or " damn " except when their use " shall be essential and required for portrayal , in proper historical context , of any scene or dialogue based upon historical fact or folklore ... or a quotation from a literary work , provided that no such use shall be permitted which is intrinsically objectionable or offends good taste . " With that amendment , the Production Code Administration had no further objection to Rhett 's closing line . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 To compose the score , Selznick chose Max Steiner , with whom he had worked at RKO Pictures in the early 1930s . Warner Bros. — who had contracted Steiner in 1936 — agreed to lend him to Selznick . Steiner spent twelve weeks working on the score , the longest period that he had ever spent writing one , and at two hours and thirty @-@ six minutes long it was also the longest that he had ever written . Five orchestrators were hired , including Hugo <unk> , Maurice de <unk> , Bernard Kaun , Adolph Deutsch and Reginald Bassett . The score is characterized by two love themes , one for Ashley 's and Melanie 's sweet love and another that evokes Scarlett 's passion for Ashley , though notably there is no Scarlett and Rhett love theme . Steiner drew considerably on folk and patriotic music , which included Stephen Foster tunes such as " Louisiana Belle , " " Dolly Day , " " Ringo De Banjo , " " Beautiful Dreamer , " " Old Folks at Home , " and " Katie Belle , " which formed the basis of Scarlett 's theme ; other tunes that feature prominently are : " Marching through Georgia " by Henry Clay Work , " Dixie , " " <unk> " and " The Bonnie Blue Flag . " The theme that is most associated with the film today is the melody that accompanies Tara , the O 'Hara plantation ; in the early 1940s , " Tara 's Theme " formed the musical basis of the song " My Own True Love " by Mack David . In all , there are ninety @-@ nine separate pieces of music featured in the score . Due to the pressure of completing on time , Steiner received some assistance in composing from <unk> , Deutsch and Heinz <unk> , and in addition , two short cues — by Franz Waxman and William <unk> — were taken from scores in the MGM library . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Preview , premiere and initial release = = = 
 On September 9 , 1939 , Selznick , his wife , Irene , investor John " Jock " Whitney and film editor Hal Kern drove out to Riverside , California to preview it at the Fox Theatre . The film was still a rough cut at this stage , missing completed titles and lacking special optical effects . It ran for four hours and twenty @-@ five minutes , but would later be cut down to under four hours for its proper release . A double bill of Hawaiian Nights and Beau Geste was playing , and after the first feature it was announced that the theater would be screening a preview ; the audience were informed they could leave but would not be readmitted once the film had begun , nor would phone calls be allowed once the theater had been sealed . When the title appeared on the screen the audience cheered , and after it had finished it received a standing ovation . In his biography of Selznick , David Thomson wrote that the audience 's response before the film had even started " was the greatest moment of [ Selznick 's ] life , the greatest victory and redemption of all his failings " , with Selznick describing the preview cards as " probably the most amazing any picture has ever had . " When Selznick was asked by the press in early September how he felt about the film , he said : " At noon I think it 's divine , at midnight I think it 's lousy . Sometimes I think it 's the greatest picture ever made . But if it 's only a great picture , I 'll still be satisfied . " 
 About 300 @,@ 000 people came out in Atlanta for the film 's premiere at the Loew 's Grand Theatre on December 15 , 1939 . It was the climax of three days of festivities hosted by Mayor William B. Hartsfield , which included a parade of limousines featuring stars from the film , receptions , thousands of Confederate flags and a costume ball . <unk> D. Rivers , the governor of Georgia , declared December 15 a state holiday . An estimated three hundred thousand residents and visitors to Atlanta lined the streets for up to seven miles to watch a procession of limousines bring the stars from the airport . Only Leslie Howard and Victor Fleming chose not to attend : Howard had returned to England due to the outbreak of World War II , and Fleming had fallen out with Selznick and declined to attend any of the premieres . Hattie McDaniel was also absent , as she and the other black cast members were prevented from attending the premiere due to Georgia 's Jim Crow laws , which would have kept them from sitting with their white colleagues . Upon learning that McDaniel had been barred from the premiere , Clark Gable threatened to boycott the event , but McDaniel convinced him to attend . President Jimmy Carter would later recall it as " the biggest event to happen in the South in my lifetime . " Premieres in New York and Los Angeles followed , the latter attended by some of the actresses that had been considered for the part of Scarlett , among them Paulette Goddard , Norma Shearer and Joan Crawford . 
 From December 1939 to July 1940 , the film played only advance @-@ ticket road show engagements at a limited number of theaters at prices upwards of $ 1 — more than double the price of a regular first @-@ run feature — with MGM collecting an unprecedented 70 percent of the box office receipts ( as opposed to the typical 30 – 35 percent of the period ) . After reaching saturation as a roadshow , MGM revised its terms to a 50 percent cut and halved the prices , before it finally entered general release in 1941 at " popular " prices . Along with its distribution and advertising costs , total expenditure on the film was as high as $ 7 million . 
 = = = Later releases = = = 
 In 1942 , Selznick liquidated his company for tax reasons , and sold his share in Gone with the Wind to his business partner , John Whitney , for $ 500 @,@ 000 . In turn , Whitney sold it on to MGM for $ 2 @.@ 8 million , so that the studio owned the film outright . MGM immediately re @-@ released the film in spring 1942 , and again in 1947 and 1954 ; the 1954 reissue was the first time the film was shown in widescreen , compromising the original Academy ratio and cropping the top and bottom to an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 75 : 1 . In doing so , a number of shots were optically re @-@ framed and cut into the three @-@ strip camera negatives , forever altering five shots in the film . A 1961 release commemorated the centennial anniversary of the start of the Civil War , and included a gala " premiere " at the Loew 's Grand Theater . It was attended by Selznick and many other stars of the film , including Vivien Leigh and Olivia de Havilland ; Clark Gable had died the previous year . For its 1967 re @-@ release , it was blown up to 70mm , and issued with updated poster artwork featuring Gable — with his white shirt ripped open — holding Leigh against a backdrop of orange flames . There were further re @-@ releases in 1971 , 1974 and 1989 ; for the fiftieth anniversary reissue in 1989 , it was given a complete audio and video restoration . It was released theatrically one more time in the United States , in 1998 . In 2013 , a 4K digital restoration was released in the United Kingdom to coincide with Vivien Leigh 's centenary . In 2014 , special screenings were scheduled over a two @-@ day period at theaters across the United States to coincide with the film 's 75th anniversary . 
 = = = Television and home video = = = 
 The film received its world television premiere on the HBO cable network on June 11 , 1976 , and played on the channel for a total of fourteen times throughout the rest of the month . It made its network television debut in November later that year : NBC paid $ 5 million for a one @-@ off airing , and it was broadcast in two parts on successive evenings . It became at that time the highest @-@ rated television program ever presented on a single network , watched by 47 @.@ 5 percent of the households sampled in America , and 65 percent of television viewers , still the record for the highest rated film to ever air on television . In 1978 , CBS signed a deal worth $ 35 million to broadcast the film twenty times over as many years . Turner Entertainment acquired the MGM film library in 1986 , but the deal did not include the television rights to Gone with the Wind , which were still held by CBS . A deal was struck in which the rights were returned to Turner Entertainment and CBS 's broadcast rights to The Wizard of Oz were extended . It was used to launch two cable channels owned by Turner Broadcasting System : Turner Network Television ( 1988 ) and Turner Classic Movies ( 1994 ) . It debuted on videocassette in March 1985 , where it placed second in the sales charts , and has since been released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc formats . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Gone with the Wind was well received upon its release , with most consumer magazines and newspapers generally giving it excellent reviews . However , while its production values , technical achievements , and scale of ambition were universally recognized , some of the more notable reviewers of the time found the film to be dramatically lacking . Frank S. Nugent for The New York Times best summed up the general sentiment by acknowledging that while it was the most ambitious film production made up to that point , it probably was not the greatest film ever made , but he nevertheless found it to be an " interesting story beautifully told " . Franz Hoellering of The Nation was of the same opinion : " The result is a film which is a major event in the history of the industry but only a minor achievement in motion @-@ picture art . There are moments when the two categories meet on good terms , but the long stretches between are filled with mere spectacular efficiency . " 
 While the film was praised for its fidelity to the novel , this aspect was also singled out as the main factor in contributing to the bloated running time , which many critics felt was to the detriment of the overall dramatic impact . John C. Flinn wrote for Variety that Selznick had " left too much in " , and that as entertainment , the film would have benefited if repetitious scenes and dialog from the latter part of the story had been trimmed . The Manchester Guardian felt that the film 's one serious drawback was that the story lacked the epic quality to justify the outlay of time and found the second half , which focuses on Scarlett 's " irrelevant marriages " and " domestic squabbles , " mostly superfluous , and the sole reason for their inclusion had been " simply because Margaret Mitchell wrote it that way " . The Guardian believed that if " the story had been cut short and tidied up at the point marked by the interval , and if the personal drama had been made subservient to a cinematic treatment of the central theme — the collapse and devastation of the Old South — then Gone With the Wind might have been a really great film . " Likewise , Hoellering also found the second half of the film to be weaker than the first half : identifying the Civil War to be the driving force of the first part while the characters dominate in the second part , he concluded this is where the main fault of the picture lay , commenting that " the characters alone do not suffice " . Despite many excellent scenes , he considered the drama to be unconvincing and that the " psychological development " had been neglected . 
 Much of the praise was reserved for the casting , with Vivien Leigh in particular being singled out for her performance as Scarlett . Nugent described her as the " pivot of the picture " and believed her to be " so perfectly designed for the part by art and nature that any other actress in the role would be inconceivable " . Similarly , Hoellering found her " perfect " in " appearance and movements " ; he felt her acting best when she was allowed to " accentuate the split personality she portrays " and thought she was particularly effective in such moments of characterization like the morning after the marital rape scene . Flinn also found Leigh suited to the role physically and felt she was best in the scenes where she displays courage and determination , such as the escape from Atlanta and when Scarlett kills a Yankee deserter . Leigh won in the Best Actress category for her performance at the 1939 New York Film Critics Circle Awards . Of Clark Gable 's performance as Rhett Butler , Flinn felt the characterization was " as close to Miss Mitchell 's conception — and the audience 's — as might be imagined " , a view which Nugent concurred with , although Hoellering felt that Gable didn 't quite convince in the closing scenes , as Rhett walks out on Scarlett in disgust . Of the other principal cast members , both Hoellering and Flinn found Leslie Howard to be " convincing " as the weak @-@ willed Ashley , with Flinn identifying Olivia de Havilland as a " standout " as Melanie ; Nugent was also especially taken with de Havilland 's performance , describing it as a " gracious , dignified , tender gem of characterization " . Hattie McDaniel 's performance as Mammy was singled out for praise by many critics : Nugent believed she gave the best performance in the film after Vivien Leigh , with Flinn placing it third after Leigh 's and Gable 's performances . 
 = = = Academy Awards = = = 
 At the 12th Academy Awards , Gone with the Wind set a record for Academy Award wins and nominations , winning in eight of the competitive categories it was nominated in , from a total of thirteen nominations . It won for Best Picture , Best Actress , Best Supporting Actress , Best Director , Best Screenplay , Best Cinematography , Best Interior Decoration , and Best Editing , and received two further honorary awards for its use of equipment and color ( it also became the first color film to win Best Picture ) . Its record of eight competitive wins stood until Gigi ( 1958 ) won nine , and its overall record of ten was broken by Ben @-@ Hur ( 1959 ) which won eleven . Gone with the Wind also held the record for most nominations until All About Eve ( 1950 ) secured fourteen . It was the longest American sound film made up to that point , and may still hold the record of the longest Best Picture winner depending on how it is interpreted . The running time for Gone with the Wind is just under 221 minutes , while Lawrence of Arabia ( 1962 ) runs for just over 222 minutes ; however , including the overture , intermission , entr 'acte , and exit music , Gone with the Wind lasts for 234 minutes ( although some sources put its full length at 238 minutes ) while Lawrence of Arabia comes in slightly shorter at 232 minutes with its additional components . 
 Hattie McDaniel became the first African @-@ American to win an Academy Award — beating out her co @-@ star Olivia de Havilland who was also nominated in the same category — but was racially segregated from her co @-@ stars at the awards ceremony at the Coconut Grove ; she and her escort were made to sit at a separate table at the back of the room . Meanwhile , screenwriter Sidney Howard became the first posthumous Oscar winner and Selznick personally received the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award for his career achievements . 
 = = = African @-@ American reaction = = = 
 Black commentators criticised the film for its depiction of black people and as a glorification of slavery . Carlton Moss , a black dramatist , complained in an open letter that whereas The Birth of a Nation was a " frontal attack on American history and the Negro people " , Gone with the Wind was a " rear attack on the same " . He went on to dismiss it as a " nostalgic plea for sympathy for a still living cause of Southern reaction " . Moss further criticized the stereotypical black characterizations , such as the " shiftless and dull @-@ witted Pork " , the " indolent and thoroughly irresponsible Prissy " , Big Sam 's " radiant acceptance of slavery " , and Mammy with her " constant haranguing and doting on every wish of Scarlett " . Following Hattie McDaniel 's Oscar win , Walter Francis White , leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , accused her of being an Uncle Tom . McDaniel responded that she would " rather make seven hundred dollars a week playing a maid than seven dollars being one " ; she further questioned White 's qualification to speak on behalf of blacks , since he was light @-@ skinned and only one @-@ eighth black . 
 Opinion in the black community was generally divided upon release , with the film being called by some a " weapon of terror against black America " and an insult to black audiences , and demonstrations were held in various cities . Even so , some sections of the black community recognized McDaniel 's achievements to be representative of progression : some African @-@ Americans crossed picket lines and praised McDaniel 's warm and witty characterization , while others hoped that the industry 's recognition of her work would lead to increased visibility on screen for other black actors . In its editorial congratulation to McDaniel on winning her Academy Award , Opportunity : A Journal of Negro Life used the film as reminder of the " limit " put on black aspiration by old prejudices . Malcolm X would later recall that " when Butterfly McQueen went into her act , I felt like crawling under the rug " . 
 = = = Audience response = = = 
 Upon its release , Gone with the Wind broke attendance records everywhere . At the Capitol Theatre in New York alone , it was averaging eleven thousand admissions per day in late December , and within four years of its release had sold an estimated sixty million tickets across the United States — sales equivalent to just under half the population at the time . It repeated its success overseas , and was a sensational hit during the Blitz in London , opening in April 1940 and playing for four years . By the time MGM withdrew it from circulation at the end of 1943 its worldwide distribution had returned a gross rental ( the studio 's share of the box office gross ) of $ 32 million , making it the most profitable film ever made up to that point . 
 Even though it earned its investors roughly twice as much as the previous record @-@ holder , The Birth of a Nation , the box @-@ office performances of the two films were likely much closer . The bulk of the earnings from Gone with the Wind came from its roadshow and first @-@ run engagements , which represented 70 percent and 50 percent of the box @-@ office gross respectively , before entering general release ( which at the time typically saw the distributor 's share set at 30 – 35 percent of the gross ) . In the case of The Birth of a Nation , its distributor , Epoch , sold off many of its distribution territories on a " states rights " basis — which typically amounted to 10 percent of the box @-@ office gross — and Epoch 's accounts are only indicative of its own profits from the film , and not the local distributors . Carl E. Milliken , secretary of the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors Association , estimated that The Birth of a Nation had been seen by fifty million people by 1930 . 
 When it was re @-@ released in 1947 , it earned an impressive $ 5 million rental in the United States and Canada , and was one of the top ten releases of the year . Successful re @-@ releases in 1954 and 1961 enabled it to retain its position as the industry 's top earner , despite strong challenges from more recent films such as Ben @-@ Hur , but it was finally overtaken by The Sound of Music in 1966 . The 1967 reissue was unusual in that MGM opted to roadshow it , a decision that turned it into the most successful re @-@ release in the history of the industry . It generated a box @-@ office gross of $ 68 million , making it MGM 's most lucrative picture after Doctor Zhivago from the latter half of the decade . MGM earned a rental of $ 41 million from the release , with the U.S. and Canadian share amounting to over $ 30 million , placing it second only to The Graduate for that year . Including its $ 6 @.@ 7 million rental from the 1961 reissue , it was the fourth highest @-@ earner of the decade in the North American market , with only The Sound of Music , The Graduate and Doctor Zhivago making more for their distributors . A further re @-@ release in 1971 allowed it to briefly recapture the record from The Sound of Music , bringing its total worldwide gross rental to about $ 116 million by the end of 1971 — more than <unk> its earnings from its initial release — before losing the record again the following year to The Godfather . 
 Across all releases , it is estimated that Gone with the Wind has sold over 200 million tickets in the United States and Canada , and 35 million tickets in the United Kingdom , generating more theater admissions in those territories than any other film . In total , Gone with the Wind has grossed over $ 390 million globally at the box office ; in 2007 Turner Entertainment estimated the gross to be equivalent to approximately $ 3 @.@ 3 billion when adjusted for inflation to current prices , while Guinness World Records arrived at a figure of $ 3 @.@ 44 billion in 2014 , making it the most successful film in cinema history . 
 The film remains immensely popular with audiences into the 21st century , having been voted the most popular film in two nationwide polls of Americans undertaken by Harris Interactive in 2008 , and again in 2014 . The market research firm surveyed over two thousand U.S. adults , with the results weighted by age , sex , race / ethnicity , education , region and household income so their proportions matched the composition of the adult population . 
 = = = Critical re @-@ evaluation = = = 
 In revisiting the film in the 1970s , Arthur Schlesinger noted that Hollywood films generally age well , revealing an unexpected depth or integrity , but in the case of Gone with the Wind time has not treated it kindly . Richard Schickel posits that one measure of a film 's quality is to ask what you can remember of it , and the film falls down in this regard : unforgettable imagery and dialogue are simply not present . Stanley Kauffmann , likewise , also found the film to be a largely forgettable experience , claiming he could only remember two scenes vividly . Both Schickel and Schlesinger put this down to it being " badly written " , in turn describing the dialogue as " flowery " and possessing a " picture postcard " sensibility . Schickel also believes the film fails as popular art , in that it has limited rewatch value — a sentiment that Kauffmann also concurs with , stating that having watched it twice he hopes " never to see it again : twice is twice as much as any lifetime needs " . Both Schickel and Andrew Sarris identify the film 's main failing is in possessing a producer 's sensibility rather than an artistic one : having gone through so many directors and writers the film does not carry a sense of being " created " or " directed " , but rather having emerged " steaming from the crowded kitchen " , where the main creative force was a producer 's obsession in making the film as literally faithful to the novel as possible . 
 Sarris concedes that despite its artistic failings , the film does hold a mandate around the world as the " single most beloved entertainment ever produced " . Judith Crist observes that , kitsch aside , the film is " undoubtedly still the best and most durable piece of popular entertainment to have come off the Hollywood assembly lines " , the product of a showman with " taste and intelligence " . Schlesinger notes that the first half of the film does have a " sweep and vigor " that aspire to its epic theme , but — finding agreement with the film 's contemporary criticisms — the personal lives take over in the second half , and it ends up losing its theme in unconvincing sentimentality . Kauffmann also finds interesting parallels with The Godfather , which had just replaced Gone with the Wind as the highest @-@ grosser at the time : both were produced from " ultra @-@ American " best @-@ selling novels , both live within codes of honor that are romanticized , and both in essence offer cultural fabrication or revisionism . 
 The critical perception of the film has shifted in the intervening years , which resulted in it being ranked 235th in Sight & Sound 's prestigious decennial critics poll in 2012 , and in 2015 sixty @-@ two international film critics polled by the BBC voted it the 97th best American film . 
 = = = Industry recognition = = = 
 The film has featured in several high @-@ profile industry polls : in 1977 it was voted the most popular film by the American Film Institute ( AFI ) , in a poll of the organization 's membership ; the AFI also ranked the film fourth on its " 100 Greatest Movies " list in 1998 , with it slipping down to sixth place in the tenth anniversary edition in 2007 . Film directors ranked it 322nd in the 2012 edition of the decennial Sight & Sound poll , and in 2016 it was selected as the ninth best " directorial achievement " in a Directors Guild of America members poll . In 2014 , it placed fifteenth in an extensive poll undertaken by The Hollywood Reporter , which <unk> every studio , agency , publicity firm and production house in the Hollywood region . Gone with the Wind was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry in 1989 . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Racial criticism = = = 
 Gone with the Wind has been criticized as having perpetuated Civil War myths and black stereotypes . David Reynolds writes that " The white women are elegant , their menfolk noble or at least dashing . And , in the background , the black slaves are mostly dutiful and content , clearly incapable of an independent existence . " Reynolds likened Gone with the Wind to The Birth of a Nation and other re @-@ imaginings of the South during the era of segregation , in which white Southerners are portrayed as defending traditional values and the issue of slavery is largely ignored . The film has been described as a " regression " that promotes the myth of the black rapist and the honourable and defensive role of the Ku Klux Klan during Reconstruction , and as a " social propaganda " film offering a " white supremacist " view of the past . From 1972 to 1996 , the Atlanta Historical Society held a number of Gone with the Wind exhibits , among them a 1994 exhibit titled , " Disputed Territories : Gone with the Wind and Southern Myths " . One of the questions explored by the exhibit was " How True to Life Were the Slaves in <unk> ? " This section showed slave experiences were diverse and concluded that the " happy darky " was a myth , as was the belief that all slaves experienced violence and brutality . 
 Despite factual inaccuracies in its depiction of the Reconstruction period , it nevertheless reflects contemporary interpretations common throughout the early 20th century . One pervasive viewpoint argued by academics is reflected in a brief scene in which Mammy fends off a leering freedman : a government official can be heard offering bribes to the emancipated slaves for their votes . The clear inference is that freedmen are ignorant about politics and unprepared for freedom , unwittingly becoming the tools of corrupt Reconstruction officials . While perpetuating some Lost Cause myths , the film makes concessions in regards to others . After the attack on Scarlett in the shanty town , a group of men including Scarlett 's husband Frank , Rhett Butler and Ashley raid the town ; in the novel they belong to the Ku Klux Klan , representing the common trope of protecting the white woman 's virtue , but the filmmakers consciously neutralize the presence of the Klan in the film by referring to it only as a " political meeting " . 
 Thomas Cripps has argued that the film in some respects undercuts racial stereotypes ; in particular , the film created greater engagement between Hollywood and black audiences , with dozens of movies making small gestures in recognition of the emerging trend . Only a few weeks after its initial run , a story editor at Warner wrote a memo to Walter Wanger about Mississippi Belle , a script that contained the worst excesses of plantation films , suggesting that Gone with the Wind had made the film " <unk> " . More than any film since The Birth of a Nation , it unleashed a variety of social forces that foreshadowed an alliance of white liberals and blacks who encouraged the expectation that blacks would one day achieve equality . According to Cripps , the film eventually became a template for measuring social change . 
 = = = Depiction of marital rape = = = 
 One of the most notorious and widely condemned scenes in Gone with the Wind depicts what is now legally defined as " marital rape " . The scene begins with Scarlett and Rhett at the bottom of the staircase , where he begins to kiss her , refusing to be told ' no ' by the struggling and frightened Scarlett ; Rhett overcomes her resistance and carries her up the stairs to the bedroom , where the audience is left in no doubt that she will " get what 's coming to her " . The next scene , the following morning , shows Scarlett glowing with barely suppressed sexual satisfaction ; Rhett apologizes for his behavior , blaming it on his drinking . The scene has been accused of combining romance and rape by making them indistinguishable from each other , and of reinforcing a notion about forced sex : that women secretly enjoy it , and it is an acceptable way for a man to treat his wife . 
 Molly Haskell has argued that nevertheless , women are mostly uncritical of the scene , and that by and large it is consistent with what women have in mind when they fantasize about being raped . Their fantasies revolve around love and romance rather than forced sex ; they assume that Scarlett was not an unwilling sexual partner and wanted Rhett to take the initiative and insist on having sexual intercourse . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Gone with the Wind and its production have been explicitly referenced , satirized , dramatized and analyzed on numerous occasions across a range of media , from contemporaneous works such as Second Fiddle — a 1939 film spoofing the " search for Scarlett " — to current television shows , such as The Simpsons . The Scarlett O 'Hara War ( a 1980 television dramatization of the casting of Scarlett ) , Moonlight and Magnolias ( a 2007 play by Ron Hutchinson that dramatizes Ben Hecht 's five @-@ day re @-@ write of the script ) , and " Went with the Wind ! " ( a sketch on The Carol Burnett Show that parodied the film in the aftermath of its television debut in 1976 ) are among the more noteworthy examples of its enduring presence in popular culture . It was also the subject of a 1988 documentary , The Making of a Legend : Gone with the Wind , detailing the film 's difficult production history . In 1990 , the United States Postal Service issued a stamp depicting Clark Gable and Vivien Leigh embracing in a scene from the film . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 Following publication of her novel , Margaret Mitchell was inundated with requests for a sequel but claimed to not have a notion of what happened to Scarlett and Rhett , and that she had " left them to their ultimate fate " . Mitchell continued to resist pressure from Selznick and MGM to write a sequel until her death in 1949 . In 1975 , her brother , Stephens Mitchell ( who assumed control of her estate ) , authorized a sequel to be jointly produced by MGM and Universal Studios on a budget of $ 12 million . Anne Edwards was commissioned to write the sequel as a novel which would then be adapted into a screenplay , and published in conjunction with the film 's release . Edwards submitted a 775 @-@ page manuscript entitled Tara , The Continuation of Gone with the Wind , set between 1872 and 1882 focusing on Scarlett 's divorce from Rhett ; MGM was not satisfied with the story and the deal collapsed . 
 The idea was revived in the 1990s , when a sequel was finally produced in 1994 , in the form of a television miniseries . Scarlett was based upon the novel by Alexandra Ripley , itself a sequel to Mitchell 's book . British actors Joanne Whalley and Timothy Dalton were cast as Scarlett and Rhett , and the series follows Scarlett 's relocation to Ireland after again becoming pregnant by Rhett . 
 = Richard Tomlinson = 
 Richard John Charles Tomlinson ( born 13 January 1963 ) is a former officer of the British Secret Intelligence Service ( MI6 ) . He believes he was subject to unfair dismissal from MI6 in 1995 , and attempted to take his former employer to a tribunal . MI6 refused , arguing that to do so would breach state security , although Tomlinson disputed this reasoning . 
 In 1997 , Tomlinson was imprisoned under the Official Secrets Act 1989 after he gave a synopsis of a proposed book detailing his career with MI6 to an Australian publisher . He served six months of a twelve @-@ month sentence before being given parole , whereupon he left the country . The book , named The Big Breach , was published in Moscow in 2001 ( and later in Edinburgh ) , and was subsequently serialised by The Sunday Times . The book detailed various aspects of MI6 operations , alleging that it employed a mole in the German Bundesbank and that it had a " licence to kill " , the latter later confirmed by the head of MI6 at a public hearing . 
 Tomlinson then attempted to assist Mohamed al @-@ Fayed in his privately funded investigation into the death of Diana , Princess of Wales and al @-@ Fayed 's son Dodi . Tomlinson claimed that MI6 had considered assassinating Slobodan Milošević , the president of Serbia , by staging a car crash using a powerful strobe light to blind the driver . He suggested that Diana and Dodi may have been killed by MI6 in the same way , although that claim was dismissed at their inquest in 2007 . MI6 admitted that plans of that nature had been drafted regarding a different Eastern European official , but that the proposal had been swiftly rejected by management . 
 In 2009 , MI6 agreed to allow Tomlinson to return to Britain , unfreeze royalties from his book and drop the threat of charges . MI6 also apologised for his mistreatment . Since 2000 , staff at MI6 have been allowed employment tribunals , and have been able to unionise since 2008 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard John Charles Tomlinson was born in Hamilton , New Zealand , and raised in the nearby town of Ngaruawahia . He was the middle child in a family of three brothers . His father came from a Lancashire farming family and he worked for the Ministry of Agriculture , and had met his wife whilst studying agriculture at Newcastle University . The family moved to Cumbria , England in 1968 . The young Tomlinson won a scholarship for the independent Barnard Castle School in County Durham , where he was a contemporary of Rory Underwood and Rob Andrew , who went on to become England rugby internationals . He excelled at mathematics and physics , and won a scholarship to Gonville and Caius College , Cambridge , in 1981 . 
 His fellow student , historian Andrew Roberts , remembers Tomlinson as " a bright and charming undergraduate , popular with the boys for his drinking and sporting prowess , and with the girls for his dark good looks . " His friends included Gideon Rachman , who wrote him a reference after his tutor refused to do so . Tomlinson completed flying training with Cambridge University Air Squadron and won a Half Blue for Modern Pentathlon . He graduated from the University of Cambridge with a starred First Class honours degree in aeronautical engineering in 1984 , and was approached by MI6 shortly afterwards , whose offer he turned down . Following his graduation he took examinations to join the Royal Navy as a Fleet Air Arm Officer , but he failed the medical examination due to childhood asthma . Instead he applied for and was awarded a Kennedy Scholarship , which allowed him to study technology policy at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with full funding during 1986 @-@ 7 . Following this , he was awarded a prize from the Rotary Foundation , allowing him to study in the country of his choice for a year . Consequently , he enrolled in a political science course at the University of Buenos Aires , where he became a fluent Spanish speaker . He continued to pursue his aeronautical interests and qualified as a glider pilot with the Fuerza Aérea Argentina . From 1988 @-@ 9 Tomlinson worked in Mayfair , London , for management consultancy company Booz Allen Hamilton . 
 = = Military and MI6 service = = 
 Finding his desk job unsatisfying , Tomlinson joined the Territorial Army in September 1989 , and after passing selection , served as a reservist with the SAS in the Artists Rifles , and then 23 SAS , qualifying as a military parachutist and radio operator . He represented Britain in the 1990 Camel Trophy , competing in Siberia , and crossed the Sahara desert solo on a motorcycle . He enjoyed the experience , and subsequently applied to join MI6 , and officially joined the Service on 23 September 1991 . He completed his training with MI6 and claims he was the best recruit on his course , being awarded the rarely given " Box 1 " attribute by his instructing officers including Nicholas Langman . 
 Tomlinson worked in the " SOV / OPS " department , operating during the ending phases of the Cold War against the Soviet Union . He was posted to a diplomatic role in Moscow , and was one of the agents responsible for the retrieval of the valuable Mitrokhin Archive in 1992 . From March 1992 until September 1993 he worked in the Eastern European <unk> . Whilst working there , it was discovered that the Conservative Party had been receiving donations from Serbian supporters . In November 1993 he joined the Balkans <unk> , and was posted to Sarajevo for six months as the MI6 representative in Bosnia during the breakup of the former Yugoslavia . There he was a " targeting officer " , with a mission to identify potential informants and gather intelligence . A soldier who escorted Tomlinson to Bosnia described him as a " liability " , a " <unk> " and " totally unprofessional " , although Tomlinson has disputed this . 
 From 1994 to 1995 Tomlinson worked in the operational counter @-@ proliferation department . His first posting in this capacity was to work as an undercover agent against Iran , where he succeeded in penetrating the Iranian Intelligence Service . He posed as a British businessman , and infiltrated a network of arms dealers that included Nahum <unk> . The British government supplied the Iranians with materials for chemical weapons in order to gain intelligence on Iran 's military programme . Tomlinson 's description of his Iranian activities are generally considered to be true , due to his personal involvement and knowledge of details that only an insider would know . 
 MI6 dismissed him on 22 May 1995 as he came to the end of his extended probationary period . Tomlinson 's probationary period had been extended over the standard six @-@ month duration due to his senior line manager 's doubts about his personality . Tomlinson claimed that he had become suicidally depressed following the death of his long @-@ term girlfriend from cancer and that he had been suffering from post @-@ traumatic stress after witnessing violence against a civilian during the Siege of Sarajevo , and that MI6 had been ill @-@ equipped to handle his condition . MI6 argued that he was dismissed for " not being a team player , lacking motivation and having a short @-@ term interest in the service " , but later conceded that he had experienced a " personality clash " with his senior line manager . Another reason given for his dismissal was for " going on frolics on his own " . Tomlinson claims that no formal reason for his dismissal was ever given , and that he was mid @-@ assignment when he suddenly found himself barred from entering MI6 headquarters . Friends suggested that he was sacked after he complained about MI6 's " unethical " tactics . Tomlinson argued that his supervisors had unfairly disregarded his personal circumstances . Tomlinson disputed the reasons for and legality of his dismissal and attempted to take MI6 before an employment tribunal . However , MI6 obtained a public @-@ interest immunity certificate from the Foreign Secretary , Malcolm Rifkind . Having no further legal recourse to appeal against his dismissal , Tomlinson left the United Kingdom , and pursued his arguments against MI6 by publishing articles in the international press protesting his treatment , whilst working on a book detailing his career in the Service . 
 In 1998 , the Parliamentary Intelligence and Security Committee recommended that MI6 should be subject to UK employment law . Since 2000 , employees of MI6 have had the same employment rights as other British citizens , including written contracts and access to employment tribunals . However , MI6 refused to allow these procedures to be applied retroactively to Tomlinson 's case . MI6 have not succeeded in obtaining another PII certificate since the Tomlinson case . 
 = = The Big Breach = = 
 Tomlinson moved to the Costa del Sol in Spain for 18 months from early 1996 . Realising that a disgruntled former spy could be problematic for the agency , the aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the head of MI6 was enlisted to attempt to appease Tomlinson in February 1997 . He offered him a £ 15 @,@ 000 loan and a marketing job with Jackie Stewart 's Formula One racing team , in return for a promise of silence . Tomlinson accepted the offer ( he claims under duress ) but retained the job for only a few months before he emigrated to Australia , where his younger brother lived . 
 Tomlinson returned to Britain , and in October 1997 was arrested and accused of breaking the Official Secrets Act 1989 , after delivering a seven @-@ page synopsis of The Big Breach to the Australian office of Transworld , a British publisher . On 18 December 1997 he was sentenced to 12 months in prison after pleading guilty . 
 In August 1998 , after serving six months in prison and four months on probation , Tomlinson left the UK to live in exile . He set about completing The Big Breach , which was published in 2001 in Russia . The book alleged that MI6 had infiltrated the German Bundesbank with a mole , and that the Service had a special means of writing in invisible ink . Other revelations were already public knowledge , such as that MI6 recruits are trained at Fort Monckton in Hampshire , and that agents in the field often use the cover of being a journalist . 
 After the Court of Appeal of England and Wales ruled in his favour , the book was made available in the UK . However following the publication , the British Government obtained a High Court order to confiscate all proceeds from the book , on the grounds that the government owned the copyright to anything written by Tomlinson . In September 2008 , MI6 ended all legal objection to the publication of The Big Breach , released the proceeds from the publication to Tomlinson , and admitted that the organisation 's previous legal actions against him were disproportionate . However , it still refused to reinstate him or compensate him for the loss of his career and pension . Since 2009 , Tomlinson can now travel freely to the UK . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Economist criticised the " mess " that MI6 had made in failing to handle the Tomlinson case properly : " Recruiting Mr Tomlinson looks like a bad mistake , and his sacking seems to have been clumsily handled . " The newspaper 's reviewer complained : " there is little useful information in this breathless , whingeing and ill @-@ written volume that a diligent reader of books about spying would not know already . " 
 Jimmy Burns , reviewing the book for the Financial Times , speculated that it was plausible that " MI6 's senior management realised they had made a terrible mistake in recruiting someone who thought that espionage was just one big adventure . " He concluded , however , that the book " left me with the feeling that the spooks in Whitehall could have avoided a great deal of adverse publicity by agreeing to Tomlinson 's original proposal : an employment tribunal held in camera . " 
 Former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela reacted angrily to Tomlinson 's accusation in the book that he had a long @-@ standing relationship with MI6 , describing it as a " disgraceful fabrication " . Tomlinson removed the references to Mandela in the British edition of the book , conceding that Mandela was probably unaware that the officials with whom he spoke were affiliated with MI6 . 
 = = Other alleged breaches and assertions = = 
 = = = List of MI6 agents = = = 
 In May 1999 , a list of 116 alleged MI6 agents was sent to the LaRouche movement 's publication Executive Intelligence Review , a weekly magazine which published it online . Its names included Andrew Fulton , who had recently retired , as well as David Spedding and Richard <unk> . MI6 biographer Stephen Dorril explained that most of the names were " light @-@ cover " sources who worked out of embassies or missions posing as diplomats . Dorril argued , " it is well known that rival intelligence networks know who these people are and accept them . " MI6 claimed that Tomlinson had originated the list , which was something he had previously threatened to do , although he denied responsibility for it , and MI6 were unable to substantiate their accusation . 
 Tomlinson wrote , " If MI6 had set out to produce a list that caused me the maximum incrimination , but caused them the minimum damage , they could not have done a better job . " He also said , " It <unk> me why MI6 gave the list credibility . If they were really worried about the safety of their agents they could have denied it . " After The Sun newspaper called Tomlinson a " traitor " and published his email address , he received death threats , and fearing for his life , went into hiding for a time . Government officials later conceded that the list did not originate from Tomlinson . 
 = = = Diana , Princess of Wales = = = 
 During 2008 , Tomlinson was a witness for the inquest into the deaths of the Princess of Wales and Dodi al Fayed . He had suggested that MI6 was monitoring Diana before her death and that her driver on the night she died , Henri Paul , may have been an MI6 informant , and that her death resembled plans he saw during 1992 for the assassination of Yugoslav President Slobodan Milošević , using a bright light to cause a traffic accident . 
 At the Coroner 's Inquest into the death of the Princess , on 13 February 2008 , speaking by video @-@ link from France , Tomlinson conceded that , after the interval of 16 or 17 years , he " could not remember specifically " whether the document he had seen during 1992 had in fact proposed the use of a strobe light to cause a traffic accident as a means of assassinating Milošević , although use of lights for this purpose had been covered in his MI6 training . On being told that no MI6 file on Henri Paul had been found , Tomlinson said that it " would be absurd after 17 years to say I can positively disagree with it , but ... I do not think the fact that they did not manage to find a file rules out anything either " . He said he believed MI6 had an informant at the Paris Ritz but he could not be certain that this person was necessarily Henri Paul . 
 = = Post @-@ MI6 = = 
 In August 1998 , Tomlinson left the United Kingdom for France , and shortly afterwards moved to New Zealand . Later that month he was deported from the United States , and in October 1998 he moved to Switzerland , before being expelled in June 1999 after the Swiss authorities described his presence there as " undesirable " . He moved to Germany until he was hounded out by officials , whereupon he moved to Italy . In 2001 he left Rimini in Italy , where he had been working as a waiter and a snowboarding instructor , for the south of France near Cannes where he worked as a yacht broker for BCR <unk> . From 2006 @-@ 7 , Tomlinson maintained a series of blogs detailing his treatment . His Riviera home was raided by police in 2006 . 
 In 2007 government lawyers decided not to prosecute him for publishing The Big Breach . The Crown Prosecution Service said there was no real prospect of conviction in a jury trial , which would reveal " sensitive matters " . In 2009 MI6 agreed to allow Tomlinson to return to Britain , unfreeze royalties from his book and drop the threat of charges if he agreed to stop disclosing information about MI6 and speaking to the media . According to The Sunday Times , MI6 also apologised for its " unfair treatment " of him . 
 He now lives permanently in France and has retrained as a professional pilot . He has worked as a flying instructor with the Ghana Air Force , and in Nigeria , Kenya and Mexico as a surveillance pilot . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1998 , Tomlinson was described as possessing " the air of slight arrogance that goes with good looks , a hard @-@ trained body and a sharp intellect " . The Geneva press reported that he had a " perfect command of [ the ] French [ language ] " . 
 = Mysore = 
 Mysore ( / <unk> / ) , officially renamed as Mysuru , is the third most populous city in the state of Karnataka , India . Located at the base of the Chamundi Hills about 146 km ( 91 mi ) southwest of the state capital Bangalore , it is spread across an area of 128 @.@ 42 km2 ( 50 sq mi ) . According to the provisional results of the 2011 national census of India , the population is 887 @,@ 446 . Mysore City Corporation is responsible for the civic administration of the city , which is also the headquarters of the Mysore district and the Mysore division . 
 Mysore served as the capital city of Kingdom of Mysore for nearly six centuries , from 1399 until 1947 . The Kingdom was ruled by the Wodeyar dynasty , except for a brief period in the late 18th century when Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan were in power . Patrons of art and culture , the Wodeyars contributed significantly to the cultural growth of the city . The cultural ambience and achievements of Mysore earned it the sobriquet Cultural capital of Karnataka . 
 Mysore is noted for its palaces , including the Mysore Palace , and for the festivities that take place during the Dasara festival when the city receives a large number of tourists . It lends its name to the Mysore style of painting , the sweet dish Mysore Pak , the Mysore Peta ( a traditional silk turban ) and the garment known as the Mysore silk saree . Tourism is the major industry , while information technology has emerged as a major employer alongside the traditional industries . Mysore depends on rail and bus transport for inter @-@ city connections . The city was the location of the first private radio station in India . Mysore houses Mysore University , which has produced several notable authors , particularly in the field of Kannada literature . Cricket is the most popular sport in the city . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Mysore is an anglicised version of Mahishūru , which means the abode of Mahisha in the local Kannada language . Though in Sanskrit Mahisha means buffalo , here Mahisha refers to Mahishasura , a mythological demon who could assume the form of both human and buffalo . According to Hindu mythology , the area was ruled by the demon Mahishasura . The demon was killed by the Goddess Chamundeshwari , whose temple is situated atop the Chamundi Hills . Mahishūru later became <unk> ( a name which , even now , the royal family uses ) and finally came to be called <unk> , its present name in the Kannada language . 
 In December 2005 , the Government of Karnataka announced its intention to change the English name of the city to Mysuru . This was approved by the Government of India , but as of 2011 the formalities necessary to incorporate the name change were yet to be completed . The central government approved this request in October 2014 and Mysore was renamed ( along with other 12 cities ) to " Mysuru " on November 1 , 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 The site where Mysore Palace now stands was occupied by a village named <unk> at the beginning of the 16th century . The Mahishūru Fort was constructed in 1524 by Chamaraja Wodeyar III ( 1513 – 1553 ) , who passed on the dominion of <unk> to his son Chamaraja Wodeyar IV ( 1572 – 1576 ) . Since the 16th century , the name of Mahishūru has commonly been used to denote the city . The Mysore Kingdom , governed by the Wodeyar family , initially served as a vassal state of the Vijayanagara Empire . With the decline of the Vijayanagara Empire after the Battle of Talikota in 1565 , the Mysore Kingdom gradually achieved independence , and by the time of King Narasaraja Wodeyar ( 1637 ) it had become a sovereign state . Seringapatam ( modern @-@ day Srirangapatna ) , near Mysore , was the capital of the kingdom from 1610 . The 17th century saw a steady expansion of its territory and , under Narasaraja Wodeyar I and Chikka Devaraja Wodeyar , the kingdom annexed large expanses of what is now southern Karnataka and parts of Tamil Nadu , to become a powerful state in the southern Deccan . 
 The kingdom reached the height of its military power and dominion in the latter half of the 18th century under the de facto rulers Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan . The latter demolished parts of Mysore to remove legacies of the Wodeyar dynasty . During this time , Mysore kingdom came into conflict with the Marathas , the British and the Nizam of Golconda , leading to the four Anglo @-@ Mysore wars , success in the first two of which was followed by defeat in the third and fourth . After Tipu Sultan 's death in the Fourth Anglo @-@ Mysore War in 1799 , the capital of the kingdom was moved back to Mysore from Seringapatam , and the kingdom was distributed by the British to their allies of the Fourth Mysore war . The landlocked interior of the previous Mysore Kingdom was turned into a princely state under the suzerainty of the British Crown . The former Wodeyar rulers were reinstated as puppet monarchs , now styled Maharajas . The British administration was assisted locally by Diwan ( chief minister ) Purnaiah . Purnaiah is credited with improving Mysore 's public works . Mysore lost its status as the administrative centre of the kingdom in 1831 , when the British commissioner moved the capital to Bangalore . It regained that status in 1881 and remained the capital of the Princely State of Mysore within the British Indian Empire until India became independent in 1947 . 
 The Mysore municipality was established in 1888 and the city was divided into eight wards . In 1897 an outbreak of bubonic plague killed nearly half of the population of the city . With the establishment of the City Improvement Trust Board ( <unk> ) in 1903 , Mysore became one of the first cities in Asia to undertake planned development of the city . Public demonstrations and meetings were held there during the Quit India movement and other phases of the Indian independence movement . 
 After Indian independence , Mysore city remained as part of the Mysore State , now known as Karnataka . <unk> Wodeyar , then king of Mysore , was allowed to retain his titles and was nominated as the <unk> ( appointed governor ) of the state . He died in September 1974 and was cremated in Mysore city . Over the years , Mysore became well known as a centre for tourism ; the city remained largely peaceful , except for occasional riots related to the Kaveri river water dispute . Among the events that took place in Mysore and made national headlines were a fire at a television studio that claimed 62 lives in 1989 , and the sudden deaths of many animals at the Mysore Zoo . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Mysore is located at 12 @.@ 30 ° N 74 @.@ 65 ° E ﻿ / 12 @.@ 30 ; 74 @.@ 65 and has an average altitude of 770 metres ( 2 @,@ 526 ft ) . It is spread across an area of 128 @.@ 42 km2 ( 50 sq mi ) at the base of the Chamundi Hills in the southern region of Karnataka . Mysore is the southern @-@ most city of Karnataka , and is a neighbouring city of the states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu in the south , flanked by the state cities Mercara , <unk> , and Mandya . People in and around Mysore extensively use Kannada as medium of language . Mysore has several lakes , such as the <unk> , the <unk> , and the <unk> lakes . In 2001 , total land area usage in Mysore city was 39 @.@ 9 % residential , 16 @.@ 1 % roads , 13 @.@ 74 % parks and open spaces , 13 @.@ 48 % industrial , 8 @.@ 96 % public property , 3 @.@ 02 % commercial , 2 @.@ 27 % agriculture and 2 @.@ 02 water . The city is located between two rivers : the Kaveri River that flows through the north of the city and the Kabini River , a tributary of the Kaveri , that lies to the south . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Mysore has a tropical savanna climate designated Aw under the Köppen climate classification . The main seasons are summer from March to June , the monsoon season from July to November and winter from December to February . The highest temperature recorded in Mysore was 39 @.@ 4 ° C ( 103 ° F ) on 4 April 1914 , and the lowest was 7 @.@ 7 ° C ( 46 ° F ) on 16 January 2012 . The city 's average annual rainfall is 804 @.@ 2 mm ( 31 @.@ 7 in ) . 
 = = Administration and utilities = = 
 The civic administration of the city is managed by the Mysore City Corporation , which was established as a municipality in 1888 and converted into a corporation in 1977 . Overseeing engineering works , health , sanitation , water supply , administration and taxation , the corporation is headed by a mayor , who is assisted by commissioners and council members . The city is divided into 65 wards and the council members ( also known as corporators ) are elected by the citizens of Mysore every five years . The council members in turn elect the mayor . The annual budget of the Corporation for the year 2011 – 2012 was ₹ 426 @.@ 96 crore ( US $ 63 @.@ 45 million ) . Among 63 cities covered under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission , Mysore City Corporation was adjudged the second best city municipal corporation and was given the " Nagara Ratna " award in 2011 . 
 Urban growth and expansion is managed by the Mysore Urban Development Authority ( MUDA ) , which is headed by a commissioner . Its activities include developing new layouts and roads , town planning and land acquisition . One of the major projects undertaken by MUDA is the creation of an Outer Ring Road to ease traffic congestion . Citizens of Mysore have criticised MUDA for its inability to prevent land mafias and ensure lawful distribution of housing lands among city residents . The Chamundeshwari Electricity Supply Corporation is responsible for electric supply to the city . 
 Drinking water for Mysore is sourced from the Kaveri and Kabini rivers . The city got its first piped water supply when the <unk> project was commissioned in 1896 . As of 2011 , Mysore gets 42 @.@ 5 million gallons water per day . Mysore sometimes faces water crises , mainly during the summer months ( March – June ) and in years of low rainfall . The city has had an underground drainage system since 1904 . The entire sewage from the city drains into four valleys : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . In an exercise carried out by the Urban Development Ministry under the national urban sanitation policy , Mysore was rated the second cleanest city in India in 2010 and the cleanest in Karnataka . 
 The citizens of Mysore elect four representatives to the Legislative assembly of Karnataka through the constituencies of Chamaraja , Krishnaraja , <unk> and Chamundeshwari . Mysore city , being part of the larger Mysore Lok Sabha constituency , also elects one member to the Lok Sabha , the lower house of the Indian Parliament . The politics in the city is dominated by three political parties : the Indian National Congress ( INC ) , the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) , and the Janata Dal ( Secular ) ( JDS ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the provisional results of the 2011 census of India , Mysore had a population of 887 @,@ 446 , consisting of 443 @,@ 813 males and 443 @,@ 633 females , making it the third most populous city in Karnataka . The gender ratio of the city is 1000 females to every 1000 males and the population density is 6 @,@ 910 @.@ 5 per square kilometre ( 17 @,@ 898 / sq mi ) . According to the census of 2001 , 76 @.@ 8 % of <unk> are Hindus , 19 % are Muslims , 2 @.@ 8 % are Christians , and the remainder belong to other religions . The population exceeded 100 @,@ 000 in the census of 1931 and grew by 20 @.@ 5 per cent in the decade 1991 – 2001 . As of 2011 , the literacy rate of the city is 86 @.@ 84 per cent , which is higher than the state 's average of 75 @.@ 6 per cent . Kannada is the most widely spoken language in the city . Approximately 19 % of the population live below the poverty line , and 9 % live in slums . According to the 2001 census , 35 @.@ 75 % of the population in the urban areas of Karnataka are workers , but only 33 @.@ 3 % of the population of Mysore are . Members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled tribes constitute 15 @.@ 1 % of the population . According to the National Crime Records Bureau of India , the number of cognisable crime incidents reported in Mysore during 2010 was 3 @,@ 407 ( second in the state , after Bangalore 's 32 @,@ 188 ) , increasing from 3 @,@ 183 incidents reported in 2009 . 
 The residents of the city are known as <unk> in English and <unk> in Kannada . The dispute between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu over the sharing of Kaveri river water often leads to minor altercations and demonstrations in the city . Growth in the information technology industry in Mysore has led to a change in the city 's demographic profile ; likely strains on the infrastructure and haphazard growth of the city resulting from the demographic change have been a cause of concern for some of its citizens . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Tourism is the major industry in Mysore . The city attracted about 3 @.@ 15 million tourists in 2010 . Mysore has traditionally been home to industries such as weaving , sandalwood carving , bronze work and the production of lime and salt . The planned industrial growth of the city and the state was first envisaged at the Mysore economic conference in 1911 . This led to the establishment of industries such as the Mysore Sandalwood Oil Factory in 1917 and the Sri <unk> Mills in 1920 . 
 For the industrial development of the city , the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board ( <unk> ) has established four industrial areas in and around Mysore , in the <unk> , <unk> , Hebbal and <unk> areas . One of the major industrial in the proximity of Mysore is Nanjangud which will be Satellite town to Mysore . Nanjangud industrial area hosts a number of Big industries like Reid and Taylor , <unk> , TVS , Asian Paints . Nanjangud Industrial area also boasts being 2nd highest VAT / Sales Tax payer which is about 400 + crores after <unk> which is in state capital Bangalore . 
 Mysore also hosts many central government organisations like <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , RPM ( Rare Material Project ) , RBI Note printing Press and RBI Paper Printing Press . 
 The growth of the information technology industry in the first decade of the 21st century has resulted in the city emerging as the second largest software exporter in Karnataka , next to Bangalore . The city contributed Rs . 1363 crore ( US $ 275 million ) to Karnataka 's IT exports . 
 Mysore is slowly becoming a consumer city with a very big outside population working with the industries and IT hubs . New housing layouts are appearing every month and the number of supermarkets and other shopping facilities is increasing very fast . Mysore is the cleanest city in India . 
 = = Education = = 
 Before the advent of the European system of education in Mysore , agraharas ( Brahmin quarters ) provided Vedic education to Hindus , and <unk> provided schooling for Muslims . Modern education began in Mysore when a free English school was established in 1833 . Maharaja College was founded in 1864 . A high school exclusively for girls was established in 1881 and later converted into the Maharani 's Women 's College . The Industrial School , the first institute for technical education in the city , was established in 1892 ; this was followed by the Chamarajendra Technical Institute in 1913 . While the modern system of education was making inroads , colleges such as the Mysore Sanskrit college , established in 1876 , continued to provide Vedic education . Vivekananda Institute , Mysore is an international organisation giving training to Indians and foreigners in development management . 
 The education system was enhanced by the establishment of the University of Mysore in 1916 , making it the first outside the British administration in India . Other important institutes are <unk> , <unk> School of Business ( founded in 2011 ) and Mysore Medical College . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Referred to as the cultural capital of South Karnataka , Mysore is well known for the festivities that take place during the period of Dasara , the state festival of Karnataka . The Dasara festivities , which are celebrated over a ten @-@ day period , were first introduced by King Raja Wodeyar I in 1610 . On the ninth day of Dasara , called Mahanavami , the royal sword is worshipped and is taken on a procession of decorated elephants , camels and horses . On the tenth day , called Vijayadashami , the traditional Dasara procession ( locally known as <unk> <unk> ) is held on the streets of Mysore which usually falls in the month of September or October .. the Idol of the Goddess Chamundeshwari is placed on a golden mantapa on the back of a decorated elephant and taken on a procession , accompanied by tabla , dance groups , music bands , decorated elephants , horses and camels . The procession starts from the Mysore Palace and culminates at a place called <unk> , where the <unk> tree ( Prosopis <unk> ) is worshipped . The Dasara festivities culminate on the night of Vijayadashami with a torchlight parade , known locally as <unk> <unk> . 
 Mysore is called the City of Palaces because of several ornate examples in the city . Among the most notable are Amba Vilas , popularly known as Mysore Palace ; <unk> Palace , which also serves as an art gallery ; Rajendra Vilas , also known as the summer palace ; Lalitha Mahal , which has been converted into a hotel ; and Jayalakshmi Vilas . The main palace of Mysore was burned down in 1897 , and the present @-@ day structure was built on the same site . Amba Vilas palace exhibits an Indo @-@ Saracenic style of architecture on the outside , but a distinctly Hoysala style in the interior . Even though the Government of Karnataka maintains the Mysore palace , a small portion has been allocated for the erstwhile Royal family to live in . The Jayalakshmi Vilas Mansion was constructed by Sri Chamaraja Wodeyar for his daughter <unk> . It is now a museum dedicated to folk culture and artefacts of the royal family . 
 The Mysore painting style is an offshoot of the Vijayanagar school of painting , and King Raja Wodeyar ( 1578 – 1617 CE ) is credited with having been its patron . The distinctive feature of these paintings is the gesso work , to which gold foil is applied . Mysore is known for rosewood inlay work ; around 4 @,@ 000 craftsmen were estimated to be involved in this art in 2002 . The city lends its name to the Mysore silk saree , a women 's garment made with pure silk and gold <unk> ( thread ) . Mysore Peta , the traditional indigenous turban worn by the erstwhile rulers of Mysore , is worn by men in some traditional ceremonies . A notable local dessert that traces its history to the kitchen in the Mysore palace is Mysore pak . 
 Mysore is the location of the International <unk> Research Centre , which researches the ancient card game <unk> and the art associated with it . The Chamarajendra Academy of Visual Arts ( <unk> ) offers education in visual art forms such as painting , graphics , sculpture , applied art , photography , photojournalism and art history . The <unk> repertory company performs plays and offers certificate courses in subjects related to theatre . Kannada writers Kuvempu , Gopalakrishna <unk> and U. R. <unk> were educated in Mysore and served as professors at the Mysore University . R. K. Narayan , a popular English @-@ language novelist and creator of the fictional town of Malgudi , and his cartoonist brother R. K. Laxman spent much of their life in Mysore . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Road = = = 
