 The 1893 New York hurricane , also known as the Midnight Storm , was a powerful and destructive tropical cyclone that struck the New York City area in August 1893 . First identified as a tropical storm on August 15 , over the central Atlantic Ocean , the hurricane moved northwestward for most of its course , ultimately peaking with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure reading of 952 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 11 inHg ) . It turned due northward as it approached the U.S. East Coast and struck western Long Island on August 24 . It moved inland and quickly deteriorated , degenerating the next day . 
 The storm inflicted severe damage with storm tides as high as 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) . Trees were brought down , houses were demolished , and Hog Island was largely washed away by the cyclone . Several areas suffered extensive effects from the hurricane , and at least 34 sailors lost their lives . The storm is regarded as one of the most severe hurricanes to strike the city . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The system was first classified as a tropical storm while situated in the central Atlantic Ocean on August 15 , 1893 . It steadily intensified as it tracked generally toward the west and attained hurricane force . Gradually curving northwestward , the storm continued to gain power and , on August 18 , it achieved wind speeds corresponding to Category 2 intensity on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . This scale was devised in 1971 to categorize tropical cyclones based on their maximum sustained winds . The storm is estimated to have maintained winds of approximately 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) for several days as it passed well to the north of the Lesser Antilles . As the hurricane turned more northerly still , approaching the United States , it strengthened to major hurricane intensity , Category 3 , on August 22 . At this point , it peaked in intensity with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . The lowest known barometric pressure in relation to the storm was 952 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 11 inHg ) . 
 Less than a day later , the storm deteriorated to Category 2 strength . Cape Hatteras , North Carolina experienced the hurricane on the morning of August 23 while its center passed less than 100 mi ( 160 km ) offshore . Heading nearly due northward , the cyclone skimmed the New Jersey coastline , passing just east of Atlantic City , and weakened further to Category 1 status . On August 23 the storm was one of four hurricanes occurring simultaneously within the Atlantic Ocean . On August 24 the storm moved ashore on western Long Island , in the New York City area . At 1200 UTC that day , while centered just inland , its maximum winds were estimated to have been 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . It progressed northward through New England , quickly weakening . It was briefly downgraded to a tropical storm before becoming extratropical . It dissipated fully on August 25 , near the mouth of the Saint Lawrence River . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Winds from the storm exceeded 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) at Atlantic City and New York , initially blowing from the northeast before shifting southwesterly . The hurricane wrought severe destruction , described by The New York Times on August 25 as " a mighty war of winds and a great tumbling of chimneys " . A 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) storm surge impacted the shore , demolishing structures . The storm has been cited as an example of a noteworthy New York City tropical cyclone . The cyclone is known for largely destroying Hog Island , a developed island that existed south of the modern @-@ day Long Island coast . The island peaked in size during the 1870s at about 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long . 
 The worst of the damage was reportedly confined to a 50 mi ( 80 km ) area surrounding New York City . In a 24 @-@ hour period , 3 @.@ 82 in ( 97 mm ) of precipitation fell , breaking the daily rainfall record . Hundreds of thousands of dollars in losses accompanied the severe impact . Low @-@ lying areas of the city , particularly those near the coast , were flooded . Roofs and chimneys were ripped off buildings and windows were broken in many homes and businesses . In Central Park , " More than a hundred noble trees were torn up by the roots , and branches were twisted off everywhere . " The park was devastated and thousands of dead birds fell to the ground after being washed out of , or drowned in , their nests . Groups of children gathered the birds and picked them up , with the apparent intention of selling them to restaurants . The storm took the lives of 34 sailors as vessels were blown ashore and men swept overboard . The tugboat Panther , towing two coal barges , was wrecked ; 17 crew members perished and three lived . 
 High winds brought down telegraph wires and left the city almost entirely cut off from communication with outside locations . At Coney Island , the storm completely destroyed many buildings , walkways , piers , and beach resorts . Brighton Beach was hit particularly hard . The raging seas swept inland , washing out tracks of the Marine Railway . Bathing houses were moved a great distance by the cyclone . Near the Sheepshead Bay , Emmons Avenue was heavily damaged . Further to the east , at Greenport , numerous yachts were wrecked and scattered . Corn crops on land were ruined and fruit trees lost their fruits . 
 At Brooklyn , still an independent city from New York , houses were dismantled and uprooted trees blocked streets . Damage was widespread throughout the area and flood waters reached waist @-@ high levels . The storm was the most severe in years at Jersey City , New Jersey , despite the fact that its damage was moderate . Trees were blown down and cellars filled with water there and in nearby areas , such as Hoboken . 
 Many of the same areas along the Eastern seaboard , including New Jersey and New York , already reeling from this storm , would be ravaged again less than a week later by the separate and even more destructive Sea Islands Hurricane that made landfall in Georgia on August 27 and then moved up the coast , causing extensive damage and casualties as far north as New England , before finally dissipating over eastern Canada on September 2 . 
 = History of Fremantle Prison = 
 The history of Fremantle Prison , a former Australian prison in Fremantle , Western Australia , extends from its construction as a prison for convicts , using convict labour , in the 1850s , through to its modern @-@ day usage as a tourist attraction . The design for Fremantle Prison was based on the Pentonville Prison in Britain , and it would be the longest , tallest prison cell block in the southern hemisphere . Construction began in 1851 , and was completed by the end of 1859 . The prison was transferred to the colonial government in 1886 for use for locally sentenced prisoners . Following a Royal Commission held in 1898 − 99 , some changes were made to Fremantle Prison , including knocking down the inner wall between two cells , introducing a prisoner classification system , and constructing internal walls in the main block to create four separate divisions . A new cell block , New Division , was completed in 1907 and occupied in 1908 . 
 Following another Royal Commission investigation 1911 , there were some rapid changes in prison policy . A new superintendent with outside experience , Hugh Hann , was appointed , and supported by the newly elected Labor government interested in penal reform . Fremantle Prison was partially used as a military gaol during both world wars . The World War II takeover necessitated the commissioning of Barton 's Mill Prison in 1942 , which remained opened after the war . Pardelup Prison Farm was another prison outstation established in 1927 to reduce overcrowding at Fremantle . Both facilities were part of reforms made to the prison system , but significant changes to the operation of Fremantle Prison did not begin until the 1960s . Comptroller General Colin Campbell introduced expedient prisoner assessments , officer training , work release programs , and social workers and welfare officers . 
 The government department in charge of the prison underwent several reorganisations in the 1970s and 1980s , but the culture of Fremantle Prison was resistant to change . Growing prisoner discontent culminated in a 1988 riot with guards taken hostage , and a fire that caused $ 1 @.@ 8 million worth of damage . The prison closed in 1991 , replaced by the new maximum @-@ security Casuarina Prison . Since 1991 , the prison has been conserved as a recognised heritage site on state , national , and World Heritage lists , and various restoration works have been undertaken since the 1990s . New uses have been found for various sections of the prison , including a New Business Enterprise Centre in the New Division cell block , and wedding ceremonies in the prison chapels . It has also become a significant tourist attraction , with guided tours since 1991 . 
 = = 19th century = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Within a few months of the founding of the Swan River Colony in June 1829 by free @-@ settlers , there was a need for a prison to incarcerate criminals . There was little infrastructure for the settlers , let alone criminals , so the shipwrecked Marquis of <unk> , just off the coast from South Beach , was used as a makeshift prison . This arrangement was quite arduous for the sheriff , who spent much of his time rowing a small boat , either to transfer prisoners or bring over their meals . It was not until September 1830 that work started on a new prison at the west end of High Street : the twelve @-@ sided Round House on Arthur Head . 
 While the Swan River Colony was established as a " free settlement " , by the 1840s the early reluctance to accept Britain 's convicts was overcome . Cheap convict labour could overcome the significant shortage of manpower in the colony . However , the arrival of the first convict ship Scindian on 2 June 1850 was unexpected . While a sailing ship had been sent ahead to inform of the pending arrival of seventy @-@ five convicts , it had been blown off course . The Round House was full to capacity , almost overflowing , so the convicts had to be left on the ship . There was also no prepared accommodation for the warders , pensioner guards , Captain Edward Walcott Henderson , Comptroller General of Convicts , or his clerk , James Manning . Rents for accommodation in Fremantle quickly rose due to the sudden increase in demand , leaving Henderson paying more for his basic lodgings in Fremantle than for his house in London . 
 Eventually Henderson leased two properties in Essex Street for £ 250 per year , at the site of the modern @-@ day Esplanade Hotel . He used his convicts to convert the buildings into a temporary prison . Meanwhile , Henderson was looking for a site to build a permanent convict establishment . Whilst he favoured Mount Eliza due to its height , which gave it pleasing vistas and supposedly healthier air , Governor Charles Fitzgerald rejected that proposal . Henderson ultimately settled on the current site on a hill overlooking Fremantle . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Henderson 's initial design for Fremantle Prison was based on the Pentonville Prison in Britain . Pentonville , designed by Joshua Jebb , used the " separate system " that kept prisoners in nearly complete isolation , to encourage reflection on their crimes . Jebb reviewed Henderson 's plans in 1851 , and to reduce the cost , he changed the two diagonal cell blocks that mimicked Pentonville into a four @-@ storey linear structure , which would be the longest , tallest prison cell block in the southern hemisphere . Construction began soon afterwards , supervised by Henderson , Manning , and Royal Engineer lieutenant Henry Wray , who had arrived with another convict ship . Within eighteen months of the Scindian ' s arrival , the convict population had grown to almost 1000 . In 1855 convicts began to be moved into The Establishment , as the prison was then known as , but the project would not be completed until 1859 . 
 Works rapidly progressed following the arrival of Wray in 1851 with the Royal Engineers , known as the sappers . They trained convicts to work with limestone , which was quarried on @-@ site . Soft stone was used to fill in swamps around Fremantle , and when the better quality stone ran out , quarries were opened at nearby sites such as Arthur Head . The first part to be constructed was a ramp connecting the town to the prison site . The graded and limestone @-@ capped slope would later become Fairbairn Street . Once this was completed , the priority was the construction of accommodation for Henderson and the prison warders to relieve the expense of paying for private lodging . Cottages were built along Henderson Street in 1851 , and Henderson 's residence , a sizable building known as The Knowle , was completed in 1851 some distance away from the other buildings , in the modern @-@ day grounds of Fremantle Hospital . Houses for the senior staff were also constructed in the 1850s . They were situated at the front of the prison site , along the road then known as The Esplanade ( modern day The Terrace ) . 
 Workshops , later to be known as the East Workshops , were built to rehabilitate prisoners , and aid in site construction . A blacksmith 's shop was constructed in 1852 , and a carpenters ’ shop was added in 1858 . The prison was designed to have other services onsite , including a kitchen , with four boilers , scullery , pantry , cool room and stores ; a bakehouse and ovens , with separate stores for flour and bread ; as well as a washhouse , laundry and drying room . The building holding these services was completed in 1855 . A separate building , a hospital providing medical services , was also planned , but was one of the last to be constructed . The foundations were laid in 1857 , but the plans were changed the next year to provide additional space to isolate contagious or dangerous patients . The hospital was finished in 1859 . 
 The prison walls were constructed beginning in 1853 , and the site for the Main Cell Block was excavated and levelled . Once the walls were completed in 1855 , the only opening was in the western side . This gap was where the gatehouse and associated entry complex was built in 1854 and 1855 . The main gate was in place in 1855 , while the London @-@ made clock for the top of the structure was installed a year later . In 1856 , a mini tornado toppled most of the northern boundary wall , and extensive work was undertaken to rebuild and widen the walls . 
 The Main Cell Block was built in two stages . Construction of the southern half of the block began in 1853 and most of the masonry works were finished within a year . The section was finished in 1855 , including the association wards , a circular jarrah stairwell , and 18 solitary confinement cells in the Refractory Block . However , iron fittings for the guardrails , which had been ordered from England three years previously , still had not arrived . Anxious for the new cell block to start being used , Henderson ordered that doors and rails be made locally , with iron salvaged from convict transport ships . The obvious transition between the local and imported railing now marks the boundary between the southern and northern wings . Prisoners were transferred from the temporary South Beach prison on 1 June 1855 . 
 Construction of the northern wing followed , and by the start of 1857 the foundations were laid , and 40 % of the masonry works were done . However , the Crimean War saw the Royal Engineers recalled , leaving only Wray – as Acting Comptroller General , while Henderson was on leave in England – to oversee the prisoners ' construction of the building . Much of the work was completed that year , including the remaining masonry , basement , slating the roof , and paving the corridor . While Henderson had wanted single cells , Wray conceded to the Governor 's lobbying for additional capacity . He adjusted the design to include some double @-@ width cells housing three prisoners , and triple @-@ width cells holding five prisoners , allowing an additional 40 prisoners to be accommodated . Another measure that increased capacity was the lengthening of the northern wing by six feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . The justification was to mirror the southern wing , which had also been constructed six feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) longer than planned , due to inaccurate surveying . However , this also caused the project to run over budget . Stairs , guard railings , and doors were installed in 1858 , and the prison was completed by the end of 1859 , with Henderson back from leave and back in charge . 
 = = = Transition to local control = = = 
 During Western Australia 's convict era , the prison was known as the Convict Establishment , and was used for convicts transported from Britain . Longer term local prisoners were also held there from 1858 , at a cost to the colonial government , as the then @-@ newly constructed Perth Gaol had been handed over to the British imperial government for use as a convict station for short term prisoners . Local prisoners were also been kept in the Round House , or on Rottnest Island . In 1876 Perth Gaol was transferred back to local control . 
 In 1868 , penal transportation ceased in Western Australia , and numbers of convicts in the colony gradually declined , down to 83 in the mid @-@ 1880s . Due to the great expense of sending these convicts back to Britain , the authorities there negotiated with the colonial government to transfer control of the convicts , as well as the prison complex – demolition was considered too expensive . Early negotiations had broken down , but were restarted in August 1883 . Governor Broome set four conditions in February 1884 : 
 The last two conditions were the most controversial , though after one and a half years , a compromise was reached : only buildings actually in use would be repaired , and pensions would be paid , but only when the officers actually retired . The British authorities authorised minimal repairs , to be made as cheaply as possible . The transfer was intended to be completed by the end of 1885 , but was not finalised until 31 March 1886 . 
 Once the prison came under the control of the colonial government , it was renamed Fremantle Prison . All prisoners in Perth Gaol were transferred to Fremantle , and from 1887 female prisoners were also imprisoned there . The women were initially held in the hospital building , and then in their own walled @-@ off section of the prison , with cells in the kitchen and wash house buildings . The women were tasked with washing and mending prisoners ' clothing , which was considered hard work . 
 = = = First Royal Commission = = = 
 The Western Australian gold rushes of the 1890s resulted in strong economic growth , and a massive increase in population : doubling from almost 50 @,@ 000 in 1891 to more than 100 @,@ 000 by 1895 , and expanding to 184 @,@ 000 by 1901 . The influx included desperate , dishonest people , from elsewhere in Australia and overseas , and Fremantle Prison was soon overcrowded . 
 The 1890s also saw a growing public unease with the treatment of prisoners . Newspaper articles on mistreatment on prisoners persisted through the late 1890s , and reform campaigners – most notably former Queensland prisoner Frederick Vosper – called for a Royal Commission . In September 1898 such an enquiry was established by the governor of Western Australia to investigate the colony 's penal system . The commission heard evidence from almost 240 witnesses , including a range of prisoners . Three reports were made between December 1898 and June 1899 . The first of these dealt with the most recognisable and prominent issues regarding classification , sentencing , prison punishments and offences , diet , and " the special problems of remand , youthful and lunatic prisoners " . The second report examined cases where " the exercise of the Royal Prerogative of mercy " might be appropriate , while the final , detailed report covered the remaining evidence presented to the commission . In particular , they considered the philosophy of the prison system – the causes of crime , as well as the types of punishments and their justifications – and in light of this , the practicality of various reform proposals . 
 The royal commission 's third report also dealt with prison administration . It found that the prison was operating under outdated legislation , with little regulation or written guidance , and that there was <unk> in administration – the positions of sheriff and inspector of prisons were held by one man , James Roe , who lived in Perth , with the prison 's superintendent , William George , taking on much of the management responsibility . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 = = = Implementation of Royal Commission recommendations = = = 
 Within a year of the enquiry , almost 100 cells had been enlarged by knocking down the inner wall between two cells , and a classification system was introduced . Internal walls were constructed in the main block , creating four separate divisions : 
 One Division , for " debtors , trials and <unk> , and juveniles " ( up to 25 years old ) 
 Two Division , for " short sentenced first offenders , petty thieves , drunkards , and vagrants " 
 Three Division , for " long sentenced and habitual prisoners " 
 Four Division , for reformatory prisoners – " cooks , bakers , cleaners , and orderlies " 
 Following the urgings of Superintendent George and various official enquiries , new workshops were built to provide increased useful employment for prisoners . The western workshops , located between the entry complex and the Female Division , were built from 1900 – 1901 of squared limestone rubble with openings dressed in brick . An open saw @-@ tooth roof with southern skylights covered the five spaces designed for the five traditional workshops : tailors , bookbinders , shoemakers , mat makers and painters . The two northern shops were later amalgamated by removing the dividing wall . 
 Further action was not taken until 1902 , when new regulations for prison officers were published in the Government Gazette . A new Prison Act was passed in 1903 , replacing sixteen previous acts . It provided for classification of prisoners , provision of adequate work for prisoners , and the creation of the position of comptroller general of prisons , to assume the functions the sheriff had undertaken as inspector of prisons . While in theory the passing of the act should have been a landmark moment in prison reform , this did not eventuate . The legislation left much of the changes to executive regulation , at the discretion of the governor , and was described by the media as a feeble document . Other problems included Fremantle Prison 's inscrutability for classification , due to its design , and that the sheriff was allowed to hold the office of comptroller general of prisons , effectively making it no more than a change in name . 
 New Division , completed in 1907 and occupied in 1908 , resulted from the 1899 Commissioners ' report recommending a modified version of the separate system . The new division , built by contractors with stone from quarries at Rottnest Island , was similar in design to Henderson 's 1850s structure , but was constructed in an L @-@ shape , was only three stories tall , and had electric lighting , with cables laid underground for safety as well as aesthetics . It also differed in its use from the main cell block . Unlike the earlier building , prisoners remained continuously in their somewhat enlarged cells , except when exercised in separate yards watched by a warder in a central tower . The 30 unit radial , panopticon @-@ style exercise yard became known as the " cage " . The concept of the separate system was already over sixty years old when introduced to Fremantle . 
 = = = Second Royal Commission = = = 
 By 1908 there were calls for another Royal Commission into Western Australia 's penal system . Truth newspaper repeatedly criticised Fremantle Prison between 1903 and 1910 , with much of the blame placed on the comptroller general and superintendent . Allegations included that new offenders still were not separated from older ones , that regulations were systemically broken , and that prisoners were not paid for the work they did . 
 In 1911 another Royal Commission investigation into Fremantle Prison recommended closing the facility . Its report was ignored by the state government , which was more concerned with building infrastructure such as roads and schools , rather than the plight of its prisoners . However , there was a rapid change in prison policy , with the appointment of a superintendent , Hugh Hann , who had recent English and colonial experience , and the election of a Labor government with members interested in penal reform . One immediate result was the dismantling of the separate system at Fremantle Prison and the demolition of the separate exercise yards in 1912 . It shares with <unk> Special Security Unit in New South Wales the record for brevity of use of a permanent Australian penal structure . 
 = = = Military gaol = = = 
 Fremantle Prison was partially used as a military gaol during both world wars . During World War II , the Australian Army took over the prison and used it as a military prison from 1940 until 1946 . It was used for the detention of military personnel , as well as an internment centre – one of more than 50 across Australia holding a combined total of more than 12 @,@ 000 enemy aliens and prisoners of war . Fremantle accommodated up to 400 military prisoners and up to 160 civilian prisoners by October 1945 . The takeover necessitated the commissioning of Barton 's Mill Prison in 1942 . After the war Fremantle Prison returned to civilian use and a variety of ad hoc structures were erected on and below the knoll terraces . 
 = = = Reform = = = 
 Prison outstations were established as part of the reforms in the 20th century , and to reduce the overcrowding at Fremantle . Pardelup Prison Farm opened in 1927 , near Mount Barker , while Barton 's Mill , though planned to be a temporary measure , remained open as a prison after World War II . Pardelup operated as a working farm , with a large @-@ scale dairy , cattle and pig raising , and crops , and Barton ' Mill prisoners cut timber to supply hospitals , houses , and the Goldfields Water Supply Scheme 's pumping station at Mundaring . In both cases , the only aspects resembling a prison were the presence of guards , and the compulsion to remain there – enforced by the remoteness of the facilities and the integrity of prisoners chosen to be transferred there . Escapees were generally punished with extended sentences at the harsher Fremantle Prison , which had little change over the four decades from 1920 to 1960 . 
 Significant reform to Western Australia 's prison system – new prisons , legislation , and administration – did not begin until the 1960s , lagging behind those that occurred in Europe , North America , and elsewhere in Australia after World War II . Seven new prisons were opened between 1960 and 1971 , including a maximum @-@ security facility at Albany , following an abrupt increase in the prisoner population in the mid- to late @-@ 1950s . In 1970 , female prisoners and staff were moved from Fremantle to the new Bandyup Women 's Prison , built at Bandyup on the outskirts of Perth . The female division , which had been the only women 's prison in Western Australia , was subsequently used for male prisoners . New legislation regarding probation , parole , and convicted drunkards was also introduced , which provided alternatives to imprisonment . With these new arrangements , and more variety in prisons and prison types , a classification board was set up in 1963 to assess prisoners . 
 The appointment of Colin Campbell as comptroller general in 1966 fostered substantial changes within Fremantle Prison itself . A university graduate with a major in psychology , he was the first senior appointment from outside the Western Australian prison system in almost half a century . He viewed prison as " a place for rehabilitation and re @-@ education ... where people can retain their identity and , if necessary , create a new identity " . One of his first changes was to make himself chairman of the classification committee , and clear its backlog of prisoners awaiting assessment through more frequent committee meetings . Campbell also established an officer training school , as well as an assessment centre , where new prisoners worked , supervised by specially trained officers who gave reports to the classification committee . Following international trends , Campbell introduced work release and community service programs , training programs for both prisoners and officers , and social workers and welfare officers to assist prisoners and their families during and after their imprisonment . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The 1970s and 1980s saw numerous changes at a departmental level , and adjustments in the roles and responsibilities of the state 's prison system . In 1971 , within the midst of Campbell 's reforms , the Prisons Department was renamed the Department of Corrections , and restructured into three divisions : Treatment and Training Branch , Correctional Psychiatric Branch , and Establishments Branch . The position of comptroller general was replaced with director of the department . William Kidston succeeded Campbell following his death in 1977 . Amidst growing prisoner numbers , Kidston oversaw a shift in policy from " paternalistic rehabilitation " of prisoners to merely providing opportunities for rehabilitation . The department was reorganised , with the Treatment and Training Branch becoming the Support Services Branch , with other branches for administration , institutions , and prison industries . 
 A new Prisons Act was passed in 1981 , which updated the 1903 act and its eleven amendments with modern philosophies and practices – codifying departmental orders , instructions , and policy documents . The act was , however , slanted towards prisoner management and safety , as the government and opposition were mindful of public opinion , and the perception of lax security at Fremantle . The result was legislation criticised by the Criminal Lawyers Association , academics , and newspapers , including for minimal welfare provisions that did little to ensure prisoner welfare . The department was at the same time renamed the Prisons Department once more , to emphasise imprisonment as its primary responsibility . 
 Ian Hill became director of the Prisons Department in 1983 , and reorganised the department several times , striving for greater " economy , efficiency , and effectiveness " . This included a merge with the Office of Probation and Parole in 1986 , resulting in the Department of Corrective Services . By 1987 , the department 's welfare division was disbanded , with prison officers made responsible for prisoner welfare . Whilst the changes of the 1980s were effective throughout most of Western Australia 's prison system , the culture of Fremantle Prison was resistant to change . Growing prisoner discontent eventually culminated in the 1988 prison riot . 
 = = = Later enquiries = = = 
 In 1972 a Royal Commission was appointed to investigate mistreatment of and discrimination against Aboriginal prisoners . Its 1973 report found that there was not " any appreciable discrimination against <unk> or part <unk> " ; however , racial stereotypes are present throughout the report , testimony of Aboriginal prisoners was considered unreliable , and the conclusion was predictable as a " validation of the actions or policies of ... government officials " . The report made recommendations regarding various aspects of prison life , including additional , independent , trained welfare officers . 
 In 1988 , an enquiry investigated the Fremantle Prison riot that occurred at the start of the year . The report suggested that little evidence supported the escape plan theory reported by the media , but that the riot was largely the result of an incident of that morning involving the mistreatment of a prisoner and his subsequent release into Three Division yard . 
 = = Closure = = 
 The state government made the decision to decommission Fremantle Prison in 1983 , but it remained in operation until 30 November 1991 . Prisoners were moved to a new metropolitan maximum security prison at Casuarina and the prison was transferred to the Building Management Authority . There were divergent views in the community over the site 's future : some wanted it demolished and redeveloped , or turned into gardens with a small monument ; others wanted the historic site to be preserved , but were opposed to turning the misery of prisoners into entertainment for tourists . The ultimate decision was for conservation of the prison , but allowing for the buildings to be adapted for reuse by the community . 
 The Fremantle Prison Trust was established in 1992 to advise the Minister for Works on the management of the site . Various new uses were found for different parts of the prison , including wedding services in the chapels , a Coastal Business Centre in New Division , and the Fremantle Children 's Literature Centre in the hospital ; the prison also became a tourist attraction . A private company organised the tourist operation for ten years under contract , until the end of 2001 ; subsequently , the state government took control . A hostel providing short @-@ stay accommodation in the women 's prison opened in May 2015 . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 = = = Heritage listing = = = 
 Fremantle Prison was listed in the Western Australian Register of Historic Places as an interim entry on 10 January 1992 , and as a permanent entry on 30 June 1995 . Described as the best preserved convict @-@ built prison in the country , it became the first building in Western Australia to be listed on the Australian National Heritage List , in 2005 . The Australian Federal Heritage Minister , Senator Ian Campbell , stated that it would be included in a nomination of eleven convict areas to become World Heritage Sites . Five years later , the prison was one of eleven former convict sites in Australia inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2010 as the Australian Convict Sites . 
 The process of obtaining World Heritage listing focused historical interpretation and conservation efforts on the prison 's convict era , at the expense of its more recent history . These included its use as an internment centre during World War II , and the imprisonment of Aboriginal prisoners . The prioritisation of convict heritage was evident from the first conservation plans from before the prison closed . This aspect became more and more important through later plans by James Semple Kerr , authored in 1992 and reviewed in 1998 , and subsequently in the state government 's masterplan , released in December 2000 . The convict @-@ era focus is reflected in the branding of the tourist experience as " Fremantle Prison – the Convict Establishment " , and through restorations which , while necessary to prevent damage and deterioration , strip away the site 's recent history . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Various parts of Fremantle Prison have had restoration works undertaken since the 1990s , to halt the deterioration of the buildings and preserve them for the future . A total of $ 800 @,@ 000 was spent between 1996 / 97 and 1998 / 99 on works that included restoring the facade of the Anglican chapel . In 2005 , work was undertaken on the restoration of the prison gatehouse area . Non @-@ original rendering was removed and the original stonework was revealed . Work was also completed on the tunnels during 2005 / 06 , and the main cell block was restored with an eighteen @-@ month , $ 1 @.@ 9 million project in 2006 and 2007 . The gallows room was restored in 2013 to conditions at the time of the last execution , in 1964 . 
 = = = Attribution = = = 
 This article incorporates text from the source Australian Heritage Database – Fremantle Prison ( former ) , 1 The Terrace , Fremantle , WA , Australia , which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 3 @.@ 0 Australia licence ( CC @-@ BY 3 @.@ 0 AU ) . Required attribution : © Commonwealth of Australia 2013 . 
 = Joachim Müncheberg = 
 Joachim Müncheberg ( 31 December 1918 – 23 March 1943 ) was a German Luftwaffe military aviator during World War II , a fighter ace credited with 135 enemy aircraft shot down in over 500 combat missions . The majority of his victories were claimed over the Western Front , with 33 claims over the Eastern Front . Of his 102 aerial victories achieved over the Western Allies , 46 were against Supermarine Spitfire fighters . 
 Born in <unk> , Müncheberg , who had strong ambitions as a track and field athlete , volunteered for military service in the Wehrmacht of the Third Reich in 1936 . Initially serving in the Heer ( Army ) , he transferred to the Luftwaffe ( Air Force ) in 1938 . Following flight training , he was posted to Jagdgeschwader 234 ( JG 234 — 234th Fighter Wing ) in October 1938 . He was transferred to Jagdgeschwader 26 " Schlageter " ( JG 26 — 26th Fighter Wing ) a year later and was appointed adjutant of the III . Gruppe ( 3rd Group ) . He fought in the Battle of France and received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross following his 20th aerial victory and during the Battle of Britain . Serving as a Staffelkapitän ( Squadron Leader ) he fought in the aerial battles during the siege of Malta and Balkans Campaign . He received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Italian Gold Medal of Military Valor ( Italian : Medaglia d 'oro al Valore Militare ) after 43 aerial victories . 
 Müncheberg then briefly served in North Africa in support of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps before transferring to France . He was given command of JG 26 's II . Gruppe ( 2nd Group ) in September 1941 and was then posted to Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) , operating on the Eastern Front , in July 1942 . Serving as a Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) in training under JG 51 wing commander Karl @-@ Gottfried Nordmann , he claimed his 100th aerial victory on 5 September 1942 for which he was awarded the Swords ( Schwerter ) to his Knight 's Cross on 9 September , his score then at 103 aerial victories . On 1 October 1942 Müncheberg was given command of Jagdgeschwader 77 ( JG 77 — 77th Fighter Wing ) , operating in the Mediterranean Theatre . He died of wounds following a mid @-@ air collision during combat near <unk> , Tunisia on 23 March 1943 . 
 = = Childhood , education and early career = = 
 Joachim " Jochen " Müncheberg was born on 31 December 1918 in <unk> near <unk> in the Province of Pomerania , at the time a province of the Free State of Prussia . Today it is <unk> in the administrative district of Gmina <unk> , within <unk> County , Poland . He was the second child of Paul Müncheberg , a farmer , and his wife Erika , née Ulrich . His sister Eva @-@ Brigitte was one and a half years older . His father had served as a cavalry officer of the reserves during World War I. The hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic forced his father to sell their farm Friedrichshof in 1923 ; they resettled in Königsberg , where Müncheberg started his elementary schooling ( <unk> ) . His father was able to repurchase their old farm in 1927 and the family moved back to Friedrichshof . Müncheberg completed his elementary school in Falkenburg , Pomerania . He walked or rode on a horse @-@ drawn wagon 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) each way to school . In 1928 he transferred to the Realgymnasium ( a type of secondary school ) in <unk> and graduated with his Abitur ( diploma ) in 1936 . 
 Müncheberg , who was talented in sports and athletics , played football for the T.V. Falkenburg youth team in the early 1930s . He attended the Sturmabteilung @-@ sports school in Hammerstein for a few weeks in 1934 and in 1935 spent his summer vacation in Bulgaria where he , among other places , stayed at the Rila Monastery . In early 1936 he attended a National Socialism course in Lauenburg , Pomerania . He completed his compulsory labour service ( Reichsarbeitsdienst ) in October 1936 with Abteilung ( department ) 5 / 50 in <unk> , district of <unk> . As an athlete , he especially excelled in the decathlon ; almost daily he practised the ten different disciplines . Aged 17 , he attended a summer camp held in conjunction with the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin . 
 In his youth he was keenly interested in flying and other technical things . His interest in flying was kindled by his cousin Hermann <unk> , a pilot during World War I , who often took Müncheberg to the Berlin @-@ Staaken airfield for sightseeing flights . He volunteered for service in the then newly emerging Luftwaffe and started his recruit training on 4 December 1936 in the Heer of the Wehrmacht . Müncheberg spent his 1936 / 37 winter vacation in Altenberg in the <unk> . He then attended the III . Lehrgang ( 3rd training course ) in the 4 . <unk> ( 4th student company ) at the Luftkriegsschule 1 ( 1st Air War School ) in Dresden as a Fahnenjunker ( Officer Applicant ) from 1 April to 30 June 1937 . A year later he completed his flight training there and was promoted to Fähnrich ( Officer Cadet ) on 16 December 1937 . He transferred to the Luftwaffe in 1938 and attended the Jagdfliegerschule ( Fighter Pilot School ) in Werneuchen , under the command of Oberst ( Colonel ) Theodor Osterkamp . He was then posted to I. Gruppe ( 1st group ) of Jagdgeschwader 234 ( JG 234 — 234th Fighter Wing ) stationed at Cologne on 23 September 1938 . He was promoted to Leutnant ( Second Lieutenant ) on 8 November 1938 . 
 While stationed in Cologne , Müncheberg trained for the decathlon at the ASV Köln ( sports club in Cologne ) during his spare time and competed in various national and international track and field events . He even had a training field built on the family estate at Friedrichshof in Pomerania and at the time had strong ambitions to compete in the 1940 Summer Olympics . His commanding officers supported him in this athletic vision and gave him additional time off to practice for the Olympics . Müncheberg owned a dachshund ( Dackel ) , which his mother had bred , named <unk> . The dog accompanied him from the start of World War II until his death on 23 March 1943 . 
 I. / JG 234 was equipped with the Messerschmitt Bf 109 E @-@ 3 in December 1938 and re @-@ designated as I. Gruppe of Jagdgeschwader 26 " Schlageter " ( JG 26 — 26th Fighter Wing ) , named after Albert Leo Schlageter , on 1 May 1939 . Müncheberg was transferred to 11 . Staffel of Lehrgeschwader 2 ( 11 . / LG 2 — 11th squadron of the 2nd Demonstration Wing ) in mid @-@ 1939 . 11 . ( Nacht ) / LG 2 was formed on 1 August 1939 and experimented with night fighting techniques . Only pilots with excellent flying abilities , especially blind flying , were chosen . 
 = = World War II = = 
 World War II in Europe began on Friday 1 September 1939 when German forces invaded Poland . 11 . ( Nacht ) / LG 2 was re @-@ designated to 10 . ( <unk> ) Staffel of Jagdgeschwader 26 which was led by Oberleutnant ( First Lieutenant ) Johannes Steinhoff . III . Gruppe was formed on 23 September 1939 in Werl and Müncheberg was appointed its adjutant . III . Gruppe relocated to Essen @-@ <unk> in early November 1939 during the Phoney War period ( October 1939 – April 1940 ) . From this airfield , he claimed his first victory on 7 November 1939 , a Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Bristol Blenheim Mk . I bomber <unk> of No. 57 Squadron RAF , piloted by Pilot Officer H.R. <unk> . This achievement earned him the Iron Cross 2nd Class on 9 November 1939 . 
 = = = Battle of France = = = 
 The Battle of France , the German invasion of France and the Low Countries , began on 10 May 1940 . II. and III . Gruppe flew close air support missions in support of German airborne landings by the Fallschirmjäger ( paratroopers ) in the Netherlands . Müncheberg filed claim for his second victory on 11 May 1940 when he shot down a Armée de l 'Air ( French Air Force ) Curtiss P @-@ 36 Hawk northwest of Antwerp . On 13 May 1940 , III . Gruppe was moved to München Gladbach , present @-@ day Mönchengladbach , closer to the border with the Netherlands and Belgium . After the surrender of the Netherlands on 17 May 1940 , III . Gruppe moved to Peer in Belgium and again moved on 19 May , this time to Beauvechain near Brussels . 
 Operating from <unk> Air Base from 27 May 1940 , Müncheberg claimed his fifth aerial victory over a Supermarine Spitfire on 29 May 1940 . This achievement earned him the Iron Cross 1st Class . At the time , III . Gruppe was providing fighter escort for Junkers Ju 87 " Stuka " dive bombers and Messerschmitt Bf 110 heavy fighters operating against the beachhead held by British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) in the Battle of Dunkirk . On 4 June 1940 , III . Gruppe relocated to La Capelle near Boulogne . The second and decisive phase , Fall Rot ( Case Red ) , of the Battle of France began on 5 June . Major ( Major ) Adolf Galland was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) of the III . Gruppe on 6 June and Müncheberg became his first adjutant . The Gruppe was again relocated on 13 June , this time to Les <unk> @-@ en @-@ Vexin and on 17 June to Villacoublay near Paris . Müncheberg flew ground support missions against the retreating French forces at the time . France surrendered on 22 June 1940 and III . Gruppe of JG 26 " Schlageter " moved back to München Gladbach in Germany . In total , Müncheberg claimed eight Allied aircraft shot down during the invasion of France , including four on 31 May 1940 , bringing his total to nine . The Gruppe then moved to Döberitz on 1 July to provide fighter protection for Berlin . The time was also used to repair and upgrade the Bf 109 E @-@ 3s to Bf 109 E @-@ 4s . 
 = = = Battle of Britain = = = 
 On 21 July 1940 , JG 26 " Schlageter " received orders to relocate to <unk> in the Nord @-@ Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais in preparation for actions against Britain in what would become the Battle of Britain . Adolf Hitler had issued Führer Directive no . 17 ( Weisung Nr. 17 ) on 1 August 1940 ; the strategic objective was to engage and defeat the RAF to achieve air supremacy , or at least air superiority , in preparation for Operation Sea Lion ( Unternehmen Seelöwe ) , the proposed amphibious invasion of Great Britain . III . Gruppe flew fighter protection for bomber formations attacking allied shipping in the English Channel on 24 July . These missions were referred to as Kanalkampf ( channel combat ) by the Germans . The unit flew its next mission one day later , providing fighter protection for Stuka 's again targeting shipping . Müncheberg , who had been promoted to Oberleutnant on 19 July 1940 , claimed his 10th aerial victory on 28 July when he shot down a No. 257 Squadron Hawker Hurricane 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) northeast of Dover . The claim was made at 15 : 15 . No other German pilot from JG 26 claimed a Hurricane at that time . The only loss suffered by 257 Squadron was Sergeant R.V Forward who bailed out wounded . However , RAF records show he was shot down at 18 : 40 over three hours after Müncheberg 's claim . Müncheberg was credited with his 11th victory on 8 August , claiming a No. 65 Squadron Spitfire piloted by Flight Sergeant Norman T. Phillips shot down . The claim would seem unlikely . The war diary for JG 26 " Schlageter " shows that Müncheberg made his claim at 12 : 55 in the afternoon as did three other pilots . No. 65 Squadron lost only two Spitfires that day , one flown by Phillips . British records show Phillips was killed in action at 10 : 45 in No. 65 Squadron 's first mission of the morning , some three hours earlier . On this day , both the Germans lost 22 aircraft shot down and 23 damaged ; the British lost 16 aircraft shot down and four damaged . Only one III . Gruppe Bf 109 was lost . The only RAF losses occurring at the time of Müncheberg 's claim were two Hurricanes belonging to No. 238 Squadron — Flight Lieutenant <unk> Turner and Flying Officer D.C. McCaw were killed in action at roughly 12 : 30 . 
 III . Gruppe continued to fly combat air patrols over the English Channel on 11 and 12 August , however Müncheberg did not claim any aircraft shot down on these days . The fighting reached a climax on 13 August when Eagle Day was launched ( code name Adlertag ) . Müncheberg claimed a Hurricane shot down from either No. 32 Squadron or No. 615 . Squadron on 14 August . The following day he filed claim for a Spitfire from No. 64 Squadron on 15 August on a fighter escort mission for Kampfgeschwader 1 " Hindenburg " ( 1st Bomber Wing ) and Kampfgeschwader 2 " <unk> " ( 2nd Bomber Wing ) . Galland was appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) of JG 26 " Schlageter " on 22 August 1940 . In consequence , Hauptmann Gerhard Schöpfel , who had led 9 . Staffel , was appointed <unk> of the III . Gruppe and Müncheberg was given command of the 7 . Staffel as Staffelkapitän ( Squadron Leader ) , replacing Oberleutnant Georg Beyer who had been prisoner of war after being shot down . 
 Flying another fighter escort mission on 24 August in an attack south of London , Müncheberg claimed a victory over a Hurricane from No. 151 Squadron and another Hurricane on 31 August . This brought his total to 15 aerial victories , which increased to 16 the next day . On 14 September 1940 , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross the same day he achieved his 20th aerial victory . This achievement earned Müncheberg a reference in the Wehrmachtbericht ( his first of five in total ) , an information bulletin issued by the headquarters of the Wehrmacht . Following the award presentation Müncheberg was sent on three weeks home leave . He returned in early October , after the third phase of the Battle of Britain where the Luftwaffe had targeted the British airfields , had come to an end . He claimed his first victory following his vacation on 17 October over a Free French Air Force Bloch <unk> and a Spitfire on 25 October . The Gruppe then relocated to Abbeville @-@ <unk> on 10 November . He claimed his last victory in the Battle of Britain , and the and his last of 1940 , on 14 November , when Galland and Müncheberg each claimed a Spitfire in combat with No. 66 . Squadron and No. 74 . Squadron . This was Müncheberg 's 23rd victory , and was claimed southeast of Dover . The weather then deteriorated , and fog and heavy rain prevented further flight operations . Hitler visited JG 26 " Schlageter " at Christmas 1940 . Hitler dined with a selected group of pilots , among them Oberleutnant Gustav <unk> , Hauptmann Walter Adolph , Hauptmann Rolf <unk> , Galland , Schöpfel and Müncheberg . The war of attrition against the RAF had cost JG 26 " Schlageter " dearly , 7 . Staffel alone lost 13 pilots , and the entire Geschwader had to be moved back to Germany to reform and re @-@ equip in early 1941 . III . Gruppe was stationed at Bonn @-@ Hangelar , in Sankt Augustin . Before the Gruppe received new aircraft , the men were sent on a skiing vacation at Sankt Anton am <unk> . 
 = = = Malta , Balkans and North Africa in 1941 = = = 
 On 4 February 1941 , Müncheberg was informed by Gruppenkommandeur Schöpfel that the 7 . Staffel had to relocate to Sicily in support of X. Fliegerkorps , under the command of General der Flieger ( General of the Flyers ) Hans Geisler , for actions against the strategically important island of Malta . With the opening of a new front in North Africa in mid @-@ 1940 , British air and sea forces based on the island could attack Axis ships transporting vital supplies and reinforcements from Europe to North Africa . To counter this threat the Luftwaffe and the Regia Aeronautica ( Italian Royal Air Force ) were tasked with bombing raids in an effort to neutralise the RAF defences and the ports . 
 Following a brief stopover in Rome , 7 . Staffel arrived in Gela on Sicily on 9 February 1941 . Here Müncheberg received a factory new Bf 109 E @-@ 7 / N with the Werknummer ( factory number ) <unk> and marked as " White 12 " . He claimed his first victory in the Siege of Malta on 12 February over a No. 261 Squadron Hurricane south of <unk> , Malta . On 16 February Müncheberg claimed his 26th victory over No. 261 Squadron Hurricane of ace Flight Lieutenant James MacLachlan , who baled out severely wounded . MacLachlan lost his arm , but returned to combat in late 1941 . Müncheberg claimed a slow flying Hurricane — he assumed that the Hurricane had engine trouble — on 25 February . Flying fighter protection for the Stukas , which were targeting the airfield at Luqa , he claimed another Hurricane at 14 : 06 and a second one the very next day . Müncheberg claimed his 33rd victory on 28 March 1941 . This was also his 200th combat mission which was celebrated by the entire Staffel . 
 The 7 . Staffel , and elements of the support ground personnel , were relocated to Grottaglie airfield near Taranto in Apulia on 5 April 1941 . Here the pilots learned that the Wehrmacht would invade Yugoslavia and Greece on 6 April . In support of this invasion , the pilots attacked the airfield at Podgorica . Müncheberg claimed a Yugoslav Hawker Fury biplane of Independent Fighter <unk> , 81 ( Bomber ) Grupa , Jugoslovensko <unk> Ratno Vazduhoplovstvo ( JKRV — Yugoslav Royal Air Force ) on 6 April 1941 . Its pilot <unk> ( First Lieutenant ) Milenko <unk> was killed . He claimed another Fury and a Breguet 19 destroyed on the ground , but he was only given credit for the first aircraft destroyed in aerial combat . The two <unk> were in fact Avia BH @-@ 33 biplanes . 
 The Balkan intermezzo was short and the detachment relocated back to Gela beginning on 8 April . Müncheberg claimed two Hurricanes of No. 261 Squadron on 11 April and another one on 23 April . A reconnaissance Bf 109 detected a four @-@ engine Short Sunderland at RAF <unk> on 27 April . Müncheberg led his 7 . Staffel in the attack , destroying the Sunderland . The victory was not credited to any individual pilot but was considered teamwork of the 7 . Staffel . On 29 April , 7 . Staffel provided fighter protection for Junkers Ju 88 bombers attacking Malta . 7 . Staffel claimed two Hurricanes shot down , one by <unk> , for the loss of one Ju 88 . The German actress and Ufa star , Carola <unk> , wife of bomber pilot Arved Crüger , on a mission to provide entertainment to the troops , visited the pilots at Gela . According to <unk> , Müncheberg was especially attracted to the actress and personally accompanied her during her visit . 
 Müncheberg surpassed 40 aerial victories on 1 May 1941 after downing two aircraft on an early morning mission . This feat earned him his second honourable mention the Wehrmachtbericht . In the afternoon , 7 . Staffel flew fighter cover for Italian Savoia @-@ Marchetti SM.79 bombers . In aerial combat with six Hurricanes over the airfields at Hal Far and Luqa he shot down his third opponent of the day . In total , 7 . Staffel was credited with six victories on this day , three by Müncheberg . The entire 7 . Staffel at the time was anxiously awaiting the announcement that Müncheberg had been awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves . Following two more Hurricanes shot down on 6 May , his total now at 43 victories , Müncheberg received the news of his award on the early morning of 7 May . Müncheberg became the 12th member of the Wehrmacht to be honoured with the Oak Leaves and two hours later received news that Duce Benito Mussolini had awarded him the Gold Medal of Military Valor ( Medaglia d 'Oro ) , the first German to receive this award . Hitler sent him a teleprinter message on 7 May 1941 congratulating him on his 40th aerial victory . 
 7 . Staffel then began a series of relocations which eventually took them to the North African theatre of operations . The Staffel first relocated to Greece at the end of May . The ground personnel were shipped from Catania to Piraeus and then to the airfield at Molaoi on the southern tip of the Peloponnese region . The original intent was to participate in the Battle of Crete . The relatively quick but costly victory made these plans obsolete . The Staffel was then given two weeks of rest at Catania before moving on to Molaoi . Here the pilots were initially tasked with long range combat air patrols before Operation Battleaxe , a British Army operation with the goal of clearing eastern Cyrenaica of German and Italian forces , was initiated on 15 June . 7 Staffel was immediately ordered to relocate to North Africa where they were subordinated to I. Gruppe of Jagdgeschwader 27 ( I. / JG 27 — 1st group of the 27th Fighter Wing ) , then under the command of Hauptmann Eduard Neumann . 
 In North Africa , Müncheberg just barely escaped being killed when one of his headphone speakers was shot off by small arms fire during a low level strafing attack . In total , Müncheberg claimed five victories in this theatre . His first three victories were over Hurricanes . The one on 20 June was claimed against pilots from either No. 1 Squadron or No. 2 Squadron of the South African Air Force ( SAAF ) . His victory on 24 June was over Pilot Officer James Alan Frederick <unk> of No. 6 Squadron who was killed in the engagement . His opponent on 15 July was either a No. 73 Squadron or No. 229 Squadron RAF pilot . The final two victories in North Africa of 1941 were over Curtiss P @-@ 40 Warhawks , both on 29 July 1941 , from No. 2 Squadron SAAF . This took his total to 48 aerial victories . 
 = = = Channel operations = = = 
 Fliegerführer Afrika received orders on 4 August 1941 to downsize the 7 . Staffel in Africa to four aircraft . The remaining aircraft and aircrews were to relocate to France back to Jagdgeschwader 26 . Before Müncheberg arrived in France , he stopped in Rome where he received the Gold Medal of Military Valour from Mussolini . He then travelled to the Wolf 's Lair , Hitler 's headquarters in Rastenburg , present @-@ day Kętrzyn in Poland , for the Oak Leaves presentation . Following the presentation Müncheberg went on two weeks of vacation . Following their return from North Africa to France the pilots of 7 . Staffel were given newer Bf 109 F @-@ 4 aircraft in replacement for the older Bf 109 E @-@ 7 type . Müncheberg claimed his first victory here on 28 August over a Spitfire and another one , his 50th overall , on 29 August . He claimed two Spitfires on 4 September and one more from No. 71 Squadron three days later . 
 On 19 September 1941 , Müncheberg was promoted to the rank of Hauptmann and became Gruppenkommandeur of II . / JG 26 " Schlageter " following the death of Hauptmann Walter Adolph the day before , in aerial combat with RAF Spitfire fighters . Müncheberg 's position of Staffelkapitän of the 7 . Staffel was passed on to Oberleutnant Klaus <unk> . II . Gruppe had already been equipped with the new Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 A @-@ 1 . It was the first Gruppe in the Luftwaffe completely equipped with the Fw 190 . Müncheberg 's number of victories continued to increase ; all but his 55th on 18 September , which was over a No. 607 Squadron Hurricane , were claimed against Spitfires . Galland was replaced by Schöpfel on 5 December as Geschwaderkommodore of JG 26 " Schlageter " . Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring had appointed Galland as General der Jagdflieger ( General of Fighters ) following the death of Oberst Werner Mölders . On 8 December Müncheberg achieved his 60th aerial victory which was announced in the Wehrmachtbericht , his third such mention . He claimed his 62nd overall victory and the last of the year 1941 on 16 December 1941 . Müncheberg went on a lengthy vacation in early 1942 , not returning before March 1942 . He therefore did not participate in Operation Donnerkeil ( 11 – 12 February 1942 ) , the air superiority operation to support the Kriegsmarine 's ( German Navy ) Operation Cerberus . 
 Müncheberg claimed the first victory following his vacation on 13 March 1942 , a Spitfire of No. 124 Squadron . During his absence the Fw 190 A @-@ 1 and A @-@ 2 had been replaced with the newer A @-@ 3 variant . Two Spitfires of No. 412 Squadron fell to his guns on 24 March which brought his score to 65 . Müncheberg claimed his 70th and 71st victory on 26 April within two minutes of combat . II . Gruppe at the time was referred to as the " Abbeville Boys " by the RAF pilots based on the Abbeville airfield where they were stationed . On 29 April 1942 he probably shot down and killed No. 131 Wing RAF leader and Polish ace Wing Commander Marian <unk> . On 2 June , II . Gruppe intercepted No. 403 Squadron on a fighter @-@ bomber mission . Müncheberg was credited with the destruction of two Spitfires taking his total to 81 aerial victories . This achievement was announced on 4 June 1942 in the Wehrmachtbericht and was followed by the presentation of the German Cross in Gold on 5 June . He claimed his final two victories ( 82 – 83 ) with II . Gruppe on 20 June 1942 in combat with Spitfires of No. 118 and No. 501 Squadron . II . Gruppe was credited with the destruction of five enemy aircraft destroyed without suffering any losses . 
 = = = Eastern Front = = = 
 Following his 83rd aerial victory , Müncheberg was summoned to his commanding officer , Geschwaderkommodore Schöpfel , who informed him of his transfer to Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) on the Eastern Front . Müncheberg was destined to become a Geschwaderkommodore but prior to receiving his own command he would have to serve as a Kommodore in training . He went on a three weeks home leave , staying at his parents home , before he received his orders to head east on 21 July 1942 . 
 On his way to the Eastern Front , Müncheberg travelled to Berlin where he briefly served on the staff of the General der Jagdflieger Galland discussing air combat tactics and how to lead a fighter wing . On 26 July 1942 he participated in the German track and field championships , starting for the ASV Köln in the decathlon . Müncheberg finally arrived on the Eastern Front in early August 1942 where he was welcomed by the Geschwaderkommodore of JG 51 , Major Karl @-@ Gottfried Nordmann . Initially Müncheberg believed that combat on the Eastern Front was child 's play in comparison to the Western Front . In the first four weeks his aircraft was twice severely damaged in combat . His first major task was re @-@ equipping JG 51 with the Fw 190 . Under his leadership JG 51 became the first fighter wing on the Eastern Front to equip with this type . He claimed his first victories in the east on 3 August 1942 , shooting down two Petlyakov Pe @-@ 2 dive bomber near Rzhev . 
 He quickly achieved further victories , reaching 90 victories on 22 August and surpassing the 100 victories on 5 September . He was the 19th Luftwaffe pilot to achieve the century mark . On 9 September , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords following his 103rd victory . Müncheberg was the 19th member of the Wehrmacht and the 13th fighter pilot who had received this award . Müncheberg claimed his last victory in this theatre on 22 September 1942 , claiming 33 victories in total over Russian aircraft , this took his overall score to 116 aerial victories . He was then ordered to the Wolf 's Lair where Hitler presented him the Swords to his Knight 's Cross with Oak Leaves . Following the award ceremony he was granted home leave before being appointed Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 77 ( JG 77 — 77th Fighter Wing ) , replacing Gordon Gollob in this role . 
 = = = North Africa and death = = = 
 Müncheberg took over command of Jagdgeschwader 77 on 1 October 1942 . Jagdgeschwader 77 at the time was deployed on the southern sector of the Eastern Front and was scheduled to relocate to North Africa where I. Gruppe under the command of Heinz Bär arrived in Ain el Gazala on 27 October . Under the leadership of Müncheberg , the Geschwaderstab ( headquarters unit ) which was equipped with new Bf 109 G @-@ 2s , arrived on 29 October . He scored over a No. 92 Squadron Spitfire piloted by Flight Sergeant Blades on 9 November , his 117th overall . Promoted to Major on 30 November 1942 , he claimed his 119th victory on 10 December and made a forced landing in his Bf 109 G @-@ 2 ( Werknummer 10 725 — factory number ; 35 % damage ) following combat with a P @-@ 40 of the 66th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron , 57th Fighter Group , United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) . On 13 March 1943 Müncheberg became the second German fighter pilot after Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille to achieve 100 aerial victories over Anglo @-@ American adversaries . 
 Müncheberg was killed in action in his Bf 109 G @-@ 2 ( Werknummer 16 381 ) on 23 March 1943 over Tunisia when his 135th victim , a USAAF 52nd Fighter Group Spitfire exploded in front of him after a close burst of cannon fire . The Spitfire was piloted by Captain Theodore Sweetman . Müncheberg managed to bail out and landed severely wounded . Although the search team quickly recovered him , Müncheberg died on the way to a field hospital . Captain Hugh L. Williamson , who was also shot down in the engagement , later stated that <unk> had deliberately rammed Müncheberg with his burning Spitfire . Müncheberg was buried originally at El <unk> ; his remains were moved to the Heroes Cemetery at Tunis and later reinterred in the 1950s at the German Military Cemetery at Bordj @-@ <unk> . The Wehrmachtbericht announced his death on 25 March 1943 . 
 = = Aerial victory credits = = 
 Müncheberg was credited with 135 aerial victories , claimed in more than 500 combat missions , 102 on the Western Front — including 19 over Malta , one in Yugoslavia and 24 in North Africa — and 33 on the Eastern Front . His tally includes at least 46 Supermarine Spitfire fighter aircraft shot down . 
 This and the – ( dash ) indicates unwitnessed aerial victory claims for which Müncheberg did not receive credit . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 17 September 1939 ) 
 1st Class ( 10 May 1940 ) 
 German Cross in Gold on 5 June 1942 as Hauptmann in the II . / Jagdgeschwader 26 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Fighter Pilots in Gold with Pennant " 400 " 
 Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords 
 Knight 's Cross on 14 September 1940 as Oberleutnant and Staffelkapitän of the 7 . / Jagdgeschwader 26 " Schlageter " 
 12th Oak Leaves on 7 May 1941 as Oberleutnant and Staffelkapitän of the 7 . / Jagdgeschwader 26 " Schlageter " 
 19th Swords on 9 September 1942 as Hauptmann and deputy Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 51 " Mölders " 
 Mentioned five times in the Wehrmachtbericht 
 Medaglia d 'oro al Valore Militare ( 7 May 1941 ) 
 = = = Dates of rank = = = 
 = Zooropa ( song ) = 
 " Zooropa " / <unk> / is a song by the rock band U2 . It is the opening track from their 1993 album Zooropa . The song was the result of combining two pieces of music , the first of which was conceived in the studio , and the second of which was discovered by guitarist The Edge while listening to soundchecks the band had done while on tour . The lyrics were written by vocalist Bono , describing two characters in a brightly lit city in a futuristic version of European society . Lyrics in the song were based on advertising slogans , and also featured the phrase " dream out loud " , which has appeared in other U2 media . The song touched on several themes , including moral confusion and the future of European society . 
 Promotional recordings of the song were released in the United States and Mexico , and the song appeared on two record charts shortly after its release in 1993 . The song was briefly performed at three shows on U2 's Zoo TV Tour in 1993 . The band had difficulties performing it in 1993 , and it was not played again until the U2 360 ° Tour in 2011 . 
 The recording of the song received mostly positive reception from critics , who praised it as the album 's opening track . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 During the Zoo TV Tour in 1992 , U2 were trying to create a vision of an attractive future for Europe , as opposed to a negative , dystopian image that would be found in science fiction . With recent and ongoing events in Europe , such as the Revolutions of 1989 , the enlargement of the European Union , and the Bosnian War , lead vocalist Bono created a surreal vision of a European location called " Zooropa " . Bono has referred to Zooropa as being a concept album , with a main theme of the exploration of interpellation within the European Union . 
 Bono and guitarist The Edge had been reading works by cyberpunk author William Gibson , who wrote about a futuristic urban environment known as " The Sprawl " . Gibson was an influence in the texture of the song , which Bono described as " fucked up sci @-@ fi " . Bono wanted to use noise to create a visual setting for the song , similar to Gibson 's futuristic world , filled with advertisements on LED displays and neon signs , as in the 1982 film Blade Runner . With " Zooropa " as the album 's opening song , Bono stated that he wanted the album 's music to be like " legal drugs " that would create a trip where " you come out of the other end and you feel like you 've been on some kind of a journey " . The closing song on the album , " The Wanderer " , features Johnny Cash on vocals , and was intended on being the " antidote " to the futuristic @-@ sounding opener . 
 The song was written and recorded during the album 's sessions at Windmill Lane Studios and The Factory Studios in Dublin , between legs of the Zoo TV Tour from March to May 1993 . " Zooropa " was first developed after The Edge listened to cassette recordings of the band 's soundchecks from the tour . Along with the album 's sound engineer Joe O 'Herlihy , The Edge edited the best parts of the soundchecks to create a song arrangement , which served as a backing track . The song 's introduction was recorded separately from the remainder of the song . The band based the introduction on a jam session in the studio , and producer Flood took parts of the jam and created an ambient mix . The bass guitar during the intro was written and performed by drummer Larry Mullen , Jr . , who came up with the piece during the recording sessions while The Edge was working on the album 's guitar riffs . The song pieces were then edited into a stereo mix , with the intro mixed in by Flood using a crossfade . Synthesizer sounds were added by producer Brian Eno on a Yamaha DX7 keyboard , including a " squishy , mad @-@ synth sound " that connected the different segments of the soundcheck . The Edge later added guitar tracks , as well as additional sounds to the song using an EMS Synthi A synthesiser . Once the song was almost finished , the band had doubts about the first segment of the soundcheck backing track . Having established an arrangement for the song , they performed it in the studio from start to finish and used the replaying for the first part of the soundcheck backing track , while using portions of the new performance for the second segment . 
 The band had originally intended on recording an EP during the sessions , but Zooropa eventually evolved into full @-@ length album . " Zooropa " was one of five songs that were part of what would have become the band 's EP , which also included " Babyface " , " Numb " , " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " , and " The Wanderer " . Prior to the song 's final title , it had the working title " Babble – Zooropa " , as mentioned in a May 1993 issue of Hot Press , and was later titled " Zooropa I & II " in a June 1993 issue of Billboard . 
 = = Composition and themes = = 
 " Zooropa " begins with a two @-@ minute @-@ long introduction . As the song fades in , sustained chords are played , and a noisy collage of mainly indecipherable human voices from radio signals fades in at 0 : 19 . The background voices include a clip of George H. W. Bush saying " Peace talks " , and are referenced in the album notes as " courtesy of the advertising world " . A quiet piano and bass guitar are heard above the voices , which get louder with each beat . At 1 : 30 , the volume of the voices rises suddenly and the bass part changes . The introduction then begins to fade out fifteen seconds later , while a guitar riff played with a delay and wah @-@ wah effect joins the mix . The riff is briefly played on its own before the bass guitar and drums join in at 2 : 03 . This is followed by background voices saying , " What do you want ? " in both English and French ( " Qu 'est @-@ ce que tu <unk> ? " ) , and " De quoi as @-@ tu <unk> ? " ( " What are you afraid of ? " ) . In response to the questions , the lyrics in the first three verses of the song consist of various advertising slogans . At 3 : 45 , following the first three verses , a break in the song 's instrumentation occurs , except for guitar , and the song returns to a state similar to the introduction 's end . A rapid rhythmic synthesiser fades in and at 4 : 03 , the drums and bass re @-@ enter and the song assumes an increased tempo . The theme of moral confusion and uncertainty becomes present in the remaining lyrics . 
 The song describes two characters in a setting with a dull and grey appeal , who emerge from blinking neon signs into a brightly lit modern city . The radio sound effects in the introduction were intended to create a mood and setting for the song . DJ Carter Alan noted that the sounds seemed to draw a connection from Achtung Baby , but Bono stated that it was not intentional and that he didn 't want it to have " anything to do with the past " . The lyrics in " Zooropa " begin with the Audi advertising slogan " Vorsprung durch Technik " ( " Advancement through technology " ) and the first three verses feature references to slogans for other brands , including Colgate , Daz , Fairy , and Zanussi . 
 Following the first three verses of advertising slogans , the song continues with the lyrics " I have no compass , and I have no map " and " No reason to get back " , referring to the uncertainty of the new direction of U2 's music at the time . The following verse begins with , " And I have no religion " , which was included in the lyrics because Bono stated that he believes " religion is the enemy of God . " A review of the album in Melody Maker compared the lyric " Uncertainty can be a guiding light " towards the end of the song to the line " If you walk away , [ ... ] I will follow " from U2 's 1980 single " I Will Follow " . The reviewer stated " The man ( Bono ) that once had so many answers now sounds simply confused . " The theme of moral confusion was first used in U2 's song " Acrobat " from Achtung Baby . The coda in " Zooropa " features the lyric " dream out loud " , which Bono included as a reference to " Acrobat " . The phrase " dream out loud " was first used by Bono during the Lovetown Tour in 1989 , and has appeared several times in U2 's work since then . The phrase was also used in the song " Always " – a B @-@ side to the " Beautiful Day " single released in 2000 — and was spoken by Bono in the PopMart : Live from Mexico City video . 
 = = Release and chart performance = = 
 " Zooropa " was the opening track from the eponymous album , and promotional recordings ( promos ) of the song were distributed by Island Records in the United States and Mexico . The U.S. promo features an edited version of the song that fades in at the first guitar riff ( removing the intro ) , and the Mexico promo features the album version of the song , along with " Numb " as a second track . The cover art of the Mexico promo features the same logo from the Zooropa album cover — a sketch of the circle of stars from the Flag of Europe with an " <unk> " figure in the middle , based on the " graffiti babyface " from the Achtung Baby album artwork . The logo represents an urban legend about a Soviet cosmonaut left floating in orbit for weeks after the collapse of the Soviet Union . 
 " Zooropa " was one of four songs from the album to be featured on the Billboard charts , and was the only song to chart that was not released as a single . On 24 July 1993 , it appeared on the Album Rock Tracks chart at number 26 , and remained on the chart for ten weeks , eventually peaking at number eight . " Zooropa " also appeared on the Modern Rock Tracks chart on 7 August 1993 at number 28 , and peaked at number 13 during its eight weeks on the chart . 
 = = Live appearances = = 
 During the Zoo TV Tour , clips of " Zooropa " were played during the beginning of the show . The clips included the lyric " What do you want ? " repeated twice , which was displayed on video screens in various languages , and interspersed with a voice saying " It 's very simple " . This part of the opening segment was intended to create confusion among the audience regarding the show 's message , and eventually lead to information overload . U2 performed " Zooropa " live at three consecutive concerts during the fourth leg of the Zoo TV Tour in 1993 . Bono originally discussed how the song would be played live during the album 's recording sessions , saying that The Edge 's guitar riffs may be extended in concert . The song debuted live at a concert in Glasgow in August 1993 , and was performed in the middle of the set list following " Numb " . The live version was much shorter than the album version , skipping the piano intro , as well as the first three verses , starting with the line " I have no compass , and I have no map " . U2 had difficulty performing the song live , which Bono acknowledged to the audience following its debut . According to the book U2 Live : A Concert Documentary , the song 's first performance sounded " shaky " and needed more rehearsal , although its subsequent Zoo TV performances " sound [ ed ] better " . Adam Clayton suggested performing the song as the show opener during the rehearsals for the tour 's fifth and final Zoomerang leg , but it was not performed again on the tour . 
 After Zoo TV , " Zooropa " was not performed live for 18 years until it was played towards the end of the U2 360 ° Tour in 2011 . Clayton said that adding the song to the tour 's set list was " very experimental " and that it was a " bit cheeky " to introduce to the tour as the band had little experience performing it . The song debuted on the tour on 10 April 2011 in São Paulo , and was rehearsed at soundchecks several days prior . The return of the song was so popular that the word " Zooropa " became a trending topic on Twitter during the evening of its tour debut . " Zooropa " was performed at the remaining 26 concerts on the tour , in addition to a private show in Denver . As of 2011 , " Zooropa " has been performed live at 31 shows . During performances , the stage 's 360 ° retractable video screen would expand its full length , and U2 would perform behind the screen as it took over the stage . The Edmonton Journal commented that by hiding themselves from the fans during the performance , the combination of advertising slogans and flickering lights " help portray this Blade Runner @-@ type world that U2 wants us to escape . " A live recording of " Zooropa " from the U2 360 ° Tour was featured on the U2.com member @-@ exclusive album , U22 , taken from the performance in Baltimore on 22 June 2011 . 
 The song was not performed during the first leg of the Innocence + Experience Tour , but at the first show of the European leg in September 2015 , a stripped @-@ down version was performed during the second half of the concert . This interpretation of the song lacks the piano intro and first verses , serving as a segue from " Bullet the Blue Sky " into " Where the Streets Have No Name " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 David Sinclair of The Times and Anthony DeCurtis of Rolling Stone both felt that " Zooropa " set the album 's tone from the start . DeCurtis described Bono 's singing and lyrics as a " <unk> seducer " . Allmusic compared " Zooropa " to the anthems of U2 's The Joshua Tree album , and Entertainment Weekly 's David Browne described the song as " ' Where the Streets Have No Name ' transported into the land of cyberpunk " , comparing parts of the song to the techno and metallic music genres . The Independent felt " Zooropa " was " a sprawling multi @-@ sectioned piece that drifts from two minutes of gentle radio babble into a more familiar reverb @-@ rock structure " . Jon Pareles from The New York Times said that the track was reminiscent of old U2 songs , but added new elements such as distorted vocals and repeating guitar squealing . Daily Variety praised the title track over the rest of the songs on the album , stating how it was the only song that " explores the sort of melodic range usually associated with U2 " . 
 = = = Interpretations = = = 
 Robert Vagacs , author of the book Religious Nuts , Political Fanatics : U2 in the Theological Perspective , describes the song as the antimatter of " Where the Streets Have No Name " , in both musical and thematic aspects . Vagacs discusses the concept of Zooropa in detail throughout the book , and refers to Zooropa as a " wasteland " and a " dystopia " , due to its lack of fulfilment and certainty . He also states how the Babylonian @-@ like location uses its demigods to control its people through scientism , <unk> , and <unk> . The final track from Achtung Baby , " Love Is Blindness " , is described as " an interpretive bridge into the land of Zooropa " , which Vagacs explains is the setting for the album , as well as the setting for songs on U2 's following album , Pop . " Beautiful Day " , the opening song from U2 's 2000 album , All That You Can 't Leave Behind , describes " a fresh start in Zooropa " . 
 The use of consumer slogans as song lyrics was also commented on by various sources . Critic Perry Gettelman interpreted them as meaning to " signify the emptiness of modern , godless life " . Kieran Keohane of York University stated that the slogans in " Zooropa " were to express an alienating form of interpellation , while J. D. Considine of The Baltimore Sun referred to the slogans as a parody of the economic hype used to pass the Maastricht Treaty , through the promising of impossibilities , such as " Be a winner " and " Eat to get slimmer " . English professor Kurt Koenigsberger of Case Western Reserve University stated that the consumer advertisements constitute Zooropa as a " sardonically dystopic " location . In the book Reading Rock and Roll , Robyn Brothers said that the song conveys a " sense of confusion in the wake of a technology speeding beyond our control " , while referencing the lyrics " I hear voices , ridiculous voices / I 'm in the slipstream " . Brothers also compared the song to " Acrobat " , stating both songs reference a response to uncertainty and an unavoidable feeling of alienation . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Zooropa producer Flood said that " Zooropa " was one of his favourite songs on the album , along with " Daddy 's Gonna Pay for Your Crashed Car " , " The First Time " , and " Numb " . Mullen felt that the song was " absolutely mesmerizing " . Following the release of " Zooropa " , references to the song have appeared in professional writings and in other media . On the day of the U2 concert in Sarajevo during the PopMart Tour in 1997 , tour set designer Willie Williams wrote about waking up that day with " Zooropa " playing in his head and stated that Sarajevo " is the city of Zooropa , if there ever was one . " José Manuel Barroso , president of the European Commission , quoted the song 's lyrics at a 2005 press conference after enlisting Bono in an effort to get governments in the European Union to give more money to developing countries , and stated that the lyrics inspired an article he wrote about the future of Europe . Thomas Diez of the Copenhagen Peace Research Institute made references to " Zooropa " ' s lyrics in a 1999 book review about the history of the European Union ; lyrics also appeared in a 2005 German – English dictionary , under its listing for " Vorsprung durch Technik " . 
 Kurt Koenigsberger 's book The Novel and the Menagerie mentioned " Zooropa " in a section discussing Salman Rushdie and his appearance on the Zoo TV Tour . In 2008 , the word " Zooropa " was used in an international finance textbook as the name of a fictional , generic city . The book Religious Nuts , Political Fanatics lists " Zooropa " as one of 22 U2 songs for " recommended listening " . A 2009 review of U2 's album No Line on the Horizon , MusicRadar described the song " Magnificent " as " ' New Year 's Day ' meets ' Zooropa ' " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Bristol = 
 Bristol ( / <unk> / ) is a city , unitary authority area and county in South West England with an estimated population of 442 @,@ 500 in 2015 . It is England 's sixth and the United Kingdom 's eighth most populous city , and the most populous city in Southern England after London . People from Bristol are known as Bristolians . The city borders the Unitary Authority areas of North Somerset and South Gloucestershire , with the historic cities of Bath and Gloucester to the south @-@ east and north @-@ east , respectively . 
 Iron Age hill forts and Roman villas were built near the confluence of the rivers Frome and Avon , and around the beginning of the 11th century the settlement was known as Brycgstow ( Old English " the place at the bridge " ) . Bristol received a royal charter in 1155 and was in Gloucestershire until 1373 , when it became a county . From the 13th to the 18th century , Bristol was among the top three English cities after London ( with York and Norwich ) in tax receipts . Bristol was surpassed by the rapid rise of Manchester , Liverpool and Birmingham during the Industrial Revolution . 
 Bristol was a starting place for early voyages of exploration to the New World . On a ship out of Bristol in 1497 John Cabot , a Venetian , became the first European since the Vikings to land on mainland North America . In 1499 William Weston , a Bristol merchant , was the first Englishman to lead an exploration to North America . The Port of Bristol has since moved from Bristol Harbour in the city centre to the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth and Royal Portbury Dock . 
 Bristol 's modern economy is built on the creative media , electronics and aerospace industries , and the city @-@ centre docks have been redeveloped as centres of heritage and culture . The city has two universities , the University of the West of England and the University of Bristol and a variety of artistic and sporting organisations and venues including the Royal West of England Academy , the Arnolfini , Spike Island , Ashton Gate and the Memorial Stadium . It is connected to London and other major UK cities by road , rail , sea and air by the M5 and M4 ( which connects to the city centre by the M32 ) , Bristol Temple Meads and Bristol Parkway mainline rail stations , and Bristol Airport . One of the UK 's most popular tourist destinations , Bristol was selected in 2009 as one of the world 's top ten cities by international travel publishers Dorling Kindersley in their Eyewitness guides for young adults . In 2014 The Sunday Times named it as the best city in Britain in which to live , and Bristol also won the EU 's European Green Capital Award in 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 Archaeological finds , including flint tools believed to be between 300 @,@ 000 and 126 @,@ 000 years old made with the Levallois technique , indicate the presence of Neanderthals in the Shirehampton and St Annes areas of Bristol during the Middle Palaeolithic . Iron Age hill forts near the city are at Leigh Woods and Clifton Down , on the side of the Avon Gorge , and on Kings Weston Hill near Henbury . A Roman settlement , Abona , existed at what is now Sea Mills ( connected to Bath by a Roman road ) ; another was at the present @-@ day Inns Court . Isolated Roman villas and small forts and settlements were also scattered throughout the area . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 Brycgstow ( Old English " the place at the bridge " ) was founded by 1000 ; by about 1020 , it was a trading centre with a mint producing silver pennies bearing its name . By 1067 Brycgstow was a well @-@ fortified burh , and that year the townsmen beat off a raiding party from Ireland led by three of Harold Godwinson 's sons . Under Norman rule , the town had one of the strongest castles in southern England . Bristol was the place of exile for Diarmait Mac Murchada , the Irish king of Leinster , after being overthrown . The Bristol merchants subsequently played a prominent role in funding Richard Strongbow de Clare and the Norman invasion of Ireland . 
 The port developed in the 11th century around the confluence of the Rivers Frome and Avon , adjacent to Bristol Bridge just outside the town walls . By the 12th century Bristol was an important port , handling much of England 's trade with Ireland , including slaves . The stone bridge built in 1247 was replaced by the current bridge during the 1760s . The town incorporated neighbouring suburbs and became a county in 1373 , the first town in England to be given this status . During this period , Bristol became a shipbuilding and manufacturing centre . By the 14th century Bristol , York and Norwich were England 's largest medieval towns after London . One @-@ third to one @-@ half the population died in the Black Death of 1348 – 49 , which checked population growth , and its population remained between 10 @,@ 000 and 12 @,@ 000 for most of the 15th and 16th centuries . 
 = = = 15th and 16th centuries = = = 
 During the 15th century Bristol was the second most important port in the country , trading with Ireland , Iceland and Gascony . It was the starting point for many voyages , including Robert <unk> 's ( 1457 – 58 ) unsuccessful attempt to break the Italian monopoly of Eastern Mediterranean trade . Bristol merchants then turned west , launching voyages of exploration in the Atlantic by 1480 in search of the phantom island of Hy @-@ Brazil . These Atlantic voyages , also aimed at China , culminated in Venetian John Cabot 's 1497 exploration of North America and subsequent expeditions to the New World , underwritten by Bristol merchants and King Henry VII until 1508 . A 1499 voyage , led by merchant William Weston of Bristol , was the first expedition commanded by an Englishman to North America . 
 During the 16th century , Bristol merchants concentrated on developing trade with Spain and its American colonies . This included the smuggling of prohibited goods , such as food and guns , to Iberia during the Anglo @-@ Spanish War ( 1585 – 1604 ) . Bristol 's illicit trade grew enormously after 1558 , becoming integral to its economy . 
 The original Diocese of Bristol was founded in 1542 , when the former Abbey of St. Augustine ( founded by Robert Fitzharding four hundred years earlier ) became Bristol Cathedral . Bristol also gained city status that year . During the English Civil War in the 1640s the city was occupied by Royalists , who built the Royal Fort House on the site of an earlier Parliamentarian stronghold . 
 = = = 17th and 18th centuries = = = 
 Growth of the city and trade came with the rise of England 's American colonies in the 17th century . Bristol 's location on the west side of Great Britain gave its ships an advantage in sailing to and from the New World , and the city 's merchants made the most of it . The 18th century saw an expansion of England 's role in the Atlantic trade in Africans taken for slavery to the Americas . Bristol and Liverpool became centres of the triangular trade . In the first side of the slavery triangle , manufactured goods were shipped to West Africa and exchanged for Africans ; the enslaved captives were transported across the Atlantic to the Americas in the Middle Passage under brutal conditions . In the third side of the triangle , plantation goods such as sugar , tobacco , rum , rice , cotton and a few slaves ( sold to the aristocracy as house servants ) returned across the Atlantic . Some household slaves were baptised in the hope this would mean their freedom in England . The Somersett Case of 1772 clarified that slavery was illegal in England . At the height of the Bristol slave trade from 1700 to 1807 , more than 2 @,@ 000 slave ships carried a conservatively estimated 500 @,@ 000 people from Africa to slavery in the Americas . The Seven Stars public house , where abolitionist Thomas Clarkson collected information on the slave trade , is still operating . 
 Fishermen from Bristol ( who had fished the Grand Banks of Newfoundland since the 15th century ) began settling Newfoundland permanently in larger numbers during the 17th century , establishing colonies at Bristol 's Hope and Cuper 's Cove . Because of Bristol 's nautical environment , maritime safety was an important issue in the city . During the 19th century , Samuel Plimsoll ( known as " the sailor 's friend " ) campaigned to make the seas safer ; shocked by overloaded vessels , he successfully fought for a compulsory load line on ships . 
 In 1739 John Wesley founded the first Methodist chapel , the New Room , in Bristol . Wesley , along with his brother Charles Wesley and George Whitefield , preached to large congregations in Bristol and the neighbouring village of Kingswood , often in the open air . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The city was associated with Victorian engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel , who designed the Great Western Railway between Bristol and London Paddington , two pioneering Bristol @-@ built oceangoing steamships ( SS Great Britain and SS Great Western ) , and the Clifton Suspension Bridge . The new railway replaced the Kennet and Avon Canal , which had fully opened in 1810 as the main route for the transport of goods between Bristol and London . Competition from Liverpool ( beginning around 1760 ) , disruptions of maritime commerce due to war with France ( 1793 ) and the abolition of the slave trade ( 1807 ) contributed to Bristol 's failure to keep pace with the newer manufacturing centres of Northern England and the West Midlands . The tidal Avon Gorge , which had secured the port during the Middle Ages , had become a liability . An 1804 – 09 plan to improve the city 's port with a floating harbour designed by William Jessop was a costly error , requiring high harbour fees . 
 By 1867 , ships were getting larger and the meanders in the river Avon prevented boats over 300 feet ( 90 m ) from reaching the harbour , resulting in falling trade . The port facilities were migrating downstream to Avonmouth and new industrial complexes were founded there . Some of the traditional industries including copper and brass manufacture went into decline , but the import and processing of tobacco flourished with the expansion of the W.D. & H.O. Wills business . 
 Supported by new industry and growing commerce , Bristol 's population ( 66 @,@ 000 in 1801 ) , quintupled during the 19th century , resulting in the creation of new suburbs such as Clifton and Cotham . These provide architectural examples from the Georgian to the Regency style , with many fine terraces and villas facing the road , and at right angles to it . In the early 19th century , the romantic medieval gothic style appeared , partially as a reaction against the symmetry of Palladianism , and can be seen in buildings such as the Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery , the Royal West of England Academy , and The Victoria Rooms . Riots broke out in 1793 and 1831 ; the first over the renewal of tolls on Bristol Bridge , and the second against the rejection of the second Reform Bill by the House of Lords . The Diocese of Bristol had undergone several boundary changes by 1897 when it was " reconstituted " into the configuration which has lasted into the 21st century . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 From a population of about 330 @,@ 000 in 1901 , Bristol grew steadily during the 20th century , peaking at 428 @,@ 089 in 1971 . Its docklands were enlarged during the early 1900s by the Royal Edward Dock . Another new dock , the Royal Portbury Dock , opened during the 1970s . As air travel grew in the first half of the century , aircraft manufacturers built factories . 
 Bristol was heavily damaged by Luftwaffe raids during World War II ; about 1 @,@ 300 people living or working in the city were killed and nearly 100 @,@ 000 buildings were damaged , at least 3 @,@ 000 beyond repair . The original central market area , near the bridge and castle , is now a park containing two bombed churches and fragments of the castle . A third bomb @-@ damaged church nearby , St Nicholas , has been restored and is a museum housing a 1756 William Hogarth triptych painted for the high altar of St Mary Redcliffe . The museum also has statues of King Edward I ( moved from Arno 's Court Triumphal Arch ) and King Edward III ( taken from <unk> ' Gate in the city walls when they were demolished about 1760 ) , and 13th @-@ century statues of Robert , 1st Earl of Gloucester ( builder of Bristol Castle ) and Geoffrey de Montbray ( who built the city 's walls ) from Bristol 's Newgate . 
 The rebuilding of Bristol city centre was characterised by 1960s and 1970s skyscrapers , mid @-@ century modern architecture and road improvements . Beginning in the 1980s some main roads were closed , the Georgian @-@ era Queen Square and Portland Square were restored , the Broadmead shopping area regenerated , and one of the city centre 's tallest mid @-@ century towers was demolished . Bristol 's road infrastructure changed dramatically during the 1960s and 1970s with the development of the M4 and M5 motorways , which meet at the Almondsbury Interchange just north of the city and link Bristol with London ( M4 eastbound ) , Swansea ( M4 westbound across the Severn Estuary ) , Exeter ( M5 southbound ) and Birmingham ( M5 northbound ) . 
 The 20th century relocation of the docks to Avonmouth Docks and Royal Portbury Dock , 7 miles ( 11 km ) downstream from the city centre , has allowed the redevelopment of the old dock area ( the Floating Harbour ) . Although the docks ' existence was once in jeopardy ( since the area was seen as a derelict industrial site ) , the inaugural 1996 International Festival of the Sea held in and around the docks affirmed the area as a leisure asset of the city . 
 = = Government = = 
 Bristol City council consists of 70 councillors representing 35 wards , with two per ward serving four @-@ year terms . Councillors are elected in thirds , with elections held in three years out of every four @-@ year period . Thus , since wards do not have both councillors up for election at the same time , two @-@ thirds of the wards participate in each election . Although the council was long dominated by the Labour Party , the Liberal Democrats have grown strong in the city and ( as the largest party ) took minority control of the council after the 2005 election . In 2007 , Labour and the Conservatives united to defeat the Liberal Democrat administration ; Labour ruled the council as a minority administration , with Helen Holland as council leader . 
 In February 2009 , the Labour group resigned and the Liberal Democrats took office with a minority administration . In the 4 June 2009 council elections the Liberal Democrats gained four seats and , for the first time , overall control of the city council . In 2010 they increased their representation to 38 seats , giving them a majority of 6 . In 2011 they lost their majority , leading to a hung council . In the 2013 local elections , in which a third of the city 's wards were up for election , Labour gained 7 seats and the Green party doubled their seats from 2 to 4 . The Liberal Democrats lost 10 seats . 
 These trends were continued into the next election in May 2014 , in which Labour gained three seats to take their total to 31 , the Green Party won two more seats , the Conservative party gained one seat , and UKIP won their first @-@ ever seat on the council . The Liberal Democrats lost a further seven seats . 
 On 3 May 2012 , Bristol held a referendum on the question of a directly elected mayor replacing one elected by the council . There were 41 @,@ 032 votes in favour of a directly elected mayor and 35 @,@ 880 votes against , with a 24 % turnout . An election for the new post was held on 15 November 2012 , and Independent candidate George Ferguson became Mayor of Bristol . 
 The Lord Mayor of Bristol , not to be confused with the Mayor of Bristol , is a figurehead elected each May by the city council . Councillor Faruk Choudhury was selected by his fellow councillors for the position in 2013 . At 38 , he was the youngest person to serve as Lord Mayor of Bristol and the first Muslim elected to the office . 
 Bristol constituencies in the House of Commons also included parts of other local authority areas until the 2010 general election , when their boundaries were aligned with the county boundary . The city is divided into Bristol West , East , South and North West . Since the 2015 election , the city has had three Labour members of parliament ( MPs ) and one Conservative . 
 The city has a tradition of political activism . Edmund Burke , MP for the Bristol constituency for six years beginning in 1774 , insisted that he was a member of parliament first and a representative of his constituents ' interests second . Women 's @-@ rights advocate Emmeline Pethick @-@ Lawrence ( 1867 – 1954 ) was born in Bristol , and left @-@ wing politician Tony Benn was MP for Bristol South East in 1950 – 1960 and 1963 – 83 . In 1963 the Bristol Bus Boycott , following the Bristol Omnibus Company 's refusal to hire black drivers and conductors , drove the passage of the UK 's 1965 Race Relations Act . The 1980 St. Pauls riot protested against racism and police harassment and showed mounting dissatisfaction with the social and economic circumstances of the city 's Afro @-@ Caribbean residents . Local support of fair trade was recognised in 2005 , when Bristol became a Fairtrade zone . 
 Bristol is both a city and a county , since Edward III granted it a county charter in 1373 . The county was expanded in 1835 to include suburbs such as Clifton , and it was named a county borough in 1889 when that designation was introduced . On 1 April 1974 , Bristol became a local government district of the county of Avon . The city regained its independence and county status on 1 April 1996 , when Avon was abolished and Bristol became a unitary authority . 
 = = Geography and environment = = 
 = = = Boundaries = = = 
 Bristol 's boundaries are defined in several ways , depending on whether they are those of the city , the developed area , or Greater Bristol . The narrowest definition of the city is the city council boundary , which includes a large section of the western Severn Estuary up to ( but not including ) the islands of Steep Holm and Flat Holm . 
 A slightly broader definition used by the Office for National Statistics ( ONS ) includes developed areas adjoining Bristol but outside the city @-@ council boundary , such as Whitchurch village , Filton , Patchway and Bradley Stoke , but excludes undeveloped areas within that boundary . The ONS has defined a Bristol Urban Area , which includes Kingswood , Mangotsfield , Stoke Gifford , Winterbourne , Frampton Cotterell , Almondsbury and Easton in Gordano . The North Fringe of Bristol , a developed area in South Gloucestershire between the Bristol city boundary and the M4 and M5 motorways , was so named as part of a 1987 plan prepared by the <unk> District Council . 
 = = = Greater Bristol = = = 
 The term Greater Bristol , used by the Government Office of the South West ( now abolished ) , the Office for National Statistics and others , refers to the city and portions of the three neighbouring local authorities ‍ — ‌ Bath and North East Somerset , North Somerset and South Gloucestershire ‍ — ‌ an area sometimes called the " former Avon area " or the West of England Partnership ( WEP ) area . Greater Bristol does not include Bath or Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , which are included in the WEP area . The Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways ( FOSBR ) conflates the terms Greater Bristol and Suburban Bristol . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 Bristol is part of a limestone area running from the Mendip Hills in the south to the Cotswolds in the northeast . The rivers Avon and Frome cut through the limestone to the underlying clay , creating Bristol 's characteristically hilly landscape . The Avon flows from Bath in the east , through flood plains and areas which were marshes before the city 's growth . To the west the Avon cuts through the limestone to form the Avon Gorge , aided by glacial meltwater after the last ice age . 
 The gorge , which helped protect Bristol Harbour , has been quarried for stone to build the city , and its surrounding land has been protected from development as The Downs and Leigh Woods . The Avon estuary and the gorge are the county boundary with North Somerset , and the river flows into the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth . Another gorge , cut by the Hazel Brook ( which flows into the River Trym ) , crosses the Blaise Castle estate in northern Bristol . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Located in southern England , Bristol is one of the warmest cities in the UK with a mean annual temperature of approximately 10 @.@ 5 ° C ( 50 @.@ 9 ° F ) . It is among the sunniest , with 1 @,@ 541 – 1 @,@ 885 hours of sunshine per year . Although the city is partially sheltered by the Mendip Hills , it is exposed to the Severn Estuary and the Bristol Channel . Annual rainfall increases from north to south , with totals north of the Avon in the 600 – 900 mm ( 24 – 35 in ) range and 900 – 1 @,@ 200 mm ( 35 – 47 in ) south of the river . Rain is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year , with autumn and winter the wetter seasons . The Atlantic Ocean influences Bristol 's weather , keeping its average temperature above freezing throughout the year , but winter frosts are frequent and snow occasionally falls from early November to late April . Summers are warm and drier , with variable sunshine , rain and clouds , and spring weather is unsettled . 
 The weather stations nearest Bristol for which long @-@ term climate data are available are Long Ashton ( about 5 miles ( 8 km ) south west of the city centre ) and Bristol Weather Station , in the city centre . Data collection at these locations ended in 2002 and 2001 , respectively , and Filton Airfield is currently the nearest weather station to the city . Temperatures at Long Ashton from 1959 to 2002 ranged from 33 @.@ 5 ° C ( 92 @.@ 3 ° F ) in July 1976 to − 14 @.@ 4 ° C ( 6 @.@ 1 ° F ) in January 1982 . Monthly high temperatures since 2002 at Filton exceeding those recorded at Long Ashton include 25 @.@ 7 ° C ( 78 @.@ 3 ° F ) in April 2003 , 34 @.@ 5 ° C ( 94 @.@ 1 ° F ) in July 2006 and 26 @.@ 8 ° C ( 80 @.@ 2 ° F ) in October 2011 . The lowest recent temperature at Filton was − 10 @.@ 1 ° C ( 13 @.@ 8 ° F ) in December 2010 . Although large cities in general experience an urban heat island effect , with warmer temperatures than their surrounding rural areas , this phenomenon is minimal in Bristol . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 Bristol was ranked as Britain 's most @-@ sustainable city ( based on its environmental performance , quality of life , future @-@ proofing and approaches to climate change , recycling and biodiversity ) , topping environmental charity Forum for the Future 's 2008 Sustainable Cities Index . Local initiatives include Sustrans ( creators of the National Cycle Network , founded as <unk> in 1977 ) and <unk> , a non @-@ profit business established in 1988 by Avon Friends of the Earth . In 2014 The Sunday Times named it as the best city in Britain in which to live , The city received the 2015 European Green Capital Award , becoming the first UK city to receive this award . 
 = = Demography = = 
 In 2014 , the Office for National Statistics estimated the Bristol unitary authority 's population at 442 @,@ 474 , making it the 43rd @-@ largest ceremonial county in England . The ONS , using Census 2001 data , estimated the city 's population at 441 @,@ 556 and that of the contiguous urban area at 551 @,@ 066 . In 2006 the ONS estimated Bristol 's urban @-@ area population at 587 @,@ 400 , making it England 's sixth @-@ most @-@ populous city and ninth @-@ most @-@ populous urban area . At 3 @,@ 599 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 9 @,@ 321 / sq mi ) it has the seventh @-@ highest population density of any English district . 
 According to the 2011 census , 84 % of the population was White ( 77 @.@ 9 % White British , 0 @.@ 9 % White Irish , 0 @.@ 1 % Gypsy or Irish Travellers and 5 @.@ 1 % Other White ) ; 3 @.@ 6 % mixed @-@ race ( 1 @.@ 7 % white @-@ and @-@ black Caribbean , 0 @.@ 4 % white @-@ and @-@ black African , 0 @.@ 8 % white and Asian and 0 @.@ 7 % other mixed ) ; 5 @.@ 5 % Asian ( 1 @.@ 5 % Indian , 1 @.@ 6 % Pakistani , 0 @.@ 5 % Bangladeshi , 0 @.@ 9 % Chinese and one percent other Asian ) ; 6 % Black ( 2 @.@ 8 % African , 1 @.@ 6 % Caribbean , 1 @.@ 6 % Other Black ) , 0 @.@ 3 % Arab and 0 @.@ 6 % with other heritage . Bristol is unusual among major British towns and cities in its larger black than Asian population . These statistics apply to the Bristol Unitary Authority area , excluding areas of the urban area ( 2006 estimated population 587 @,@ 400 ) in South Gloucestershire , Bath and North East Somerset ( BANES ) and North Somerset — such as Kingswood , Mangotsfield , Filton and Warmley . 
 = = Economy and industry = = 
 Bristol has a long history of trade , originally exporting wool cloth and importing fish , wine , grain and dairy products ; later imports were tobacco , tropical fruits and plantation goods . Major imports are motor vehicles , grain , timber , produce and petroleum products . Since the 13th century , the rivers have been modified for docks ; during the 1240s , the Frome was diverted into a deep , man @-@ made channel ( known as Saint Augustine 's Reach ) which flowed into the River Avon . 
 Ships occasionally departed Bristol for Iceland as early as 1420 , and speculation exists that sailors from Bristol made landfall in the Americas before Christopher Columbus or John Cabot . Beginning in the early 1480s , the Bristol Society of Merchant Venturers sponsored exploration of the North Atlantic in search of trading opportunities . In 1552 , Edward VI granted a royal charter to the Merchant Venturers to manage the port . 
 By 1670 the city had 6 @,@ 000 tons of shipping ( of which half was imported tobacco ) , and by the late 17th and early 18th centuries shipping played a significant role in the slave trade . During the 18th century , Bristol was Britain 's second @-@ busiest port ; business was conducted in the trading area around The Exchange in Corn Street over bronze tables known as Nails . Although the Nails are cited as originating the phrase " cash on the nail " ( immediate payment ) , the phrase was probably in use before their installation . 
 The city 's economy also relies on the aerospace , defence , media , information technology , financial services and tourism industries . The Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) ' s Procurement Executive , later known as the Defence Procurement Agency and Defence Equipment and Support , moved to its headquarters at Abbey Wood , Filton , in 1995 . This organisation , with a staff of 7 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 , procures and supports MoD equipment . One of the UK 's most popular tourist destinations , Bristol was selected in 2009 as one of the world 's top @-@ ten cities by international travel publishers Dorling Kindersley in their Eyewitness guides for young adults . 
 Bristol is one of the eight largest regional English cities that make up the Core Cities Group , and is ranked as a gamma world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network , the fourth highest ranked English city . In 2014 Bristol 's gross domestic product was £ 30 @.@ 502 billion . Its per capita GDP was £ 46 @,@ 000 ( $ 65 @,@ 106 , € 57 @,@ 794 ) , which was some 65 % above the national average , the third highest of any English city ( after London and Nottingham ) and the sixth highest of any city in the United Kingdom ( behind London , Edinburgh , Glasgow , Belfast and Nottingham ) . Bristol 's March 2007 unemployment rate was 4 @.@ 8 % , compared with four percent for South West England and the national average of 5 @.@ 5 % . 
 Although Bristol 's economy no longer relies upon its port , which was moved to docks at Avonmouth during the 1870s and to the Royal Portbury Dock in 1977 as ship size increased , it is the largest importer of cars to the UK . Until 1991 , the port was publicly owned ; it is leased , with £ 330 million invested and its annual tonnage increasing from 3 @.@ 9 million long tons ( 4 million tonnes ) to 11 @.@ 8 million ( 12 million ) . Tobacco importing and cigarette manufacturing have ceased , but the importation of wine and spirits continues . 
 The financial services sector employs 59 @,@ 000 in the city , and 50 micro @-@ electronics and silicon design companies employ about 5 @,@ 000 . In 1983 Hewlett @-@ Packard opened its national research laboratory in Bristol . In 2014 the city was ranked seventh in the " top 10 UK destinations " by TripAdvisor . 
 During the 20th century , Bristol 's manufacturing activities expanded to include aircraft production at Filton by the Bristol Aeroplane Company and aircraft @-@ engine manufacturing by Bristol Aero Engines ( later Rolls @-@ Royce ) at Patchway . Bristol Aeroplane was known for their World War I Bristol Fighter and World War II Blenheim and Beaufighter planes . During the 1950s they were a major English manufacturer of civilian aircraft , known for the Freighter , Britannia and Brabazon . The company diversified into automobile manufacturing during the 1940s , producing hand @-@ built , luxury Bristol Cars at their factory in Filton , and the Bristol Cars company was spun off in 1960 . The city also gave its name to Bristol buses , which were manufactured in the city from 1908 to 1983 : by Bristol Tramways until 1955 , and from 1955 to 1983 by Bristol Commercial Vehicles . 
 Filton played a key role in the Anglo @-@ French Concorde supersonic airliner project during the 1960s . The British Concorde prototype made its maiden flight from Filton to RAF Fairford on 9 April 1969 , five weeks after the French test flight . In 2003 British Airways and Air France decided to discontinue Concorde flights , retiring the aircraft to locations ( primarily museums ) worldwide . On 26 November 2003 Concorde 216 made the final Concorde flight , returning to Bristol Filton Airport as the centrepiece of a proposed air museum which is planned to include the existing Bristol Aero collection ( including a Bristol Britannia ) . 
 The aerospace industry remains a major sector of the local economy . Major aerospace companies in Bristol include BAE Systems , a merger of Marconi Electronic Systems and BAe ( the latter a merger of BAC , Hawker Siddeley and Scottish Aviation ) . Airbus and Rolls @-@ Royce are also based at Filton , and aerospace engineering is an area of research at the University of the West of England . Another aviation company in the city is Cameron Balloons , who manufacture hot air balloons ; each August the city hosts the Bristol International Balloon Fiesta , one of Europe 's largest hot @-@ air balloon festivals . 
 In 2005 Bristol was named by the UK government one of England 's six science cities . A £ 500 million shopping centre , Cabot Circus , opened in 2008 amidst predictions by developers and politicians that the city would become one of England 's top ten retail destinations . The Bristol Temple Quarter Enterprise Zone , focused on creative , high @-@ tech and low @-@ carbon industries around Bristol Temple Meads railway station , was announced in 2011 and launched the following year . The 70 @-@ hectare ( 170 @-@ acre ) Urban Enterprise Zone has streamlined planning procedures and reduced business rates . Rates generated by the zone are channelled to five other designated enterprise areas in the region : Avonmouth , Bath , Bristol and Bath Science Park in Emersons Green , Filton , and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . Bristol is the only big city whose wealth per capita is higher than that of Britain as a whole . With a highly skilled workforce drawn from its universities , Bristol claims to have the largest cluster of computer chip designers and manufacturers outside Silicon Valley . The wider region has one of the biggest aerospace hubs in the UK , centred on Airbus , Rolls @-@ Royce and GKN at Filton airfield . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 Bristol has a thriving current and historical arts scene . Some of the modern venues and modern digital production companies have merged with legacy production companies based in old buildings around the city . In 2008 the city was a finalist for the 2008 European Capital of Culture , although the title was awarded to Liverpool . 
 The Bristol Old Vic , founded in 1946 as an offshoot of The Old Vic in London , occupies the 1766 Theatre Royal ( 607 seats ) on King Street ; the 150 @-@ seat New Vic ( a studio @-@ type theatre ) , and a foyer and bar in the adjacent Coopers ' Hall ( built in 1743 ) . The Theatre Royal , a grade I listed building , is the oldest continuously operating theatre in England . The Bristol Old Vic Theatre School ( which originated in King Street ) is a separate company , and the Bristol Hippodrome is a 1 @,@ 951 @-@ seat theatre for national touring productions . Other smaller theatres include the Tobacco Factory , <unk> , the Redgrave Theatre at Clifton College and the Alma Tavern . Bristol 's theatre scene features several companies as well as the Old Vic , including Show of Strength , Shakespeare at the Tobacco Factory and Travelling Light . Theatre Bristol is a partnership between the city council , Arts Council England and local residents to develop the city 's theatre industry . Several organisations support Bristol theatre ; the Residence ( an artist @-@ led community ) provides office , social and rehearsal space for theatre and performance companies , and Equity has a branch in the city . 
 The city has many venues for live music , its largest the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Colston Hall named after Edward Colston . Others include the Bristol Academy , The Fleece , The Croft , the Exchange , Fiddlers , the Victoria Rooms , Trinity Centre , St George 's Bristol and several pubs , from the jazz @-@ oriented The Old Duke to rock at the Fleece and Firkin and indie bands at the Louisiana . In 2010 PRS for Music called Bristol the UK 's most musical city , based on the number of its members born there relative to the city 's population . Since the late 1970s Bristol has been home to bands combining punk , funk , dub and political consciousness , and trip hop and Bristol Sound artists such as Tricky , Portishead and Massive Attack ; the list of bands from Bristol is extensive . The city is a stronghold of drum and bass , with artists such as Roni Size 's Mercury Prize @-@ winning <unk> , as DJ Krust and More Rockers . This music is part of the Bristol urban @-@ culture scene which received international media attention during the 1990s . 
 The Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery houses a collection encompassing natural history , archaeology , local glassware , Chinese ceramics and art . The M Shed museum opened in 2011 on the site of the former Bristol Industrial Museum . Both are operated by Bristol Museums , Galleries and Archives , which also runs three historic houses ‍ — ‌ the Tudor Red Lodge , the Georgian House and Blaise Castle House ‍ — ‌ and Bristol Record Office . The 18th- and 19th @-@ century portrait painter Thomas Lawrence , 19th @-@ century architect Francis Greenway ( designer of many of Sydney 's first buildings ) were born in the city . The graffiti artist Banksy is believed to be from Bristol , and many of his works are on display in the city . 
 The Watershed Media Centre and Arnolfini gallery ( both in dockside warehouses ) exhibit contemporary art , photography and cinema , and the city 's oldest gallery is at the Royal West of England Academy in Clifton . The nomadic Antlers Gallery opened in 2010 , moving into empty spaces on Park Street , on Whiteladies Road and in the Purifier House on Bristol 's Harbourside . Stop motion animation films and commercials ( produced by Aardman Animations ) are made in Bristol . Bristol is home to the regional headquarters of BBC West and the BBC Natural History Unit . Locations in and around Bristol have featured in the BBC 's natural @-@ history programmes , including Animal Magic ( filmed at Bristol Zoo ) . 
 Bristol is the birthplace of 18th @-@ century poets Robert Southey and Thomas Chatterton . Southey ( born on Wine Street in 1774 ) and his friend , Samuel Taylor Coleridge , married the Fricker sisters from the city . William Wordsworth spent time in Bristol , where Joseph Cottle published Lyrical Ballads in 1798 . Comedians from the city include Justin Lee Collins , Lee Evans Russell Howard and writer @-@ comedian Stephen Merchant . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Bristol has 51 Grade I , 500 Grade II * and over 3 @,@ 800 Grade II listed buildings in a variety of architectural styles , from medieval to modern . During the mid @-@ 19th century Bristol Byzantine , a style unique to the city , was developed , and several examples have survived . Buildings from most architectural periods of the United Kingdom can be seen in the city . Surviving elements of the fortifications and castle date to the medieval period , and the Church of St James dates back to the 12th century . 
 The oldest Grade I listed buildings in Bristol are religious . St James ' Priory was founded in 1129 as a Benedictine priory by Earl Robert of Gloucester , the illegitimate son of Henry I. The second oldest is Bristol Cathedral and its associated Great Gatehouse . Founded in 1140 , the church became the seat of the bishop and cathedral of the new Diocese of Bristol in 1542 . Most of the medieval stonework , particularly the Elder Lady Chapel , is made from limestone taken from quarries around Dundry and Felton with Bath stone being used in other areas . Amongst the other churches included in the list is the 12th century St Mary Redcliffe which is the tallest building in Bristol . The church was described by Queen Elizabeth I as " the fairest , goodliest , and most famous parish church in England . " 
 Secular buildings include The Red Lodge , built in 1580 for John Yonge as a lodge for a larger house that once stood on the site of the present Colston Hall . It was subsequently added to in Georgian times and restored in the early 20th century . St Bartholomew 's Hospital is a 12th @-@ century town house which was incorporated into a monastery hospital founded in 1240 by Sir John la Warr , 2nd Baron De La Warr ( c . 1277 – 1347 ) , and became Bristol Grammar School from 1532 to 1767 , and then Queen Elizabeth 's Hospital 1767 – 1847 . The round piers predate the hospital , and may come from an aisled hall , the earliest remains of domestic architecture in the city , which was then adapted to form the hospital chapel . Three 17th @-@ century town houses which were attached to the hospital were incorporated into model workers ' flats in 1865 , and converted to offices in 1978 . St Nicholas 's Almshouses were built in 1652 to provide care for the poor . Several public houses were also built in this period , including the Llandoger Trow on King Street and the Hatchet Inn . 
 Manor houses include Goldney Hall , where the highly decorated Grotto dates from 1739 . Commercial buildings such as the Exchange and Old Post Office from the 1740s are also included in the list . Residential buildings include the Georgian Portland Square and the complex of small cottages around a green at Blaise Hamlet , which was built around 1811 for retired employees of Quaker banker and philanthropist John Scandrett Harford , who owned Blaise Castle House . The 18th @-@ century Kings Weston House , in northern Bristol , was designed by John Vanbrugh and is the only Vanbrugh building in any UK city outside London . Almshouses and pubs from the same period intermingle with modern development . Several Georgian squares were designed for the middle class as prosperity increased during the 18th century . During World War II , the city centre was heavily bombed during the Bristol Blitz . The central shopping area near Wine Street and Castle Street was particularly hard @-@ hit , and the Dutch House and St Peter 's Hospital were destroyed . Nevertheless , in 1961 John Betjeman called Bristol " the most beautiful , interesting and distinguished city in England " . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Bristol has teams representing all the major national sports . Bristol City and Bristol Rovers are the city 's main football clubs . Bristol Rugby ( Rugby Union ) and Gloucestershire County Cricket Club are also based in the city . 
 The two Football League clubs are Bristol City and Bristol Rovers ‍ — ‌ the former being the only club from the city to play in the precursor to the Premier League . Non @-@ league clubs include Mangotsfield United , Bristol Manor Farm and Brislington . Bristol City , formed in 1897 , were Division One runners @-@ up in 1907 and lost the FA Cup final in 1909 . In the First Division in 1976 , they then sank to the bottom professional tier before reforming after a 1982 bankruptcy . Bristol City were promoted to the second tier of English football in 2007 , losing to Hull City in the playoff for promotion to the Premier League that season . 
 Bristol Rovers , the oldest professional football team in the city , were formed in 1883 and promoted back into the football league in 2015 . They were third @-@ tier champions twice ( Division Three South in 1952 – 53 and Division Three in 1989 – 90 ) , Watney Cup Winners ( 1972 ) and runners @-@ up for the Johnstone 's Paint Trophy ( 2006 – 07 ) although have never played in England 's top Division . The club has planning permission for a new 21 @,@ 700 @-@ capacity all @-@ seater stadium at the University of the West of England 's Frenchay campus . Construction was due to begin in mid @-@ 2014 , but in March 2015 the sale of the Memorial Stadium site ( needed to finance the new stadium ) was in jeopardy . Bristol Academy Women 's Football Club is based at South Gloucestershire and Stroud College . 
 The city is also home to Bristol Rugby , formed in 1888 as Bristol Football Club by the merger of the Carlton club with rival Redland Park . Westbury Park declined the merger and folded , with many of its players joining Bristol . Bristol Rugby has often competed at the highest level of the sport since its formation in 1888 . The club played at the Memorial Ground , which it shared with Bristol Rovers from 1996 . Although Bristol Rugby owned the stadium when the football club arrived , a decline in the rugby club 's fortunes led to a transfer of ownership to Bristol Rovers . In 2014 Bristol Rugby moved to their new home , Ashton Gate Stadium ( home to Bristol Rovers ' rivals Bristol City ) , for the 2014 – 15 season . Dating from 1901 , the Bristol Combination and its 53 clubs promote rugby union in the city and help support Bristol Rugby . The most prominent of Bristol 's smaller rugby clubs include Clifton Rugby , <unk> Crusaders , and Cleve . Rugby league is represented in Bristol by the Bristol Sonics . 
 The first @-@ class cricket club Gloucestershire County Cricket Club has its headquarters and plays the majority of its home games at the Bristol County Ground , the only major international sports venue in the south west of England . It was formed by the family of W. G. Grace . The club is arguably Bristol 's most successful , achieving a period of success between 1999 and 2006 when it won nine trophies and became the most formidable one @-@ day outfit in England , including winning a " double double " in 1999 and 2000 ( both the Benson and Hedges Cup and the C & G Trophy ) , and the Sunday League in 2000 . Gloucestershire CCC also won the Royal London One @-@ Day Cup in 2015 . 
 The Bristol Flyers basketball team have competed in the British Basketball League , the UK 's premier professional basketball league , since 2014 . Bristol Aztecs play in Britain 's premier American football competition , the BAFA National Leagues . In 2009 ice hockey returned to Bristol after a 17 @-@ year absence , with the Bristol Pitbulls playing at Bristol Ice Rink ; after its closure , it shared a venue with Oxford City Stars . Bristol sponsors an annual half marathon and hosted the 2001 IAAF World Half Marathon Championships . Athletic clubs in Bristol include Bristol and West AC , Bitton Road Runners and Westbury Harriers . Bristol has staged finishes and starts of the Tour of Britain cycle race and facilities in the city were used as training camps for the 2012 London Olympics . The Bristol International Balloon Fiesta , a major UK hot @-@ air ballooning event , is held each summer at Ashton Court . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Bristol is home to the regional headquarters of BBC West and the BBC Natural History Unit based at Broadcasting House , which produces television , radio and online content with a natural history or wildlife theme . These include nature documentaries , including The Blue Planet and Planet Earth . The city has a long association with David Attenborough 's authored documentaries , including Life on Earth . 
 Bristol has two daily newspapers , the Western Daily Press and the Bristol Post ; a weekly free newspaper , the Bristol Observer ; and a Bristol edition of the free Metro newspaper . All are owned by the Trinity Mirror Group . 
 The city has several radio stations , including BBC Radio Bristol . Bristol 's television productions include Points West for BBC West , Endemol productions such as Deal or No Deal , and ITV News West Country for ITV West & Wales ( formerly HTV West ) and ITV Westcountry . The hospital drama Casualty , formerly filmed in Bristol , moved to Cardiff in 2012 . Bristol has been a location for the Channel 4 comedy @-@ drama Teachers , the BBC drama Mistresses , the E4 teen drama Skins and the BBC3 comedy @-@ drama Being Human ; the latter moved to Barry after series two . 
 Publishers in the city have included 18th @-@ century Bristolian Joseph Cottle , who helped introduce Romanticism by publishing the works of William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge . During the 19th century , J.W. Arrowsmith published the Victorian comedies Three Men in a Boat ( by Jerome K. Jerome ) and The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith . The contemporary Redcliffe Press has published over 200 books covering all aspects of the city . Bristol is home to YouTube video producers The Yogscast , with founders Simon Lane and Lewis Brindley moving their operations from Reading to Bristol in 2012 . 
 = = = Dialect = = = 
 A dialect of English , known as Bristolian , Bristolese , <unk> or Bristle ( after the publication of Derek Robson 's " Krek Waiters peak Bristle " ) is spoken by longtime residents , who are known as Bristolians . Bristol natives have a rhotic accent , in which the post @-@ vocalic r in " car " and " card " is pronounced ( unlike in Received Pronunciation ) . The unique feature of this accent is the " Bristol ( or terminal ) l " , in which l is appended to words ending in a or o . Whether this is a broad l or a w is a subject of debate , with " area " pronounced " areal " or " <unk> " . The ending of " Bristol " is another example of the Bristol l . Bristolians pronounce -a and -o at the end of a word as <unk> ( <unk> ) . To non @-@ natives , the pronunciation suggests an l after the vowel . 
 Until recently Bristolese was characterised by retention of the second @-@ person singular , as in the doggerel " Cassn 't see what bist looking at ? Cassn 't see as well as couldst , <unk> ? And if couldst , ' <unk> 't , ' <unk> ? " The West Saxon bist is used for the English " art " , and children were admonished with " Thee and thou , the Welshman 's cow " . In Bristolese , as in French and German , the second @-@ person singular was not used when speaking to a superior ( except by the egalitarian Quakers ) . The pronoun " thee " is also used in the subject position ( " What bist thee doing ? " ) , and " I " or " he " in the object position ( " Give he to I. " ) . Linguist Stanley Ellis , who found that many dialect words in the Filton area were linked to aerospace work , described Bristolese as " a cranky , crazy , crab @-@ apple tree of language and with the sharpest , juiciest flavour that I 've heard for a long time " . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 In the 2011 United Kingdom census , 46 @.@ 8 % of Bristol 's population identified as Christian and 37 @.@ 4 % said they were not religious ; the English averages were 59 @.@ 4 % and 24 @.@ 7 % , respectively . Islam is observed by 5 @.@ 1 % of the population , Buddhism by 0 @.@ 6 % , Hinduism by 0 @.@ 6 % , Sikhism by 0 @.@ 5 % , Judaism by 0 @.@ 2 % and other religions 0 @.@ 7 % ; 8 @.@ 1 % did not identify with a religion . 
 Bristol has several Christian churches ; the most notable are the Anglican Bristol Cathedral and St Mary Redcliffe and the Roman Catholic Clifton Cathedral . Nonconformist chapels include Buckingham Baptist Chapel and John Wesley 's New Room in Broadmead . After St James ' Presbyterian Church was bombed on 24 November 1940 , it was never again used as a church ; although its bell tower remains , its nave was converted into offices . The city has eleven mosques , several Buddhist meditation centres , a Hindu temple , Reform and Orthodox @-@ Jewish synagogues and four Sikh temples . 
 = = Education , science and technology = = 
 Bristol has two major institutions of higher education : the University of Bristol , a " redbrick " chartered in 1909 , and its main building opened in 1925 . A polytechnic university opened in 1969 , giving the city a second institute of higher education which became the University of the West of England in 1992 . The University of Law also has a campus in the city . Bristol has two further education institutions ( City of Bristol College and South Gloucestershire and Stroud College ) and three theological colleges : Trinity College , Wesley College and Bristol Baptist College . The city has 129 infant , junior and primary schools , 17 secondary schools , and three learning centres . After a section of north London , Bristol has England 's second @-@ highest number of independent @-@ school places . Independent schools in the city include Clifton College , Clifton High School , Badminton School , Bristol Grammar School , Redland High School , Queen Elizabeth 's Hospital ( the only all @-@ boys school ) and the Red Maids ' School ( founded in 1634 by John Whitson , which claims to be England 's oldest girls ' school ) . 
 In 2005 Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown named Bristol one of six English " science cities " , and a £ 300 million science park was planned at Emersons Green . Research is conducted at the two universities , the Bristol Royal Infirmary and Southmead Hospital , and science is demonstrated at At @-@ Bristol , the Bristol Zoo , the Bristol Festival of Nature and the Create Centre . 
 The city has produced a number of scientists , including 19th @-@ century chemist Humphry Davy ( who worked in Hotwells ) . Physicist Paul Dirac ( from Bishopston ) received the 1933 Nobel Prize for his contributions to quantum mechanics . Cecil Frank Powell was the Melvill Wills Professor of Physics at the University of Bristol when he received the 1950 Nobel Prize for , among other discoveries , his photographic method of studying nuclear processes . Colin <unk> was the planetary scientist behind the Beagle 2 project , and neuropsychologist Richard Gregory founded the Exploratory ( a hands @-@ on science centre which was the predecessor of At @-@ Bristol ) . 
 Initiatives such as the Flying Start Challenge encourage an interest in science and engineering in Bristol secondary @-@ school pupils ; links with aerospace companies impart technical information and advance student understanding of design . The Bloodhound SSC project to break the land speed record is based at the Bloodhound Technology Centre on the city 's harbourside . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Bristol has two principal railway stations . Bristol Temple Meads ( near the city centre ) has First Great Western service which includes high @-@ speed trains to London Paddington station and local , regional and CrossCountry trains . Bristol Parkway , north of the city centre , has high @-@ speed First Great Western service to Swansea , Cardiff Central and London Paddington and CrossCountry service to Birmingham and the North East . Limited service to London Waterloo via Clapham Junction from Bristol Temple Meads is operated by South West Trains , and there are scheduled coach links to most major UK cities . 
 The M4 motorway connects the city on an east @-@ west axis from London to West Wales , and the M5 is a north – south west axis from Birmingham to Exeter . The M49 motorway is a shortcut between the M5 in the south and the M4 Severn Crossing in the west , and the M32 is a spur from the M4 to the city centre . 
 The runway , terminal and other facilities at Bristol Airport ( <unk> ) , Lulsgate , have been upgraded since 2001 . Public transport in the city consists primarily of a FirstGroup ( formerly the Bristol Omnibus Company ) bus network . Other providers are Abus , Wessex and Wessex Star , operated by Wessex for the two universities . Bristol 's bus service has been criticised as unreliable and expensive , and in 2005 FirstGroup was fined for delays and safety violations . 
 Private car use is high in the city , leading to traffic congestion costing an estimated £ 350 million per year . Bristol allows motorcycles to use most of the city 's bus lanes and provides secure , free parking for them . Although the city council has included a light rail system in its local transport plan since 2000 , it has not yet funded the project ; Bristol was offered European Union funding for the system , but the Department for Transport did not provide the required additional funding . 
 A new bus rapid transit system ( BRT ) called MetroBus , is currently under construction across Bristol , as of 2015 , to provide a faster and reliable service than buses , improve transport infrastructure and reduce congestion . The MetroBus rapid transit scheme will run on both bus lanes and segregated guided busways on three routes ; Ashton Vale to Temple Meads ( <unk> ) , North Fringe to Hengrove and South Bristol Link ( <unk> ) . MetroBus services are expected to start in 2017 . 
 Several road @-@ construction plans , including re @-@ routing and improving the South Bristol Ring Road , are supported by the city council . Three park and ride sites serve Bristol . The city centre has water transport operated by Bristol Ferry Boats , Bristol Packet Boat Trips and Number Seven Boat Trips , providing leisure and commuter service in the harbour . 
 Bristol 's principal surviving suburban railway is the Severn Beach Line to Avonmouth and Severn Beach . Although Portishead Railway 's passenger service was a casualty of the Beeching cuts , freight service to the Royal Portbury Dock was restored from 2000 to 2002 with a Strategic Rail Authority rail @-@ freight grant . The MetroWest scheme , formerly known as The Greater Bristol Metro , proposes to increase the city 's rail capacity as well as the restoration of a further 3 miles ( 5 km ) of track to Portishead ( a dormitory town with one connecting road ) , despite concerns about insufficient funds to rebuild stations , is scheduled for completion by 2019 . 
 Bristol was designated as England 's first " cycling city " in 2008 and is home to Sustrans , the sustainable transport charity . The city has urban cycle routes and links with National Cycle Network routes to Bath , London , Gloucester , Wales and South West England . Cycling trips have increased by 21 % from 2001 to 2005 . 
 = = Twin cities = = 
 Bristol was among the first cities to adopt town twinning after World War II . Twin towns include : 
 Bordeaux , France ( since 1947 ) 
 Hanover , Germany ( since 1947 ; one of the first post @-@ war twinnings of British and German cities ) 
 Porto , Portugal ( since 1984 ) 
 Tbilisi , Georgia ( since 1988 ) 
 Puerto Morazán , Nicaragua ( since 1989 ) 
 Beira , Mozambique ( since 1990 ) 
 Guangzhou , China ( since 2001 ) 
 = Production – possibility frontier = 
 A production – possibility frontier ( AKA Production Possibility Curve ( PPC ) ) is a graphical representation of possible combination of two goods with constant resources and technology . 
 It is a graph representing production tradeoffs of an economy given fixed resources . It is a graphical representation of the maximal mix of outputs that an economy can achieve by fully using its existing resources and in the most efficient way . 
 In its microeconomic applications , the graph shows the various combinations of amounts of two commodities that an economy can produce per unit of time ( such as number of guns vs. kilograms of butter ) using a fixed amount of each of the factors of production , given the production technologies available . 
 At the macroeconomic level , it can be used to depict other <unk> trade @-@ offs like production of fixed capital versus production of consumer goods . Graphically bounding the production set for fixed input quantities , the PPF curve shows the maximum possible production level of one commodity for any given production level of the other , given the existing state of technology . 
 By doing so , it defines productive efficiency in the context of that production set : a point on the frontier indicates efficient use of the available inputs , and a point beneath the curve indicates inefficiency . The commodities compared can be goods or services . The combination represented by the point on the PPF where an efficient economy operates shows the priorities or choices of the economy , such as the choice of producing more capital goods and fewer consumer goods , or vice versa . 
 <unk> are normally drawn as bulging upwards or outwards from the origin ( " concave " ) , but they can be represented as bulging downward ( inwards ) or linear ( straight ) , depending on a number of factors . A PPF illustrates a number of economic concepts , such as scarcity of resources ( the fundamental economic problem that all societies face ) , opportunity cost ( or marginal rate of transformation ) , productive efficiency , <unk> efficiency , and economies of scale . 
 An outward shift of the PPF results from growth of the availability of inputs , such as physical capital or labour or technological progress in knowledge of how to transform inputs into outputs . Such a shift reflects economic growth of an economy already operating at its full productivity ( on the PPF ) , which means that more of both outputs can be produced during the specified period of time without sacrificing the output of either good . Conversely , the PPF will shift inward if the labor force shrinks , the supply of raw materials is depleted , or a natural disaster decreases the stock of physical capital . 
 However , most economic contractions reflect not that less can be produced but that the economy has started operating below the frontier , as typically , both labor and physical capital are underemployed . 
 = = Indicators = = 
 = = = Efficiency = = = 
 A PPF ( production possibility frontier ) typically takes the form of the curve illustrated on the right . An economy that is operating on the PPF is said to be efficient , meaning that it would be impossible to produce more of one good without decreasing production of the other good . In contrast , if the economy is operating below the curve , it is said to be operating inefficiently because it could reallocate resources in order to produce more of both goods or some resources such as labor or capital are sitting idle and could be fully employed to produce more of both goods . 
 For example , if one assumes that the economy 's available quantities of factors of production do not change over time and that technological progress does not occur , if the economy is operating on the PPF , production of guns would need to be sacrificed to produce more butter . If production is efficient , the economy can choose between combinations ( points ) on the PPF : B if guns are of interest , C if more butter is needed , D if an equal mix of butter and guns is required . 
 In the PPF , all points on the curve are points of maximum productive efficiency ( no more output of any good can be achieved from the given inputs without sacrificing output of some good ) ; all points inside the frontier ( such as A ) can be produced but are productively inefficient ; all points outside the curve ( such as X ) cannot be produced with the given , existing resources . Not all points on the curve are Pareto efficient , however ; only in the case where the marginal rate of transformation is equal to all consumers ' marginal rate of substitution and hence equal to the ratio of prices will it be impossible to find any trade that will make no consumer worse off . 
 Any point that lies either on the production possibilities curve or to the left of it is said to be an attainable point : it can be produced with currently available resources . Points that lie to the right of the production possibilities curve are said to be unattainable because they cannot be produced using currently available resources . Points that lie strictly to the left of the curve are said to be inefficient , because existing resources would allow for production of more of at least one good without sacrificing the production of any other good . An efficient point is one that lies on the production possibilities curve . At any such point , more of one good can be produced only by producing less of the other . 
 Such a two @-@ good world is a theoretical simplification because of the difficulty of graphical analysis of multiple goods . If we are interested in one good , a composite score of the other goods can be generated using different techniques . Furthermore , the production model can be generalised using higher @-@ dimensional techniques such as Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) and others . 
 = = = Opportunity cost = = = 
 From a starting point on the frontier , if there is no increase in productive resources , increasing production of a first good entails decreasing production of a second , because resources must be transferred to the first and away from the second . Points along the curve describe the tradeoff between the goods . The sacrifice in the production of the second good is called the opportunity cost ( because increasing production of the first good entails losing the opportunity to produce some amount of the second ) . Opportunity cost is measured in the number of units of the second good forgone for one or more units of the first good . 
 In the context of a PPF , opportunity cost is directly related to the shape of the curve ( see below ) . If the shape of the PPF curve is a straight @-@ line , the opportunity cost is constant as production of different goods is changing . But , opportunity cost usually will vary depending on the start and end points . In the diagram on the right , producing 10 more packets of butter , at a low level of butter production , costs the loss of 5 guns ( shown as a movement from A to B ) . At point C , the economy is already close to its maximum potential butter output . To produce 10 more packets of butter , 50 guns must be sacrificed ( as with a movement from C to D ) . The ratio of gains to losses is determined by the marginal rate of transformation . 
 = = = Marginal rate of transformation = = = 
 The slope of the production – possibility frontier ( PPF ) at any given point is called the marginal rate of transformation ( MRT ) . The slope defines the rate at which production of one good can be redirected ( by reallocation of productive resources ) into production of the other . It is also called the ( marginal ) " opportunity cost " of a commodity , that is , it is the opportunity cost of X in terms of Y at the margin . It measures how much of good Y is given up for one more unit of good X or vice versa . The shape of a PPF is commonly drawn as concave to the origin to represent increasing opportunity cost with increased output of a good . Thus , MRT increases in absolute size as one moves from the top left of the PPF to the bottom right of the PPF . 
 The marginal rate of transformation can be expressed in terms of either commodity . The marginal opportunity costs of guns in terms of butter is simply the reciprocal of the marginal opportunity cost of butter in terms of guns . If , for example , the ( absolute ) slope at point BB in the diagram is equal to 2 , to produce one more packet of butter , the production of 2 guns must be sacrificed . If at AA , the marginal opportunity cost of butter in terms of guns is equal to 0 @.@ 25 , the sacrifice of one gun could produce four packets of butter , and the opportunity cost of guns in terms of butter is 4 . 
 = = Shape = = 
 The production @-@ possibility frontier can be constructed from the contract curve in an Edgeworth production box diagram of factor intensity . The example used above ( which demonstrates increasing opportunity costs , with a curve concave to the origin ) is the most common form of PPF . It represents a disparity , in the factor intensities and technologies of the two production sectors . That is , as an economy specializes more and more into one product ( such as moving from point B to point D ) , the opportunity cost of producing that product increases , because we are using more and more resources that are less efficient in producing it . With increasing production of butter , workers from the gun industry will move to it . At first , the least qualified ( or most general ) gun workers will be transferred into making more butter , and moving these workers has little impact on the opportunity cost of increasing butter production : the loss in gun production will be small . However , the cost of producing successive units of butter will increase as resources that are more and more specialized in gun production are moved into the butter industry . 
 If opportunity costs are constant , a straight @-@ line ( linear ) PPF is produced . This case reflects a situation where resources are not specialised and can be substituted for each other with no added cost . Products requiring similar resources ( bread and pastry , for instance ) will have an almost straight PPF and so almost constant opportunity costs . More specifically , with constant returns to scale , there are two opportunities for a linear PPF : if there was only one factor of production to consider or if the factor intensity ratios in the two sectors were constant at all points on the production @-@ possibilities curve . With varying returns to scale , however , it may not be entirely linear in either case . 
 With economies of scale , the PPF would curve inward , with the opportunity cost of one good falling as more of it is produced . Specialization in producing successive units of a good determines its opportunity cost ( say from mass production methods or specialization of labor ) . 
 = = Position = = 
 The two main determinants of the position of the PPF at any given time are the state of technology and management expertise ( which are reflected in the available production functions ) and the available quantities of factors of production ( materials , direct labor , and factory overhead ) . 
 Only points on or within a PPF are actually possible to achieve in the short run . In the long run , if technology improves or if the supply of factors of production increases , the economy 's capacity to produce both goods increases ; if this potential is realized , economic growth occurs . That increase is shown by a shift of the production @-@ possibility frontier to the right . Conversely , a natural , military or ecological disaster might move the PPF to the left in response to a reduction in an economy 's productive capability . Thus all points on or within the curve are part of the production set : combinations of goods that the economy could potentially produce . 
 If the two production goods depicted are capital investment ( to increase future production possibilities ) and current consumption goods , the higher is investment this year , the more the PPF would shift out in following years . Shifts of the curve can represent how technological progress that favors production possibilities of one good , say guns , more than the other shifts the PPF outwards more along the favored good 's axis , " biasing " production possibilities in that direction . Similarly , if one good makes more use of say capital and if capital grows faster than other factors , growth possibilities might be biased in favor of the capital @-@ intensive good . 
 = = Other applications = = 
 In microeconomics , the PPF shows the options open to an individual , household , or firm in a two @-@ good world . By definition , each point on the curve is productively efficient , but , given the nature of market demand , some points will be more profitable than others . Equilibrium for a firm will be the combination of outputs on the PPF that is most profitable . 
 From a macroeconomic perspective , the PPF illustrates the production possibilities available to a nation or economy during a given period of time for broad categories of output . It is traditionally used to show the movement between committing all funds to consumption on the y @-@ axis versus investment on the x @-@ axis . However , an economy may achieve productive efficiency without necessarily being <unk> efficient . Market failure ( such as imperfect competition or externalities ) and some institutions of social decision @-@ making ( such as government and tradition ) may lead to the wrong combination of goods being produced ( hence the wrong mix of resources being allocated between producing the two goods ) compared to what consumers would prefer , given what is feasible on the PPF . 
 = SMS Hannover = 
 SMS Hannover ( " His Majesty 's Ship Hannover " ) was the second of five Deutschland @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) . Hannover and the three subsequently constructed ships differed slightly in both design and construction from the lead ship Deutschland in their propulsion systems and slightly thicker armor . Hannover was laid down in November 1904 and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in October 1907 ; this was ten months after the revolutionary " all @-@ big @-@ gun " HMS Dreadnought was commissioned into the Royal Navy . As a result , Hannover was obsolete as a capital ship before she was even completed ; Dreadnought 's more powerful main battery and higher speed would have made it unwise for a ship like Hannover to engage her in the line of battle . The ship was named after the Prussian province of Hannover , now in Lower Saxony . 
 Hannover and her sisters saw extensive service with the fleet . The ship took part in all major training maneuvers until World War I broke out in July 1914 . Hannover and her sisters were immediately pressed into guard duties in the mouth of the Elbe River while the rest of the fleet mobilized . The ship took part in a number of fleet advances , which culminated in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . During the battle , Hannover served as the flagship for the IV Division of the II Battle Squadron . After Jutland , Hannover and her three surviving sisters were removed from active duty with the fleet to serve as guard ships . In 1917 , Hannover was briefly used as a target ship before being returned to guard duties in the Baltic Sea . The ship was decommissioned in December 1918 , shortly after the end of the war . 
 Hannover was brought back to active service in the Reichsmarine , the post @-@ war Germany navy . She served with the fleet for ten years , from 1921 to 1931 , before she was again decommissioned . The navy planned to convert the ship into a radio @-@ controlled target ship for aircraft , but this was never carried out . The ship was ultimately broken up for scrap between 1944 and 1946 in Bremerhaven . Her bell is preserved at the Military History Museum of the Bundeswehr in Dresden . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Hannover was intended to fight in the German battle line with the other battleships of the High Seas Fleet . The ship was laid down on 7 November 1904 at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven . She was launched on 29 May 1905 and commissioned for trials on 1 October 1907 , but the fleet exercises in the Skagerrak in November interrupted the trials . Trials resumed after the maneuvers were completed , and by 13 February 1908 Hannover was ready to join the active fleet . She was assigned to the II Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet , joining her sisters Deutschland and Pommern . However , the new British battleship HMS Dreadnought — armed with ten 12 @-@ inch ( 30 @.@ 5 cm ) guns — was commissioned in December 1906 , well before Hannover entered service . Dreadnought 's revolutionary design rendered obsolete every ship of the German navy , including the brand @-@ new Hannover . 
 Hannover was 127 @.@ 60 m ( 418 ft 8 in ) long , had a beam of 22 @.@ 20 m ( 72 ft 10 in ) , and a draft of 8 @.@ 21 m ( 26 ft 11 in ) . She had a full @-@ load displacement of 14 @,@ 218 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 993 long tons ) . The ship was equipped with triple expansion engines that produced a rated 17 @,@ 524 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 068 kW ) and a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . At a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , she could steam for 4 @,@ 520 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 370 km ; 5 @,@ 200 mi ) . 
 The ship 's primary armament consisted of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 40 guns in two twin turrets . She was also equipped with fourteen 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) guns mounted in casemates and twenty 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) guns in pivot mounts . The ship was also armed with six 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 72 in ) torpedo tubes , all of which were submerged in the hull . 
 = = Service = = 
 Upon her commissioning , Hannover joined the II Battle Squadron . From May to June 1908 , Hannover took part in maneuvers in the North Sea . From the following month until August , the fleet conducted a training cruise into the Atlantic . During the cruise , Hannover stopped in Punta Delgado in the Azores from 23 July to 1 August . The annual autumn exercises began in September ; after these were completed Hannover was transferred to the I Squadron , where she served as the flagship for two years . In November , fleet and unit exercises were conducted in the Baltic Sea . 
 The training regimen in which Hannover participated followed a similar pattern over the next five years . This included another cruise into the Atlantic , from 7 July to 1 August 1909 . February 1910 saw the I Squadron conduct individual training in the Baltic . The unit was subsequently transferred from Kiel to the base in Wilhelmshaven on 1 April . Fleet maneuvers were conducted shortly thereafter , followed by a summer cruise to Norway , and additional fleet training in the fall . On 3 October 1911 , the ship was transferred back to the II Squadron . Due to the Agadir Crisis in July , the summer cruise only went into the Baltic . On 14 July 1914 , the annual summer cruise to Norway began , but the threat of war in Europe caused the excursion to be cut short ; within two weeks Hannover and the rest of the II Squadron had returned to Wilhelmshaven . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Following the outbreak of World War I , Hannover was tasked with guard duty in the Altenbruch roadstead in the mouth of the Elbe River during the period of mobilization for the rest of the fleet . In late October , the ships were sent to Kiel to have modifications made to their underwater protection systems to make them more resilient . Hannover then joined the battleship support for the battlecruisers that bombarded Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . During the operation , the German battle fleet of some 12 dreadnoughts and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens convinced the German commander , Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , that he was confronted with the entire Grand Fleet , and so he broke off the engagement and turned for home . 
 Hannover put to sea during the Battle of Dogger Bank on 24 January 1915 to support the beleaguered German battlecruisers , but quickly returned to port . On 17 – 18 April , Hannover supported a minelaying operation off the Swarte Bank by the light cruisers of the II Reconnaissance Group . A fleet advance to the Dogger Bank followed on 21 – 22 April . On 16 May , Hannover was sent to Kiel to have one of her 28 cm guns replaced . The ship returned to Kiel on 28 June to have supplemental oil firing installed for her boilers ; work lasted until 12 July . On 11 – 12 September , II Reconnaissance Group conducted another minelaying operation off the Swarte Bank with Hannover and the rest of II Squadron in support . This was followed by another <unk> sweep by the fleet on 23 – 24 October . During the fleet advance of 5 – 7 March 1916 , Hannover and the rest of II Squadron remained in the German Bight , ready to sail in support . They then rejoined the fleet during the operation to bombard Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April . During this operation , the battlecruiser Seydlitz was damaged by a British mine and had to return to port prematurely . Visibility was poor , so the operation was quickly called off before the British fleet could intervene . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the commander of the German fleet , immediately planned another advance into the North Sea , but the damage to Seydlitz delayed the operation until the end of May . Hannover was the flagship in the IV Division of the II Battle Squadron , which was positioned at the rear of the German line . The II Battle Squadron was commanded by Rear Admiral Franz Mauve . During the " Run to the North " , Scheer ordered the fleet to pursue the retreating battleships of the British V Battle Squadron at top speed . Hannover and her sisters were significantly slower than the faster dreadnoughts and quickly fell behind . During this period , Scheer directed Hannover to place herself at the rear of the German line , so he would have a flagship on either end of the formation . By 19 : 30 , the Grand Fleet had arrived on the scene and confronted Scheer with significant numerical superiority . The German fleet was severely hampered by the presence of the slower Deutschland @-@ class ships ; if Scheer ordered an immediate turn towards Germany , he would have to sacrifice the slower ships to make good his escape . 
 Scheer decided to reverse the course of the fleet with the Gefechtskehrtwendung , a maneuver that required every unit in the German line to turn 180 ° simultaneously . As a result of their having fallen behind , the ships of the II Battle Squadron could not conform to the new course following the turn . Hannover and the other five ships of the squadron therefore were located on the disengaged side of the German line . Mauve considered moving his ships to the rear of the line , astern of the III Battle Squadron dreadnoughts , but decided against it when he realized the movement would interfere with the maneuvering of Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers . Instead , he attempted to place his ships at the head of the line . 
 Later on the first day of the battle , the hard @-@ pressed battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group were being pursued by their British opponents . Hannover and the other so @-@ called " five @-@ minute ships " came to their aid by steaming in between the opposing battlecruiser squadrons . The ships were very briefly engaged , owing in large part to the poor visibility . Hannover fired eight rounds from her 28 cm guns during this period . The British battlecruiser HMS Princess Royal fired on Hannover several times until the latter was obscured by smoke . Hannover was struck once by fragments from one of the 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 34 cm ) shells fired by Princess Royal . Mauve decided it would be inadvisable to continue the fight against the much more powerful battlecruisers , and so ordered an 8 @-@ point turn to starboard . 
 Late on the 31st , the fleet organized for the night march back to Germany ; Deutschland , Pommern , and Hannover fell in behind König and the other dreadnoughts of the III Battle Squadron towards the rear of the line . Hannover was then joined by the Hessen , Schlesien , and Schleswig @-@ Holstein . Hessen situated herself between Hannover and Pommern , while the other two ships fell in at the rear of the line . Shortly after 01 : 00 , the leading ships of the German line came into contact with the armored cruiser HMS Black Prince ; Black Prince was quickly destroyed in a hail of gunfire from the German dreadnoughts . Nassau was forced to heel out of line to avoid the sinking British ship , and an hour later rejoined the formation directly ahead of Hannover . At around 03 : 00 , British destroyers conducted a series of attacks against the fleet , some of which targeted Hannover . Shortly thereafter , Pommern was struck by at least one torpedo from the destroyer Onslaught ; the hit detonated an ammunition magazine which destroyed the ship in a tremendous explosion . Hannover was astern of Pommern and was forced to turn hard to starboard in order to avoid the wreck . Simultaneously , a third torpedo from Onslaught passed closely astern of Hannover , which forced the ship to turn away . Shortly after 04 : 00 , Hannover and several other ships fired repeatedly at what were thought to be submarines ; in one instance , the firing from Hannover and Hessen nearly damaged the light cruisers Stettin and München , which prompted Scheer to order them to cease firing . Hannover and several other ships again fired at imaginary submarines shortly before 06 : 00 . 
 Despite the ferocity of the night fighting , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British destroyer forces and reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later , where the undamaged dreadnoughts of the Nassau and Helgoland classes took up defensive positions . Over the course of the battle , Hannover had fired eight 28 cm shells , twenty @-@ one 17 cm rounds , and forty @-@ four shells from her 8 @.@ 8 cm guns . She emerged from the battle completely unscathed . 
 = = = = Later actions = = = = 
 After Jutland , Hannover went into dock for periodic maintenance on 4 November . Hannover and the rest of II Battle Squadron were then detached from the High Seas Fleet on 30 November and reassigned to picket duty in the mouth of the Elbe . In early 1917 , Hannover was used as a target ship in the Baltic . On 21 March , Hannover had some of her guns removed ; the ship was then converted into a guard ship from 25 June to 16 September . During this period , on 15 August , the II Battle Squadron was officially disbanded . On 27 September , Hessen was assigned to guard duties in the Baltic , where she replaced the older battleship Lothringen . 
 = = = Postwar service = = = 
 On 11 November 1918 , Germany entered into the Armistice with the Western Allies . According to the terms of the Armistice , the most modern components of Germany 's surface fleet were interned in the British naval base at Scapa Flow , while the rest of the fleet was demilitarized . On the day the armistice took effect , Hannover was sent briefly to Swinemünde , before returning to Kiel on 14 – 15 November along with Schlesien . Hannover was decommissioned a month later on 17 December in accordance with the terms of the Armistice . 
 The terms of the Treaty of Versailles , signed on 21 June 1919 , permitted Germany to retain a surface fleet of eight obsolete battleships . This amounted to three of the Deutschland @-@ class battleships , Hannover , Schleswig @-@ Holstein and Schlesien , as well as the five Braunschweig @-@ class battleships . 
 Hannover was the first of all the old battleships to come in service with the Reichsmarine in February 1921 as fleet flagship in the Baltic . Her first homeport was Swinemünde but she was transferred to Kiel in 1922 . In 1923 the German Navy adopted a new command structure and Braunschweig became flagship of the Fleet . In October 1925 , Hannover was moved to the North Sea station . She was decommissioned in March 1927 when Schlesien returned to active service . With newly built masts but still three funnels she entered service again replacing Elsass in February 1930 until September 1931 . 
 The ship was struck from the naval register in 1936 , after which the navy intended to rebuild Hannover for use as a target ship . The conversion , however , never occurred . Ultimately , the ship was broken up between May 1944 and October 1946 in Bremerhaven . Her bell now resides in the Military History Museum of the Bundeswehr in Dresden . 
 = Action Button Entertainment = 
 Action Button Entertainment , LLC ( commonly referred to as Action Button ) is a video game development studio consisting of Tim Rogers , Brent Porter , Michael Kerwin , and Nicholas Wasilewski that has produced four games since 2012 : Ziggurat , TNNS , Ten by Eight , and the in @-@ development Videoball . The group convened as Rogers worked on Ziggurat based on an idea he had while playing Angry Birds that he could not complete on his own . Porter joined Action Button after responding to a call for artists Rogers made via Twitter , and Kerwin joined based on a connection he had with Rogers from producing a mockup of a game concept Rogers outlined in his Kotaku column . Action Button released Ziggurat in February 2012 , TNNS in November , 10 × 8 in July 2013 , and Videoball is expected for release in 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 Action Button Entertainment was founded by Tim Rogers . The studio consists of Tim Rogers , Brent Porter , Michael Kerwin , and Nicholas Wasilewski , who have built all of the studio 's four games from Ziggurat through Videoball . Their games are consistently " simple " in their aesthetics and controls . The team formed during the development of Ziggurat , which began with an idea Rogers had while playing Angry Birds about pushing back a swarm of bats by shooting projectiles at them . He decided that he could not make the game alone . Rogers put out a call for artists on Twitter with a submissions request of " fan art of the Japanese box art of Phantasy Star II " , and Action Button artist Brent Porter replied in under an hour with an entry Rogers called " incredible " . In mid 2011 , Rogers decided to work on an iPhone game for a few weeks as a break from a larger project . Rogers said the team was convinced by his design document — this game would become Ziggurat . Rogers contacted an Internet acquaintance who had previously mocked up a design idea from Rogers 's Kotaku column , programmer Michael Kerwin , who came through with a rough draft within a week . Andrew Toups converted a soundtrack created by Rogers 's rock band into an 8 @-@ bit soundtrack . After six months of hiatus and working at a social games company , Rogers rekindled development and the team finished the Ziggurat , which was released in February 2012 . 
 Rogers has said that he aspires for Action Button Entertainment to make games that share his preferred gaming styles and his hobbies . Realizing that the common link between his top 25 video games ( including Panzer Dragoon , Cave Story , Canabalt , and his favorite , Out of This World ) was minimalist aesthetics with no overt story to tell other than through game mechanics , Rogers wanted Ziggurat and future games to live up to those expectations and used his gut to fine @-@ tune design decisions . The games also reflect aspects of Rogers 's personality , such as in the " scream sound effect " on Ziggurat made and distorted from his guitar based on sounds made by eccentric Japanese musicians whose records he owned . He also called Ziggurat a descendant of his hobbies : Ibara : Black Label and the Rubik 's Cube . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Ziggurat = = = 
 Ziggurat , stylized as <unk> , is a retro @-@ style arcade shooter video game developed by Action Button Entertainment for iOS platforms . As the world 's last human fighting off incoming aliens from atop a ziggurat , the player uses simple touch controls to charge and shoot the enemies away , and dies if hit by an enemy . The game has 16 @-@ bit graphics style and an 8 @-@ bit chiptune soundtrack . Action Button designer Tim Rogers developed the game idea based on his experience with Angry Birds , which later led to the formation of Action Button as a company with Ziggurat as its first release on February 17 , 2012 . 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers praised Ziggurat 's controls and minimalism . It won a Destructoid Editors ' Choice Award , and Time magazine picked the game as one of the best for the then new high @-@ resolution third generation iPad . 
 = = = TNNS = = = 
 TNNS , pronounced " tennis " , is a brick @-@ breaking action game released in November 2012 for iOS . As a universal app , it is playable on iPhones , iPads , and iPods . It was developed by Action Button Entertainment and produced by <unk> . Players use a paddle along the screen 's left side to bounce a ball towards breakable objects on the right side of the screen , and to avoid getting the ball in their goal . A star box ends the level . The game 's over 500 stages are built as puzzles and played at random . Level features include wormholes that move the ball from one part of the screen to another and arrows that change the ball 's trajectory . Power @-@ ups include " multi @-@ ball " , which puts multiple balls into play . TNNS also includes objectives , a same @-@ device two @-@ player mode , objectives , in @-@ app purchases , and Facebook and Twitter integration . Action Button later released an Android version . 
 The game Action Button described as " about keeping your eyes on balls " was inspired by tennis . It was released with little advanced notice in early November 2012 . Danny Cowan of IndieGames.com compared it with Sidhe Interactive 's Shatter and VG247 called it a rendition of Breakout . Pocket Gamer 's Mark Brown likened it to both and further compared it with Alleyway , Arkanoid , and Super Hexagon with a " telekinetic power " to alter the ball 's direction apart from the panel ( as in Shatter ) . He found the game frustrating at times when unable to control the ball . Though Brown found TNNS fun , different , and addictive , it had " not quite won [ him ] over " . 
 = = = Ten by Eight = = = 
 Ten by Eight , stylized as 10 × 8 , is a puzzle video game by Action Button Entertainment where players match tiles . It was released on July 31 , 2013 in North America for PlayStation Mobile — the PlayStation Vita and compatible devices . International editions followed . Players align similarly colored blocks and trace the path they create when aligned . The goal is to make the longest path possible , and bonus points are awarded for paths that connect the screen 's edges . Star blocks act as power @-@ ups that extend combos , such that a chain of green tiles can link to a chain of red tiles using a star block . Points can be spent on new character unlocks , including some from Ziggurat , that have no gameplay function . Ten by Eight has three modes of play . In endless mode , rocks around the grid block possible paths and can only be cleared by making paths that envelop the rocks . The game ends if a rock fully crosses the grid . The zen mode has no rocks or time limit . The timed mode sets a several @-@ minute restriction on gameplay and has no rocks . Rogers produced an " infomercial @-@ style trailer " for the game , which VG247 called one of his signature moves and that IndieGames.com called " glorious " . 
 Paste 's Garrett Martin rated the game 8 @.@ 0 of 10 . Though he acknowledged <unk> " endless " modes as usually the best puzzle game mode , he found Ten by Eight 's endless and zen modes " problematic " , citing the difficulty and frustration in removing the endless mode 's rocks and the dearth of urgency in the zen mode . Martin found the timed mode 's length to be " perfect " , but suggested that the Vita 's screen was less so , recommending a tablet release . He compared the minimalist soundtrack to Kraftwerk , and noted that players uninterested in high scores would not stay interested for long . 
 = = = Videoball = = = 
 Videoball is a minimalist sports video game by Action Button Entertainment . Using solely one analog stick and one button , players control triangles that shoot projectiles to knock a circular ball into the opposing team 's endzone . Holding the button creates a projectile ( a " unit " ) that fires upon release . The projectile can propel the ball , nullify other projectiles , or incapacitate opponents . The projectile charges the longer the button is held , such that a charged " slam " shot can sail across the full screen . Games last an average of four minutes . 
 Videoball designer Tim Rogers describes the game as " an abstract minimalist electronic sport " . Its development began as a dare from QWOP developer Bennett Foddy , Rogers 's friend , to make a " one @-@ button StarCraft " . Rogers compared the game 's design process to Gordon Ramsay 's Kitchen Nightmares , where Ramsay convinces failing restaurants to provide fewer menu options and to make those dishes well . Polygon 's Tracey Lien discussed their process as " chasing a certain purity " and mentioned the strong role of strategy in playing the game . Rogers noted basketball @-@ like strategy in prototype games , with players positioned as center or forward positions or playing zone defense . He <unk> prerelease sessions of Videoball via Twitch . The game is expected for release in 2014 with cross @-@ platform multiplayer and support for more than six simultaneous players . 
 Reviewers all cited Videoball 's minimalism both in aesthetics and gameplay , and compared the game with the skill and strategy of football and basketball . Before its release , PC Gamer 's Wes Fenlon wrote that he thought about Videoball daily after last playing two weeks prior due to its " addictive sort of fun " and his excitement for local multiplayer on PC following <unk> and TowerFall . He felt that the game 's tagline of being appropriate for both a child 's birthday party and prison was correct albeit silly . Fenlon praised the game 's minimalist visuals , " peppy music , and chirpy sound effects " . He compared the player 's controls to that of Asteroids and contrasted its simplicity with the 100 @-@ hour <unk> process for League of Legends , having learned Videoball after " a couple minutes " . Polygon 's Tracey Lien compared the game 's feel to basketball , football , and hockey . Citing the strong role of strategy in playing the game , she compared the array of projectiles fired to military strategy or a football play . 
 = = = Tuffy the Corgi = = = 
 Tuffy the Corgi and the Tower of Bones is a 2D platform adventure game for PlayStation Mobile where the player attempts to collect all 108 bones about a single , long level . As the player @-@ character Tuffy is constantly running , the player can only jump and change direction by pressing any button on either side of the screen . When the player touches a spike or enemy , they must restart the game from the beginning . It features a counter that shows how many times the player has died . Rogers produced a video trailer for the game . The game was designed by Rogers , programmed by Kerwin , and illustrated by Porter . Ken " Coda " Snyder made the music . It was released in June 2014 . Game Informer 's Jeff Marchiafava wrote that the platformer was " hopelessly difficult " , as it required a " level of perfectionism only speedrunners possess " . He added that Tuffy was both what he " loved and hated " about the video games of his youth , between its 16 @-@ bit era art , tight platforming controls , " unforgiving " gameplay , and " reliance on rote memorization " of path through the level . Marchiafava added that gameplay trends had forgotten these types of games for a reason , and concluded that he " never warmed to Tuffy " despite his interest in " punishing retro platformers like Spelunky and Super Meat Boy " . 
 = Macrolepiota clelandii = 
 Macrolepiota clelandii , commonly known as the slender parasol or graceful parasol , is a species of mushroom @-@ forming fungus in the family <unk> . The species is found in Australia and New Zealand , where it fruits singly or in small groups on the ground in eucalypt woodlands , parks , and roadsides . It is a tall mushroom up to roughly 20 cm ( 8 in ) , with a broad cap covered with distinctive rings of dark brown scales . The whitish gills on the cap underside are closely spaced and free from attachment to the slender stipe , which has a loose ring on its upper half , and a bulbous base . The edibility of the mushroom is not known with certainty , but closely related parasol mushrooms are edible and some are very sought after . 
 The fungus , first documented by naturalist John Burton Cleland in the early 20th century , was initially assumed to be the close relative Macrolepiota procera , a European species now known to be absent from Australia . Australian mycologist Cheryl Grgurinovic recognized Cleland 's collections as a distinct species , officially describing it in 1997 . The fungus has been referred to by several names : M. konradii , M. <unk> , and M. mastoidea . Else Vellinga showed using molecular phylogenetic analysis that these names refer to European species and were misapplied by Australian authors . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Macrolepiota clelandii was officially described by mycologist Cheryl Grgurinovic in her 1997 work Larger Fungi of South Australia . Before this , Australian naturalist John Burton Cleland had referred the fungus to Macrolepiota procera , a widespread , common species that is now known to not occur in Australia . Grgurinovic identified Cleland 's taxon , characterised by having two @-@ spored basidia , as a distinct species . The type collection was made by Cleland in 1912 , near Hawkesbury River in New South Wales . The specific epithet clelandii honours Cleland 's early work in documenting the species several times in the early 20th century . The mushroom is commonly called the slender or graceful parasol fungus . " Bush parasol " is a proposed common name for use in New Zealand . 
 Molecular analysis of DNA sequences from Australian collections labeled Macrolepiota konradii , M. <unk> , M. mastoidea , and M. procera has shown that they are the same species as Macrolepiota clelandii . Similarly , several New Zealand collections were historically misidentified as Macrolepiota <unk> . These names , given originally to European species , were erroneously applied to Australian collections . Else Vellinga subsequently emended the species concept of Macrolepiota clelandii to include specimens with four @-@ spored basidia and pale fruitbody colouring . Phylogenetically , M. clelandii is in a clade with closely related species such as M. procera , M. <unk> , and M. mastoidea . This clade is sister to a group containing Leucoagaricus and <unk> species . The presence of clamp connections in the hyphae place M. clelandii in the section Macrolepiota of genus Macrolepiota . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruitbody of Macrolepiota clelandii has a cap that is initially egg @-@ shaped , later becoming convex and then flattened in maturity , reaching diameters of 7 @.@ 6 – 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 9 in ) . It has a dark brown umbo and small dark brown scales that show the whitish flesh underneath . These scales are arranged in concentric rings that become increasingly crowded until the umbo , which is completely covered in scales . Small fragments of the partial veil may be left hanging on the cap margin . 
 The white gills are free from attachment to the stipe and closely spaced . The slender , hollow stipe measures up to 18 @.@ 7 cm ( 7 @.@ 4 in ) long , and has a somewhat bulbous base . It has a pale brown colour , and features a ring on its upper half that often detaches to become freely movable up and down the stipe . The mushrooms have no distinctive odour . Its tall stature means the gills are usually clean , having avoided rain splash from the forest floor . 
 According to Peter Roberts and Shelley Evans , all " parasol " species ( i.e. , M. procera and its close relatives , including M. clelandii ) are edible . Anthony M. Young notes the similarity of M. clelandii to the edible European species M. konradii , but warns " the toxicity of the Australian species is unknown . " 
 Macrolepiota clelandii produces a white spore print . Individual spores are ellipsoid with a small germ pore , smooth , thick @-@ walled , and measure 13 @.@ 4 – 24 @.@ 8 by 9 @.@ 6 – 16 @.@ 0 µm . They have a dextrinoid staining reaction ( reddish @-@ brown ) with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , measuring 38 @.@ 0 – 50 by 10 @.@ 2 – 13 @.@ 6 µm . They are two- , three- , or four @-@ spored , with sterigmata up to 8 @.@ 0 µm long . Collections with predominantly four @-@ spored basidia will generally have smaller spores than those with two @-@ spored basidia . Two @-@ spored basidia produce spores with four nuclei . Cheilocystidia are plentiful on the edge of the gill . They have dimensions of 24 @.@ 8 – 42 @.@ 4 by 7 @.@ 2 – 10 @.@ 4 µm , with a cylindrical to club shape . There are no cystidia on the gill face ( pleurocystidia ) . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The European species Macrolepiota konradii , similar in appearance to M. clelandii , has a smaller range of spore dimensions , typically 13 – 17 by 8 – 10 µm . M. <unk> , described from China in 2012 , is genetically close to M. clelandii . Unlike the latter species , it has yellow gills . M. procera is a larger with broad caps up to 12 in ( 30 cm ) in diameter , and the stipe surface is covered with brownish zigzag bands or scaly girdles on a whitish background . Its spores are smaller than those of M. konradii , measuring on average 13 @.@ 8 – 15 @.@ 7 µm . It is now known to occur only in Europe . 
 The " false parasol " , <unk> <unk> , a toxic species that can be mistaken for M. konradii , also occurs in Australia ( but not New Zealand ) . It can be distinguished by its green spore print and gills that turn light green in age . Some deadly poisonous Lepiota species have a similar pattern of scales on the cap , but their fruitbodies are smaller . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Macrolepiota clelandii fruits singly or in small groups on the ground in grass or among leaf litter . It is typically found in eucalypt forest and subtropical rainforests . It has been recorded from Queensland , New South Wales , Victoria , South Australia , and Western Australia . In southwest Australia it is found in jarrah ( Eucalyptus marginata ) and karri ( Eucalyptus diversicolor ) forests , where fruiting usually occurs in late autumn and early winter . The fungus appears to prefer disturbed ground , as it is often found at roadsides by forests , on lawns , grassy areas of parks , and among the slash of thinned karri regrowth forests . It is common in river red gum ( Eucalyptus camaldulensis ) woodlands . M. clelandii also occurs in New Zealand , where it is found in mixed <unk> ( Leptospermum scoparium ) , <unk> ( Kunzea <unk> ) , and kauri ( Agathis ) forest , and in conifer plantations . It is the smallest and most slender of the Macrolepiota species that occur there . 
 = World Heavyweight Championship ( WWE ) = 
 The World Heavyweight Championship was a professional wrestling world heavyweight championship owned by WWE . It was one of two top championships in WWE , complementing the WWE World Championship . It was established under the Raw brand in 2002 , after Raw and SmackDown ! became distinct brands under WWE , and moved between both brands on different occasions ( mainly as a result of the WWE draft ) until August 29 , 2011 when all programming became full roster " <unk> " . The World Heavyweight Championship was retired at the WWE PPV TLC : Tables , Ladders , and Chairs on December 15 , 2013 when it was unified with the WWE Championship . 
 The title was one of six to be represented by the historic Big Gold Belt , first introduced in 1986 . Its heritage can be traced back to the first world heavyweight championship , thereby giving the belt a legacy over 100 years old , the oldest in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 WWE introduced its World Heavyweight Championship in 2002 , by Eric Bischoff with Triple H becoming the inaugural champion on September 2 . However , its origin is attributed the first world heavyweight championship , and then to events that began in the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) , which had many different territorial promotions as members . In the late 1980s , World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) was a member of the NWA , having been formed by the purchase of Jim Crockett Promotions ( JCP ) , which had absorbed many other NWA members , by Turner Broadcasting , which aired WCW 's programming . During this time , WCW used the NWA World Heavyweight Championship as its world title . The WCW World Heavyweight Championship was soon established when the recognition was awarded to then @-@ NWA World Heavyweight Champion Ric Flair in 1991 . In 1993 , WCW seceded from the NWA and grew to become a rival promotion to the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , itself a former member of the NWA . Both organizations grew into mainstream prominence and were eventually involved in a television ratings war dubbed the Monday Night Wars . Near the end of the ratings war , WCW began a financial decline which culminated in March 2001 with the WWF 's purchase of selected assets of WCW . As a result of the purchase , the WWF acquired the video library of WCW , select talent contracts , and championships among other assets . The slew of former WCW talent joining the WWF roster began " The Invasion " which effectively phased out the WCW name . Following this , the WCW World Heavyweight Championship was unified with the WWF Championship , the WWF 's world title , at Vengeance in December . At the event , the WCW World Heavyweight Championship was decommissioned with Chris Jericho becoming the final WCW World Heavyweight Champion and the subsequent Undisputed WWF Champion after defeating The Rock and Steve Austin respectively . The WWF title became the undisputed Championship in professional wrestling until September 2002 with the creation of this World Heavyweight Championship , spun off from the Undisputed WWE Championship as the successor to the WCW World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 By 2002 , the WWE roster had doubled in size due to the overabundance of contracted workers . As a result of the increase , the WWE divided the roster through its two main television programs , Raw and SmackDown , assigning championships and appointing figureheads to each brand . This expansion became known as the " Brand Extension " . In May 2002 , the WWF was renamed to World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . Following these changes , the Undisputed WWE Championship remained unaffiliated with either brand as competitors from both brands could challenge the Undisputed Champion . Following the appointment of Eric Bischoff and Stephanie McMahon as General Managers of the Raw and SmackDown brands respectively , Stephanie McMahon contracted then @-@ champion Brock Lesnar to the SmackDown brand , leaving the Raw brand without a World Title . On September 2 , after disputing the brand designation of the Undisputed title , Eric Bischoff announced the creation of the World Heavyweight Championship . Bischoff awarded the title to Triple H due to previously being Lesnar 's scheduled opponent . Immediately afterwards , the Undisputed Championship returned to being the WWE Championship . 
 = = = Historical lineage = = = 
 While introduced in 2002 as a new title , the WWE often made allusions often being made to other titles including those of WCW and the NWA , amalgamating the history of this championship with the history of the belt that represents it . As affirmed by WWE , the World Heavyweight Championship is not a continuation of the WCW Championship , but rather its successor by way of the WWE Undisputed Championship , just as the WCW Championship spun off from the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . Due to its relation to both titles , its lineage is connected with the earliest recognized world heavyweight championship . In 2009 , WWE released a DVD set called History of the World Heavyweight Championship that definitively linked the title to the WCW and NWA titles . 
 = = = Brand designation history = = = 
 The following is a list of dates indicating the transitions of the World Heavyweight Championship between the Raw and SmackDown ! brands . 
 = = Reigns = = 
 The inaugural champion was Triple H , and there were 25 different champions overall . The longest reigning champion was Batista who held the title from April 3 , 2005 to January 10 , 2006 for a total of 282 days . Triple H holds the record for longest combined reigns at 616 days . The shortest reigning champion was Big Show who officially held the title for 45 seconds . The youngest champion was Randy Orton , who won the title of the age of 24 . The oldest champion was The Undertaker who won at the age of 44 . Edge held the title the most times with seven championship reigns . There were five vacancies throughout the title 's history . 
 Randy Orton was the final champion in his fourth reign . He defeated John Cena in a TLC match at TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs on December 15 , 2013 in Houston , Texas to unify the WWE and World Heavyweight Championships . 
 = Fortress of Klis = 
 The Klis Fortress ( Croatian : <unk> Klis ) is a medieval fortress situated above a village bearing the same name , near the city of Split , in central Dalmatia , Croatia . From its origin as a small stronghold built by the ancient Illyrian tribe <unk> , becoming a royal castle that was the seat of many Croatian kings , to its final development as a large fortress during the Ottoman wars in Europe , Klis Fortress has guarded the frontier , being lost and re @-@ conquered several times throughout its more @-@ than @-@ two @-@ thousand @-@ year @-@ long history . Due to its location on a pass that separates the mountains Mosor and Kozjak , the fortress served as a major source of defense in Dalmatia , especially against the Ottoman advance , and has been a key crossroad between the Mediterranean belt and the Balkan rear . 
 = = Importance = = 
 Since Duke Mislav of the Duchy of Croatia made Klis Fortress the seat of his throne in the middle of the 9th century , the fortress served as the seat of many Croatia 's rulers . The reign of his successor , Duke Trpimir I , the founder of the Croatian royal House of Trpimirović , is significant for spreading Christianity in the Duchy of Croatia . He largely expanded the Klis Fortress , and in <unk> , in the valley under the fortress , he built a church and the first Benedictine monastery in Croatia . During the reign of the first Croatian king , Tomislav , Klis and Biograd na Moru were his chief residences . 
 In March 1242 at Klis Fortress , Tatars who were a constituent segment of the Mongol army under the leadership of Kadan suffered a major defeat while in pursuit of the Hungarian army led by King Béla IV . After their defeat by Croatian forces , the Mongols retreated , and Béla IV rewarded many Croatian towns and nobles with " substantial riches " . During the Late Middle Ages , the fortress was governed by Croatian nobility , amongst whom Paul I Šubić of Bribir was the most significant . During his reign , the House of Šubić controlled most of modern @-@ day Croatia and Bosnia . Excluding the brief possession by the forces of Bosnian King , Tvrtko I , the fortress remained in <unk> @-@ Croatian hands for the next several hundred years , until the 16th century . 
 Klis Fortress is probably best known for its defense against the Ottoman invasion of Europe in the early 16th century . Croatian captain Petar Kružić led the defense of the fortress against a Turkish invasion and siege that lasted for more than two and a half decades . During this defense , as Kružić and his soldiers fought without allies against the Turks , the military faction of Uskoks was formed , which later became famous as an elite Croatian militant sect . Ultimately , the defenders were defeated and the fortress was occupied by the Ottomans in 1537 . After more than a century under Ottoman rule , in 1669 , Klis Fortress was besieged and seized by the Republic of Venice , thus moving the border between Christian and Muslim Europe further east and helping to contribute to the decline of the Ottoman Empire . The Venetians restored and enlarged the fortress , but it was taken by the Austrians after Napoleon extinguished the republic itself in 1797 . Today , Klis Fortress contains a museum where visitors to this historic military structure can see an array of arms , armor , and traditional uniforms . 
 = = Location = = 
 The fortress is located above a village bearing the same name , 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) from the Adriatic Sea , on a pass that separates the mountains Mosor and Kozjak , at the altitude of 360 metres ( 1 @,@ 180 ft ) , northeast of Split in Croatia . Owing to its strategic position , the fortress is regarded as one of the region ’ s most important fortifications . 
 Perched on an isolated rocky eminence , inaccessible on three sides , the fortress overlooks Split , the ancient Roman settlement of Salona , Solin , Kaštela and Trogir , and most of the central Dalmatian islands . Historically , the fortress has controlled access to and from Bosnia , Dalmatia and inland Croatia . The importance of such a position was felt by every army that invaded , or held possession of this part of Croatia . Klis Fortress was a point against which their attacks were always directed , and it has been remarkable for the many sieges it withstood . It has been of major strategic value in Croatia throughout history . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ancient stronghold of Illyrians and Romans = = = 
 The ancient Illyrian tribe of <unk> , which held a stronghold on this spot , were the first known inhabitants who lived on the site of what is today Klis Fortress . They were defeated several times , and in the year 9 AD , finally annexed by Romans . Today 's Klis Fortress was known to the Romans by the name of " <unk> " or " <unk> " , and in later times " Clausura " , which is the origin of later " Clissa " and modern " Klis " . To the Romans , Klis became famous for its celebrated siege by Augustus , at the time of the Illyrian revolt in Dalmatia . The road that lead from Klis to Salona was called " Via <unk> " or " Via <unk> " , which according to an inscription found at Salona , appears to have been made by Tiberius . Southeast of the fortress , the traces of a Roman camp are still visible , as well as an inscription carved on a rock ; both which are supposed to be contemporary with the siege under Tiberius . The description of this siege during the Illyrian Wars demonstrates that this place was strong and unreachable in those times . 
 = = = Migration period and the arrival of the Croats = = = 
 After the fall of the Roman Empire , Barbarians plundered the region around Klis . First it was ruled by Odoacer , and then by the Theodoric the Great , after he eliminated Odoacer , and set up an Ostrogothic Kingdom . After Justinian I fought an almost continual war for forty years to recover the old Roman Empire , he seized Dalmatia , and Klis was from 537 , a part of Byzantine Empire . The name of Klis ( <unk> or <unk> ) was first described in chapter 29 of Emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus ' De Administrando Imperio . While describing the Roman settlement of Salona , Constantine VII speaks of the stronghold , which may have been designed or improved , to prevent attacks on the coastal cities and roads by Slavs . 
 Salona , the capital of the province of Dalmatia was sacked and destroyed in 614 by Avars and Slavs . The population fled to Diocletian 's walled palace of Split , which was able to hold up . Thereafter , Split rose quickly in importance , as one of Dalmatia 's major cities . After a few decades , the Avars were driven out by the Croats . This probably happened after 620 , when in second wave Croats migrated on the invitation by the Emperor Heraclius to counter the Avar threat on the Byzantine Empire . 
 = = = Royal Castle = = = 
 From the early 7th century on , Klis was an important Croat stronghold , and later , one of the seats of many Croatia 's rulers . In the 9th century , Croatian duke Mislav of the Duchy of Croatia , from 835 to 845 , made the castle of Klis seat of his throne . Despite Frankish overlordship , the Franks had almost no role in Croatia in the period from the 820s through 840s . After Mislav 's death , starting with Duke Trpimir I , Klis was ruled by royal members of the House of Trpimirović , who were at first Dukes of the Croatian Duchy ( dux <unk> ) , and afterwards Kings of the Croatian Kingdom ( rex <unk> ) . They developed the early Roman stronghold into their capital . Relations with the Byzantines greatly improved under the Croatian duke Trpimir I , who moved the dux 's main residence from Nin to Klis . 
 The reign of Mislav 's successor Trpimir I , is significant for spreading Christianity in the medieval Croatian state , and for the first mention of the name " Croats " in domestic documents . On 4 March , in 852 , Trpimir I issued a " Charter in <unk> " ( Latin : in loco <unk> <unk> ) in Latin , confirming Mislav 's donations to the Archbishopric in Split . In this document Trpimir I named himself ; " By the mercy of God , Duke of Croats " ( Latin : Dux <unk> <unk> <unk> divino ) , and his realm as the " Realm of the Croats " ( Latin : Regnum <unk> ) . In the same document Trpimir I mentioned Klis as his property — seat . Under Klis , in <unk> , the duke Trpimir built a church and the first Benedictine monastery in Croatia , which is known from the discovery of a stone fragment on a gable arch from an altar screen , inscribed with the duke 's name and title . 
 A controversial Saxon theologian of the mid @-@ 9th century , Gottschalk of Orbais , spent some time at Trpimir 's court between 846 and 848 . His work " De Trina <unk> " is an important source of information for Trpimir 's reign . Gottschalk was a witness to the battle between Trpimir and Byzantine strategos , when Trpimir was victorious . During the reign of Croatian king Tomislav , who had no permanent capital , the castle of Klis along with Biograd , were his chief residences . 
 = = = Knights Templar = = = 
 From the early 12th century , and after the decay of the native Croatian royal family of Trpimirović , the castle of Klis was mainly governed by Croatian nobility , under the supremacy of Hungarian kings . The Kingdom of Croatia and the Kingdom of Hungary were , from 1102 , in a personal union of two kingdoms , united under the Hungarian king . 
 Andrew II of Hungary was extremely favorably disposed towards the Templars . During his participation in the Fifth Crusade , he appointed Pontius de Cruce , Master of the Order in the Hungarian Kingdom , as a regent in Croatia and Dalmatia . After his return in 1219 , in recognition of the great logistical and financial support which the Order had given him during the campaign , he granted the Order the estate of Gacka . Even before his departure from the city of Split in 1217 , he had made over to the Templars the castle of Klis ( Clissa ) , a strategic point in the hinterland of Split ( Spalato ) , which controlled the approaches to the town . The king Andrew was reluctant to entrust the castle of Klis to any of the local magnates , knowing what great harm could come from that castle . It was the king 's will that Split receive the castle of Klis for the defense of their city . The city of Split showed little interest in the royal favors , so the king entrusted Klis into Templars hands . Shortly after this , the Templars lost Klis , and , in exchange , the king gave them the coastal town of Šibenik ( Sebenico ) . 
 = = = Mongol siege = = = 
 Tatars under the leadership of Kadan experienced a major failure in March 1242 at Klis Fortress , when they were hunting for Béla IV of Hungary . The Tatars believed that the king was in the Klis Fortress , and so they began to attack from all sides , launching arrows and hurling spears . However , the natural defenses of the fortress gave protection , and the Tatars could cause only limited harm . They dismounted from their horses and began to creep up hand over hand to higher ground . But the fortress defenders hurled huge stones at them , and managed to kill a great number . This setback only made the Tatars more ferocious , and they came right up to the great walls and fought hand to hand . They looted the houses and took away much plunder . Upon learning that the king was not there , they abandoned their attack , and ascending their mounts rode off in the direction of Trogir , a number of them turning off toward Split . 
 The Mongols attacked the Dalmatian cities for the next few years but eventually withdrew without major success , as the mountainous terrain and distance were not suitable for their style of warfare . They pursued Béla IV from town to town in Dalmatia . The Croatian nobility and Dalmatian towns such as Trogir and Rab helped Béla IV to escape . After this failure , the Mongols retreated and Béla IV rewarded the Croatian towns and nobility . Only the city of Split did not help Béla IV in his escape . 
 Some historians claim that the mountainous terrain of Croatian Dalmatia was fatal for the Mongols , because they suffered great losses when attacked by the Croats from ambushes in mountain passes . Other historians claim that the death of Ögedei Khan ( Croatian : <unk> ) was the only reason for retreat . Much of Croatia was plundered by the Mongols , but without any major military success . Saint Margaret ( January 27 , 1242 – January 18 , 1271 ) , a daughter of Béla IV and Maria Laskarina , was born in Klis Fortress during the Mongol invasion of Hungary @-@ Croatia . 
 = = = Šubić 's rule = = = 
 The weakening of royal authority under Stephen V of Hungary allowed the House of Šubić to regain their former role in Dalmatia . In 1274 , <unk> Šubić of Bribir died , and Paul I Šubić of Bribir succeeded him as the family elder . Soon , Ladislaus IV of Hungary , recognizing the balance of power in Dalmatia , named Paul I as Ban of Croatia and Dalmatia . Ladislaus IV died in 1290 leaving no sons , and a civil war between rival candidates , pro @-@ Hungarian Andrew III of Hungary , and pro @-@ Croatian Charles Martel of Anjou , started . Charles Martel 's father Charles II of Naples , awarded all Croatia from Gvozd Mountain ( Croatian : Petrova Gora ) to the river Neretva mouth hereditary to Paul I Šubić of Bribir . Thus , Charles converted Paul 's personal position as Ban into a hereditary one for the Šubić family . All the other nobles in this region , were to be vassals of Paul Šubić . In response , Andrew III in 1293 issued a similar charter for Paul Šubić . During this struggle over the throne , George I Šubić of Bribir , Ban Paul 's brother went to Italy , visiting the pope and the Naples court . In August 1300 , George I returned to Split , bringing Charles Robert with him . Paul Šubić accompanied Charles Robert ( later known as Charles I of Hungary ) to Zagreb , where he was recognized as king ; then they proceeded to Esztergom , where , in 1301 , the Archbishop of Esztergom crowned him as King of Hungary and Croatia . 
 Paul I Šubić , Ban of Croatia and Dalmatia , became Lord of all of Bosnia in 1299 . Although supporting the king , Paul I continued to act independently , and ruled over a large portion of modern @-@ day Croatia and Bosnia . He appointed his brothers as commissars of Dalmatian cities , and gave Split to his brother Mladen I Šubić , and Šibenik , Nin , Trogir and Omiš to his brother George I Šubić . After George I Šubić died in 1302 , his brother Mladen I Šubić ruled as a Bosnian Ban over Bosnia from Klis Fortress , until he was killed in a battle during 1304 . Then , Šubić gave the Klis Fortress to his son Mladen II Šubić , who ruled over Bosnia like his uncle Mladen I. George II Šubić and his son , Mladen III Šubić , ruled over Klis Fortress until the late 14th century . During summer @-@ long festivities in Klis Fortress , open to the whole population , Mladen III Šubić gave his sister 's Jelena Šubić hand in marriage to Vladislaus of Bosnia , from the House of Kotromanić . Jelena Šubić gave birth to the first Bosnian King , Tvrtko I , who later inherited the fortress . 
 = = = Petar Kružić and the Uskoci = = = 
 Owing to its location , Klis Fortress was an important defensive position during the Ottoman conquest of the Balkans . The fortress stands along the route by which the Ottomans could penetrate the mountain barrier separating the coastal lowlands from around Split , from Turkish @-@ held Bosnia . The Croat feudal lord Petar Kružić gathered together a garrison composed of Croat refugees , who used the base at Klis both to hold the Turks at bay , and to engage in marauding and piracy against coastal shipping . Although nominally accepting the sovereignty of the Habsburg king Ferdinand who had obtained the Croatian crown in 1527 , Kružić and his freebooting Uskoks were a law unto themselves . 
 When a large Turkish force threatened the fortress , Kružić appealed to Ferdinand I for help , but the Emperor 's attention was diverted by a Turkish invasion into Slavonia . For more than two and half decades , Captain Kružić , also called ( Prince of Klis ) , defended the fortress against the Turkish invasion . Kružić led the defense of Klis , and with his soldiers fought almost alone against the Ottomans , as they hurled army after army against the fortress . No troops would come from the Hungarian king , as they were defeated by the Ottomans at the Battle of Mohács in 1526 , and the Venetians baulked at sending any help . Only the popes were willing to provide some men and money . 
 = = = Final Ottoman siege = = = 
 Pope Paul III claimed some rights in Klis , and in September , 1536 , there was talk in the Curia of strengthening the defenses of the fortress . The Pope notified Ferdinand that he was willing to share the costs of maintaining a proper garrison in Klis . Ferdinand I did send aid to Klis and was apparently hopeful of holding the fortress , when the Turks again laid siege to it . Ferdinand I recruited men from Trieste and elsewhere in the Habsburg lands , and Pope Paul III sent soldiers from Ancona . There were about 3 @,@ 000 infantry in the reinforcements , which made a sizeable relief force , that were commanded by Petar Kružić , Niccolo dalla Torre , and a papal commissioner <unk> <unk> d <unk> . On March 9 , 1537 , they disembarked near Klis , at a place called S. Girolamo , with fourteen pieces of artillery . After Ibrahim 's death , Suleiman the Magnificent sent 8 @,@ 000 men under the command of Murat @-@ beg Tardić ( <unk> <unk> ) , a Croatian renegade who had been born in Šibenik , to go and lay siege to Klis fortress ( Clissa ) , and fight against Petar Kružić . An initial encounter of the Christian relief force with the Turks was indecisive , but , on March 12 , they were overwhelmed by the arrival of a great number of Turks . 
 The attempts to relieve the citadel ended in farce . Badly @-@ drilled reinforcements sent by the Habsburgs fled in the fear of Turks , and their attempts to re @-@ board their boats at Solin bay caused many vessels to sink . Niccolo dalla Torre and the papal commissioner managed to escape . Kružić himself – who had left the fortress to make contact with the reinforcements was captured and executed : the sight of his head on a stick was too much for the remaining defenders of Klis , who were now willing to give up the fortress in return for safe passage north . After Petar Kružić 's death , and with a lack of water supplies , the Klis defenders finally surrendered to the Ottomans in exchange for their freedom , on March 12 , 1537 . Many of the citizens fled the town , while the Uskoci retreated to the city of Senj , where they continued fighting the Turkish invaders . 
 = = = Sanjak centre of Ottoman Bosnia = = = 
 During the Ottoman wars in Europe , Klis Fortress was , for a century , an administrative centre or sanjak ( Kilis Sancağı ) of the Bosnia Eyalet . On April 7 , 1596 , Split noblemen Ivan Alberti and Nikola <unk> , along with Uskoci , <unk> , and <unk> irregulars , organized an occupation of Klis . Assisted by dissident elements of the Turkish garrison , they succeeded . Bey Mustafa responded by bringing more than 10 @,@ 000 soldiers under the fortress . General Ivan Lenković , leading 1 @,@ 000 Uskoci , came in relief of the 1 @,@ 500 Klis defenders . During the battle , Ivan Lenković and his men retreated after he was wounded in battle , and the fortress was lost to the Turks , on May 31 . Nevertheless , this temporary relief resounded in Europe and among the local population . 
 From the well @-@ fortified position in the Klis Fortress , the Turks were a constant threat to the Venetians and to the local Croatian population in the surrounding area . In 1647 , after the Turkish success at Novigrad , the Turks were said to have 30 @,@ 000 troops ready to attack Split . The Signoria send off two thousand soldiers with munitions and provisions to the threatened area . Although Split and Zadar were strong fortresses , they were clearly in danger . 
 = = = Venetian domination = = = 
 In 1420 , the Anjou contender Ladislaus of Naples was defeated and forced to sail away for Naples . Upon his departure he sold his " rights " to Dalmatia to the Venetian Republic for the relatively meager sum of 100 @,@ 000 ducats . However , Klis and Klis Fortress remained parts of the Kingdom of Croatia . From that time , the Venetians were eager to take control over Klis , as the fortress was one of the region ’ s most important strategic points . 
 The Venetians fought for decades before they finally managed to re @-@ take Klis . During the <unk> War ( 1645 – 1669 ) , the Venetians in Dalmatia enjoyed the support of the local population , particularly the <unk> ( <unk> ) . Venetian commander Leonardo Foscolo seized several forts , retook Novigrad , temporarily captured the Knin Fortress , and managed to compel the garrison of Klis Fortress to surrender . At the same time , a month @-@ long siege of the Šibenik Fortress by the Ottomans in August and September failed . 
 From 1669 , Klis Fortress was in the possession of the Venetians , and it remained so until the fall of the Venetian state . The Venetians restored and enlarged the fortress during their rule . After another , the seventh war with the Turks from 1714 to 1718 , the Venetians were able to advance up to the present Bosnian / Croatian border , taking in the whole <unk> field and <unk> . Thereafter the Turkish menace was laid to rest and Venice had no serious challenge to its authority in Dalmatia , until Napoleon extinguished the republic itself in 1797 . The border between Christian and Muslim Europe had been moved further east , and the fortress lost its main strategic importance . Subsequently , Klis was taken by the Austrians . The last military occupation of Klis Fortress was by Axis powers during World War II . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Klis Fortress is one of the most valuable surviving examples of defensive architecture in Dalmatia . The fortress is a remarkably comprehensive structure with three long rectangular defensive lines , consisting of three defensive stone walls , which are surrounding a central strongpoint , the " <unk> <unk> " at its eastern , highest end . " <unk> <unk> " or " Grand position " is a mixed Croatian @-@ Italian term , dating from the time when Leonardo Foscolo captured the fortress for the Venetians in 1648 . At that time , a village started to spread below the ramparts . The structures of the fortress are mostly irregular , as they were constructed to suit the natural topography . On the hills around Klis , there are several small towers , built by the Turks to keep the fortress under surveillance . 
 = = = Fortress outskirts = = = 
 The Klis Fortress rises on a bare cliff divided into two parts . The first , lower part is on the west , out topped by Mount <unk> from the north . The second , higher part is on the east , and includes the Tower " Oprah " , whose name most likely refers to a specific part in the defense . In this section which was not topped by any side , was located the flat of the Commander . The only entrance into the fortress is from the western side . On the southwest side of the fortress , and below it was a resort ( part of the modern village of Klis ) called " <unk> " or " <unk> " , surrounded by double walls with 100 – 200 towers . A similar but smaller resort ( also part of modern village of Klis ) existed below Mount <unk> on a plateau called <unk> . This included <unk> and quarantines which were in Turkish times called " <unk> " . There were also many inns for travellers , which were used for isolation during epidemics . Thus , the coastal towns , primarily the city of Split was protected from epidemics that came from Bosnia . Near the fortress , there were several sources of drinking water , and the closest was the " Holy Biblical Magi " whose importance was invaluable during long sieges . 
 = = = Present appearance = = = 
 The fortress was built into the south face of a rocky mass , and is barely discernible from the distance as a man @-@ made structure . The defensive capabilities of the fortress have been tested through history in many military operations . During the centuries of its use , the structure served various armies and has undergone a number of renovations , to keep up with the development of arms . The original appearance of the fortress is no longer known , due to the structural changes undertaken by Croatian nobility , Turks , Venetians and Austrians . The present day aspect of a mostly stone fortress dates back to the restructuring work carried out by the Venetians in the 17th century . 
 = = = = First defensive line = = = = 
 Many buildings of the Klis Fortress which are from 17th through 19th centuries are partially or entirely preserved . The Fortress actually consists of three parts , enclosed by walls with separate entrances . The first main entrance was built by the Austrians in the early 19th century , on the place of an earlier Venetian entrance . Left of the entrance there is a fortification erected by the Venetians in the early 18th century . Also , near the main entrance there is a " position <unk> " built in 1648 , which was repeatedly renewed afterwards . On the ground floor of the fortification there is a narrow over @-@ vaulted corridor , which is called a Casemate . 
 = = = = Second defensive line = = = = 
 The second entrance which was significantly damaged in the siege of 1648 , leads to the former medieval part of the fortress previously ruled by a Croatian nobility . After 1648 , Venetians fully restored the second entrance , but its present appearance was made by the Austrians during the early 19th century . Along the northern wall near the second entrance , there is fortress @-@ tower called " Oprah " , the most important medieval fortification of the western part of the fortress . It was mentioned for the first time in 1355 , but later the Venetians made the lower crown on it . Nearby of the entrance are artillery barracks , built by the Austrians in the first half of the 19th century . In 1931 its upper floor was ruined , so now only the ground floor remains . 
 = = = = Third defensive line = = = = 
 The third entrance leads to the former medieval part built in the early Middle Ages . The Venetians renewed it several times after conquest in 1648 , and the last upgrade was in 1763 . Within this part of the fortress there is the side tower , built during the 18th century , and completed in 1763 . Following is a repository of weapons built in the mid @-@ 17th century and old powder magazine from the 18th century . " House of Dux " later called governor ’ s residence was rebuilt in the mid @-@ 17th century on the foundations of the oldest buildings from the period of Croatian kings . Austrians repaired this building , and there were placed commandments unity of the fortress and Engineering . On the top point of the fortress there was a " New gunpowder storage " , built in the early 19th century . 
 The oldest remaining building with the dome and minaret , was a former square @-@ shaped Turkish mosque , built after the conquest of Klis in 1537 on the foundations of an earlier Old Croatian Catholic <unk> after occupation in 1648 , the Venetians pulled down the minaret and converted it into a Roman Catholic church , dedicated to St. Vitus ( Croatian : Crkva St. Vida ) . It is a simple constructed square with the octagonal stone roof . There used to be three Altars , dedicated to St. Vid , Virgin Mary and St. Barbara , but today the church has no inventory . In the church there is a Baroque stone sink from the 17th century , which served as a baptistery , where there is engraved the year of 1658 . West of the church is the bastion of Bembo , the largest artillery position in the third defense line and in the whole fortress . It has wide holes for guns , and was built in the mid @-@ 17th century on the site of former Kružić 's tower , and the defensive positions of Speranza . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The Klis Fortress has been developed as a visitor attraction by the " <unk> <unk> " re @-@ enactment association in Klis with the aid of the conservation department of the Ministry of Culture in Split . Visitors to the historic military structure can see an array of arms , armor , and traditional uniforms in a building which was formerly an Austrian armory . Klis is remembered in a Croatian byword based on the resistance of Klis and the strength of its people : It is difficult for Klis because it is on the rock and it is difficult for the rock because Klis is on it . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The fortress was used in a 1972 historical film Eagle in a Cage , portraying Saint Helena . Klis is also being used as a location for filming the HBO series Game of Thrones . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = I Will Be = 
 " I Will Be " is a song co @-@ written and originally performed by Canadian singer Avril Lavigne , which was included on the North American , Taiwanese , and Japanese limited editions of her third studio album The Best Damn Thing and as an iTunes Store pre @-@ order bonus track in 2007 ; British singer @-@ songwriter Leona Lewis covered the song for her debut studio album , Spirit , also released in 2007 . Max Martin and Lukasz Gottwald also co @-@ wrote the song , whilst production was helmed by Gottwald under his production name Dr. Luke . It was co @-@ produced by Steven Wolf and Max Beckley and Smit . It is a piano and guitar led song . It garnered a mixed response from music critics , with some critics praising Lewis 's vocal performance and delivery , whilst others described it as emotionless . 
 Upon the release of Spirit in November 2007 , the song peaked at number 160 on the UK Singles Chart due to strong digital download sales . It was released for US Contemporary hit radio airplay on 6 January 2009 . Throughout January to March 2009 , it also made an impact on the Canadian and United States charts ; in the former it peaked at number 83 , while it peaked at number 66 on the Billboard Hot 100 in the latter . However , it was more successful on the US Adult Pop Songs and Pop Songs charts , peaking at numbers 23 and 24 , respectively . As part of promotion , a music video was shot in New York City and featured Chace Crawford as Lewis 's love interest . In January 2009 , she performed the song on the Late Show with David Letterman . 
 = = Production and recording = = 
 " I Will Be " was written by Avril Lavigne , Max Martin , Lukasz " Dr. Luke " Gottwald ; it was produced by Dr. Luke , and was co @-@ produced by Steven Wolf and Max Beckley and Smit . Lavigne originally performed the song , which was included on her third studio album The Best Damn Thing ( 2007 ) , included on the bonus track edition . In the same year Leona Lewis covered the song . Lewis 's version was recorded at multiple recording studios around the world , including Conway Recording Studios and Westlake Recording Studios , in Los Angeles , California ; Henson Recording Studios , <unk> Music , and Ocean Way Recording , all located in Hollywood , California ; Dr. Luke 's personal recording studio in New York City ; Atlantic Studios , Stockholm , Sweden ; Sarm West , London , England . The production coordinators were Gary " The Shredder " Silver and Emily Wright . 
 A multitude of engineers were involved with the process of recording the song , including Doug McKean , Rob Smith , Seth Waldmann , Keith <unk> , Josh Wilbur , Tom <unk> , Tatiana Gottwald , Chris Soper , Sam Holland , Chris Holmes , <unk> Kapoor , Wesley Seidman , Janne Hansson , Emily Wright , Marcus <unk> and Sam Cross . " I Will Be " was mixed by Chris Lord @-@ Alge at <unk> Recording Studios , Burbank , CA , and was assisted by Keith Armstrong and Nik <unk> . For the instrumental , Leon Pendarvis was the conductor and arranger ; Martin provided piano , Dr. Luke provided the electric guitar and Yamaha Acoustic guitar , Jack Daley provided the bass and Wolf provided the drums and percussion . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " I Will Be " is a piano and guitar led song , which lasts for a duration of 3 minutes , 58 seconds . The song was composed in the key of G major using common time and a slow groove at 72 beats per minute . Lewis 's vocal range spans two octaves , from the low note of B3 to the high note of B5 , on the song . The song opens with the lyrics " There 's nothing I could say to you , nothing I could ever do to make you see what you mean to me . " Chad Grischow for IGN described the song 's piano led instrumental to be " overblown " , but noted that Lewis has enough " vocal strength to prevent her from being overshadowed by the <unk> lush sound . " Eric R. Danton wrote on his review of Spirit for the Hartford Courant daily that " I Will Be " begins with a " spare piano introduction " that " blossoms into an arrangement buoyed by strings and then drums and guitar " . Danton described Lewis 's vocals as " delicate " and that " take flight on the chorus " . 
 = = Response = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 It garnered a mixed response from music critics . Nate Chinen for The New York Times was complimentary of Lewis 's cover , and praised her " powerhouse vocals " . Matt O 'Leary for Virgin Media wrote that Lewis 's rendition of the song was " epic " , and that when the production is kept minimal , " her uniqueness is allowed to shine . " Although Sarah Rodman for The Boston Globe described the song as " predictable " , she praised Lewis 's ability to sing with " believable pathos " and hit clean notes . Sarah @-@ Louise James for the Daily Star was critical of Lewis 's rendition , and described it as insincerely emotional . Sal Cinquemani for Slant Magazine was also critical of the song , writing that it is " dangerously middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road . " Danton from the Hartford Courant considered the song as " ready @-@ made for awards shows or emotional on @-@ screen montages . " He concluded that " I Will Be " is a " powerful stuff , and it would make for a gem of a pop record if it kept up . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Upon the release of Spirit in the United Kingdom , " I Will Be " debuted and peaked at number 160 on the UK Singles Chart from digital download sales . Upon its release as a single in January 2009 in the United States , " I Will Be " debuted on the US Pop Songs chart at number 34 on 31 January 2009 . In its second week it rose to number 31 , and again to number 28 in its third week . It peaked at number 24 and remained on the chart for eight weeks . In its seventh and eighth weeks , it charted at numbers 25 and 31 , respectively . It debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 94 on 14 February 2009 . It peaked at number 66 , and exited the chart at number 80 . The song debuted on the US Adult Pop Songs chart at number 39 on 7 March 2009 , and rose to number 34 the following week . In its third and fourth weeks , the song charted at numbers 33 and 25 , respectively . " I Will Be " peaked at number 23 in its fifth week on the chart , and fell to number 24 the following week . It also debuted at number 65 on the US Hot Digital Songs chart on 21 February 2009 , which was also its peak . In Canada , the song entered the chart at number 86 , and peaked at number 83 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " I Will Be " was shot in New York City on 18 December 2008 , and features Gossip Girl actor Chace Crawford as one of the characters . A reporter for People explained how the inclusion of Crawford in the video came to fruition , writing that " Chace went to London a couple months ago for meetings and to promote Gossip Girl . He went to a party and ended up meeting Leona . [ They ] hit it off and talk every once in a while and have become fast friends . A couple weeks ago Leona called Chace and asked if he would be in her next video . He obviously said yes . " In the video , it is presumed that Lewis and Crawford have stolen a large amount of money , as it opens with dialogue between the pair and how they are going to try and arrange to meet each other at a later date , due to the police closing in on them . As the song begins to play , Lewis sings the first verse on the car bonnet in which they were shown sitting in previously . As she sings the first chorus , she stands up and faces Crawford in the car , and begins to walk away in a car park as she sings the second verse . For the second chorus , Lewis is shown to evade the police by trying to escape by car park stairways , but is confronted by policemen in most directions she goes . For the final chorus , Lewis makes it out onto the road and runs from the police in their cars , but is ultimately blocked from escape in all directions as they close in on her , arrest her , and place her in the back of a police car . People ranked the video as one of the most anticipated videos to be released in January 2009 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On 20 January 2009 , Lewis ' performed the song on the Late Show with David Letterman to promote its release as a single . Complimentary of her performance , Letterman said " Beautiful ! Oh my God that was lovely " after Lewis finished the song . Lizzie Smith for The Guardian wrote that her performance was the " latest step towards her domination of the American music scene . " She also commented on the interaction between Lewis and Letterman after her performance , writing " It 's rare for American chatshow host David Letterman to do more than shake the hands of performers on his U.S. show , but when X Factor winner Leona Lewis made an appearance he could hardly keep his hands off her . <unk> Leona , a smitten Letterman caught her by surprise by asking : ' Anything you want to talk about ? ' As Leona looked bemused Letterman cheekily added : ' Let 's go up to the house and we 'll talk about it . ' " Smith concluded her review of the performance with " But rather than looking pleased with his attentions a blushing Leona looked distinctly uncomfortable . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Conway Recording Studios , Los Angeles , CA ; Henson Recording Studios , Hollywood , CA ; Dr. Luke 's , NYC ; <unk> Music , Hollywood CA ; Ocean Way Recording , Hollywood , CA ; Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , CA ; Atlantic Studios , Stockholm , Sweden ; Sarm West , London , England . 
 Mixed at <unk> Studios , Burbank , CA . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Spirit , Syco Music , J Records , Sony Music . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Iconic ( song ) = 
 " Iconic " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Madonna for her thirteenth studio album Rebel Heart ( 2015 ) . It was written by Madonna , Toby Gad , Maureen McDonald , Larry Griffin Jr . , Chancelor Bennett , <unk> <unk> and Michael Tucker . " Iconic " was produced by Madonna , Gad , AFSHeeN and Josh Cumbee , while DJ Dahi and <unk> served as additional producers . It features American rapper Chance the Rapper and a spoken intro by American professional boxer Mike Tyson . The song 's demo was leaked onto the internet on December 17 , 2014 , alongside twelve other tracks from the album , with " Iconic " also being rumored as the album 's title . Its final version was released on February 9 , 2015 , with " Hold Tight " and " Joan of Arc " , on the iTunes store . 
 A trap @-@ influenced EDM song , " Iconic " features in its instrumentation " ice @-@ cold " synths , marching drums and " booming " bass , as well as <unk> stabs and electronic gears . Lyrically , the song encourages people to take control of their life , to pursue their dreams and to find their own greatness . The song received generally favorable reviews from critics , who praised the song 's " weird " beat and odd collaboration , recognizing its catchiness . Although , some criticized Tyson 's addition and were confused with the song 's message . It charted in some European territories , peaking inside the top @-@ forty in Finland , Hungary and Spain . Madonna performed the track on her Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) . During the performance , she is inside a medieval @-@ looking cage in a kimono @-@ like robe , with her dancers being dressed as gladiators . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 During the recording process of Rebel Heart , Madonna enlisted several collaborators , including MoZella , Symbolyc One and Toby Gad . Madonna posted a photograph of the trio working with her in a recording studio on her Instagram account . She said on the photograph , " Having an Iconic Moment in the studio with Toby @-@ Mozilla and S1 . My throat hurts from singing , laughing and crying . " Gad worked with Madonna on fourteen songs , twelve appeared on the album 's multiple <unk> , with one being " Iconic " . According to Gad , " The first week she was quite intimidating . It was like a test phase . You have to criticize , but you can 't really offend . But she also likes honest , harsh critics to say things as they are . It worked out really well and she got sweeter and sweeter . " For the track , she initially asked American rapper Jay Z to be featured on with verses about icons , however he called American rapper Chance the Rapper and said that it would be better if somebody that was a new person and that he thought that could be a new icon got on the record . Chance and Madonna had met before through American recording artist Frank Ocean in a concert and became friends , prompting the singer to accept Jay Z 's suggestion . 
 Madonna also enlisted American professional boxer Mike Tyson to give a speech that would be used on the track . According to the singer , " I was thinking : who is in my eyes super iconic , who do I look up to , who is alive today that 's been through what I feel like I 've been through , that 's been through a lot , survived , has stories to tell , has evolved as human being [ ... ] is a survivor , his name came to mind right away . " She also revealed that she was moved and impressed after seen his HBO @-@ documentary " Mike Tyson : Undisputed Truth " , directed by Spike Lee and contacted him . Tyson revealed that he ad @-@ libbed his part of the song in one take and was inspired by Benito Mussolini , who Tyson admitted that was seen as arrogant , but he tried to come from a positive perspective and be uplifting . In an interview for Rolling Stone he explained : " I didn 't know what the hell I was going there for . I 'm just there having a good time and hanging out with Madonna . She has her producer there and I go into the studio and I didn 't know if she wanted me to talk or rap . I just go in there and start talking . I 'm talking about my life and things that I have endured . I 'm saying some really crazy stuff . It was really intense . " 
 In December 2014 , thirteen unfinished demos of tracks for the album , including " Iconic " , were leaked to the Internet . The leaked material included artwork suggesting the album was to be titled Iconic as well . The leaked version didn 't feature either Chance the Rapper or Mike Tyson . In the same day , Madonna expressed her dissatisfaction with the leaked material , claiming it was an artistic rape and a form of terrorism . To avoid further leaks , Madonna released six completed tracks with the pre @-@ order for the album on the iTunes Store on December 20 , 2014 , as an " early Christmas gift " . On January 22 , 2015 , an updated version of the previously @-@ leaked demo version surfaced online , with Chance and Tyson . On February 9 , 2015 , the singer released three other finished tracks , including the final version of " Iconic " , as well as the album 's track list . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Iconic " was written by Madonna , Toby Gad , Maureen McDonald , Larry Griffin Jr . , Chancelor Bennett , <unk> <unk> and Michael Tucker . It was produced by Madonna , Gad , AFSHeeN and Josh Cumbee , while DJ Dahi and Tucker served as additional producers . It features Chance the Rapper and Mike Tyson . Gad , <unk> and Cumbee were also responsible for programming and the song 's instruments , with Gad also providing background vocals . The track was engineered and mixed by Demacio " Demo " Castellon with Gad and Angie Teo . It is an EDM song with trap influences , that starts with a " crowd cheering " and " rapturous applause " as Tyson opens the song with " a boastful spoken word segment " . Later , the verses build up , with the hook having " a stomping rhythm to be sung ' en masse ' , with a high euphoric melody like a precocious , pre @-@ recession club classic , " as The Quietus ' Amy Pettifer described . As she added , " the sonically sparse verse breaks down " with the song featuring " <unk> stabs " and " grinding electronic gears . " Its pre @-@ chorus " drops into stabs of ice @-@ cold synths , " with other instrumentation consisting in " marching drums and booming bass . " Its " weird " beat was described by Sam C. Mac of Slant Magazine as " Kanye and Jay @-@ Z 's ' H • A • M ' arm @-@ wrestling Skrillex . " 
 Lyrically , " Iconic " talks about taking control of your life and letting your inner fire burn and encourages listeners to pursue their dreams . During the song , she urges the listeners to " making [ their ] voices heard before someone does it for [ them ] " with her voice " echoing like the announcer in the ring . " In another part , during the motivational encouragement , she informs that " there ’ s only two letters difference between ' I Can 't ' and ' Icon ' , " while also inspiring the listeners to find their own greatness , singing : " Just shine your light like a beautiful star / Show the world who you are . " Tyson opening speech talks about how he ’ s ‘ the best the world ’ s ever seen ' and that he " worked hard and sweated [ his ] tears . " He later <unk> : " I 'm never falling again and if I did , I 'll come back . " Chance , on the other hand , raps about idolatry . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Iconic " received favorable reviews from most music critics . Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times noted that the song is driving by " focus " , which puts it " into that sweet spot between club frenzy and revelatory lyricism , the kind that can lift spirits to emotional heights . " Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph described it as a song that " reflect [ s ] a contemporary trend for fast , furious and funny mash ups of conflicting ideas , constantly teetering on the edge of collapse but pulling out another beat or hook to keep things moving . " In a similar mode , <unk> Anderson of Entertainment Weekly confessed that he thought the song would be his " most @-@ skipped track , " but admitted that he " kind of admire its barely @-@ conscious chaos . " James Grebey of Spin dismissed Tyson 's inclusion , however he praised the song for having a statement that is the album 's lynchpin and that " [ w ] ith its robotic , authoritarian droning , ' Iconic ' conveys the point that — love her or hate her — Madonna is an icon , and you ’ re not getting rid of her anytime soon . " John Marrs of Gay Times gave the track four out of five stars , claiming that " the finished product is wholly different from the demo and much more gutsy , getting better with every play . " Lewis Corner of Digital Spy defined it as " a club @-@ ready dash of trap @-@ pop " and selected the song as one of the " tracks to download " . Nick Levine of Time Out agreed , writing that " the sassy stuff is excellent , especially the catchy , trap @-@ tinged ' Iconic ' . " 
 Sam C. Mac of Slant Magazine noted that the song has the album ’ s " toughest , weirdest beat , not to mention a show @-@ stopping Chance the Rapper verse and a pretty disarming message from the singer herself . " He was unsure if Madonna meant to " embrace her iconic status or fight her way out from under its oppressive expectations " during the track , but praised the discontent and uncommon message for making the album her " most committed work since 2003 's underrated ' American Life ' . " Bradley Stern of MuuMuse was positive , saying that the result is " a confidence @-@ boosting compliment to a grueling gym workout . " He continued : " The ominous beat drops are certainly more ‘ on @-@ trend ’ than , say , ' Hold Tight , ' but the song still feels ( mostly ) fresh and strange , as opposed to the late @-@ to @-@ the @-@ party dubstep / EDM excursion on ' MDNA ' . [ ... ] It ’ s a thrilling , weird and semi @-@ embarrassing @-@ yet @-@ ultimately @-@ empowering centerpiece of Rebel Heart that feels as bold as a song called ' Iconic ' by Madonna should . " Joe Lynch of Billboard called the collaboration " just about as odd as you 'd expect , " but labeled it " a fairly overwrought affair . Chance 's verse is fire , but the intense , busy production ultimately adds up to very little . " Michelle <unk> of Consequence of Sound pointed out that " as odd as the circumstances might be , the track surprisingly gels together far more smoothly than one would expect . " Ben Kelly of Attitude named it " her own ‘ bow down bitches ’ moment . " while Ludovic Hunter @-@ Tilney of Financial Times said that the song is " wonderfully unhinged . " 
 In a mixed analysis , Amy Pettifer of The Quietus called it " a Ted @-@ talk of well @-@ worn , motivational encouragement cloaked in a club anthem . " Saaed Saaed of The National called the album 's " mini slump , " while <unk> Murphy of musicOMH noted that the song " falls rather flat . " Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club was confused with the song 's message , saying that it " can ’ t decide if it wants to skewer fame or encourage people to embrace it . " Lydia Jenkins wrote for New Zealand Herald that the song " could definitely be accused of trying to emulate the success of Katy Perry 's ' Dark Horse . " Lauren Murphy of The Irish Times dismissed Tyson 's appearance , declaring that his spoken word turn on ' Iconic ' is tokenistic . " Sasha Geffen of Consequence of Sound criticized the song 's " lazy rhymes " , which according to herself , lumps into " an awkward hybrid of EDM and hip @-@ hop featuring one of hip @-@ hop ’ s finest [ that ] sounds out of place here amid the bass drops and robot vocals . " 
 = = Live performance = = 
 " Iconic " was chosen to be the opening song from the Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) . It begins with a video featuring Madonna in a glamorous dress cavorting with bare @-@ bodied males juxtaposed with Mike Tyson talking inside of a cage . Tyson commented about the shooting , saying : " Riveting is not [ the word ] . It 's just intense ... I 'm in a cage . I 'm a hostage . I 'm chained . I 'm naked . I look like a savage . When I [ shot ] it , it didn 't seem that intense . But then you watch it and go , ' Whoa ' . It was like [ something out of ] National Geographic . I need to be tamed , man . " Madonna performed wearing an " ornate kimono @-@ like robe with wide sequin @-@ lined sleeves " inside a medieval @-@ looking cage surrounded by religious iconography that she later breaks out of as she sings the first lines , while guards dressed similar to Wicked Witch of the West 's castle marched onstage . During the performance , she also hung upside down on a cross . 
 The performance was received with a positive response from critics . Jordan Zivitz of Montreal Gazette called the performance " insanely theatrical , Broadway @-@ worthy . " Melissa Maerz wrote for Entertainment Weekly that " As visually spectacular as it was narratively [ sic ] heavy @-@ handed , it felt like a callback to her last tour , ' MDNA ' , which featured a dark charade that found Madonna wielding a gun on stage . But when the song ended with video footage of the gladiators knocking over a saintly @-@ looking Madonna statue , the tone changed . Madonna has built a career by playing with what we hold sacred , whether it ’ s crucifixes or underground dance crazes . Now the only sacred thing she 's tearing down is Madonna herself . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . ( ASCAP ) / Atlas Music Publishing and Gadfly Songs ( ASCAP ) / EMI April Music , Inc. and Mo Zella Mo Music ( ASCAP ) / WB Music Corp. , Roc Nation Music and <unk> ’ s Soul Music Publishing WB Music Corp. ( ASCAP ) / / Chancelor Bennett ( BMI ) c / o Davis , Shapiro , <unk> , <unk> , Leven , Granderson & Blake / Sony / ATV Sonata and Dahi Productions ( SESAC ) / Michael Tucker Music ( ASCAP ) c / o Kobalt Songs Music Publishing , These Are Songs of Pulse ( ASCAP ) and OWSLA Trax ( ASCAP ) c / o Kobalt Songs Music Publishing . 
 Personnel 
 Management and personnel adapted from Madonna 's official website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = West Indian cricket team in England in 1988 = 
 The West Indian cricket team played 16 first @-@ class cricket matches in England in 1988 , under the captaincy of Viv Richards . The West Indies enjoyed tremendous success during the tour , while England endured a " disastrous summer " of continuous change . 
 England easily won the initial three @-@ match One Day International ( ODI ) series , retaining the Texaco Trophy and raising expectations for a successful summer in the five @-@ match Test series to follow . However , the West Indies comfortably retained the Wisden Trophy by winning the Test series 4 – 0 . This tour has become known in cricketing circles as the " summer of four captains " as England used four different captains in the five Test matches . 
 = = West Indian cricket team = = 
 By the summer of 1988 , the West Indies had experienced nearly ten years as the best Test team in world cricket , including a streak of winning 10 of 11 Test series they played from 1980 to 1985 – 86 ( the other was drawn ) . However , the West Indies side that had enjoyed this considerable recent success was beginning to show signs of ageing . The experienced batsmen Viv Richards ( the captain ) , Gordon Greenidge , Jeff Dujon , and Desmond Haynes were all coming to the end of their careers , and bowlers Michael Holding and Joel Garner and batsman Larry Gomes had recently retired . As a result , the squad arrived with an unusually inexperienced group of pace bowlers . Supporting Malcolm Marshall , a veteran of 53 Tests , were relative newcomers Courtney Walsh ( 20 Tests ) , Patrick Patterson ( 11 ) , Winston Benjamin ( 4 ) , Curtly Ambrose ( 3 ) and Ian Bishop ( 0 ) . 
 The West Indies ' most recent series had been a hard @-@ fought 1 – 1 draw at home against Pakistan , but their previous two Test series against England had both resulted in 5 – 0 victories . The first of these , in England in 1984 , was the first whitewash England had suffered since the 1920 – 21 season when England toured Australia , while the second occurred in the Caribbean in 1985 – 86 . These two one @-@ sided victories by the West Indies became known as " <unk> " . 
 = = English cricket team = = 
 By contrast , the English team had suffered a run of bad performances spanning several years , winning only seven of their previous 52 Tests . The England side had most recently toured Australia , drawing the Bicentennial Test and losing the only One Day International played , and New Zealand , drawing all three Test matches and sharing the ODIs 2 – 2 . Before this , they had endured a " hostile " and highly controversial tour of Pakistan , during which an argument between captain Mike Gatting and umpire <unk> Rana had led to a diplomatic incident . The three match series was lost 1 – 0 , but the " teasing , taunting ... bemusing " performance of leg @-@ spinner Abdul Qadir , who took 30 wickets in three Tests , was unlikely to be repeated , given that the West Indies ' only specialist spinner was Roger Harper , an off @-@ break bowler . 
 Despite having lost 5 – 0 to the West Indies in each of the two most recent series , England had grounds for optimism leading up to the Test series : the West Indian team was ageing and lacked a leg @-@ spinner ; and the England team had home advantage . England 's morale was also surging following good performances in the shorter form of the game : the team had reached the World Cup Final the previous year , losing to Australia , and were expected to do well in One Day International cricket , even against the West Indies . 
 = = England 's " summer of four captains " = = 
 As the series unfolded , England were dominated by the West Indians in " the crazy summer of 1988 " . Wisden was moved to comment " The morale and reputation of English cricket has seldom been as severely bruised as it was during the 1988 Cornhill Insurance Test series against West Indies " . 
 The notability of there being four captains in just five Test matches can better be understood with context . The captain of a cricket team performs a vital role . Unlike many other team sports , the captain makes crucial decisions regarding on @-@ field tactics , and may also have an important say in team selection . Traditionally , captains of international teams are not changed frequently – for example , between 1977 and 1988 ( comprising 104 Test matches ) , only seven different men captained England , yet there were four captains in just a few weeks in the summer of 1988 . 
 The many changes of captain over the summer reflected uncertainty in the English cricketing establishment as to how to respond to the drubbing the team was receiving from the West Indies ; the selectors " did not seem to know where to turn , either for a new captain or for a settled team " . 
 The England team had not suffered such uncertainty since the West Indies tour of England in 1966 , where the selectors chose 23 different players and three different captains ( Colin Cowdrey , M. J. K. Smith and Brian Close ) and England lost the five @-@ Test series 3 – 1 . Notably , Peter May was on the Board of Selectors for the 1966 series , while he was chairman of the board of Selectors for the 1988 series . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 Before the Test series began , the West Indian cricket team played three One Day Internationals against England in May 1988 . All of the ODIs were won by England , largely thanks to disciplined , economical bowling by Gladstone Small , Phil DeFreitas and Derek Pringle throughout and good batting performances from Mike Gatting in the First ( 82 * ) and Third ( 40 * ) ODIs . England retained the Texaco Trophy . 
 The ODIs were followed by five Test matches . The First Test was drawn , and the remaining four Tests were all won convincingly by the West Indies . 
 The West Indies played 11 first @-@ class matches , in addition to the five Tests , defeating Somerset in May and Kent in June . The other nine first @-@ class matches , and the First Test , were all drawn : Sussex , Gloucestershire , Worcestershire , Lancashire , Northamptonshire , Leicestershire , Glamorgan , Nottinghamshire , and Essex . During the match against Gloucestershire at Bristol , immediately after the ODI series , Phil Simmons suffered a horrific injury , receiving a ball to the head from bowler David Lawrence . Not wearing a helmet , the blow caused his heart to stop and he had to be taken to hospital where he underwent emergency brain surgery . He missed the rest of the tour , but made a full recovery in time for the 1991 West Indies tour of England . 
 In addition to the One Day Internationals , there were four other non @-@ first @-@ class fixtures . West Indies beat Lavinia , Duchess of Norfolk 's XI in a 40 @-@ over match , Hampshire in a 50 @-@ over match and a combined Oxford and Cambridge Universities team over three days ; they also drew with Minor Counties in a two @-@ day match . 
 = = Test matches in detail = = 
 = = = First Test = = = 
 Mike Gatting was the incumbent England captain for the First Test at Trent Bridge . The result was a draw , with Graham Gooch and David Gower helping England to save the game from a position of weakness , after conceding a sizeable first @-@ innings lead to the West Indies . 
 England won the toss and declined from 125 / 0 to 245 all out , the last five wickets tumbling for just 22 runs . Malcolm Marshall and Curtly Ambrose took all ten wickets between them . The West Indies racked up 448 / 9 despite no batsman reaching a century . England had a chance to get back into the match , but from 334 / 7 , the unheralded batting of Marshall ( 72 ) and Ambrose ( 43 * ) took the tourists into a position of dominance . 
 The West Indian surge for victory was frustrated by the weather , which periodically interrupted the match throughout , and by an obdurate partnership of 161 between Gooch ( 146 ) and Gower ( 88 * ) . 
 Before the Second Test , Gatting was sacked for an alleged off @-@ field indiscretion with a barmaid . The tabloid media made allegations of " shenanigans " in his room ; he " admitted taking ... [ her ] into his room but denied anything untoward had happened " . During the previous winter , Gatting had been involved in a notorious on @-@ field altercation with umpire <unk> Rana in Pakistan that snowballed into a diplomatic disaster with the third day of the second Test in Faisalabad being abandoned and accusations of cheating . His recently published autobiography Leading From The Front " ... was banned in all shops on county grounds . Gatting was good enough to lead Middlesex and England , but spectators couldn 't buy his book at Lord 's " . The new allegations may simply have been the last straw . 
 This proved to be Gatting 's last match as captain . He had captained England in 23 Test matches since taking charge against India in 1986 , but won only two . 
 = = = Second Test = = = 
 Gatting was replaced as England captain by his Middlesex colleague John Emburey . Gatting was also dropped from the team , replaced by Yorkshire 's Martyn Moxon . Phil DeFreitas was also replaced , by Gladstone Small , but the tourists were unchanged . 
 England began the Second Test with an inspired fiery burst of fast bowling by Graham Dilley , who took four of the first five wickets to fall to reduce the West Indies to 54 / 5 . At lunch on the first day , Dilley had figures of 4 / 35 , and " he would have taken five had Pringle at first slip caught Logie when he was 10 " . 
 The missed chance was to prove costly . The pattern established in the first Test recurred , as England let the West Indies recover , with Gus Logie and Jeff Dujon scoring 81 and 53 as the team passed 200 . 
 In England 's first innings , the West Indian pace attack found little resistance after they had dismissed Gooch and Gower . Marshall was again to the fore , with six wickets , and West Indies secured a precious first @-@ innings lead of 44 runs . 
 The touring batsmen then enjoyed the Lord 's conditions , reaching 397 in their second innings , with sizeable contributions from Greenidge ( 103 ) , Richards ( 72 ) , Dujon ( 52 ) and Logie again , this time with an unbeaten 95 , a match performance that secured him the award of Man of the match . 
 England never seriously threatened to reach the victory target of 442 runs , which would have comfortably broken the world record for a fourth @-@ innings run chase . Allan Lamb added to his reputation for mastering fast bowling with a defiant 113 , but it was sizeable contributions from the tail and extras that took England to a respectable total of 307 – but a bad defeat by 134 runs . 
 = = = Third Test = = = 
 The third Test changed the pattern of the summer . England were " unable to cope for any length of time with the West Indian fast bowlers " and never gave even a sign of competing in a one @-@ sided affair . 
 The England team had a different look , with four changes to the team . 36 @-@ year @-@ old Essex off @-@ spinner John Childs made his debut , the oldest England debutant for 40 years . Childs joined the recalled Gatting and DeFreitas , and newcomer David Capel . Small and Paul Jarvis were both left out due to injury , and Derek Pringle was dropped , but the most media attention focused on Chris Broad , who was also dropped , " ostensibly for his consistent failure to make runs in home Tests , but there was always a suspicion that he was being disciplined for the incident at Lord 's when he was spotted by a television camera mouthing his disappointment at an lbw decision " . 
 For West Indies , Desmond Haynes was unfit , ending a run of 72 consecutive caps . He was replaced by the spinner Roger Harper , and Patrick Patterson was replaced by Winston Benjamin . 
 No batsman scored more than 33 in England 's first innings , as the four quick bowlers shared cheap wickets . In reply , West Indies piled up 384 / 7 , again without a century , in a team effort down to and including man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match Marshall , who scored 43 * batting at number eight . 
 Needing 249 to make West Indies bat again , England were dismissed for just 93 , Marshall finishing with magnificent figures of 15 @.@ 4 – 5 – 22 – 7 , the best of his Test career . Extras were the third highest scorer , with 12 . 
 With such a huge margin of victory and such a poor performance , England ( and Emburey ) were strongly criticised . After being bowled out for just 93 runs , and a personally very unsuccessful match ( no wickets as a bowler , and scoring just 1 and 8 runs as a batsman ) , Emburey was sacked as England captain and dropped from the team . 
 = = = Fourth Test = = = 
 The England selectors surprised the cricket public with their new appointment as captain , selecting a player who many believed owed his appointment more to his father than his own ability . Chris Cowdrey was the son of Colin Cowdrey , an England captain in the 1960s and later given a knighthood and then life peerage for his services to the sport ; Chris Cowdrey was also godson of the chairman of selectors , Peter May . Cowdrey was a successful captain of Kent in county cricket , but had played just five Tests previously , during the 1984 – 85 tour to India , captained by David Gower . He became only the second son to follow his father as captain of the England cricket team , after George Mann in the 1940s followed Frank Mann in the 1920s . 
 The England side was thoroughly shaken @-@ up following the debacle in the Third Test at Old Trafford . The selectors tried to turn things around with seven new faces in the team , the most extensive change of an England XI during a Test series since seven players were changed for the 1921 Ashes Tests against Australia at Lord 's and Headingley ( when only <unk> Douglas , <unk> Parkin , Lionel Tennyson and Frank Woolley were retained , and Tennyson replaced Douglas as captain ) . As well as Cowdrey replacing Emburey , the selectors also dropped Paul Downton , Martyn Moxon , Mike Gatting , David Capel , Phil <unk> and John Childs in favour of Derek Pringle , Neil Foster , Bill Athey , and Jack Richards , with Tim Curtis and Robin Smith making their Test debuts . For the West Indies , both Greenidge and Richardson sat the match out , injured : Haynes returned , and a debut was handed to Keith Arthurton . Jeff Dujon was promoted up the batting order as a makeshift opener . 
 Apart from Pringle , who played in the First and Second Tests , none of the six new selections had played in the series so far , but the match followed the old pattern , as the England batting again failed twice against the hostile West Indies pace attack , only Lamb and Smith in the first innings and Gooch in the second offering much resistance . The side fell to a relatively facile defeat against a West Indies team whose own batsmen failed to dominate ; they had no need . Curtly Ambrose secured his first man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match award for taking seven wickets at a cost of 98 runs - despite being hampered early on in the match , when a blocked drain resulted in the bowler 's run @-@ up area being waterlogged and in some places flooded with overflow rainwater , Ambrose being hapless bowler who was forced to bring the situation to the attention of the umpires so that play could be suspended and the playing area dried out . 
 An all @-@ rounder with a moderate first class record ( averaging 32 with the bat and 40 with the ball ) , Cowdrey 's debut as captain in the Fourth Test at Headingley was a disaster . He scored 0 and 5 and took no wickets , as England were crushed by 10 wickets , West Indies again winning at a canter . Worse for Cowdrey , he suffered a minor injury in a county match and was persuaded to step aside for the Fifth Test . He never played for England again . 
 = = = Fifth Test = = = 
 In desperation , the England selectors turned to 35 @-@ year @-@ old Graham Gooch , stalwart opening batsman , as their fourth captain of the series , for the Fifth Test at The Oval . England also replaced Cowdrey with DeFreitas , dropped Gower for Matthew Maynard , and replaced the injured Allan Lamb with Rob Bailey , a recall and two Test debuts respectively . The tourists replaced the youngster Keith Arthurton with Greenidge , who had recovered from an injury . 
 England won the toss and the new captain received the first ball , but Gooch was soon out with the score on only 12 . Some solid top @-@ order play followed , with Curtis ( 30 ) , Bailey ( 43 ) and Smith ( 57 ) all making starts but getting out when well set . From 120 / 3 , England lost their remaining wickets for 85 , but that is perhaps less surprising than the fact that off @-@ spinner Roger Harper took three of them . A lion @-@ hearted response by the England bowlers , led by Neil Foster ( 5 / 64 ) , gave England a chance of a rare win , as the West Indies were dismissed for 183 , giving the England team their first first @-@ innings lead of the series , 22 runs ahead . 
 In England 's second innings , Gooch played a lone hand . With the exception of Foster ( 34 ) , promoted as nightwatchman at the end of day two , no @-@ one else passed 15 . When Gooch was last man out for 84 on the third day , England had compiled 202 . The England bowlers managed to restrain the West Indian batsmen , Childs notably bowling 40 overs for just 79 runs , but , with more than two days left to play , there was little pressure on the West Indies , and they strolled to victory in 91 overs , losing just two wickets , with more than a day to spare . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Gooch had enjoyed a successful series against West Indies as a batsman , and remained in charge for England 's next match , against Sri Lanka at Lord 's later in 1988 , in which he achieved his first victory as captain . England did not tour that winter - in large part due to India 's objection to Gooch as England captain thanks to his participation in the 1981 rebel tour of South Africa ( for which he had served a three @-@ year ban ) , and due to other English players having played club cricket in South Africa . Exceptions might have been made for the rank and file players ( as indeed they had been for Gooch , when India raised no objection to his representing England in the 1987 World Cup ) , but for the Indian government , Gooch 's appointment as captain of a representative tour party was a step too far . As a result , England 's planned tour to India was cancelled , Gooch was dropped from the captaincy , and David Gower returned to the captaincy for the six @-@ match Ashes series at home against Australia in the summer of 1989 . England lost 4 – 0 , bringing Gower 's long captaincy career to a close . A second " rebel " tour of South Africa , under Gatting - whom some had previously supported for a return to the captaincy , rather than Gower - removed a number of players from the England reckoning halfway through the summer , some of them regulars and most with at least occasional England experience , as no less than 30 players were tried in the six @-@ match series - beating the record of 28 , set only the previous summer : the players involved ( including John Emburey , the only player to go on both 1981 and 1989 rebel tours ) received the same three @-@ year international ban as the 1981 party . 
 Gooch thus took over again as England captain for the tour to West Indies in the winter of 1989 – 90 ( he had not played well in the 1989 Ashes , but there was really no other credible candidate as captain , and the West Indies made no objection , having officially ended the " life " bans of their own rebel South Africa tourists after six years ) with only a couple of veterans in an otherwise almost new @-@ look team : surprising everybody by winning one Test ( their first victory over the <unk> since 1974 ) and drawing another before injury forced him out of the team , his hand being broken by fast bowler Ezra Moseley - ironically , Moseley was the only one of West Indies ' rebel tourists to play international cricket after their ban was lifted . Gooch was replaced as captain for the remainder of the series by Allan Lamb ( himself South African @-@ born ) , who lost both of his matches in charge . Gooch went on to captain England the following summer against New Zealand and India at home , remaining in that position almost exclusively until 1993 and bringing England a degree of success that they had not experienced for almost a decade , at least at home : the 1991 home series against the West Indies , in fact , was a hard @-@ fought 2 @-@ 2 draw , and England reached the World Cup final for the second successive time the following winter ( which was much less of a surprise - even when their Test record was at its worst , England were one of the leading one @-@ day sides of the time , often winning the one @-@ day series even when a Test series was lost , including both the otherwise disastrous 1988 and 1989 summers . ) For much of this period , he was also rated as one of the world 's leading batsmen . Away from home , though , England were not so strong , losing heavily to Australia in 1990 @-@ 1 and to India and Sri Lanka in 1992 @-@ 3 , though these were either side of a series victory in New Zealand . 
 The West Indies team 's next opposition was Australia where the team enjoyed a 3 – 1 Test series win on foreign soil , their only defeat in that series coming on a pitch friendly to spin bowling in which 11 wickets were taken by the occasional left @-@ arm spin of Allan Border . " The West Indians made a slow start to their tour , losing twice to Western Australia before running into form ... So effectively , at times irresistibly , did Vivian Richards 's West Indian side play in the first three Test matches in Australia that by the New Year they had already retained the Frank Worrell Trophy . " 
 The West Indies went on to record further Test series victories in the next two years , defeating India 3 – 0 in a four @-@ Test series in the Caribbean in 1988 – 89 , and narrowly beating England once again in the Caribbean in 1989 – 90 . However , the team 's long period of pre @-@ eminence was coming to an end . For several of their senior players , the 1991 tour of England was a swansong : Richards , Marshall and Dujon all retired from Tests after the final match , while Greenidge had announced his intention to do likewise but was forced out of the tour by injury before the Tests began , and Logie also played his last Test on the tour . Nevertheless , the West Indies were to remain unbeaten in a Test series for a few more years yet , but never as dominant as they had been : and their 2 – 1 home defeat by Australia in 1994 – 95 saw the West Indies relinquish the mantle as the World 's best Test cricket side to their visitors , and by the time that the International Cricket Council launched the official Test rankings in 2001 , the West Indies were rated as the sixth best team in the world . 
 = = Squads = = 
 The following players represented England in at least one Test or One @-@ day International during the 1988 tour : 
 The following players represented West Indies on the 1988 tour of England : 
 Key : * = Captain , † = Wicket @-@ keeper 
 = The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan = 
 The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan is the second studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Bob Dylan , released on May 27 , 1963 by Columbia Records . Whereas his debut album Bob Dylan had contained only two original songs , Freewheelin ' represented the beginning of Dylan 's writing contemporary words to traditional melodies . Eleven of the thirteen songs on the album are Dylan 's original compositions . The album opens with " Blowin ' in the Wind " , which became an anthem of the 1960s , and an international hit for folk trio Peter , Paul & Mary soon after the release of Freewheelin ' . The album featured several other songs which came to be regarded as amongst Dylan 's best compositions and classics of the 1960s folk scene : " Girl from the North Country " , " Masters of War " , " A Hard Rain 's a @-@ Gonna Fall " and " Don 't Think Twice , It 's All Right " . 
 Dylan 's lyrics embraced stories taken from the headlines about civil rights and he articulated anxieties about the fear of nuclear warfare . Balancing this political material were love songs , sometimes bitter and accusatory , and material that features surreal humor . Freewheelin ' showcased Dylan 's songwriting talent for the first time , propelling him to national and international fame . The success of the album and Dylan 's subsequent recognition led to his being named as " Spokesman of a Generation " , a label Dylan repudiated . 
 The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan reached number 22 in the United States ( eventually going platinum ) , and became a number @-@ one hit in the United Kingdom in 1964 . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 97 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . In 2002 , Freewheelin ' was one of the first 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry . 
 = = Recording sessions = = 
 Neither critics nor the public took much notice of Dylan 's debut album , Bob Dylan , which sold only 5 @,@ 000 copies in its first year , just enough to break even . In a pointed rebuke to John Hammond , who had signed Dylan to Columbia Records , some within the company referred to the singer as " Hammond 's Folly " and suggested dropping his contract . Hammond defended Dylan vigorously and was determined that Dylan 's second album should be a success . The recording of Freewheelin ' took place from April 1962 to April 1963 , and the album was assembled from eight recording sessions in the Columbia Records Studio A , 799 Seventh Avenue , in New York City . 
 = = = Political and personal background = = = 
 Many critics have noted the extraordinary development of Dylan 's songwriting immediately after completing his first album . One of Dylan 's biographers Clinton Heylin connects the sudden increase in lyrics written along topical and political lines to the fact that Dylan had moved into an apartment on West 4th Street with his girlfriend Suze Rotolo in January 1962 . Rotolo 's family had strong left @-@ wing political commitments ; both of her parents were members of the American Communist Party . Dylan acknowledged her influence when he told an interviewer : " Suze was into this equality @-@ freedom thing long before I was . I checked out the songs with her . " 
 Dylan 's relationship with Rotolo also provided an important emotional dynamic in the composition of the Freewheelin ' album . After six months of living with Dylan , Rotolo agreed to her mother 's proposal that she travel to Italy to study art . Dylan missed her and wrote long letters to her conveying his hope that she would return soon to New York . She postponed her return several times , finally coming back in January 1963 . Critics have connected the intense love songs expressing longing and loss on Freewheelin ' to Dylan ’ s fraught relationship with Rotolo . In her autobiography , Rotolo explains that musicians ' girlfriends were routinely described as " chicks " , and she resented being regarded as " a possession of Bob , who was the center of attention " . 
 The speed and facility with which Dylan wrote topical songs attracted the attention of other musicians in the New York folk scene . In a radio interview on WBAI in June 1962 , Pete Seeger described Dylan as " the most prolific songwriter on the scene " and then asked Dylan how many songs he had written recently . Dylan replied , " I might go for two weeks without writing these songs . I write a lot of stuff . In fact , I wrote five songs last night but I gave all the papers away in some place called the Bitter End . " Dylan also expressed the impersonal idea that the songs were not his own creation . In an interview with Sing Out ! magazine , Dylan said , " The songs are there . They exist all by themselves just waiting for someone to write them down . I just put them down on paper . If I didn 't do it , somebody else would . " 
 = = = Recording in New York = = = 
 Dylan began work on his second album at Columbia 's Studio A in New York on April 24 , 1962 . The album was provisionally entitled Bob Dylan 's Blues , and as late as July 1962 , this would remain the working title . At this session , Dylan recorded four of his own compositions : " Sally Gal " , " The Death of Emmett Till " , " Rambling , Gambling Willie " , and " Talkin ' John Birch Paranoid Blues " . He also recorded two traditional folk songs , " Going To New Orleans " and " Corrina , Corrina " , and Hank Williams ' " ( I Heard That ) Lonesome Whistle " . 
 Returning to Studio A the following day , Dylan recorded his new song about fallout shelters , " Let Me Die In My Footsteps " . Other original compositions followed : " Rocks and Gravel " , " Talking Hava <unk> Blues " , " Talking Bear Mountain Picnic Massacre Blues " , and two more takes of " Sally Gal " . Dylan recorded cover versions of " Wichita " , Big Joe Williams ' " Baby , Please Don 't Go " , and Robert Johnson 's " Milk Cow 's Calf 's Blues " . Because Dylan 's songwriting talent was developing so rapidly , nothing from the April sessions appeared on Freewheelin ' . 
 The recording sessions at Studio A resumed on July 9 , when Dylan recorded " Blowin ' in the Wind " , a song that he had first performed live at Gerde 's Folk City on April 16 . Dylan also recorded " Bob Dylan 's Blues " , " Down the Highway " , and " Honey , Just Allow Me One More Chance " , all of which ended up on Freewheelin ' , plus one other original composition , " Baby , I 'm in the Mood for You " , which did not . 
 At this point , music manager Albert Grossman began to take an interest in Dylan 's business affairs . Grossman persuaded Dylan to transfer the publishing rights of his songs from Duchess Music , whom he had signed a contract with in January 1962 , to Witmark Music , a division of Warner 's music publishing operation . Dylan signed a contract with Witmark on July 13 , 1962 . Unknown to Dylan , Grossman had also negotiated a deal with Witmark . This gave Grossman fifty percent of Witmark 's share of the publishing income generated by any songwriter Grossman had brought to the company . This " secret deal " resulted in a bitter legal battle between Dylan and Grossman in the 1980s . 
 Albert Grossman became Dylan 's manager on August 20 , 1962 . Since Dylan was under twenty @-@ one when he had signed his contract with CBS , Grossman argued that the contract was invalid and had to be re @-@ negotiated . Instead , Hammond responded by inviting Dylan to his office and persuading him to sign a " <unk> " — agreeing to abide by the original contract . This effectively neutralized Grossman 's strategy , and led to some animosity between Grossman and Hammond . Grossman enjoyed a reputation in the folk scene of being commercially aggressive , generating more income and defending his clients ' interests more fiercely than " the nicer , more amateurish managers in the Village " . Dylan critic Andy Gill has suggested that Grossman encouraged Dylan to become more reclusive and aloof , even paranoid . 
 On September 22 , Dylan appeared for the first time at Carnegie Hall , part of an all @-@ star hootenanny . On this occasion , he premiered his new composition " A Hard Rain 's a @-@ Gonna Fall " , a complex and powerful song built upon the question and answer refrain pattern of the traditional British ballad " Lord Randall " . " Hard Rain " would gain added resonance one month later , when President Kennedy appeared on national television on October 22 , and announced the discovery of Soviet missiles on the island of Cuba , initiating the Cuban Missile Crisis . In the sleeve notes on the Freewheelin ' album , Nat Hentoff quotes Dylan as saying that he wrote " Hard Rain " in response to the Cuban Missile Crisis : " Every line in it is actually the start of a whole new song . But when I wrote it , I thought I wouldn 't have enough time alive to write all those songs so I put all I could into this one " . In fact , Dylan had written the song more than a month before the crisis broke . 
 Dylan resumed work on Freewheelin ' at Columbia 's Studio A on October 26 , when a major innovation took place — Dylan made his first studio recordings with a backing band . Accompanied by Dick <unk> on piano , Howie Collins and Bruce Langhorne on guitar , Leonard Gaskin on bass , and Herb Lovelle on drums , Dylan recorded three songs . Several takes of Dylan 's " Mixed @-@ Up Confusion " and Arthur Crudup 's " That 's All Right Mama " were deemed unusable , but a master take of " Corrina , Corrina " was selected for the final album . An ' alternate take ' of " Corrina , Corrina " from the same session would also be selected for a single issued later in the year . At the next recording session on November 1 , the band included Art Davis on bass , while jazz guitarist George Barnes replaced Howie Collins . " Mixed @-@ Up Confusion " and " That 's All Right Mama " were re @-@ recorded , and again the results were deemed unsatisfactory . A take of the third song , " Rocks and Gravel " , was selected for the album , but the track was subsequently dropped . 
 On November 14 , Dylan resumed work with his backup band , this time with Gene Ramey on bass , devoting most of the session to recording " Mixed @-@ Up Confusion " . Although this track did not appear on Freewheelin ' , it was released as a single on December 14 , 1962 , and then swiftly withdrawn . Unlike the other material which Dylan recorded between 1961 and 1964 , " Mixed @-@ Up Confusion " attempted a rockabilly sound . Cameron Crowe described it as " a fascinating look at a folk artist with his mind wandering towards Elvis Presley and Sun Records " . 
 Also recorded on November 14 was the new composition " Don 't Think Twice , It 's All Right " . ( Clinton Heylin writes that , although the sleeve notes of Freewheelin ' describe this song as being accompanied by a backing band , no band is audible on the released version . ) Langhorne then accompanied Dylan on three more original compositions : " Ballad of Hollis Brown " , " Kingsport Town " , and " Whatcha Gonna Do " , but these performances were not included on Freewheelin ' . 
 Dylan held another session at Studio A on December 6 . Five songs , all original compositions , were recorded , three of which were eventually included on The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan : " A Hard Rain 's a @-@ Gonna Fall " , " Oxford Town " , and " I Shall Be Free " . Dylan also made another attempt at " Whatcha Gonna Do " and recorded a new song , " Hero Blues " , but both songs were ultimately rejected and left unreleased . 
 = = = Traveling to England = = = 
 Twelve days later , Dylan made his first trip abroad . British TV director Philip Saville had heard Dylan perform in Greenwich Village , and invited him to take part in a BBC television drama : Madhouse on Castle Street . Dylan arrived in London on December 17 . In the play , Dylan performed " Blowin ' in the Wind " and two other songs . Dylan also immersed himself in the London folk scene , making contact with the Troubadour folk club organizer Anthea Joseph and folksingers Martin Carthy and Bob Davenport . " I ran into some people in England who really knew those [ traditional English ] songs , " Dylan recalled in 1984 . " Martin Carthy , another guy named [ Bob ] Davenport . Martin Carthy 's incredible . I learned a lot of stuff from Martin . " 
 Carthy taught Dylan two English songs that would prove important for the Freewheelin ' album . Carthy 's arrangement of " Scarborough Fair " would be used by Dylan as the basis of his own composition , " Girl from the North Country " . A 19th century ballad commemorating the death of Sir John Franklin in 1847 , " Lady Franklin 's Lament " , gave Dylan the melody for his composition " Bob Dylan 's Dream " . Both songs displayed Dylan 's fast @-@ growing ability to take traditional melodies and use them as a basis for highly personal songwriting . 
 From England , Dylan traveled to Italy , and joined Albert Grossman , who was touring with his client Odetta . Dylan was also hoping to make contact with his girlfriend , Suze Rotolo , unaware that she had already left Italy and was on her way back to New York . Dylan worked on his new material , and when he returned to London , Martin Carthy received a surprise : " When he came back from Italy , he 'd written ' Girl From the North Country ' ; he came down to the Troubadour and said , ' Hey , here 's " Scarborough Fair " ' and he started playing this thing . " 
 = = = Returning to New York = = = 
 Dylan flew back to New York on January 16 , 1963 . In January and February , he recorded some of his new compositions in sessions for the folk magazine Broadside , including a new anti @-@ war song , " Masters of War " , which he had composed in London . Dylan was happy to be reunited with Suze Rotolo , and he persuaded her to move back into the apartment they had shared on West 4th Street . 
 Dylan 's keenness to record his new material for Freewheelin ' paralleled a dramatic power struggle in the studio : Albert Grossman 's determination to have John Hammond replaced as Dylan 's producer at CBS . According to Dylan biographer Howard Sounes , " The two men could not have been more different . Hammond was a WASP , so relaxed during recording sessions that he sat with feet up , reading The New Yorker . Grossman was a Jewish businessman with a shady past , hustling to become a millionaire . " 
 Because of Grossman 's hostility to Hammond , Columbia paired Dylan with a young , African @-@ American jazz producer , Tom Wilson . Wilson recalled : " I didn 't even particularly like folk music . I 'd been recording Sun Ra and Coltrane ... I thought folk music was for the dumb guys . [ Dylan ] played like the dumb guys , but then these words came out . I was flabbergasted . " At a recording session on April 24 , produced by Wilson , Dylan recorded five new compositions : " Girl from the North Country " , " Masters of War " , " Talkin ' World War III Blues " , " Bob Dylan 's Dream " , and " Walls of Red Wing " . " Walls of Red Wing " was ultimately rejected , but the other four were included in a revised album sequence . 
 The final drama of recording Freewheelin ' occurred when Dylan was scheduled to appear on The Ed Sullivan Show on May 12 , 1963 . Dylan had told Sullivan he would perform " Talkin ' John Birch Paranoid Blues " , but the " head of program practices " at CBS Television informed Dylan that this song was potentially libelous to the John Birch Society , and asked him to perform another number . Rather than comply with TV censorship , Dylan refused to appear on the show . There is disagreement between Dylan 's biographers about the consequences of this censorship row . Anthony Scaduto writes that after The Ed Sullivan Show debacle , CBS lawyers were alarmed to discover that the controversial song was to be included on Dylan 's new album , only a few weeks from its release date . They insisted that the song be dropped , and four songs ( " John Birch " , " Let Me Die In My Footsteps " , " Rambling Gambling Willie " , " Rocks and Gravel " ) on the album were replaced with Dylan 's newer compositions recorded in April ( " Girl from the North Country " , " Masters of War " , " Talkin ' World War III Blues " , " Bob Dylan 's Dream " ) . Scaduto writes that Dylan felt " crushed " by being compelled to submit to censorship , but he was in no position to argue . 
 According to biographer Clinton Heylin , " There remains a common belief that [ Dylan ] was forced by Columbia to pull ' Talkin ' John Birch Paranoid Blues ' from the album after he walked out on The Ed Sullivan Show . " However , the " revised " version of The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan was released on May 27 , 1963 ; this would have given Columbia Records only two weeks to recut the album , reprint the record sleeves , and press and package enough copies of the new version to fill orders . Heylin suggests that CBS had probably forced Dylan to withdraw " John Birch " from the album some weeks earlier , and that Dylan had responded by recording his new material on April 24 . Whether the songs were substituted before or after The Ed Sullivan Show , critics agree that the new material gave the album a more personal feel , distanced from the traditional folk @-@ blues material which had dominated his first album , Bob Dylan . 
 A few copies of the original pressing of the LP with the four deleted tracks have turned up over the years , despite Columbia 's supposed destruction of all copies during the pre @-@ release phase ( all copies found were in the standard album sleeve with the revised track selection ) . Other permutations of the Freewheelin ' album include versions with a different running order of the tracks on the album , and a Canadian version of the album that listed the tracks in the wrong order . The original pressing of The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan is considered the most valuable and rarest record in America , with one copy having sold for $ 35 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Songs and themes = = 
 " Blowin ' in the Wind " 
 " Blowin ' in the Wind " is among Dylan 's most celebrated compositions . In his sleeve notes for The Bootleg Series Volumes 1 – 3 ( Rare & Unreleased ) 1961 – 1991 , John Bauldie writes that it was Pete Seeger who first identified the melody of " Blowin ' in the Wind " as Dylan 's adaptation of the old Negro spiritual " No More Auction Block " . According to Alan Lomax 's The Folk Songs of North America , the song originated in Canada and was sung by former slaves who fled there after Britain abolished slavery in 1833 . In 1978 , Dylan acknowledged the source when he told journalist Marc Rowland : " ' Blowin ' in the Wind ' has always been a spiritual . I took it off a song called ' No More Auction Block ' — that 's a spiritual and ' Blowin ' in the Wind ' follows the same feeling . " Dylan 's performance of " No More Auction Block " was recorded at the Gaslight Cafe in October 1962 , and appeared on The Bootleg Series Volumes 1 – 3 ( Rare & Unreleased ) 1961 – 1991 . 
 Critic Andy Gill wrote : " ' Blowin ' in the Wind ' marked a huge jump in Dylan 's songwriting : for the first time , Dylan discovered the effectiveness of moving from the particular to the general . Whereas ' The Ballad of Donald White ' would become completely redundant as soon as the eponymous criminal was executed , a song as vague as ' Blowin ' in the Wind ' could be applied to just about any freedom issue . It remains the song with which Dylan 's name is most inextricably linked , and safeguarded his reputation as a civil libertarian through any number of changes in style and attitude . " 
 " Blowin ' in the Wind " became world @-@ famous when Peter , Paul and Mary issued the song as a single three weeks after the release of Freewheelin ' . They and Dylan both shared the same manager : Albert Grossman . The single sold a phenomenal three hundred thousand copies in the first week of release . On July 13 , 1963 , it reached number two on the Billboard chart with sales exceeding one million copies . Dylan later recalled that he was astonished when Peter Yarrow told him he was going to make $ 5 @,@ 000 from the publishing rights . 
 " Girl from the North Country " 
 There has been much speculation in print about the identity of the girl in the song . Clinton Heylin states that the most frequently mooted candidates are Echo <unk> , an early girlfriend of Dylan from his hometown of Hibbing , and Suze Rotolo , whom Dylan was pining for as he finished the song in Italy . Howard Sounes suggests the girl Dylan probably had in mind was Bonnie Beecher , a girlfriend of Dylan 's when he was at the University of Minnesota . Musicologist Todd Harvey notes that Dylan not only took the tune of " Scarborough Fair " , which he learned from Martin Carthy in London , but also adapted the theme of that song . " Scarborough Fair " derives from " The Elfin Knight " ( Child Ballad Number 2 ) , which was first transcribed in 1670 . In the song , a supernatural character poses a series of questions to an innocent , requesting her to perform impossible tasks . Harvey points out that Dylan " retains the idea of the listener being sent upon a task , a northern place setting , and an antique lyric quality " . Dylan returned to this song on Nashville Skyline ( 1969 ) , recording it as a duet with Johnny Cash and he returned to it again in the studio with an unreleased organ and sax version in 1978 . 
 " Masters of War " 
 A scathing song directed against the war industry , " Masters of War " is based on Jean Ritchie 's arrangement of " <unk> Town " , an English riddle song . Written in late 1962 while Dylan was in London , eyewitnesses ( including Martin Carthy and Anthea Joseph ) recall Dylan performing the song in folk clubs at the time . Ritchie would later assert her claim on the song 's arrangement ; according to one Dylan biography , the suit was settled when Ritchie received $ 5 @,@ 000 from Dylan 's lawyers . 
 " Down the Highway " 
 Dylan composed this song in the form of a 12 @-@ bar blues . In the sleeve notes of Freewheelin ’ , Dylan explained to Nat Hentoff : " What made the real blues singers so great is that they were able to state all the problems they had ; but at the same time , they were standing outside of them and could look at them . And in that way , they had them beat . " Into this song , Dylan injected one explicit mention of an absence that was troubling him : the sojourn of Suze Rotolo in Perugia : " My baby took my heart from me / She packed it all up in a suitcase / Lord , she took it away to Italy , Italy . " 
 " Bob Dylan 's Blues " 
 Dylan begins this track with a spoken intro where he describes the origins of folk songs in a satirical vein : " most of the songs that are written uptown in Tin Pan Alley , that ’ s where most of the folk songs come from nowadays " . What follows has been characterized as an absurd , improvised blues which Dylan , in the sleeve notes , describes as " a really off @-@ the @-@ cuff @-@ song . I start with an idea and then I feel what follows . Best way I can describe this one is that it ’ s sort of like walking by a side street . You gaze in and walk on . " Harvey points out that Dylan subsequently elaborated this style of self @-@ deprecatory , absurdist humor into more complex songs , such as " I Shall Be Free No.10 " ( 1964 ) . 
 " A Hard Rain 's a @-@ Gonna Fall " 
 Dylan was only 21 years old when he wrote one of his most complex songs , " A Hard Rain 's a @-@ Gonna Fall " , often referred to as " Hard Rain " . Dylan is said to have premiered " Hard Rain " at the Gaslight Cafe , where Village performer Peter <unk> recalled : " He put out these pieces of loose @-@ leaf paper ripped out of a spiral notebook . And he starts singing [ ' Hard Rain ' ] ... He finished singing it , and no one could say anything . The length of it , the episodic sense of it . Every line kept building and bursting " . Dylan performed " Hard Rain " days later at Carnegie Hall on September 22 , 1962 , as part of a concert organized by Pete Seeger . The song gained added resonance during the Cuban Missile Crisis , just one month after Dylan 's first performance of " Hard Rain " , when U.S. President John F. Kennedy gave his warning to the Soviet Union over their deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba , . Critics have interpreted the lyric ' hard rain ' as a reference to nuclear fallout , but Dylan resisted the specificity of this interpretation . In a radio interview with Studs Terkel in 1963 , Dylan said , 
 " No , it 's not atomic rain , it 's just a hard rain . It isn 't the fallout rain . I mean some sort of end that 's just gotta happen … In the last verse , when I say , ' the pellets of poison are flooding the waters ' , that means all the lies that people get told on their radios and in their newspapers . " 
 Many people were astonished by the power and complexity of this work . For Robert Shelton , who had given Dylan an important boost in his 1961 review in the New York Times , this song was " a landmark in topical , folk @-@ based songwriting . Here blooms the promised fruit of the 1950s poetry @-@ jazz fusion of Ginsberg , Ferlinghetti , and Rexroth . " Folk singer Dave Van Ronk later commented : " I was acutely aware that it represented the beginning of an artistic revolution . " Pete Seeger expressed the opinion that this song would last longer than any other written by Dylan . 
 " Don 't Think Twice , It 's All Right " 
 Dylan wrote this song on hearing from Suze Rotolo that she was considering staying in Italy indefinitely , and he used a melody he adapted from Paul Clayton 's song " Who 's Gonna Buy You Ribbons ( When I 'm Gone ) " . In the Freewheelin ' sleeve notes , Dylan comments : " It isn 't a love song . It 's a statement that maybe you can say to make yourself feel better . It 's as if you were talking to yourself . " 
 Dylan 's contemporaries hailed the song as a masterpiece : Bob Spitz quotes Paul Stookey saying " I thought it was a masterful statement " , while Dave Van Ronk called it " self @-@ pitying but brilliant " . Dylan biographer Howard Sounes commented : " The greatness of the song was in the cleverness of the language . The phrase " don 't think twice , it 's all right " could be snarled , sung with resignation , or delivered with an ambiguous mixture of bitterness and regret . Seldom have the contradictory emotions of a thwarted lover been so well expressed , and the song transcended the autobiographical origins of Dylan 's pain . " 
 " Bob Dylan 's Dream " 
 " Bob Dylan 's Dream " was based on the melody of the traditional " Lady Franklin 's Lament " , in which the title character dreams of finding her husband , Arctic explorer Sir John Franklin , alive and well . ( Sir John Franklin had vanished on an expedition searching for the North West Passage in 1845 ; a stone cairn on King William Island detailing his demise was found by a later expedition in 1859 . ) Todd Harvey points out that Dylan transforms the song into a personal journey , yet he retains both the theme and the mood of the original ballad . The world outside is depicted as stormy and harsh , and Dylan 's most fervent wish , like Lady Franklin 's , is to be reunited with departed companions and to relive the fond memories they represent . 
 " Oxford Town " 
 " Oxford Town " is Dylan 's sardonic account of events at the University of Mississippi in September 1962 . U.S. Air Force veteran James Meredith was the first black student to enroll at the University of Mississippi , located a mile from Oxford , Mississippi . When Meredith first tried to attend classes at the school , some Mississippians pledged to keep the university segregated , including the state governor Ross Barnett . Ultimately , the University of Mississippi had to be integrated with the help of U.S. federal troops . Dylan responded rapidly : his song was published in the November 1962 issue of Broadside . 
 " Talkin ' World War III Blues " 
 The " talkin ' blues " was a style of improvised songwriting that Woody Guthrie had developed to a high plane . ( A Minneapolis domestic recording that Dylan made in September 1960 includes his performances of Guthrie 's " Talking Columbia " and " Talking Merchant Marine " . ) " Talkin ' World War III Blues " was a spontaneous composition Dylan created in the studio during the final session for The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan . He recorded five takes of the song and the fifth was selected for the album . The format of the " talkin ' blues " permitted Dylan to address the serious subject of nuclear annihilation with humor , and " without resorting to his finger @-@ pointing or apocalyptical @-@ prophetic persona " . 
 " Corrina , Corrina " 
 " Corrina , Corrina " was recorded by the Mississippi Sheiks , and by their leader Bo Carter in 1928 . The song was covered by artists as diverse as Bob Wills , Big Joe Turner , and Doc Watson . Dylan 's version borrows phrases from a few Robert Johnson songs : " Stones In My <unk> " , " 32 @-@ 20 Blues " , and " <unk> On My Trail " . An alternate take of the song was used as a B @-@ side for his " Mixed @-@ Up Confusion " single . 
 " Honey , Just Allow Me One More Chance " 
 " Honey , Just Allow Me One More Chance " is based on " Honey , Won 't You Allow Me One More Chance ? " , a song dating back to the 1890s that was popularized by Henry Thomas in his 1928 recording . " However , Thomas 's original provided no more than a song title and a notion " , writes Heylin , " which Dylan turned into a personal plea to an absent lover to allow him ' one more chance to get along with you . ' It is a vocal tour de force and ... showed a Dylan prepared to make light of his own blues by using the form itself . " 
 " I Shall Be Free " 
 " I Shall Be Free " is a rewrite of Lead Belly 's " We Shall Be Free " , which was performed by Lead Belly , Sonny Terry , Cisco Houston , and Woody Guthrie . According to Todd Harvey , Dylan 's version draws its melody from the Guthrie recording but omits its signature chorus ( " We 'll soon be free / When the Lord will call us home " ) . Critics have been divided about the worth of this final song . Robert Shelton dismissed the song as " a decided anticlimax . Although the album has at least a half dozen blockbusters , two of the weakest songs are tucked in at the end , like <unk> . " Todd Harvey has argued that by placing the song at the close of the Freewheelin ' LP , Dylan ends on a note of levity which is a relief after the weighty sentiments expressed in several songs on the album . 
 = = Outtakes = = 
 The known outtakes from the Freewheelin ' album are as follows . All songs released in 1991 on The Bootleg Series 1 – 3 are discussed in that album 's liner notes , while songs that have never been released have been documented by biographer Clinton Heylin , except where noted . All songs written by Bob Dylan , except where noted . 
 = = Release = = 
 Dylan promoted his upcoming album with radio appearances and concert performances . In May 1963 , Dylan performed with Joan Baez at the Monterey Folk Festival , where she joined him on stage for a duet of a new Dylan song , " With God on Our Side " . Baez was at the pinnacle of her fame , having appeared on the cover of Time magazine the previous November . The performance not only gave Dylan and his songs a new prominence , it also marked the beginning of a romantic relationship between Baez and Dylan , the start of what Dylan biographer Sounes termed " one of the most celebrated love affairs of the decade " . 
 The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan was released at the end of May . According to Scaduto , it was an immediate success , selling 10 @,@ 000 copies a month and bringing Dylan an income of about $ 2 @,@ 500 a month . An article by Nat Hentoff on folk music appeared in the June issue of Playboy magazine and devoted considerable space to Dylan 's achievements , calling him " the most vital of the younger <unk> " . 
 In July , Dylan appeared at the second Newport Folk Festival . That weekend , Peter , Paul and Mary 's rendition of " Blowin ' in the Wind " reached number two on Billboard 's pop chart . Baez was also at Newport , appearing twice on stage with Dylan . The combination of the chart success of " Blowin ' in the Wind " , and the glamor of Baez and Dylan singing together generated excitement about Dylan and his new album . Tom Paxton recalled : " That was a big breakout festival for Bob . The buzz kept growing exponentially and it was like a coronation of Bob and Joan . They were King and Queen of the festival " . His friend Bob <unk> recalled that after Newport , Dylan told him that " suddenly I just can 't walk around without a disguise . I used to walk around and go wherever I wanted . But now it 's gotten very weird . People follow me into the men 's room just so they can say that they saw me pee . " 
 In September , the album entered Billboard 's album charts ; the highest position Freewheelin ' reached was number 22 , but it eventually came to sell one million copies in the US . Dylan himself came to acknowledge Freewheelin ' as the album that marked the start of his success . During his dispute with Albert Grossman , Dylan stated in a deposition : " Although I didn 't know it at the time , the second album was destined to become a great success because it was to include ' Blowin ' in the Wind ' . " Besides " Blowin ' in the Wind " , " Masters of War " , " Girl from the North Country " , " A Hard Rain 's a @-@ Gonna Fall " and " Don 't Think Twice , It 's All Right " have all been acclaimed as masterpieces , and they have been mainstays of Dylan 's performing repertory to the present day . The album 's balance between serious subject matter and levity , earnest finger @-@ pointing songs and surreal jokes captured a wide audience , including The Beatles , who were on the cusp of global success . John Lennon recalled : " In Paris in 1964 was the first time I ever heard Dylan at all . Paul got the record ( The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan ) from a French DJ . For three weeks in Paris we didn 't stop playing it . We all went potty about Dylan . " 
 The album was re @-@ issued in 2010 as part of The Original Mono Recordings , a Columbia Legacy box set that included the monaural versions of Dylan 's first eight albums . 
 = = = Cover art = = = 
 The album cover features a photograph of Dylan with Suze Rotolo . It was taken in February 1963 — a few weeks after Rotolo had returned from Italy — by CBS staff photographer Don Hunstein at the corner of Jones Street and West 4th Street in the West Village , New York City , close to the apartment where the couple lived at the time . In 2008 , Rotolo described the circumstances surrounding the famous photo to The New York Times : " He wore a very thin jacket , because image was all . Our apartment was always cold , so I had a sweater on , plus I borrowed one of his big , bulky sweaters . On top of that I put on a coat . So I felt like an Italian sausage . Every time I look at that picture , I think I look fat . " In her memoir , A Freewheelin ' Time , Rotolo analyzed the significance of the cover art : 
 It is one of those cultural markers that influenced the look of album covers precisely because of its casual down @-@ home spontaneity and sensibility . Most album covers were carefully staged and controlled , to terrific effect on the Blue Note jazz album covers ... and to not @-@ so great @-@ effect on the perfectly posed and clean @-@ cut pop and folk albums . Whoever was responsible for choosing that particular photograph for The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan really had an eye for a new look . 
 Critic Janet Maslin summed up the iconic impact of the cover as " a photograph that inspired countless young men to hunch their shoulders , look distant , and let the girl do the clinging " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of Freewheelin ' transformed the public perception of Dylan . Before the album 's release , he was one amongst many folk @-@ singers . Afterwards , at the age of 22 , Dylan was regarded as a major artist , perhaps even a spokesman for disaffected youth . As one critic described the transformation , " In barely over a year , a young plagiarist had been reborn as a songwriter of substance , and his first album of fully realized original material got the 1960s off their musical starting block . " Janet Maslin wrote of the album : " These were the songs that established him as the voice of his generation — someone who implicitly understood how concerned young Americans felt about nuclear disarmament and the growing movement for civil rights : his mixture of moral authority and nonconformity was perhaps the most timely of his attributes . " 
 This title of " Spokesman of a Generation " was viewed by Dylan with disgust in later years . He came to feel it was a label that the media had pinned on him , and in his autobiography , Chronicles , Dylan wrote : " The press never let up . Once in a while I would have to rise up and offer myself for an interview so they wouldn 't beat the door down . Later an article would hit the streets with the headline " Spokesman Denies That He 's A Spokesman " . I felt like a piece of meat that someone had thrown to the dogs . " 
 The album secured for Dylan an " unstoppable cult following " of fans who preferred the harshness of his performances to the softer cover versions released by other singers . Richard Williams has suggested that the richness of the imagery in Freewheelin ' transformed Dylan into a key performer for a burgeoning college audience hungry for a new cultural complexity : " For students whose exam courses included Eliot and Yeats , here was something that flattered their expanding intellect while appealing to the teenage rebel in their early @-@ sixties souls . James Dean had walked around reading James Joyce ; here were both in a single package , the words and the attitude set to music . " Andy Gill adds that in the few months between the release of Freewheelin ' in May 1963 , and Dylan 's next album The Times They Are A @-@ Changin ' in January 1964 , Dylan became the hottest property in American music , stretching the boundaries of what had been previously viewed as a collegiate folk music audience . 
 Critical opinion about Freewheelin ' has been consistently favorable in the years since its release . Dylan biographer Howard Sounes called it " Bob Dylan 's first great album " . In a survey of Dylan ’ s work published by Q magazine in 2000 , the Freewheelin ’ album was described as " easily the best of [ Dylan ’ s ] acoustic albums and a quantum leap from his debut — which shows the frantic pace at which Dylan ’ s mind was moving . " The magazine went on to comment , " You can see why this album got the Beatles listening . The songs at its core must have sounded like communiques from another plane . " 
 For Patrick Humphries , " rarely has one album so effectively reflected the times which produced it . Freewheelin ' spoke directly to the concerns of its <unk> and addressed them in a mature and reflective manner : it mirrored the state of the nation . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine ’ s verdict on the album in the Allmusic guide was : " It 's hard to overestimate the importance of The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan , the record that firmly established Dylan as an unparalleled songwriter ... This is rich , imaginative music , capturing the sound and spirit of America as much as that of Louis Armstrong , Hank Williams , or Elvis Presley . Dylan , in many ways , recorded music that equaled this , but he never topped it . " 
 In March 2000 , Van Morrison told the Irish rock magazine Hot Press about the impact that Freewheelin ' made on him : " I think I heard it in a record shop in Smith Street . And I just thought it was incredible that this guy 's not singing about ' moon in June ' and he 's getting away with it . That 's what I thought at the time . The subject matter wasn 't pop songs , ya know , and I thought this kind of opens the whole thing up ... Dylan put it into the mainstream that this could be done . " 
 Freewheelin ' was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry in 2002 . The citation read : " This album is considered by some to be the most important collection of original songs issued in the 1960s . It includes " Blowin ' in the Wind , " the era 's popular and powerful protest anthem . " The following year , Rolling Stone magazine ranked it number 97 on their list of the 500 greatest albums of all time ( this ranking would later be changed to number 98 in the published book version of the list ) . 
 The album was included in Robert Dimery 's 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Bob Dylan , except where noted : 
