 Club competitions between teams from different European countries can trace their origins as far back as 1897 , when the Challenge Cup was created for clubs in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire , who did not meet under normal circumstances . The Sir Thomas Lipton Trophy , named after entrepreneur and sportsman Thomas Lipton , was established in 1909 and was contested between clubs from Italy , Great Britain , Germany and Switzerland ; the competition lasted for two years . The earliest attempt to create a cup for national champion clubs of Europe was made by Swiss club FC Servette . Founded in 1930 , the Coupe des Nations featured clubs of ten major European football leagues and was deemed a success . Due to financial reasons , the competition was abandoned . 
 The first continental competition organised by UEFA was the European Cup in 1955 . Conceived by Gabriel Hanot , the editor of L 'Équipe , as a competition for winners of the European national football leagues , it is considered the most prestigious European football competition . When the European Cup was first played , Liverpool were in the Second Division , following relegation from the First Division after the 1953 – 54 season , and thus were ineligible for the competition . During their time in the Second Division , two further competitions were created : the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup and UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup . Established in 1955 , the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup was later re @-@ branded as the UEFA Cup when it came under the auspices of UEFA in 1971 . Since the 2009 – 10 season , the competition has been known as the UEFA Europa League . The UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup was inaugurated in 1960 for the winners of domestic cup competitions . 
 In 1962 Liverpool were promoted to the First Division . Two years later , they won the Football League championship , thus making their European debut in the 1964 – 65 European Cup . In the following years , further European competitions were inaugurated . The first , the UEFA Super Cup , was originally a match played between the winners of the European Cup and the Cup Winners ' Cup . First established in 1973 , it changed formats in 2000 ; since then , it has been contested between the winners of the Champions League ( formerly the European Cup ) and the Europa League ( formerly the UEFA Cup ) , following the Cup Winners ' Cup amalgamation into the latter . The Intercontinental Cup was a competition for the winners of the European Cup ( later , the UEFA Champions League ) and the South American equivalent , the Copa Libertadores . Established in 1960 , the Intercontinental Cup was jointly organised by UEFA and the Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol ( CONMEBOL ) . It ran until 2004 , when the FIFA Club World Cup , which includes the winners of all six confederations ' regional championships replaced it . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First steps in Europe – the Shankly years ( 1965 – 74 ) = = = 
 Bill Shankly began managing Liverpool in 1959 , and it was under him that the team first competed in European competition in 1964 – 65 , qualifying for the European Cup by winning the First Division championship the previous season . The club 's first opponents were <unk> <unk> of Iceland , who they played in the preliminary round . Liverpool won 11 – 1 on aggregate . The next round , against Belgian club Anderlecht , was the first time in Liverpool 's history that they wore their now common all @-@ red strip . The decision was made to change from red shirts , white shorts and socks by Shankly , who wanted his players to make more of a psychological impact on opponents . They beat Anderlecht and progressed to the semi @-@ finals , where they met Italian team Internazionale . Before the first leg at Anfield , Shankly asked two injured players to parade the FA Cup , which Liverpool had won the previous week , to intimidate the Italians . The team won the match 3 – 1 , but Inter won the second leg 3 – 0 , securing a 4 – 3 aggregate victory . The second leg was controversial ; Shankly described it as " a war " . He felt that the referee , Jose Maria Ortiz de <unk> , had shown bias towards Internazionale , and the Liverpool players felt cheated by his decisions . The club 's 1964 – 65 FA Cup victory ensured qualification for the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup the following season , and in that competition , they reached their first European final . Borussia Dortmund , Liverpool 's opponents , employed counter @-@ attacking tactics that had paid dividends in previous rounds and did so again , with the West Germans beating Liverpool 2 – 1 after extra time . 
 In the next four seasons , they competed in the European Cup and Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , but failed to progress past the third round in either competition . A tie against Dutch team Ajax during the 1966 – 67 European Cup was to prove pivotal in the history of Liverpool in European competition . Ajax beat Liverpool 7 – 3 on aggregate . However , the style of football that Ajax played – a patient passing game , inspired by Johann Cruyff – convinced Shankly that Liverpool had to replicate this style to be successful in Europe . Liverpool reached the semi @-@ finals of the 1970 – 71 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , losing 1 – 0 on aggregate to Leeds United . They competed in the 1971 – 72 European Cup Winners ' Cup , despite losing the 1971 FA Cup Final , as the FA Cup winners , Arsenal , had also qualified for the European Cup by winning the league championship . Liverpool were eliminated in the second round by Bayern Munich of Germany , losing 3 – 1 on aggregate . 
 The changes made to Liverpool 's tactics came to fruition during the 1972 – 73 UEFA Cup . The club reached their second European final , where they faced Borussia Mönchengladbach of Germany . Liverpool won the first leg 3 – 0 as a result of two goals from Kevin Keegan and one from Larry Lloyd . Victory in this first leg meant Liverpool only needed to avoid losing by three or more goals in order to win the final . This influenced their tactics – The Times reported that Liverpool employed a " holding action " against the " attacking Germans " . The tactics worked , allowing Mönchengladbach only two goals , granting Liverpool a 3 – 2 aggregate victory . Liverpool also won the First Division championship that season , and as a result qualified for the 1973 – 74 European Cup , where they were eliminated in the second round by Red Star Belgrade of Yugoslavia . At the end of that season , Shankly retired . 
 = = = European domination – the Paisley years ( 1974 – 83 ) = = = 
 Shankly was succeeded by his assistant , Bob Paisley , in 1974 . Liverpool competed in the Cup Winners ' Cup during Paisley 's first season and defeated Strømsgodset of Norway 11 – 0 at Anfield . This remains the club 's largest margin of victory in all matches . They lost in the next round to Hungarian side Ferencváros on the away goals rule . In 1975 – 76 the club entered the UEFA Cup after a second @-@ place finish in the First Division . Victories over Hibernian ( Scotland ) , Real Sociedad ( Spain ) , Śląsk Wrocław ( Poland ) , Dynamo Dresden ( East Germany ) and FC Barcelona ( Spain ) took Liverpool to their third European final . Crucial to their progress was goalkeeper Ray Clemence , who made two important penalty saves against Hibernian and Dresden , saving Liverpool from elimination on the away goals rule on both occasions . Their opponents in the final were Club Brugge of Belgium . Liverpool recovered from a two @-@ goal deficit to win the first leg at Anfield 3 – 2 , with Ray Kennedy , Jimmy Case , and Keegan scoring a goal each in a span of six minutes . A 1 – 1 draw at the Jan Breydel Stadion in Bruges meant Liverpool won 4 – 3 on aggregate , earning their second UEFA Cup . 
 As the 1975 – 76 league champions , the club entered the 1976 – 77 European Cup . They defeated Crusaders of Northern Ireland and Trabzonspor of Turkey to reach the quarter @-@ finals , where they faced the runners @-@ up from the previous season , Saint @-@ Étienne . The French team won the first leg 1 – 0 . The second leg at Anfield began well for Liverpool when Keegan scored in the first two minutes . Saint @-@ Étienne equalised to make the score 2 – 1 on aggregate in their favour . Kennedy scored for Liverpool , but the away goals rule meant they still needed another goal to win the tie . With six minutes remaining , David Fairclough was brought on to replace John Toshack ; he immediately scored in front of the Kop , ensuring a 3 – 2 aggregate victory for Liverpool . In the semi @-@ finals , they defeated FC Zürich of Switzerland 6 – 1 on aggregate to reach the final , where they met their opponents from the 1973 UEFA Cup Final , Borussia Mönchengladbach . The final was held in Rome , four days after the club had lost the 1977 FA Cup Final to Manchester United . Before the match , Paisley announced that striker Toshack would be fit to start . However , he was not named in the matchday squad . This change upset the Germans ' game plan and allowed Keegan to torment his marker , Berti Vogts . Liverpool won 3 – 1 to become European champions for the first time . 
 By winning the European Cup , they qualified for the European Super Cup and played the winners of the Cup Winners ' Cup , German team Hamburg , who had just signed Keegan . Liverpool won the tie 7 – 1 on aggregate . Liverpool entered the 1977 – 78 European Cup as champions and received a bye in the first round . They defeated Dynamo Dresden and Portuguese team Benfica in the second round and quarter @-@ finals , respectively . In the semi @-@ final , the club again met Borussia Mönchengladbach , who won the first leg 2 – 1 . Liverpool won the second leg 3 – 0 , progressing to a second successive European Cup final , this time against Club Brugge at Wembley Stadium in London . In the final Kenny Dalglish , who had been signed to replace Keegan , scored the winning goal after receiving the ball from a Graeme Souness pass . The 1 – 0 victory meant Liverpool became the first British team to retain the European Cup . They faced Anderlecht in the 1978 European Super Cup , but failed to retain the trophy , losing 4 – 3 on aggregate against the Belgian side . Liverpool were eliminated in the first round of the 1978 – 79 European Cup by English champions Nottingham Forest . Nottingham Forest won the tie 2 – 0 on aggregate , and went on to win the competition . Liverpool entered the 1979 – 80 European Cup as English champions but were again eliminated in the first round , this time beaten 4 – 2 on aggregate by Dinamo Tbilisi of the Soviet Union . 
 Liverpool participated in the 1980 – 81 European Cup as English league champions , defeating Finnish champions Oulun Palloseura , Scottish club Aberdeen and CSKA Sofia of Bulgaria to qualify for the semi @-@ finals , where they faced three @-@ time champions Bayern Munich . The first leg at Anfield finished goalless . In the second leg at the Olympiastadion in Munich , Ray Kennedy scored in the 83rd minute and , although the German side equalised , Liverpool went through to the final on the away goals rule . They faced Spanish side Real Madrid in the final , held at the Parc des Princes in Paris . Alan Kennedy scored the only goal to give Liverpool a 1 – 0 victory , which secured the club 's — and Paisley 's — third European Cup . As champions of Europe , Liverpool competed in the Intercontinental Cup against South American champions Flamengo of Brazil . Liverpool lost the match 3 – 0 . The club 's defence of the European Cup in 1981 – 82 was ended by CSKA Sofia in the quarter @-@ finals . Another quarter @-@ final exit occurred in the 1982 – 83 European Cup when Polish club Widzew Łódź eliminated Liverpool 4 – 3 on aggregate . Paisley retired as manager at the end of the season and was succeeded by his assistant , Joe Fagan . 
 = = = Triumph and tragedy – the Fagan years ( 1983 – 85 ) = = = 
 Liverpool entered the 1983 – 84 European Cup as league champions for the fourth time in five seasons . Victories over Odense of Denmark and Spanish champions Athletic Bilbao brought Liverpool to face Portuguese champions Benfica in the quarter @-@ finals . Liverpool won the first leg at Anfield 1 – 0 . In the second leg , their tactic of withdrawing Dalglish into midfield put Benfica 's game plan into disarray , leading to a 4 – 1 match victory and a 5 – 1 aggregate victory . Their opponents in the semi @-@ finals were Dinamo Bucharest of Romania . The tie proved a brutal encounter , characterised by Souness breaking the jaw of the Bucharest captain <unk> Movilă , and was won 3 – 1 on aggregate by Liverpool . 
 Fagan 's first season in charge of Liverpool had been a successful one . When they reached their fourth European Cup final , they had already won the Football League Cup and the league championship ; victory in the European final against Italian side Roma would complete an unprecedented treble . The final was played at Rome 's Stadio Olimpico , and Liverpool went ahead in the 13th minute when Phil Neal scored , though Roma equalised towards the end of the first half . The score remained the same throughout full and extra time ; Liverpool won the subsequent penalty shoot @-@ out , with Alan Kennedy scoring the winning penalty after goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar had put off Francesco Graziani , causing him to place his penalty over the crossbar . After the game , gangs of Roma fans assaulted Liverpool supporters travelling back to their hotels . Success in the European Cup entitled Liverpool to compete in the 1984 Intercontinental Cup . However , they were unable to beat the winners of the Copa Libertadores , Independiente of Argentina , who claimed a 1 – 0 victory . 
 Liverpool entered the 1984 – 85 European Cup as champions , and once again progressed to the final , where their opponents were Juventus of Italy . They aimed to win their fifth European Cup and keep the trophy . The 1985 European Cup Final was held at the Heysel Stadium in Brussels . The choice of venue had been criticised due to the dilapidated state of the stadium , and the club tried to persuade UEFA to change the venue . Before the kick @-@ off , Liverpool fans breached a fence separating the two groups of supporters and charged the Juventus fans . The resulting weight of people caused a retaining wall to collapse , killing 39 people and injuring hundreds more . Despite calls for an abandonment , the match was played , as it was felt that further trouble would be caused otherwise . 
 Juventus won the match 1 – 0 ; Michel Platini scored from the penalty spot to give Juventus their first European Cup . UEFA laid the blame for the incident solely on the Liverpool fans : the official UEFA observer stated , " Only the English fans were responsible . Of that there is no doubt " . Three days after the final , UEFA banned all English clubs from European competition for an indefinite period . Liverpool were initially given an additional three @-@ year ban . Fagan retired after the 1984 – 85 season and was succeeded by Dalglish , who took over as player @-@ manager . 
 The ban on English clubs in European competitions ultimately lasted for five years , and even when the ban was lifted in 1990 , Liverpool were not re @-@ admitted ; they had to serve an extra year . The ban prevented them qualifying for the European Cup in 1986 ( as league champions and FA Cup winners ) , the UEFA Cup in 1987 ( as league runners @-@ up ) , the European Cup in 1988 ( as league champions ) , the European Cup Winners ' Cup in 1989 ( as FA Cup winners ) and the European Cup in 1990 ( as league champions ) . 
 = = = Return to Europe ( 1991 – 2004 ) = = = 
 Liverpool were allowed to return to European competition in the 1991 – 92 season , a year later than other English clubs . They qualified for the UEFA Cup as runners @-@ up in the English league . Their manager by this stage was Graeme Souness , who had taken over towards the end of the previous season following Dalglish 's resignation . 
 Their first match , in the UEFA Cup , was against Finnish side <unk> Lahti , which they won 6 – 1 . A 6 – 2 aggregate victory set up a tie against Auxerre of France in the second round who they beat 3 – 2 on aggregate . The club defeated Swarovski Tirol of Austria in the third round 6 – 0 on aggregate before losing to Genoa ( Italy ) 4 – 1 over two legs in the quarter finals . 
 Liverpool 's victory over Sunderland in the 1992 FA Cup Final qualified them for the 1992 – 93 European Cup Winners ' Cup , but this campaign was short @-@ lived , as they were eliminated in the second round by Russian side Spartak Moscow . Liverpool finished no higher than sixth in the Premier League during the next two seasons , thus failing to qualify for European competition . In the 1995 – 96 season , they entered the UEFA Cup , but again progressed no further than the second round , this time losing to Brøndby of Denmark . 
 As runners @-@ up to League champions Manchester United in the 1996 FA Cup Final , Liverpool were able to compete in the 1996 – 97 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup . This proved the club 's most successful campaign since their return to European competition , as they reached the semi @-@ finals , where they were eliminated 3 – 2 on aggregate by French team Paris Saint – Germain . In the next two seasons , Liverpool played in the UEFA Cup but were eliminated at an early stage of the competition , by Strasbourg of France and Spanish side Celta de Vigo , respectively . A seventh @-@ place finish in the 1998 – 99 FA Premier League meant the club did not qualify for Europe in 1999 – 2000 . 
 Having finished fourth in the 1999 – 2000 FA Premier League , Liverpool qualified for the 2000 – 01 UEFA Cup . Their victory in this competition marked a third win for a club . The entire season was the club 's most successful since the 1983 – 84 season , as they won a cup treble consisting of the UEFA Cup , the FA Cup and the League Cup . Their opponents in the final in Dortmund were Deportivo Alavés of Spain . The match was tied at 4 – 4 in extra time when Alavés defender Delfí Geli scored an own goal to give Liverpool victory on the golden goal rule . The performance of Gary McAllister , whose free @-@ kick resulted in the winning goal , was praised as " outstanding " by Trevor Brooking . This was the club 's first European trophy since their European Cup victory in 1984 . As UEFA Cup winners , Liverpool played in the 2001 UEFA Super Cup against Champions League winners Bayern Munich and won 3 – 2 . 
 In the 2001 – 02 season , Liverpool returned to the European Cup , now called the UEFA Champions League , for the first time since the Heysel disaster . A 2 – 0 victory over Roma in the second group stage meant they progressed to the quarter @-@ finals . They faced German club Bayer Leverkusen and won the first leg 1 – 0 . The outlook for the second leg appeared to be to Liverpool 's advantage , as their counter @-@ attacking style of play had served them well during away matches throughout the season ; however , they lost the second leg 4 – 2 and were eliminated 4 – 3 on aggregate . 
 A second @-@ place finish in the 2001 – 02 FA Premier League entitled Liverpool to participate in the Champions League for a second successive season , but they only finished third in their group and were eliminated from the competition . The third @-@ place finish meant they entered the 2002 – 03 UEFA Cup . Liverpool beat Dutch team Vitesse Arnhem and Auxerre to set up an all @-@ British tie with Scottish team Celtic . A 1 – 1 draw in the first leg meant Liverpool would progress to the semi @-@ finals if they did not concede a goal in the second leg at Anfield . However , Celtic scored before half @-@ time and again in the second half to win 3 – 1 on aggregate . 
 Liverpool entered the UEFA Cup for the 2003 – 04 season , after Chelsea beat them on the final day of the previous league season to claim the fourth place needed to qualify for the Champions League . Liverpool were eliminated in the fourth round by eventual runners @-@ up Marseille of France . At the end of the season , manager Gérard Houllier was replaced by Rafael Benítez . 
 = = = Renewed European success – the Benítez years ( 2004 – 10 ) = = = 
 Liverpool had finished fourth in the 2003 – 04 season , which qualified them to compete in the Champions League in the 2004 – 05 season . A poor start in the group stages , with two losses in their first five games , had the club facing elimination . However , a 3 – 1 victory over Greek side Olympiacos eventually ensured their passage to the knock @-@ out rounds . Liverpool beat Bayer Leverkusen and Juventus to reach the semi @-@ finals , and progressed to the final after they beat Chelsea 1 – 0 on aggregate ; the goal scored by Luis García was referred to as a " ghost goal " by Chelsea manager José Mourinho , as it was unclear whether the ball crossed the goal line . Liverpool 's performances in Europe contrasted strongly with their league form , where they struggled to finish in the top @-@ four and thus ensure qualification for the next Champions League season . 
 Liverpool faced six @-@ time European champions Milan in the final at the Atatürk Stadium in Istanbul on 25 May 2005 . Trailing 3 – 0 at half @-@ time , they scored three goals in a six @-@ minute spell in the second half to level the score at 3 – 3 . There were no goals during extra time , so the match was decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out . With the shoot @-@ out score at 3 – 2 , Liverpool goalkeeper Jerzy Dudek saved Andriy Shevchenko 's penalty to give Liverpool victory . The nature of Liverpool 's comeback victory has led to the match being referred to as the " miracle of Istanbul . " As this was the club 's fifth European Cup victory , Liverpool were allowed to keep the European Champion Clubs ' Cup permanently , and a new trophy was commissioned for the following year 's competition . The victory also entitled Liverpool to compete in the 2005 UEFA Super Cup at Stade Louis II , Monaco in August . They defeated UEFA Cup winners CSKA Moscow of Russia 3 – 1 to win their third Super Cup . Their success in the Champions League meant Liverpool also qualified for the 2005 FIFA Club World Championship , where they lost 1 – 0 in the final to Brazilian team São Paulo . 
 A fifth @-@ place finish in the Premier League in 2004 – 05 meant Liverpool were not guaranteed entry into the Champions League , and faced the prospect of not being able to defend their European title . UEFA eventually ruled that they would be allowed to do so , but would be required to start in the first qualifying round , with no country protection , meaning they could face a team from England in the group stages . This turned out to be the case — Liverpool advanced through three qualifying rounds and were drawn with Chelsea in the group stages . They progressed from their group as winners but were beaten by Benfica in the first knock @-@ out round . 
 In the 2006 – 07 UEFA Champions League , Liverpool progressed from the group stages and beat holders Barcelona , Dutch team PSV Eindhoven and Chelsea to face Milan in a rematch of the 2005 final . The Liverpool team , which contained only five players from the 2005 final , enjoyed more possession than in 2005 , but two goals from Filippo Inzaghi gave Milan their seventh European Cup in a 2 – 1 win . 
 Liverpool were eliminated from the 2007 – 08 UEFA Champions League in the semi @-@ finals by Chelsea , who they had beaten in the semi @-@ finals in 2005 and 2007 . A fourth @-@ place finish in the 2007 – 08 Premier League secured their entry into the 2008 – 09 UEFA Champions League . Liverpool reached the quarter @-@ finals and again faced Chelsea , but lost 7 – 5 on aggregate . 
 A second @-@ place finish in the 2008 – 09 Premier League entitled Liverpool to compete in the 2009 – 10 UEFA Champions League , but their campaign was short @-@ lived ; they finished third in their group , and were eliminated from the competition . They entered the 2009 – 10 UEFA Europa League , progressing to the semi @-@ finals , where they were eliminated by eventual winners Atlético Madrid of Spain on the away goals rule after the tie finished 2 – 2 on aggregate . 
 = = = Decline ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 Benítez left the club at the end of the 2009 – 10 season and was replaced by Roy Hodgson . A seventh @-@ place finish in the 2009 – 10 Premier League meant Liverpool would be competing in the 2010 – 11 UEFA Europa League . They beat Rabotnički ( Macedonia ) and Trabzonspor ( Turkey ) to progress to the 2010 – 11 UEFA Europa League group stage , where Liverpool were drawn alongside Italian club Napoli , Dutch team Utrecht and Romanian team Steaua Bucureşti . They won two games and drew four to finish top of their group with 10 points and progress to the round of 32 . They were drawn against Czech club Sparta Prague in the next round . Before the tie was played , Hodgson was replaced by former manager Kenny Dalglish , who initially served as a caretaker manager . A 1 – 0 aggregate victory ensured progression to the round of 16 , in which Liverpool lost 1 – 0 on aggregate to eventual runners @-@ up Braga of Portugal . A sixth @-@ place finish in the 2010 – 11 Premier League meant the club failed to qualify for European competition for the first time since 1999 , but victory in the 2012 Football League Cup Final ensured Liverpool a place in the 2012 – 13 UEFA Europa League . 
 Liverpool qualified for the Knockout phase of the 2012 – 13 UEFA Europa League after winning their group at the group stage , but were eliminated from the competition at the round of 32 by Zenit Saint Petersburg on the away goals rule after a 0 – 2 loss away and a 3 – 1 win at home . A seventh @-@ place finish in the 2012 – 13 Premier League and a failure to secure qualification via domestic cups meant Liverpool failed to qualify for any European competition in the 2013 – 14 season . A second @-@ placed finish in the 2013 – 14 Premier League , ensured Liverpool qualified for the group stage of the 2014 – 15 UEFA Champions League . One win out of six in the group stage meant they were eliminated and entered into the Knockout phase of the 2014 – 15 UEFA Europa League . The campaign was short @-@ lived , as Liverpool eliminated by Turkish club Beşiktaş in the Round of 32 . 
 Finishing 6th in the 2014 – 15 Premier League qualified Liverpool directly to the group stage of the 2015 – 16 UEFA Europa League where they faced Sion , Bordeaux and for the first time Russian side Rubin Kazan . During the group stage , manager Brendan Rodgers was replaced by Jurgen Klopp . After winning the group , Liverpool qualified for the knockout phase , beating German side FC Augsburg in the Round of 32 , before facing bitter rivals Manchester United in the Round of 16 , the two clubs ' first meeting in Europe . Liverpool defeated them 3 @-@ 1 on aggregate , and victory led to a quarter final tie with manager Jurgen Klopp 's former team Borussia Dortmund . After a 1 @-@ 1 draw in the first leg at Signal Iduna Park , Dortmund went 3 @-@ 1 up in the return leg at Anfield with 60 minutes remaining , requiring Liverpool to score 3 goals due to the Away goals rule . Goals from Philippe Coutinho , Mamadou Sakho and a last minute winner from Dejan <unk> saw Liverpool complete the comeback and qualify for their first European semi @-@ final since 2010 . They faced Spanish side Villarreal completing a second comeback after overturning a 1 @-@ 0 defeat in the first leg at El Madrigal to qualify for the final with a 3 @-@ 1 win on aggregate . Liverpool played Sevilla FC in final at St. Jakob @-@ Park in Basel on 18 May , and lost 3 @-@ 1 . 
 = = Records = = 
 Most appearances in European competition : Jamie Carragher , 150 
 Most goals in European competition : Steven Gerrard , 41 
 First European match : Liverpool 6 – 0 <unk> <unk> , European Cup , first round , 17 August 1964 
 First goal scored in Europe : Gordon Wallace , against KR Reykjavik 
 Biggest win : Liverpool 11 – 0 Strømsgodset , in the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup , 17 September 1974 
 Biggest defeat : Liverpool 1 – 5 Ajax , in the European Cup , 7 December 1966 
 Highest European home attendance : 55 @,@ 104 , against Barcelona in the 1975 – 76 UEFA Cup 
 Lowest European home attendance : 12 @,@ 021 against Dundalk in the 1982 – 83 European Cup 
 = = = By season = = = 
 Key 
 = = = By competition = = = 
 = = = By country = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = Operation Crossroads = 
 Operation Crossroads was a pair of nuclear weapon tests conducted by the United States at Bikini Atoll in mid @-@ 1946 . They were the first nuclear weapon tests since Trinity in July 1945 , and the first detonations of nuclear devices since the atomic bombing of Nagasaki on August 9 , 1945 . The purpose of the tests was to investigate the effect of nuclear weapons on warships . 
 The Crossroads tests were the first of many nuclear tests held in the Marshall Islands , and the first to be publicly announced beforehand and observed by an invited audience , including a large press corps . They were conducted by Joint Army / Navy Task Force One , headed by Vice Admiral William H. P. Blandy , rather than by the Manhattan Project , which had developed nuclear weapons during World War II . A fleet of 95 target ships was assembled in Bikini Lagoon and hit with two detonations of Fat Man plutonium implosion @-@ type nuclear weapons of the kind dropped on Nagasaki , each with a yield of 23 kilotons of TNT ( 96 TJ ) . 
 The first test was Able . The bomb , named Gilda after Rita Hayworth 's character in the 1946 eponymous film , was dropped from the B @-@ 29 Superfortress Dave 's Dream of the 509th Bombardment Group on July 1 , 1946 , and detonated 520 feet ( 158 m ) above the target fleet . It caused less than the expected amount of ship damage because it missed its aim point by 2 @,@ 130 feet ( 649 m ) . The second test was Baker . The bomb , known as Helen of Bikini , was detonated 90 feet ( 27 m ) underwater on July 25 , 1946 . Radioactive sea spray caused extensive contamination . A third deep water test , Charlie , planned for 1947 , was canceled primarily because of the United States Navy 's inability to decontaminate the target ships after the Baker test . Ultimately , only nine target ships were able to be scrapped rather than scuttled . Charlie was rescheduled as Operation Wigwam , a deep water shot conducted in 1955 off the California coast . 
 Bikini 's native residents agreed to evacuate the island , with most moving to the Rongerik Atoll . Later , in the 1950s , a series of large thermonuclear tests rendered Bikini unfit for subsistence farming and fishing . Because of radioactive contamination , Bikini remains uninhabited as of 2015 , though it is occasionally visited by sport divers . Although planners attempted to protect participants in the Operation Crossroads tests against radiation sickness , one study showed that the life expectancy of participants was reduced by an average of three months . The Baker test 's radioactive contamination of all the target ships was the first case of immediate , concentrated radioactive fallout from a nuclear explosion . Chemist Glenn T. Seaborg , the longest @-@ serving chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission , called Baker " the world 's first nuclear disaster . " 
 = = Background = = 
 The first proposal to test nuclear weapons against naval warships was made on August 16 , 1945 , by Lewis Strauss , future chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission . In an internal memo to Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal , Strauss argued , " If such a test is not made , there will be loose talk to the effect that the fleet is obsolete in the face of this new weapon and this will militate against appropriations to preserve a postwar Navy of the size now planned . " With very few bombs available , he suggested a large number of targets widely dispersed over a large area . A quarter century earlier , in 1921 , the Navy had suffered a public relations disaster when General Billy Mitchell 's bombers sank every target ship the Navy provided for the Project B ship @-@ versus @-@ bomb tests . The Strauss test would be designed to demonstrate ship survivability . 
 Nine days later , Senator Brien McMahon , who within a year would write the Atomic Energy Act and organize and chair the Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy , made the first public proposal for such a test , but one designed to demonstrate the vulnerability , rather than survivability , of ships . He proposed dropping an atomic bomb on captured Japanese ships and suggested , " The resulting explosion should prove to us just how effective the atomic bomb is when used against the giant naval ships . " On September 19 , the Chief of the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) , General of the Army Henry H. Arnold , asked the Navy to set aside ten of the thirty @-@ eight captured Japanese ships for use in the test proposed by McMahon . 
 Meanwhile , the Navy proceeded with its own plan , which was revealed at a press conference on October 27 by the Commander in Chief , United States Fleet , Fleet Admiral Ernest King . It involved between 80 and 100 target ships , most of them surplus U.S. ships . As the Army and the Navy maneuvered for control of the tests , Assistant Secretary of War Howard C. Peterson observed , " To the public , the test looms as one in which the future of the Navy is at stake ... if the Navy withstands [ the tests ] better than the public imagines it will , in the public mind the Navy will have ' won . ' " 
 The Army 's candidate to direct the tests , Major General Leslie Groves , head of the Manhattan Project which built the bombs , did not get the job . The Joint Chiefs of Staff decided that because the Navy was contributing the most men and materiel , the test should be headed by a naval officer . Commodore William S. " Deak " Parsons was a naval officer who had worked on the Manhattan Project and participated in the bombing of Hiroshima . He was now the assistant to the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Special Weapons , Vice Admiral William H. P. Blandy , whom he proposed for the role . This recommendation was accepted , and on January 11 , 1946 , President Harry S. Truman appointed Blandy as head of Army / Navy Joint Task Force One ( JTF @-@ 1 ) , which was created to conduct the tests . Parsons became Deputy Task Force Commander for Technical Direction . USAAF Major General William E. Kepner was Deputy Task Force Commander for Aviation . Blandy codenamed the tests Operation Crossroads . 
 Under pressure from the Army , Blandy agreed to crowd more ships into the immediate target area than the Navy wanted , but he refused USAAF Major General Curtis LeMay 's demand that " every ship must have a full loading of oil , ammunition , and fuel . " Blandy 's argument was that fires and internal explosions might sink ships that would otherwise remain afloat and be available for damage evaluation . When Blandy proposed an all @-@ Navy board to evaluate the results , Senator McMahon complained to Truman that the Navy should not be " solely responsible for conducting operations which might well indeed determine its very existence . " Truman acknowledged that " reports were getting around that these tests were not going to be entirely on the level . " He imposed a civilian review panel on Operation Crossroads to " convince the public it was objective . " 
 = = Opposition = = 
 Pressure to cancel Operation Crossroads altogether came from scientists and diplomats . Manhattan Project scientists argued that further testing was unnecessary and environmentally dangerous . A Los Alamos study warned " the water near a recent surface explosion will be a witch 's brew " of radioactivity . When the scientists pointed out that the tests might demonstrate ship survivability while ignoring the effect of radiation on sailors , Blandy responded by adding test animals to some of the ships , thereby generating protests from animal rights advocates . 
 Secretary of State James F. Byrnes , who a year earlier had told physicist Leo Szilard that a public demonstration of the bomb might make the Soviet Union " more manageable " in Europe , now argued the opposite : that further display of U.S. nuclear power could harden the Soviet Union 's position against acceptance of the Acheson – Lilienthal Plan , which discussed possible methods for the international control of nuclear weapons and the avoidance of future nuclear warfare . At a March 22 cabinet meeting he said , " from the standpoint of international relations it would be very helpful if the test could be postponed or never held at all . " He prevailed on Truman to postpone the first test for six weeks , from May 15 to July 1 . For public consumption , the postponement was explained as an opportunity for more Congressional observers to attend during their summer recess . 
 When Congressmen complained about the destruction of $ 450 million worth of target ships , Blandy replied that their true cost was their scrap value at $ 10 per ton , only $ 3 @.@ 7 million . Veterans and legislators from New York and Pennsylvania requested to keep their namesake battleships as museum ships , as Texas had done with USS Texas , but the JTF @-@ 1 replied that " it is regretted that such ships as the USS New York cannot be spared . " 
 = = Preparation = = 
 A series of three tests was recommended to study the effects of nuclear weapons on ships , equipment , and materiel . The test site had to be in territory controlled by the United States . The inhabitants would have to be evacuated , so it was best if it was uninhabited , or nearly so , and at least 300 miles ( 500 km ) from the nearest city . So that a B @-@ 29 could drop a bomb , there had to be an airbase within 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) . To contain the target ships , it needed to have a protected anchorage at least 6 miles ( 10 km ) wide . Ideally , it would have predictable weather patterns , and be free of severe cold and violent storms . Predictable winds would avoid having radioactive material blown back on the task force personnel , and predictable ocean currents would allow material to be kept away from shipping lanes , fishing areas , and inhabited shores . Timing was critical because Navy manpower required to move the ships was being released from active duty as part of the post – World War II demobilization , and civilian scientists knowledgeable about atomic weapons were leaving federal employment for college teaching positions . 
 On January 24 , Blandy named the Bikini Lagoon as the site for the two 1946 detonations , Able and Baker . The deep underwater test , Charlie , scheduled for early 1947 , would take place in the ocean west of Bikini . Of the possible places given serious consideration , including Ecuador 's Galápagos Islands , Bikini offered the most remote location with a large protected anchorage , suitable but not ideal weather , and a small , easily moved population . It had come under exclusive United States control on January 15 , when Truman declared the United States to be the sole trustee of all the Pacific islands captured from Japan during the war . The Navy had been studying test sites since October 1945 and was ready to announce its choice of Bikini soon after Truman 's declaration . On February 6 , the survey ship Sumner began blasting channels through the Bikini reef into the lagoon . The local residents were not told why . 
 The 167 Bikini islanders first learned their fate four days later , on Sunday , February 10 , when Navy Commodore Ben H. Wyatt , United States military governor of the Marshall Islands , arrived by seaplane from Kwajalein . Referring to Biblical stories which they had learned from Protestant missionaries , he compared them to " the children of Israel whom the Lord saved from their enemy and led into the Promised Land . " He also claimed it was " for the good of mankind and to end all world wars . " There was no signed agreement , but he reported by cable " their local chieftain , referred to as King Juda , arose and said that the natives of Bikini were very proud to be part of this wonderful undertaking . " On March 6 , Wyatt attempted to stage a filmed reenactment of the February 10 meeting in which the <unk> had given away their atoll . Despite repeated promptings and at least seven retakes , Juda confined his on @-@ camera remarks to , " We are willing to go . Everything is in God 's hands . " The next day , LST 861 moved them and their belongings 128 miles ( 206 km ) east to the uninhabited Rongerik Atoll , to begin a permanent exile . Three Bikini families returned in 1974 but were evacuated again in 1978 because of radioactivity in their bodies from four years of eating contaminated food . As of 2015 , the atoll remains unpopulated . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 To make room for the target ships , 100 short tons ( 90 t ) of dynamite were used to remove coral heads from Bikini Lagoon . On the grounds of the David Taylor Model Basin outside Washington , DC , dress rehearsals for Baker were conducted with dynamite and model ships in a pond named " Little Bikini . " A fleet of 95 target vessels was assembled in Bikini Lagoon . At the center of the target cluster , the density was 20 ships per square mile ( 7 @.@ 7 per km ² ) , three to five times greater than military doctrine would allow . The stated goal was not to duplicate a realistic anchorage , but to measure damage as a function of distance from the blast center , at as many different distances as possible . The arrangement also reflected the outcome of the Army / Navy disagreement about how many ships should be allowed to sink . 
 The target fleet included four obsolete U.S. battleships , two aircraft carriers , two cruisers , eleven destroyers , eight submarines , numerous auxiliary and amphibious vessels , and three surrendered German and Japanese ships . The ships carried sample amounts of fuel and ammunition , plus scientific instruments to measure air pressure , ship movement , and radiation . The live animals on some of the target ships were supplied by the support ship USS Burleson , which brought 200 pigs , 60 guinea pigs , 204 goats , 5 @,@ 000 rats , 200 mice , and grains containing insects to be studied for genetic effects by the National Cancer Institute . Amphibious target ships were beached on Bikini Island . 
 A support fleet of more than 150 ships provided quarters , experimental stations , and workshops for most of the 42 @,@ 000 men ( more than 37 @,@ 000 of whom were Navy personnel ) and the 37 female nurses . Additional personnel were located on nearby atolls such as Eniwetok and Kwajalein . Navy personnel were allowed to extend their service obligation for one year if they wanted to participate in the tests and see an atomic bomb explode . The islands of the Bikini Atoll were used as instrumentation sites and , until Baker contaminated them , as recreation sites . 
 = = = Cameras = = = 
 Radio @-@ controlled autopilots were installed in eight B @-@ 17 bombers , converting them into remote @-@ controlled drones which were then loaded with automatic cameras , radiation detectors , and air sample collectors . Their pilots operated them from mother planes at a safe distance from the detonations . The drones could fly into radiation environments , such as Able 's mushroom cloud , which would have been lethal to crew members . All the land @-@ based detonation @-@ sequence photographs were taken by remote control from tall towers erected on several islands of the atoll . In all , Bikini cameras took 50 @,@ 000 still pictures and 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 feet ( 460 @,@ 000 m ) of motion picture film . One of the cameras could shoot 1 @,@ 000 frames per second . 
 Before the first test , all personnel were evacuated from the target fleet and Bikini Atoll . They boarded ships of the support fleet , which took safe positions at least 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ) east of the atoll . Test personnel were issued special dark glasses to protect their eyes , but a decision was made shortly before Able that the glasses might not be adequate . Personnel were instructed to turn away from the blast , shut their eyes , and cradle their arm across their face for additional protection . A few observers who disregarded the recommended precautions advised the others when the bomb detonated . Most shipboard observers reported feeling a slight concussion and hearing a disappointing little " <unk> " . 
 On 26 July 2016 , the National Security Archive declassified and released the entire stock of footage shot by surveillance aircraft that flew over the nuclear test site just minutes after the bomb detonated . The footage can be seen at https : / / www.youtube.com / watch ? v = <unk> . 
 = = = Nicknames = = = 
 Able and Baker are the first two letters of the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet , used from 1941 until 1956 . Alpha and Bravo are their counterparts in the current NATO phonetic alphabet . Charlie is the third letter in both systems . According to eyewitness accounts , the time of detonation for each test was announced as H or How hour ; in the official JTF @-@ 1 history , the term M or Mike hour is used instead . 
 There were only seven nuclear bombs in existence in July 1946 . The two bombs were Fat Man plutonium implosion @-@ type nuclear weapons of the kind dropped on Nagasaki . The Able bomb was stenciled with the name Gilda and decorated with an Esquire magazine photograph of Rita Hayworth , star of the 1946 movie , Gilda . The Baker bomb was Helen of Bikini . This femme @-@ fatale theme for nuclear weapons , combining seduction and destruction , is epitomized by the use in all languages , starting in 1946 , of " bikini " as the name for a woman 's two @-@ piece bathing suit . 
 The United States ' test series summary table is here : United States ' nuclear testing series . 
 = = Test Able = = 
 At 9 : 00 on July 1 , Gilda was dropped from the B @-@ 29 Superfortress Dave 's Dream of the 509th Bombardment Group . The plane , formerly known as Big Stink , had been the photographic equipment aircraft on the Nagasaki mission in 1945 . It had been renamed in honor of Dave Semple , a bombardier who was killed during a practice mission on March 7 , 1946 . Gilda detonated 520 feet ( 158 m ) above the target fleet , with a yield of 23 kilotons . Five ships were sunk . Two attack transports sank immediately , two destroyers within hours , and one Japanese cruiser the following day . 
 Some of the 114 press observers expressed disappointment at the effect on ships . The New York Times reported , prematurely , that " only two were sunk , one capsized , and eighteen damaged . " The next day , the Times carried an explanation by Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal that " heavily built and heavily armored ships are difficult to sink unless they sustain underwater damage . " 
 The main cause of less @-@ than @-@ expected ship damage was that the bomb missed its aim point by 710 yards ( 649 m ) . The ship the bomb was aimed at failed to sink . The miss resulted in a government investigation of the flight crew of the B @-@ 29 bomber . Various explanations were offered , including the bomb 's known poor ballistic characteristics , but none was convincing . Images of the drop were inconclusive . The bomb sight was checked and found error free . Pumpkin bomb drops were conducted , but were accurate . Colonel Paul W. Tibbets believed that the miss was caused by a miscalculation by the crew . The mystery was never solved . There were other factors that made Able less spectacular than expected . Observers were much farther away than at the Trinity test , and the high humidity absorbed much of the light and heat . 
 The battleship USS Nevada had been designated as the aim point for Able and was painted red , with white gun barrels and gunwales , to make her stand out in the central cluster of target ships . There were eight ships within 400 yards ( 366 m ) of it . Had the bomb exploded over the Nevada as planned , at least nine ships , including two battleships and an aircraft carrier , would likely have sunk . The actual detonation point , west @-@ northwest of the target , was closer to the attack transport USS Gilliam , in much less crowded water . 
 = = = Able target array = = = 
 In addition to the five ships that sank , fourteen were judged to have serious damage or worse , mostly due to the bomb 's air @-@ pressure shock wave . All but three were located within 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 914 m ) of the detonation . Inside that radius , orientation to the bomb was a factor in shock wave impact . For example , ship # 6 , the destroyer USS Lamson , which sank , was farther away than seven ships that stayed afloat . Lamson was broadside to the blast , taking the full impact on her port side , while the seven closer ships were anchored with their sterns toward the blast , somewhat protecting the most vulnerable part of the hull . 
 The only large ship inside the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 914 m ) radius which sustained moderate , rather than serious , damage was the sturdily built Japanese battleship Nagato , ship # 7 , whose stern @-@ on orientation to the bomb gave her some protection . Also , unrepaired damage from World War II may have complicated damage analysis . As the ship from which the Pearl Harbor attack had been commanded , Nagato was positioned near the aim point to guarantee her being sunk . The Able bomb missed its target , and the symbolic sinking came three weeks later , in the Baker shot . 
 Serious damage to ship # 10 , the aircraft carrier Saratoga , more than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the blast , was due to fire . For test purposes , all the ships carried sample amounts of fuel and ordnance , plus airplanes . Most warships carried a seaplane on deck , which could be lowered into the water by crane , but Saratoga carried several airplanes with highly volatile aviation fuel , both on deck and in the hangars below . The fire was extinguished and Saratoga was kept afloat for use in the Baker shot . 
 = = = Radiation = = = 
 As with Little Boy ( Hiroshima ) and Fat Man ( Nagasaki ) , the Crossroads Able shot was an air burst . These were purposely detonated high enough in the air to prevent surface materials from being drawn into the fireball . The height @-@ of @-@ burst for the first nuclear explosion Trinity , in New Mexico on July 16 , 1945 , was 100 feet ( 30 m ) ; the device was mounted on a tower . It made a crater 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep and 500 feet ( 150 m ) wide , and there was some local fallout . The test was conducted in secret , and the world at large learned nothing about the radioactive fallout at the time . To be a true air burst with no local fallout , the Trinity height @-@ of @-@ burst needed to be 580 feet ( 180 m ) . With an air burst , the radioactive fission products rise into the stratosphere and become part of the global , rather than the local , environment . Air bursts were officially described as " self @-@ cleansing . " There was no significant local fallout from Able . 
 There was an intense transitory burst of fireball radiation lasting a few seconds . Many of the closer ships received doses of neutron and gamma radiation that could have been lethal to anyone on the ship , but the ships themselves did not become radioactive . Neutron activation of materials in the ships was judged to be a minor problem by the standards of the time . One sailor on the support ship USS Haven was found to be " sleeping in a shower of gamma rays " from an illegal metal souvenir he had taken from a target ship . Fireball neutrons had made it radioactive . Within a day nearly all the surviving target ships had been reboarded . The ship inspections , instrument recoveries , and moving and <unk> of ships for the Baker test proceeded on schedule . 
 Fifty @-@ seven guinea pigs , 109 mice , 146 pigs , 176 goats , and 3 @,@ 030 white rats had been placed on 22 target ships in stations normally occupied by people . 35 % of these animals died or were sacrificed in the three months following the explosion : 10 % were killed by the air blast , 15 % were killed by radiation , and 10 % were killed by the researchers as part of later study . The most famous survivor was Pig # 311 , which was ( reportedly ) found swimming in the lagoon after the blast and was brought back to the National Zoo in Washington , DC . The mysterious survival of Pig # 311 caused some consternation at the time and has continued to be reported in error . However , an investigation pointed to the conclusion that it had neither swam in the ocean nor escaped the blast ; it had likely been safely aboard an observation vessel during the test , thus " absent without leave " from its post on <unk> and showing up about the same time other surviving pigs were captured . 
 The high rate of test animal survival was due in part to the nature of single @-@ pulse radiation . As with the two Los Alamos criticality accidents involving the demon core , victims who were close enough to receive a lethal dose died , while those farther away recovered and survived . Also , all the mice were placed outside the expected lethal zone in order to study possible mutations in future generations . 
 Although the Able bomb missed its target , Nevada , by nearly half a mile , and it failed to sink or to contaminate the battleship , a crew would not have survived . Goat # 119 , tethered inside a gun turret and shielded by armor plate , received enough fireball radiation to die four days later of radiation sickness having survived two days longer than goat # 53 , which was on the deck , unshielded . Had Nevada been fully manned , she would likely have become a floating coffin , dead in the water for lack of a live crew . In theory , every unprotected location on the ship received 10 @,@ 000 rems ( 100 Sv ) of initial nuclear radiation from the fireball . Therefore , people deep enough inside the ship to experience a 90 % radiation reduction would still have received a lethal dose of 1 @,@ 000 rems . In the assessment of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , " a large ship , about a mile away from the explosion , would escape sinking , but the crew would be killed by the deadly burst of radiations from the bomb , and only a ghost ship would remain , floating unattended in the vast waters of the ocean . " 
 = = Test Baker = = 
 In Baker on July 25 , the weapon was suspended beneath landing craft LSM @-@ 60 anchored in the midst of the target fleet . Baker was detonated 90 feet ( 27 m ) underwater , halfway to the bottom in water 180 feet ( 55 m ) deep . How / Mike Hour was 08 : 35 . No identifiable part of LSM @-@ 60 was ever found ; it was presumably vaporized by the nuclear fireball . Ten ships were sunk , including the German heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen , which sank in December , five months after the test , because radioactivity prevented repairs to a leak in the hull . 
 Photographs of Baker are unique among nuclear detonation pictures . The searing , blinding flash that usually obscures the target area took place underwater and was barely seen . The clear image of ships in the foreground and background gives a sense of scale . The large Wilson cloud and the vertical water column are distinctive Baker shot features . One picture shows a mark where the 27 @,@ 000 @-@ ton battleship USS Arkansas was . 
 As with Able , any ships that remained afloat within 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 914 m ) of the detonation were seriously damaged , but this time the damage came from below , from water pressure rather than air pressure . The greatest difference between the two shots was the radioactive contamination of all the target ships by Baker . Regardless of the degree of damage , only nine surviving Baker target ships were eventually decontaminated and sold for scrap . The rest were sunk at sea after decontamination efforts failed . 
 = = = Baker target array = = = 
 The German heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen , ship # 36 , survived both the Able and Baker tests but was too radioactive to have leaks repaired . In September 1946 she was towed to Kwajalein Atoll , where she capsized in shallow water on December 22 , 1946 , five months after Baker . She remains there today , with starboard propeller blades in the air . 
 The submarine USS Skipjack was the only sunken ship successfully raised at Bikini . She was towed to California and sunk again , as a target ship off the coast , two years later . 
 Three other ships , all in sinking condition , were towed ashore at Bikini and beached : attack transport USS Fallon , ship # 25 ; destroyer USS Hughes , ship # 27 ; and submarine USS <unk> , ship # 24 . <unk> , being submerged ( thus avoiding the base surge ) and outside the 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 914 m ) circle , escaped serious contamination and hull damage and was successfully decontaminated , repaired , and briefly returned to service . 
 = = = Sequence of blast events = = = 
 The Baker shot produced so many unusual phenomena that a conference was held two months later to standardize nomenclature and define new terms for use in descriptions and analysis . The underwater fireball took the form of a rapidly expanding hot gas bubble that pushed against the water , generating a supersonic hydraulic shock wave which crushed the hulls of nearby ships as it spread out . Eventually it slowed to the speed of sound in water , which is one mile per second ( 1600 m / s ) , five times faster than that of sound in air . On the surface , the shock wave was visible as the leading edge of a rapidly expanding ring of dark water , called the " slick " for its resemblance to an oil slick . Close behind the slick was a visually more dramatic , but less destructive whitening of the water surface called the " crack " . 
 When the gas bubble 's diameter equaled the water depth , 180 feet ( 55 m ) , it hit the sea floor and the sea surface simultaneously . At the bottom , it started digging a shallow crater , ultimately 30 feet ( 9 m ) deep and 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) wide . At the top , it pushed the water above it into a " spray dome , " which burst through the surface like a geyser . <unk> time since detonation was four milliseconds . 
 During the first full second , the expanding bubble removed all the water within a 500 @-@ foot ( 152 m ) radius and lifted two million tons of spray and seabed sand into the air . As the bubble rose at 2 @,@ 500 feet per second ( 762 m / s ) , it stretched the spray dome into a hollow cylinder or chimney of spray called the " column , " 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 829 m ) tall and 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) wide , with walls 300 feet ( 91 m ) thick . 
 As soon as the bubble reached the air , it started a supersonic atmospheric shock wave which , like the crack , was more visually dramatic than destructive . Brief low pressure behind the shock wave caused instant fog which shrouded the developing column in a " Wilson cloud " , also called a " condensation cloud " , obscuring it from view for two seconds . The Wilson cloud started out hemispherical , expanded into a disk which lifted from the water revealing the fully developed spray column , then expanded into a doughnut and vanished . The Able shot also produced a Wilson cloud , but heat from the fireball dried it out more quickly . 
 By the time the Wilson cloud vanished , the top of the column had become a " cauliflower , " and all the spray in the column and its cauliflower was moving down , back into the lagoon . Although <unk> in shape , the cauliflower was more like the top of a geyser where water stops moving up and starts to fall . There was no mushroom cloud ; nothing rose into the stratosphere . 
 Meanwhile , lagoon water rushing back into the space vacated by the rising gas bubble started a tsunami which lifted the ships as it passed under them . At 11 seconds after detonation , the first wave was 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) from surface zero and 94 feet ( 29 m ) high . By the time it reached the Bikini Island beach , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 6 km ) away , it was a nine @-@ wave set with shore breakers up to 15 feet ( 5 m ) high , which tossed landing craft onto the beach and filled them with sand . 
 Twelve seconds after detonation , falling water from the column started to create a 900 @-@ foot ( 274 m ) tall " base surge " resembling the mist at the bottom of a large waterfall . Unlike the water wave , the base surge rolled over rather than under the ships . Of all the bomb 's effects , the base surge had the greatest consequence for most of the target ships , because it painted them with radioactivity that could not be removed . 
 = = = Arkansas = = = 
 Arkansas was the closest ship to the bomb other than the ship from which it was suspended . The underwater shock wave crushed the starboard side of her hull , which faced the bomb , and rolled the battleship over onto her port side . It also ripped off the two starboard propellers and their shafts , along with the rudder and part of the stern , shortening the hull by 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) . 
 At 562 feet ( 171 m ) long , the battleship was three times as long as the water is deep . When the Wilson cloud lifted , Arkansas was apparently bow @-@ pinned to the sea floor with her truncated stern 350 feet ( 110 m ) in the air . Unable to sink straight down in the relatively shallow lagoon , she toppled backward into the water curtain of the spray column . 
 She was next seen by Navy divers , the same year , lying upside down with her bow on the rim of the underwater bomb crater and stern angled toward the center . There was no sign of the superstructure or the big guns . The first diver to reach Arkansas sank up to his armpits in radioactive mud . When National Park Service divers returned in 1989 and 1990 , the bottom was again firm @-@ packed sand , and the mud was gone . They were able to see the barrels of the forward guns , which had not been visible in 1946 . 
 All battleships are top heavy and tend to settle upside down when they sink . Arkansas settled upside down , but a 1989 diver 's sketch of the wreck shows hardly any of the starboard side of the hull , making it look like the ship is lying on her side . Most of the starboard side is present , but severely compacted . 
 The superstructure has not been found . It was either stripped off and swept away or is lying under the hull , crushed and buried under sand which flowed back into the crater , partially refilling it . The only diver access to the inside is a tight squeeze through the port side casemate , called the " <unk> . " The National Park Service divers practiced on the similar casemate of the battleship USS Texas , a museum ship , before entering Arkansas in 1990 . 
 = = = Aircraft carriers = = = 
 Saratoga , placed close to Baker , sank 7 @.@ 5 hours after the underwater shock wave opened up leaks in the hull . Immediately after the shock wave passed , the water wave lifted the stern 43 feet ( 13 m ) and the bow 29 feet ( 8 @.@ 8 m ) , rocked the ship side to side , and crashed over her , sweeping all five moored airplanes off the flight deck and knocking the stack over onto the deck . She remained upright and outside the spray column , but close enough to be drenched by radioactive water from the collapsing cauliflower head as well as by the base surge . Blandy ordered tugs to tow the carrier to <unk> island for beaching , but Saratoga and the surrounding water remained too radioactive for close approach until after she sank . She settled upright on the bottom , with the top of her mast 40 feet ( 12 m ) below the surface . 
 USS Independence survived Able with spectacular damage to the flight deck . She was moored far enough away from Baker to avoid further physical damage , but was severely contaminated . She was towed to San Francisco , where four years of decontamination experiments at the Hunters Point Naval Shipyard failed to produce satisfactory results . On January 29 , 1951 , she was scuttled near the Farallon Islands . 
 = = = Fission @-@ product radioactivity = = = 
 Baker was the first nuclear explosion close enough to the surface to keep the radioactive fission products in the local environment . It was not " self @-@ cleansing . " The result was radioactive contamination of the lagoon and the target ships . While anticipated , it caused far greater problems than were expected . 
 The Baker explosion produced about 3 pounds ( 1 @.@ 4 kg ) of fission products . These fission products were thoroughly mixed with the two million tons of spray and seabed sand that were lifted into the spray column and its cauliflower head and then dumped back into the lagoon . Most of it stayed in the lagoon and settled to the bottom or was carried out to sea by the lagoon 's internal tidal and wind @-@ driven currents . 
 A small fraction of the contaminated spray was thrown back into the air as the base surge . Unlike the Wilson cloud , a meteorological phenomenon in clean air , the base surge was a heavy fog bank of radioactive mist that rolled across all the target ships , coating their surfaces with fission products . When the mist in the base surge evaporated , the base surge became invisible but continued to move away , contaminating ships several miles from the detonation point . 
 Unmanned boats were the first vessels to enter the lagoon . Onboard instruments allowed remote @-@ controlled radiation measurements to be made . When support ships entered the lagoon for evaluation , decontamination , and salvage activities , they steered clear of lagoon water hot spots detected by the drone boats . The standard for radiation exposure to personnel was the same as that used by the Manhattan Project : 0 @.@ 1 roentgens per day . Because of this constraint , only the five most distant target ships could be boarded on the first day . The closer @-@ in ships were hosed down by Navy fireboats using saltwater and flame retardants . The first <unk> reduced radioactivity by half , but subsequent <unk> were ineffective . For most of the ships , <unk> had to wait until the short @-@ lived radioisotopes decayed ; ten days elapsed before the last of the targets could be boarded . 
 In the first six days after Baker , when radiation levels were highest , 4 @,@ 900 men boarded target ships . Sailors tried to scrub off the radioactivity with brushes , water , soap , and lye . Nothing worked , short of sandblasting to bare metal . 
 = = = Test animals = = = 
 Only pigs and rats were used in the Baker test . All the pigs and most of the rats died . Several days elapsed before sailors were able to reboard the target ships where test animals were located ; during that time the accumulated doses from the gamma rays produced by fission products became lethal for the animals . Since much of the public interest in Operation Crossroads had focused on the fate of the test animals , in September Blandy asserted that radiation death is not painful : " The animal merely languishes and recovers or dies a painless death . Suffering among the animals as a whole was negligible . " This was clearly not true . While the well @-@ documented suffering of Harry Daghlian and Louis Slotin as they died of radiation injury at Los Alamos was still secret , the widely reported radiation deaths at Hiroshima and Nagasaki had not been painless . In 1908 , Dr. Charles Allen Porter had stated in an academic paper , " the agony of inflamed X @-@ ray lesions is almost unequalled in any other disease . " 
 = = = Induced radioactivity = = = 
 The Baker explosion ejected into the environment about twice as many free neutrons as there were fission events . A plutonium fission event produces , on average , 2 @.@ 9 neutrons , most of which are consumed in the production of more fission , until fission stops and the remaining uncaptured neutrons escape . In an air burst , most of these environmental neutrons are absorbed by superheated air which rises into the stratosphere , along with the fission products and <unk> plutonium . In the underwater Baker detonation , the neutrons were captured by seawater in the lagoon . 
 Of the four major elements in seawater – hydrogen , oxygen , sodium , and chlorine – only sodium takes on intense , short @-@ term radioactivity with the addition of a single neutron to its nucleus : common sodium @-@ 23 becomes radioactive sodium @-@ 24 , with a 15 @-@ hour half @-@ life . In six days its intensity drops a thousandfold , but the corollary of short half @-@ life is high initial intensity . Other isotopes were produced from seawater : hydrogen @-@ 3 from hydrogen @-@ 2 , oxygen @-@ 17 from oxygen @-@ 16 , and chlorine @-@ 36 from chlorine @-@ 35 , and some trace elements , but due to low abundance or low short @-@ term intensity ( long half @-@ life ) they were considered insignificant compared with sodium @-@ 24 . 
 Less than one pound of radioactive sodium was produced . If all the neutrons released by the fission of 2 pounds ( 0 @.@ 91 kg ) of plutonium @-@ 239 were captured by sodium @-@ 23 , 0 @.@ 4 pounds ( 0 @.@ 18 kg ) of sodium @-@ 24 would result , but sodium did not capture all the neutrons . Unlike fission products , which are heavy and eventually sank to the bottom of the lagoon , the sodium stayed in solution . It contaminated the hulls and onboard salt water systems of support ships that entered the lagoon , and the water used in decontamination . 
 = = = <unk> plutonium = = = 
 The 10 @.@ 6 pounds ( 4 @.@ 8 kg ) of plutonium which did not undergo fission and the 3 pounds ( 1 @.@ 4 kg ) of fission products were scattered . Plutonium is not a biological hazard unless ingested or inhaled , and its alpha radiation cannot penetrate skin . Once inside the body it is significantly toxic both radiologically and chemically , having a heavy metal toxicity on a par with that of arsenic . Estimates based on the Manhattan Project 's " tolerance dose " of one microgram of plutonium per worker put 10 @.@ 6 pounds at the equivalent of about five billion tolerable doses . 
 Plutonium could not be detected by the film badges and Geiger counters used by people who boarded the target ships . It was assumed to be present in the environment wherever fission product radiation was detected . The decontamination plan was to scrub the target ships free of fission products and assume the plutonium would be washed away in the process . To see if this plan was working , samples of paint , rust , and other target ship surface materials were taken back to a laboratory on the support ship Haven and examined for plutonium . The tests showed that the plan was not working . The results of these plutonium detection tests , and of tests performed on fish caught in the lagoon , caused all decontamination work to be abruptly terminated on August 10 , effectively shutting down Operation Crossroads for safety reasons . Tests conducted on the support ship USS Rockbridge in November indicated the presence of 2 milligrams ( 0 @.@ 031 gr ) of plutonium , which represented 2000 tolerance doses . 
 = = Failed Baker cleanup and program termination = = 
 The program termination on August 10 , sixteen days after Baker , was the result of a showdown between Dr. Stafford Warren , the Army colonel in charge of radiation safety for Operation Crossroads , and Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Special Weapons , Vice Admiral William H. P. Blandy . A radiation safety monitor under Warren 's command later described him as " the only Army colonel who ever sank a Navy flotilla . " 
 Warren had been Chief of the Medical Section of the Manhattan Project , and was in charge of radiation safety at the first nuclear test , Trinity , in New Mexico , as well as of the on @-@ ground inspections at Hiroshima and Nagasaki after the bombings . At Operation Crossroads , it was his job to keep the sailors safe during the cleanup , and to avoid giving them grounds to sue the Navy if health problems developed later . 
 = = = Radiation monitoring = = = 
 A total of 18 @,@ 875 film badge dosimeters were issued to personnel during the operation . About 6 @,@ 596 dosimeters were given to personnel who were based on the nearby islands or support ships that had no potential for radiation exposure . The rest were issued to all of the individuals thought to be at the greatest risk for radiological contamination along with a percentage of each group who were working in less contaminated areas . Personnel were removed for one or more days from areas and activities of possible exposure if their badges showed more than 0 @.@ 1 roentgen ( R ) per day exposure . This is the about same as the annual occupational dose limit in practice at many modern U.S. nuclear facilities . Experts believed at the time that this radiation dose could be tolerated by individuals for long periods without any harmful effects . The maximum accumulated dose of 3 @.@ 72 R was received by a radiation safety monitor . 
 = = = Cleanup issues = = = 
 The cleanup was hampered by two significant factors : the unexpected base surge and the lack of a viable cleanup plan . It was understood that if the water column fell back into the lagoon , which it did , any ships that were drenched by falling water might be contaminated beyond redemption . Nobody expected that to happen to almost the entire target fleet . No decontamination procedures had been tested in advance to see if they would work and to measure the potential risk to personnel . In the absence of a decontamination protocol , the ships were cleaned using traditional deck @-@ scrubbing methods : hoses , mops , and brushes , with water , soap , and lye . The sailors had no protective clothing . 
 = = = Secondary contamination = = = 
 By August 3 , Colonel Warren concluded the entire effort was futile and dangerous . The unprotected sailors were stirring up radioactive material and contaminating their skin , clothing , and , presumably , their lungs . When they returned to their support ship living quarters , they contaminated the shower stalls , laundry facilities , and everything they touched . Warren demanded an immediate halt to the entire cleanup operation . He was especially concerned about plutonium , which was undetectable on site . 
 Warren also observed that the <unk> procedures were not being followed correctly . Fire boats got too close to the target ships they were <unk> and drenched their crews with radioactive spray . One fire boat had to be taken out of service . Film badges showed 67 overdoses between August 6 and 9 . More than half of the 320 Geiger counters available shorted out and became unavailable . The crews of two target ships , USS Wainwright and USS Carteret , moored far from the detonation site , had moved back on board and become overexposed . They were immediately evacuated back to the United States . 
 Captain L. H. Bibby , commanding officer of the apparently undamaged battleship New York , accused Warren 's <unk> monitors of holding their Geiger counters too close to the deck . He wanted to reboard his ship and sail it home . The steadily dropping radiation counts on the target ships gave an illusion that the cleanup was working , but Warren explained that although fission products were losing some of their gamma ray potency through radioactive decay , the ships were still contaminated . The danger of ingesting microscopic particles remained . 
 = = = Warren persuades Blandy = = = 
 Blandy ordered Warren to explain his position to 1 @,@ 400 skeptical officers and sailors . Some found him persuasive , but it was August 9 before he convinced Blandy . That was the date when Blandy realized , for the first time , that Geiger counters could not detect plutonium . Blandy was aware of the health problems of radium dial painters who ingested microscopic amounts of radium in the 1920s , and the fact that plutonium was assumed to have a similar biological effect . When plutonium was discovered in the captain 's quarters of Prinz Eugen , unaccompanied by fission products , Blandy realized that plutonium could be anywhere . 
 The following day , August 10 , Warren showed Blandy an <unk> of a fish , an x @-@ ray picture made by radiation coming from the fish . The outline of the fish was made by alpha radiation from the fish scales , evidence that plutonium , mimicking calcium , had been distributed throughout the fish , out to the scales . Blandy announced his decision , " then we call it all to a halt . " He ordered that all further decontamination work be discontinued . Warren wrote home , " A self x ray of a fish ... did the trick . " 
 The decontamination failure ended plans to outfit some of the target ships for the 1947 Charlie shot and to sail the rest home in triumph . The immediate public relations problem was to avoid any perception that the entire target fleet had been destroyed . On August 6 , in anticipation of this development , Blandy had told his staff that ships sunk or destroyed more than 30 days after the Baker shot " will not be considered as sunk by the bomb . " By then , public interest in Operation Crossroads was waning , and the reporters had gone home . The failure of decontamination did not make news until the final reports came out a year later . 
 = = Test Charlie = = 
 Testing program staff originally set test Charlie for early 1947 . They wanted to explode it deep under the surface in the lee of the atoll to test the effect of nuclear weapons as depth charges on unmoored ships . The unanticipated delays in <unk> the target ships after test Baker prevented the required technical support personnel from assisting with Charlie and also meant that there were no uncontaminated target ships available for use in Charlie . The naval weapons program staff decided the test was less pressing given that the entire U.S. arsenal had only a handful of nuclear weapons and cancelled the test . The official reason given for cancelling Charlie was that the program staff felt it was unnecessary due to the success of the Able and Baker tests . The deep ocean effects testing that Charlie was to have performed were fulfilled nine years later with Operation Wigwam . 
 = = Operation Crossroads follow @-@ up = = 
 All ships leak and require the regular operation of bilge pumps to stay afloat . If their bilge pumps could not be operated , the target ships would eventually sink . Only one suffered this fate : Prinz Eugen , which sank in the Kwajalein lagoon on December 22 . The rest were kept afloat long enough to be deliberately sunk or dismantled . After the August 10 decision to stop decontamination work at Bikini , the surviving target fleet was towed to Kwajalein Atoll where the live ammunition and fuel could be offloaded in uncontaminated water . The move was accomplished during the remainder of August and September . 
 Eight of the major ships and two submarines were towed back to the United States and Hawaii for radiological inspection . Twelve target ships were so lightly contaminated that they were remanned and sailed back to the United States by their crews . Ultimately , only nine target ships were able to be scrapped rather than scuttled . The remaining target ships were scuttled off Bikini or Kwajalein <unk> , or near the Hawaiian Islands or the California coast during 1946 – 1948 . 
 The support ships were decontaminated as necessary and received a radiological clearance before they could return to the fleet . This required a great deal of experimentation at Navy shipyards in the United States , primarily in San Francisco . The destroyer USS Laffey required " sandblasting and painting of all underwater surfaces , and acid washing and partial replacement of salt @-@ water piping and evaporators . " 
 Finally , a formal resurvey was conducted in mid @-@ 1947 to study long @-@ term effects of the Operation Crossroads tests . According to the official report , decontamination efforts " revealed conclusively that removal of radioactive contamination of the type encountered in the target vessels in test Baker cannot be accomplished successfully . " 
 On August 11 , 1947 , Life summarized the report in a 14 @-@ page article with 33 pictures . The article stated , " If all the ships at Bikini had been fully manned , the Baker Day bomb would have killed 35 @,@ 000 crewmen . If such a bomb were dropped below New York 's Battery in a stiff south wind , 2 million people would die . " 
 The contamination problem was not widely appreciated by the general public until 1948 , when No Place to Hide , a best @-@ selling book by David Bradley , M.D. , was serialized in the Atlantic Monthly , condensed by the Reader 's Digest , and selected by the Book of the Month Club . In his preface , Bradley , a key member of the Radiological Safety Section at Bikini known as the " Geiger men " , asserted that " the accounts of the actual explosions , however well intended , were liberally seasoned with fantasy and superstition , and the results of the tests have remained buried in the vaults of military security . " His description of the Baker test and its aftermath brought to world attention the problem of radioactive fallout from nuclear weapons . 
 = = Personnel exposure = = 
 All Operation Crossroads operations were designed to keep personnel from being exposed to more than 0 @.@ 1 roentgen ( R ) per day . At the time , this was considered to be an amount of radiation that could be tolerated for long periods without any harmful effects on health . Since there was no special clothing or radiation shielding available , the protection plan relied on managing who went where , when , and for how long . 
 <unk> " hot " areas were predicted in advance , and then checked with Geiger counters , sometimes by remote control , to see if they were safe . The level of measured gamma radiation determined how long personnel could operate in them without exceeding the allowable daily dose . Instant gamma readings were taken by radiation safety specialists , but film @-@ badge dosimeters , which could be read at the end of the day , were issued to all personnel believed to be at the greatest radiological risk . Anyone whose badge showed more than 0 @.@ 1 R per day exposure was removed for one or more days from areas and activities of possible exposure . The maximum accumulated exposure recorded was 3 @.@ 72 R , received by a radiation safety specialist . 
 A percentage of each group working in less contaminated areas was badged . Eventually , 18 @,@ 875 film @-@ badge dosimeters were issued to about 15 % of the total work force . On the basis of this sampling , a theoretical total exposure was calculated for each person who did not have a personal badge . As expected , exposures for target ship crewmen who reboarded their ships after Baker were higher than those for support ship crews . The hulls of support ships that entered the lagoon after Baker became so radioactive that sleeping quarters were moved toward the center of each ship . Of the total mass of radioactive particles scattered by each explosion , 85 % was <unk> plutonium which produces alpha radiation not detected by film badges or Geiger counters . There was no method of detecting plutonium in a timely fashion , and participants were not monitored for ingestion of it . 
 A summary of film badge readings ( in roentgens ) for July and August , when the largest number of personnel was involved , is listed below : 
 Service members who participated in the clean up of contaminated ships were exposed to unknown amounts of radiation . In 1996 , a government @-@ sponsored mortality study of Operation Crossroads veterans showed that , by 1992 , 46 years after the tests , veterans had experienced a 4 @.@ 6 % higher mortality than a control group of non @-@ veterans . There were 200 more deaths among Operation Crossroads veterans than in the similar control group ( 12 @,@ 520 vs. 12 @,@ 320 ) , implying a life @-@ span reduction of about three months for Operation Crossroads veterans . Veterans who were exposed to radiation formed the non @-@ profit National Association of Atomic Veterans association in 1978 to lobby for veterans benefits covering illnesses they believed were due to their exposure . 
 Legislation was passed in 1988 that removed the need for veterans to prove a causal link between certain forms of cancer and radiation exposure due to nuclear tests . Incidence of the main expected causes of this increased mortality , leukemia and other cancers , was not significantly higher than normal . Death by those diseases was tabulated on the assumption that if radiation exposure had a life @-@ shortening effect it would likely show up there , but it did not . Not enough data were gathered on other causes of death to determine the reason for this increase in all @-@ cause mortality , and it remains a mystery . The mortality increase was higher , 5 @.@ 7 % , for those who boarded target ships after the tests than for those who did not , whose mortality increase was only 4 @.@ 3 % . 
 = = Bikini after Operation Crossroads = = 
 The 167 Bikini residents who were moved to the Rongerik Atoll prior to the Crossroads tests were unable to gather sufficient food or catch enough fish and shellfish to feed themselves in their new environment . The Navy left food and water for a few weeks and then failed to return in a timely manner . By January 1947 , visitors to Rongerik reported the islanders were suffering malnutrition , facing potential starvation by July , and were emaciated by January 1948 . In March 1948 they were evacuated to Kwajalein , and then settled onto another uninhabited island , Kili , in November . With only one third of a square mile , Kili has one sixth the land area of Bikini and , more important , has no lagoon and no protected harbor . Unable to practice their native culture of lagoon fishing , they became dependent on food shipments . Their four thousand descendants today are living on several islands and in foreign countries . 
 Their desire to return to Bikini was thwarted indefinitely by the U.S. decision to resume nuclear testing at Bikini in 1954 . During 1954 , 1956 , and 1958 , twenty @-@ one more nuclear bombs were detonated at Bikini , yielding a total of 75 megatons of TNT ( 310 PJ ) , equivalent to more than three thousand Baker bombs . Only one was an air burst , the 3 @.@ 8 megaton Redwing Cherokee test . Air bursts distribute fallout in a large area , but surface bursts produce intense local fallout . The first after Crossroads was the dirtiest : the 15 megaton Bravo shot of Operation Castle on March 1 , 1954 , which was the largest @-@ ever U.S. test . Fallout from Bravo caused radiation injury to Bikini islanders who were living on <unk> Atoll . 
 The brief attempt to resettle Bikini from 1974 until 1978 was aborted when health problems from radioactivity in the food supply caused the atoll to be evacuated again . Sport divers who visit Bikini to dive on the shipwrecks must eat imported food . The local government elected to close the fly @-@ in fly @-@ out sports diving operation in Bikini lagoon in 2008 , and the 2009 diving season was canceled due to fuel costs , unreliable airline service to the island , and a decline in the Bikini Islanders ' trust fund which subsidized the operation . After a successful trial in October 2010 , the local government licensed a sole provider of dive expeditions on the nuclear ghost fleet at Bikini Atoll starting in 2011 . The aircraft carrier Saratoga is the primary attraction of a struggling , high @-@ end sport diving industry . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following test Baker decontamination problems , the United States Navy equipped newly constructed ships with a <unk> <unk> System ( <unk> ) of piping and nozzles to cover exterior surfaces of the ship with a spray of salt water from the firefighting system when nuclear attack appeared imminent . The film of flowing water would theoretically prevent contaminants from settling into cracks and crevices . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The juxtaposition of half @-@ naked islanders with nuclear weapons that had the power to reduce everyone to a primitive state provided some with an inspirational motif . Atomic bombs were featured in popular songs in 1946 and 1947 . During Operation Crossroads , Paris swimwear designer Louis Réard adopted the name " Bikini " for his revolutionary minimalist swimsuit design that for the first time exposed the wearer 's navel . He explained that " like the bomb , the bikini is small and devastating " . Fashion writer Diana Vreeland described the bikini as the " atom bomb of fashion " . Réard 's bikini was one of two , two @-@ piece swimsuit designs that exposed the navel , but his name stuck . 
 In the 2014 movie Godzilla , the United States Armed Forces attempted to kill Godzilla using a nuclear weapon known as " Lucky Dragon " in 1954 . The scene which showed the explosion of " Lucky Dragon " was actually the detonation of Baker , with the film implying that Operation Crossroads and the other detonation tests in Bikini Atoll were just cover stories for their attempts to kill Godzilla . 
 = WASP @-@ 44b = 
 WASP @-@ 44b is a closely orbiting Jupiter @-@ sized planet found in the orbit of the sunlike star WASP @-@ 44 by the SuperWASP program , which searches for transiting planets that cross in front of their host stars as seen from Earth . After follow @-@ up observations using radial velocity , the planet was confirmed . Use of another telescope at the same observatory detected WASP @-@ 44 transiting its star . The planet completes an orbit around its star every two and a half days , and orbits at roughly 0 @.@ 03 AU from its host star . WASP @-@ 44b 's discovery was reported by the Royal Astronomical Society in May 2011 . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Using the WASP @-@ South station at the South African Astronomical Observatory , the SuperWASP project searched the night sky for potential planets that transited , or crossed in front of , their host stars at a roughly periodic rate . WASP @-@ 44 was among the candidates identified as a possible host to a transit event . WASP @-@ 44 's reclassification as a potential planetary host came about after WASP @-@ South scanned the Cetus constellation between July and November 2009 . In combination with later observations using both WASP @-@ South and the SuperWASP @-@ North in the Canary Islands , over 15 @,@ 755 photometric measurements were collected . A later set of observations between August and November 2010 produced a 6 @,@ 000 point photometric data set , but the light curve was prepared late and was not considered in the discovery paper . The star was observed at the same time as stars WASP @-@ 45 and WASP @-@ 46 . 
 In 2010 , the European team of astronomers used the CORALIE spectrograph on the 1.2m Leonhard Euler Telescope at Chile 's La Silla Observatory . The same radial velocity measurements detected by SuperWASP were detected . The planet WASP @-@ 44b was confirmed after analysis of the results ruled out spectroscopic binary stars , leaving a transiting planet as the most likely cause of the radial velocity variations . 
 The Euler telescope was used to observe WASP @-@ 44b as it transited its host star . For 4 @.@ 2 hours on September 14 , 2010 , Euler observed WASP @-@ 44 in search of a slight dimming in brightness until a more precise light curve could be found . Accounting for all data yet collected , analysis yielded the planet 's characteristics . 
 The discovery of WASP @-@ 44b , along with those of WASP @-@ <unk> and WASP @-@ 46b , were reported on May 16 , 2011 by the Royal Astronomical Society . The scientists who worked on the paper discussed the role of orbital eccentricity , or how elliptical an orbit is , and how poorly constrained it tends to be amongst Hot Jupiters , where a circular orbit is assumed . They used the three newly discovered planets as studies into the creation of a non @-@ eccentric , circular model for a planet 's orbit ( the most likely solution ) or an eccentric , elliptical solution for a planet 's orbit ( the solution that , according to the discovery team , required less of an assumption ) . 
 = = Host star = = 
 WASP @-@ 44 is a sunlike G @-@ type star in the Cetus constellation . WASP @-@ 44 has a mass of 0 @.@ 951 solar masses and a radius of 0 @.@ 927 solar radii , which means that WASP @-@ 44 is 95 % the mass of and 92 % the size of the Sun . With an effective temperature of 5410 K , WASP @-@ 44 is cooler than the Sun , although it is richer in iron , with a measured metallicity of [ Fe / H ] = 0 @.@ 06 ( 1 @.@ 15 times the amount of iron found in the Sun ) . The star is an estimated 900 million years old , although this age is uncertain , as error bars are large . Based on its spectrum , WASP @-@ 44 is not active in its chromosphere ( outer layer ) . The star was also not found to demonstrate a high rate of rotation . 
 With an apparent magnitude of 12 @.@ 9 , WASP @-@ 44 cannot be seen with the unaided eye from Earth . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 WASP @-@ 44b is a Hot Jupiter with a mass of 0 @.@ 889 times Jupiter 's mass and a radius of 1 @.@ 002 times that of Jupiter . Although less massive than Jupiter , the planet is bloated to a greater size because its proximity to its host star heats it , a common effect in such closely orbiting gas giants . WASP @-@ 44b orbits at a mean distance of 0 @.@ <unk> AU , which is about 3 % of the distance between the Earth and Sun . An orbit is completed every 2 @.@ <unk> days ( 58 @.@ 171 hours ) . 
 WASP @-@ 44b has an orbital inclination of <unk> , which is almost edge @-@ on as seen from Earth . 
 = Typhoon Vera = 
 Typhoon Vera , also known as the <unk> Typhoon ( <unk> , Ise @-@ wan Taifū ) , was an exceptionally intense tropical cyclone that struck Japan in September 1959 , becoming the strongest and deadliest typhoon on record to make landfall on the country . The storm 's intensity resulted in damage of unparalleled severity and extent , and was a major setback to the Japanese economy , which was still recovering from World War II . In the aftermath of Vera , Japan 's disaster management and relief systems were significantly reformed , and the typhoon 's effects would set a benchmark for future storms striking the country . 
 Vera developed on September 20 between Guam and Chuuk State , and initially tracked westward before taking a more northerly course , reaching tropical storm strength the following day . By this point Vera had assumed a more westerly direction of movement and had begun to rapidly intensify , and reached its peak intensity on September 23 with maximum sustained winds equivalent to that of a modern @-@ day Category 5 hurricane . With little change in strength , Vera curved and accelerated northward , resulting in a landfall on September 26 near Shionomisaki on Honshu . Atmospheric wind patterns caused the typhoon to briefly emerge into the Sea of Japan before recurving eastward and moving ashore Honshu for a second time . Movement over land greatly weakened Vera , and after reentering the North Pacific Ocean later that day , Vera transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on September 27 ; these remnants continued to persist for an additional two days . 
 Though Vera was accurately forecast and its track into Japan was well anticipated , limited coverage of telecommunications , combined with lack of urgency from Japanese media and the storm 's intensity , greatly inhibited potential evacuation and disaster mitigation processes . Rainfall from the storm 's outer rainbands began to cause flooding in river basins well in advance of the storm 's landfall . Upon moving ashore Honshu , the typhoon brought a strong storm surge that destroyed numerous flood defense systems , inundating coastal regions and sinking ships . Damage totals from Vera reached US $ 600 million ( equivalent to US $ 4 @.@ 87 billion in 2015 ) . The number of fatalities caused by Vera remain discrepant , though current estimates indicate that the typhoon caused at least 4 @,@ 000 deaths , making it the deadliest typhoon in Japanese history . 
 Relief efforts were initiated by Japanese and American governments immediately following Typhoon Vera . Due to the inundation caused by the typhoon , localized epidemics were reported , including those of dysentery and tetanus . The spread of disease and blocking debris slowed the ongoing relief efforts . Due to the unprecedented damage and loss of life following Vera , the National Diet passed legislation in order to more efficiently assist affected regions and mitigate future disasters . This included the passage of the Disaster Countermeasures Basic Act in 1961 , which set standards for Japanese disaster relief , including the establishment of the Central Disaster Prevention Council . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origin of Typhoon Vera can be ascertained back to a diffuse area of low pressure first incorporated into surface weather analysis early on September 20 . At the time , the disturbance was situated between Guam and Chuuk State . Though the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) did not classify the incipient system as a tropical cyclone , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) analyzed the disturbance to be a tropical depression as early as 0000 UTC that day . Initially , the depression tracked westward , but transiently shifted to a more northerly course on September 21 . Late that day , a reconnaissance airplane dispatched by the JTWC to analyze the disturbance failed to reach its center due to engine failure . However , the data collected from the storm 's periphery was sufficient enough for the warning center to classify the depression as a tropical storm at 1800 UTC that day . Despite the flight data , the JMA had already determined the system to have been of at least tropical storm intensity six hours earlier . As a result of the reclassification , the tropical storm was designated the name Vera by the JTWC . At this point the tropical cyclone began to take a more westerly course . 
 Early on September 22 , an aircraft fix located Vera 175 km ( 110 mi ) north @-@ northeast of Saipan . Throughout the course of the day , periodic reconnaissance flights into the storm indicated that Vera had begun to rapidly intensify . By 1800 UTC later that day , data analysis concluded that the tropical cyclone had reached typhoon intensity . Rapid intensification continued into the following day , as the typhoon 's maximum sustained winds and barometric pressure quickly rose and fell , respectively . Concurrently , Vera 's size grew to a point at which it spanned 250 km ( 155 mi ) across . At 0600 UTC the following day , Vera achieved its minimum estimated barometric pressure at 895 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 43 inHg ) . This indicated a 75 mbar ( hPa ; 2 @.@ 22 inHg ) pressure drop in the preceding 24 hours . Upon reaching its minimum pressure , Vera was estimated to have attained winds equivalent to a Category 5 – the highest classification possible on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The typhoon 's winds continued to increase before peaking at 1200 UTC on September 23 , when reconnaissance aircraft reported maximum sustained winds of 305 km / h ( 190 mph ) . Upon peaking in wind speed , Vera was located 645 km ( 400 mi ) northeast of Guam . The tropical cyclone 's ability to quickly intensify was attributed to conducive atmospheric divergence and highly sustainable sea surface temperatures . 
 Vera only maintained peak intensity for roughly twelve hours , but still remained a powerful tropical cyclone . With very little change in strength , the typhoon tracked northwestward throughout September 24 . Due to the influence of a nearby high @-@ pressure area , Vera began to gradually curve and rapidly accelerate northward towards Japan . At 0900 UTC on September 26 , Vera made its first landfall on Honshu , just west of Shionomisaki . At the time , the typhoon had maximum sustained winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 920 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 17 inHg ) . Vera traversed the Japanese island rather quickly at a speed 61 km / h ( 38 mph ) , and emerged into the Sea of Japan at 1530 UTC that day . Despite its short stint over land , the terrain greatly weakened the tropical cyclone . Tracking into a westerly wind flow , Vera was forced eastward , resulting in a second landfall near Sakata , Honshu , with an intensity equivalent to that of a Category 1 hurricane . Vera re @-@ emerged into the North Pacific Ocean late on September 26 , having weakened due to advection of cold air in addition to continued land interaction . At 0600 UTC on September 27 , the JTWC analyzed the typhoon to have weakened to tropical storm intensity . The warning center discontinued its periodic monitoring of the system , as Vera had begun to transition into an extratropical cyclone . Consequently , the JMA officially reclassified the system as an extratropical storm at 1200 UTC that day . Vera 's extratropical remnants continued to persist and track eastward for the next two days before the JMA last noted the storm at 1200 UTC on December 29 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Despite being well forecast and tracked throughout its duration , Typhoon Vera 's effects were highly disastrous and long @-@ lasting . In addition to the storm 's intensity , the severe damage and large death tolls were partially attributed to a lack of urgency from Japanese media in advance of Vera 's landfall . Though estimates for damage costs indicated totals in excess of US $ 261 million ( equivalent to US $ 2 @.@ 12 billion in 2015 ) , other damage estimates suggested that damage costs were as high as US $ 600 million ( equivalent to US $ 4 @.@ 87 billion in 2015 ) . Death tolls also remain unclear , but reports generally indicated that around 5 @,@ 000 people were killed , with hundreds of other persons missing . In addition to the dead nearly 40 @,@ 000 people were injured , and an additional 1 @.@ 6 million people were rendered homeless . Countrywide approximately 834 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and roughly 210 @,@ 000 ha ( 520 @,@ 000 ac ) of agricultural fields were damaged . The damage wrought by Vera made it the deadliest typhoon in Japanese history , succeeding the 1934 Muroto typhoon . Vera was also the third deadliest natural disaster in Japan during the 20th century , only behind the Great Hanshin earthquake in 1995 and the Great Kantō earthquake in 1923 . 
 Well in advance of Vera 's landfall , heavy rainfall ahead of the typhoon occurred across the Tōkai region of Japan starting on September 23 , when the storm reached peak intensity over open waters . In Nagoya , rainfall totals reached 10 cm ( 4 in ) . In other parts of the Tōkai region , nearly 20 cm ( 8 in ) of rain was reported . The precipitation caused flooding along several river basins in the swath of rain . Steady rainfall occurred throughout Vera 's passage of Honshu , though the worst of the rain @-@ induced flooding occurred well after the typhoon 's initial landfall . In Kawakami , Nara , a landslide killed 60 people after crushing 12 homes . 
 Most of the damage associated with Vera was a result of highly destructive storm surge . At the coast , the typhoon 's intensity resulted in a strong storm surge that inundated low @-@ lying coastal regions . In Ise Bay , storm surge heights were greatly enhanced due to the curvature of the land and the bay 's shallow depth , which allowed water to be easily driven the length of the bay towards the coast . In addition , the storm passed the area at high tide . Water levels began to rise prior to Vera 's landfall and peaked during the typhoon 's first traversal of Honshu . The highest storm surge measurement was observed in the Port of Nagoya , where water levels peaked 3 @.@ 9 m ( 13 ft ) above normal . The intense storm surge easily engulfed or breached earthen levees and other flood prevention mechanisms around Ise Bay . However , these coastal dykes still remained partially unfinished and were seriously impacted by Vera 's storm surge . Only newly installed flood mitigation systems along the southern portion of the bay were able to withstand the wave action . Offshore , the waves sunk 25 fishing boats , with thousands of other ships grounded or missing . In total , damage was reported to 7 @,@ 576 vessels . In addition to the damaged craft , numerous oyster rafts were also lost , with losses totaling US $ 6 million . Also , 75 million individual pearl oysters were lost to the waves , resulting in US $ 10 million in additional losses . 
 The resulting inundation caused by Vera 's storm surge submerged areas around the periphery of the bay for extended periods of time , with some low @-@ lying areas remaining underwater in excess of four months . Due to the failure of multiple flood mitigation systems in quick succession , coupled with the narrow coverage of telecommunications exacerbated by Vera 's strong winds , many persons in affected regions had very little time to evacuate . Nagoya was one of the worst impacted cities by Vera , and as a result of the storm surge and wind , its harbor was put out of service in under three hours . The effects of the typhoon 's storm surge there were further worsened by the destruction of lumber yards in Nagoya Harbor , which set loose large quantities of logs that caused considerable damage to structures . The release of logs also hampered relief efforts following the typhoon 's passage . City @-@ wide , 50 @,@ 000 homes were severely damaged by flood waters , and 1 @,@ 800 other residences were washed away off of their foundations . Total damage to crops was estimated at US $ 30 million . Rice crops sustained heavy impacts , with 150 @,@ 000 tons ( 135 @,@ 000 tonnes ) of rice lost . In addition to the crop damage , US $ 2 @.@ 5 million worth of fruits and US $ 4 million worth of vegetables were lost . The collapse of a single apartment home in the city buried 84 people under debris ; a similar incident in Naka , Ibaraki buried roughly 300 people . Beach houses were destroyed , and large swaths of nearby cropland were heavily damaged . In addition to the storm surge , Nagoya experienced sustained winds of about 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) , with gusts reaching as high as 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) , downing power lines and causing power outage . Southeast of Nagoya , in Handa , Aichi , around 300 people were killed after Vera 's waves engulfed more than 250 homes . Casualties throughout Aichi totaled 3 @,@ 168 and roughly 59 @,@ 000 people were injured , based on an enumeration conducted in March 1960 . 
 On the western side of Ise Bay , in Mie Prefecture , 1 @,@ 233 people were killed , with approximately 5 @,@ 500 others sustaining injuries . Approximately 95 % of Nagashima was submerged underwater . Nearby <unk> suffered a similar fate as 80 % of the city proper was flooded . There , 58 people were killed and 800 others were displaced . The towns of <unk> and <unk> were also wiped out by the flood inundation . Further inland , in Nagano Prefecture , strong winds unroofed numerous homes . The United States Air Force 's Tachikawa Airfield near Tokyo sustained significant damage from the typhoon , with damage costs totaling in excess of US $ 1 million . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the immediate aftermath following Typhoon Vera , the Japanese government established a disaster headquarters in Tokyo and allocated resources to aid impacted areas . The government also set up the Central Japan Disaster Relief Department in Nagoya . Due to the large estimated damage cost of Vera 's impacts , Japanese parliament was forced to introduce a supplementary national budget to cover the losses . Beginning on September 27 , refuge shelters were opened and local government agencies assisted in rescuing stranded civilians . On September 29 , the Japan Self @-@ Defense Forces began to take part in the relief effort . United States lieutenant general Robert Whitney Burns ordered all available servicemen stationed in Japan to take part in typhoon relief efforts . The USS Kearsarge was dispatched to Nagoya to assist in relief efforts there . In Nagoya , the flood waters contaminated drinking water , greatly reducing clean water supplies . Despite rapid sanitation and disinfection work , disease epidemic broke out in parts of the city . Over 170 cases of dysentery were reported , along with other cases of gangrene and tetanus . In addition to water shortage , food rationing , which had been prompted due to food shortages caused by Vera , resulted in hunger issues for impacted populations . 
 As a result of breaches in flood defenses around Ise Bay , seawater continued to pour into inundated areas after Vera 's passage , slowing down repair efforts . One breach spanning 150 km ( 93 mi ) across required 5 @,@ 000 personnel , 32 @,@ 000 sandbags , and bulldozers dispatched by the Japanese Ministry of Defense to relieve water flow . In Aichi 's Ama District , reconstruction efforts for levees , roadways , and infrastructure lasted until the end of December 1959 . Due to losses sustained by the pearl industry as a result of the typhoon , Japanese pearl production in 1959 was expected to decrease by 30 % in 1959 , with production losses of 40 % expected in 1960 . Monetary losses to the industry were expected to eclipse US $ 15 million , causing Japanese pearl costs to hike up by 20 % . Furthermore , the effects of Vera on the country 's pearl industry were expected to persist for two to three years . 
 = = = Disaster relief and mitigation reformation = = = 
 The unprecedented destruction caused by Vera prompted Japanese parliament to pass legislation in order to more efficiently assist affected regions and mitigate future disasters . In October 1959 , a special parliamentary session enacted several measures coordinated by various government ministries and provided subsidiaries to persons effected by Vera and other natural disasters in Japan from August and September of that year . A long lasting legislation prompted by Vera 's effects was the 1961 passage of the Disaster Countermeasures Basic Act , widely regarded as the " cornerstone of legislation on disaster risk reduction in Japan . " The act established the Central Disaster Prevention Council , which was set to coordinate disaster risk reduction . The legislation also mandated an annual disaster prevention plan , to be submitted to the Japanese parliament yearly . Finally , the act established September 1 as a National Disaster Prevention Day . 
 In addition to legislative reform , the breaching of coastal flood defense systems during Vera prompted a redesign of such mechanisms . In Nagoya , regulation was created for coastal construction and their heights . Development of flood defenses in Ise , Osaka , and Tokyo bays was also set into motion . The heights of such defense systems were based on worst @-@ case scenarios and maximum storm surge heights caused by the typhoon . 
 = I Do ( Lost ) = 
 " I Do " is the sixth episode of the third season of Lost , and the 55th episode overall . It aired on November 8 , 2006 , on ABC . The episode was written by Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse and directed by Tucker Gates . The character of Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) is featured in the episode 's flashbacks , where her brief marriage to a police officer , Kevin Callis ( Nathan Fillion ) , is shown . In the present events , Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) considers whether or not to perform surgery on Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) , and is motivated by Kate 's claims that if he does not comply , Sawyer ( Josh Holloway ) will be killed . 
 This was the last episode to air before a 13 @-@ week hiatus , so it was written so that it would fit as a " mini @-@ series finale " , and also had a major theme in the contrast between Kate 's relationships with Kevin and Sawyer . " I Do " gained mostly positive reviews , with much praise to the cliffhanger ending , and had 17 @.@ 15 million American viewers upon release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 While on the run from the law , Kate goes to Miami , where under the name " Monica " she meets and gets engaged to a police officer , Kevin Callis ( Nathan Fillion ) . Before their wedding , Kevin 's mother , Suzanne , gives Kate a gold locket that had been passed down on the female side of the family at weddings . A while after the ceremony , Kate calls U.S. Marshal Edward Mars ( Fredric Lane ) . She does not want to run any more and pleads for him to stop chasing her . Mars guesses that Kate has gotten involved with a man , and tells her that if Kate can really stay put , settle down , he will stop chasing her , but that they both know it is unlikely that Kate will ever stop running . Later , Kate shows signs of relief after getting a negative pregnancy test , and decides to reveal the truth about her life to her husband . She drugs Kevin , places her mother @-@ in @-@ law 's locket in his hands and leaves . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 On the main island , John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) tells Nikki Fernandez ( Kiele Sanchez ) , Paulo ( Rodrigo Santoro ) , Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) and Desmond Hume ( Henry Ian Cusick ) that Mr. Eko ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) was killed by an animal , and decides to bury Eko where he died as he thinks the other castaways have seen " too many funerals " recently . As Locke goes to the beach to get shovels , Sayid follows him and asks what really killed Eko . Locke says that the survivors call it " The Monster " , and further speculates that The Monster may be what brought them there and that Eko died for a reason , he just does not know what it is yet . After the burial , Locke sees a message on Eko 's stick : " Lift up your eyes and look north , John 3 : 05 " . 
 On Hydra island , Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) checks Ben Linus 's ( Michael Emerson ) x @-@ rays and medical file , and tells Ben that the tumor in his spine will become inoperable in a week . Jack however adds he is not going to operate on Ben because he does not trust the Others ' promise of freeing him , Kate and Sawyer ( Josh Holloway ) . 
 After the quarry where Kate and Sawyer are working suffers an invasion by Alex ( Tania Raymonde ) , who demands to know where her boyfriend Karl ( Blake Bashoff ) is , Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) brings Kate to talk to Jack , telling her that it is the only way to prevent Danny Pickett ( Michael Bowen ) from killing Sawyer . When Jack and Kate see each other , Kate asks him to operate on Ben to prevent Sawyer from getting killed , but Jack gets angry and refuses . 
 After returning to her cage , Kate and Sawyer have an argument , and she climbs out of her cage and breaks open Sawyer 's , saying if he does not want Jack to save his life , he is going to save his own . Sawyer then tells her that they cannot run because they are on another island , something he did not tell her " because I wanted you to believe that we had a damn chance . " Kate and Sawyer then have sex , unknowingly in full view of the cameras . At the Hydra station , Jack finds his door unlocked and unguarded , and outside reaches a surveillance room , where he sees Kate and Sawyer cuddling together on a monitor . Ben appears behind him , and after a brief exchange Jack decides to do the surgery , but wants Ben to keep his promise to let Jack off the island . 
 As Juliet <unk> Ben and Jack begins the operation , Pickett goes with another man to Sawyer 's cage . Kate and Sawyer attempt to fight , but Pickett 's companion overpowers Kate and holds her at gunpoint , leading Sawyer to surrender . Meanwhile , Jack sabotages the operation by cutting Ben 's kidney sack , and demands that Tom ( M.C. Gainey ) let him speak with Kate . Before Pickett can shoot Sawyer , Tom calls over the walkie @-@ talkie . As Pickett gives the walkie to Kate , Jack tells her she has an hour 's head start , and directs her to call him on the radio when she is safe . 
 = = Production = = 
 Show runners Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse wrote " I Do " as a " mini @-@ season finale " , as it was the last episode before mid @-@ season hiatus , and would end in a cliffhanger . It also served as a climax and beginning of a closure of Jack , Kate and Sawyer 's captivity on Hydra Island , with the writers saying that afterwards there would be a return to the beach and the six @-@ episode block would be " more palatable " and make more sense , comparing them to the first seven episodes of season 2 where the tail section survivors are introduced . Executive producer Bryan Burk also said the pre @-@ hiatus episodes were " our season 2 @.@ 5 . Like , this is kind of like wrapping up a lot of where we were last year " , considering season three would really begin in the seventh episode . 
 A main theme of the episode is Kate 's inability to commit to other people , always running from difficult emotional situations , and having barriers between her and her interests – physical , as in Sawyer 's cage or Jack 's aquarium , or metaphorical , as in her inability to settle down as Kevin 's wife . Kate 's marriage , which was first alluded in the season one episode " Outlaws " , is meant to be a contrast with her relationship with Sawyer in the realtime events – Kate and Kevin is a heartfelt and passionate relationship where Kate tries to get involved but her lifestyle ends up on making the marriage fail , whereas with Sawyer both are afraid of intimacy and connection yet still end up together . 
 Nathan Fillion was cast as Kevin because the producers thought he fit as " someone to believe that Kate had actually married and settled down with " for being " really good and kinda fun and intelligent " , and also because Cuse and Lindelof were fans of Fillion 's work on Firefly . Fillion said that he was a Lost fan and described his experience working at the show as " a dream " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 17 @.@ 15 million American viewers watched this episode live , standing as the ninth most @-@ seen program of the week . It also had 1 @.@ 1 million viewers in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Chris Carabott of IGN gave a 9 @.@ 3 out of 10 to " I Do " , describing it as " delivering some key moments in the series ' history and leaving viewers with a spectacular cliffhanger ending . " Carabott complimented Locke 's scenes as " short but nonetheless powerful " and praised Matthew Fox 's acting , saying he " steals the show with one of his best performances to date " . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Christine Fenno considered that the flashbacks " weren 't as exciting as the action on the island , but they were full of fun details " and liked Jack 's scenes at the operating room . Jonathan Toomey of AOL 's TV Squad called " I Do " " an episode worthy of being called a mid @-@ season finale " , thinking that the romantic scenes between Kate and Sawyer worked for " the tension that existed " . BuddyTV 's Oscar Dahl considered " I Do " as " a worthy end to Lost 's truncated Fall season " , having a good reaction to the cliffhanger and saying the episode " set up incredible possibilities for the rest of the season " . Not all reviews were positive , with Slant Magazine 's critic Andrew Dignan feeling it was " lacking both the immediacy and urgency that keeps viewers clamoring for months on end " , and being critical of the writing , particularly on most of the essential plot elements occurring in the final minutes . 
 " I Do " was selected as one of the " 25 Sexiest TV Shows on DVD " by Entertainment Weekly . IGN ranked the episode 28th out of the 115 Lost episodes , describing it as a " turning point episode of the third season . " On the other hand , a similar list by Los Angeles Times ranked " I Do " as the 91st , saying it " mostly botched " the plot point of Kate 's wedding despite Nathan Fillion 's presence , and feeling it was an episode that " probably shouldn 't have had to have as much pressure on it as it did ( acting as a mini @-@ cliffhanger in early Season 3 ) " . 
 Evangeline Lilly submitted this episode for consideration for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = 1998 – 99 NBA lockout = 
 The 1998 – 99 NBA lockout was the third lockout of four in the history of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . It lasted from July 1 , 1998 to January 20 , 1999 , and forced the 1998 – 99 regular season to be shortened to 50 games per team and that season 's All @-@ Star Game to be canceled . NBA owners reopened the league 's collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) in March 1998 , seeking changes to the league 's salary cap system and a ceiling on individual player salaries . The National Basketball Players Association ( NBPA ) opposed the owners ' plans and wanted raises for players who earned the league 's minimum salary . After the two sides failed to reach an agreement , the owners began the lockout . 
 The dispute received a tepid response from sports fans , and provoked criticism from media members . It continued into January 1999 , threatening cancellation of the entire season . After division within the players union , however , NBPA executive director Billy Hunter reached an agreement with NBA commissioner David Stern on January 6 to end the work stoppage . Quickly ratified by the owners and players , the deal was signed later in January , ending the lockout after 204 days . The settlement provided for maximum salaries for players and a pay scale for first @-@ year players . In the months after the lockout , television ratings and ticket sales declined during the 50 @-@ game season , and both remained below pre @-@ lockout levels in subsequent seasons . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before 1998 , there had been two lockouts in the previous three years : a labor dispute that lasted more than two months in 1995 and a brief work stoppage in 1996 that ended within three hours . However , on both occasions , the players and owners reached a deal before the start of the season , and before 1998 , the NBA was the only major sports league in the United States that had never lost a game because of a work stoppage . A six @-@ year CBA had been in place since September 1995 , but it included a clause allowing NBA owners to reopen the contract after three years if more than 51 @.@ 8 percent of " basketball @-@ related income " went to player salaries . 
 By the 1997 – 98 season , 57 percent of basketball @-@ related income was used to pay players , while the previous deal called for a 48 percent split . According to the NBA , 15 of the 29 teams posted losses that season . The NBPA disputed this figure and claimed that only four teams had losses . The league 's owners voted on whether to reopen the CBA on March 23 , 1998 , and the vote passed by a 27 – 2 margin . Negotiations between the NBPA and owners started on April 1 , and nine further bargaining sessions took place in the next three months . 
 The primary issue was that of player salaries , which owners sought to curb . A salary cap had been a part of the CBA since 1983 , but it included loopholes that allowed teams to exceed the payroll limit . Among them was the " Larry Bird exception " , named after the former player who was an early beneficiary of the rule . The Bird exception enabled teams to spend an unlimited amount of money to re @-@ sign their own players , causing a substantial increase in the value of upper @-@ end contracts . Club owners wanted to remove the exemption and place limits on maximum player salaries . Owners also desired a modified pay scale for rookie players that would prevent them from gaining unrestricted free agency after three seasons , and wanted to ban the use of marijuana and performance @-@ enhancing drugs . The players union , wanting to avoid a decline in salaries , opposed changes to the salary cap system , in particular those involving the Larry Bird exception . Other NBPA positions included opposition to a cap on individual player salaries and support for a raise of the minimum salary , which 22 percent of NBA players earned during 1997 – 98 . 
 = = Lockout = = 
 After negotiations between the sides broke off on June 22 , the lockout started nine days later . Teams were barred from making player transactions and holding workouts and meetings for the duration of the work stoppage . The Hofstra Labor and Employment Law Journal 's Grant M. Hayden described the NBA 's action as an " offensive lockout " , in which an employer attempts to force its workers into a settlement that does not favor them . An early byproduct of the lockout was the exclusion of NBA players from the U.S. national team that played at the 1998 FIBA World Championship . USA Basketball , the governing body for the sport in the U.S. , elected to send a team consisting of lower @-@ level professional players and amateurs . Negotiations resumed at an August 6 bargaining session , the first since the start of the lockout . NBA commissioner David Stern and several owners left the talks after the NBPA presented an offer that included increased revenue sharing between teams . 
 By September 25 , 24 exhibition games were canceled and training camps were postponed indefinitely as a result of stalled talks . Further negotiating sessions took place in October and November , but no agreement was reached . The season 's first two weeks were officially canceled on October 13 , and 99 games scheduled for November were lost as a result . It was the first time in NBA history that games were canceled due to a labor dispute . On October 20 , arbitrator John Feerick ruled that the owners did not have to pay players with guaranteed contracts during the lockout . Feerick 's decision gave the owners leverage in bargaining talks . Another factor favoring the owners was that their teams received money from the NBA 's television broadcasters , whose contracts with the league called for payments to be made if games were not played . 
 Further games were canceled as the lockout continued through November and December , including the 1999 All @-@ Star Game , which had been scheduled to be played on February 14 , 1999 at the First Union Center in Philadelphia . As a result of the All @-@ Star Game 's cancellation , the NBA later awarded the 2002 All @-@ Star Game to Philadelphia . Discussions during the lockout were characterized by frequent hostility between the players and owners . One example of the heated nature of the talks came at an early December bargaining session , when Stern and NBPA executive director Billy Hunter became involved in what CBS News called " an extremely heated , expletive @-@ laden screaming match " . Both men temporarily walked away from the bargaining table , and indicated after the session that the entire season might be canceled . Although the 1998 portion of the schedule was not played because of the lockout , 16 NBA players participated in a December 19 exhibition game in Atlantic City , New Jersey . The event 's organizers intended to give NBPA members a share of the money raised , but the idea proved controversial , and charities ultimately received the proceeds . 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 On December 23 , Stern announced that he would recommend canceling the season if there was no deal by January 7 , 1999 . At a December 27 meeting , a " final " deal was proposed by the owners . The sides met again on January 4 , and the NBPA gave its last proposal to the owners , who turned it down . Stern discussed the possibility of having replacement players brought in to begin the following season . As Stern 's deadline approached , the NBPA showed signs of division from within . Highly paid players were seen as the ones most affected by the disputed issues , rather than the union 's membership as a whole . Agent David Falk , who was considered an influential voice for the players , represented NBPA president Patrick Ewing and nine players on the union 's 19 @-@ person negotiating committee . 
 The NBPA scheduled a meeting in New York City on January 6 , where players would vote on the proposal by the owners , which the committee had recommended opposing . Several players , including Shaquille O 'Neal and Hakeem Olajuwon , wanted the vote to be conducted by secret ballot , while others indicated a desire to return to competition regardless of how the vote went . Kevin Johnson stated that most players " were just ready to throw down [ fight ] Wednesday at our meeting if an agreement hadn 't been reached . " Faced with a splintering union , Hunter moved to resume talks with Stern . On January 6 , the day before Stern 's deadline , he and Hunter reached an agreement , which was ratified by the NBPA later that day and by the NBA Board of Governors on January 7 . 
 Widely viewed as a victory for Stern and the owners , the agreement was signed by both parties on January 20 , officially ending the lockout after 204 days . It capped players ' salaries at between $ 9 million and $ 14 million , depending on how long they had played in the NBA . The league became the first major sports organization in the U.S. to limit the salaries of its players . A rookie pay scale was introduced , with salary increases tied to how early a player was selected in the NBA Draft . The Larry Bird exception was retained , though maximum annual pay raises were capped . New " average " and " median " salary cap exemptions , which the NBPA had proposed , allowed teams to sign one player per category even if they were over the spending limit . For teams that wished to exceed the salary cap , a luxury tax was instituted requiring offenders to pay on a dollar @-@ for @-@ dollar basis , provided total league salaries were above a specified level . The league 's minimum salary was increased to $ 287 @,@ 500 , a $ 15 @,@ 000 raise from before the lockout . The players were promised that their salaries would equal 55 percent of league revenues over the agreement 's final three seasons . However , any higher percentage would lead to a salary decrease . The NBA 's drug policy was expanded to cover performance @-@ enhancing drugs and marijuana , with once @-@ yearly testing . 
 = = Reaction and aftermath = = 
 The lockout prompted indifference among most American sports fans , who thought that greed was shown by both sides ; the latter was a similar sentiment to what fans voiced during the 1994 – 95 Major League Baseball strike . A CBS News – New York Times poll conducted in October 1998 showed that , while most fans ' opinion of professional basketball was unaffected by the work stoppage , 29 percent reported that their views had become more negative . The same poll showed that fans backed the NBPA in the dispute by a 36 – 29 margin , while the general public supported the owners 24 percent to 22 percent . One @-@ quarter of basketball fans who responded to the poll stated that they did not know enough about the lockout to give an opinion , along with 45 percent of the general public . Media members were frequently critical of the owners and players . Sportswriter Tony <unk> described the labor dispute as one " between tall millionaires and short millionaires . " An article in Newsweek termed the lockout " an incomprehensible and unconscionable dispute between rival gangs of millionaires " . Time 's Bill <unk> believed that each side was damaged by the lockout , in terms of financial losses and negative publicity . Stern said that he had made concessions in the agreement , while Hunter said that the parties " both blinked . " 
 From a broader labor perspective , Hayden commented that the lockout was " rather pedestrian " and " made no noteworthy contributions to legal doctrine . " He considered the NBPA to be a union that had more power , and a greater ability to enter a labor dispute , than most other labor organizations , which he believed to hold weaker positions comparatively . In addition , Hayden noted that a contrast existed between the work activities of regular workers and NBA players , as perceived by typical employees , and that " the NBA lockout may have strengthened the view of many that unions are out of touch with their lives and thus have little to offer them . " 
 The 1998 – 99 season , which began on February 5 , 1999 , was shortened to 50 games per team , as opposed to the normal 82 . As a result of the 204 @-@ day lockout , 464 regular @-@ season games were lost . In addition to the lockout , the NBA 's popularity was affected by the second retirement of Michael Jordan , who had been largely responsible for an increase in fan interest during his career . The average attendance during the shortened season was 16 @,@ 738 fans per game , down 2 @.@ 2 percent from the 1997 – 98 average of 17 @,@ 117 spectators per contest . Ticket sales fell nearly two percent further in the opening months of 1999 – 00 , and remained under 17 @,@ 000 per game for the following three seasons . The league also saw television ratings drop for three consecutive seasons after the lockout . 
 In the years following the lockout , a higher percentage of players signed contracts worth the maximum amount possible under the cap . Some young players , such as LeBron James , began signing shorter contracts that allowed for more flexibility in team choice and salary . The agreement expired in 2005 , and both sides became concerned about the possibility of another work stoppage . A lockout was prevented , however , when a six @-@ year CBA was reached in June 2005 . After the expiration of that CBA , a lockout occurred in 2011 ; it was the fourth in league history and lasted for about five months before the sides came to an agreement . Each team 's schedule in the 2011 – 12 NBA season was cut by 16 games . 
 = Hurricane Lane ( 2006 ) = 
 Hurricane Lane was the thirteenth named storm , ninth hurricane , and sixth major hurricane of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season . The strongest Pacific hurricane to make landfall in Mexico since Hurricane Kenna of 2002 , Lane developed on September 13 from a tropical wave to the south of Mexico . It moved northwestward , parallel to the coast of Mexico , and steadily intensified in an area conducive to further strengthening . After turning to the northeast , Lane attained peak winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) , and made landfall in the state of Sinaloa at peak strength . It rapidly weakened and dissipated on September 17 , and later brought precipitation to southern part of the U.S. state of Texas 
 Throughout its path , Lane resulted in four deaths and moderate damage . Damage was heaviest in Sinaloa , where the hurricane made landfall , including reports of severe crop damage . Across Mexico , an estimated 4 @,@ 320 homes were affected by the hurricane , with about 248 @,@ 000 people affected . Moderate flooding was reported in Acapulco , resulting in mudslides in some areas . Damage across the country totaled $ 2 @.@ 2 billion ( 2006 MXN ) , or $ 206 million ( 2006 USD , or $ 218 million in 2010 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 31 , 2006 . It moved westward without development , and entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on September 10 . An area of convection developed along the wave axis , several hundred miles south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . It moved slowly westward and steadily organized . Convection and banding features organized around a developing center , and the system developed into Tropical Depression Thirteen @-@ E on September 13 . The system continued to organize and strengthened into Tropical Storm Lane early on September 14 about 90 miles ( 145 km ) off the coast of Mexico . Based on a potentially developing anticyclone over the storm and a track over warm water temperatures , the Statistical Hurricane Intensity Prediction Scheme model issued a 46 percent probability for rapid intensification of the storm . 
 Lane continued to become better organized , with deep convection developing into a central dense overcast and well @-@ defined outflow in the western half of the storm . Late on September 14 , an eyewall began to develop a short distance off the Mexican coastline . Lane continued to strengthen as it turned more to the north @-@ northwest , a motion caused due to the storm moving around the western periphery of a mid @-@ level ridge over Mexico . Based on reports from Reconnaissance Aircraft , Lane was upgraded to hurricane status on September 15 about 40 miles ( 65 km ) west @-@ northwest of Cabo Corrientes , Jalisco . Subsequently it quickly strengthened , and by six hours after it became a hurricane it attained winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson scale . Later that day , the 10 mile ( 16 km ) wide eye crossed over the Islas Marías . Early on September 16 , Lane strengthened into a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) hurricane just 50 miles ( 85 km ) off the coast of Mexico , becoming the sixth major hurricane of the season . 
 Hurricane Lane continued to organize with its 9 mile ( 14 km ) wide eye surrounded by very deep convection , and the storm strengthened further to reach peak winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) by midday on September 16 . It turned unexpectedly to the northeast , and at 1915 UTC on the 16th , Hurricane Lane made landfall in a sparsely populated region of Sinaloa , 20 miles ( 32 km ) southeast of El Dorado . This made Lane the most intense hurricane to strike Mexico since Hurricane Kenna in the 2002 season . The combination of the mountainous terrain of Mexico and increasing west @-@ southwesterly wind shear caused the storm to rapidly weaken , and the storm dissipated on September 17 . The remnants of Lane later moved into Texas , United States . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Due to Lane 's projected path near the western coast of Mexico , authorities closed ports to small boats in the cities of Acapulco . Just weeks after Hurricane John took a similar path through the area , several tourists voluntarily left their vacations to fly home . Many residents boarded up buildings and bought hurricane supplies in preparation for the storm . Officials also closed schools across the state of Guerrero . In all , 40 @,@ 400 tourists were evacuated from the Mexican coastline . According to the Secretaría de <unk> , under which the Mexican Civil Protection Service operates , there were 5 @.@ 5 million homes and 21 million people in 21 states threatened by the system in all of Mexico . As a result , authorities evacuated about 2 @,@ 000 people to emergency shelters . 
 As Lane came closer to the coastline , all the seaports between Michoacán and Sinaloa were closed , and the Servicio Meteorológico Nacional ( Mexico ) ( National Meteorological Service , in Spanish ) warned the general population about the threat of flooding and landslides . When the hurricane made landfall , the government of the state of Sinaloa issued a state of emergency for the municipalities of Ahome , Guasave , Angostura , Salvador Alvarado , Culiacán , Navolato , Elota , San Ignacio and Mazatlán . The arrival of the hurricane forced the closure of several flights at the General Rafael <unk> International Airport in Mazatlán , Sinaloa . 
 Prior to entering the area , the U.S. National Weather Service issued a Flood Watch for large portions of Texas due to the remnants of Lane . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In Acapulco , the storm produced strong waves and heavy rain , leaving coastal streets with up to 16 inches ( 405 mm ) of water . The heavy rainfall flooded 200 houses and caused a mudslide , resulting in the death of a seven @-@ year @-@ old boy . Flooding also occurred at the airport in Acapulco , though service was not interrupted . Offshore , strong waves capsized a boat , leaving one person missing . Heavy rainfall in the port of Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán , overflowed a canal , forcing over 500 people to evacuate their homes . 500 acres ( 2 km2 ) of crops were destroyed by Lane in Michoacán . Road and airport damage in Colima totaled to about $ 30 million ( 2006 MXN , $ 2 @.@ 7 million 2006 USD ) . In <unk> de Peña , Jalisco , rainfall totaled to 7 @.@ 36 inches ( 187 mm ) . One man died in Pueblos Unidos after being knocked over by strong winds . Throughout Jalisco , 109 people had to evacuate their homes due to landslides and heavy rainfall . 
 In El Dorado , Sinaloa , near where the storm made landfall , the hurricane washed out away roads and destroyed many flimsy homes . Strong winds knocked down electricity towers , trees , and traffic signs , leaving many without power . In Mazatlán , to the southeast of where Lane moved ashore , the hurricane produced strong winds and heavy rains , causing street flooding and power outages . The threat of the hurricane forced the cancellation of an Independence Day Parade . Between Mazatlán and the state capital , Culiacán , the hurricane destroyed a bridge , leaving dozens of trucks stranded . In Culiacán , one person died when he drove his car into a river , while several streets were flooded from the storm . Throughout Sinaloa , several damaged roads left many communities cut off from the rest of the country . Lane caused severe agricultural damage in the state , possibly reaching as high as $ 600 million ( 2006 MXN , $ 55 million 2006 USD ) . The hurricane also damaged water treatment facilities and distribution systems in multiple communities , prompting the Secretariat of Health to declare a sanitary alert in Sinaloa . Damage in Sinaloa totaled to around $ 1 @.@ 2 billion ( 2006 MXN ) , $ 109 @.@ 3 million ( 2006 USD ) . 
 Throughout Mexico , Hurricane Lane killed four people . An estimated 4 @,@ 320 homes were affected by the hurricane , with about 248 @,@ 000 people affected . Water systems were damaged in nine municipalities , leaving thousands temporarily without water . A total of 19 @,@ 200 miles ( 30 @,@ 000 km ) of roads and highways were damaged to some degree , including some destroyed bridges . In all , the hurricane caused about $ 2 @.@ 2 billion ( 2006 MXN , $ 203 million 2006 USD ) in damage in the country . In the United States , the remnants of Lane brought precipitation to southern Texas . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the day after Hurricane Lane made landfall , most of the evacuated people returned to their homes to begin the cleanup process . Some tourists who remained in the area for the storm continued their vacations , while others tried to leave the area . The federal government declared a state of emergency for nine municipalities in Sinaloa , allowing emergency funds to give relief support to the affected population . Helicopters were used to distribute foods and locate cut @-@ off residents . The government set up three temporary shelters in Mazatlán for 360 people and three shelters in Culiacán for about 1 @,@ 000 affected residents . To prevent the spread of Dengue fever , officials sent epidemiologists to 67 communities , with 18 mobile units and 15 <unk> units . By a month after the storm , all roads and highways affected by the hurricane were open for transportation . 
 = John Stainer = 
 Sir John Stainer ( 6 June 1840 – 31 March 1901 ) was an English composer and organist whose music , though not generally much performed today ( except for The Crucifixion , still heard at <unk> in many churches of the Anglican Communion ) , was very popular during his lifetime . His work as choir trainer and organist set standards for Anglican church music that are still influential . He was also active as an academic , becoming Heather Professor of Music at Oxford . 
 Stainer was born in Southwark , London in 1840 , the son of a cabinet maker . He became a chorister at St Paul 's Cathedral when aged ten and was appointed to the position of organist at St Michael 's College , Tenbury at the age of sixteen . He later became organist at Magdalen College , Oxford , and subsequently organist at St Paul 's Cathedral . When he retired due to his poor eyesight and deteriorating health , he returned to Oxford to become Professor of Music at the university . He died unexpectedly while on holiday in Italy in 1901 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 John Stainer was the eighth of nine children born to William Stainer and his wife Ann ( née Collier ) on 6 June 1840 . At least three of the children died in infancy , and John was much younger than his brother , William , and his three sisters , Ann , Sarah and Mary . The family lived in Southwark , London , where his father was a cabinet maker and later a vestry clerk and registrar of births . He was also an <unk> musician and player of the piano , violin and flute . He built a small chamber organ at home on which the precocious John used to accompany him when he played hymn tunes on the violin . His sister Ann also used it – she was the regular organist at Magdalen Hospital , Streatham . It was a happy family , and young John seems to have been spoiled by his elders . He was precocious and could play Bach 's Fugue in E major at the age of seven . 
 In 1849 , after a year 's probation , Stainer became a chorister at St Paul 's Cathedral . He was already an accomplished player on keyboard instruments and possessed perfect pitch and a fine treble voice and soon became the choir 's principal soloist . In 1854 he was invited to sing in the first English performance of Bach 's St Matthew Passion under William Sterndale Bennett at the Hanover Square Rooms . He travelled each day between his home in Streatham and the cathedral by steamboat . The choristers were required to sing for services at 9 @.@ 30 a.m. and 3 @.@ 15 p.m. In between these times the choristers were instructed in Latin , arithmetic , writing and other subjects , and Stainer probably received a much better education there than he would have done had he been educated at the local elementary school . A house in the cathedral 's present choir school has since been named after him . He received organ lessons at St. Sepulchre 's Church , Holborn from George Cooper , assistant organist at St Paul 's Cathedral under John Goss . He may have met future composer Arthur Sullivan , his junior by two years , there . At any rate they became friends and undertook activities together on half @-@ holidays . In 1855 he was offered a six @-@ month contract as organist at St Benet 's , Paul 's Wharf . He proved successful , and his contract was renewed several times for further six @-@ month terms . As he was still a minor , his salary of £ 30 per year was paid to his father . During this period , he sometimes deputised for the regular organists , Goss and Cooper , at services in St Paul 's Cathedral . 
 At the age of sixteen , he was appointed by Sir Frederick Ouseley to the post of organist at the newly founded St. Michael 's College , Tenbury . At that time Ouseley was Heather Professor of Music at Oxford University and had recently become vicar of St Michael 's College on the outskirts of Tenbury Wells , a choir school with a church that he had founded and endowed and which was intended to serve as a model for Anglican church music . Although not much older than they were , Stainer was in charge of the choir and choristers , and one of his duties was to give piano lessons to the boys for two hours a day . Ouseley was an antiquarian and had an extensive library . He was much interested in the history of music and acted as Stainer 's mentor . Under his guidance , Stainer became the youngest ever successful candidate for the Bachelor of Music degree at Oxford . For this , Stainer wrote a cantata , " Praise the Lord , O my soul " , with text from Psalm 103 . Its traditional style was designed to appeal to the examining board and sounds stilted when set against his later works . About this time he wrote several anthems , the most successful of which was " I saw the Lord " , a bolder and more original work in a more contemporary style . 
 = = Magdalen College = = 
 In 1860 he became organist at Magdalen College , Oxford , initially for a period of six months , at a salary of £ 120 per year . His duties included playing for services , training the choir and leading them on Fridays , a day on which the organ was not used . A new organ had been installed five years earlier that was ideal for developing his talent . He proved satisfactory in the post , and his contract was made permanent . He was permitted to study for a degree as long as it did not interfere with his duties , and he chose to do so in the expectation that it would raise his social status . He gained his BA in 1864 and his MA two years later and was keen to proceed to his Mus Doc , which would raise his standing within the university . 
 <unk> conscientious as a choirmaster , Stainer introduced new anthems and service music , bringing the choir to a higher level of attainment than it had previously seen . It had been the custom for the adult choir members , the lay clerks , not to attend practice at all ; but Stainer had a magnetic personality and persuaded them to come . Their more regular attendance enabled the repertoire to be enlarged . Stainer 's skill on the organ was much respected , and he was regarded as " the finest organist Oxford had seen in many generations " . The vice chancellor , Dr Francis Jeune , was an admirer and in 1861 appointed Stainer to the prestigious post of University Organist at the University Church of St Mary the Virgin . Here he was expected to play for a service every Sunday ( at a later time in the morning than the Magdalen service ) . 
 At this time he was composing liturgical music and developing his musical style . There were several anthems and two more technically assured multi @-@ sectioned verse anthems , " Drop down , ye heavens from above " and " They were lovely and pleasant in their lives " . His routine included two services daily , rehearsals , lectures , tutorials , attendance at Ouseley 's lectures , and visits home to Southwark in the vacations . He must have performed his duties with diligence as his salary was raised by £ 10 a year and after 1862 he received an allowance towards his rent . 
 Stainer was also conductor of the Magdalen Madrigal Society , which gave concerts in the College Hall , and the Magdalen Vagabonds , which performed during vacations . The latter gave concerts in various towns and cities and raised money for church restoration . He wrote some madrigals himself , which were published by Novello , a company with which he was to do much future business . He also wrote an oratorio , Gideon , as the exercise for his doctorate and it was performed in November 1865 . It was well received on the day and was sufficient to gain him his doctorate but has not been performed since . 
 After Stainer had obtained his doctorate , Ouseley enrolled him as an examiner for Oxford musical degrees . In this capacity Stainer met and later became friends with Hubert Parry . Attending at evensong at Magdalen College in 1866 , Parry wrote in his diary " Stainer played the last 3 movements of the Sonata in B flat ( Mendelssohn ) afterwards most gloriously " . He examined William Pole and Frederick Bridge and became involved in organ and music tuition and wider musical activities . He had considerable influence on sacred music in Oxford and his reputation spread beyond the confines of the city . He was employed to play solo organ works at weekly concerts at Crystal Palace and took part regularly in the Three Choirs Festival . 
 Stainer was interested in the history of music and traditional folk songs . There was a revived interest in carols at the time , and he rediscovered old carols , provided new settings for others and introduced contemporary works . Many of his harmonisations are still in use today . He published a volume Christmas Carols New and Old which was a considerable success , with thousands of copies sold . He followed this up with another edition the following year to which he persuaded Arthur Sullivan to contribute . He also composed several hymn tunes , and some of these are still to be found in Anglican hymnals , with " Love divine , all loves excelling " being popular at wedding services . Other parish music followed with a congregational Te Deum in C which was regularly sung at Magdalen on Sundays and a verse anthem " Sing a song of praise " . Two more substantial anthems , intended for use in cathedrals , were " Lead kindly light " composed in 1868 , followed by " Awake , awake , put on thy strength " in 1871 . He also produced two evening canticles and a comprehensive set of music for morning , communion and evening services . He had also been working for a long time on his first theoretical work , A Theory of Harmony Founded on the Tempered Scale , published by Novello in 1871 . 
 = = St Paul 's Cathedral = = 
 In 1871 , Goss resigned as organist of St Paul 's Cathedral and Stainer was appointed to the position early in 1872 at a salary of £ 400 per annum . By this time he had been married for seven years and had five children with another due shortly . The organ was in the process of being rebuilt , by the organ builder Henry Willis to Stainer 's design , with portions on either side of the entrance to the choir stalls . Around this time he was asked to help revise Hymns Ancient and Modern , a task he did with enthusiasm . At St Paul 's , he soon set about reinvigorating the choir . The appointment of vicars choral was for life , and the tenor and bass voices saw no need for rehearsal , meaning that the repertoire was static . Stainer was able to change their attitude , and new anthems and liturgies were introduced , a choir school built , and the number of choristers increased from twelve to thirty @-@ five . When William Sparrow Simpson was appointed <unk> , the raising of standards continued , and St Paul 's Cathedral became the focus of religious ceremony in the capital , including state occasions , ceremonial events , memorial services and the funerals of the great and famous . A peal of twelve bells was installed in 1878 . 
 Further appointments followed . Stainer became an honorary fellow of the Royal Academy of Music in 1877 and an examiner for the Doctor of Music degree at Cambridge and London Universities . He accepted the post of Musical Director of the Madrigal Society of London . He was particularly honoured to be asked to be a juror at the French Exhibition in Paris in 1878 and in 1880 was an adjudicator at the Welsh Eisteddfod at Caernarvon . He was made Chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 1879 . 
 In 1882 , Stainer was offered the post of Inspector of Music in Schools and Colleges , a position he took with great seriousness and which he occupied for six years . He worked towards raising standards in music teaching and toured the country , visiting schools and colleges and examining candidates . He advocated the use of musical notation and tonic sol @-@ fa rather than the learning @-@ by @-@ ear method previously used . He was by now treated with the greatest respect in musical circles , but his many activities diminished the time available for composition . The flow of new anthems and service music slowed down , but in 1883 he completed his oratorio Mary Magdalen . This was followed in 1887 by The Crucifixion , the work for which he is most remembered . 
 In 1885 , he was awarded an honorary degree by Durham University , and he became Heather Professor at Oxford in 1889 following the death of Ouseley . He conducted pioneering research into early music , notably the output of Netherlandish Renaissance composer Guillaume Dufay , then scarcely known even among experts . He also contributed a small treatise , Harmony , and another , Composition , to the famous series of Novello musical primers . For budding organists he wrote a primer called , simply , The Organ , which continues to have a following . In recognition of his services to British music , he received a knighthood from Queen Victoria in 1888 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Following a childhood accident , Stainer had lost the use of one eye . There is some confusion about this and he may merely have had a lazy eye , but for a brief period in 1875 he feared he was losing the sight of the other eye . This proved not to be the case , but he suffered from eye strain and impairment to his vision for much of his life . This was a major reason for his decision to retire from St Paul 's Cathedral in 1888 , while still in his forties . As Bumpus was to write , " Such honours as are at the disposal of his fellow musicians have been freely showered upon him , for he is universally beloved and esteemed , but his many onerous duties , his <unk> of this , his presidency of that , and his incessant hard work as an examiner , have all involved responsibility and constant application , and the result is that his sight and general health have given way under the severe strain of sheer hard work . " 
 In later life , he and his wife took to travelling to the Riviera , Florence or Mentone each year for him to relax and recuperate . It was on such a visit to Verona , Italy that on Palm Sunday , 31 March 1901 he felt unwell and retired to his room . Later that afternoon he died of a heart attack . He was sixty . His body was taken back to England , and his funeral service was held on 6 April at St Cross Church , Oxford with a large number of friends and colleagues present , followed by burial in adjacent Holywell Cemetery . 
 Lady Stainer was devastated by his death and went into mourning for a year , but as she confided to a friend , the pianist Francesco Berger , " I am thankful he has been spared long illness and the weariness of old age , which he always dreaded " . She gave a memorial stained glass window to St Cross Church and arranged for a monument to be erected at Magdalen College . Her husband 's valuable library of antiquarian music books passed to his elder son , J F R Stainer , who allowed its use for study and research purposes . The collection was sold to an American collector in 1932 who , on his death in 1973 , had it bequeathed to the Bodleian Library , where it remains . Lady Stainer died in 1916 leaving six children . She is buried near Holy Cross Church beside her husband . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stainer 's output of sacred music was extensive , including the Passion cantata or oratorio The Crucifixion ( 1887 ) , the Sevenfold Amen ( this latter piece was especially admired by the lexicographer Sir George Grove ) , and numerous hymn tunes , including " Cross of Jesus " , " All for Jesus " ( both from The Crucifixion ) , and " Love Divine " . His settings for the Gloria and Sanctus were sung at the coronation of Edward VII in 1902 . 
 His work as a composer was much esteemed during his lifetime but is not well known today . The Crucifixion is one of the few major works of his that is still regularly performed . It is often given in Anglican churches during Holy Week and forms part of the repertoire of numerous choirs . He also made a lasting contribution to the music of Christmas in his Christmas Carols New and Old ( 1871 ) , produced in collaboration with the Revd . H. R. Bramley , which marked an important stage in the revival of the Christmas carol . The book includes Stainer 's arrangements of what were to become the standard versions of " What Child Is This " , " God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen " , " Good King Wenceslas " , " The First Nowell " , and " I Saw Three Ships " , among others . He was a skilled musician and accompanist and Walter <unk> Alcock , who was taught composition by Arthur Sullivan at the National Training School for Music , recalls Sullivan saying " I was at St Paul 's yesterday , listening to Dr Stainer <unk> . My dear young friends , he is a genius , and I hope you will miss no chance of hearing him . " John Stainer was also a close friend of Edmund Hart Turpin , the later Hon. <unk> of the Royal College of Organists for more than fifty years . 
 = = Incomplete list of works = = 
 A list of Stainer 's more prominent works is provided below . 
 = = = Anthems = = = 
 Awake , awake , put on thy strength , O Zion 
 Blessed is the man that <unk> temptation 
 Drop down , ye heavens , from above 
 God so loved the world ( chorus from The Crucifixion ) 
 Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God 
 Hail , <unk> Light , of His pure glory poured 
 Holy Father , God Almighty 
 How beautiful upon the mountains 
 I could not do without thee 
 I desired wisdom 
 In the cross of christ I glory 
 I saw the Lord 
 Jesus , tender shepherd , hear me 
 Lead kindly light 
 Leave us not , neither forsake us 
 Lift up your heads , rejoice 
 Lord Jesus , think on me 
 O <unk> 
 O Zion , that <unk> good tidings 
 We sing the glorious conquest 
 What are these that are arrayed in white robes 
 = = = Services = = = 
 Full services in E flat , D / A , B flat and D 
 Communion services in A , F and C 
 = = = Hymn Tunes = = = 
 <unk> ( " All for Jesus " ) ( 1887 ) 
 Cross of Jesus ( 1887 ) 
 Love Divine ( 1889 ) 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Stainer wrote four oratorios : 
 Gideon ( 1865 ) 
 The Daughter of Jairus ( 1878 ) 
 St. Mary <unk> ( 1887 ) 
 The Crucifixion ( 1887 ) 
 = = = Books with carols and hymns = = = 
 Christmas Carols , New and Old with Henry Ramsden Bramley ( London : Novello , Ewer & Co . , 1878 ) 
 A <unk> of the office of holy communion from the Cathedral Prayer Book ( London : Novello & Co . , 1883 ) 
 The Hymnal Companion to the Book of Common Prayer with accompanying tunes with Edward Henry Bickersteth , Charles Vincent , D.J. Word and John Stainer ( 1890 ) 
 Church <unk> , John Stainer ( ed . ) , 1902 
 = = = Organ music = = = 
 The Village Organist , John Stainer ( ed . ) , 1893 
 = = = Books on musical theory , history and instruments = = = 
 A Theory of Harmony founded on the tempered scale , with questions and exercises for the use of students ( 1871 ) 
 A theory of harmony founded on the tempered scale with questions and exercises for the use of students John Stainer ( 1872 ) 
 Composition ( 1877 ? ) 
 The Music of the Bible : with an account of the development of modern musical instruments from ancient types ( London , Novello , Ewer & Co . , 1879 ) 
 A Treatise on harmony and the classification of chords with questions and exercises for the use of students ' John Stainer ( 1880 ) 
 The Present State of Music in England : An <unk> Lecture delivered in the Sheldonian Theatre , Oxford , November 13 , 1889 ( Oxford , England : Horace Hart , 1889 ) 
 A Dictionary of Musical Terms ed . John Stainer and W.A. Barrett ( 1889 ) 
 Catalogue of English song books forming a portion of the library of Sir John Stainer , with appendices of foreign song books , collections of carols , books on bells John Stainer ( 1891 ) 
 Music in Relation to the Intellect and Emotions ( 1892 ) 
 The Story of the Cross ( 1893 ) 
 Harmony with an appendix containing one hundred graduated exercises ( London : Novello , Ewer & Co . , 1893 ) 
 The Organ ( 1909 ) 
 = Nach dir , Herr , verlanget mich , BWV 150 = 
 Nach dir , Herr , verlanget mich ( For Thee , O Lord , I long ) , BWV 150 , is an early church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach composed for an unknown occasion . It is unique among Bach 's cantatas in its sparse orchestration and in the independence and prominence of the chorus , which is featured in four out of seven movements . The text alternates verses from Psalm 25 and poetry by an unknown librettist . Bach scored the work for four vocal parts and a small Baroque instrumental ensemble of two violins , bassoon and basso continuo . 
 Many scholars think that it may be the earliest extant cantata by Bach , possibly composed in Arnstadt in 1707 . 
 = = History and text = = 
 Bach 's original score is lost . The music survives in a copy made by C F <unk> , one of Bach 's last pupils , after the composer 's death . Although the date of composition is not known , this is one of Bach 's earliest surviving cantatas . Sources differ as to when and where Bach composed the work , but the balance of opinion has tended to push the date back to the beginning of Bach 's career . Suggestions for the place of composition have been : 
 Weimar , where Bach worked from 1708 . The conductor and academic Jonathan Green dates the work c . 1708 – 1710 ; the Bach scholar William G. Whittaker dates it c . 1712 . 
 Mühlhausen , where Bach worked in 1707 / 1708 . The <unk> catalogue ( which attempts to list the cantatas chronologically ) dated it as the sixth of the surviving cantatas by Bach , and placed Aus der Tiefen rufe ich , Herr , zu dir , BWV 131 , as the earliest . Aus der Tiefen rufe ich , Herr , zu dir is known to have been composed in Mühlhausen in 1707 / 1708 . 
 Arnstadt , where Bach worked until his move to Mühlhausen in the summer of 1707 . Recent scholarship suggests Nach dir , Herr , verlanget mich could have been composed at Arnstadt . 
 The Bach scholar Andreas Glöckner argued in 1988 that the cantata may have been composed in Arnstadt . The scholar Hans @-@ Joachim Schulze identified in 2010 a remarkable acrostic in the concluding four movements ( which he described in the 2010 Bach @-@ Jahrbuch , the journal of the Neue <unk> ) . Adjusting for transposition errors by the copyist , the initial letters should spell <unk> <unk> <unk> and plausibly therefore the work was composed to mark this Mühlhausen councillor 's 70th birthday in April 1707 . On this basis the cantata may date from Bach 's time in Arnstadt . Possibly the cantata was heard a few weeks later after the end of Lent , and thus it may have formed a test @-@ piece for the Mühlhausen appointment , composed in Arnstadt with Bach 's supporter <unk> in mind . 
 The cantata is , as John Eliot Gardiner notes , " generally accepted to be Bach 's very first church cantata . Gardiner conducted in 2000 the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage and performed the cantata in the church for which it was then probably composed , at Bach 's time called Neue Kirche ( new church ) , now the Johann @-@ Sebastian @-@ Bach @-@ Kirche . 
 The libretto alternates between biblical verses and free contemporary poetry , which is common in Bach 's later cantatas , but rare among his early cantatas . The text of movements 2 , 4 , and 6 are selected psalm verses , Psalms 25 : 1 – 2 , 5 , 15 . The author of the poetry is unknown . On the basis of the text , it has been suggested that the work was written for a penitential service . 
 The cantata was first published in 1884 in the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft @-@ Ausgabe , the first edition of Bach 's complete works . The composer Johannes Brahms , who served on the editorial board of the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft @-@ Ausgabe , took an interest in the cantata as it was being published . He used an adapted version of the bass line of the closing chaconne for a work he completed in 1885 , his Symphony No. 4 . 
 = = Structure and scoring = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in seven movements , an opening instrumental sinfonia and four choral movements interspersed by only two arias . He scored it for four soloists ( soprano , alto , tenor and bass ) , a four @-@ part choir , and a small Baroque instrumental ensemble of two violins ( Vl ) , bassoon ( obbligato ) ( Fg ) and basso continuo . The duration of the cantata is about 17 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The work begins with a sinfonia and then alternates choral movements and arias . There are no recitatives , no da capo repeats , and there is no chorale tune , unusually for Bach 's cantatas . Bach makes extensive use of choral fugues and imitative polyphony , often shifting the tempo and character of the music within movements very quickly to accommodate a new musical idea with each successive phrase of text . 
 The sinfonia and the opening choral movement are both based on the motive of an octave leap followed by five descending half steps . This chromatic figure , sometimes dubbed the " lamento bass " or <unk> <unk> , has been utilized by composers as early as Monteverdi as a musical representation of anguish , pain , and longing . The sinfonia also introduces thematic material developed later in the work , uses asymmetric phrasing , and " a seamless flow of unstoppable melody " . 
 The first chorus on the beginning of Psalm 25 , " Nach dir , Herr , verlanget mich . Mein Gott , ich <unk> auf dich . " ( Lord , I long for you . My God , I hope in you . ) , is " <unk> constructed despite its relative brevity " . It is episodic , emphasizing a descending chromatic scale motif . The musicologist Tadashi Isoyama notes " the graphically chromatic phrases of the opening sinfonia and the following chorus ; these are evocative of the suffering of the world " . 
 The following soprano aria , " Doch bin und bleibe ich vergnügt " ( Yet I am and remain content ) , is also brief but includes significant word painting . 
 The fourth movement , " Leite mich in deiner Wahrheit und <unk> mich " ( Lead me in your Truth and teach me ) , is another short and episodic chorus , divided into four sections . 
 Movement five , " <unk> müssen von den Winden oft viel <unk> <unk> " ( Cedars must , before the winds , often feel much hardship ) , is one of only a handful of vocal trios to be found in Bach 's oeuvre , as well as the only movement in the cantata in all major . Isoyama <unk> : " the continuo part drives the music forward with its phrase describing the trials of the <unk> " . 
 The penultimate movement , " Meine Tage in den Leiden <unk> Gott <unk> zur Freuden " ( My days in suffering God will nevertheless end in joy ) , features a " celestial haze " of instruments as part of a complex texture . It is in binary form and modulates from D major through B minor to B major . 
 The final movement , " Gott ist mein König von <unk> " ( God is my King from long ago ) , is a chaconne , a form which is typically constructed over a repeated ground bass . Bach uses a ground bass which is possibly a borrowing from Pachelbel . It is the inversion of the chromatic fourth ostinato from the opening movement . Bach 's orchestration includes strumming effects which could be seen as recalling the origin of the chaconne in Spanish guitar music . From a theological point of view , both the inversion of the lamento bass and the series of modulations in this movement express in baroque musical affect how Christ leads from sorrow to joy . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 Heinrich @-@ Schütz @-@ Chor Heilbronn , <unk> Kammerorchester Heilbronn , dir . Fritz Werner . Les Grandes <unk> de J.S. Bach Vol . 28 . Erato , 1973 . 
 Knabenchor Hannover , Collegium Vocale Gent , Leonhardt @-@ Consort , dir . Gustav Leonhardt . J.S. Bach : Das Kantatenwerk – Complete Cantatas Vol . 36 . Teldec , 1985 
 Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra & Choir , dir . Ton Koopman . J.S. Bach : Complete Cantatas Vol . 1 . Antoine Marchand , 1994 . 
 Bach Collegium Japan , dir . Masaaki Suzuki . Bach Cantatas Vol . 1 . BIS , 1995 . 
 Monteverdi Choir , English Baroque Soloists , dir . John Eliot Gardiner . Bach Cantatas . Soli Deo Gloria , 2000 . 
 = Donkey Kong ( video game ) = 
 Donkey Kong ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Donkī Kongu ) is an arcade game released by Nintendo in 1981 . It is an early example of the platform game genre , as the gameplay focuses on maneuvering the main character across a series of platforms while dodging and jumping over obstacles . In the game , Mario ( originally named Mr. Video and then Jumpman ) must rescue a damsel in distress named Pauline ( originally named Lady ) , from a giant ape named Donkey Kong . The hero and ape later became two of Nintendo 's most popular and recognizable characters . Donkey Kong is one of the most important titles from the Golden Age of Video Arcade Games , and is one of the most popular arcade games of all time . 
 The game was the latest in a series of efforts by Nintendo to break into the North American market . Hiroshi Yamauchi , Nintendo 's president at the time , assigned the project to a first @-@ time video game designer named Shigeru Miyamoto . Drawing from a wide range of inspirations , including Popeye , Beauty and the Beast and King Kong , Miyamoto developed the scenario and designed the game alongside Nintendo 's chief engineer , Gunpei Yokoi . The two men broke new ground by using graphics as a means of characterization , including cutscenes to advance the game 's plot , and integrating multiple stages into the gameplay . 
 Regardless of initial doubts by Nintendo 's American staff , Donkey Kong succeeded commercially and critically in North America and Japan . Nintendo licensed the game to Coleco , who developed home console versions for numerous platforms . Other companies cloned Nintendo 's hit and avoided royalties altogether . Miyamoto 's characters appeared on cereal boxes , television cartoons , and dozens of other places . A lawsuit brought on by Universal City Studios , alleging Donkey Kong violated their trademark of King Kong , ultimately failed . The success of Donkey Kong and Nintendo 's victory in the courtroom helped to position the company for video game market dominance from its release in 1981 until the late 1990s ( 1996 – 1999 ) . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Following 1980 's Space Panic , Donkey Kong is one of the earliest examples of the platform game genre even prior to the term being coined ; the US gaming press used climbing game for titles with platforms and ladders . As the first platform game to feature jumping , Donkey Kong requires the player to jump between gaps and over obstacles or approaching enemies , setting the template for the future of the platform genre . With its four unique stages , Donkey Kong was the most complex arcade game at the time of its release , and one of the first arcade games to feature multiple stages , following 1980 's Phoenix and 1981 's <unk> and Scramble 
 Competitive video gamers and referees stress the game 's high level of difficulty compared to other classic arcade games . Winning the game requires patience and the ability to accurately time Mario 's ascent . In addition to presenting the goal of saving Pauline , the game also gives the player a score . Points are awarded for the following : finishing each stage ; leaping over obstacles ; destroying objects with a hammer power @-@ up ; collecting items such as hats , parasols , and purses ( apparently belonging to Pauline ) ; and completing other tasks . The player typically receives three lives with a bonus awarded for the first 7 @,@ 000 points , although this can be modified via the game 's built in <unk> switches . 
 The game is divided into four different single @-@ screen stages . Each represents 25 meters of the structure Donkey Kong has climbed , one stage being 25 meters higher than the previous . The final stage occurs at 100 meters . Stage one involves Mario scaling a construction site made of crooked girders and ladders while jumping over or hammering barrels and oil barrels tossed by Donkey Kong . Stage two involves climbing a five @-@ story structure of conveyor belts , each of which transports cement pans . The third stage involves the player riding elevators while avoiding bouncing springs . The final stage involves Mario removing eight rivets which support Donkey Kong . Removing the final rivet causes Donkey Kong to fall and the hero to be reunited with Pauline . These four stages combine to form a level . 
 Upon completion of the fourth stage , the level then increments , and the game repeats the stages with progressive difficulty . For example , Donkey Kong begins to hurl barrels faster and sometimes diagonally , and fireballs get speedier . The victory music alternates between levels 1 and 2 . The 22nd level is colloquially known as the kill screen , due to an error in the game 's programming that kills Mario after a few seconds , effectively ending the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Donkey Kong is considered to be the earliest video game with a storyline that visually unfolds on screen . The eponymous Donkey Kong character is the game 's de facto villain . The hero is a carpenter originally named Jumpman , later renamed Mario . The ape kidnaps Mario 's girlfriend , originally known as Lady , but later renamed Pauline . The player must take the role of Mario and rescue her . This is the first occurrence of the damsel in distress scenario that would provide the template for countless video games to come . 
 The game uses graphics and animation as vehicles of characterization . Donkey Kong smirks upon Mario 's demise . Pauline has a pink dress and long hair , and a speech balloon crying " HELP ! " appears frequently beside her . Mario , depicted in red overalls and cap , is an everyman character , a type common in Japan . Graphical limitations and the low pixel resolution of the small sprites prompted his design : drawing a mouth is infeasible , so the character was given a mustache ; the programmers could not animate hair , so he got a cap ; and to make his arm movements visible , he needed colored overalls . The artwork used for the cabinets and promotional materials make these cartoon @-@ like character designs even more explicit . Pauline , for example , is depicted to be disheveled ( like King Kong 's Fay Wray ) in a torn dress and stiletto heels . 
 Donkey Kong is the first example of a complete narrative told in video game form , and like 1980 's Pac @-@ Man , it employs cutscenes to advance its plot . The game opens with the gorilla climbing a pair of ladders to the top of a construction site . He sets Pauline down and stomps his feet , causing the steel beams to change shape . He then moves to his final perch and sneers . This brief animation sets the scene and adds background to the gameplay , a first for video games . Upon reaching the end of the stage , another cutscene begins . A heart appears between Mario and Pauline , but Donkey Kong grabs the woman and climbs higher , causing the heart to break . The narrative concludes when Mario reaches the end of the rivet stage . He and Pauline are reunited , and a short intermission plays . The gameplay then loops from the beginning at a higher level of difficulty , without any formal ending . 
 = = Development = = 
 As of late 1980 to early 1981 , Nintendo 's efforts to expand to North America had failed , culminating with the attempted export of the otherwise successful Radar Scope . They were left with a large number of unsold Radar Scope machines , so company president Hiroshi Yamauchi thought of simply converting them into something new . He approached a young industrial designer named Shigeru Miyamoto , who had been working for Nintendo since 1977 , to see if he could design such a replacement . Miyamoto said that he could . Yamauchi appointed Nintendo 's head engineer , Gunpei Yokoi , to supervise the project . Nintendo 's budget for the development of the game was $ 100 @,@ 000 . Some sources also claim that Ikegami <unk> was involved in some of the development . They played no role in the game 's creation or concept , but were hired by Nintendo to provide " mechanical programming assistance to fix the software created by Nintendo " . 
 At the time , Nintendo was also pursuing a license to make a game based on the Popeye comic strip . When this license attempt failed , Nintendo took the opportunity to create new characters that could then be marketed and used in later games . Miyamoto came up with many characters and plot concepts , but he eventually settled on a love triangle between gorilla , carpenter , and girlfriend that mirrors the rivalry between Bluto and Popeye for Olive Oyl . Bluto became an ape , which Miyamoto said was " nothing too evil or repulsive " . He would be the pet of the main character , " a funny , hang @-@ loose kind of guy . " Miyamoto has also named " Beauty and the Beast " and the 1933 film King Kong as influences . Although its origin as a comic strip license played a major part , Donkey Kong marked the first time that the storyline for a video game preceded the game 's programming rather than simply being appended as an afterthought . Unrelated Popeye games would eventually be released by Nintendo for the Game & Watch the following month , and for the arcades in 1982 . 
 Yamauchi wanted primarily to target the North American market , so he mandated that the game be given an English title , though many of their games to this point had English titles anyway . Miyamoto decided to name the game for the ape , whom he felt to be the strongest character . The story of how Miyamoto came up with the name " Donkey Kong " varies . A false urban myth says that the name was originally meant to be " Monkey Kong " , but was misspelled or misinterpreted due to a blurred fax or bad telephone connection . Another , more credible story claims Miyamoto looked in a Japanese @-@ English dictionary for something that would mean " stubborn gorilla " , or that " Donkey " was meant to convey " silly " or " stubborn " ; " Kong " was common Japanese slang for " gorilla " . A rival claim is that he worked with Nintendo 's export manager to come up with the title , and that " Donkey " was meant to represent " stupid and goofy " . In the end , Miyamoto stated that he thought the name would convey the thought of a " stupid ape " . 
 Miyamoto himself had high hopes for his new project . He lacked the technical skills to program it alone , so instead came up with concepts and consulted technicians to see if they were possible . He wanted to make the characters different sizes , move in different manners and react in various ways . Yokoi thought Miyamoto 's original design was too complex , though he had some difficult suggestions himself , such as using see @-@ saws to catapult the hero across the screen ( eventually found too hard to program , though a similar concept would appear in the aforementioned Popeye arcade game ) . Miyamoto then thought of using sloped platforms , barrels and ladders . When he specified that the game would have multiple stages , the four @-@ man programming team complained that he was essentially asking them to make the game repeatedly . Nevertheless , they followed Miyamoto 's design , creating a total of approximately 20 kilobytes of content . Yukio <unk> composed a simplistic soundtrack to serve as background music for the levels and story events . 
 Hiroshi Yamauchi thought the game was going to sell well and called Minoru Arakawa , head of Nintendo 's operations in the US , to tell him . Nintendo 's American distributors , Ron Judy and Al Stone , brought Arakawa to a lawyer named Howard Lincoln to secure a trademark . 
 The game was sent to Nintendo of America for testing . The sales manager disliked it for being too different from the maze and shooter games common at the time , and Judy and Lincoln expressed reservations over the strange title . Still , Arakawa adamantly believed that it would be big . American staffers asked Yamauchi to change the name , but he refused . Arakawa and the American staff began translating the storyline for the cabinet art and naming the other characters . They chose " Pauline " for the Lady , after Polly James , wife of Nintendo 's Redmond , Washington , warehouse manager , Don James . The name of " Jumpman " , a name originally chosen for its similarity to the popular brands Walkman and Pac @-@ Man , was eventually changed to " Mario " in likeness of Mario <unk> , the landlord of the original office space of Nintendo of America . These character names were printed on the American cabinet art and used in promotional materials . Donkey Kong was ready for release . 
 Stone and Judy convinced the managers of two bars in Seattle , Washington , to set up Donkey Kong machines . The managers initially showed reluctance , but when they saw sales of $ 30 a day — or 120 plays — for a week straight , they requested more units . In their Redmond headquarters , a skeleton crew composed of Arakawa , his wife Yoko , James , Judy , Phillips and Stone set about gutting 2 @,@ 000 surplus Radar Scope machines and converting them with Donkey Kong motherboards and power supplies from Japan . The game officially went on sale in July 1981 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his 1982 book Video Invaders , Steve Bloom described Donkey Kong as " another bizarre cartoon game , courtesy of Japan " . Donkey Kong was , however , extremely popular in the United States and Canada . The game 's initial 2 @,@ 000 units sold , and more orders were made . Arakawa began manufacturing the electronic components in Redmond because waiting for shipments from Japan was taking too long . By October , Donkey Kong was selling 4 @,@ 000 units a month , and by late June 1982 , Nintendo had sold 60 @,@ 000 Donkey Kong machines overall and earned $ 180 million . Judy and Stone , who worked on straight commission , became millionaires . Arakawa used Nintendo 's profits to buy 27 acres ( 11 ha ) of land in Redmond in July 1982 . Nintendo earned another $ 100 million on the game in its second year of release , totaling $ 280 million ( equivalent to $ 729 million in 2016 ) . It remained Nintendo 's top seller into summer 1983 . Donkey Kong also sold steadily in Japan . Electronic Games speculated in June 1983 that the game 's home versions contributed to the arcade version 's extended popularity , compared to the four to six months that the average game lasted . 
 In January 1983 , the 1982 Arcade Awards gave it the Best Solitaire Videogame award and the Certificate of Merit as runner @-@ up for Coin @-@ Op Game of the Year . In September 1982 , Arcade Express reviewed the ColecoVision port and scored it 9 out of 10 . Computer and Video Games reviewed the ColecoVision port in its September 1984 issue and scored it 4 out of 4 in all four categories of Action , Graphics , Addiction and Theme . 
 = = Licensing and ports = = 
 By late June 1982 , Donkey Kong 's success had prompted more than 50 parties in the U.S. and Japan to license the game 's characters . Mario and his simian nemesis appeared on cereal boxes , board games , pajamas , and manga . In 1983 , the animation studio Ruby @-@ Spears produced a Donkey Kong cartoon ( as well as Donkey Kong Jr . ) for the Saturday Supercade program on CBS . In the show , mystery crime @-@ solving plots in the mode of Scooby @-@ Doo are framed around the premise of Mario and Pauline chasing Donkey Kong ( voiced by <unk> Sales ) , who has escaped from the circus . The show lasted two seasons . 
 Makers of video game consoles were also interested . Taito offered a considerable sum to buy all rights to Donkey Kong , but Nintendo turned them down after three days of discussion within the company . Rivals Coleco and Atari approached Nintendo in Japan and the United States respectively . In the end , Yamauchi granted Coleco exclusive console and tabletop rights to Donkey Kong because he felt that " It [ was ] the <unk> company " . In addition , Arakawa felt that as a more established company in the US , Coleco could better handle marketing . In return , Nintendo would receive an undisclosed lump sum plus $ 1 @.@ 40 per game cartridge sold and $ 1 per tabletop unit . On December 24 , 1981 , Howard Lincoln drafted the contract . He included language that Coleco would be held liable for anything on the game cartridge , an unusual clause for a licensing agreement . Arakawa signed the document the next day , and , on February 1 , 1982 , Yamauchi persuaded the Coleco representative in Japan to sign without running the document by the company 's lawyers . 
 Coleco did not offer the game cartridge stand @-@ alone ; instead , they bundled it with their ColecoVision , which went on sale in August 1982 . Six months later , Coleco offered Atari 2600 and Intellivision versions , too . Notably , they did not port it to the Atari 5200 , a system comparable to their own ( as opposed to the less powerful 2600 and Intellivision ) . Coleco 's sales doubled to $ 500 million and their earnings quadrupled to $ 40 million . Coleco 's console versions of Donkey Kong sold six million cartridges in total , grossing over $ 153 million , and earning Nintendo over $ 5 million in royalties . Coleco also released stand @-@ alone Mini @-@ Arcade tabletop versions of Donkey Kong , which , along with Pac @-@ Man , Galaxian , and Frogger , sold three million units combined . Meanwhile , Atari got the license for computer versions of Donkey Kong and released it for the Atari 400 / 800 . When Coleco unveiled the Adam Computer , running a port of Donkey Kong at the 1983 Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago , Illinois , Atari protested that it was in violation of the licensing agreement . Yamauchi demanded that Arnold Greenberg , Coleco 's president , shelve his Adam port . This version of the game was cartridge @-@ based , and thus not a violation of Nintendo 's license with Atari ; still , Greenberg complied . Ray Kassar of Atari was fired the next month , and the home PC version of Donkey Kong fell through . 
 In 1983 , Atari released several computer versions under the Atarisoft label . All of the computer ports had the cement factory level , while most of the console versions did not . None of the home versions of Donkey Kong had all of the intermissions or animations from the arcade game . Some have Donkey Kong on the left side of the screen in the barrel level ( like he is in the arcade game ) and others have him on the right side . 
 Miyamoto created a greatly simplified version for the Game & Watch <unk> . Other ports include the Amiga , Apple II , Atari 7800 , Intellivision , Commodore 64 , Commodore VIC @-@ 20 , Famicom Disk System , IBM PC <unk> , ZX Spectrum , Amstrad CPC , MSX , Atari 8 @-@ bit family and Mini @-@ Arcade versions . The game was ported to Nintendo 's Family Computer ( Famicom ) console in 1983 as one of the system 's three launch titles ; the same version was an early title for the Famicom 's North American version , the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . However , the cement factory level is not included , nor are most of the cutscenes since Nintendo did not have large enough cartridge ROMs available in the beginning . This port includes a new song composed by Yukio <unk> for the title screen ; an arrangement of the tune appears in Donkey Kong Country for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Both Donkey Kong and its sequel , Donkey Kong Jr . , are included in the 1988 NES compilation Donkey Kong Classics . The NES version was re @-@ released as an unlockable game in Animal Crossing for the GameCube and as an item for purchase on the Virtual Console for the Wii , Wii U and Nintendo 3DS . The Wii U version is also the last game that was released to celebrate the 30 @-@ year anniversary of the Japanese version of the NES , the Famicom . The original arcade version of the game appears in the Nintendo 64 game Donkey Kong 64 . Nintendo released the NES version on the e @-@ Reader and for the Game Boy Advance Classic NES series in 2002 and 2004 , respectively . The Famicom version of the game sold 840 @,@ 000 units in Japan . 
 Donkey Kong : Original Edition is a port based on the NES version that reinstates the cement factory stage and includes some intermission animations absent from the original NES version , which has only ever been released on the Virtual Console . It was preinstalled on 25th Anniversary PAL region red Wii systems , which were first released in Europe on October 29 , 2010 . In Japan , a download code for the game for Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console was sent to users who purchased New Super Mario Bros. 2 or Brain Age : Concentration Training from the Nintendo eShop from July 28 to September 2 , 2012 . In North America , a download code for the game for Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console was sent to users who purchased one of five select 3DS titles on the Nintendo eShop and registered it on Club Nintendo from October 1 , 2012 to January 6 , 2013 . In Europe and Australia , it was released for purchase on the Nintendo 3DS eShop , being released on September 18 , 2014 in Europe and on September 19 , 2014 in Australia . 
 = = Clones = = 
 Crazy Kong was officially licensed from Nintendo and manufactured by Falcon for some non @-@ US markets . Nevertheless , Crazy Kong machines found their way into some American arcades , often installed in cabinets marked as <unk> . Nintendo was quick to take legal action against those distributing the game in the US . Bootleg copies of Donkey Kong also appeared in both North America and France under the Crazy Kong , <unk> Kong or Donkey King names . The 1982 Logger arcade game from Century Electronics is a direct clone of Donkey Kong , with a large bird standing in for the ape and rolling logs instead of barrels . 
 In 1981 , O. R. Rissman , president of Tiger Electronics , obtained a license to use the name King Kong from Universal City Studios . Under this title , Tiger created a handheld game with a scenario and gameplay based directly on Nintendo 's creation . 
 Many home computer clones directly borrowed the gorilla theme : Killer Gorilla ( BBC Micro , 1983 ) , Crazy Kong 64 ( Commodore 64 , 1983 ) , Kongo Kong ( Commodore 64 , 1983 ) , Donkey King ( TRS @-@ 80 Color Computer , 1983 ) , and Kong ( ZX Spectrum , 1983 ) . Others recast the game with different characters , such as Cannonball Blitz ( Apple II , 1982 ) , with a soldier and cannonballs replacing the ape and barrels , and the American Southwest @-@ themed Canyon Climber ( Atari 8 @-@ bit , 1982 ) . One of the first releases from Electronic Arts was Hard Hat Mack ( Apple II , 1983 ) , a three @-@ stage game that even uses the construction site setting from Donkey Kong . 
 Epyx 's Jumpman ( Atari 8 @-@ bit , 1983 ) reuses a prototypical name for the Mario character in Donkey Kong . A magazine ad for the game has the tagline " If you liked Donkey Kong , you 'll love <unk> ! " Jumpman , along with Miner <unk> ( Atari 8 @-@ bit 1982 ) and Mr. Robot and His Robot Factory ( Atari 8 @-@ bit , 1984 ) , focused on traversing all of the platforms in the level , or collecting scattered objects , instead of climbing to the top . 
 There were so many games with multiple ladder and platforms stages by 1983 that Electronic Games described Nintendo 's own Popeye game as " yet another variation of a theme that 's become all too familiar since the success of Donkey Kong " . That year Sega created a Donkey Kong clone called Congo Bongo . Despite using isometric perspective , the structure and gameplay are similar . 
 = = Universal City Studios , Inc. v. Nintendo Co . , Ltd . = = 
 In April 1982 , Sid Sheinberg , a seasoned lawyer and president of MCA and Universal City Studios , learned of the game 's success and suspected it might be a trademark infringement of Universal 's own King Kong . On April 27 , 1982 , he met with Arnold Greenberg of Coleco and threatened to sue over Coleco 's home version of Donkey Kong . Coleco agreed on May 3 , 1982 to pay royalties to Universal of 3 % of their Donkey Kong 's net sale price , worth about $ 4 @.@ 6 million . Meanwhile , Sheinberg revoked Tiger 's license to make its King Kong game , but O. R. Rissman refused to acknowledge Universal 's claim to the trademark . When Universal threatened Nintendo , Howard Lincoln and Nintendo refused to cave . In preparation for the court battle ahead , Universal agreed to allow Tiger to continue producing its King Kong game as long as they distinguished it from Donkey Kong . 
 Universal sued Nintendo on June 29 , 1982 and announced its license with Coleco . The company sent cease and desist letters to Nintendo 's licensees , all of which agreed to pay royalties to Universal except Milton Bradley and Ralston Purina . Universal City Studios , Inc. v. Nintendo , Co . , Ltd. was heard in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York by Judge Robert W. Sweet . Over seven days , Universal 's counsel , the New York firm Townley & Updike , argued that the names King Kong and Donkey Kong were easily confused and that the plot of the game was an infringement on that of the films . Nintendo 's counsel , John Kirby , countered that Universal had themselves argued in a previous case that King Kong 's scenario and characters were in the public domain . Judge Sweet ruled in Nintendo 's favor , awarding the company Universal 's profits from Tiger 's game ( $ 56 @,@ 689 @.@ 41 ) , damages and attorney 's fees . 
 Universal appealed , trying to prove consumer confusion by presenting the results of a telephone survey and examples from print media where people had allegedly assumed a connection between the two Kongs . On October 4 , 1984 , however , the court upheld the previous verdict . 
 Nintendo and its licensees filed counterclaims against Universal . On May 20 , 1985 , Judge Sweet awarded Nintendo $ 1 @.@ 8 million for legal fees , lost revenues , and other expenses . However , he denied Nintendo 's claim of damages from those licensees who had paid royalties to both Nintendo and Universal . Both parties appealed this judgment , but the verdict was upheld on July 15 , 1986 . 
 Nintendo thanked John Kirby with the gift of a $ 30 @,@ 000 sailboat named Donkey Kong and " exclusive worldwide rights to use the name for sailboats " . The court battle also taught Nintendo they could compete with larger entertainment industry companies . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Donkey Kong spawned the sequels Donkey Kong Jr. and Donkey Kong 3 , as well as the spin @-@ off Mario Bros. A complete remake of the original arcade game on the Game Boy , named Donkey Kong or Donkey Kong ' 94 contains levels from both the original Donkey Kong and Donkey Kong Jr. arcades . It starts with the same damsel @-@ in @-@ distress premise and four basic locations as the arcade game and then progresses to 97 additional puzzle @-@ based levels . It is the first game to have built @-@ in enhancement for the Super Game Boy accessory . The arcade version makes an appearance in Donkey Kong 64 in the Frantic Factory level . 
 Nintendo revived the Donkey Kong franchise in the 1990s for a series of platform games and spin @-@ offs developed by Rare , beginning with Donkey Kong Country in 1994 . In 2004 , Nintendo released Mario vs. Donkey Kong , a sequel to the Game Boy title . In it , Mario must chase Donkey Kong to get back the stolen Mini @-@ Mario toys . In the follow @-@ up Mario vs. Donkey Kong 2 : March of the Minis , Donkey Kong once again falls in love with Pauline and kidnaps her , and Mario uses the Mini @-@ Mario toys to help him rescue her . Donkey Kong Racing for the GameCube was in development by Rare , but was canceled when Microsoft purchased the company . In 2004 , Nintendo released the first of the Donkey Konga games , a rhythm @-@ based game series that uses a special bongo controller . Donkey Kong Jungle Beat ( 2005 ) is a unique platform action game that uses the same bongo controller accessory . In 2007 , Donkey Kong Barrel Blast was released for the Nintendo Wii . It was originally developed as a GameCube game and would have used the bongo controller , but it was delayed and released exclusively as a Wii title with no support for the bongo accessory . Super Smash Bros. Brawl features music from the game arranged by Hirokazu " Hip " Tanaka and a stage called " <unk> " , an almost exact replica of its Donkey Kong namesake . While the stage contains her items , Pauline is missing from her perch at the top of the stage . 
 Donkey Kong was said to be an inspiration for the 1983 platform game for home computers Jumpman , according to the game 's creator . 
 In 2013 , video game developer Mike Mika hacked the game to create a version where Pauline is the main character and rescues Mario . He created this remixed version for his three @-@ year @-@ old daughter who wanted to play as a heroine . Donkey Kong appears as a game in the Wii U game NES Remix , which features multiple NES games and sometimes " remixes " them by presenting significantly modified versions of the games as challenges . One such challenge features Link from The Legend of Zelda traveling through the first screen to save Pauline . The difficulty is increased compared to the original Donkey Kong because of Link 's inability to jump , as seen in Zelda . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Since its original release , Donkey Kong 's success has entrenched the game in American popular culture . In 1982 , Buckner & Garcia and R. Cade and the Video Victims both recorded songs ( " Do the Donkey Kong " and " Donkey Kong " , respectively ) based on the game . Artists like DJ Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh Prince and Trace Adkins referenced the game in songs . Episodes of television series such as The Simpsons , Futurama , Crank Yankers and The Fairly OddParents have also contained references to the game . Even today , sound effects from the Atari 2600 version often serve as generic video game sounds in films and television series . The Killer List of Videogames ranks Donkey Kong the third most popular arcade game of all time and places it at No. 25 on the " Top 100 Videogames " <unk> in February 2006 , Nintendo Power rated it the 148th best game made on a Nintendo system . Today , Donkey Kong is the fifth most popular arcade game among collectors . The phrase " It 's on like Donkey Kong " has been used in various works of popular culture . In November 2010 , Nintendo applied for a trademark on the phrase with the United States Patent and Trademark Office . 
 = = = Atari computer Easter egg = = = 
 The Atari computer port of Donkey Kong contains one of the longest @-@ undiscovered Easter eggs in a video game . Landon Dyer , the programmer assigned to create the port , added a secret where his initials would appear if the player died under certain conditions and then waited for the game to cycle to the title screen . This secret remained undiscovered for 26 years until Dyer revealed it on his blog , stating " there 's an easter egg , but it 's totally not worth it , and I don 't remember how to bring it up anyway . " After this announcement , the steps required to trigger the Easter egg were discovered by Don Hodges , who used an emulator and a debugger to trace through the 25 @,@ 000 lines of the game 's code . 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 The 2007 motion picture documentary The King of Kong : A Fistful of Quarters explores the world of competitive classic arcade gaming and tells the story of Steve Wiebe 's quest to break Billy Mitchell 's record . The current Donkey Kong world record was set by Wes Copeland on May 5 , 2016 , with a score of 1 @,@ 218 @,@ 000 . 
 = Great Britain at the 2002 Winter Paralympics = 
 Great Britain competed at the 2002 Winter Paralympics held in Salt Lake City , Utah , United States , from 7 to 16 March 2002 . The team was able to be made up of athletes from the whole United Kingdom ; athletes from Northern Ireland , who elected to hold Irish citizenship under the pre @-@ 1999 article 2 of the Irish constitution , were eligible to represent either Great Britain or Ireland at the Paralympics . However no Northern Irish athletes took part in the Winter Paralympics until 2010 in Vancouver . In order to be eligible to take part in the Games athletes had to have a disability that fell into one of the six Paralympics disability categories . 
 Two British athletes competed , both in alpine skiing events , and no medals were won . The size of the team was a decrease from that which had entered previous Games , in the 1998 Winter Paralympics 20 British athletes had participated . One reason for this is that whilst funding for the two athletes was provided by the British Paralympic Association , it totalled only £ 1 @,@ 500 compared to the £ 4 million worth of funding available to British athletes at the 2002 Winter Olympics . 
 = = Disability classification = = 
 Every participant at the Paralympics has their disability grouped into one of five disability categories ; amputation , the condition may be congenital or sustained through injury or illness ; cerebral palsy ; wheelchair athletes , there is often overlap between this and other categories ; visual impairment , including blindness ; Les autres , any physical disability that does not fall strictly under one of the other categories , for example dwarfism or multiple sclerosis . Each Paralympic sport then has its own classifications , dependent upon the specific physical demands of competition . Events are given a code , made of numbers and letters , describing the type of event and classification of the athletes competing . Events with " B " in the code are for athletes with visual impairment , codes LW1 to LW9 are for athletes who stand to compete and LW10 to LW12 are for athletes who compete sitting down . Each different number refers to a different severity of <unk> and defines the equipment that competitors may use ; e.g. LW4 is for athletes with a single leg amputation below the knee who compete using two skis and two poles . 
 = = Alpine skiing = = 
 Both of Britain 's athletes at the Games competed in alpine skiing events , funding for the two athletes was provided by the British Paralympic Association . Russell Docker , who was paralysed from the waist down following a skiing accident in 1995 , appeared at the Paralympics for the first time and competed in the LW12 classification . He crashed out in the downhill event and failed to complete his other three races . Stephen Napier , who was disabled after being knocked off a motorbike by an unmarked police car in 1995 , also competed in four events in the LW10 classification . His highest finish was sixth in the Super @-@ G and he also had three seventh place finishes . In each of his events Napier was the lowest ranked athlete to complete the course . 
 Calculated time 
 To ensure a fair event when athletes with differing disabilities compete , times achieved are sometimes modified by a factor percentage , to produce a result known as " Calculated Time " . It is this time that decides the result of the races . Actual times recorded is also listed . 
 = New York State Route 441 = 
 New York State Route 441 ( NY 441 ) is an east – west state highway in the eastern suburbs of Rochester , New York , in the United States . It extends for 12 @.@ 55 miles ( 20 @.@ 20 km ) from an intersection with NY 96 in Brighton to a junction with NY 350 in Walworth . The route starts as a four @-@ lane divided highway in Brighton and western Penfield , and gradually narrows to a two @-@ lane undivided road as it heads away from the city of Rochester . NY 441 connects to Interstate 490 ( I @-@ 490 ) in Brighton and intersects NY 250 in Penfield . 
 NY 441 was originally routed on Penfield Road between Brighton and Penfield when it was assigned in 1949 . It remained on Penfield Road through Penfield and into Wayne County to Marion , where the highway ended at NY 21 . The entirety of this routing had previously been part of NY 33 , which was truncated westward to downtown Rochester as part of NY 441 's assignment . NY 441 was cut back to NY 350 in Walworth by 1970 . The divided highway that now carries NY 441 through Brighton and western Penfield was constructed during the late 1960s and opened as a realignment of NY 441 by 1971 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = West of Penfield = = = 
 NY 441 begins at an intersection with NY 96 ( East Avenue ) in the Monroe County town of Brighton . This portion of NY 441 is named Linden Avenue ; the road continues west of Route 96 as Elmwood Avenue . Just east of Route 96 , Route 441 meets I @-@ 490 at exit 23 . Past the interchange , NY 441 turns southeastward and becomes a divided highway . The portion of NY 441 from East Avenue to the Wayne County line is designated as the " Korean War Memorial Highway " by the state of New York . 
 Linden Avenue separates from NY 441 roughly 0 @.@ 4 miles ( 0 @.@ 6 km ) from I @-@ 490 and follows a routing parallel to NY 441 on the opposite side of the nearby Rochester Subdivision , a double @-@ tracked rail line owned by CSX Transportation . Continuing onward , Route 441 curves eastward and crosses over the CSX railroad line ahead of another intersection with Linden Avenue in the town of Pittsford . Linden Avenue crosses NY 441 and heads southeastward toward East Rochester ; however , NY 441 curves northeastward to enter the town of Penfield . 
 Although this portion of NY 441 is surrounded by woodlands , it is actually located in a largely developed area of Penfield known locally as Panorama . The woods cease as NY 441 approaches an interchange with Panorama Trail ( NY 153 ) , the lone limited @-@ access junction along the divided highway . East of NY 153 , NY 441 crosses over Irondequoit Creek and downgrades to a four @-@ lane undivided highway at a junction with Penfield Road . Here , Route 441 becomes Penfield Road and enters the densely populated hamlet of Penfield . 
 = = = Penfield and Wayne County = = = 
 In Penfield , Route 441 passes through the commercial town center and intersects Five Mile Line Road at the Four Corners of Penfield . The junction with Five Mile Line Road was once the northern terminus of NY 253 . As NY 441 heads east through the town of Penfield , the businesses are largely replaced by residences . The one exception to this is in the immediate vicinity of Lloyd 's Corners — the intersection of NY 441 and NY 250 — where three of the four corners of the junction are occupied by large strip malls . The level of development along NY 441 begins to decline 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) east of NY 250 , where the road narrows to two lanes . The surroundings become largely undeveloped by the point where NY 441 enters Wayne County . 
 Now in the town of Walworth , NY 441 becomes Walworth – Penfield Road . Just east of the county line , NY 441 shifts slightly northward by way of an S @-@ curve that serves as a connector between the segmented West Walworth Road , which NY 441 intersects at both ends of the curve . This is the last curve along NY 441 as it follows a linear east – west routing over several small hills to a junction with NY 350 west of the hamlet of Walworth , where NY 441 terminates . The roadway , however , continues east to Marion as Walworth – Penfield Road , Walworth – Marion Road , and Buffalo Street , a continuous highway maintained by Wayne County as County Route 205 ( CR 205 ) west of Hall Center Road and Maple Avenue and as CR 207 east of those roads . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and designation = = = 
 The portion of NY 441 from where Penfield Road leaves NY 441 in Penfield to Walworth was originally designated as part of NY 33 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . West of the Four Corners of Penfield , NY 33 remained on Penfield Road through Penfield and Brighton to the modern intersection of Penfield Road and NY 96 ( East Avenue ) . The route turned west to follow East Avenue into Rochester . On its eastern end , NY 33 continued on to Marion , where it ended at NY 21 . NY 33 was truncated to its current eastern terminus at NY 31 in downtown Rochester on January 1 , 1949 . The portion of former NY 33 east of NY 96 was redesignated as NY 441 . 
 Like NY 33 before it , NY 441 officially ended at NY 21 in Marion when it was first assigned . By 1970 , the east end of the route was moved to NY 350 in Walworth . The change in NY 441 's alignment had no effect on the maintenance of the Walworth – Marion highway , however , as the Wayne County portion of NY 441 was entirely county @-@ maintained . On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of NY 441 from the Monroe County line to NY 350 was transferred from Wayne County to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . In return , the county received a part of NY 21 in Williamson that connected to a state highway at only one end . 
 = = = Brighton – Penfield divided highway = = = 
 Construction on a new divided highway through the towns of Brighton and Penfield began in the late 1960s and was completed by 1971 , at which time it became a realignment of NY 441 . At the western end , NY 441 was routed onto the pre @-@ existing Linden Avenue to connect to NY 96 at a junction southeast of its original western terminus . While most of Linden Avenue was transferred to the state , the westernmost section from NY 96 to I @-@ 490 was maintained by Monroe County as part of CR 15 . The 2 @.@ 46 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 96 km ) portion of NY 441 's former routing on Penfield Road from NY 96 to Panorama Trail was transferred to Monroe County and designated CR 269 . 
 In 2007 , ownership and maintenance of the county @-@ maintained portion of NY 441 near its west end was transferred to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state and Monroe County . A bill ( S4856 , 2007 ) to enact the swap was introduced in the New York State Senate on April 23 and passed by both the Senate and the New York State Assembly on June 20 . The act was signed into law by Governor Eliot Spitzer on August 28 . Under the terms of the act , it took effect 90 days after it was signed into law ; thus , the maintenance swap officially took place on November 26 , 2007 . The entirety of NY 441 is now maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Kitty Kat ( song ) = 
 " Kitty Kat " is a song recorded by American R & B singer Beyoncé Knowles for her second studio album , B 'Day ( 2006 ) . It was composed by Beyoncé Knowles , Pharrell Williams , Makeba Riddick , Shawn Carter , and Chad Hugo . " Kitty Kat " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B song whose lyrics detail a situation where a woman feels that her man has underestimated her . The song was generally well received by music critics who noted it to be a seductive track thanks to its " I 'm not feelin [ g ] it " vibe . However , some music critics felt that the production does not live up to those of other songs featured on B 'Day . 
 " Kitty Kat " was never released as a single but it garnered airplay on R & B stations , thus managing to chart on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , where it reached a high point of number sixty @-@ six in May 2007 . The accompanying music video for the song was directed by Melina Matsoukas and co @-@ directed by Knowles for the B 'Day Anthology Video Album ( 2007 ) . It is only one @-@ minute long and it serves as the introduction of the music video for " Green Light " ( 2007 ) . The video for " Kitty Kat " features Knowles showing cat @-@ like eyes with leopard print make @-@ up and fashion on . In some parts of the clip , Knowles rides on an oversized black cat . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Kitty Kat " was conceived partly at the Sony Music Studios , in New York City and the Record Plant Studios , in Los Angeles . It sees songwriting duties by Knowles , Pharrell Williams , Makeba Riddick as well as Shawn Carter , and utilizes production from The Neptunes , compromising of Williams and Chad Hugo . The latter also produced the song " Green Light " ( 2006 ) . Jason Goldstein mixed " Kitty Kat " with assistance from Steve Tolle . Concerning the song , Knowles told MTV : " [ Kitty Kat ] is [ a ] very sexy [ song ] , talking about a man who is out with friends all night and you 're left at home . And you are like , ' No more of this . It 's time to go . ' " The song appeared online through the website of Rap @-@ Up magazine on August 23 , 2006 , prior to the release of B 'Day . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , " Kitty Kat " is a smooth R & B song with hip hop influences pacing in common time . The nearly four @-@ minute long track is written in the key of D major . The song features a moderately slow groove of 78 beats per minute , with Knowles ' vocals range spanning from the note of G ♯ 3 to C5 . Spence D of IGN Music noted that the beat is down @-@ tempo and this goes in contrast with the previous works of The Neptunes , who usually favors electro clash amplification . Jim DeRogatis of Chicago Sun @-@ Times noted that the song is similar to " Whitney Houston balladry " while Andy Kellman of Allmusic commented that it could have been pulled from one of the first three albums of the American musical artist , Kelis . " 
 In the song , the female protagonist feels that her love interest has underestimated her . This is demonstrated in the opening lines : " You know I hate <unk> [ g ] alone , but you said that you will soon be home . But baby , that was a long time ago . " As the song progresses , she also wonders : " What about my body , body ? / You don ’ t want my body , body . " According to Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine , the female protagonist " literally packs up her pussy " and leaves the man who no longer seems interested in her , shown in the chorus lines : " Let 's go , little kitty kat / I think it 's time to go / He don 't want you anymore . " Similarly , <unk> B. Selah of The Village Voice noted that " Kitty Kat " was a threat for " jetting " and John Boone of E ! Online commented that it was about Knowles ' sex organ . Eb Haynes of AllHipHop commented that " Kitty Kat " warns all restless boys that they too , become restless . Elysa Gardner of USA Today commented that the lyrics of the song include raw feelings for an unfaithful lover which are sung with " sass " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Kitty Kat " received generally favorable reviews from critics . Eb Haynes of AllHipHop described " Kitty Kat " as a seductive track . Norman Mayers of Prefix Magazine wrote that B 'Day is packed with standouts such as " the Rich Harrison @-@ produced ' Freakum Dress ' and the Neptunes @-@ helmed ' Kitty Kat ' . " Picking out " Kitty Kat " as one of the four top tracks of the album , Spence D of IGN Music added that the song slows things down , allowing for Knowles ' " crystal clear vocals to take some down time and relinquish up a dreamy , creamy sound that is playfully sensuous . " Andy Kellman of Allmusic described " Kitty Kat " as " a deceptively sweet , rainbow @-@ colored track " where purrs - that are sound made by all species of felids and are a part of cat communication - are more like " claws @-@ out dismissals . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times called the song a " cooing [ and ] sighing " one . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine noted that " Kitty Kat " was " the only mid @-@ tempo break " until the very end of the album . Darryl Sterdan , writing for the Canadian website Jam ! , said that the song is just about what you think . Thomas Inskeep of Stylus Magazine commented that " Kitty Kat " seems to be an obvious tracks produced by The Neptunes . He went on complimenting " the squishy R & B keyboard which works well with the song ’ s ' I ’ m not feelin [ g ] it ' vibe . " A writer of Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer commented , " Beyoncé is better at being sexy than sarcastic , and ' Kitty Kat ' doesn 't make any bones about what her absentee lover is missing . " Michael Roberts of New Times Broward @-@ Palm Beach commented that Knowles " purrs at lower speed " in the song . 
 Phil Harrison of Time Out said that " Kitty Kat " feels " slightly anodyne despite its sweetly vicious climax . " Gail Mitchell of Billboard magazine described it as " slick , [ and ] wicked " . Mike Joseph of PopMatters was much less impressed , giving the song a negative review : " The dreary ' Kitty Kat ' is a waste of four minutes of my time . Pharrell Williams , who produced this song , needs to be told that his glory days are two years behind him if not more . " This was somehow echoed by Dave de Sylvi of Sputnikmusic who wrote : " Pharrell 's other contribution to the album is the regrettably plain ' Kitty Kat , ' a slower track that gives further credence to the view that he cannot cope when thrust outside his comfort zone . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Kitty Kat " was directed by Melina Matsoukas and co @-@ directed by Knowles for the B 'Day Anthology Video Album , which was released the same month . It was the first video of the eight videos shot in two weeks for the album . The music video for " Kitty Kat " is only one @-@ minute long and it serves as the introduction for the music video of " Green Light " . On the other hand , Matsoukas said that the half @-@ day shoot for " Kitty Kat " , by comparison , " was a breeze . " Elaborating on the conception of the video , Knowles said : " We had the oversized kitty cat [ in the video ] , which was so cute ! I had to pretend it was there , because I was really in front of the green screen — I 'd be on a big giant wooden cow and they superimposed a kitten . And we used leopard @-@ print makeup and the catsuit and the nails to make me more like a cat . I really am a cat person " . 
 Matsoukas told that getting the cats to cooperate was a difficult step . She told MTV : " They were definitely the most diva out of anybody . Those cats were mad . We had animal trainers , but you really can 't train a cat . " To get the effect of Knowles riding the cat , Matsoukas used a large plastic cow covered in a black fur drape for Knowles to perform on . The video was originally going to be its own music video as seen in the behind the scenes of B 'Day Anthology with Knowles wearing more outfits and shooting more scenes than shown . It begins with Knowles showing cat @-@ like eyes with leopard print make @-@ up and fashion on . In some parts of the clip , Knowles plays with an oversized ball of pink yarn and later plays with an oversized black cat . The clip ends with Knowles pulling the oversized cat on a gold chain off set and just immediately after that , the music video for " Green Light " begins . <unk> Guha of BlackBook magazine described the video as " deplorable " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine described the video for " Kitty Kat " as " pure camp " . In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the video at number five on their list of Knowles ' ten best music videos , writing " It 's Beyoncé running <unk> with a giant cat ! And then riding it ! What more could you want from a music video ? ! " . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Beyoncé performed " Kitty Kat " for the first time a capella on The Formation World Tour in Houston on May 7 , 2016 , almost ten years after the song was released . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Kitty Kat " debuted at number sixty @-@ nine on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart dated May 5 , 2007 . The next week , it ascended to number sixty @-@ six , a position which became its peak . The song stayed on the chart for eight weeks , including one re @-@ entry in July 2007 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from B 'Day liner notes . 
 Vocals : Beyoncé Knowles 
 Writing : Beyoncé Knowles , Shawn Carter , Pharrell Williams , Riddick 
 Producing : Pharrell Williams , Chad Hugo , Beyoncé Knowles 
 Recording : Jim Caruana , Geoff Rice ( Sony Music Studios , New York City ) , assisted by Rob Kinelski and Andrew Coleman ( The Record Plant Studios , Los Angeles ) 
 Mixing : Jason Goldstein ( Sony Music Studios , New York City ) , assisted by Steve Tolle 
 = Practice Date = 
 " Practice Date " is the fourth episode of the second season of Parks and Recreation , and the tenth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 8 , 2009 . In the episode , Ann takes Leslie to dinner to help prepare for her first date , while the rest of the parks department tries to learn secrets about each other as part of a game . 
 The episode was written by Harris Wittels and directed by Alex Hardcastle . It featured stand @-@ up comedian Louis C.K. in his third guest appearance as Dave Sanderson , a Pawnee police officer who develops a romantic interest in Leslie . The episode also featured a fictional sex scandal mirroring the real @-@ life 2009 scandal of South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford . 
 " Practice Date " was the first episode to establish the personality of Jerry as the co @-@ worker everyone else in the office picks on , and marked the first of several appearances by Jay Jackson as news reporter Perd Hapley . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 4 @.@ 97 million household viewers , an improvement over the previous week 's episode , " Beauty Pageant " . " Practice Date " received generally positive reviews , with several commentators praising it for fleshing out the characters of Ron and Tom . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) and the rest of the Parks department watching media coverage of Pawnee Councilman Bill Dexhart ( Kevin Symons ) , a married man , admitting to having four @-@ way sex in a Brazilian cave while pretending to be " building houses for the underprivileged " . He tries to justify it by saying that it was his birthday on the day of the foursome , and that he " ... really wanted to do it . " Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) insists nobody could find any scandalous information about him , prompting the parks department employees to start a game to see who can get the most dirt on each other . Meanwhile , Leslie tells Ann ( Rashida Jones ) she is nervous about her first date with Pawnee police officer Dave Sanderson ( Louis C.K. ) . Ann offers to take Leslie on a practice date to help Leslie prepare for the real date . During the practice date , Ann realizes that Leslie has a serious problem : Leslie brought note cards with " topics of conversation " and engages in fake @-@ sounding " practice laughing . " 
 Ann decides to use exposure therapy on Leslie to help her deal with the worst @-@ case date scenario . She acts very mean to Leslie , who is initially horrified , but she eventually stands up to Ann . When Ann tells her she is now ready for anything , Leslie feels cheered up and very confident . They go to a bar later to celebrate , where Leslie gets very drunk . After leaving Ann , she visits Dave 's house to tell him that she was nervous about their upcoming date , but now realizes he is lucky to have her because of how " awesome " she is . A seemingly annoyed Dave brings Leslie home . The next day , Leslie feels horrible for ruining her chances with Dave . He arrives at her office later and she starts to apologize , but he says she can make it up to them on their second date , thereby reassuring her the first date is already over . Leslie once again feels cheered up . 
 Meanwhile , during the office game , Mark ( Paul Schneider ) announces Jerry 's ( Jim O 'Heir ) adoptive mother was arrested for marijuana possession . A distraught Jerry said he did not know he was adopted , making Mark feel terribly guilty . Later , Ron ( Nick Offerman ) declares himself the winner when he tells Tom he knows Tom 's marriage to Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) is a green card marriage to prevent her from being deported to Canada . A desperate Tom turns to Mark for help in finding dirt on Ron , and Mark suggests Tom visit an out @-@ of @-@ town bar and speak to Ron 's old friend Duke Silver . Tom visits the bar and learns Duke Silver is actually the alter ego of Ron himself , who secretly plays saxophone in a jazz club . Tom confronts Ron , who immediately calls a truce to the game to prevent his secret from getting out ( in the Pilot episode , Mark " cashes in " a favor Ron owes him , probably that ) . After watching more footage of Dexhart , Mark decides he wants Ann to learn all his own dark secrets from him . He visits her late at night and tells him about an affair he had with a married woman at age 16 , among other secrets . Although initially confused , Ann is ultimately flattered by the gesture . April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , disappointed nobody found dirt on her , announces she drove a lawnmower through a Nordstrom department store . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Practice Date " was written by Harris Wittels and directed by Alex Hardcastle . The episode featured stand @-@ up comedian Louis C.K. in his third guest performance as Dave Sanderson , a Pawnee police officer romantically involved with Leslie . Kevin Symons also appeared as Pawnee Councilman Bill Dexhart . The sex scandal involving Dexhart mirrored the real @-@ life 2009 scandal of South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford , who publicly admitted to a long @-@ time extramarital affair with an Argentinian woman . 
 Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Michael Schur conceived the idea for Ron Swanson 's jazz musician alter ego before they learned Nick Offerman actually played the saxophone in real life , and had for his entire life . Offerman praised the decision : " When he came to me and said , ' You 're going to have an alter ego who plays jazz saxophone , ' I go , ' How do you see inside me ? ' " After the episode broadcast , NBC created an official " Duke Silver " website , which included a biography , discography , reviews , gallery , tour schedule and booking information for the fictional band . 
 " Practice Date " marked a turning point for the character Jerry . Prior to the episode , Jerry had appeared in every episode , but his personality had not yet been developed . Schur said the Parks and Recreation staff liked Jim O 'Heir , so they cast him in the show and " figured we 'd work it out later " . After the scene when Mark inadvertently reveals Jerry was adopted , the writers built upon that joke and established Jerry as the co @-@ worker the rest of the department picks on . Schur said after " Practice Date " , " We realized that 's who he is : He 's the guy who wants to put his head down and get his pension , but is asking for it all the time . In the next three scripts , it was like throwing chum into the water . Every script after that had 15 slams on Jerry . " Practice Date " marked the first of several appearances by Jay Jackson as Pawnee news reporter Perd Hapley . The character was only originally intended for one appearance , but Schur said the staff enjoyed his performance so much that they made him a recurring character . 
 Within a week of the episode 's original broadcast , three deleted scenes from " Practice Date " were made available on the official Parks and Recreation website . The first clip features approximately two minutes of extended scenes , including Leslie talking about her anxiety about the date , Ann offering her advice , a drunk Leslie complaining about the heat in Dave 's apartment , which he secretly tells the camera is " freezing cold right now " . The second 75 @-@ second clip features more of Pawnee City Councilman Bill Dexhart 's press conference about the sex scandal . Dexhart refuses to promise he will not continue his transgressions , which he insists is a sign he is no longer lying to Pawnee residents . Reporters also discuss Dexhart 's credit card bills , which include purchases Dong @-@ O @-@ Rama Sex Toy Company , <unk> Doctors and a product called " vibrating raisins " . In the third 75 @-@ second clip , Ron discusses in detail his " scientifically perfect ten @-@ point scale of human beauty " , the criteria for which he admits is " extremely misogynistic " . It also included more footage of Ron 's Duke Silver persona , along with interviews by older women who fantasize about him . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Leslie worries she will bring up the genocide in the Sudanese country Darfur too much , or not enough , during her first date with Dave . While describing his scale of the attractiveness of women , Ron says tennis star Steffi Graf is a " perfect ten " . Ron believes Tom is wearing the robes of the Taliban , a Sunni Islamist political movement , in a photo he finds for the contest . The photo is actually of Tom wearing a Halloween costume of a Jedi from the Star Wars universe . Tom learns one African American co @-@ worker donated money to David Duke , a white nationalist involved in the Ku Klux Klan , because " he promised to lower taxes " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on October 8 , 2009 , " Practice Date " was seen by 4 @.@ 97 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . The episode received a 2 @.@ 2 rating / 6 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . It was an improvement over the previous two episodes , which drew 4 @.@ 22 million household viewers and 4 @.@ 63 million household viewers , respectively . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews , with several commentators praising it for fleshing out more information about the supporting cast , such at Ron 's jazz singer persona and the back story behind Tom 's marriage and chronic flirting . In an article reflecting on the show 's second season , Slate magazine writer Jonah Weiner dubbed " Practice Date " the episode in which Parks and Recreation " truly hit its stride " . In particular , he called the background @-@ check game " a funny , economical way to bring them more vividly to life " , and said the green card marriage subplot " at once punctured ( Tom 's ) slimy façade and deepened our sympathies for him " . Entertainment Weekly writer Henning Fog called " Practice Date " " the most satisfying comedy of the week " , even compared to the wedding of Jim and Pam on The Office and a Seinfeld reunion on Curb Your Enthusiasm . Fog said the episode " managed to be sweet and sharp and absolutely hilarious " at once , and praised Poehler 's improvising and Ron 's jazz singer persona , but he said Mark 's appearance at Ann 's house to confess his life 's sins was the episode 's " weak spot " . 
 Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said the episode was " completely satisfying - funny when it needed to be , sweet when it wanted to be " . Sepinwall said Jones was particularly funny during the fake date , as well as the " constant one @-@ <unk> " between Ron and Tom . Matt Fowler of IGN said the episode had a " winning formula " . He particularly praised Jones during the practice date , as well as Jerry 's role during the contest , which Fowler said was a good way to allow the supporting cast to work together . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club said it seemed like the episode " took everything they were warming up to over the last few weeks , and hit them hard " . Heisler particularly praised Poehler 's performance , as well as the interactions between Ron and Tom . In contrast , however , A.V. Club writer Leonard Pierce said " Practice Date " " was the first time all year I felt like P & R wasn 't firing on all cylinders " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Practice Date " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = Lady of the Forest = 
 Lady of the Forest : A Novel of Sherwood is a 1992 historical fiction novel by American author Jennifer Roberson . A re @-@ telling of the Robin Hood legend from the perspective of twelve characters associated with the legend , the story centers around English noblewoman Lady Marian FitzWalter 's encounters with Lord Robert of Locksley and his scheming rival the Sheriff of Nottingham amid the backdrop of Prince John 's schemes – he aims to increase his own wealth and power at the expense of post @-@ Conquest England and his brother , King Richard . 
 Roberson wrote her novel as a prequel to the known legend . Understanding that Robin Hood lacked a single origin story , she decided to create an original narrative that depicted how " seven very different people from a rigidly stratified social structure came to join together to fight the inequities of medieval England . " Roberson spent a year researching and writing the story , and sought to combine fact and legend in developing the motivations for certain characters . 
 The novel was published in September 1992 by Zebra Books , with a cover designed by illustrator Anne Yvonne Gilbert . Lady of the Forest received generally positive reviews , and has been analyzed by Robin Hood scholar Stephen Thomas Knight , who observed that Roberson 's Marian is a " strong woman " who helps Robert , a traumatized veteran of the Crusades , adjust to his life in England ; Knight connects this to the " post @-@ Vietnam " mood that existed when the novel was written . Roberson released a sequel , Lady of Sherwood , in 1999 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The story begins in the spring of 1194 in the English county of Nottinghamshire . Lady Marian FitzWalter attends a festival held at Huntington Castle by the Earl of Huntington , who wishes to honour the return of his only surviving heir , Lord Robert of Locksley , from the Crusades . Marian seeks an audience with Robert to learn the manner of her father , Sir Hugh 's , death the previous year , as Robert was a witness . The reserved , mentally scarred Robert reacts strongly , having flashbacks to Sir Hugh 's violent murder at the hands of Saracens . He informs her that Hugh wished for Marian to marry William DeLacey , the harsh and scheming Sheriff of Nottingham , to her dismay . DeLacey knows naught of this , but intends to make her marry him anyway . 
 Prince John arrives unexpectedly with plans : he states his wish to ally himself with the Earl by marrying Robert to his bastard daughter Joanna , and also approaches DeLacey about raising more taxes ostensibly to be sent to ransom John 's brother , King Richard . In truth , John wishes to keep the revenue for himself and maintain his brother 's imprisonment . Soon after , Marian is reluctantly manipulated into accompanying the Sheriff to attend a market at Nottingham Castle . There , she is kidnapped by the prisoner William " Scarlet " <unk> , an enraged man imprisoned for killing four Norman soldiers , and is taken into the depths of nearby Sherwood Forest . Lord Robert , who was taught how to navigate the massive forest as a youth , secretly tracks Scarlet and is able to secure Marian 's release . While accompanying Marian back to her modest manor – <unk> – Robert falls ill from a fever . Marian gradually wears down the mental wall he had built up in captivity by the Saracens , and after his recovery at <unk> , they consummate their relationship soon after she refuses DeLacey 's offer of marriage . 
 Robert returns to Huntington , along the way besting outlaws such as Adam Bell and Will Scarlet at a contest of archery . He encounters his father and several other prominent noblemen , and is told they wish for him to marry Joanna to mislead Prince John about their intentions to thwart his grabs for power . Robert refuses . Meanwhile , Marian barely avoids being forced to marry DeLacey , and only escapes with the help of the kind Friar Tuck and the Sheriff 's seneschal Guy de Gisbourne , who is infatuated with her . She flees to Huntington Castle ; the Earl is displeased with his son 's disobedience and their liaison , causing Marian and Robert to travel to the small village of Locksley , his namesake and holding . 
 Robert endeavours to steal the funds needed for King Richard 's ransom , and begins robbing the rich with the help of Sherwood 's outlaws , whom he has gradually befriended . At the same time , Eleanor of Aquitaine , Richard 's mother , is working to raise the ransom through more legal methods : by taxing clergy and laymen for a quarter of the value of their property , confiscating the gold and silver treasures of the churches , and imposing scutage and carucage taxes . Back in the small village of Locksley , Marian is captured and sent to the Sheriff 's dungeon , where she is given an ultimatum : marry DeLacey or find herself charged with witchcraft . She is rescued by Robert , who arrives with his friends to free her . Just as they are about to be arrested by a wrathful Prince John , whose money has been stolen by the outlaws , King Richard arrives unexpectedly , allowing Robert and his associates to escape . 
 = = Development = = 
 American author Jennifer Roberson was known for writing fantasy novels before she moved into historical fiction , a genre new to her . She noted , " One thing I 'd always wanted to try – another ‘ someday ’ dream – was a big , sprawling , mainstream historical epic . " She proposed to her literary agent that she write a reinterpretation of the Robin Hood legend from the perspective of Maid Marian . Roberson understood that her rendition was not a " recounting " of the original story , because " there is none " ; rather , Lady of the Forest was " purely [ her ] own concoction . " Describing the novel as a prequel , the author explained , " I wanted very much to write the story of how the legend came to be ; the tale of how seven very different people from a rigidly stratified social structure came to join together to fight the inequities of medieval England . To me , the key was logic — I <unk> historical fact with the fantasy of the classic legend , and developed my own interpretation of how things came to be . I wanted to come to know all of these people ; to climb inside their heads and learn what motivated them to do what they did . " 
 It took Roberson a year to research and write the novel . She credited as resource materials J. C. Holt 's Robin Hood , Maurice Keen 's The Outlaws of Sherwood , The Ballads of Robin Hood , Elizabeth Hallam 's The Plantagenet Chronicles , W. L. Warren 's King John , as well as the works of Frances and Joseph Gies . In a 2007 interview , Roberson stated that writing the story was " extremely challenging " because she employs the viewpoints of twelve main characters – Marian , Lord Robert , DeLacey , Sir Guy de Gisbourne , the Earl of Huntington , Eleanor DeLacey ( the Sheriff 's plain , scheming daughter ) , Friar Tuck , Will Scarlet , the minstrel Alan of the Dales ( whom becomes an outlaw after being falsely accused of rape ) , the simple boy Much , the moneylender Abraham the Jew ( who Robert uses to raise money for the ransom ) , and the shepherd turned reluctant outlaw Little John . Roberson believed that this experience made her a better writer . 
 Roberson has spoken of the difficulties of writing medieval women , particularly because so many contemporary authors are accused of giving their characters " anachronistic independence of thought and feminist leanings . " The author acknowledged that with Eleanor DeLacey , an invented character , she " tread [ s ] close to the boundaries " but believes Eleanor is a reflection of women of " loose morals " , who indeed existed in the 1190s . Roberson continued , " I choose to believe an Eleanor might well have looked to sexual dalliance as a means of seeking freedom of choice in an age when women had very little . " Conversely , Marian , Roberson wrote , " is a truer product of her times , shaped by the ordinary responsibilities and expectations of a medieval woman . " Marian only gains the strength and freedom to love after the loss of her good reputation as a captive in Sherwood Forest . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Stephen Thomas Knight , a scholar on Robin Hood , has written extensively on Roberson 's " interesting " perspective of the legend . According to him , Lady of the Forest was another in a long line of contemporary stories that has elevated Marian to " hero status " . He connects this to a corresponding " weakening " of Robin in Roberson 's story , noting that there is a relationship between the novel 's " post @-@ Vietnam " date and its story , with Robin rendered as a " <unk> veteran returning from the Crusades " in a " traumatized state . " Knight continues that " it is evident that Roberson is using the post @-@ Vietnam mood as the basis for her weakening of Robin to permit a ' strong woman ' presentation of Marion . " Roberson 's Marian is made " an independent and intelligent woman who helps Lord Robin , traumatised by the crusades , re @-@ establish himself both as a man and a leader of resistance . " 
 In an article published in the Journal of Gender Studies , Jane Tolmie stated that Lady of the Forest was another in a long line of contemporary fantasy novels that depicted women having to endure acts of rape , violence , and oppression as " aspects of a continuum rather than as isolated difficulties " – Marian for instance is subjected to abductions and attempted forced marriage . Tolmie added that in the context of Roberson 's book , Marian is praised as " extraordinary " only within the " oppressive , gender @-@ based " criteria promoted by the patriarchal Norman society . After Marian wields a quarterstaff to attack another , Robert compares the lady to a man , namely her father – both " had met adversity with the same determination , the same intensity . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Lady of the Forest was published in September 1992 by New York City @-@ based Zebra Books , with cover art by Yvonne Gilbert . A Japanese translation was released in 1994 , while a German edition was published in 2003 . Roberson stated in a March 2007 interview that " various options " had been taken for adapting the book but added that this was true of many other works . In 1999 , she followed the novel with the sequel Lady of Sherwood , which depicts the effects of King Richard 's death : the outlaws are persecuted anew by the Sheriff , while the Earl works against John in favor of Arthur of Brittany . 
 Lady of the Forest has received generally positive reviews , with Stephen Knight deeming it a " highly effective novel . " The Library Journal lauded Roberson for thoroughly researching the story and yet not overwhelming readers with facts , and predicted the book would be popular in the wake of the 1991 feature film Robin Hood : Prince of Thieves . The Journal continued that the author 's " personal touches create a delightful historical novel with traditional romantic overtones . The writing is so colorful and active that it is difficult to put the book down . " 
 Publishers Weekly praised the novel for its " lively storytelling and pacing " , which helped make it " an enjoyable , almost creditable recasting of the Robin Hood legend as historical fiction . " The book 's romance , the reviewer added , " works beautifully , capturing in the tale of Robin and Marian the terrifying bliss of first love . A diverting , delightful book from a most promising talent . " However , Publishers Weekly included some criticisms , opining that Robert of Locksley and Marian " are unlikely to have been as naive as Roberson depicts them . " 
 = RAF Coastal Command = 
 RAF Coastal Command was a formation within the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . Founded in 1936 , it was the RAF 's only maritime arm , as the Fleet Air Arm was transferred to the Royal Navy in 1937 . Naval aviation had been neglected in the inter @-@ war period , due to the RAF having control of the aircraft flying from Royal Navy carriers . As a consequence Coastal Command did not receive the resources it needed to develop properly or efficiently . This continued until the outbreak of the Second World War , during which it came to prominence . But owing to the Air Ministry 's concentration on RAF Fighter Command and RAF Bomber Command , Coastal Command was often referred to as the " Cinderella Service " , a phrase first used by the First Lord of the Admiralty at the time A V Alexander . 
 Coastal Commands 's primary task became the protection of Allied convoys from attacks by the German Kriegsmarine 's U @-@ boats , groups of which were known as " wolfpacks " . It also protected Allied shipping from aerial attacks by the Luftwaffe . The main operations of Coastal Command were defensive , defending supply lines in the various theatres of war , most notably the [ Mediterranean , Middle East and African , and the battle of the Atlantic . It also had an offensive capacity . In the Mediterranean theatre and the Baltic sea it attacked German shipping carrying war materials from Italy to North Africa and from Scandinavia to Germany . By 1943 Coastal Command finally received sufficient Very Long Range [ <unk> ] aircraft it needed and its operations proved decisive in the victory over the U @-@ boats . These aircraft were Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberators and , from early 1943 , these , and other Coastal Command aircraft , were fitted with Mark III ASV [ air @-@ to @-@ surface vessel ] centimetric radar , the latest depth charges , including homing torpedoes , officially classed as Mark 24 mines [ nicknamed ' Wandering Annie ' or ' Wandering Willie ' ] and even rockets . 
 The Command saw action from the first day of hostilities until the last day of the Second World War . It completed one million flying hours , 240 @,@ 000 operations and destroyed 212 U @-@ boats . Coastal Command 's casualties amounted to 2 @,@ 060 aircraft to all causes . From 1940 to 1945 Coastal Command sank 366 German transport vessels and damaged 134 . The total tonnage sunk was 512 @,@ 330 tons and another 513 @,@ 454 tons damaged . 10 @,@ 663 persons were rescued by the Command , comprising 5 @,@ 721 Allied crew members , 277 enemy personnel , and 4 @,@ 665 non @-@ aircrews . 5 @,@ 866 Coastal Command personnel were killed in action . 
 After the war , the Command continued Anti @-@ Submarine Warfare duties during the Cold War , to combat the threat posed by the Soviet Navy and other fleets of the Warsaw Pact . It ceased to exist in 1969 when it was subsumed into the newly formed Strike Command , which had also absorbed the former Bomber , Fighter and Signals Commands and later also absorbed Air Support Command , the former Transport Command . 
 = = Formation and neglect = = 
 In 1936 , almost 18 years after the end of the First World War , there was a major change in the command structure of the RAF . Several Expansion Schemes were heading at such pace to re @-@ arm the British military in face of the Nazi threat that " Area " formations were now to be called " Commands " . Fighter and Bomber Areas became Fighter and Bomber Commands and Coastal Area was renamed Coastal Command . Its Headquarters was located at Lee @-@ on @-@ Solent . Air Marshal Sir Arthur Longmore , AOC RAF Coastal Area oversaw the renaming and handed over command to Air Marshal Philip Joubert de la Ferté on 24 August 1936 . 
 In March 1935 the threat from Nazi Germany prompted a series of expansion schemes which pushed the number of squadrons up to 163 ( as per Expansion Scheme M , the last before the outbreak of war ) and the number of aircraft to 2 @,@ 549 . But it was never fully implemented , and Scheme F , 124 Squadrons and 1 @,@ 736 aircraft , was the only scheme that ran its full course . It did produce modern aircraft and it made adequate provision for reserves ( 75 percent ) , but again , the bomber forces received no less than 50 percent which averaged 57 percent over all schemes . Maritime air units never made up more than 12 per cent of British air strength . From a pre @-@ expansion strength of just five squadrons , four of which were flying boats , the figure of maritime squadrons rose to 18 by September 1939 , with a strength of just 176 aircraft . Some 16 of these were allocated to trade defence , but given Trenchard 's policy ( which was still in place after his retirement ) of developing bombers for the maritime arm which could bolster the air offensive , most were not specialised ASW aircraft , and the Air Ministry was thoroughly uninterested in any aircraft which fell outside the bomber function . 
 De la Ferté was highly critical of the Air Ministry 's attitude to his service . In 1937 several exercises were carried out by Coastal Command in co @-@ operation with submarines against the Home Fleet to judge the surface fleet 's defence against submarine and air attack . However , despite the experiences of the First World War , no attention was paid to the problem of attacking submarines from the air as part of trade protection measures . Owing to the imperfect ASDIC invention , it appeared the Royal Navy no longer considered U @-@ boats were a threat to Britain 's sea lanes . The Air Ministry , keen to concentrate on strategic air forces , did not dispute the Admiralty 's conclusions and Coastal Command did not receive any guidance from the Air Ministry . The saving grace for both services was the construction of the Combined Headquarters which enabled rapid collaboration in maritime operations . This was one of the few successes in organisation and preparation made before the outbreak of war . 
 When the review of the role Coastal Command was to play in war was assessed in 1937 , the then AOC Sir Frederick Bowhill was informed by his Senior Air Staff Officer Air Commodore Geoffrey Bromet that the other two commands ( Bomber and Fighter ) had clear mission objectives while Coastal Command had been given no clear mandate . It was assumed that Coastal Command was to keep sea communications open for merchant shipping and prevent seaborne raids on British coastlines and ports . No mention of U @-@ boats was made by either man . Both assumed aircraft and surface raiders presented the greater threat in British waters . Thus they followed the Admiralty line that U @-@ boats were no longer a danger . When Admiral Sir Dudley Pound enquired about aerial assets in trade and commerce defence , Chief of the Air Staff Cyril Newall , 1st Baron Newall , replied that there was not enough " jam " [ resources ] to go around and stated it was more advisable to risk losses on trade routes than weaken the RAF 's ability to protect Britain from air attack and bomb its enemies . 
 In March 1937 , the then Director of Operations Group Captain Robert <unk> , complained that the role for Coastal Command in war , namely supporting the bomber offensive , and second , the support of naval forces along the British coastline , were too limited and was in danger of diverting the Command from its main concern : ASW . In October the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff ( DCAS ) Air Vice Marshal Richard Peirse confirmed that there was no formal role for the service or location of its units . Peirse did reverse the decision to have strategic bombing support as the primary function . This was changed to trade defence . Coastal Command was only to be used for other purposes if trade routes were suffering little interference and the intensity of air attack on Britain , or air attacks on enemy targets , required all available air units for those purposes . However , in December 1937 , the Naval and Air Staffs met again and changed the priority to North Sea reconnaissance . The Naval Staff insisted that commerce raiders presented the greatest danger , and aircraft could prove decisive only in locating enemy warships . ASW remained in third place , behind direct co @-@ operation with surface fleets . In December 1938 , this was changed again , and ASW moved up to second priority . In August 1939 it was moved to first priority . When Coastal Command went to war , its first task was to co @-@ operate with the Navy to prevent enemy vessels from escaping into the North Sea and Atlantic Oceans . Secondly , it was to provide ASW support where and when it could . These steps are significant as the language indicates a change from passive reconnaissance of enemy warships and submarines to an active directive which involved the attack of the vessels by Coastal Command aircraft . 
 Since the late 1920s the tension between the air and naval services had declined . It arose briefly again in 1937 when the question of the FAA operational control arose . On this occasion the British Government sided with the Admiralty . Despite a spirited defence of its asset , once the Minister for Coordination of Defence , Sir Thomas Inskip had decided to transfer the arm , the Air Ministry was content to let the matter rest . Any threat to the Air Ministry 's existence had long since passed ; budgetary constraint , and the reluctance to engage in another battle which would waste resources were also factors in the Air Ministry 's decision not to contest the issue further . However , inter @-@ service squabbling assured maritime aviation 's stagnation , especially in shore @-@ based elements . Virtually no co @-@ operation existed in the area of research and development . In the case of Coastal Command , it continued to come third in the Air Ministry 's list of priorities , after Fighter and Bomber Commands , well into the late 1930s . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Early war = = = 
 From its formation in 1936 Coastal Command did not receive the support it required to be an effective naval air service . In September 1939 Nazi Germany invaded Poland beginning the war in Europe . The Command 's position was comfortable for the first nine months of the war , the period known as the Phoney War . German submarines were not able to reach the Atlantic unless they undertook a dangerous transit journey through the North Sea and around Britain 's northern waters , or through the English Channel , which was guarded by the Royal and French Navies . The powerful French Navy was responsible for covering half of the Atlantic shipping routes , and thus contributed half of the Allied forces available . 
 However , the events of April to June 1940 overturned the balance of naval and air power , as the Germans conquered Denmark , Norway , The Netherlands , Belgium and France . The occupation of these countries permitted the Luftwaffe and Kriegsmarine to operate from French ports on the Atlantic coast , hundreds of miles closer to the Atlantic shipping lanes . German medium bombers could also now reach British ports on the country 's westernmost and northernmost coasts . The advantage now enjoyed by the Germans allowed them to interdict merchant shipping supplying food and war materials to Britain much more effectively which had the potential to starve Britain . While merchant shipping was suffering these losses , Coastal Command had proven ineffective at countering German air and sea attacks on shipping . In particular , it was ineffective at protecting English Channel convoys , which were forced to abandon operations for a few months , starting in July 1940 . RAF Fighter Command was given the task as it enjoyed the majority of RAF resources at the time . The objectives of strategic air attack and defence predominated in the RAF , despite the warning signs from 1914 to 1918 , that U @-@ boats would become a serious threat again , and the experience that aircraft were a suitable counter to their operations . As a result , Coastal Command became the " Cinderella service " until 1943 . 
 The situation would not improve until 1942 . In the meantime , however , Coastal Command did operate with effect alongside RAF Bomber Command in disrupting enemy shipping during the Battle of Britain in 1940 . Coastal Command attacked shipping and mined waters around invasion ports . The German invasion of Britain in 1940 , Operation Sea Lion , was eventually cancelled owing to the German defeat in the Battle of Britain . 
 During the first three years of the Second World War , Coastal Command and the Admiralty fought a continuous battle with the RAF and Air Ministry over the primacy of trade defence in relation to the bomber effort against mainland Germany , a strategic tussle which conceivably could have cost the Western Alliance the Battle of the Atlantic . The Air Staff and Bomber Command enjoyed the backing of Churchill and the maritime air effort struggled to receive the recognition it needed . On the outbreak of war , the order of battle listed just 298 aircraft , of which only 171 were operational . On 15 February 1941 Coastal Command was placed under the operational control of the Admiralty . Instrumental in improving the strike rate against submarines was scientific advisor and assistant director of research E. J. Williams , who applied scientific analysis to the logistical problems to great effect and was present at some meetings of the Cabinet Anti @-@ U @-@ boat Committee at 10 Downing Street under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister . 
 Owing to the starvation of resources , even as late as March 1943 the Atlantic supply lines were being threatened . This situation arose as a direct result of the lack of very long @-@ range aircraft . Despite the enormous losses of the disastrous 1940 – 1942 period , known to the Germans as the " First " and " Second Happy Time " , the Air Ministry refused to invest in trade defence . Further delays in resource procurement might have led to German success , which could have defeated Britain and forced it out of the war , or at least caused a postponement of Operation <unk> , the Allied landings in French North @-@ West Africa and [ Operation <unk> ] , the landing in France , in 1942 and 1944 respectively . Other research indicates that losses unquestionably affected the build @-@ up for Operation <unk> , the naval phase of the landings in Europe . 
 = = = Mid and later war = = = 
 Eventually the Command was given the investment it needed . Radar and long @-@ range aircraft enabled the Command to hunt down and destroy U @-@ boats with growing efficiency . German submarines had been sinking a large number of Allied ships in the Atlantic Gap , which was a stretch of water in the central Atlantic beyond the range of most Allied aircraft . The covering of the gap by long @-@ range aircraft equipped with radar helped reduce the effectiveness of U @-@ boats . In May 1943 the campaign reached a peak , when a large number of U @-@ boats were sunk with little loss to Allied shipping . During this time Coastal Command gained the initiative . It was known by the Germans as Black May . Thereafter the suppression of German submarines was effective not only in the Atlantic , but also in their transit routes through the Bay of Biscay in 1942 , 1943 and 1944 . In June 1944 the Normandy landings and subsequent Operation <unk> liberated France and cost the Germans their air and submarine bases , won in 1940 . The U @-@ boats were thus forced to relocate to Norway and Germany in August , restoring many of the difficulties faced by the Kriegsmarine in 1939 and early 1940 . The entire strategic position , which had been the foundation of the U @-@ boat war since June 1940 had been undermined . 
 In the last three years of the war , Coastal Command sank more U @-@ boats than any other service and continued to hold the technological advantage from 1943 onwards . A brief threat , in the shape of the German Type XXI submarine emerged , but was too late to alter the course of events . In any event the technological answers to the Type XXI were already available in the form of 3 @-@ centimetre radar and magnetic anomaly detectors in aircraft . It was not until midnight on 4 June 1945 that official wartime operations ceased . The last mission was flown by Wing Commander J. Barret DFC , commanding officer of No. 201 Squadron RAF . By that time over 2 @,@ 000 decorations had been awarded . These included four Victoria Crosses , of whom only one survived the war , 17 George Medals , and 82 Distinguished Service Orders . 
 = = Cold War = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 The capitulation of Germany in May 1945 was followed by a rapid rundown of Coastal Command with the immediate disbandment of combat units and the transfer of aircraft to the RAF Transport Command . Commonwealth personnel were also sent home and the powerful Bristol Beaufighter and de Havilland Mosquito wings were reduced . The Command still maintained strong air @-@ sea @-@ rescue ASR and reconnaissance forces but its ASW was lopsided . With a few exceptions , only a handful of squadrons with ASW aircraft remained by January 1946 . 
 While the Command retained a minimum peacetime force and the Air Ministry had every intention of maintaining it as such , the fleet was further reduced and suffered from procurement problems . The Short Shetland and Short Seaford were rejected as replacements for the Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator . A maritime version of the promising Avro Lincoln had yet to be ordered by the time the Lend @-@ Lease programme ended in August 1945 . The Short Sunderland was forced to continue as the main operational type until the end of 1946 . Most of the aircraft that operated in the command were the Second World War types ; the Spitfire , Lancaster , Mosquito and Beaufighter . 
 The Command was kept busy in the late 1940s . Units were sent to the Middle East and Palestine as part of an air policing policy , in co @-@ operation with the Israeli Air Force and Egyptian Air Force to prevent conflict between the two countries owing to the formation of the state of Israel in 1948 . While there , they undertook a major operation , Operation <unk> , to prevent floods of illegal Jewish immigrants coming into Israel . In May 1948 the variety of aircraft was reduced despite increasing demand for operations . In May Palestinian terrorists and their supporters began attacking British military installations throughout the region . In the largest British post @-@ war action , Operation DAWN ( 13 to 14 May 1948 ) was launched with the support of Coastal Command . 
 On 28 June 1948 Coastal Command was also involved in the Berlin Airlift . The Soviet Union attempted to cut off all aid to the city which was jointly occupied by the four major powers , the Soviets in the east , and the Americans , French and British in the west . The joint American @-@ British operation continued for almost a year . Coastal Command aircraft were involved as flying boats were the only aircraft with internal anti @-@ corrosion treatment allowing bulk salt to be transported . The Command 's operations grew in intensity . By 13 July daily sorties had risen to 16 . By October it was 214 sorties ( other RAF Commands were also flying in supplies ) . The flying boats made their flight in using the Elbe river , but these operations came to a close on 14 December 1948 , when the hazard from uncharted sandbanks and wreckage which , in some cases had been deliberately placed there by the Soviets to prevent the Western Allies from supplying the city , made operations impractical . Over 1 @,@ 000 sorties had been made , and 4 @,@ 500 tons of supplies were flown in and 1 @,@ 113 people , mainly children , evacuated . 
 = = = Soviet threat = = = 
 NATO ( North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ) began preparations for a military defence of Western Europe by incorporating most West European nations into a defence pact against Soviet aggression in April 1951 . This led to the militarisation of West Germany in 1955 and was met with the militarisation of East Germany soon after , and its merger into the Warsaw Pact alliance with the Soviet Union . The purpose of Coastal Command was to help bolster the defence and guard against a potential Soviet naval threat in Atlantic and European waters . 
 For Coastal Command the main concern was the Atlantic . On 1 March 1950 it had lost the photo reconnaissance units to RAF Bomber Command . The transfer was not complete when North Korea invaded South Korea beginning the Korean War . Handley Page Hastings were hastily modified and ready for operations but were not sent , owing to the need for ASW aircraft in the Eastern Atlantic . 
 The Avro Shackleton was the main operational aircraft in the 1950s , replacing the wartime Liberator <unk> , along with the Neptune <unk> At the end of August 1951 , No. 201 Squadron RAF became the first unit to complete training on the type . In mid @-@ 1953 Coastal Command 's order of Battle consisted of eight Shackleton squadrons ; one at Gibraltar , four covering the South @-@ Western Approaches in the Atlantic , and three more covering the North @-@ Western Approaches . This force numbered 64 aircraft . A further four Sunderland squadrons totalling 20 aircraft were split between the North @-@ Western and South @-@ Western Approaches . The Neptunes , numbering 32 aircraft in four squadrons , covered the North @-@ Eastern and Eastern Approaches . The Helicopter also joined Coastal Command . Bristol Sycamores entered service in 1953 and 16 aircraft were dispersed in Britain for ASW . In March the Avro Lancaster was finally phased out of Coastal Command service . 
 The Command was too expensive to maintain and cost cuts were made during the 1950s which caused a reduction in strength . By mid @-@ 1957 the Command had been cut to 82 aircraft . By mid @-@ 1958 it had shrunk to just 67 . The Shackletons dominated the core of this force , numbering 54 aircraft . The Neptune was cut from the service altogether , beginning on 31 August 1956 . There was little operational action for the Command at this point . It airlifted British Army forces into Egypt during the Suez Crisis which was its major action during this period . The lack of funds and any active conventional military role saw the Command struggle to keep its front @-@ line strength high . There was a brief alert in October 1962 , during the Cuban Missile Crisis , when all six squadrons it then possessed were put on high alert , but nothing came of the crisis , although the Shackleton squadrons at RAF Ballykelly were sent to <unk> as it was known that Ballykelly was on the Soviet <unk> target list . 
 In the early 1960s the Soviet Navy and Communist Bloc 's fishing fleets began operating around the British Isles in increasing numbers . The British public began taking an interest in their operations as civilian fisherman began complaining about their presence . Operation <unk> began , in which Coastal Command began monitoring their movements , in particular other vessels that loitered in areas covering the arrival and departure routes for Royal Navy nuclear submarine forces . Soon after , counter operations such as Operation <unk> were carried out , which was aimed at searching for Soviet submarines . The main threat from the Soviets in the Atlantic came from the Soviet Northern Fleet and in early 1965 most of the Command 's units were concentrated in No. 18 Group RAF , based in Scotland to monitor their activities . No recorded confrontation took place between Coastal Command and Soviet naval forces during this time , although both the Shackletons from RAF Ballykelly and frigates operating out of Londonderry would ' ping ' the Soviet submarines carrying out surveillance off the mouth of Lough Foyle . In at least one instance , a Ballykelly @-@ based Shackleton lost its radome when making a mock attack on the Russian sub . 
 In 1969 the special @-@ purpose Hawker @-@ Siddeley Nimrod , based on the de Havilland Comet airliner , was introduced into RAF service and Coastal Command duties were passed on to general squadrons . The Nimrod was a replacement for the Shackleton and it began to do so on 2 October 1969 . However , less than eight weeks later , Coastal Command was disbanded and ceased to exist on 27 November 1969 , when it was subsumed into RAF Strike Command . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 = = Commanders in Chief = = 
 The following officers commanded the service : 
 = = Depiction in film = = 
 The work of Coastal Command was immortalised in a 1942 wartime propaganda documentary named Coastal Command with a score by Ralph Vaughan Williams . 
 = William Eustis = 
 William Eustis ( June 10 , 1753 – February 6 , 1825 ) was an early American physician , politician , and statesman from Massachusetts . Trained in medicine , he served as a military surgeon during the American Revolutionary War , notably at the Battle of Bunker Hill . He resumed medical practice after the war , but soon entered politics . 
 After several terms in the state legislature , Eustis won election to the United States Congress in 1800 , serving as a moderate Democratic @-@ Republican . He briefly returned to state politics after losing reelection in 1804 , and was chosen to be Secretary of War in 1809 by President James Madison . Due in part to his inexperience at managing the army and a lack of preparedness , the military failures in the early months of the War of 1812 were laid on his shoulders , leading to his resignation . 
 Madison then appointed Eustis Minister to the Netherlands , a post he held from 1814 until 1818 . After another period in Congress , he was elected Governor of Massachusetts in 1822 . A popular successor to long @-@ serving John Brooks , Eustis died in office in 1825 . His Boston mansion , built in the 1750s by royal governor William Shirley , is known as the Shirley @-@ Eustis House and is a National Historic Landmark . 
 = = Early years and military service = = 
 William Eustis was born on June 10 , 1753 in Cambridge , Massachusetts , to Benjamin Eustis , a prominent Boston doctor , and Elizabeth ( Hill ) Eustis . He was the second surviving son of twelve children . He was educated at the Boston Latin School before he entered Harvard College , from which he graduated in 1772 . While at Harvard he belonged to an undergraduate militia unit called the <unk> Band . 
 After graduation he studied medicine under Dr. Joseph Warren , a well @-@ known Patriot political leader . When the Battles of Lexington and Concord sparked the American Revolutionary War in April 1775 , Warren and Eustis both worked in the field , tending the injured revolutionaries . Warren secured for Eustis a commission as regimental surgeon to the rebel artillery . Eustis helped care for the wounded at the June 1775 Battle of Bunker Hill , in which Warren was killed . He served with the Continental Army in the New York and New Jersey campaign , refusing a lieutenant colonel 's commission offered by artillery chief Henry Knox . During his Continental Army service , Eustis met and established an enduring friendship with New Jersey native Aaron Burr . 
 In 1777 Eustis was placed in command of a military hospital established at the former residence of Loyalist Beverley Robinson north of New York City , where he remained for the duration of the war . In September 1780 he played a minor role in events surrounding the flight of traitor Benedict Arnold : he treated Arnold 's wife Peggy , who was seemingly hysterical over the sudden departure of her husband and the discovery of his plot . 
 After the war Eustis returned to medical practice in Boston . He was once again called on to serve in military matters when Shays ' Rebellion broke out in western Massachusetts in 1786 , becoming surgeon to the militia force raised by General Benjamin Lincoln that quashed the rebellion in the early months of 1787 . Eustis became vice president of the Society of the Cincinnati in 1786 , a post he held until 1810 , and again in 1820 . 
 = = Legislator = = 
 Eustis was elected to the Massachusetts General Court ( the state legislature ) from 1788 to 1794 , which he left because he was " sick of " the political gamesmanship in the body . He was thereafter chosen to serve on the Governor 's Council for two years . In 1800 he ran for a seat in the United States House of Representatives . During his successful campaign against Josiah Quincy , Eustis was charged with either authoring , or being complicit in the production of , letters that formed a part of the 1783 Newburgh Conspiracy , a threatened uprising in the Continental Army . Eustis publicly denied being the author of the letters , but was silent on his role in the affair . ( John Armstrong later admitted to writing the letters , and Eustis acknowledged some years later that he was privy to the plot . ) 
 Eustis was a moderate Democratic @-@ Republican who did not seek the significant reforms more radical Republicans wanted . He demonstrated this by voting against President Thomas Jefferson 's repeal of the Judiciary Act of 1801 , a Federalist bill passed in the late days of the John Adams administration that had greatly expanded the number of seats on the federal bench . In 1802 Eustis was reelected , defeating John Quincy Adams , and in a rematch of the 1800 election with Quincy , Eustis was defeated by fewer than 100 votes . While in the House , he was one of the managers appointed by the House of Representatives in 1804 to conduct the impeachment proceedings ( the first such action to succeed ) against John Pickering , judge of the United States District Court for New Hampshire . In 1804 he argued in favor of arming merchant vessels headed for the West Indies . 
 = = Secretary of War = = 
 When James Madison became president in 1809 , he sought to enhance the status of the Democratic @-@ Republicans in Federalist @-@ dominated New England . To that end he chose Eustis to be his Secretary of War . Eustis was not a good choice for the post , lacking the necessary administrative skills and detailed military background . He also had difficult relations with James Wilkinson and Wade Hampton , two senior army commanders . 
 Eustis made a major push to update the military 's field manuals , which had not changed since the Revolutionary War . After acquiring copies of manuals published in 1791 for use by the armies of the French Republic , Eustis commissioned a translation and lobbied for adoption of new manuals based on French tactics . Although a new manual was ready for use in 1812 , it was not well received by the officer corps , and was not used in the war that broke out that year . 
 As tensions grew between the United States and Great Britain , Eustis made modest moves to improve military readiness , but did not otherwise distinguish himself or introduce other initiatives or proposals . When the War of 1812 began , the army 's logistics were in shambles , and it had no overall commander , forcing Eustis to make detailed decisions for nine military districts . When the war began poorly with the surrender of General William Hull at Detroit , Eustis was severely criticized . Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin wrote that there was " a total want of confidence " in Eustis that was felt " through every ramification of the public service . " Eustis tendered his resignation in December 1812 , and Secretary of State James Monroe took over his duties until John Armstrong assumed the office on February 13 , 1813 . 
 = = Netherlands minister = = 
 Eustis was next appointed minister of the United States to the Netherlands by President Madison , serving from 1814 to 1818 . Madison believed the post to be important for sounding out conditions in Europe due to The Hague 's historical use as a neutral ground for negotiations , and he instructed Eustis to track European diplomatic sentiment . However , the status of the Dutch declined after the defeat of Napoleon , and the post was not particularly active . Eustis unsuccessfully pursued claims against the Dutch for seizures of American goods and ships that had taken place during the reign of Louis Bonaparte over the Kingdom of Holland ( the claims were eventually acknowledged by France ) . Eustis was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1815 . Eustis and Albert Gallatin , then the US Ambassador to France , negotiated a new commerce treaty with the Dutch government in 1817 ; it was ratified in 1818 . Eustis was at a disadvantage due to his lack of French language skill , and was recalled in 1818 after the Dutch government reduced its American delegation head to a chargé d 'affaires . While in Europe Eustis renewed an acquaintance with the Marquis de Lafayette , with whom he had served in the Revolutionary War . 
 = = Later offices = = 
 Upon his return from Europe , Eustis purchased the mansion in Roxbury built by royal governor William Shirley in the 1750s ( which is now known as the Shirley @-@ Eustis House ) . Eustis was again elected to Congress in a special election called after the resignation of Representative Edward Dowse . He served from 1820 to 1823 , presiding as chairman of the U.S. House Committee on Military Affairs . In the debate on the admission of Missouri as a state ( leading to the Missouri Compromise ) , Eustis made an impassioned speech in opposition to proposed language in the Missouri Constitution forbidding the entry of free blacks into the state . 
 He ran unsuccessfully for Governor of Massachusetts three times ( 1820 – 22 ) , losing each time to the popular moderate Federalist John Brooks . In 1823 Eustis won the seat in a highly contentious contest with the unpopular arch @-@ Federalist Harrison Gray Otis . Republicans presented Eustis as a moderate successor to Brooks who would be less partisan than Otis , and also highlighted his Revolutionary War experience . He carried Federalist strongholds in Hampshire and Essex Counties , and very nearly defeated in Otis in Boston . Eustis ' victory in the election ( combined with a Republican sweep of the legislature the following year ) marked the effective end of the Federalist Party in Massachusetts . 
 Eustis was a popular governor , continuing Brooks ' moderate policies . He nominated his lieutenant governor , Levi Lincoln , Jr . , to the state 's high court , and won reelection in 1824 with former Representative Marcus Morton as his lieutenant . While governor he received his old friend Lafayette when he toured the United States . In March – April 1824 , perhaps due to his popularity , William Eustis was honored with a single vote at the Democratic @-@ Republican Party Caucus to be the party 's candidate for the Office of U.S. Vice President for the upcoming 1824 U.S. Presidential Election . 
 Eustis died in Boston of pneumonia while governor on February 6 , 1825 . His funeral and temporary interment took place Boston 's Granary Burying Ground , and he was memorialized by his friend Edward Everett . He was later reinterred at Lexington 's Old Cemetery . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 During the Revolutionary War Eustis became close friends with Aaron Burr , a friendship that deepened in the 1790s . Burr and Eustis exchanged letters on the most intimate subjects , recommending potential romantic partners to each other and sharing a taste for well @-@ educated women . Eustis aided Burr on one occasion by helping him find accommodations for a young woman whose mother had been involved in an adulterous relationship with Alexander Hamilton ; she was placed in a Boston @-@ area boarding school . Eustis may have also been the subject of a teenage crush by Burr 's daughter Theodosia , who shared intimate details of her life with him ( including medical conditions emanating from a difficult pregnancy ) well into adulthood . 
 Eustis was for many years a confirmed bachelor , described as urbane and charming . He married Caroline Langdon in 1801 ; they had no children . She was the sister of Henry Sherburne Langdon , who had married Eustis ' sister Ann , and the daughter of Woodbury Langdon , a prominent Portsmouth , New Hampshire merchant and judge . His wife survived him by forty years , after which his Boston property was divided among relatives . The mansion fell into decay , but was acquired by preservationists in 1913 and restored to its 19th @-@ century grandeur in the late 20th century . It is now a house museum and a National Historic Landmark . 
 = Red Ruffing = 
 Charles Herbert " Red " Ruffing ( May 3 , 1905 – February 17 , 1986 ) was an American professional baseball player . A pitcher , he played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) from 1924 through 1947 . He played for the Boston Red Sox , New York Yankees , and Chicago White Sox . Ruffing is most remembered for his time with the highly successful Yankees teams of the 1930s and 1940s . 
 Ruffing dropped out of school as a child to work in a coal mine in his native Illinois . He played for the mine 's company baseball team as an outfielder and first baseman . After he lost four toes from his left foot in a mining accident , he became unable to run in the field , and switched to pitching . He played in minor league baseball in 1923 and 1924 before making his MLB debut with the Red Sox . After struggling with Boston , pitching to a 36 – 93 win – loss record , the Red Sox traded Ruffing to the Yankees , where he became successful , pitching as the Yankees ' ace through 1946 . After one season with the White Sox , Ruffing retired from pitching to work in coaching . He served as a bullpen coach for the White Sox , a pitching coach for the New York Mets , and a scout and minor league instructor for the Cleveland Indians . 
 Ruffing was a member of six World Series championship teams with the Yankees . He also appeared in six MLB All @-@ Star Games . He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1967 . The Yankees dedicated a plaque to Ruffing in Monument Park in 2004 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ruffing was born on May 3 , 1905 , in Granville , Illinois . He was one of five children . His parents , John and Louise Ruffing , emigrated to the United States from Germany . Ruffing was raised in Coalton , Illinois and Nokomis , Illinois . He went to school in Nokomis . His father was a coal miner , working in a mine in Coalton , Illinois , until he suffered a broken back . John became the superintendent of the mine , and also served as mayor of Coalton . 
 Red quit school at the age of 13 to work for his father in the mine , earning $ 3 per day ( $ 47 in current dollar terms ) , working as a coupler . Conditions in the mine were dangerous . Red 's cousin , who also worked in the mine , died in an accident . He also played baseball as an outfielder and first baseman for the mine 's company team , and for a semi @-@ professional team in Nokomis . 
 When Ruffing was 15 years old , he suffered an accident in the mine , where his left foot was crushed between two cars . Though the doctor was able to save his foot , Red lost four toes . He was supposed to begin his professional baseball career in the Kentucky – Illinois – Tennessee League that year , but he found himself unable to run as fast as he previously could . Doc Bennett , the manager of a nearby semi @-@ professional team , suggested that Ruffing should try to continue pursuing a baseball career by becoming a pitcher . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues ( 1923 – 24 ) = = = 
 Bennett helped arrange for Ruffing to sign his first professional contract when he reached the age of 18 . Ruffing signed with the Danville Veterans of the Illinois – Indiana – Iowa League , a minor league baseball team in the Class B designation level . With Danville , Ruffing had a 12 – 16 win – loss record . After pitching for Danville in the 1923 season , the Boston Red Sox purchased Ruffing from Danville for $ 4 @,@ 000 ( $ 55 @,@ 555 in current dollar terms ) . 
 The Red Sox assigned Ruffing to the Dover Senators of the Class D Eastern Shore League to pitch at the start of the 1924 season . He had a 4 – 7 record for Dover . 
 = = = Major leagues = = = 
 = = = = Boston Red Sox ( 1924 – 30 ) = = = = 
 Ruffing made his major league debut with the Red Sox on May 31 , 1924 . He pitched without earning a decision in over 23 innings pitched , and had a 6 @.@ 65 earned run average ( ERA ) . He saw regular playing time with the Red Sox over the next few years but had limited success . He had a 9 – 18 win @-@ loss record with a 5 @.@ 01 ERA in the 1925 season , as the Red Sox finished in last place in the eight team American League ( AL ) . Ruffing had a 6 – 15 win @-@ loss record and a 4 @.@ 39 ERA in the 1926 season , and a 5 – 13 win @-@ loss record with a 4 @.@ 66 ERA in the 1927 season , with the Red Sox finishing in last place both years . His best season to date , in terms of earned run performance , came in 1928 , when he posted a 3 @.@ 89 ERA . However , he led the AL in earned runs allowed , with 125 , and had a 10 – 25 win @-@ loss record , which led the AL in losses . On a positive note , he also led the AL with 25 complete games . As Ruffing had a .314 batting average during the 1928 season , the Red Sox and Ruffing considered having him shift to the outfield . The team decided against a position change due to the limitations of Ruffing 's left foot . 
 The Red Sox chose Ruffing to be their Opening Day starting pitcher for the 1929 season . During the 1929 season , he again led the AL in losses , with 22 , and earned runs , with 135 . He won only nine games . Ruffing often had difficulty pitching more than five innings in a game . Someone in the Red Sox organization suggested to Ruffing that he should try to gain weight by drinking beer , which saw him grow from 185 pounds ( 84 kg ) to 240 pounds ( 110 kg ) . 
 During the 1930 season , Bob Quinn , the owner of the Red Sox , was in debt and afraid he would lose the team due to foreclosure . To raise capital , he traded Ruffing to the New York Yankees for reserve outfielder Cedric Durst , $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 708 @,@ 267 in current dollar terms ) , and a $ 50 @,@ 000 loan from Jacob Ruppert , the Yankees ' owner . Ruffing ended his five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year tenure with the Red Sox with a 39 – 93 win @-@ loss record ; his winning percentage ( .289 ) was lower than that of the Red Sox during his tenure ( .344 ) . 
 = = = = New York Yankees = = = = 
 = = = = = 1930 – 38 = = = = = 
 Miller Huggins , who served as the Yankees ' manager through 1929 , had attempted to acquire Ruffing from the Red Sox for the last couple years of his Yankees ' tenure . When Ruffing told him that he was considering moving to the outfield , Huggins told him he should continue as a pitcher . Bob Shawkey , a former pitcher who succeeded Huggins as the Yankees new manager in 1930 , had convinced Ed Barrow , the Yankees ' general manager , to acquire Ruffing . Shawkey believed he could change Ruffing 's approach to pitching to obtain better results . Shawkey worked with Ruffing to change his pitching delivery , so that Ruffing used his body more . This helped Ruffing save his arm strength for the later innings of the game . The trade of Ruffing for Durst is now reckoned as one of the most lopsided trades in baseball history ; Durst was a reserve outfielder who always batted at the bottom of the lineup when he was used . The 1930 season proved to be Durst 's last year in the majors . Ruffing had a 0 – 3 record with the Red Sox before the trade . He won 15 games for the Yankees after the trade , losing only five games . 
 The Yankees chose Ruffing as their starting pitcher for Opening Day in 1931 . During the 1931 season , Ruffing had a 16 – 14 win @-@ loss record with a 4 @.@ 41 ERA . The Yankees finished the season in second place . On August 13 , 1932 , Ruffing threw a complete game shutout and hit a home run in the tenth inning off of Washington Senators ' pitcher Tommy Thomas to give the New York Yankees a 1 – 0 victory . Ruffing became the first pitcher in major league history to win a game 1 – 0 , hit a home run in the game , and strike out ten or more batters . Two other pitchers have since achieved this feat : Early Wynn in 1957 , and Yovani Gallardo , who did it in 2009 . Ruffing won 18 games during the 1932 season . He had a 3 @.@ 09 ERA , second in the AL only to Lefty Grove 's 2 @.@ 84 . Ruffing had 190 strikeouts , which led the AL . The Yankees won their first pennant since 1928 . Ruffing won his first World Series game during the 1932 World Series against the Chicago Cubs . He started Game One , and the Yankees swept the Cubs four games to zero . 
 Ruffing had a 9 – 14 win @-@ loss record with a 3 @.@ 91 ERA in the 1933 season , as the Yankees finished in second place in the AL . He threw a one @-@ hitter on June 20 , 1934 , against the Cleveland Indians . Two weeks later , Joe Cronin selected Ruffing for the 1934 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game . At that point , he had a 9 – 3 win @-@ loss record on the season . He finished the season with a 19 – 11 win @-@ loss record , as the Yankees finished second in the AL . Ruffing pitched to a 16 – 11 record in the 1935 season , as the Yankees again finished second in the AL . His 3 @.@ 12 ERA was third in the league , behind only Grove and Ted Lyons . 
 Ruffing won 20 games during the 1936 season . His 3 @.@ 85 ERA was the sixth @-@ best in the league , and his 20 wins tied him for third place , with Johnny Allen and Wes Ferrell , behind Tommy Bridges and Vern Kennedy . He started Game One of the 1936 World Series against the New York Giants , but lost . The Yankees defeated the Giants four games to two . In a salary dispute with the Yankees , Ruffing did not report to spring training , and he held out at the start of the 1937 season , missing the first month . He signed in May , receiving a $ 15 @,@ 000 salary ( $ 246 @,@ 910 in current dollar terms ) . Ruffing had a 20 – 7 win @-@ loss record for the Yankees in 1937 . He finished with the fourth @-@ best ERA in the league , 2 @.@ 98 , trailing Lefty Gomez , Monty Stratton , and Allen , and his 20 wins were second only to Gomez , who had 21 . His performance earned him eighth place in AL Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) Award voting . He started Game Two in the 1937 World Series , earning the victory , as the Yankees defeated the Giants four games to one . 
 The Yankees started Ruffing on Opening Day for the 1938 season . He was again named an All @-@ Star during the 1938 season . Yankees ' manager Joe McCarthy , who managed the AL team in the All @-@ Star Game , chose teammate Lefty Gomez as the starting pitcher . As McCarthy did not believe in pitching two players from the same team in an All @-@ Star Game , Ruffing did not appear in the game . He led the AL with 21 wins in the 1938 season . He also tied for the AL lead in shutouts during with three , while his 3 @.@ 31 ERA was third @-@ best in the league , behind only Grove . Ruffing pitched the opening game of the 1938 World Series against the Cubs . He won two games in the series as the Yankees defeated the Cubs . Ruffing finished fourth in AL MVP voting for the 1938 season . 
 = = = = = 1939 – 46 = = = = = 
 McCarthy named Ruffing to be the starting pitcher for the Yankees on Opening Day in 1939 . McCarthy , managing the AL All @-@ Star team that year , also selected Ruffing as his starter for the 1939 MLB All @-@ Star Game . He missed several weeks late in the 1939 season due to an arm injury , but managed to start Game One of the 1939 World Series . He defeated the Cincinnati Redlegs in that game , and the Yankees won the series in a four games to zero sweep . Ruffing won 21 games during the 1939 season . His four shutouts in the 1939 season again tied him for the AL lead , while he finished second in wins behind Bob Feller , and fourth in ERA ( 2 @.@ 93 ) behind Grove , Lyons , and Feller . He finished fifth in the balloting for the AL MVP . 
 Ruffing was the Yankees ' Opening Day starting pitcher in 1940 . He was named to the 1940 All @-@ Star team , and Cronin , acting as manager , selected Ruffing as his starting pitcher . Ruffing finished the season with a 15 – 12 win @-@ loss record . Ruffing was a member of the 1941 All @-@ Star team as well , but he did not pitch in the game . He had a 15 – 6 win @-@ loss record during the 1941 season , and was named the starting pitcher for Game One of the 1941 World Series against the Brooklyn Dodgers . Ruffing defeated the Dodgers , as the Yankees won the series four games to one . 
 Ruffing pitched for the Yankees during Opening Day of the 1942 season . On the year , he compiled a 14 – 7 win @-@ loss record . He was again named an All @-@ Star , and again did not pitch in the All @-@ Star Game , which was started by teammate Spud Chandler . Though teammate Tiny Bonham had a better season , pitching to a 21 – 5 win @-@ loss record , McCarthy again chose Ruffing as his Game One starter for the 1942 World Series , setting a record with six World Series Game One starts that stood until Whitey Ford started his seventh Game One in the 1963 World Series . Ruffing defeated the St. Louis Cardinals in Game One , his seventh World Series victory . This set a record that was surpassed by Ford in 1960 . Ruffing pitched again in the Game Five , with the Yankees down three games to one . Ruffing lost the game , as the Cardinals defeated the Yankees to win the series . 
 After the 1942 season , Ruffing took a job with Vultee Aircraft , a defense contractor . Despite his age ( 37 ) and missing toes , a United States Army doctor certified Ruffing as Class 1 @-@ B in the Selective Service System , overruled Ruffing 's personal physician , who had ruled Ruffing unfit for service . The Army decided that Ruffing could serve in a non @-@ combat role . Ruffing missed the 1943 and 1944 seasons due to his service during World War II . He served in the Sixth Ferrying Group of the Air Transport Command of the United States Army Air Forces at the rank of private . However , he did pitch for the Air Transport Command 's baseball team , throwing a perfect game against Joe DiMaggio 's team , and leading his team to the championship against Ted Lyons ' team . In 1944 , he played with an All @-@ Star team for troops stationed in Hawaii . 
 Ruffing turned forty years of age during the war , resulting in his discharge in June 1945 . He rejoined the Yankees that month , signing for the same $ 20 @,@ 000 salary ( $ 262 @,@ 884 in current dollar terms ) he earned in 1942 . He made his first appearance with the Yankees since the 1942 season in July 1945 . Pitching for the Yankees as a spot starter in 1946 , he had a 5 – 1 win @-@ loss record and a 1 @.@ 77 ERA when he suffered a broken kneecap from a line drive hit by Hank <unk> , and missed the remainder of the season . 
 In total , Ruffing won 231 games with the Yankees . This mark was the most in franchise history , until Ford surpassed it in 1965 . He remains the winningest right @-@ handed pitcher in Yankees ' history . 
 = = = = Chicago White Sox ( 1947 ) = = = = 
 Suffering from recurrent knee injuries , the Yankees released Ruffing after the 1946 season . He signed with the Chicago White Sox for the 1947 season , but continued to be limited by his knee . In May , the White Sox removed Ruffing from their active roster after he was hit in his bad knee with another line drive . He rejoined the White Sox ' active roster in July . He pitched to a 3 – 5 win – loss record and a 6 @.@ 11 ERA in nine games pitched on the season . Ruffing retired after the 1947 season . 
 = = = = Career summary = = = = 
 Ruffing finished his career with 273 wins , 225 losses , 1 @,@ 987 strikeouts and a 3 @.@ 80 ERA . He also had 16 saves . Ruffing compiled 335 complete games in his 536 games started . Ruffing could also handle the bat very well compared to most other pitchers , hitting 36 home runs and batting .269 in 1 @,@ 937 career at @-@ bats . He hit over .300 in eight different seasons , and was frequently used as a pinch hitter in games he did not pitch . He also played in the outfield in emergency situations . Ruffing 's home run total as a pitcher trails only Ferrell , Warren Spahn , and Bob Lemon . Ruffing holds the AL record for most runs and earned runs allowed . 
 Ruffing threw a fastball , a " sharp " curveball , and a slider . According to AL umpire Bill Summers , " [ O ] n account of Red Ruffing , the slider got to be the thing . " Joe <unk> , also an AL umpire , said " The first game I ever worked behind the plate in the major leagues was against the guy who invented the slider and had the best slider ever seen — Red Ruffing " . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 After he retired from pitching , Ruffing stayed with the White Sox organization to instruct their players . The White Sox named Ruffing the manager of their Class A minor league affiliate , the Muskegon Clippers of the Central League , for the 1949 season . That season , the Clippers finished in fifth place out of six teams . In 1950 , Ruffing managed the Daytona Beach Islanders of the Florida State League , a Cleveland Indians ' affiliate . 
 When Al Simmons retired from his coaching position with the Indians just before the 1951 season due to his failing health , bullpen coach Jake Flowers was moved to the third base coaching position , and Ruffing took over Flowers 's duties . From 1952 through 1961 , Ruffing was a player personnel executive for the Indians . Ruffing returned to the baseball field serving as pitching coach for the expansion New York Mets in 1962 , which were run by George Weiss , the general manager , and Casey Stengel , the manager . Weiss and Stengel had held the same positions with the Yankees during Ruffing 's tenure . As a team , the Mets had a 5 @.@ 04 ERA across the 1962 season , which was the worst in the major leagues . The job also involved scouting duties , which Ruffing did not like , and he retired shortly after the season ended . He returned to baseball again for the 1969 season , at the request of former teammate Don Heffner , who was managing the Denver Bears of the American Association . Ruffing served as Heffner 's pitching coach . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Ruffing married Pauline Mulholland , a native of Chicago , at the end of the 1934 season . The couple settled in Long Beach , California . When he worked for the Indians in the 1950s , the Ruffing family relocated to Cleveland . The couple had a son , named Charles , Jr . 
 Ruffing suffered a stroke in 1974 , at the age of 68 , which left him paralyzed on his left side . As a result , he used a wheelchair for the remainder of his life . This was Ruffing 's second stroke , and he also suffered from kidney and heart problems . He contracted skin cancer , necessitating the partial amputation of one of his ears . He died on February 17 , 1986 , at Hillcrest Hospital in Mayfield Heights , Ohio , of heart failure . 
 = = Honors = = 
 In balloting for the National Baseball Hall of Fame following his retirement , Ruffing often received votes from approximately 50 % of the voters in the Baseball Writers ' Association of America , short of the 75 % required for induction . Bob Feller wrote an article in The Saturday Evening Post in 1962 , calling Ruffing , Satchel Paige , and Luke Appling the three most deserving players who had yet to be elected . The balloting of 1967 was Ruffing 's final year of eligibility , as he had retired twenty years prior . Ruffing finished with 212 votes , tied with Joe Medwick for the highest vote count , but was seven votes short of the 219 required for induction . However , a runoff election held the next month saw Ruffing into the Hall of Fame the next month . 
 During an Old @-@ Timers ' Day ceremony held on July 10 , 2004 at Yankee Stadium , the Yankees dedicated a plaque in Ruffing 's memory . The plaque is displayed in Monument Park . ESPN.com ranked Ruffing as the ninth greatest Yankee of all time . 
 A museum in Nokomis , Illinois , the Bottomley @-@ Ruffing @-@ Schalk Museum , is dedicated to Ruffing and fellow Hall of Famers Ray Schalk and Jim Bottomley . 
 = Washington State Route 538 = 
 State Route 538 ( SR 538 , alternatively named College Way ) is a 3 @.@ 62 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 83 km ) long state highway located within the northern area of Mount Vernon city limits and the urban growth boundary , located in Skagit County , a subdivision of the U.S. state of Washington . The highway , which has existed as a county road since 1911 , travels from Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in the west , passing former U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) , now Riverside Drive , and Skagit Valley College 's main Mount Vernon campus before terminating at a roundabout with SR 9 . 
 Before being designated Secondary State Highway 1G ( SSH 1G ) in 1937 , the current roadway that is now SR 538 was a county road through farmland for 26 years . SSH 1G traveled between Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) , also known as US 99 , and SSH 1A until 1964 , when the current designation of SR 538 was created . US 99 was bypassed by I @-@ 5 after 1966 and became Riverside Drive . The roundabout at SR 9 was constructed in 2007 while the Riverside Drive intersection was widened in 2009 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 538 ( SR 538 ) begins at the Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) interchange in northern Mount Vernon located south of the Skagit River . The roadway , which handled a daily average of 27 @,@ 000 motorists at the interchange in 2008 , is named College Way and travels east through a commercial zone , passing Riverside Drive , the former route of U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) , and crossing a set of rail tracks used by BNSF Railway . Transitioning from a commercial to residential area , the Mount Vernon campus of the Skagit Valley College , located on the north side of the highway , is passed and eventually SR 538 leaves Mount Vernon city limits . The road turns southeast and ends at a roundabout with SR 9 within Mount Vernon 's urban growth boundary . 
 = = History = = 
