 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 ^ Sébastien Bourdais , Kazuki Nakajima and Jenson Button started the race from the pit lane . 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Vukovar massacre = 
 The Vukovar massacre , also known as the Vukovar hospital massacre or the Ovčara massacre , was the killing of Croatian prisoners of war and civilians by Serb paramilitaries and the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) at the Ovčara farm southeast of Vukovar on 20 November 1991 , during the Croatian War of Independence . The massacre occurred shortly after Vukovar 's capture by the JNA , Croatian Serb Territorial Defence ( TO ) , and paramilitaries from neighbouring Serbia . It was the largest massacre of the war , and the worst war crime in Europe since World War II until that time . 
 In the final days of the battle , the evacuation of the Vukovar hospital was negotiated between Croatian authorities , the JNA and the European Community Monitor Mission in cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) . The JNA subsequently refused the ICRC access to the hospital despite the agreement and removed approximately 300 people from its premises . The group , largely consisting of Croats but also including Serbs , Hungarians , Muslims and two foreign nationals who fought on the side of the Croatian National Guard , was initially transported to the JNA barracks in Vukovar . Several prisoners were identified as hospital staff and removed from the group to be returned to the hospital while the rest of them were transported to the Ovčara farm south of Vukovar . Once at the farm , the prisoners were beaten for several hours before the JNA pulled its troops from the site , leaving the prisoners in the custody of the Croatian Serb TO and Serbian paramilitaries . The prisoners were then taken to a prepared site , shot in groups of ten to twenty and buried in a mass grave . 
 The mass grave was discovered in October 1992 and guarded by the United Nations Protection Force which had deployed to the area earlier that year . In 1996 , 200 sets of remains were exhumed from the grave by International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) investigators . Croatia believes 61 others were buried in a different grave on the site , while ICTY prosecutors believe that figure stands at 60 . The ICTY convicted two JNA officers in connection with the massacre , and also tried former Serbian President Slobodan Milošević for a number of war crimes , including those committed at Vukovar . Milošević died in prison before his trial could be completed . The ICTY trial of Croatian Serb political leader Goran Hadžić for various war crimes , including those committed in Vukovar , is ongoing . Several former members of the Croatian Serb TO and Serbian paramilitary units have been tried by the Serbian judiciary and convicted for their involvement in the massacre . In February 2015 , the International Court of Justice ruled that the massacre did not constitute genocide . 
 The site of the mass grave is marked by a monument , and the storage building used at Ovčara farm to hold the prisoners in captivity before their execution was rebuilt as a memorial centre in 2006 . Since then , the centre has been visited by half @-@ a @-@ million tourists . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , ethnic tensions between Serbs and Croats worsened after the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia by the Croatian Democratic Union ( Croatian : Hrvatska demokratska zajednica – HDZ ) . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Serbian Latin : Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Croatian : Teritorijalna obrana – TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt of the Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin ( approximately 60 kilometres ( 37 miles ) north @-@ east of Split ) , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina and eastern Croatia . In January 1991 , Serbia , supported by Montenegro and Serbia 's provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo , unsuccessfully tried to obtain the Yugoslav Presidency 's approval for a JNA operation to disarm Croatian security forces . The request was denied and a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March prompted the JNA itself to ask the Federal Presidency to give it wartime authority and declare a state of emergency . Even though the request was backed by Serbia and its allies , the JNA request was refused on 15 March . Serbian President Slobodan Milošević , preferring a campaign to expand Serbia rather than to preserve Yugoslavia with Croatia as a federal unit , publicly threatened to replace the JNA with a Serbian army and declared that he no longer recognized the authority of the federal Presidency . The threat caused the JNA to abandon plans to preserve Yugoslavia in favour of expanding Serbia as the JNA came under Milošević 's control . The first casualties of the conflict occurred by the end of March . In early April , leaders of the Serb revolt in Croatia declared their intention to unite the areas under their control with Serbia . These areas were viewed by the Government of Croatia as breakaway regions . 
 At the beginning of 1991 , Croatia had no regular army . To bolster its defence , Croatia doubled its police numbers to about 20 @,@ 000 . The most effective part of the Croatian police force was a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police comprising twelve battalions organised along military lines . There were also 9 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 regionally organised reserve police in 16 battalions and 10 companies , but they lacked weapons . In response to the deteriorating situation , the Croatian government established the Croatian National Guard ( Croatian : Zbor narodne garde – ZNG ) in May by expanding the special police battalions into four all @-@ professional guards brigades . Under the control of the Croatian Ministry of Defence and commanded by retired JNA General Martin Špegelj , the four guards brigades comprised approximately 8 @,@ 000 troops . The reserve police , also expanded to 40 @,@ 000 , was attached to the ZNG and reorganised into 19 brigades and 14 independent battalions . The guards brigades were the only units of the ZNG that were fully equipped with small arms ; throughout the ZNG there was a lack of heavier weapons and there was poor command and control structure above the brigade level . The shortage of heavy weapons was so severe that the ZNG resorted to using World War II @-@ era arms taken from museums and film studios . At the time , the Croatian weapon stockpile consisted of 30 @,@ 000 small arms purchased abroad and 15 @,@ 000 previously owned by the police . To replace the personnel lost to the guards brigades , a new 10 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police was established . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 After Croatia launched the Battle of the Barracks to capture JNA facilities in Croatia on 14 – 15 September , the JNA launched a small @-@ scale operation against Vukovar to relieve the city garrison . At the same time , it began large @-@ scale mobilization in preparation for its campaign in Croatia . It was met with widespread refusal of mobilised personnel to report to their designated units , desertions and an overall lack of enthusiasm for the campaign . This resulted in low troop availability , forcing the JNA to deploy fewer infantry units . Response to the mobilisation was particularly poor in Central Serbia , where only 26 percent of those called @-@ up reported for service . 
 The JNA 's offensive operations , directly associated with the campaign in the east Croatian region of Slavonia , were launched on 20 September . The assault on Croatian positions in Vukovar gradually became the main effort of the campaign as the JNA was repeatedly unable to capture the city . The fighting in and around Vukovar lasted months and eventually drew in the JNA 's main armoured force , which had previously been slated to advance west towards Serb @-@ held areas in western Slavonia . In addition to relieving its Vukovar garrison , the JNA wished to dissipate the Croatian forces in the city so that they would not pose any threat to its rear in the event that the campaign progressed west of Vinkovci . 
 The JNA forces around Vukovar were reinforced by local Serb @-@ manned TO units and Serbian paramilitary volunteers who were meant to replace those reservists that had failed to respond to their call @-@ up . The volunteers were often motivated by ethnic hatred , looted countless homes and committed numerous atrocities against Croatian civilians . After more than two months of fighting , the Croatian forces in the city surrendered on 18 November . Vukovar suffered great destruction from JNA artillery and rocket barrages against the town . By the end of the battle , over 700 @,@ 000 shells and other missiles had been fired at Vukovar at a rate of up to 12 @,@ 000 a day . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Evacuation arrangements = = = 
 On 17 November , Major General Andrija Rašeta , the commander of the JNA 5th ( Zagreb ) Military District , notified the European Community Monitor Mission ( ECMM ) that the JNA accepted in principle the quick evacuation of vulnerable persons from Vukovar . At the time , it was estimated that there were about 400 people trapped in the city 's hospital , but the actual number was later discovered to be about 450 . This included about 40 patients receiving treatment for severe injuries sustained over the preceding few days and about 360 patients recovering from wounds suffered earlier on . In addition to these individuals , some civilians had taken shelter in the hospital in the final days of the battle . They moved there expecting to be evacuated from the city , even though the hospital itself was subjected to daily artillery attack . Furthermore , a number of Croatian troops took refuge in the hospital posing as patients or staff . 
 On 18 November , the Tripartite Commission , consisting of representatives of Croatia , the JNA and the ECMM , discussed methods of evacuation with representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) , the Médecins Sans Frontières and the <unk> International . On the night of 18 / 19 November , Rašeta and Croatian Health Minister Andrija Hebrang signed an agreement on the evacuation . The agreement guaranteed that the evacuees would travel via the route Lužac suburb – Bogdanovci – Marinci – Zidine junction – Nuštar – Vinkovci . They were to be handed over to international authorities at the Zidine junction , the hospital was to be placed under the <unk> of the ICRC and the ECMM was to oversee the entire operation . Hebrang notified the hospital director Vesna Bosanac of the agreement and told her that ICRC teams would arrive . That evening Siniša Glavašević , a radio reporter who had covered the entire course of the siege from within the city , broadcast his final report from the hospital . Glavašević himself hoped to leave the city with the ICRC , fearing for his life should the Serb paramilitaries capture him . 
 = = = Takeover of the hospital = = = 
 On the morning of 19 November , the ECMM became aware that organised resistance had ceased in Vukovar , but it did not receive any information on the fate of the hospital patients . Consequently , the head of the ECMM , ambassador Dirk Jan van Houten , contacted Rašeta asking him to intervene on the ECMM 's behalf . That day , a JNA unit arrived at the hospital and Bosanac was taken to meet JNA Colonel Mile Mrkšić . According to Bosanac , Mrkšić told her that he was not obligated by the evacuation agreement . Even though the ICRC was not granted access to Vukovar by JNA officers at the scene , in the early evening of 19 November , ICRC representative Nicolas Borsinger managed to reach the hospital claiming he had an appointment with " a general " . Once there , Borsinger found a JNA captain in charge of the facility who agreed to grant the ICRC access . Borsinger then rejoined the ICRC convoy that was moving towards the hospital to evacuate it . The hospital was also toured by French reporter Agnès <unk> that day , and there she recorded an interview with Jean @-@ Michel Nicolier , a wounded Frenchman who fought alongside Croatian forces in Vukovar . <unk> offered Nicolier a press pass to try to get him out of the city , but he refused . 
 On the morning of 20 November , the ICRC convoy reached Vukovar , only to be stopped at a bridge near the hospital . An armoured vehicle blocked access to the bridge leading to the hospital , and a JNA officer at the scene , Major Veselin Šljivančanin , refused to let the ICRC pass . In order to facilitate negotiations with the ICRC at the scene , BBC reporter Martin Bell volunteered his interpreter . In a confrontation recorded by television cameras , Šljivančanin told the ICRC personnel : " This is my country , we have conquered this . This is Yugoslavia , and I am in command here ! " The ECMM personnel that had arrived at the Zidine junction to meet the returning convoy were informed by the JNA that the evacuees would instead be turned over to them in Bosanski Šamac , in northern Bosnia , on 22 November . While Šljivančanin held back the convoy , the prisoners were smuggled out of the hospital in buses in another direction . In total , approximately 300 people were taken away from the hospital . 
 = = = Ovčara farm = = = 
 Later on 20 November , Šljivančanin and Colonel Nebojša <unk> informed the press that the JNA would provide buses to transport the wounded out of Vukovar . Instead , at about 10 : 30 , the buses took the prisoners to the JNA barracks on the southern edge of Vukovar , where 15 men were separated from the group and returned to the hospital after being identified as hospital staff . During their stay in the barracks , the Croatian Serb TO and Serbian paramilitaries threatened the prisoners . Croatian Serb leaders opposed moving the prisoners to detention facilities in Serbia , claiming they wished to prosecute them for alleged crimes committed against Serbs . After spending two hours at the barracks , the buses took the prisoners to the Ovčara farm near the village of <unk> . The group largely consisted of Croats , but also included several ethnic Serbs , Muslims , ethnic Hungarians , the French national Nicolier , and one German national who fought in defence of Vukovar . It also included Rašeta 's nephew , who worked at the Vukovar hospital pharmacy at the time . The group of taken to Ovčara consisted of 261 people . Sources disagree as to whether the group included one , or two women , one of whom was five months pregnant . The age of the prisoners ranged from 16 to 72 . The youngest among them was 16 @-@ year @-@ old Igor Kačić . 
 Once they reached Ovčara , ten kilometres ( six miles ) away from Vukovar , the captives were ordered from the buses one @-@ by @-@ one and forced to run the gauntlet past dozens of JNA troops and Serb paramilitaries towards a farm storage building . Slavko Dokmanović , a former mayor of Vukovar , was one of the armed men involved in beating prisoners . As the captives were beaten , they were also stripped of their personal belongings , money and jewelry . Over the course of the day , the JNA military police failed to prevent soldiers of the Croatian Serb TO and Serbian paramilitaries from beating the prisoners in the storage building . They were beaten using sticks , rifle butts , chains , baseball bats , and in one instance a wounded prisoner was beaten with his own crutches . By sundown , at least two men were beaten to death . In addition , one of the captors shot five prisoners , including one Frenchman , who is presumed to be Nicolier . Seven or eight men were returned to Vukovar on orders of the JNA , presumably released at the intervention of their Serb neighbours . Ultimately , Mrkšić ordered the JNA military police to withdraw from the farm , leaving the prisoners in the custody of a Croatian Serb TO unit led by <unk> Vujović , commander of the Croatian Serb TO in Vukovar , and the Leva Supoderica paramilitary unit . Leva Supoderica was a volunteer unit set up by the Serbian Radical Party ( Serbian : Srpska radikalna stranka ; SRS ) in Šid , Serbia , and subordinated to the JNA 's 1st Guards Mechanised Brigade . 
 At about 18 : 00 , the prisoners were divided into groups . Each group of 10 to 20 was loaded onto a truck and transported several hundred metres ( yards ) from the building towards a wooded ravine . When the prisoners reached the previously prepared execution site , they were shot and buried in a mass grave using a bulldozer . After 15 – 20 minutes , the truck would return empty to pick up the next group . The final group of prisoners was executed just outside the farm building itself . By 22 : 00 that evening , all the prisoners had been killed . Sources variously report their number at about 260 , but up to 264 in total . Croatian authorities believe the total figure stands at 261 . ICTY prosecutors asserted that there were approximately 260 victims . The massacre was the most severe individual war crime committed in Europe since World War II until that point . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Croatian Serb forces turned Ovčara into a prison camp in early October 1991 . Aside from the massacre , 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 male prisoners were temporarily held in the Ovčara camp at some point during autumn of 1991 before being transported to the prison in Sremska Mitrovica or to the local JNA barracks , which was the transit point for Serbian detention camps such as Stajićevo and Begejci . Following a series of political agreements concluded in 1991 and a ceasefire between the JNA and Croatia in early 1992 , the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) was deployed for peacekeeping in certain parts of Croatia , including Vukovar and its surroundings . It began its deployment in March 1992 . 
 = = = Discovery of the mass grave = = = 
 Forensic anthropologist Clyde Snow learned of the massacre during his visit to Zagreb in October 1992 . Snow travelled there as a United Nations ( UN ) team member sent to investigate reports of war crimes . In a meeting Snow had with the dean of the Zagreb University School of Medicine , he was introduced to a former soldier who claimed to have survived the massacre and told Snow where it took place . Three days later , Snow went to Vukovar and drove to Ovčara accompanied by Royal Canadian Mounted Police Sergeant Larry Moore who was deployed to the region with the UNPROFOR . At the site , Moore spotted a human skull in the mud . A few days later , the UN declared the site a crime scene and deployed Russian UNPROFOR troops to guard it . 
 Snow put together a four @-@ man team including himself to conduct a preliminary investigation of the site before the winter , and the team arrived at the site in December 1992 . They examined the site still under guard by the Russian troops , excavated the skull spotted by Moore and the rest of the body , as well as another set of partially covered remains . The team excavated a one metre ( 3 @.@ 3 feet ) trench across the site . That allowed them to detect a few more bodies and infer the size of the grave . The information they obtained led Snow to conclude that the grave may contain more than two hundred bodies . The investigators also found spent cartridges consistent with standard Yugoslav @-@ built AK @-@ 47s on one side of the grave and bullet holes in trees on the opposite side , leading them to conclude that a firing squad had stood on one side of the pit and fired across or into it . 
 Croatian authorities launched initiatives to exhume the bodies buried at Ovčara in 1993 and 1994 , but those were unsuccessful . A five @-@ member Commission of Experts appointed by the UN Secretary General came to Ovčara to exhume the victims in October 1993 . However , they were prevented from carrying out their work by the local Croatian Serb administration . After the Croatian Serb authorities blocked several attempts to further investigate the mass grave at Ovčara , still under constant guard by the Russian peacekeepers , the site was visited by then @-@ U.S. Ambassador to the UN Madeleine Albright in January 1994 . She used the occasion to stress U.S. support for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , which had been set up in 1993 . 
 = = = Exhumation = = = 
 The political situation in the area did not change until 1995 . That year , Croatia militarily defeated the Croatian Serbs in offensives codenamed Flash and Storm , in May and August respectively . That left eastern Slavonia as the last remaining Croatian Serb @-@ held area . Gradual restoration of the area to Croatian rule was agreed upon in November through the Erdut Agreement , and the United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia , Baranja and Western Sirmium ( UNTAES ) peacekeeping mission was deployed to implement the agreement . 
 The exhumation of the remains at Ovčara began on 1 September 1996 while the site was still under the constant guard of peacekeepers . The exhumation was conducted by ICTY personnel and the Physicians for Human Rights , with Croatian observers at the site . The excavation works uncovered a mass grave encompassing approximately 30 square metres ( 320 square feet ) and containing a heap of intertwined bodies . Most of the bodies exhibited evidence of multiple gunshot wounds . By 24 October , 200 sets of remains were recovered from the grave . The remains were transported for forensic examination to the Zagreb University School of Medicine . In the four years preceding the exhumation , Croatian authorities collected ante @-@ mortem information on presumed victims , built a modern morgue at the School of Medicine and trained geneticists in DNA analysis to allow for the identification of those who could not be identified by ICTY investigators using traditional methods . By October 2002 , 184 victims were identified , largely using DNA analyses , and the figure was increased to 194 by 2010 . Glavašević 's remains were among those exhumed at Ovčara . 
 Croatian authorities suspect that a further 61 individuals killed at Ovčara were buried there as well . They suspect one or more additional mass graves exist in the general area , or that the bodies originally buried at the site were moved to a secondary grave . <unk> <unk> , the Croatian author of a book on Nicolier , claims that an additional shallow grave was excavated at Ovčara in November 1991 and that Nicolier and 60 others were buried there . According to her , they were exhumed by Croatian Serb authorities and moved to a secondary location in early 1992 because the grave was so shallow that body parts protruded through the ground surface . 
 = = = War crime trials = = = 
 In November 1995 , the ICTY indicted Mrkšić , Šljivančanin and JNA captain Miroslav Radić for war crimes related to the Ovčara massacre . The group was subsequently termed the " Vukovar three " by the media . The ICTY also charged Dokmanović , mayor of Vukovar at the time , with war crimes in connection with the massacre in a sealed indictment in March 1996 . He was arrested by UNTAES troops in Operation Little Flower and transferred to the ICTY via <unk> Airfield on 27 June 1997 . The operation was the first arrest of a person indicted by the ICTY by any UN force in the former Yugoslavia . Dokmanović 's trial never produced a verdict , however . He hanged himself in his ICTY prison cell on 28 June 1998 , several days before a verdict was to be announced . The ICTY also linked Serb warlord Željko Ražnatović and his paramilitary formations to the massacre , but he was assassinated in Belgrade before he could be brought to trial . 
 Mrkšić surrendered to the ICTY in the Netherlands in May 2002 . Radić and Šljivančanin were arrested in Serbia in May and June 2003 respectively . The arrests were made shortly before the expiration of a deadline set by the U.S. Congress linking financial assistance to Serbia to its cooperation with the ICTY . In 2007 , the ICTY convicted Mrkšić and Šljivančanin , but acquitted Radić . Mrkšić received a 20 @-@ year prison sentence , while Šljivančanin was sentenced to five years in prison . In 2009 , Šljivančanin 's sentence was increased to 17 years in prison on appeal and finally reduced to ten years following a review of the judgment in 2010 . 
 The ICTY also indicted Milošević , as well as Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović of the Serbian State Security Service , Croatian Serb political leader Goran Hadžić and the leader of the Serbian Radical Party Vojislav Šešelj for various war crimes , including those committed in Vukovar . Milošević 's trial ended without any verdict upon his death in March 2006 , while the Vukovar @-@ related charges against Stanišić and Simatović were dropped from their indictments even before the pair were acquitted on all counts in 2013 . In March 2016 , Šešelj was acquitted on all counts pending appeal . Hadžić 's trial is ongoing as of 2014 . 
 As of 2015 , Serbian authorities have convicted 15 people in connection with the Ovčara massacre . In 2010 , Vujović and Stanko Vujanović ( deputy commander of Croatian Serb TO in Vukovar ) were convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison along with eleven others , all of them former members of the Croatian Serb TO or Leva Supoderica . Predrag <unk> , Đorđe <unk> , Miroslav <unk> and Saša <unk> were sentenced to 20 years in prison , Milan Vojnović and Ivan <unk> were sentenced to 15 years in prison , Jovica Perić was sentenced to 13 years , Nada <unk> was sentenced to 11 years , Milan <unk> was sentenced to seven , and Predrag <unk> and Goran <unk> were given five @-@ year prison sentences . In December 2013 , these convictions were set aside by the Constitutional Court of Serbia and the case was returned to the Court of Appeals for a new trial . In February 2015 , Vujović , Vujanović , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> were released from custody based on a decision of the Supreme Court of Cassation pending a retrial by the Court of Appeals . In a separate trial completed in 2014 , Serbian authorities convicted and sentenced Petar <unk> to 15 years in prison for participating in the massacre as a member of Leva Supoderica . In February 2015 , the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) ruled that the siege of Vukovar and the ensuing massacre did not constitute genocide , though it confirmed that serious crimes had taken place . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 Since 1998 , the victims of the Battle of Vukovar and the events that occurred in its immediate aftermath are commemorated annually on 18 November by a procession starting at the Vukovar hospital and reaching the city 's memorial cemetery . In 2014 , the event drew 80 @,@ 000 participants . A monument sculpted by <unk> <unk> that marks the site of the mass grave at Ovčara was unveiled on 30 December 1998 . Monuments of the same design have subsequently been used to mark all the other mass graves from the Croatian War of Independence . The massacre itself has come to be referred to as the Vukovar massacre , the Ovčara massacre , or the Vukovar hospital massacre . It was by far the largest massacre committed during the Croatian War of Independence . 
 In 2006 , the Ovčara Memorial Centre , designed by Miljenko <unk> , opened at the site of the former Ovčara farm . The centre opened in a remodeled storage building where prisoners were held on 20 November 1991 before they were executed . The dim interior of the building , accessed through a glass @-@ encased foyer , features illuminated photographs of 200 victims exhumed from the mass grave and the 61 missing who were executed at Ovčara . The concrete floor contains encased spent cartridges and the Spiral of Evil ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> ) sculpture displaying the names of 261 victims . The ceiling contains 261 lighting fixtures symbolising the number of victims . The centre also contains an exhibition of personal belongings and documents found in the mass grave . The completion of the centre was funded by the City of Zagreb at the cost of 2 million kuna ( c . 270 @,@ 000 euro ) . By July 2014 , the centre was visited by half @-@ a @-@ million people . In the same year , Croatia launched an education programme which entails visits to the centre by eighth @-@ grade pupils , and 50 @,@ 000 pupils are scheduled to visit the centre annually . In 2010 , Serbian President Boris Tadić visited the memorial centre and the mass grave site , as the first Serbian head of state to do so . He laid wreaths at the site and apologized on behalf of the Serbian state . 
 Several victims of the massacre are honoured individually in Vukovar . There is a monument honouring Kačić together with his father who was killed on 2 October 1991 during the Battle of Vukovar , a bridge in the city is named after Nicolier , and one of the city 's schools is named after Glavašević . 
 = 2011 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final = 
 The 2011 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final was a soccer match between the Seattle Sounders FC and the Chicago Fire , played on October 4 , 2011 , at CenturyLink Field in Seattle , Washington . The match was the culmination of the 2011 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup , a tournament open to amateur and professional soccer teams affiliated with the United States Soccer Federation ( U.S. Soccer ) . This was the 98th edition of the U.S. Open Cup , the oldest ongoing competition in American soccer . The Seattle Sounders FC won by defeating the Chicago Fire 2 – 0 with goals scored by Fredy Montero and Osvaldo Alonso . The attendance was 36 @,@ 615 , breaking the record for the final set the previous year when Seattle also won and hosted . Seattle became the first team since 1968 to win three consecutive U.S. Open Cup championships and the fourth team ever to do so in the 98 @-@ year history of the tournament . 
 Sounders FC automatically qualified for the third round of the U.S. Open Cup tournament by finishing among the top six in the 2010 Major League Soccer season . The Fire did not automatically qualify , and had to play through two qualification rounds before entering the official tournament . Prior to the final , Chicago and Seattle had met twice in 2011 , with Seattle winning one game and the other ending in a draw . 
 The final was televised live on Fox Soccer . This was the second consecutive year the tournament final was played at CenturyLink Field . As the winner of the tournament , Seattle earned a berth in the 2012 – 13 CONCACAF Champions League and received a $ 100 @,@ 000 cash prize . Chicago received a $ 50 @,@ 000 prize as the runner @-@ up . Following the final , criticism was raised regarding Seattle winning hosting rights for each round they played . In response , U.S. Soccer announced changes to the rules for determining the host of tournament matches . 
 = = Road to the final = = 
 The U.S. Open Cup is an annual American soccer competition open to all U.S. Soccer affiliated teams , from amateur adult club teams to the professional clubs of Major League Soccer ( MLS ) . The 2011 tournament was the 98th edition of the oldest soccer tournament in the United States . 
 The MLS , which has teams that play in both the United States and Canada , was allowed to enter eight of its fifteen U.S.-based teams in the tournament . The top six MLS teams from the previous season 's league standings qualified automatically for the tournament , while the remaining two spots were determined by preliminary qualification matches . The eight MLS entries began play in the third round of the tournament . In 2010 , Seattle Sounders FC finished among the top six in the MLS overall league standings to qualify for the third round of the 2011 U.S. Open Cup . The Chicago Fire however , did not and therefore had to play a series of qualification matches against fellow MLS teams that finished outside of the top six to qualify for the Open Cup tournament . 
 = = = Chicago Fire = = = 
 Prior to reaching the 2011 final , the Chicago Fire had reached the U.S. Open Cup final five times in their 14 @-@ year history , the most of any MLS franchise , winning four out of five of the tournaments – most recently in 2006 . The Fire began their 2011 Open Cup campaign on March 30 , 2011 , in the MLS qualification semifinals , hosting the Colorado Rapids at Shea Stadium in Peoria , Illinois . Chicago scored first with a goal from Gastón <unk> right before half time . Just one minute into the second half , the Rapids equalized off of a goal from Andre <unk> . Following <unk> 's goal , the match remained tied for 15 minutes until Chicago 's Jalil <unk> scored the match @-@ winning goal in the 61st minute of play . Chicago moved on to the next round of qualification with a final score of 2 – 1 . 
 The Fire then turned their attention to their second and final qualification match hosted by the San Jose Earthquakes at Buck Shaw Stadium in Santa Clara , California . Played on May 24 , 2011 , in front of 4 @,@ 124 spectators , the hosts took a two @-@ goal lead in the first half with Ellis McLoughlin and Justin Morrow scoring in the 14th and 43rd minutes , respectively . The Fire halved the deficit in the 61st minute with a goal from Orr Barouch . Fifteen minutes later the Fire tied the score with a strike from <unk> Cuesta . The score remained tied until the end of regulation , leading to extra time , during which Chicago 's Gonzalo <unk> was ejected for dissent . Despite the Earthquakes ' man advantage , the two sides remained tied during overtime , prompting a penalty shootout . In the fifth round of penalties , with Chicago leading 5 – 4 , San Jose 's Scott Sealy missed his shot as it deflected off of the crossbar , giving the Fire a second qualifier victory and a berth into the third round of the 2011 U.S. Open Cup tournament . 
 In the third round , Chicago faced the Rochester Rhinos of the USL Pro division . Rochester hosted the match on June 28 at the Rhinos ' Sahlen 's Stadium in front of a crowd of 5 @,@ 558 . The Fire 's Diego <unk> netted the match 's only goal in the 37th minute of play , earning the Fire a spot in the quarterfinals for the first time since 2008 . 
 In the quarterfinals , held on July 12 , 2011 , the Fire hosted MLS Eastern Conference rival the New York Red Bulls at Toyota Park in Bridgeview , Illinois . Against mostly reserves for New York , the Fire won the match 4 – 0 with two goals from Orr Barouch and a goal each scored by Dominic Oduro and <unk> Cuesta . Due to power outages in the area following a severe thunderstorm , the game 's start time was moved up from 7 : 30 pm to 5 : 00 pm local time , resulting in a late @-@ arriving attendance of about 2 @,@ 000 . Following the match , uproar from Red Bull fans prompted coach Hans Backe to explain that fatigue was the reason for sending only his team 's reserve players and an assistant coach to Chicago . New York had lost to DC United in league play just 2 days earlier . 
 On August 31 , 2011 , the Fire played host to another USL Pro side , the Richmond Kickers , in the semifinal round . On their way to the semifinals , the Kickers defeated two MLS teams in consecutive rounds . They upset the Columbus Crew and Sporting Kansas City in the third round and the quarterfinals , respectively . The semifinal was hosted by the Fire at Toyota Park in front of a crowd of 8 @,@ 909 . In the 32nd minute , the Fire took the lead with a goal from Sebastián Grazzini . In the 61st minute , Chicago went up 2 – 0 with a goal from Dominic Oduro . Seven minutes later , the Kickers cut the lead in half with a goal from <unk> William . The Fire won 2 – 1 , earning their sixth trip to the U.S. Open Cup final . 
 = = = Seattle Sounders FC = = = 
 In 2009 , Seattle Sounders FC became the second MLS expansion club to win the U.S. Open Cup tournament , after the Chicago Fire in 1998 . They defended their title in 2010 to win a second straight championship . Prior to the final , Sounders FC played U.S. Open Cup home games at the Starfire Sports Complex in Tukwila , Washington . The facility is smaller than the club 's home stadium for league matches , CenturyLink Field , but Sounders FC representatives preferred the atmosphere at Starfire for smaller cup matches . 
 Sounders FC began the defense of their title on June 28 , 2011 , when they hosted the Kitsap Pumas of the USL Premier Development League from Bremerton , Washington . The match was played at Starfire in front of 3 @,@ 811 fans . Seattle took the lead in the 39th minute when Michael Fucito scored off a headed pass from Nate Jaqua . Early in the second half Fucito doubled the lead by taking a pass from Mike Seamon and shooting past several defenders for the goal . Kitsap attempted their comeback in the 71st minute when Nikolas <unk> scored off of a crossing pass from Robert <unk> . In the 83rd minute , Kitsap forward <unk> Silva nearly equalized on a breakaway run , but his shot went into the side netting . Seattle was able to hold on for the 2 – 1 victory . 
 Seattle then hosted their quarterfinal match on July 13 against a fellow MLS side , the Los Angeles Galaxy . The match was again held at Starfire , with an attendance of 4 @,@ 322 . Nate Jaqua scored following a pass from Pat Noonan in the 4th minute . In the 25th minute , Fredy Montero scored with a left footed shot off of an assist from Jaqua giving Seattle a 2 – 0 lead . The Galaxy gained a goal back in the 40th minute when Adam <unk> scored on a cross from Chris Birchall . In the 74th minute , Seattle midfielder Lamar Neagle scored from a cross by Álvaro Fernández , extending Seattle 's lead to 2 goals . 
 On August 30 , 2011 , Sounders FC hosted their semifinal opponent , FC Dallas , in front of 4 @,@ 593 at Starfire Sports Complex . Both teams started their first team players for the match . Seattle applied offensive pressure for most of the first half and broke through with a goal in the 40th minute . Fredy Montero , who had just missed with a bicycle kick shot moments earlier , took a curling left @-@ footed shot in front of goal for the score . Dallas nearly equalized in the 49th minute when Marvin Chavez had a shot bounce hard off of the goal post . Dallas continued to attack for most of the second half , and Chavez again had a chance to equalize just before the final whistle , but his shot went high over the goal . With a final score of 1 – 0 , Seattle secured their third straight appearance in the U.S. Open Cup final match . Following the match , Dallas coach <unk> Hyndman complained about how hosts are determined for U.S. Open Cup matches saying , " for me , this is one of the best events – the Lamar Hunt Open Cup – but I 'd really like to see it into a structure where it 's not a bid system . A bid system is where one team will buy the games because they 're bidding higher . " He continued , " it could go to the higher seeds , instead of a bid system where you 're spending money , or it could be pre @-@ determined . I think that brings out all the fairness to the event . " 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 = = = Venue selection = = = 
 On August 26 , 2011 , U.S. Soccer announced the potential sites for the final , depending on the outcome of the semifinals . It was determined through a blind bid process that if Seattle qualified for the final , they would host it at CenturyLink Field regardless of the opponent , for the second straight year . If FC Dallas defeated Sounders FC in the semifinals , they would host the Richmond Kickers at Pizza Hut Park in Frisco , Texas , or visit the Chicago Fire at Toyota Park in Bridgeview , Illinois , depending on the outcome of the other semifinal match . Seattle defeated Dallas and Chicago defeated Richmond in the semifinals , which resulted in Sounders FC hosting the Fire in the 2011 Open Cup final at CenturyLink Field . Seattle had hosted the previous final , in 2010 , drawing a crowd of 31 @,@ 311 and breaking the 81 @-@ year @-@ old attendance record for the event set in 1929 when New York <unk> defeated the Madison Kennel Club of St. Louis . 
 Tickets for the 2011 final went on sale to the public on September 6 . By September 19 , it was announced that 27 @,@ 000 tickets had already been sold . Nine days later , ticket sales surpassed 30 @,@ 000 and it was announced that the " Hawks Nest " bleacher seats in the north end of CenturyLink Field would be made available for the event . In the week leading up to the final , Sounders FC owner and general manager Adrian Hanauer indicated that sections of the stadium would continue to be opened to meet demand . He stated that " no paying customer would be turned away . " 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 With a better MLS regular season record and home field advantage , Sounders FC were the favorites to win the match ; however , the Fire had improved throughout the year through better play from their wingers and midfielders . 
 Seattle and Chicago had met twice in MLS regular season matches in 2011 . The first meeting , on April 9 , 2011 , resulted in a 2 – 1 win for Sounders FC in front of their home crowd . It was Seattle 's 5th game of the season . The second meeting was hosted by Chicago on June 4 , 2011 , and resulted in a 0 – 0 draw . It was the first game for Chicago coach Frank Klopas as he replaced Carlos de los Cobos , who was fired by the club the previous week . As a player , Klopas had scored the winning goal for Chicago in the 1998 U.S. Open Cup final . As coach , <unk> analyst Charlie Corr credited him with the team 's successful shift in tactics since previously meeting Seattle . 
 In the days leading up to the final , Seattle had recently finished a long road trip . Chicago 's schedule made the match their third in a week 's time . In preparation for the final , the managers fielded weaker sides during their respective league matches two days before the game , allowing them to rest several regular starters . The Sounders were playing well , having already clinched a MLS playoff berth . A victory over the New England Revolution on the weekend prior to the final gave the team a three @-@ game winning streak . The Fire had defeated Real Salt Lake on September 28 , but their playoff chances were diminished after a tie against the Houston Dynamo on the weekend prior to the final . 
 = = Match = = 
 The match was televised live on Fox Soccer with coverage starting at 7 pm PT ( 02 : 00 UTC ) . The attendance of 36 @,@ 615 was a record crowd for the competition 's final . Seattle 's Emerald City Supporters unveiled <unk> before kickoff depicting the Grim Reaper over the graves of D.C. United , the Columbus Crew , and the Chicago Fire . 
 Injuries to key players were a concern for both teams in the buildup to the final . For Seattle , midfielder Mauro Rosales 's knee was injured and he did not recover in time for the final . Also , Sounders FC defender James Riley was recovering from a concussion . He practiced in the week prior to the final and started in the match . For Chicago , midfielder Sebastian Grazzini was a key player who was questionable before the match . Grazzini began the game on the bench for Chicago . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 The match started with a frenetic pace as both teams earned free kick attempts within the opening two minutes . Seattle forward Mike Fucito had the first goal scoring opportunity of the match in the eighth minute as he broke free in the penalty area and took a shot on goal . The shot was kicked away by Fire goalkeeper Sean Johnson . Neither side appeared to gain control as the match progressed through the first 10 minutes . In the 11th minute , Chicago midfielder Marco Pappa slipped between two defenders in the middle of the field and had a long range shot go just wide of the net . Two minutes later Pappa again had a long shot which forced Seattle goalkeeper Kasey Keller to make a save . Pappa was responsible for all five of his team 's shots in the first half . In the 26th minute , Patrick <unk> was shown a yellow card by referee Alex Prus for a hard tackle on Seattle 's Osvaldo Alonso near the touch @-@ line . 
 As the match passed the 30 minute mark , Seattle began to take control as they held possession and created more scoring opportunities . Five minutes before half time Marco Pappa again tested the Seattle goalkeeper as he cut inside a defender and took a shot from 30 yards . The shot forced Kasey Keller to make a diving save . In the 44th minute Seattle striker Mike Fucito rushed onto a poor backpass by the Chicago defense and then <unk> a pass to Alvaro Fernandez who was streaking into the box . His shot was stopped with a reaching save by Chicago goalkeeper Sean Johnson . One minute later , in first half injury time , Seattle striker Fredy Montero nearly scored with a 20 @-@ yard shot that flew past the keeper and bounced off the left goal post . The half ended with the score tied 0 – 0 . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 At half time , Seattle midfielder Erik <unk> was subbed on for Alvaro Fernandez , who had suffered a slight concussion during the first half . Shortly after the second half began , Seattle nearly broke the stalemate . In the 53rd minute , a Sounders FC throw @-@ in was flicked on to Mike Fucito , who lifted a shot up and over the keeper . His shot was chased by several Chicago defenders as it crossed the goal mouth and bounced off the far goal post and back into play . In the 78th minute , Montero broke the deadlock on a corner kick taken by Erik Friberg . Sounders FC defender Jeff Parke headed the corner kick on goal and Chicago goalkeeper Sean Johnson saved the shot . The ball rebounded to the feet of Fredy Montero , who tapped the ball into the net for in the first goal of the game . Sounders FC now had a 1 – 0 lead . 
 For much of the first half and early second half , Sounders FC 's defensive efforts had been focused on closely defending Chicago midfield Pável Pardo . With Pardo unable to distribute the ball to Chicago 's speedy wingers , Patrick <unk> and Domonic Oduro , Chicago 's offense had been effectively neutralized for much of the match . Fire coach Frank Klopas made two substitutions late in the match , bringing on forward Diego Chaves in the 80th minute and midfielder Sebastián Grazzini in the 85th . Chicago 's best chance of the half came in the 90th minute when Dominic Oduro headed a shot toward Kasey Keller , who made the save even though the attempt was ruled offside . 
 As the match neared its conclusion , Chicago shifted players forward as they searched for an equalizing goal . However , in the sixth minute of stoppage time , Osvaldo Alonso scored Seattle 's second goal on a counterattack play as he dribbled around multiple defenders and the goalkeeper and finally tapped the ball into the net . The goal gave Sounders FC a 2 – 0 lead and sealed the victory . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 Overall 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Most of the record crowd remained after the game as they watched Seattle players and coaches engaged in the post match trophy awarding ceremony and celebrated on the field . In the post match press conference , Sigi Schmid praised his team 's defensive efforts in the match , saying " We talked about making sure their defenders – and primarily Pável Pardo – didn ’ t have a chance to lift their heads and hit those long balls in behind . " Schmid continued , " I thought Evans did a really good job . Sometimes we were stretched in the midfield , but I thought he did a very good job of stepping up to Pável . When you look at the 90 minutes , it was a rare occasion that he was able to hit a ball behind our defense . " Chicago midfielder Logan Pause commented on the game saying , " It ’ s disappointing . We came here to win . We were under the gun all night . They ’ re a great team , one of the best in the league . It was a great atmosphere and home field advantage . The better team won tonight unfortunately . " 
 The day after the match , Sounders FC flew a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 280 m2 ) scarf over Seattle and Bellevue in the afternoon and early evening respectively , in celebration of their victory . By winning the final , Sounders FC became the first MLS team to win the competition three times in a row , and the first club to do so in the competition since Greek American Atlas did so in 1968 , 42 years earlier . Seattle also became the fourth team in the 98 @-@ year history of the tournament to win three in a row . As U.S. Open Cup champions , Seattle received the $ 100 @,@ 000 cash prize while Chicago was given $ 50 @,@ 000 as the runner up . Seattle also earned a berth in the 2012 – 13 CONCACAF Champions League with the victory . In the Champions League , Seattle won their group and were eventually knocked out of the tournament in the semifinals by Mexican club Santos Laguna . 
 Sounders FC midfielder Osvaldo Alonso was voted the " player of the round " for the final . Alonso was recognized for his goal scoring effort as well as his record @-@ setting fourth consecutive appearance as a player in the U.S. Open Cup final match . He had appeared first with the Charleston Battery in the 2008 final and then 3 times with Seattle from 2009 to 2011 . Seattle forward Fredy Montero was recognized as the " player of the tournament " as he scored the game winning goals for Sounders FC in their quarterfinal , semifinal , and final matches . Osvaldo Alonso was one of the four finalists for " player of the tournament " along with Montero and two players from the semifinalist Richmond Kickers – Ronnie Pascale and David Bulow . 
 = = = Host selection process changes = = = 
 U.S. Soccer was criticized after the match for the secretive bid process that allows teams to outspend their opponents for hosting rights . Both the blind bidding process for hosting tournament matches and the manner in which MLS teams qualified for the tournament were widely criticized . An example of the concerns raised around hosting came from FC Dallas midfielder Daniel Hernandez on Twitter , where he complained about Seattle 's home @-@ field advantage throughout the 2011 tournament . Following the final , MLS and U.S. Soccer officials met to discuss rule changes to the tournament 's host bidding system and team qualification processes . Sounders FC owner Adrian Hanauer commented on the changes and the possibility of raising the profile of the tournament , " I don ’ t think the bidding process is going to change the profile of the tournament , necessarily . It might make a few people happy , it might make a few people unhappy . But ultimately , I ’ m not convinced that ’ s what is going to raise the profile . " 
 In January 2012 , in preparation for the 2012 edition of the U.S. Open Cup , U.S. Soccer announced several changes to the tournament format . Included in these changes was the introduction of a new host selection process . Beginning in 2012 , for all rounds of the tournament through the quarterfinals , a random host selection process would be used . While in previous years a blind bidding system was used to determine the host of a match , the new process has the host determined by blind draw if both teams ' venues meet minimum standards . The blind bidding system for hosting rights remained in effect for the semifinals and final of the 2012 tournament . However , U.S. Soccer announced in 2013 that hosting for all rounds of the tournament would be determined randomly as long as both venues met minimum standards . 
 = Robert Ramsay ( cricketer ) = 
 Robert Christian Ramsay ( 20 December 1861 – 25 June 1957 ) was an English @-@ born gentleman who spent much of his life as a pastoralist and businessman in Queensland , Australia . During the late 1880s , he was also an amateur cricketer who played for Harrow , Cambridge University and Somerset . In 1882 , he also played for the Gentlemen of England under W.G. Grace . 
 Born in Cheltenham , Gloucestershire , Ramsay spent his early childhood in Australia , but moved back to England with his family in March 1874 to enable him and his older brother to receive an education . He attended Harrow and then Cambridge , and gained his sporting Blue at the latter , playing in the University match against Oxford in 1882 . He made fifteen first @-@ class appearances for Cambridge and Somerset in 1881 and 1882 , but did not play any first @-@ class cricket after that . In 1883 , he left Cambridge without graduating and returned to Australia where , after working as a jackaroo at <unk> Station in New South Wales for nearly two years , he joined his brother Frank at Eton Vale , a large pastoral station on Queensland 's Darling Downs owned by their father Robert Burnett Ramsay and Arthur Hodgson . At the time , Eton Vale was being managed by Arthur Hodgson 's son Edward . 
 Bob Ramsay remained in Australia until his retirement in June 1920 , when he returned with his wife and children to England and settled in <unk> , Kent . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life and cricket = = = 
 Robert Christian Ramsay was born in Cheltenham , Gloucestershire on 20 December 1861 as the sixth child and fourth son of Robert Burnett Ramsay and Susan , née Lindsay Carnegie . Three of his elder siblings died in very early childhood and his older brother Alfred died from appendicitis in 1874 when only 15 years old . Apart from spending five years as a director of mercantile firm Ramsay , Young & Co. in Sydney between 1839 and 1844 , Robert Ramsay 's father was a pastoralist and politician in Queensland who served as the eighth treasurer of Queensland . Bob Ramsay was at school in Warwick and then briefly at Ipswich Grammar School in Queensland , Australia until the family moved to England in March 1874 . He then attended Elstree School and Harrow School . At Harrow , he was part of the football team in 1878 and 1879 , captaining the side in the latter year . He also played for the school 's cricket team , alongside his older brother Marmaduke Francis Ramsay , better known as Frank . In 1879 , the brothers combined to take seventeen of Eton College 's twenty wickets , of which Robert claimed six in the first innings and four in the second . 
 Ramsay followed his older brother to Trinity Hall , Cambridge , and in his first year played in the freshmen 's trial match in which he claimed six wickets , five of them in the first innings . He played one first @-@ class match for the university that summer , bowling ten overs without taking a wicket against Yorkshire . He also played five second @-@ class matches during 1881 , all for Somerset County Cricket Club . His best performance for Somerset during that time was against Kent , when he claimed six wickets in the first innings . 
 The following year at Cambridge , Ramsay played nine first @-@ class matches for the university , and gained his blue . His first match in the summer of 1882 was played for the university against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) , a match which Cambridge won by 189 runs , aided by the strong bowling of Ramsay , who claimed 13 wickets and conceded 49 runs , the tenth best bowling performance for the university . Later in the summer he claimed eight wickets against Lancashire , and then picked up 12 wickets against the touring Australians . In the match against the Australians , he collected five wickets in the first innings and seven in the second , albeit more expensively than in the match against the MCC . He was less prolific against Lancashire for Somerset , during a match played in such cold weather that catches were hard to hold . Bill Roe said that during this match , Lancashire 's number eleven , George Nash was dropped off every ball of an over bowled by Ramsay , before Roe himself caught Nash off the first ball of the following over . Ramsay was selected to play for the " Gentlemen of England " against the touring Australians , and claimed three wickets in a match which the Australians won by an innings . In the University match against Oxford , Ramsay had little success , taking two wickets from his 52 overs , during which he conceded 91 runs . Cambridge won the match by seven wickets . 
 In all , Ramsay played 15 first @-@ class cricket matches , and took 69 wickets at an average of 17 @.@ 82 . He claimed five wickets in an innings five times , and ten wickets in a match twice . He bowled with an unusual action which gained him the nickname " Twisting Tommy " , because of its resemblance to a corkscrew . As a batsman , he totalled 303 runs at an average of 13 @.@ 77 , including two half @-@ centuries , with a career best of 71 . 
 = = = Return to Australia = = = 
 Ramsay did not graduate from Cambridge , but instead returned to Australia in 1883 to go into farming , first as a jackaroo on <unk> Station in New South Wales and then , in late 1885 , with his older brother Frank at Eton Vale , a large station on the Darling Downs owned by their father and Arthur Hodgson , later Sir Arthur Hodgson , that was then being managed by Arthur Hodgson 's son Edward . 
 In December 1886 , he and Frank , together with Edward Hodgson , established Ramsay Bros. & Hodgson independently of their fathers and bought <unk> , a huge station that , in Bob 's own words in a letter to his father , was " about 140 miles from Hughenden Railway and 18 miles from Winton , [ and ] consists of 1035 square miles of country as good as it is possible to get " . The two Ramsay brothers became five when three younger Ramsay brothers , Lauderdale , Douglas and Norman joined the firm two years later . Ramsay Brothers & Hodgson went on to acquire numerous other Queensland stations and , after the premature death of Edward Hodgson in 1896 , became one of the largest sheep @-@ farming enterprises in the world . In response to claims by an American journalist about an American sheep @-@ farmer , The Western Champion and General Advertiser dated 9 October 1905 echoed the North Queensland Register in saying that the Ramsay Bros. would , " with a good season or two , give the American a shaking " for the title of biggest sheep @-@ farmers in the world . At <unk> , Ramsay established what the Australian Dictionary of Biography described as " the most progressive run [ station ] in north @-@ west Queensland . " He used modern technology to achieve this , including " private telephone @-@ lines , shearing machines , Humber motorcycles and <unk> steam @-@ motorcars . " In 1907 , Ramsay married 20 @-@ year @-@ old Olive <unk> Voss at St James ' Cathedral in Townsville , Queensland , with whom he had seven children between 1908 and 1924 . 
 He took over management of the family estates upon his brother Frank 's retirement to England in November 1908 , and two years later became a founding member of the Brisbane branch of the Round Table . Between 1914 and 1917 , he was a member of the Queensland Recruiting Committee but left in protest over the failure of the 1916 Federal Government referendum to introduce conscription . Instead , he joined the Queensland Reinforcements Referendum Committee , of which he became president . He remained active as a pastoralist and businessman until his retirement in 1920 , at which time he moved to England . In 1921 , he moved to <unk> , his parents ' former home in <unk> , Kent , and remained there until he died on 25 June 1957 . 
 = Boroughitis = 
 Boroughitis ( also borough fever or borough mania ) was the creation , usually by referendum , of large numbers of small boroughs in the American state of New Jersey in the 1890s , particularly in Bergen County . Attempts by the New Jersey Legislature to reform local government and the school systems led to the breakup of most of Bergen County 's townships into small boroughs , communities that still <unk> the state 's political map . This occurred because of the development of commuter suburbs in New Jersey , residents of which wanted more government services than did the long @-@ time rural population . 
 In the late 19th century , much of New Jersey was divided into large townships . In Bergen Counties , several of these townships contained multiple commuter suburbs , often formed around railroad stations . Political disputes arose between the growing number of commuters , who wanted more government services for the new developments near railroad lines , and long @-@ time residents such as farmers , who feared higher taxes . A previously little @-@ used law permitted small segments of existing townships to vote by referendum to form independent boroughs . In late 1893 , Republicans , backed by commuters , captured control of the legislature and the following year passed legislation allowing boroughs that were formed from parts of two or more townships to elect a representative to the county Board of Chosen Freeholders . This 1894 act , in combination with a second one the same year that consolidated school districts into one per township , made it easy and attractive for dissatisfied communities to break away and become boroughs , in order to gain a seat on the county board or to keep control of the local school . 
 Forty new boroughs were formed in 1894 and 1895 , with the bulk in Bergen County , where townships were broken up or greatly reduced in size ; there are few there today . Feeling that the 1894 laws had allowed the formation of an excessive number of municipalities , the legislature scuttled the right to elect a freeholder in 1895 , and ended the formation of boroughs by referendum the following year . Municipalities continued to be created by the legislature into the 20th century , and although there have been efforts at consolidation in recent years to lower the cost of government , their number has been only slightly reduced . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time of the union of East Jersey and West Jersey into the Province of New Jersey in 1702 , there were about 24 townships ; more were added under British government by letters patent , court decrees , or legislative action . Following the American Revolutionary War , the New Jersey Legislature confirmed all municipal charters , and granted new ones ; by 1798 , the state had 104 townships . Increased economic activity in Essex , Morris and Sussex counties , and the formation of Warren County , raised the number to 125 by 1834 . 
 Most of the townships had low taxes and little government ; the roads ( mostly of dirt ) were maintained by farmers in lieu of taxes . Township meetings occurred each February ; the citizens would discuss concerns , seek solutions , and collectively appoint agents to carry out their will . Voters in each township elected members of the county governing body , the Board of Chosen Freeholders . 
 The railroad brought major changes to New Jersey beginning in the mid @-@ 19th century . The state was mostly agricultural , and the new lines made it easier for farmers to get their crops to market . But they also made it easier for those employed in New York City or Philadelphia to live outside the urban core and yet go to work each day . Even before the Civil War , the Brick Church station , in Orange , Essex County , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) from New York City , became the center of the nation 's first commuter suburb . New Jersey 's townships acquired a new population , of commuters , who formed communities near railroad stations , and who wanted good well @-@ lit streets and roads , quality schools , and a stake in the government . They were bitterly opposed on each issue by the rural , agricultural population ( or " <unk> dusters " ) , who feared that their taxes would be raised to pay for services they did not want . 
 Schools and school districts caused angry debate between commuters and long @-@ time residents . School district lines were independent of those of townships , for every school formed its own school district . Accordingly , townships could contain a number of school districts : Bergen County 's Franklin Township in the early 1890s contained eleven school districts serving 774 students . Bergen County was sparsely populated when the railroad lines went through in the 1850s , making for a different pattern of development than other suburban counties , such as Union and Camden , which saw more planned development around railroad stations . Bergen 's pattern of development was unique in New Jersey , with , until 1894 , several commuter suburbs in a single township , something rare elsewhere in the state . 
 The town @-@ meeting style of government then prescribed for townships proved ill @-@ suited to those changing times . The New Jersey Constitution gave the state government in Trenton relatively weak powers over the townships , but from time to time the legislature attempted reform . The townships were divided into road districts , with residents appointed to see that maintenance was done ; in 1859 , the state allowed residents of each district to elect a road commissioner , who saw to it their road taxes were spent effectively . Many of these districts later became individual municipalities , with the road commissioner often the first mayor . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 Until 1875 , municipalities had been created or modified only by special acts of the legislature , but this ended then , with lawmakers instead passing general laws , and leaving actual incorporation of municipalities to referenda in areas wanting redress . In 1878 , the legislature passed the Borough Act , allowing landowners in an area less than 4 square miles ( 10 km2 ) and with fewer than 1 @,@ 000 people to seek a referendum on secession from the township to become a borough . This referendum could take place on petition of the owners of 10 percent of the land , as measured by value , in the area in question , and 10 days notice of the vote was required . In 1882 , the legislature expanded this measure to allow areas of less than 2 square miles ( 5 @.@ 2 km2 ) to become borough commissions with some autonomy within the township . Another impetus towards more municipalities developed in the 1870s , with the New Jersey public soured on the railroads because of the Panic of 1873 . The newly Democratic legislature passed laws that ended tax exemptions on railroad @-@ owned lands . Much of the land , generally near stations , was sold off , and was transformed into communities that in the following years would secede from the township in which they lay , creating some of the " doughnut holes " , with boroughs surrounded by the townships they were formerly part of , that mark the New Jersey municipal landscape today . 
 In the 1893 elections , Republicans recaptured control of the New Jersey Legislature . This was due in part to another economic depression , the Panic of 1893 , which had occurred with Democrat Grover Cleveland in the White House , and in part because some Democrats , like Republicans before them , had proven corrupt . The increasing commuter population also played a role ; Bergen County contained ( and still does ) many commuter communities because of its proximity to New York City . These new residents were strongly Republican , as contrasted with the Democratic farmers . According to local historian Kevin Wright , " Having gained sufficient numbers by 1893 to challenge Punkin Dusters at the polls , the Commuters of Bergen County led a political revolution in Home Rule that finally toppled the ancien régime . " Legal disputes about control of the New Jersey Senate and the Republican desire to undo many Democratic policies occupied the legislature in the early part of its 1894 session . Nevertheless , interest groups such as local landowners pushed the legislature for permissive policies on municipal incorporation , hoping to gain power in the new governments . 
 As the legislature sat , the townships of Bergen County fractured . The provision of the Borough Act allowing separation had been little used prior to 1893 . A year @-@ long legal battle in Palisades Township , along the Hudson River , led to a referendum that saw Tenafly break away in January 1894 . Some communities seceded in early 1894 because of disputes about how to pay for macadamized roads , which were first paved through much of Bergen County in the first half of the 1890s . The Hackensack Republican reported on March 1 , " the chief reason why Delford [ later <unk> ] , Westwood , Hillsdale and Park Ridge want to become boroughs is that they may avoid what is feared will be heavy macadam tax " . The proposed borough of Delford would take land from multiple townships , uniting communities on both sides of the Hackensack River that shared a school , but incorporation was put on hold because of legal uncertainty as to whether a borough could be formed from parts of more than one township . 
 In April , the Republican majority in Trenton let it be known they were working on a bill to solve Delford 's problem by allowing boroughs to be formed from portions of two or more townships , and this became the Act of May 9 , 1894 . The act also granted such boroughs a seat on the county Board of Chosen Freeholders . According to Wright , " the consequences of casting special legislation under guise of a general law soon became patent " . Since 1885 , new boroughs had not gotten their own freeholder , with borough voters instead joining with those in the township they were formerly part of to elect one . Partisans saw the political possibilities of the 1894 law , and contested control of the Bergen County government through the formation of boroughs that would elect freeholders of their party . 
 The energetic legislators finally reached school reform with Chapter <unk> of the Public Laws of 1894 . That act , passed on May 25 , provided that " the several school districts in each township shall be consolidated into one school district " . The legislature 's intent was to equalize funding between wealthier districts and poorer ones . Had the legislature done no more , according to former New Jersey General Assembly Speaker Alan Karcher , " New Jersey might have had fewer than 500 municipalities today " . However , the legislature further enacted in the bill , " that each city , borough , and incorporated town , shall be a school district , separate and distinct from the township school district " . Thus , if a community seceded from its township to form a borough , it would keep control of its school . The new township school districts would be responsible for the debts of their predecessors , meaning that some communities faced the prospect of paying off , in part , the debts of others , and seeing some of their tax dollars going to fund others ' schools . Under the law , by becoming an incorporated borough , they could avoid these things . 
 The school legislation greatly fueled the borough craze in Bergen County . Wealthy communities that had had their own school districts now faced the prospect of sharing their school tax revenues with poorer areas , or of being divided up piecemeal in borough referenda . Allendale broke away , principally from Franklin Township , because of such fears . At 650 people , Allendale was one of the more populous boroughs formed in 1894 . In such commuter communities as Park Ridge , those new residents often led the borough drives against the opposition of the old inhabitants who feared the improvements would not benefit them and that the new borough would quickly incur debt through issuance of municipal bonds . 
 Another new borough created by the residents to keep local school control was <unk> , which was formed around the settlement of Pascack from parts of Harrington Township and Orvil Township , and which in 1910 became <unk> Lake . Rural Upper Saddle River broke away from Orvil Township and <unk> Township , taking one of Orvil Township 's six schoolhouses — the press noted that the nascent borough would most likely go Democratic as only 16 Republicans could be found . Ridgewood , then a township , avoided further depredations by Midland Park and Glen Rock by incorporating as a village . The borough of Wood @-@ Ridge was formed after the boundary lines were carefully drawn with an eye to the referendum , to exclude the home of a family of prominent landowners who were opposed to the incorporation — though not excluding their farmland . Once Wood @-@ Ridge was successfully established , the farmhouse was annexed by borough ordinance . 
 Of the 40 boroughs created in 1894 and 1895 , 26 were in Bergen County . The ones elsewhere included Roselle and Mountainside , in Union County . In September 1894 , state Senator Henry D. Winton warned that the legislature at its next session was likely to amend if not gut the Borough Act because of the craze in Bergen County . Nine new members had been added to the Board of Chosen Freeholders from the previous sixteen , Winton noted , with a proportionate increase in the cost of government , which would be further inflated by the multiplicity of boroughs . The signal that the law might change did not slow the incorporations : Wood @-@ Ridge , Carlstadt , Edgewater , Old Tappan and other boroughs trace their <unk> to late 1894 . There were some fistfights and hard feelings over the borough formations , and Russell Jones , whose house was on the newly drawn line between Teaneck and Bogota , saw it burn down as firefighters argued about who had jurisdiction . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 The wave of incorporations continued into 1895 , with Cliffside Park gaining borough status in January . That month , Bergen County 's school superintendent , John Terhune , wrote a report to Trenton , decrying that the law allowed borough petitioners to set the proposed lines to exclude opponents of incorporation , " The idea of allowing a bare majority the power to accept or reject a few that have dared to oppose the new fad , and for this simple expression of their rights to cut them from all school facilities is radically wrong and gross injustice . There is no defense for the injured , but they must meekly accept the situation . It is inconsistent with liberty , a term so dear to us all " . Superintendent Terhune wrote that " until the <unk> is done " , it would not be possible to assess the many problems that the rapid subdivision had caused : " I would not attempt to estimate , let alone approximate , the changes caused by the boroughs . It is simply inconceivable " . 
 The Act of February 18 , 1895 amended the previous year 's borough bill to raise the requirement for incorporation petitions from owners of 10 percent of the land value to 50 percent . The rush was also slowed by the legislature deciding that no borough created thereafter could maintain a separate school system unless there were at least 400 children living within its limits . With the Bergen County Board of Chosen Freeholders by then at 28 members , divided evenly between the parties , the legislature passed a bill setting the number of members of such boards in third @-@ class counties ( including Bergen ) at 9 , with the freeholders elected from the Delford @-@ style boroughs to go out of office on May 8 . Nevertheless , on May 9 , electors in what became the borough of Englewood Cliffs voted to secede from Englewood , 34 – 1 . 
 North Arlington was incorporated as a borough by a referendum held on March 26 , 1896 , the day the state legislature passed a bill providing that , " no borough or village shall hereafter be incorporated in this state except by special act of the legislature . " The following year , the legislature undertook a thorough revision of the laws relating to boroughs , and forbade incorporations , dissolutions , or boundary changes without its leave . This simply moved the venue for conflicts over schools from local referenda to the corridors of the State House in Trenton . Boroughs continued to be incorporated by legislative act , with a major burst in the 1920s . These 20th century increases in the number of boroughs were sometimes caused by conflicts over road funds , causing Caldwell Township , Essex County , to divide into six municipalities by 1908 , and with Clementon Township , Camden County fracturing into nine between 1915 and 1929 . 
 By the 1920s , the number of municipalities in Bergen County had reached 70 , where it still stands . After the 1920s , the legislature did not create many new municipalities , but local officials used zoning to affect land use , making annexation less attractive . Because of <unk> , the township as a form of government all but disappeared from Bergen County . One that remains is South Hackensack , the remnants of Lodi Township that no seceding borough wanted . Its three pieces are separated from each other by several miles . 
 A number of boroughs became townships in the early 1980s , though they did not necessarily change their form of government , as until 1986 , more federal aid was available to municipalities called townships than to those styled boroughs . As of 2014 , New Jersey has 565 municipalities , the highest number of municipalities per capita of any state , and more than eight other states combined . Its boroughs include Teterboro in Bergen County , site of an airport , industrial buildings , and the homes of fewer than a hundred residents , and Pine Valley and Tavistock in Camden County , each consisting primarily of a country club . Governor Chris Christie has urged consolidation to lower the cost of government , and a number of municipalities have studied it , but the only significant recent merger has been that of Princeton Borough with Princeton Township ( 2012 ) . 
 Karcher , both while Speaker and afterwards , promoted consolidation , but saw it fall victim to home rule advocates . He discussed the long @-@ term effect of the <unk> craze : 
 The ultimate cost to the state 's taxpayers ... directly attributable to the Republican reforms of 1894 , is incalculable . One need only take an afternoon drive through Bergen County . The only evidence that you have traversed one borough in the last five minutes and are now entering another , which may take only three minutes to cross , is a sign . Otherwise it is virtually impossible to tell one fungible borough from the other . Yet each has its own most prized possession , and prized it should be considering its cost : its own school district . 
 = Brian Adams ( wrestler ) = 
 Brian Keith Adams ( April 14 , 1964 – August 13 , 2007 ) was an American professional wrestler . Adams is well known for his time with the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , under the name Crush , and for World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) under his real name Brian Adams . Trained in Japan by Antonio Inoki , he was a two @-@ time WCW World Tag Team Champion and a one @-@ time WWF World Tag Team Champion and All Japan Pro Wrestling World Tag Team Champion , among other titles and accomplishments . In 2002 , he briefly tried a career in boxing until he was forced to retire due to back and shoulder injuries . He died of accidental respiratory failure from a combination of <unk> , <unk> , chlordiazepoxide and alprazolam . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brian Adams was born in Kona , Hawaii and was raised in Kealakekua , Hawaii and attended <unk> High School . After graduating from high school , Adams joined the US Air Force , where he began boxing . It was during his time in the USAF , while stationed in Japan , that he was also exposed to wrestling . Adams was trained in wrestling by famed Japanese wrestler and mixed martial artist Antonio Inoki . In 1986 , after training in Japan , Adams came to the United States and began working in Portland , Oregon 's Pacific Northwest Wrestling ( PNW ) . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = New Japan Pro Wrestling ( 1986 – 1987 ) = = = 
 Brian Adams made his debut for New Japan Pro Wrestling in 1986 . However , his work visa expired , forcing him to return to the United States . 
 = = = Pacific Northwest Wrestling ( 1987 – 1990 ) = = = 
 In the Pacific Northwest Wrestling ( PNW ) promotion , he was given the nickname The American Ninja and was put in a tag team called " The Wrecking Crew " with Len Denton , who wrestled under a mask , billed as " The Grappler . " Adams and Denton were the Pacific Northwest Tag Team Champions for a time and worked a feud with the Southern Rockers , Steve Doll and Rex King . In 1990 , he won the Pacific Northwest Heavyweight Championship after winning a tournament final match against Larry Oliver in Portland on April 21 , 1990 for the vacant title . He lost the title to Scott Norton on May 12 , 1990 in Portland . 
 = = = Return to NJPW ( 1987 – 1988 ) = = = 
 In September 1987 , Adams returned to NJPW with a couple of victories over Kenichi Oya . By February 1988 , he began wearing a mask and going by the name The Midnight Soldier . Although he was usually on the losing end of most of the matches , he wrestled to a double countout with George Takano and held a victory over <unk> Goto . 
 = = = All Japan Pro Wrestling ( 1989 ) = = = 
 In January 1989 , Adams went to All Japan Pro Wrestling for its New Year 's Giant Series tour . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation ( 1990 – 1991 ) = = = 
 In June 1990 , while still working for the PNW , Adams debuted in the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) as Crush , the third member of the WWF World Tag Team Championship team Demolition . With Adams joining Demolition , the stable exercised the Freebird Rule allowing any combination of the three to defend the tag team title , which allowed Crush to become a World Tag Team Champion without being involved in the match where the team won the title ( Demolition had begun their third reign as champions at Wrestlemania VI in April 1990 before Adams even debuted for the WWF ) . At the SummerSlam pay @-@ per @-@ view in 1990 , Demolition , with new member Adams , lost the Tag Team title to The Hart Foundation in a two out of three falls match with Adams getting pinned for the final fall to lose the title . After SummerSlam , Demolition resumed an earlier feud with The Legion of Doom . Adams continued to perform as part of Demolition until after WrestleMania VII where he and Smash lost to Genichiro Tenryu and Koji Kitao . After WrestleMania , the WWF decided to disband Demolition as a team . 
 = = = Return to PNW ( 1991 – 1992 ) = = = 
 Upon his departure from the WWF , Adams , who continued to use the Crush gimmick , returned to PNW . He was portrayed as a dominant wrestler , winning both the Pacific Northwest Tag Team Championship and the Pacific Northwest Heavyweight Championship . Adams received the first of these two championships during this stint in the PNW while teaming with previous rival Steve Doll and defeating The <unk> Brothers for the Tag Team Championship on July 27 , 1991 in Portland , Oregon . They remained the champions until September 1 , 1991 when they lost the title to The Grappler and Don Harris . A little more than a month later , Adams received his second Pacific Northwest Heavyweight title , on October 12 , 1991 , in Portland after he defeated Rip Oliver via submission to the Full Nelson hold . Adams was the champion for just over three months , losing the title to Ron Harris at a show in Portland , on January 18 , 1992 . 
 = = = Return to WWF = = = 
 = = = = Kona Crush ( 1992 – 1993 ) = = = = 
 Adams went back to work for the WWF in 1992 and was given a new fan favorite gimmick : an easygoing surfing Hawaiian who wore bright neon tights and utilized a new two @-@ handed skull vice finisher called the Kona Crush . Crush made his televised debut in WWF under his new character on May 9 , 1992 episode of Superstars , defeating Kato . At SummerSlam 1992 at the famous Wembley Stadium in London , England in front of 80 @,@ 355 fans , he defeated his former tag team partner Barry <unk> ( Smash ) who was now known as Repo Man , although it was never part of a storyline that the two were former tag @-@ team partners . Crush then engaged in a feud with Doink the Clown ( Matt Osborne ) , after he was attacked with a loaded prosthetic arm while confronting the clown about his cruel pranks on children at ringside , which caused Crush to miss the 1993 Royal Rumble . The feud culminated at WrestleMania IX in Las Vegas , where Crush lost after a second , identical Doink ( played by Steve Keirn ) appeared from underneath the ring and struck Crush with the prosthetic arm . At the first King of the Ring pay @-@ per @-@ view , Crush challenged Shawn Michaels for the Intercontinental Championship , but lost the match after a distraction by Doink . 
 On July 4 , 1993 , Crush injured his back in the stars and stripes challenge trying to bodyslam WWF Champion Yokozuna who at the time had a billed weight of 580 lb ( 260 kg ) ( the bodyslam challenge took place on the US Navy Aircraft carrier USS Intrepid ) . Crush , generally considered to have the best chance of those present , was the first wrestler to actually get Yokozuna off his feet but his back gave out forcing him to stop . Lex Luger , repackaged from the heel character The Narcissist to an all @-@ American hero , arrived soon after via helicopter and slammed the 580 lb WWF Champion . On the July 12 edition of Monday Night RAW , Crush faced Yokozuna for the WWF Championship in a losing effort . To send a message to Luger , Yokozuna performed several Banzai Drops to Crush , leaving him off TV for several months . 
 = = = = Various alliances and storylines ( 1993 – 1995 ) = = = = 
 Crush returned in the fall of 1993 and attacked his on @-@ screen friend Randy Savage , because Savage had encouraged him to enter the Body Slam Challenge , and had failed to contact him during recuperation . Crush then allied himself with Yokozuna and Mr. Fuji , becoming a villain . Adams adopted a " Japanese sympathizer " gimmick to go with his new attitude , including growing a beard , using face paint ( albeit a design far different from his Demolition days ) , and wearing darker colors . This rivalry led to a falls count anywhere match against Savage at WrestleMania X , which he lost when Savage <unk> him to a metal rack and returned to the ring before a 60 @-@ second count . The match with Savage is notable for being Savage 's final WrestleMania appearance . 
 After the feud with Savage ended , Crush was put into a feud with Lex Luger . Crush would also briefly form a tag team with Yokozuna , defeating such combinations as The Smoking Gunns and Mabel and Typhoon before challenging The Headshrinkers for the World Tag Team Championship at the 1994 King of the Ring pay @-@ per @-@ view . They lost the match after Luger distracted Crush as retaliation for Crush costing him a spot in the King of the Ring tournament . The feud was dropped in July when rumors that Luger was joining Ted DiBiase 's Million Dollar Corporation were starting . Crush left the WWF in August 1994 . 
 In January 1995 , Crush returned and took part in the 1995 Royal Rumble match as the 30th entrant in the elimination match . He eliminated Billy Gunn , Bart Gunn , Adam Bomb , and Fatu before being eliminated by Davey Boy Smith . Shortly after , while home in Hawaii , he was arrested and subsequently jailed for purchasing steroids and possessing an illegal hand gun . 
 = = = = NOD and DOA ( 1996 – 1997 ) = = = = 
 After a brief stint in jail , Adams was brought back to the WWF with a new biker look at the beginning of the Monday Night Wars in 1996 , with his real @-@ life incarceration being referenced as part of a storyline on Monday Night Raw . Upon his return , the WWF gave Adams Clarence Mason , who portrayed a lawyer @-@ like character on @-@ screen , as a manager . Shortly after his return , he was made a member of the Nation of Domination ( NOD ) along with Faarooq and Savio Vega . Adams was later kicked out of the group , while once again turning face and subsequently formed and led a wrestling biker gang stable called the Disciples of Apocalypse ( DOA ) . The DOA feuded with Faarooq 's NOD and Vega 's new stable , Los Boricuas . Adams later left the WWF in 1997 , partially in protest to the Montreal Screwjob , while in storyline , he was injured by Kane even though his real last appearance was on Shotgun Saturday Night that week as he and the rest of the DOA defeated Steve Corino , Marty Garner , Mike Hollow , and Jason <unk> . 
 = = = World Championship Wrestling ( 1998 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Adams signed with World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) in 1998 and debuted as part of the New World Order . As a lower card performer , he often tag @-@ teamed with the likes of Scott Norton and Stevie Ray , occasionally losing matches against smaller and lesser known wrestlers . However , he also gained squash victories over jobbers in singles competition . During his time with the promotion , he was involved in a tag team tournament steel cage match on WCW Thunder in February 1999 , in which he and Horace Hogan lost to Chris Benoit and Dean Malenko . Afterwards , he was chosen to portray the KISS @-@ themed wrestler " The Demon " after walking out on the New World Order and entering a limo that supposedly had the band inside . He played the character for its debut on WCW Monday Nitro in which KISS also played a live concert . He would play it one more time to come out and have a staredown with heel wrestler Vampiro and abandoned it afterwards , never wrestling a single match with the gimmick . The Demon mantle was subsequently passed to Dale Torborg with no explanation given . Later , he formed a team with Bryan Clark called KroniK , which won the WCW World Tag Team Championship twice . 
 = = = Second return to WWF ( 2001 ) = = = 
 After the WWF 's purchase of WCW , KroniK appeared in WWF as part of the Alliance storyline . During their time in WWF , they were managed by Steven Richards and were placed in a short feud with The Brothers of Destruction ( The Undertaker and Kane ) . Adams and Clark faced , and lost to , the duo at the 2001 Unforgiven pay @-@ per @-@ view . Both men were accosted by the Undertaker in the locker room after the match for their lackluster performance . Clark was released from his WWF contract after refusing to go to the then WWF developmental territory Heartland Wrestling Association in Cincinnati , Ohio , while Adams did go to the HWA , where he performed until he , too , was released from his WWF contract in November 2001 . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Adams and Clark briefly worked for World Wrestling All @-@ Stars in early 2002 . They then traveled to Japan to work for All Japan Pro Wrestling ( AJPW ) . On July 17 , 2002 , at an AJPW pay @-@ per @-@ view , Adams and Clark defeated Keiji Mutoh and Taiyō Kea for the World Tag Team Championship . Adams and Clark remained champions until November 2002 when AJPW declared the title vacant , because Adams had left the promotion to pursue a boxing career . 
 = = = Wrestle @-@ 1 ( 2002 – 2003 ) = = = 
 After recovering from his shoulder injury , Adams returned to wrestling for " Wrestle 1 " , a pay @-@ per @-@ view for the Japanese promotion W @-@ 1 , which was held at the Tokyo Dome in Japan . In January 2003 , he made his last in @-@ ring performance , teaming with Bryan Clark , and facing Bill Goldberg and Keiji Mutoh in a losing effort . He suffered a spinal injury in this match that forced him into retirement . 
 = = Boxing career = = 
 Adams was scheduled to have his first boxing match , against Rick <unk> , on November 16 , 2002 at the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino in Las Vegas , Nevada with professional wrestler Randy Savage in his corner . This bout was to air on the Never Surrender boxing pay @-@ per @-@ view , but during his training for the bout , Adams injured his shoulder and was unable to fight . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On March 13 , 1995 , Adams was arrested at his home in Kona , Hawaii , after narcotics officers search his home and discover 500 units of anabolic steroids and several unregistered semi @-@ automatic guns . He was released on $ 10 @,@ 275 bail . On October 28 , 1995 , he was sentenced to five years probation after pleading no @-@ contest to 11 counts of drug and weapons charges . 
 In 1996 , Adams had an uncredited role in the Bollywood movie <unk> Ka Khiladi . In the movie , he played " Crush " and was killed by " The Undertaker " ( played by Brian Lee ) in a wrestling match . 
 Adams had surgery to attempt to correct his spinal injury , but it left him unfit to continue to wrestle . Following his retirement , Adams became a bodyguard for his longtime friend , wrestler @-@ turned @-@ rapper Randy Savage , who was touring to promote his CD , Be a Man . It was reported that Adams was living on income from a Lloyd 's of London insurance policy . Adams expressed interest in opening a health club in Tampa , Florida , which was to be a franchise of fellow wrestler Marc Mero 's " Body Slam " training center . Brian Adams and his wife had two children . 
 = = Death = = 
 On August 13 , 2007 , Adams was found unconscious in his bed by his youngest son ( age 7 ) at their Tampa , Florida home . His son called 911 , but Adams was pronounced dead by paramedics when they arrived . The medical examiner concluded that he died as a result of mixing the painkiller <unk> with the muscle relaxant <unk> and the sedatives chlordiazepoxide and alprazolam . The coroner determined the drugs in his system were individually at therapeutic levels , but their combination impeded his respiratory system enough to kill him . He was 43 years old . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Chokeslam – WCW 
 Cranium Crush / Kona Clutch ( Two @-@ handed <unk> ) – 1992 – 1993 
 Heart punch – 1994 ; 1996 – 1997 
 Signature moves 
 Around the Islands ( Tilt @-@ a @-@ whirl into either a backbreaker or a mat slam ) 
 Backbreaker 
 Bearhug 
 Bow and arrow hold 
 Cuts Like a Knife ( Full nelson slam ) 
 Dropkick 
 Fireman 's carry DDT 
 Flying shoulder block 
 Gorilla press into either a gutbuster or a slam 
 Headbutt 
 Inverted atomic drop 
 Multiple suplex variations 
 Delayed 
 Super 
 Ura @-@ nage 
 Vertical 
 Piledriver 
 Superkick 
 With Ax or Smash 
 Demolition Decapitation ( Backbreaker hold / Diving elbow drop combination ) 
 With Bryan Clark 
 High Times ( Double chokeslam ) 
 Total Meltdown ( Powerbomb ( Clark ) / Diving clothesline ( Adams ) combination ) 
 Managers 
 Jim Cornette 
 Paul <unk> . 
 Mr. Fuji 
 Clarence Mason 
 Steven Richards 
 Vincent 
 Nicknames 
 " Big " 
 " B.A. " 
 " The Original Hawaiian Punch " 
 Entrance themes 
 " In The World Beyond " by Loudness ( NJPW ; 1988 ) 
 " Demolition Daze " by Jimmy Hart , <unk> , and Rick Derringer ( WWF ; 1990 ) 
 " Demolition " ( 3rd Theme ) by Jim Johnston ( WWF ; 1990 – 1991 ) 
 " Crush " by Jim Johnston ( WWF ; 1992 – 93 ) 
 " Crush " ( 2nd Theme ) by Jim Johnston ( WWF ; 1993 – 1995 ) 
 " Jailbird " by Jim Johnston ( WWF ; 1996 ) 
 " Nation of Domination " by Jim Johnston ( WWF ; used while part of the Nation of Domination ; 1996 – 1997 ) 
 " Disciples of Apocalypse " by Jim Johnston ( WWF ; 1997 ) 
 " <unk> " by <unk> and Howard Helm ( WCW ; used while a part of the New World Order ; 1998 – 1999 ) 
 " God of Thunder " by KISS ( August 30 , 1999 ) 
 " KroniK " by Jimmy Hart & Howard Helm ( 2000 – 2001 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 All Japan Pro Wrestling 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Bryan Clark 
 Oregon Wrestling Federation 
 <unk> Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Mike Miller 
 Pacific Northwest Wrestling 
 NWA Pacific Northwest Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 NWA Pacific Northwest Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with The Grappler ( 1 ) and Steve Doll ( 1 ) 
 Salem City Tournament ( 1988 ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 35 of the 500 best singles wrestlers of the year in the PWI 500 in 1993 
 PWI ranked him # 289 of the Top 500 Singles Wrestlers of the " PWI Years " in 2003 
 PWI ranked him # 59 of the 100 best tag teams during the PWI Years with Smash and Ax in 2003 
 World Championship Wrestling 
 WCW World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Bryan Clark 
 World Wrestling Federation 
 WWF World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Smash and <unk> 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards 
 Worst Worked Match of the Year ( 2001 ) with Bryan Clark vs. The Undertaker and Kane at Unforgiven 
 Worst Feud of the Year ( 1997 ) vs. Los Boricuas 
 Worst Tag Team ( 2000 , 2001 ) with Bryan Clark 
 <unk> , after Crush became a member , defended the titles via the Freebird Rule 
 = Para Siempre = 
 Para Siempre ( Forever ) is the 79th studio album released by Mexican singer Vicente Fernández on September 18 , 2007 by Sony BMG Norte . Written and produced by Joan Sebastian , and co @-@ produced by Jesús Rincón , the album is a successful mariachi record . It has sold two million copies worldwide , and is one of the biggest @-@ selling albums by Fernández . It spawned four singles : " Estos Celos " , " La Derrota " , " Un Millón de Primaveras " and the title track , the latter of which was used as the main theme to the Mexican telenovela Fuego En La Sangre , which brought the album wider exposure and helped it to stay in the charts for over two years . It was named the best @-@ selling Regional Mexican Album of the decade by Billboard . 
 Originally conceived as a banda music project , the album earned Fernández a Latin Grammy Award for Best Ranchero Album , four Premios Oye ! and a Grammy nomination . Para Siempre is considered responsible for bringing Mexican traditional music to a younger audience that had never listened to the singer before . Fernández released music videos for the twelve tracks and recorded a TV special on his ranch in Guadalajara , Jalisco . A sold @-@ out promotional tour led to the recording of the live album Primera Fila , Fernández ' follow up album . 
 = = Background = = 
 Two recognized artists worked together for the first time on Para Siempre : Vicente Fernández , the " king " of Mexico 's traditional ranchera music and one of that country 's most recognizable and influential cultural icons , and singer @-@ songwriter Joan Sebastian . Since Fernández 's emergence in the mid- ' 60s , his popularity among Mexicans and Mexican @-@ Americans has been likened to that of Frank Sinatra and Elvis Presley in the United States . His concerts both in Mexico and the United States routinely sell out and his 100 @-@ plus albums ( including compilations ) have reportedly sold 50 million copies . Sebastian has been celebrated by critics for his contribution to Mexican culture , thanks to his successful singer career and his work producing artists such as Antonio Aguilar , Pepe Aguilar , Lucero and Rocío <unk> ; he is also a three time Grammy winner . Para Siempre , the 79th studio album by Fernández , was released in September 2007 in several countries . It was recorded to celebrate the 40th anniversary of his singing career , and is , according to Fernández 's record label , one of his most important albums . Nevertheless , Sebastian said that the label did not have high expectations for the album . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Fernández has stated that the album was conceived as a banda album with original music by Sebastian , a first for the singer ; before this , in 1993 , he included a cover of a song written by Sebastian titled " Verdad Que Duele " ( " It Hurts " ) on his album <unk> Que Seas <unk> ( A Shame You Belong to Another ) . Fernández ' fans kept asking to record banda songs and written by Sebastian , prompting him to record the album . Fernández was not pleased with the idea of trading his classic mariachi style for banda , but agreed to record with Sebastian as a " thank you " to his fans . In the album liner notes the singer dedicated the album to his wife and included a message for this fans : " As long as you keep applauding , I will be singing ' forever ' . " 
 In late 2006 , on Fernández ' ranch in Guadalajara , Jalisco , he asked Sebastian for songs to record on his next album and they agreed that his next project would be to work with Fernández on the album . Sebastian began preparing the demos along with Beto Jiménez , and in early 2007 he told Fernández that the songs were ready . The singer flew to the producer 's studio and recorded them . Fernández has said of working with Sebastian : " He is more than a friend , he is my brother , he writes excellent songs and has a great sensibility . " 
 The album was recorded in Cuernavaca , Morelos at the JS Studios . " I went to one of his houses for a day and in less than seven hours my part of the album was ready , he put everything on the table , it 's very good and romantic . " Fernández kept his mariachi style on the album and the producer only added more <unk> ; the singer was confident that this album was going to be a success , since his audience was demanding his union with Sebastian . 
 = = Composition = = 
 From the 12 tracks included , only the title track presents a successful love relationship ; while Sebastian 's lyrics contain popular slang . Guitars , trumpets , violins and an accordion create the mariachi sound . The last track , " El <unk> " ( " The Driver " ) , is a resembles José Alfredo Jiménez lyrical style , since Fernández travels " through Laredo to Michoacán . " Some inspiration for the tracks came from the writer 's crush on the Mexican actress Salma Hayek . 
 = = Presentation = = 
 The album debuted on September 15 , 2007 , in a live concert at the Arena <unk> in Guadalajara , Jalisco . Due to his dislike of massive tours , Fernández did not hold a large promotional campaign . Despite this , he performed live in the Mexican cities of Ciudad Juárez , Reynosa , Ciudad del Carmen , Lagos de Moreno , <unk> , Jiménez , Tijuana , Ensenada , San Luis Potosí , México City , Guadalajara , Pachuca , and the American cities Phoenix , Denver , Atlanta , New York , Miami , Chicago , Dallas , Houston , Los Angeles , Las Vegas , Nevada and San Jose . This short tour garnered a nomination for Latin Tour of the Year at the Billboard Latin Music Awards . Vicente Fernández recorded a TV special on his ranch in Guadalajara , Jalisco , which was broadcast in late September 2007 and December 25 , 2007 , by Televisa . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On his review for Billboard En Español , Joel Brito declared that the tracks , " Un Millón de Primaveras " ( " A Million Springs " ) and " El Último Beso " ( " The Last Kiss " ) , are tender and desperate , with Vicente 's voice powerful , sweet and cheerful ; while " Estos Celos " , was one of his best performances , along with " Niña <unk> " ( " Wicked Girl " ) . Jason Birchmeier of Allmusic gave the album four stars ; he described it as " near @-@ perfect " and " stellar " . He praised the singing , the songwriting , and the instrumentation . <unk> Ilich of About.com gave the album a four and a half stars calling " Para Siempre for a melody as lovely as the story " . According to the Colombian newspaper El Tiempo , Para Siempre was one of the most memorable albums of 2008 , since Fernández dominates the " formula for success " . For the Grammy Awards of 2008 the album received a nomination for Best Mexican / Mexican @-@ American Album which it lost to 100 % Mexicano by Pepe Aguilar . For the Latin Grammy Awards of 2008 Para Siempre won for Best Ranchero Album , and the first single " Estos Celos " won a Latin Grammy as Best Regional Mexican Song . The album was also nominated for Album of the Year , which was awarded to La Vida ... Es un <unk> , by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Juanes . In México , the album won four Premios Oye ! in the following categories : Album of the Year , Song of the Year ( " Estos Celos " ) , Best Ranchero Solo Artist and Best <unk> , Movie or Series Song ( " Para Siempre " ) . Joan Sebastian also received two awards by the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers for the title track : Song of the Year and Best Regional Music Song . 
 Vicente Fernández received five nominations for the 11th Billboard Latin Music Awards for his work on this album : Hot Latin Songs Artist , Hot Latin Song , Male ( " Para Siempre " ) , Top Latin Albums Artist and Regional Mexican Airplay Song , Male ( " Para Siempre " and " La Derrota " ) ; Joan Sebastian was nominated for both Songwriter and Producer of the Year . On April 23 , 2009 , Fernández won the awards for Top Latin Albums Artist and Regional Mexican Airplay Song for the title track . 
 = = Commercial release = = 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 The standard CD track listing was released on September 18 , 2007 in México , September 25 , 2007 in United States and on February 26 , 2008 in Spain with an album cover featuring the performer on a red background . On April 15 , 2008 , a CD / DVD format , with a black background on the cover was released , which included music videos for the 12 tracks recorded on Para Siempre , directed by Benjamin Hidalgo . A karaoke version of the album , with a yellow background , was released in April 2008 . 
 = = = Album = = = 
 The recording debuted at number 51 on the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas Mexican Album Chart in October 2007 and climbed to the top position 21 weeks later ; it spent a total of 14 weeks ( non @-@ consecutive ) at the top of the chart . Para Siempre was certified diamond in Mexico for sales of 600 @,@ 000 units . The sales were , according to Sony BMG Marketing Vice @-@ President and A & R Nir <unk> , a " phenomenon " because " the music market in Mexico is completely pirated " and Fernández 's albums usually sell only 50 @,@ 000 units per album . 
 In October 2007 , the album debuted at number two on the Billboard Top Latin Albums and spent almost its entire chart run in the Top Ten ; it topped the chart for five non @-@ consecutive weeks , three weeks in 2008 and two in 2009 , when it replaced Primera Fila , Fernández ' follow @-@ up live album , at the top of the chart , being the first time that a male performer replaces himself at number @-@ one , and the first time since Selena did it in 1995 . According to Sony BMG Norte , with over one million copies sold worldwide , Para Siempre is the most successful release by Vicente Fernández since 2000 . Only seven other recordings by Fernández sold more units in the United States . It was the best @-@ selling Regional Mexican album of 2008 and at the Billboard Top Latin Albums Year @-@ end chart the album ranked at number two , behind Los <unk> by Wisin & Yandel . Para Siempre was purchased on 50 @,@ 000 mobile phones in Mexico , a " novelty " for a regional Mexican album . The album 's success is attributed to a change in the sound ; instead of employing multiple composers and producers as in previous albums , Para Siempre was written and produced entirely by Joan Sebastian . Miguel Trujillo , Sony BMG México CEO , commented about the album , " This album connected to a new generation that probably never listened to Vicente before . " Para Siempre was named the best @-@ selling Regional Mexican album of the decade in the United States . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 On August 10 , 2007 , " Estos Celos " ( " This Jealousy " ) was released in México and United States as the lead single from the album . It peaked at number three in the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks , spent 40 weeks on the chart , . " Estos Celos " ranked 28th in 2007 and 5th in 2008 in the Billboard Hot Regional Mexican Songs Year @-@ end charts and its ringtone has been one on the top two sellers for Sony BMG Norte since the album release . In Colombia , broadcast of a cover version of this single performed by ' El Cape ' Medina and <unk> <unk> — recorded in vallenato style and included on the album Por Siempre y Para Siempre — was not allowed by the Colombian Music Association . The song was recorded without a planned commercial release , and the album recorded by Medina and <unk> was only given to their friends , but the song unexpectedly achieved success on the Internet and some radio stations in Colombia . ' Cape ' Medina said that the song may have been restricted out of the original Mexican publisher 's jealousy . This version can still be found on file sharing websites and in the video sharing website YouTube . The second single released , " La Derrota " ( " The Defeat " ) , peaked at number seven in the Hot Latin Tracks chart and number one in México and Colombia . The third single , " Para Siempre " , was featured as the main theme for the Mexican telenovela Fuego En La Sangre and hit the number two spot in the Latin charts in United States and number one in México and Colombia . The fourth single yielded from the album was " Un Millón de Primaveras " which did not chart in United States , but peaked at number one in México and Colombia . On the Billboard Year @-@ end charts of 2008 , Vicente Fernández appeared three times within the Top 25 with three singles from this release : the title track ranked at number six , " Estos Celos " at number 10 and " La Derrota " ended at number 25 . The ringtones for " Estos Celos " and " Para Siempre " received a platinum certification for sales over 25 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Joan Sebastian . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following information is from Allmusic and from Para Siempre liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Karen O 'Connor = 
 Karen <unk> O 'Connor ( born February 17 , 1958 ) is an American equestrian who competes in three day eventing . Although she did not come from a family of equestrians , her interest in horses started at an early age , and she received her first horse for her 11th birthday . O 'Connor began competing internationally in the late 1970s , and in 1986 began riding for the US national eventing team . Since then , she had ridden in five Olympic Games , three World Equestrian Games and two Pan @-@ American Games , winning multiple medals , including a team silver at the 1996 Olympic Games and a team bronze at the 2000 Olympic Games . She has also posted numerous wins and top @-@ 10 finishes at other international events . As of 2013 , O 'Connor is not competing , having suffered fractures to two thoracic vertebrae during a fall at a competition in October 2012 . 
 In 1993 , O 'Connor married fellow equestrian David O 'Connor , also a three day event rider for the US team . When not competing , she plays active roles in the administration side of the United States Equestrian Federation and the United States Eventing Association ( USEA ) . O 'Connor and her horses have been honored by multiple organizations for their competition record , and as of 2013 , six horses ridden by O 'Connor held positions in the list of the top 50 USEA high scoring horses . 
 = = Early life and marriage = = 
 O 'Connor was born in Bolton , Massachusetts , to parents Phillip and Joanne <unk> . She was the second child of three , and the only girl ; her two brothers are Steven and Chip . She did not come from a family of equestrians , but became interested in the sport after seeing a documentary on Great Britain 's Princess Anne 's involvement in the sport . For O 'Connor 's 11th birthday , she received a horse named Midnight . She was a member of the United States Pony Clubs , in the Groton Pony Club in the Central New England Region . She has been inducted into the United States Pony Club Hall of Fame . She later owned a Connemara pony named Erin 's Shamrock , who in 1978 was awarded the <unk> Trophy by the American Connemara Pony Society " in recognition of a career of outstanding competitive performance " . 
 O 'Connor married fellow equestrian David O 'Connor , also an international three day event rider , on June 26 , 1993 . The pair became the first married couple to compete on the same US Olympic equestrian team when they rode with their team to a silver medal at the 1996 Summer Olympics . They rode to a second shared medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics , again marking a historical Olympic moment as the first husband and wife duo to do so . They operate equestrian training facilities in The Plains , Virginia and Ocala , Florida . 
 = = Career = = 
 O 'Connor began competing internationally in the late 1970s , and in 1986 started riding with the US national eventing team , beginning with the Australian Gawler World Championships , mounted on <unk> V. She won multiple <unk> * events , including the Rolex Kentucky Three Day and the Fair Hill International , and the CCI4 * at the 1999 Rolex event , riding Prince Panache . During the 1990s , O 'Connor and her horse Biko were mainstays of the US eventing team , riding to multiple top @-@ ten finishes at major international events , including the Badminton Horse Trials and the Rolex Kentucky Three Day . O 'Connor rode at the 1994 World Equestrian Games and the 1998 World Equestrian Games , helping the US team to a bronze medal at the latter . At the 2006 World Equestrian Games she rode <unk> as an individual , but did not compete in the team portion of the event . 
 O 'Connor has competed in five Olympic Games , representing the US team at all five and also riding as an individual at three . At the 1988 Summer Olympics , riding The Optimist , she posted a DNF ( did not finish ) in both the team and individual portions . At the 1996 Summer Olympics , riding Biko , she and the US team rode to a silver medal . At the 2000 Summer Olympics , riding Prince Panache , O 'Connor and the US team again took a medal , this time bronze . O 'Connor did not ride as an individual at either the 1996 or the 2000 events . In the 2008 Summer Games , riding Mandiba , she placed 44th individually , while the US team took 7th . O 'Connor was not originally scheduled to ride in the 2008 Games , but was moved to a competition spot in July 2008 when teammate Heidi White was forced to withdraw . Four years later , at the 2012 Summer Games , the US team repeated their placing , while O 'Connor improved to 9th , riding Mr. <unk> . Her 9th place finish was the highest rank achieved by a US equestrian at the 2012 Games . O 'Connor was the oldest Olympian to represent the US in any sport at the 2012 Games . 
 At the 2003 Pan American Games , O 'Connor took an individual silver medal , riding Joker 's Wild . During the 2000s , O 'Connor and her 14 @.@ 1 hands ( 57 inches , 145 cm ) sport pony Theodore O 'Connor , nicknamed Teddy , gathered a large following as he competed and won against much larger horses . The pair finished third at the 2007 Rolex Kentucky Three Day and sixth at the same event in 2008 . At the 2007 Pan American Games , O 'Connor , riding Teddy , won individual gold and assisted the US squad to a team gold . In 2008 , short @-@ listed for the US eventing team at the 2008 Olympic Games , Teddy suffered a catastrophic injury and was euthanized . The United States Equestrian Federation ( USEF ) issued a press release that stated " Seeing was believing with ‘ Teddy ’ as it seemed impossible to imagine that a pony of his size could do his job with such tremendous ease . " In September 2009 , O 'Connor suffered a broken shoulderblade in a motorcycle accident . She was out of competition for five weeks , during which time her main mount , Mandiba , was ridden by fellow US eventer Phillip Dutton . Between 2010 and 2012 , O 'Connor continued her successful career , riding to multiple top @-@ ten finishes , and several wins , at <unk> – 4 * events , aboard a number of horses . On October 6 , 2012 , O 'Connor fell while competing at the Morven Park Fall Horse Trials in Leesburg , Virginia . She suffered a burst fracture of her T4 vertebra and a compression fracture of her T5 vertebra . After one of the vertebra shifted , she underwent surgery on October 18 . In June 2013 , it was announced that during the remainder of her recovery , Phillip Dutton would again take over as the rider of her top horse , this time 2012 Olympic mount Mr. <unk> . 
 When not competing , O 'Connor serves as a member of the USEF 's Board of Directors and as an active member of the United States Eventing Association 's ( USEA ) Instructor Certification Program . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 In 1995 , O 'Connor 's horse Biko was named The Chronicle of the Horse 's Eventing Horse of the Year , and in 1996 , O 'Connor was named the journal 's Eventing Horseman of the Year , in combination with her husband , David . In 1999 , Biko was honored as the USEA 's Horse of the Century , and in 2006 , was inducted into the organization 's Hall of Fame . In 2007 , O 'Connor 's pony Theodore O 'Connor was named The Chronicle of the Horse 's Overall Horse of the Year and Eventing Horse of the Year , as they called him the " horse world 's most adored underdog " . As of 2013 , six horses ridden by O 'Connor ( <unk> , Biko , Prince Panache , Mandiba , Regal Scot and Grand Slam III ) held positions in the list of the top 50 USEA high scoring horses . 
 = War of the Antiochene Succession = 
 The War of the Antiochene Succession , also known as the Antiochene War of Succession , comprised a series of armed conflicts in Northern Syria between 1201 and 1219 , connected to the disputed succession of Bohemond III of Antioch . The Principality of Antioch was the leading Christian power in the region during the last decades of the 12th century , but Armenian Cilicia challenged its supremacy . The capture of an important fortress , Bagras , in Syria by Leo II of Cilicia gave rise to a prolonged conflict already in the early 1190s . Leo tried to capture Antioch , but the Greek and Latin burghers formed a commune and prevented the Armenian soldiers from occupying the town . Bohemond III 's eldest son , Raymond , died in 1197 , leaving an infant son , Raymond @-@ Roupen . The boy 's mother , Alice of Armenia , was Leo I 's niece and heir presumptive . Bohemond III and the Antiochene noblemen confirmed Raymond @-@ Roupen 's right to succeed his grandfather in Antioch , but the commune preferred Bohemond III 's younger son ( Raymond @-@ Roupen 's uncle ) , Bohemond , Count of Tripoli . 
 Bohemond of Tripoli seized Antioch without resistance after his father died in April 1201 , but many noblemen left the principality to seek refuge in Cilicia . Leo invaded the Principality of Antioch in almost every year between 1201 and 1208 , but he had to return to his kingdom on each occasion because Az @-@ Zahir Ghazi , the Ayyubid emir of Aleppo , or Kaykaus I , the Seljuq sultan of Rum stormed into Cilicia in his absence . Pope Innocent III initially supported Leo . However , the conflict between Leo and the Knights Templar over Bagras led to Leo 's excommunication in 1208 . During the following years , Leo captured new fortresses in Syria , abandoning them in 1213 as part of an effort to improve his relationship with the Holy See . Taking advantage of Bohemond IV 's isolation , Leo entered Antioch , helping Raymond @-@ Roupen seize the principality in 1216 . Before long , Leo abandoned Bagras and lost the Armenian fortresses to the north of the Taurus Mountains to the Seljuqs . Raymond @-@ Roupen increased taxes , which made him unpopular in Antioch . His relationship with Leo also became tense , enabling Bohemond IV to regain Antioch in 1219 . The war contributed to the weakening of the Christian states in Northern Syria . 
 = = Background = = 
 After Saladin , the Ayyubid sultan of Syria and Egypt , destroyed the Kingdom of Jerusalem in the late 1180s , the Principality of Antioch became the leading Christian power of Northern Syria . By 1186 Leo II , Lord of Armenian Cilicia , had already acknowledged the suzerainty of Bohemond III of Antioch , but their relationship became tense after Bohemond borrowed money from Leo but failed to repay it . 
 In 1191 Leo captured and rebuilt Bagras , a strategically important fortress that Saladin had seized from the Knights Templar and then destroyed before abandoning it . Bohemond ordered Leo to return it to the Templars , but Leo refused , stating that his right of recent conquest was stronger that the claim of the Templars who had lost their property . After Bohemond failed include Cilicia in his truce with Saladin in 1192 , Leo invited him to Bagras to start negotiations . Bohemond accepted the offer , but Leo had him captured , forcing him to surrender Antioch . Although the noblemen ( who were closely related to Armenian nobles ) were willing to accept Leo 's rule , the mainly Greek and Latin townspeople formed a commune and prevented the Armenian soldiers from occupying Antioch . 
 Peace was restored with the mediation of Henry I of Jerusalem , who persuaded both Leo and Bohemond to renounce their claims to suzerainty over each other . Leo 's occupation of Bagras was confirmed . Bohemond 's eldest son , Raymond , married Leo 's niece and heir presumptive , Alice . Raymond died in early 1197 , but his widow give birth to a posthumous son , Raymond @-@ Roupen . The almost sixty @-@ year @-@ old Bohemond III sent Alice and her son to Armenia , showing that he did not want to acknowledge his infant grandson 's right to succeed him in Antioch . 
 Leo had meanwhile united the Armenian Church in Cilicia with Rome and acknowledged the suzerainty of the Holy Roman Emperor , Henry VI . The emperor 's envoy , Conrad of Wittelsbach , Archbishop of Mainz , was present when Leo was crowned the first king of Armenian Cilicia on 6 January 1198 . Before long , Conrad went to Antioch and persuaded Bohemond and his barons to swear an oath to accept Raymund @-@ Roupen 's right to inherit Antioch . 
 Bohemond III 's younger son ( Raymund @-@ Roupen 's uncle ) , Bohemond , Count of Tripoli , disputed the validity of their oath . He expelled his father from Antioch with the support of the Templars , the Hospitallers and the commune of the burghers in late 1198 . Three months later Leo invaded the Principality of Antioch , forcing the younger Bohemond to allow his father to return to Antioch . Pope Innocent III also supported the restoration of Bohemond III in Antioch , but , responding to the Templars ' demand , he also began urging Leo to restore Bagras to them . 
 = = War = = 
 = = = First phase = = = 
 When Bohemond III died in April , Bohemond of Tripoli hurried to Antioch , where , because he was the late duke 's closest living relative , he was recognized by the commune of the townspeople as his father 's rightful heir . The nobles who had regarded Raymond @-@ Roupen ( the only son of Bohemond III 's eldest son ) the lawful prince , fled to the Kingdom of Cilicia . Bohemond repaid a loan that Raymond III of Tripoli had long before borrowed from the Knights Hospitaller , thus winning them over to his side . 
 Leo continued to support Raymond @-@ Roupen , which sparked an enduring conflict , with many theatres of war . During the war , neither Leo nor Bohemond IV was able to control his own territory ( Cilicia and Tripoli , respectively ) and Antioch at the same time , due to insufficient forces . Az @-@ Zahir Ghazi , the Ayyubid emir of Aleppo , and the Seljuq rulers of Anatolia were always ready to invade Cilicia , while the Ayyubid rulers of Hama and Homs controlled the territory between Antioch and Tripoli , hindering the movements of Bohemond 's troops between the two crusader states . 
 Shortly after Bohemond seized Antioch , Leo laid siege to it to press Raymond @-@ Roupen 's cause , but Bohemond 's allies , Az @-@ Zahir Ghazi and Suleiman II , Seljuq Sultan of Rum , stormed into Cilicia , forcing Leo to withdraw in July 1201 . He soon sent letters to Pope Innocent , informing him of Bohemond 's cooperation with the Muslim rulers . Leo again invaded Antioch in 1202 , but Aimery , King of Jerusalem and Cyprus , and the papal legate , Cardinal <unk> , mediated a truce . After Bohemond IV refused to acknowledge the right of the Holy See to pass judgement in the case of the succession of Antioch , Leo renewed the war . Taking advantage of Bohemond 's absence , Leo entered Antioch on 11 November 1203 , but he was not able to seize the citadel , which was defended by the Templars and the troops of the commune . Before long , Az @-@ Zahir Ghazi again invaded Cilicia , forcing Leo to return to his kingdom . 
 <unk> of <unk> , who had married an heiress in the County of Tripoli without Bohemond 's consent , rose up against Bohemond in late 1204 . He routed Bohemond at the gates of Tripoli . Leo seized the Antiochene fortresses in the Amanus Mountains , which controlled the road towards Antioch . He laid siege to the fortress at <unk> on 25 December 1205 , but Az @-@ Zahir Ghazi 's troops routed his army . After crushing <unk> of <unk> 's revolt , Bohemond returned to Antioch , forcing Leo to sign a truce for eight years in summer 1206 . 
 = = = Conflicts with the Church = = = 
 A conflict between the new papal legate , Peter of Capua , and the Latin Patriarch of Antioch , Peter of Angoulême , who had become Raymond @-@ Roupen 's supporter , ended with the excommunication of the patriarch . Exploiting the situation to get rid of his opponent , Bohemond replaced Peter of Angoulême with the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch , Symeon II with the support of the commune in early 1207 . Peter of Angoulême was reconciled with the legate , excommunicated Bohemond and the commune , and then persuaded some nobles to rise up against Bohemond , forcing him to take refuge in the citadel . Leo entered Antioch , but Bohemond collected his forces and defeated the Armenians . Peter of Angoulême was captured and died of drink deprivation in his prison . 
 The Ayyubid sultan , Al @-@ Adil I , stormed into the County of Tripoli , creating an opportunity for Leo to plunder the land around Antioch in 1208 . Bohemond persuaded Kaykaus I , Sultan of Rum , to invade Cilicia , forcing Leo to withdraw from Antioch . Pope Innocent tasked Albert Avogadro , Patriarch of Jerusalem , to mediate a peace . Avogadro , who was an ally of the Knights Templar , urged Leo to return Bagras to them . In an attempt to renew the truce , Leo obeyed the legate 's demand , promising to withdraw from Bagras . 
 Before long , Leo broke his promise and refused to return Bagras to the Templars . He also decided to terminate the union of the Armenian Church with Rome . On the other hand , he granted fortresses to the Teutonic Knights in Cilicia . He also arranged the marriage of Raymond @-@ Roupen with <unk> , sister of Hugh I of Cyprus . Leo ambushed a caravan which had been transporting provisions to the Templars in 1211 . In the skirmish , Guillaume de Chartres , Grand Master of the Knights Templar , was badly injured . News of Leo 's action shocked Pope Innocent , who forbade all Christian rulers to assist Leo and urged John of Brienne , King of Jerusalem , to intervene on the Templars ' behalf . John sent fifty knights to Northern Syria to fight against Leo . Leo expelled the Latin priests from Cilicia and gave shelter to the Orthodox Patriarch , <unk> , who had been driven out of Antioch . He dispatched Raymond @-@ Roupen to plunder the region of Antioch in 1212 . 
 Pope Innocent , who had proclaimed a new crusade in 1213 , wanted to persuade Leo to assist the crusaders . In that year , Leo renounced all lands that he had seized from the Templars , but retained Bagras . John of Brienne married Leo 's daughter , Stephanie , in 1214 . During the same period , Bohemond 's position weakened . His attempt to take vengeance on the Assassins for the murder of his eldest son , Raymond , brought him into conflict with his old ally , Az @-@ Zahir Ghazi of Aleppo . 
 = = = Raymond @-@ Roupen in Antioch = = = 
 With Leo 's support , Raymond @-@ Roupen began to find new allies , promising land grants to the Hospitallers and Antiochene noblemen , including <unk> of <unk> , the head of the commune of the burghers . Taking advantage of the absence of Bohemond IV , Leo and his army entered Antioch during the night of 14 February 1216 . A few days later , the Templars , who had held the citadel , also surrendered without a struggle . The Latin Patriarch of Antioch , Peter of Ivrea , consecrated Raymond @-@ Roupen prince . After his protégé seized the Principality of Antioch , Leo restored Bagras to the Knights Templar . During Leo 's absence , Kaykaus I captured the Armenian forts to the north of the Taurus Mountains . 
 After finding an empty treasure in Antioch , Raymond @-@ Roupen increased taxation , which made him unpopular among his subjects . He also refused to assist Leo against the Seljuqs . In 1217 , Raymond @-@ Roupen tried to capture Leo , but the Templars assisted Leo to flee to Cilicia . Bohemond visited John , King of Jerusalem , in Acre in autumn 1217 . John recognized Bohemond as the lawful prince of Antioch early the next year , but did not provide him with military assistance . 
 The burghers and noblemen of Antioch rose up against Raymond @-@ Roupen . Their leader , William <unk> , persuaded Bohemond to come back to the town . After Bohemond 's arrival , Raymond @-@ Roupen at first sought refuge in the citadel but soon fled to Cilicia , granting the citadel to the Hospitallers . Raymond @-@ Roupen could never regain Antioch , thus the war " came to a rather unspectacular end " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Leo was dying when Raymond @-@ Roupen came to Cilicia . Leo did not forgive his great @-@ nephew and willed Cilicia to his five @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Isabella , in May 1219 . Both Raymond @-@ Roupen ( the grandson of Leo 's elder brother , <unk> ) and John , King of Jerusalem ( the husband of Leo 's eldest daughter , Stephanie ) refused to accept Leo 's last will , claiming Cilicia for themselves . The new conflict lasted for decades , further weakening the Christian states of Northern Syria . 
 = Peter Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood = 
 Sir Peter Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood , 1st Baronet , ( 9 May 1801 – 12 April 1866 ) was an English landowner , developer and Member of Parliament , who founded the town of Fleetwood , in Lancashire , England . Born Peter Hesketh , he changed his name by Royal assent to Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood , incorporating the name of his ancestors , and was later created Baronet Fleetwood . Predeceased by an older brother , he inherited estates in west Lancashire in 1824 . Inspired by the transport developments of the early 19th century , he decided to bring the railway to the Lancashire coast and develop a holiday resort and port . He hired architect Decimus Burton to design his new town , which he named Fleetwood ; construction began in 1836 . Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood was instrumental in the formation of the Preston and Wyre Railway Company and with his financial support , a railway line was built between Preston and Fleetwood which opened in 1840 . 
 Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood married twice and had several children , most of whom died in infancy . His new town flourished , but the expense of building it left him close to bankruptcy and forced him to sell most of his estates including Rossall Hall , which had been his family home . He left Lancashire and died in London , succeeded by his son Louis . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Peter Hesketh was born in 1801 at Wennington Hall , in Wennington , near Lancaster , the second son of Robert and Maria ( née Rawlinson ) Hesketh . He had an older brother , Edward , a younger brother , Charles , and a younger sister , Anna . He was descended ( through his paternal grandmother ) from the Fleetwood family who had owned the large Rossall estate in West Lancashire for over 200 years . Robert inherited the estate in 1819 on the death of his elder brother , Bold , and the family relocated to the manor house , Rossall Hall , on the Fylde coast . On Robert 's death in 1824 , the estate passed to Peter , his elder brother Edward having predeceased him in 1820 . By that time the family 's land extended from <unk> in the north , to North Meols , near Southport , in the south , and encompassed most of the Fylde . 
 Hesketh was educated , along with his younger brother Charles , at Trinity College , Oxford . Although Charles was a studious young man , who planned to enter the church on graduation , Peter had an active social life in both Oxford and London . He holidayed in southern resorts including St Leonards @-@ on @-@ Sea , a new development in Sussex , where he admired the work of architect James Burton . He became close friends with Burton 's son Decimus , who was also an architect . The two men were involved in the formation of London 's Athenaeum Club and Burton designed the club 's building in Pall Mall . Hesketh received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1823 and his Master of Arts degree in 1826 . That same year , he married Eliza Debonnaire Metcalfe , the daughter of Sir Theophilus Metcalfe , 2nd Baronet , commonly known by her middle name . Debonnaire 's father gave the couple a house in Dover , but they also spent time at the Rossall estate . The couple were very close to Charles and his new wife Anna , and their sister Anna , and her husband Thomas <unk> . Charles was ordained in 1828 and as patron of St Chad 's Church in Poulton @-@ le @-@ Fylde , Peter presented his brother with that curacy . 
 Hesketh enjoyed looking after the Rossall estate ( which had no steward or agent ) , but struggled to keep on top of finances ; he was an indulgent landlord . He became an enthusiastic member of the Lancashire Agricultural Society and was concerned about the fate of local farm workers who were losing their jobs because of increased mechanisation . Hesketh was gradually becoming more interested in the lives and conditions of the working classes . 
 The <unk> ' first child , Anna Maria ( known as Maria to distinguish her from three close relatives named Anna ) , was born in 1827 . Three more children — named Metcalfe Bold , Debonnaire and Frances — all died in infancy . In 1831 Hesketh changed his name by royal licence to Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood , incorporating the better @-@ known family name of his ancestors into his own . Debonnaire contracted tuberculosis and died in early 1833 . Shortly before Debonnaire 's death Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood contracted scarlet fever . This was followed by erysipelas , a bacterial infection so severe that it necessitated the removal of one of his eyes . At the end of the year , the Rossall estate was severely flooded and suffered damage costing about £ 3 @,@ 000 to repair . Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood subsequently spent very little time at Rossall . 
 In 1837 in Belgium , Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood married Virginie Marie Garcia , the daughter of a Spanish nobleman . Maria , his daughter with Debonnaire , contracted tuberculosis and died in 1838 at Regent 's Park , aged 11 . She was interred in a glass coffin in the family vault at St Chad 's , Poulton . Around the same time as Maria 's death , Virginie gave birth to a son , Peter Louis . In 1841 , on the death of his aunt , Anna Maria Hesketh , Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood succeeded to <unk> Hall in Preston . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Hesketh was appointed High Sheriff of Lancashire in 1830 . In 1831 he was invited to stand as a Tory Party candidate for the constituency of Preston . He had similar views to Tory statesman Robert Peel and readily agreed to stand . Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood opposed monopolies , slavery and capital punishment and was in favour of reforming the Corn Laws . At the 1832 general election , he was elected — along with his friend , Henry Stanley — Member of Parliament for Preston , in the first parliament following the Reform Act . He made his maiden speech to parliament in 1834 . 
 Queen Victoria came to the throne in 1837 , and in June the following year Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood was knighted in the Coronation honours list and created Baronet Fleetwood . He remained MP for Preston until the 1847 general election , although towards the end of his parliamentary career he was recorded as a Liberal MP . In 1840 he translated Victor Hugo 's pamphlet , The Last Day of a Condemned Man , with a foreword entitled " Observations on capital punishment " that made clear Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood 's abolitionist stance on the issue . 
 = = Development of Fleetwood = = 
 As a student holidaying in coastal towns , Hesketh had become aware of the lack of resorts in Lancashire . He was concerned that the working classes of Lancashire could not afford to travel south for their holidays as wealthy people like him could . The number of railways in Great Britain steadily increased in the first half of the 19th century , and Hesketh was impressed by the arrival in 1828 of the steam locomotive in Lancashire . As High Sheriff of Lancashire , he attended the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway on 15 December 1830 . The event filled him with great excitement at the idea of bringing the railway to the coast and enabling Lancashire mill workers to take day @-@ trips to the seaside . 
 As he discussed the idea with his brother Charles , Hesketh soon realised that day @-@ trippers would need certain facilities that were not yet available , and decided that a new town would need to be built . He initially planned to site his town and railway terminus near the village of Thornton , but it was not close enough to the coast for his liking . He eventually decided on Rossall Point , a small peninsula north of Rossall Hall , at the mouth of the River Wyre , which was then an uninhabited rabbit warren . Although bleak and waterlogged , the area had views of Morecambe Bay and the Lake District . 
 Hesketh was influenced in the early planning stages by his friends , including mill owners Samuel Fielden and Benjamin Whitworth . They pointed out that mill workers would not wish to make day trips to the seaside all year round , and wondered how the people of the new town would be occupied during the winter months . They encouraged Hesketh to build a new port ; because charges at Liverpool were on the rise , and there were no reasonable alternatives for Manchester mill owners , both Whitworth and Fielden agreed that they would make good use of a port on the Fylde coast . Hesketh soon found that he was not the only one thinking of extending the railway , or of building a new port . He had competition from the residents of Lytham , a village about 13 miles ( 21 km ) south of Rossall , at the mouth of the River Ribble . They were already planning the formation of the Preston Port Company ; Hesketh acted quickly and applied to the official railway committee to have a port built on the River Wyre . The committee agreed to hear all applications . 
 Charles met Frederick Kemp , a land agent newly arrived in Poulton from his native Essex , and introduced him to his brother , who was on the lookout for a steward or agent . Kemp , well @-@ dressed and charming , made a good impression on Hesketh , who employed him immediately . At the meeting of the railway committee Hesketh put forward a persuasive argument . Despite opposition from the Lytham contingent the committee decided that Rossall Point was the best place for the railway terminus to be built , and the Railway and Port Company was formed . In the early 19th century it was thought that steam locomotives would be unable to negotiate hilly terrain , and that Lake District hills like Shap Fell would prevent the railway from reaching Scotland . The Fylde terminus would have even more importance than Hesketh had hoped , providing a sea link for passengers from London to travel on to Scotland . Initially Hesketh had considered naming his new town New Liverpool or <unk> , but after changing his name to Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood in 1831 he decided to call it Fleetwood . With a new career in parliament to prepare for , he readily handed over financial management of the project to his manager , Frederick Kemp . 
 After Debonnaire 's death in 1833 , Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood immersed himself in his development plans . Southport , a town he owned much of , was becoming a popular sea bathing resort , and Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood organised the construction of a promenade . He was becoming concerned over delays on the part of the Railway and Port Company and decided to get on with building Fleetwood . He hired his old friend Decimus Burton , who had become a successful architect , and together they discussed what buildings would be required . Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood wanted a church , docks , housing , a gas office , a school and a hotel . Burton agreed that a hotel would be important for passengers to spend the night before travelling on to Scotland . Because those passengers would be arriving from Euston railway station in London , Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood decided to call the hotel the North Euston Hotel . Burton 's plans were ready by 1835 . 
 In 1835 , still frustrated by the lack of activity on the part of the Railway and Port Company , Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood organised the formation of the Preston and Wyre Railway Company to raise the funds required to bring the railway to Fleetwood . The estimated cost was £ 122 @,@ 000 . The company obtained Royal assent to start construction , with an underwritten guarantee from Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood . The following year Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood and Burton oversaw the marking out of Fleetwood 's first street , and the first railway lines were laid . 
 By 1838 it had become clear that construction costs for the town were spiralling out of control . To make matters worse , the railway 's engineer informed Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood that the cost of the railway was expected to exceed £ 300 @,@ 000 . The company had also sold far fewer shares than had been hoped . Frederick Kemp was collecting rents and rates from tenants , and Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood repeatedly asked him for money to pay some of the mounting bills . Kemp , a more forceful character than his employer , kept claiming that there was no money . Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood turned to his brother Charles and asked him to get £ 4 @,@ 000 out of Kemp . Charles was more assertive , but Kemp said that the money had been spent on workers ' wages and produced yet more invoices that needed to be paid . During Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood 's many absences from the Fylde , Kemp managed to involve himself in a number of enterprises in the town , to his own financial advantage . The railway was taking longer than expected and , with mounting debts , Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood grew increasingly depressed and began to withdraw from society . 
 Construction of the railway was finally completed in 1840 , and in July the Preston and Wyre Railway opened . The following year St Peter 's Church was finished , and Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood appointed as vicar the Rev. St. Vincent Beechey of Hilgay in Norfolk . Also in 1841 , the North Euston was the fourth hotel to open in the town . Steamer services opened to the Isle of Man , Whitehaven , Ardrossan and Belfast . Fleetwood initially flourished , but Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood had run out of money and was compelled to take out mortgages . He lost the £ 75 @,@ 000 he had invested in the Preston and Wyre Railway Company owing to a lack of accounts . Kemp claimed that Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood owed him money , but Kemp refused to explain his book @-@ keeping . In the face of enormous debts Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood sold his estates at Blackpool , Southport , Meols Hall , and <unk> Hall . Charles bought the <unk> estate , where he and his wife had been living , from his brother . In 1844 Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood auctioned off his personal possessions from Rossall Hall and left Lancashire . The Rev. St. Vincent Beechey had set up the Northern Church of England School for boys . Close to bankruptcy , Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood leased the buildings at Rossall Hall to the school for six years , with the option to buy it after nine for £ 7 @,@ 000 . Thereafter , the school was called Rossall School . 
 Fleetwood continued to grow without its principal investor , albeit slowly . As a port , it soon faced competition from Lytham and Preston . In 1847 Queen Victoria and Prince Albert travelled through Fleetwood on their way to London from Scotland , but that year saw the decline of the town 's importance on the route to Scotland . More powerful locomotives were now able to travel over hilly terrain , and the railway was extended over Shap Fell all the way to Scotland ; Fleetwood was no longer needed as a sea link . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood moved to London with Virginie and their son Louis . He rarely visited Lancashire again , and in 1847 he retired from politics . The family spent some time living in Virginie 's home country , Spain . In 1861 Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood expressed an intention to return to politics , but was prevented from doing so by his failing health . He died at his home in Piccadilly , London on 12 April 1866 , following a lengthy illness . He is buried at Kensal Green Cemetery . His son Rev. Peter Louis Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood ( 1838 – 1880 ) succeeded to the baronetcy , which became extinct on his death . What was left of Hesketh @-@ Fleetwood 's land in Lancashire was bought by the Fleetwood Estate Company in 1875 . 
 = Entren Los Que Quieran = 
 Entren Los Que Quieran ( English : Enter Those Who Want to ) is the fourth studio album from Puerto Rican band Calle 13 , released on November 22 , 2010 . Recorded in the wake of controversial events surrounding the group , the album contains more political lyrical themes not discussed on previous Calle 13 releases . It also expands upon the musical experimentation demonstrated in the group 's albums Residente o Visitante ( 2007 ) and Los de Atrás Vienen Conmigo ( 2008 ) . The record features various stylistic elements in its compositions , including rock , ska , merengue , reggaeton , and Bollywood music . 
 The album received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised the record 's diverse musical experimentation . Entren Los Que Quieran impacted several charts internationally , peaking at number six on the Billboard Latin Albums chart and number 25 on the Billboard Rap Albums chart . The record spawned seven singles , including " Latinoamérica " , which reached the top ten of both the Billboard Latin Digital Songs and Latin Rhythm Digital Songs charts . The record won a total of nine Latin Grammy Awards including Album of the Year . It was also nominated for a Grammy in the Best Latin , Pop , Rock or Urban Album category at the 2012 Grammys . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Drawing influence from a more diverse array of musical styles than Residente o Visitante ( 2007 ) , Calle 13 released Los de Atrás Vienen Conmigo in 2008 , which experimented with genres such as samba , <unk> , and electronica . The album won five Latin Grammys at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2009 including " Album of the Year " . The group generated controversy when vocalist / lyricist Residente was hosting the 2009 MTV Latin America Awards and attempted to inform the audience about a strike in Puerto Rico in protest of governor Luis Fortuño 's cutting of thousands of government jobs , one of which belonged to Residente 's mother . During the ceremony , he referred to Fortuño as a " son of a whore " , which generated widespread anger towards the group . Reflecting on the incident " I was upset , really upset . But I 'm a little more strategic now - I want to speak the truth , but I don 't want to diminish the merits of what I 'm saying . " 
 Calle 13 once again became the subject of debate when the duo traveled to Cuba in March 2010 to perform in front of the American embassy in the country . Before the show , a political prisoner had died in a hunger strike in protest of the Cuban government , and Cuban exiles in Miami criticized the group for performing at such a time . Residente defended the performance , noting that it had been inaccurately reported and that " we said things that no artist had said from the stage , like ' here the people are in charge , and the government has to obey . ' " These events had a major impact on Residente 's lyrical style and the subjects he planned to discuss on the new album : " What 's making me more mature is not about my age , it 's about what I 'm seeing and living . I 'm not saying things carelessly anymore . I 'm thinking before I say them . " 
 Recording sessions for the album took place at <unk> Studios and Música <unk> Studios in San Juan , Puerto Rico , as well as Circle House Studios in Miami , Florida . It was mixed at Circle House Studios and Zeitgeist Sound Studios in Long Island , New York . The phrase " <unk> los que <unk> " has been translated as " everyone is welcome " . Visitante explained that the title of the album means that " Everyone ’ s invited to enter . If you don ’ t want to , well don ’ t . " Ed Morales of NY Daily News interpreted the album 's title as " an invitation to like @-@ minded Latino youth to a safe space for rebellion . " The album 's artwork features illustrations of explosives ; Billboard writer Judy Cantor Navas opined that this " simultaneously exceeded and parodied [ Calle 13 's ] reputation as provocateur " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Visitante , who composed and performed the music on the record , stated that the album continues to experiment with different styles of music . He noted that the group 's collaboration with Omar Rodríguez @-@ López from The Mars Volta on " Calma Pueblo " gives the song a " Beastie Boys vibe . " Rodríguez @-@ López 's guitar work on the track has been categorized as " vicious " and is said to match the violence in the song 's lyrics " at every turn " . " Baile de los Pobres " contains elements of Bollywood music and reggaeton , while the atmospheric qualities of " La Bala " have been compared to spaghetti western film soundtracks . " Vamo ' a Portarnos Mal " features ska and merengue @-@ influenced rhythms . Visitante employs a ukulele on " Muerte en Hawaii " , a song that contains a " cool beach sound " . " Latinoamérica " has been described as " folkloric " and features guest vocals from Susana Baca , from Peru , <unk> la <unk> , from Colombia , and Maria Rita , from Brazil . 
 With the lyrics on Entren Los Que Quieran , Residente took a more political approach , inspired by events that transpired after the last album . " Calma Pueblo " discusses various topics including dishonest politicians , lip @-@ synching in live performances , and payola . Residente also references Calle 13 's sponsors with the line " Adidas doesn 't use me , I use Adidas . " Residente originally wrote eight pages of lyrics for " Calma Pueblo " , but later " deleted and deleted " many of the words , as he felt that the song 's subject matter " can come off like cheap pamphleteering . And that 's not what I wanted to do . " " Digo Lo Que Pienso " has been labeled as a " scathing attack " on San Juan mayor Jorge Santini . 
 " Latinoamérica " is a celebration of Latin America and its culture as well as a statement against United States intervention in the region ; in the song , Residente vows that he will " never forget " Operation Condor . " La Bala " illustrates the pathway of a bullet as a means to denounce violence . According to Visitante , " <unk> la Cena " is about " being imprisoned " , adding , " Sometimes you can be imprisoned and still be outside . " " Baile De Los Pobres " has been described as a " lust song " with subject matter comparable to Billy Joel 's " working @-@ class desires " in his 1983 song " Uptown Girl " . Residente 's " gentler side " is displayed on " La Vuelta al Mundo " , where he describes a trip around the world to escape the monotonous nature of working in an office cubicle . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Entren Los Que Quieran peaked at number six on the Billboard Latin Albums chart , remaining on the chart for 25 weeks . It also peaked at number 25 on the Billboard Rap Albums chart , remaining on the chart for one week , as well as number 199 on the magazine 's Top Current Albums chart . The record peaked at number one in Argentina , number 22 in Mexico , and number 90 in Spain . 
 " Calma Pueblo " was the first single to be released from the album which was released on August 9 , 2010 . " Vamo ' A Portarnos Mal " was the second single released from the album which peaked at # 32 on the Billboard Latin Pop Airplay , # 21 on the Billboard Latin Tropical Airplay , and # 11 on the Billboard Latin Rhythm Airplay charts . " Digo Lo Que Pienso " peaked at # 16 on the Latin Rhythm Digital Songs . " Baile de los Pobres " was the fourth single to be released from the album on February 21 , 2011 . The fifth single , " Muerte en Hawaii " , peaked at # 33 on the Latin Pop Airplay and # 11 on the Latin Rhythm Airplay charts . " Latinoamerica " peaked at # 9 on the Billboard Latin Digital Songs and # 3 on the Latin Rhythm Digital Songs chart . " La Vuelta al Mundo " was the last single from the album which peaked at # 14 on the Latin Rhythm Airplay chart and # 44 in Mexico . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Entren Los Que Quieran received generally positive reviews from critics . Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly gave the album an A- grade , writing , " <unk> their agitprop songs with Bollywood , Hawaiian , hip @-@ hop , and Latin styles on Entren Los Que Quieran , they ’ ll make you want to bomb any radio station that won ’ t play rock en español . " Mariano Prunes of Allmusic gave Entren Los Que Quieran three and a half stars out of five , and felt that while the album was strong overall , the shock value employed in the group 's earlier records had become less impactful : " As the album progresses , while the beats remain strong and the lyrics clever , this maximum @-@ impact approach tends to eventually exhaust itself . " Jasmine <unk> of NPR praised the album and referred to the song " Latinoamérica " as " a gorgeous ode to Latinos everywhere " . <unk> commented on the band 's appeal to Latin American listeners , explaining " They are fighters who endure and struggle against the very real horrors of Latin America . But part of their defiance lies in the ability to have fun , to be funny and sexy in spite of these horrors . " 
 Bill Friskics @-@ Warren of The Washington Post recommended the album , particularly the tracks " Calma Pueblo , " " La Bala , " and " Vamo ' a Portarnos Mal " , and applauded Visitante 's musical diversity , calling his compositions " as globally conscious as the band 's message . " Judy Cantor @-@ Navas of Billboard called " La Bala " the album 's " most affecting " track , and wrote that " Calle 13 's fierce brand of first @-@ person social commentary and all @-@ terrain rebellion transmits as honest and even brave , even if Perez 's defensive swagger can become tiresome . " Melissa MacEwen of The Tufts Daily gave the album four out of five stars , commending the album 's cohesiveness and calling the album a " highly listenable album valuable for both its witty lyrics and song structures , and its definitively dance − worthy feel " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Entren Los Que Quieran received ten nominations at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2011 — a record for Latin Grammy nominations . Jon Pareles of the Los Angeles Times opined that the group 's eclectic musical experimentation helped the band qualify for multiple categories , including Urban , Alternative , and Tropical . The record won " Album of the Year " , the group 's second release in a row to win the award , after Los de Atrás Vienen Conmigo ( 2008 ) . The group also won Best Urban album , Best Urban Song for " Baile de los Pobres " , and both Record of the Year ( for recording ) and Song of the Year ( for songwriting ) for " Latinoamérica " . The album also received a Grammy nomination for Best Latin Pop , Rock or Urban Album . In Mexico , the album received two nominations for the Oye ! Awards for Album of the Year and Latin Urban Album of the Year , while " <unk> la Cena " was nominated for Song of the Year from a <unk> show . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Residente , all music composed by Visitante . 
 = = Tour = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Apollo 17 = 
 Apollo 17 was the final mission of NASA 's Apollo program , the enterprise that landed the first humans on the Moon . Launched at 12 : 33 am Eastern Standard Time ( EST ) on December 7 , 1972 , with a crew made up of Commander Eugene Cernan , Command Module Pilot Ronald Evans , and Lunar Module Pilot Harrison Schmitt , it was the last use of Apollo hardware for its original purpose ; after Apollo 17 , extra Apollo spacecraft were used in the Skylab and Apollo – Soyuz programs . 
 Apollo 17 was the first night launch of a U.S. human spaceflight and the final manned launch of a Saturn V rocket . It was a " J @-@ type mission " which included three days on the lunar surface , extended scientific capability , and the third Lunar Roving Vehicle ( LRV ) . While Evans remained in lunar orbit in the Command / Service Module ( CSM ) , Cernan and Schmitt spent just over three days on the moon in the Taurus – Littrow valley and completed three moonwalks , taking lunar samples and deploying scientific instruments . Evans took scientific measurements and photographs from orbit using a Scientific Instruments Module mounted in the Service Module . 
 The landing site was chosen with the primary objectives of Apollo 17 in mind : to sample lunar highland material older than the impact that formed Mare Imbrium , and investigate the possibility of relatively new volcanic activity in the same area . Cernan , Evans and Schmitt returned to Earth on December 19 after a 12 @-@ day mission . 
 Apollo 17 is the most recent manned Moon landing and was the last time humans travelled beyond low Earth orbit . It was also the first mission to be commanded by a person with no background as a test pilot , and the first to have no one on board who had been a test pilot ; X @-@ 15 test pilot Joe Engle lost the lunar module pilot assignment to Schmitt , a scientist . The mission broke several records : the longest moon landing , longest total extravehicular activities ( moonwalks ) , largest lunar sample , and longest time in lunar orbit . 
 = = Crew = = 
 Eugene Cernan , Ronald Evans , and former X @-@ 15 pilot Joe Engle were assigned to the backup crew of Apollo 14 . Engle flew sixteen X @-@ 15 flights , three of which exceeded the 50 mi ( 80 km ) border of space . Following the rotation pattern that a backup crew would fly as the prime crew three missions later , Cernan , Evans , and Engle would have flown Apollo 17 . Harrison Schmitt served on the backup crew of Apollo 15 and , following the crew rotation cycle , was slated to fly as Lunar Module Pilot on Apollo 18 . However , Apollo 18 was cancelled in September 1970 . Following this decision , the scientific community pressured NASA to assign a geologist to an Apollo landing , as opposed to a pilot trained in geology . In light of this pressure , Harrison Schmitt , a professional geologist , was assigned the Lunar Module Pilot position on Apollo 17 . Scientist @-@ astronaut Curt Michel believed that it was his own decision to resign , after it became clear that he would not be given a flight assignment , that mobilized this action . 
 Subsequent to the decision to assign Schmitt to Apollo 17 , there remained the question of which crew ( the full backup crew of Apollo 15 , Dick Gordon , Vance Brand , and Schmitt , or the backup crew of Apollo 14 ) would become prime crew of the mission . NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton ultimately assigned the backup crew of Apollo 14 ( Cernan and Evans ) , along with Schmitt , to the prime crew of Apollo 17 . 
 = = = Backup crew = = = 
 = = = = Original = = = = 
 = = = = Replacement = = = = 
 The Apollo 15 prime crew received the backup assignment since this was to be the last lunar mission and the backup crew would not rotate to another mission . However , when the Apollo 15 postage stamp incident became public in early 1972 the crew was reprimanded by NASA and the United States Air Force ( they were active duty officers ) . Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton removed them from flight status and replaced them with Young and Duke from the Apollo 16 prime crew and Roosa from the Apollo 14 prime and Apollo 16 backup crews . 
 = = = Support crew = = = 
 Robert F. Overmyer 
 Robert A. Parker 
 C. Gordon Fullerton 
 = = = Mission insignia = = = 
 The insignia 's most prominent feature is an image of the Greek sun god Apollo <unk> by a rendering of an American eagle , the red bars on the eagle mirroring those on the flag of the United States . Three white stars above the red bars represent the three crewmen of the mission . The background includes the Moon , the planet Saturn and a galaxy or nebula . The wing of the eagle partially overlays the Moon , suggesting man 's established presence there . The gaze of Apollo and the direction of the eagle 's motion embody man 's intention to explore further destinations in space . 
 The patch includes , along with the colors of the U.S. flag ( red , white , and blue ) , the color gold , representative of a " golden age " of spaceflight that was to begin with Apollo 17 . The image of Apollo in the mission insignia is a rendering of the Apollo Belvedere sculpture . The insignia was designed by Robert McCall , with input from the crew . 
 = = Planning and training = = 
 Like Apollo 15 and Apollo 16 , Apollo 17 was slated to be a " J @-@ mission , " an Apollo mission type that featured lunar surface stays of three days , higher scientific capability , and the usage of the Lunar Roving Vehicle . Since Apollo 17 was to be the final lunar landing of the Apollo program , high @-@ priority landing sites that had not been visited previously were given consideration for potential exploration . A landing in the crater Copernicus was considered , but was ultimately rejected because Apollo 12 had already obtained samples from that impact , and three other Apollo expeditions had already visited the vicinity of Mare Imbrium . A landing in the lunar highlands near the crater Tycho was also considered , but was rejected because of the rough terrain found there and a landing on the lunar far side in the crater <unk> was rejected due to technical considerations and the operational costs of maintaining communication during surface operations . A landing in a region southwest of Mare Crisium was also considered , but rejected on the grounds that a Soviet spacecraft could easily access the site ; Luna 20 eventually did so shortly after the Apollo 17 site selection was made . 
 After the elimination of several sites , three sites made the final consideration for Apollo 17 : Alphonsus crater , Gassendi crater , and the Taurus @-@ Littrow valley . In making the final landing site decision , mission planners took into consideration the primary objectives for Apollo 17 : obtaining old highlands material from a substantial distance from Mare Imbrium , sampling material from young volcanic activity ( i.e. , less than three billion years ) , and having minimal ground overlap with the orbital ground tracks of Apollo 15 and Apollo 16 to maximize the amount of new data obtained . 
 The Taurus @-@ Littrow site was selected with the prediction that the crew would be able to obtain samples of old highland material from the remnants of a landslide event that occurred on the south wall of the valley and the possibility of relatively young , explosive volcanic activity in the area . Although the valley is similar to the landing site of Apollo 15 in that it is on the border of a lunar mare , the advantages of Taurus @-@ Littrow were believed to outweigh the drawbacks , thus leading to its selection as the Apollo 17 landing site . 
 Apollo 17 was the only lunar landing mission to carry the Traverse Gravimeter Experiment ( TGE ) , an experiment built by Draper Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology designed to provide relative gravity measurements throughout the landing site at various locations during the mission 's moonwalks . Scientists would then use this data to gather information about the geological substructure of the landing site and the surrounding vicinity . 
 As with previous lunar landings , the Apollo 17 astronauts underwent an extensive training program that included training to collect samples on the surface , usage of the spacesuits , navigation in the Lunar Roving Vehicle , field geology training , survival training , splashdown and recovery training , and equipment training . 
 = = Mission hardware and experiments = = 
 = = = Traverse Gravimeter = = = 
 Apollo 17 was the only Apollo lunar landing mission to carry the Traverse Gravimeter Experiment . As gravimeters had proven to be useful in the geologic investigation of the Earth , the objective of this experiment was to determine the feasibility of using the same techniques on the Moon to learn about its internal structure . The gravimeter was used to obtain readings at the landing site in the immediate vicinity of the Lunar Module ( LM ) , as well as various locations on the mission 's traverse routes . The TGE was carried on the Lunar Roving Vehicle ; measurements were taken by the astronauts while the LRV was not in motion or after the gravimeter was placed on the surface . 
 A total of twenty @-@ six measurements were taken with the TGE during the mission 's three moonwalks , with productive results . As part of the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package ( ALSEP ) , the astronauts also deployed the Lunar Surface Gravimeter , a similar experiment , which ultimately failed to function properly . 
 = = = Scientific Instrument Module = = = 
 Sector one of the Apollo 17 Service Module ( SM ) contained the Scientific Instrument Module ( SIM ) bay . The SIM bay housed three experiments for use in lunar orbit : a lunar sounder , an infrared scanning radiometer , and a far @-@ ultraviolet spectrometer . A mapping camera , panoramic camera , and a laser altimeter were also included in the SIM bay . 
 The lunar sounder beamed electromagnetic impulses toward the lunar surface , which were designed with the objective of obtaining data to assist in developing a geological model of the interior of the Moon to an approximate depth of 1 @.@ 3 km ( 0 @.@ 81 mi ) . 
 The Infrared Scanning Radiometer was designed with the objective of generating a temperature map of the lunar surface to aid in locating surface features such as rock fields , structural differences in the lunar crust , and volcanic activity . 
 The Far @-@ Ultraviolet Spectrometer was to be used to obtain data pertaining to the composition , density , and constituency of the lunar atmosphere . The spectrometer was also designed to detect far @-@ UV radiation emitted by the Sun that has been reflected off the lunar surface . 
 The Laser Altimeter was designed with the intention of measuring the altitude of the spacecraft above the lunar surface within approximately two meters ( 6 @.@ 5 feet ) , and providing altitude information to the panoramic and mapping cameras . 
 = = = Light flash phenomenon = = = 
 Throughout the Apollo lunar missions , the crew members observed light flashes that penetrated closed eyelids . These flashes , described as " streaks " or " specks " of light , were usually observed by astronauts while the spacecraft was darkened during a sleep period . These flashes , while not observed on the lunar surface , would average about two per minute and were observed by the crew members during the trip out to the Moon , back to Earth , and in lunar orbit . 
 The Apollo 17 crew conducted an experiment , also conducted on Apollo 16 , with the objective of linking these light flashes with cosmic rays . As part of an experiment conducted by NASA and the University of Houston , one astronaut wore a device that recorded the time , strength , and path of high @-@ energy atomic particles that penetrated the device . Analysis of the results concluded that the evidence supported the hypothesis that the flashes occurred when charged particles travelled through the retina in the eye . 
 = = = Surface Electrical Properties Experiment = = = 
 Apollo 17 was the only lunar surface expedition to include the Surface Electrical Properties ( SEP ) experiment . The experiment included two major components : a transmitting antenna deployed near the Lunar Module and a receiving antenna located on the Lunar Roving Vehicle . At different stops during the mission 's traverses , electrical signals traveled from the transmitting device , through the ground , and received at the LRV . The electrical properties of the lunar soil could be determined by comparison of the transmitted and received electrical signals . The results of this experiment , which are consistent with lunar rock composition , show that the top 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of the Moon are extremely dry . 
 = = = Lunar Roving Vehicle = = = 
 Apollo 17 was the third mission ( the others being Apollo 15 and Apollo 16 ) to make use of a Lunar Roving Vehicle . The LRV , in addition to being used by the astronauts for transport from station to station on the mission 's three moonwalks , was used to transport the astronauts ' tools , communications equipment , and samples . The Apollo 17 LRV was also used to carry experiments unique to the mission , such as the Traverse Gravimeter and Surface Electrical Properties experiment . The Apollo 17 LRV traveled a cumulative distance of approximately 35 @.@ 9 km ( 22 @.@ 3 mi ) in a total drive time of about four hours and twenty @-@ six minutes ; the greatest distance Eugene Cernan and Harrison Schmitt traveled from the Lunar Module was about 7 @.@ 6 km ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) . 
 = = = Biological cosmic ray experiment = = = 
 Apollo 17 included a biological cosmic ray experiment ( <unk> ) , carrying mice that had been implanted with radiation monitors to see whether they suffered damage from cosmic rays . 
 Five pocket mice ( <unk> <unk> ) were implanted with radiation monitors under their scalps and flown on the mission . The species was chosen because it was well @-@ documented , small , easy to maintain in an isolated state ( not requiring drinking water for the duration of the mission and with highly concentrated waste ) , and for its ability to withstand environmental stress . Four of the five mice survived the flight ; the cause of death of the fifth mouse was not determined . 
 The study found lesions in the scalp itself and liver . The scalp lesions and liver lesions appeared to be unrelated to one another , and were not thought to be the result of cosmic rays . No damage was found in the mice 's retinas or viscera . At the time of the publication of the Apollo 17 Preliminary Science Report , the mouse brains had not yet been examined . However , subsequent studies showed no significant effect on the brains . 
 Officially , the mice — four male and one female — were assigned the identification numbers <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Unofficially , according to Cernan , the Apollo 17 crew dubbed them " Fe " , " Fi " , " Fo " , " Fum " and " Phooey " . 
 = = Mission highlights = = 
 = = = Launch and outbound trip = = = 
 Apollo 17 was launched at 12 : 33 am EST on December 7 , 1972 , from launch pad 39 @-@ A at the Kennedy Space Center . It was the last manned Saturn V launch and the only night launch . The launch was delayed by two hours and forty minutes due to an automatic cutoff in the launch sequencer at the T @-@ 30 second mark in the countdown . The issue was quickly determined to be a minor technical error . The clock was reset and held at the T @-@ 22 minute mark while technicians worked around the malfunction in order to continue with the launch . This pause was the only launch delay in the Apollo program caused by this type of hardware failure . The count resumed and the rocket lifted off achieving a normal low Earth orbit . 
 Approximately 500 @,@ 000 people were estimated to have observed the launch in the immediate vicinity of Kennedy Space Center , despite the early morning hour . The launch was visible as far away as 800 km ( 500 mi ) ; observers in Miami , Florida , saw a " red streak " crossing the northern sky . 
 At 3 : 46 am EST , the S @-@ IVB third stage was re @-@ ignited to propel the spacecraft towards the Moon . 
 At approximately 2 : 47 pm EST on December 10 , the Service Propulsion System engine on the Command / Service Module ignited to slow down the CSM / Lunar Module stack into lunar orbit . Following orbit insertion and orbital stabilization , the crew began preparations for landing in the Taurus @-@ Littrow valley . 
 = = = Moon landing = = = 
 After separating from the Command / Service Module , the Lunar Module Challenger and its crew of two , Eugene Cernan and Harrison Schmitt , adjusted their orbit and began preparations for the descent to Taurus @-@ Littrow . While Cernan and Schmitt prepared for landing , Command Module Pilot Ron Evans remained in orbit to take observations , perform experiments and await the return of his crew @-@ mates a few days later . 
 Soon after completing their preparations for landing , Cernan and Schmitt began their descent to the Taurus @-@ Littrow valley on the lunar surface . Several minutes after the descent phase was initiated , the Lunar Module pitched over , giving the crew their first look at the landing site during the descent phase and allowing Cernan to guide the spacecraft to a desirable landing target while Schmitt provided data from the flight computer essential for landing . The LM touched down on the lunar surface at 2 : 55 pm EST on December 11 . Shortly thereafter , the two astronauts began re @-@ configuring the LM for their stay on the surface and began preparations for the first moonwalk of the mission , or EVA @-@ 1 . 
 = = = Lunar surface = = = 
 The first moonwalk ( EVA ) of the mission began approximately four hours after landing , at about 6 : 55 pm on December 11 . The first task of the first lunar excursion was to offload the Lunar Roving Vehicle and other equipment from the Lunar Module . While working near the rover , a fender was accidentally broken off when Gene Cernan brushed up against it , his hammer getting caught under the right @-@ rear fender , breaking off the rear extension . The same incident had also occurred on Apollo 16 as Commander John Young maneuvered around the rover . Although this was not a mission @-@ critical issue , the loss of the fender caused Cernan and Schmitt to be covered with dust thrown up when the rover was in motion . The crew used duct tape to fix the problem by attaching a map to the damaged fender , but the dust picked up on the tape surface prevented it from sticking properly and the first fix was short lived . After an overnight rethink by the flight controllers , a better method of applying the tape resulted in a satisfactory fix that lasted for the length of the exploration . The crew then deployed the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package ( ALSEP ) west of the immediate landing site . After completing this , Cernan and Schmitt departed on the first geologic traverse of the mission towards Steno crater to the south of the landing site , during which they gathered 14 kilograms ( 31 lb ) of samples ; took seven gravimeter measurements ; and deployed two explosive packages , which were later detonated remotely to test <unk> that had been placed by the astronauts and seismometers that had been placed on previous Apollo missions . The EVA ended after seven hours and twelve minutes . 
 On December 12 , at 6 : 28 pm EST , Cernan and Schmitt began their second lunar excursion . One of the first tasks of the EVA was repairing the right @-@ rear fender on the LRV , the rearward extension of which had been broken off the previous day . The pair did this by taping together four <unk> maps with duct tape and clamping the replacement fender extension to the fender , thus providing a means of preventing dust from raining down upon them while in motion . During this EVA , the pair sampled several different types of geologic deposits found in the valley , including the avalanche at the base of the South Massif , orange @-@ colored soil at Shorty crater , and ejecta of Camelot crater . The crew completed this moonwalk after seven hours and thirty @-@ seven minutes . They collected 34 kilograms ( 75 lb ) of samples , deployed three more explosive packages and took seven gravimeter measurements . 
 The third moonwalk , the last of the Apollo program , began at 5 : 26 pm EST on December 13 . During this excursion , the crew collected 66 kilograms ( 146 lb ) of lunar samples and took nine gravimeter measurements . They drove the rover to the north and east of the landing site and explored the base of the North Massif , the Sculptured Hills , and the unusual crater Van Serg . Before ending the moonwalk , the crew collected a rock , a breccia , and dedicated it to several different nations which were represented in Mission Control Center in Houston , Texas , at the time . A plaque located on the Lunar Module , commemorating the achievements made during the Apollo program , was then unveiled . Before reentering the LM for the final time , Gene Cernan expressed his thoughts : 
 ... I 'm on the surface ; and , as I take man 's last step from the surface , back home for some time to come - but we believe not too long into the future - I 'd like to just [ say ] what I believe history will record . That America 's challenge of today has forged man 's destiny of tomorrow . And , as we leave the Moon at Taurus @-@ Littrow , we leave as we came and , God willing , as we shall return , with peace and hope for all mankind . " Godspeed the crew of Apollo 17 . " 
 Cernan then followed Schmitt into the Lunar Module after spending approximately seven hours and 15 minutes outside during the mission 's final lunar excursion . 
 = = = Return to Earth = = = 
 Eugene Cernan and Harrison Schmitt successfully lifted off from the lunar surface in the ascent stage of the Lunar Module on December 14 , at 5 : 55 pm EST . After a successful rendezvous and docking with Ron Evans in the Command / Service Module in orbit , the crew transferred equipment and lunar samples between the LM and the CSM for return to Earth . Following this , the LM ascent stage was sealed off and jettisoned at 1 : 31 am on December 15 . The ascent stage was then deliberately crashed into the Moon in a collision recorded by seismometers deployed on Apollo 17 and previous Apollo expeditions . 
 On December 17 , during the trip back to Earth , at 3 : 27 pm EST , Ron Evans successfully conducted a one @-@ hour and seven minute spacewalk to retrieve exposed film from the instrument bay on the exterior of the CSM . 
 On December 19 , the crew jettisoned the no @-@ longer @-@ needed Service Module , leaving only the Command Module for return to Earth . The Apollo 17 spacecraft reentered Earth 's atmosphere and landed safely in the Pacific Ocean at 2 : 25 pm , 6 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) from the recovery ship , USS Ticonderoga . Cernan , Evans and Schmitt were then retrieved by a recovery helicopter and were safely aboard the recovery ship 52 minutes after landing . 
 = = Spacecraft locations = = 
 The Command Module America is currently on display at Space Center Houston at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston , Texas . 
 The ascent stage of lunar module Challenger impacted the Moon December 15 , 1972 at 06 : 50 : 20 @.@ 8 UT ( 1 : 50 am EST ) , at 19 @.@ 96 ° N 30 @.@ 50 ° E ﻿ / 19 @.@ 96 ; 30 @.@ 50 ﻿ ( Apollo 17 LM ascent stage ) . The descent stage remains on the Moon at the landing site , 20 @.@ <unk> ° N 30 @.@ <unk> ° E ﻿ / 20 @.@ <unk> ; 30 @.@ <unk> ﻿ ( Apollo 17 LM descent stage ) . 
 In 2009 and again in 2011 , the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter photographed the landing site from increasingly low orbits . 
 = = Depiction of mission in fiction and popular culture = = 
 Portions of the Apollo 17 mission are dramatized in the 1998 HBO miniseries From the Earth to the Moon episode entitled " Le Voyage dans la Lune . " 
 The prologue to the 1999 novel Back to the Moon , by Homer Hickam , begins with a dramatized depiction of the end of the second Apollo 17 EVA . The orange soil then becomes the major driver of the plot of the rest of the story . 
 The 2005 novel Tyrannosaur Canyon by Douglas Preston opens with a depiction of the Apollo 17 moonwalks using quotes taken from the official mission transcript . 
 Additionally , there have been fictional astronauts in film , literature and television who have been described as " the last man to walk on the Moon , " implying they were crew members on Apollo 17 . One such character was Steve Austin in the television series The Six Million Dollar Man . In the 1972 novel Cyborg , upon which the series was based , Austin remembers watching the Earth " fall away during Apollo XVII . " In the 1998 film Deep Impact fictional astronaut Spurgeon " Fish " Tanner , portrayed by Robert Duvall , was described at a Presidential press conference as the " last man to walk on the moon " by the President of the United States , portrayed by Morgan Freeman . 
 In the Anime <unk> , the Apollo 17 mission locates an ancient transporter gate leading to Mars left by an unknown , extinct alien race . This discovery is the divergence point for the story 's alternate history . 
 = = Multimedia = = 
 = Marge in Chains = 
 " Marge in Chains " is the 21st episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 6 , 1993 . In the episode , Marge is arrested for shoplifting after forgetting to pay for an item at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . The family hires attorney Lionel Hutz to defend her at trial , but she is found guilty and sentenced to 30 days imprisonment . Homer , and the rest of the family have trouble coping without Marge . The townspeople start a riot when an annual bake sale missing Marge fails to raise enough money for a statue of Abraham Lincoln and they have to settle for a statue of Jimmy Carter . Mayor Quimby has Marge released from jail in order to save his career and quell the riot . 
 After its initial airing on Fox , the episode was later included as part of a 1997 video release titled The Simpsons : Crime and Punishment . It was released again on the 2005 edition of the same set . The episode is included in the June 15 , 2004 DVD release of The Simpsons – The Complete Fourth Season . " Marge in Chains " received a positive reception from television critics . A quote by Lionel Hutz from the episode was included in The News Tribune 's " Eight Great ' Simpsons ' Quotes " . The authors of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide commented positively on the episode , as did reviews in The Daily Mirror and The Observer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Many of Springfield 's residents purchase " Juice <unk> " through the mail , which are inefficient and loud <unk> built in Japan and shipped from there . One of the assembly line workers has the flu and coughs into the box destined for Homer , filling it with airborne germs . When the Juice <unk> arrive in Springfield , the dreaded Osaka Flu hits the town and many of the townspeople are affected by the illness . Due to exhaustion from having to look after the rest of her ill family , Marge accidentally forgets to pay for Grampa 's bottle of bourbon when shopping at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . She is then arrested for shoplifting . Chief Wiggum tells Mayor Quimby about the arrest in confidence , and Quimby later reveals this fact to everyone in town during a public address . Marge 's reputation is lowered dramatically among the townspeople , who now distrust her around their possessions . The family hires Lionel Hutz to defend Marge at her trial , but Hutz loses the case and the jury finds Marge guilty . She is sentenced to 30 days imprisonment at Springfield Women 's Prison . 
 Marge 's absence is felt at home as Homer and the rest of the family struggles to cope without her . Without Marge , the house shortly becomes a complete wreck . The annual bake sale also suffers – without Marge 's marshmallow squares , the Springfield Park Commission fails to raise enough money to pay for a statue of Abraham Lincoln . Instead they purchase one of Jimmy Carter . The townspeople are enraged by this , and riot . When Marge is released from jail , the townspeople welcome her back and apologize for suspecting her . They even unveil a statue for Marge , though it is just the Carter statue with Marge 's hair added to it . The last scene shows Bart and Lisa playing on the statue , which has been converted into a tether ball post . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Marge in Chains " was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein and was the first episode that they wrote as staff writers . The script was assigned to them after somebody else had come up with the idea . The first draft of the script was " slightly more realistic " than the final version of the episode because Oakley and Weinstein had done a lot of research about women in prison , much of which was later replaced . For Apu and Sanjay 's brief lines of Indian dialogue , the writers called the Embassy of India in Washington to get them to translate . The Embassy was not " interested or happy " but still did it . 
 In the episode , Jimmy Carter is referred to as " history 's greatest monster " . In the 2004 Season 4 DVD commentary for this episode , show runners Mike Reiss and Al Jean reveal that they did not like Carter , although they would vote for him ahead of George W. Bush . Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart operator Apu testifies in a courtroom scene in the episode that he is able to recite 40 @,@ 000 decimal places of the number pi . He correctly notes that the <unk> digit is the number one . The episode 's writers prepared for this scene by asking David H. Bailey of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( now at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ) for the number of the <unk> decimal place of pi . Bailey sent them back a printout of the first 40 @,@ 000 digits . 
 " Marge in Chains " originally aired May 6 , 1993 on Fox . The episode was selected for release in a 1997 video set of selected episodes titled : The Simpsons : Crime and Punishment . Other episodes included in the set were " Homer the Vigilante " , " Bart the Fink " , and " You Only Move Twice " . It was included in The Simpsons season 4 DVD set , which was released June 15 , 2004 – The Simpsons – The Complete Fourth Season . The episode was again included in the 2005 DVD release of the " Crime and Punishment " set . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 David Crosby portrays himself in a cameo appearance in the episode as the 12 @-@ step sponsor for Lionel Hutz . During Marge 's trial for shoplifting , prosecutors show the Zapruder film and assert that Marge was present on the grassy knoll when President John F. Kennedy was assassinated . The scene where Maude Flanders peers through a hole in a wall at Marge is a reference to the 1960 film Psycho . In Lionel Hutz 's dream of what the world would be like without lawyers , the writers had wanted to use the song " I 'd Like to Teach the World to Sing " which was used in Coca @-@ Cola advertisements , but they could not get the rights to it . Instead , they used a similar instrumental theme . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Marge in Chains " finished 31st in ratings for the week of May 3 – 9 , 1993 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 1 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 3 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 In a review of the episode in The Observer , Caroline Boucher wrote : " My domestic Simpsons correspondent , Simon , reports a particularly fine episode , Marge in Chains to the extent that he watched the tape twice . " Karl French of Financial Times characterized the plot of the episode as a " modern version " of It 's a Wonderful Life . Dusty Lane of The News Tribune cited a quote from Lionel Hutz in the episode among his list of " Eight Great ' Simpsons ' Quotes " – " Well , he 's kind of had it in for me since I kinda ran over his dog . Well , replace the word ' kinda ' with the word ' repeatedly , ' and the word ' dog ' with ' son ' . " 
 Jessica Mellor of The Daily Mirror highlighted the episode in a review of The Simpsons season four DVD release , along with " Kamp Krusty " , " New Kid on the Block " , and " I Love Lisa " , commenting : " Springfield 's finest prove once again why they are the cleverest thing on telly . " In a section on the episode in their book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood wrote : " We like Bart 's plan to rescue Marge from prison by becoming the glamorous <unk> , and Lionel Hutz is supremely inept " . 
 = Run the World = 
 " Run the World " is a song recorded by American entertainer Jennifer Lopez for her seventh studio album Love ? ( 2011 ) . Written and produced by Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash and C. " Tricky " Stewart , " Run the World " was one of several songs recorded with the duo following Lopez 's move from Epic Records to Island Records . The track originally featured vocals from The @-@ Dream and a rap verse from American rapper Rick Ross however , the rap verse was removed during mastering process and The @-@ Dream was credited with background vocals instead . 
 According to Lopez , " Run the World " is about a " type of love when you come together you make each other better ; " noting that she shared that love with her husband Marc Anthony . Relating the song to Anthony , Lopez said she believes that they have made each other better artists and people . " Run the World " is a midtempo pop song that critics compared to Lopez 's 2002 single " Jenny from the Block " . 
 = = Production and leak = = 
 " Run the World " was written and produced by Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash and Tricky Stewart . Lopez 's vocals for the song were produced by Kuk Harrell , who also provided backing vocals alongside Anesha Birchett , Lauren Evans and The @-@ Dream . The vocals were recorded by Jim Annunziato , Josh Gudwin at Record Plant Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California , Larrabee Studios in Hollywood , California and MSR in New York City , New York . Brian " B @-@ Luv " Thomas and Chris " Tek " O 'Ryan handled audio engineering of " Run the World " , with additional engineering from Andrew Wuepper , Pat Thrall , Chris Galland and Chris Soper and assistance from Dustin <unk> , Nick Banns and Steven Dennis . The song was later mixed by Jaycen Joshua with the assistance of Jesus Garnica at Larrabee Studios . 
 " Run the World " was leaked onto the internet on September 13 , 2010 . The version that leaked featured guest vocals from American rapper Rick Ross , as well as song 's co @-@ producer The @-@ Dream . The @-@ Dream 's featuring credit was demoted to backing vocals and Ross ' rap was removed from the mastered version of the song . In a February 2011 article about the then @-@ upcoming release of Love ? conducted by Rap @-@ Up , Lopez called " Run the World " featuring Ross one of her favorite songs on the album . Ross ' rap from the song was later removed during the mastering process of the track . 
 = = Lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Run the World " is a midtempo song with a length of three minutes and fifty @-@ five seconds ( 3 : 55 ) . It was cited by Shane Phoenix of Hot Spots as " bringing back " the old school feel of Lopez 's single " Jenny from the Block " ; the " feel and style that made ' The Girl from the Block ' [ Lopez ] so famous " . The song contains " nice drum synchs with a real throw back feel " , that will " get you tapping your foot and <unk> back and forth " . Although Lopez did not write the song herself , " Run the World " is based on her relationship with husband Marc Anthony . The song is about a " type of love when you come together you make each other better " . Lopez further stated that she believes that since her and Anthony have been together they have made each other better artists and better people — " and that 's when you can really run the world " . 
 Of working with Stewart and The @-@ Dream , Lopez stated that : " What I love about great producers and writers is that they can take you and transport you right into this moment , but not change you . And that 's what I feel like Tricky and Dream did with this record . They took that ' Jenny from the Block ' side of me , which is still very much a part of who I am and will always be , and they put it right there on that track " . According to Scott Shetler of PopCrush , " Run the World " contains an optimistic message and upbeat melody . Shetler particularly noted the lyric " Our love could run the world " as a good example of the optimism in the song . 
 Lopez told MTV News at an album @-@ release event in May 2011 , that out of all the songs on Love ? , she was most excited for people to hear " Run the World " , " ( What Is ) Love ? " , " One Love " , " Papi " and " Starting Over " . Lopez stated that : " They all express different moments in love and that 's what this album was about . You know , sometimes it 's difficult , sometimes it 's amazing , sometimes overwhelming , sometimes you just don 't know what to do . And I hope that I captured all of that on this album " . MTV News noted that on the songs , Lopez might be " giving us some insight about what she was dealing with in her personal life in the months before it was released " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey noted the song to be inspired by J to tha L – O ! The Remixes ( 2002 ) . He concluded by stating that the song was worthy of a standalone release . Monica Herrera from Billboard complimented The @-@ Dream for the production of the song and his background vocals . She continued by calling " Run the World " refreshingly self @-@ assured . When the original version of the song leaked online , an editor from Vibe commented that with the help of The @-@ Dream and Rick Ross , Lopez " takes another shot at running the charts " . Shane Phoenix of Hot Spots said that the keys are " a little lost " and the synth clapping is over used , but the " breaks are amazing and the lyrics have something to say " . 
 Poppy Reid of The Music Network criticized the song for its reliance on auto @-@ tune and lyrics " you just don 't expect ( or want ) from a 41 @-@ year @-@ old " . UR Chicago 's Neil Miller , Jr. also gave a negative review of the song , questioning if " Run the World " was meant for Lopez , stating that : " Because up until this point , it seemed like we were listening to the album that Brave was meant to be – a collection of tracks meant to make us dance , not ones that we 're supposed to blast out of our trunks . <unk> <unk> of Radio and Music gave a negative review of the song , stating that it is " slow paced and has a miss on beats which leaves listeners wanting for more " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love ? . 
 = Sesame Street international co @-@ productions = 
 Sesame Street international co @-@ productions are educational children 's television series based on the American Sesame Street but tailored to the countries in which they are produced . Shortly after the debut of Sesame Street in the US in 1969 , television producers , teachers , and officials of several countries approached the show 's producers and the executives of Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) about the possibility of airing international versions of Sesame Street . Creator Joan Ganz Cooney hired former CBS executive Mike Dann to field offers to produce versions of the show in other countries . 
 The producers of these shows developed them using a variant on the CTW model , a flexible model of production based upon the experiences of the creators and producers of the US show . The model consisted of the combination of producers and researchers working together on the show , the development of a unique curriculum , and extensive test screening of the shows . The shows came to be called co @-@ productions , and they contained original sets , characters , and curriculum goals . Different co @-@ productions were produced , depending upon each country 's needs and resources . They included both dubbed versions of the American show and versions created , developed , and produced in each country that reflected their needs , educational priorities , and culture . For example , the first HIV @-@ positive Muppet , Kami , from the South African co @-@ production Takalani Sesame was created in 2003 to address the epidemic of AIDS in South Africa , and was met with controversy in the US . By 2006 , there were 20 co @-@ productions in countries all over the world . In 2001 , there were more than 120 million viewers of all international versions of Sesame Street , and by the US show 's 40th anniversary in 2009 , they were seen in more than 140 countries . 
 = = History = = 
 A few months after the 1969 debut of Sesame Street on PBS in the US , producers from Brazil , Mexico , Canada , and Germany requested that the organization responsible for the show 's production , the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) create and produce versions of Sesame Street in those countries . Even before the American show 's debut , the CTW established an international division , which oversaw its licensing in other countries . According to Gregory J. Gettas , the division immediately developed four main licensing policies : ( 1 ) like the American version , all foreign versions had to be broadcast without commercials ; ( 2 ) any changes would have to meet high production standards , which protected the CTW 's proprietary interests ; ( 3 ) all versions had to reflect the country 's cultural values and traditions ; and ( 4 ) all changes would have to be approved , initiated , and supervised by a local committee working with the CTW . 
 Many years later , co @-@ creator Joan Ganz Cooney recalled , " To be frank , I was really surprised , because we thought we were creating the quintessential American show . We thought the Muppets were quintessentially American , and it turns out they 're the most international characters ever created " . Mike Dann , a former CBS executive whom Cooney had hired as a CTW vice @-@ president and her assistant , was assigned to field offers from other countries to produce their own versions of Sesame Street . Dann 's appointment led to television critic Marvin Kitman stating , " After he [ Dann ] sells [ Sesame Street ] in Russia and Czechoslovakia , he might try Mississippi , where it is considered too controversial for educational TV " . 
 By summer 1970 , Dann had made the first international agreements for what the CTW later called " co @-@ productions " . 38 Canadian Broadcasting Corporation television stations broadcast Sesame Street to Canada 's English @-@ speaking provinces . The Armed Forces Radio and Television Network agreed to air the first 130 episodes of the US @-@ made show for children of military personnel serving in 16 countries , including Iceland , Greece , Ethiopia , and South Korea . During his tenure at CTW , Dann also made agreements with several Caribbean nations , Mexico , Australia , Japan , the Philippines , France , Israel , and Germany . He later told author Michael Davis , " I was aggressive and I knew people around the world " . During the same period there were discussions about broadcasting the US version in England or producing a British version of Sesame Street but British broadcasters found the show too controversial and rejected the idea . The American version was broadcast throughout the UK on a limited basis starting in 1971 , but went off the air in 2001 . 
 As of 2006 , there were 20 active " co @-@ productions " . CTW vice @-@ president Charlotte Cole , in 2001 , estimated that there were more than 120 million viewers of all international versions of Sesame Street , and by the show 's 40th anniversary in 2009 , they were seen in more than 140 countries . In 2005 , Doreen Carvajal of The New York Times reported that income from the co @-@ productions accounted for US $ 96 million . Cole stated , " Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) can be regarded as the single largest informal educator of young children in the world " . Studies conducted on the effects of several co @-@ productions ( Mexico in 1974 , Turkey in 1990 , Portugal in 1993 , and Russia in 1998 ) , found that viewers of these shows gain basic academic skills , especially literacy and numeracy , from watching them . 
 In 2001 , the Workshop introduced Sesame English , a series focused on teaching children and their families the basics of the English language and on familiarizing them with some aspects of American culture . As of 2009 , it aired in several countries , including Japan , Korea , and Italy . In 2003 , in response to the epidemic of AIDS in South Africa , the co @-@ producers of Takalani Sesame included the first preschool AIDS / HIV curriculum . They created the first HIV @-@ positive Muppet , Kami , to confront the stigma of HIV and AIDS in South Africa . According to the documentary , The World According to Sesame Street , the reaction of many in the US surprised Sesame Workshop . Some members of Congress attacked Sesame Street , Sesame Workshop ( previously , the CTW ) , and PBS . According to co @-@ producer Naila Farouky , " The reaction we got in the US blew me away . I didn 't expect people to be so horrible ... and hateful and mean " . The controversy in the US was short @-@ lived , and died down when the public discovered the facts about the South African co @-@ production , and when Kofi Anan and Jerry Falwell praised the Workshop 's efforts . 
 Gettas explained what he called " Sesame Street 's unprecedented appeal abroad " was its broad appeal and adaptability to other cultures . Gettas stated , " Here is a program that speaks to them in their own language , on their level , and with respect for their intelligence " . According to Cooper Wright , the Sesame Workshop 's vice @-@ president of International Co @-@ Productions in 2006 , the " mission " of the co @-@ productions was to " help children reach their highest potential " . The producers were further galvanized to accomplish this goal after the events of 9 / 11 . Cooney stated , " Our producers are like old @-@ fashioned missionaries . It 's not religion they 're spreading , but it is learning and tolerance and love and mutual respect " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The earliest international versions were what then @-@ CTW vice @-@ president Charlotte Cole called " fairly simple " , consisting of dubbed versions of the show with local language voice @-@ overs and instructional cutaways . Dubbed versions of the show continued to be produced if the country 's needs and resources warranted it . They utilized a variant of a flexible model called the CTW model , developed by the producers and creators of the original show , to create and produce independently produced preschool television shows in other countries . The Workshop recognized that the production model developed in the US , which reflected its needs and culture at the time , served as a framework for other countries that wanted to repeat it . Its inherent flexibility was attractive to producers in other countries , who saw the model as " a methodological approach that is neither doctrinaire nor culture @-@ bound " that could be used to achieve different results in different countries . According to the 2006 documentary , The World According to Sesame Street , the producers of the co @-@ productions repeated the " experiment " undertaken by the original US show , but adapted it to each specific situation . In 1969 , the producers of the original show depended upon government and foundation funding , but as Sesame Workshop CEO Gary Knell stated in 2009 , the US funding model would not necessarily be effective in countries with different economic and political structures . All co @-@ productions share elements with the American show , but because of their different needs , no two are exactly alike . According to Gettas , the producers of the programs would " rely on variants of the CTW model to help them create programming that faithfully reflects the linguistic , cultural , social , or religious diversity of their native lands " . 
 The need for preschool education in each country was assessed through research and interviews with television producers , researchers , and educational experts , which paralleled what the producers of Sesame Street did in the late 1960s . Then they convened the experts in a series of meetings , held in the individual countries , to create and develop a curriculum , the show 's educational goals , and its set and characters , as was done in 1968 in the US . Finally , they held a series of meetings , both at the CTW offices in New York City and in the individual countries , to train the co @-@ production team in the CTW model . Writing seminars were also held in New York . 
 The co @-@ productions consisted of unique characters , sets , and curricula designed to meet the needs of their own children . Cole reported that the goal of the co @-@ productions was to provide children in each country a program that reflected their country 's culture , local values , and educational priorities . She stated that this cultural specificity was the reason for the co @-@ productions ' success , popularity , and educational impact . The co @-@ productions combined universal curriculum goals that were common around the world with educational content that specifically addressed the needs of children in each country . Another goal of the international co @-@ productions of Sesame Street was , as executive producer <unk> Horne stated in 1987 , the improvement of " the overall quality of a country 's television " . He added , " We give a country a model of how television can be used effectively to address people 's needs " . 
 US cast members Kevin Clash and Marty Robinson have cast and trained the international puppeteers . At first , Muppet builder Kermit Love constructed the puppets for the new shows in the US . According to Gikow in 2009 , Jim Henson 's Creature Shop , overseen by Connie Peterson , has taken over puppet creation . The producers of Sisimpur , the Bangladesh co @-@ production , created their own traditional puppets because their puppet @-@ making craft is thousands of years old and an important part of their culture . The producers of each co @-@ production developed and built their own sets , live @-@ action videos , and animations in @-@ country . After they developed , produced , and aired the new show , they conducted research to ascertain whether their curriculum goals were met , just as was done in the US after the first season of Sesame Street . According to producer Nadine <unk> , they faced unusual challenges rarely experienced in the US . For example , riots and conflicts between Serbs and Albanians in 2004 delayed production of the Kosovo co @-@ production for three months . In 2005 , a nationwide strike in Bangladesh temporarily stalled production of their show . 
 When countries were not able to afford creating original co @-@ productions , the Workshop provided alternatives for them . They created Open Sesame , a series with no specific cultural references in it , and with , as Horne described , " universally acceptable material " . The show was also broadcast in US military bases . The Workshop 's library of Muppet skits , short films , and animations were sold to many countries and were either broadcast in English or dubbed in the local language . According to Gikow , it often served as the basis for the creation of new material for their own co @-@ productions . As of 2009 , the Workshop opened its entire library of episodes , short films , and animations created all over the world so that poorer countries could use and adapt them for their purposes . 
 = = Co @-@ productions = = 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 The first international co @-@ production of Sesame Street was Brazil 's Vila Sésamo , which first aired in 1972 and had an initial run of two years . Its set consisted of an open plaza . The Muppet Garibaldo was " the centerpiece " of the Brazil co @-@ production and remained popular with viewers when the show was revived in 2007 . Garibaldo 's performer in the revival , Fernando Gomes , became a puppeteer because of the original Brazilian show 's influence . It was broadcast in Portuguese . Also in 1972 , Plaza Sésamo was produced in Mexico . This co @-@ production has also been broadcast in Puerto Rico and in Spanish @-@ speaking Latin America since 1973 , and has aired on Spanish television stations in the US since 1995 . 
 In 1973 , West Germany , one of the first countries to approach CTW , began airing Sesamstraße . It has been continually produced since . At first , this co @-@ production incorporated original German animation and live action segments into the US version . Starting in 1978 , its producers began using puppets filmed in their own studio in Germany . The Netherlands ' version , Sesamstraat , began in 1976 . This show has aired in both Dutch and Flemish . In Sesamstraat 's early years , Belgium television participated in its production , so it also aired there . In 2011 , to celebrate the show 's 35th anniversary , the Sesame Workshop partnered with the Vincent van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam to recreate a version of van Gogh 's " Bedroom in Arles " , featuring Muppets from both the American and Dutch shows . France aired Open Sesame in the early 1970s before creating its own co @-@ production . One version , created in 1974 , Bonjour Sesame , was fifteen minutes long and had no street scenes . 5 , Rue <unk> began in 1976 ; its set consists of a courtyard of a building in a small French town . 
 The final two co @-@ productions of the 70s , both made in 1979 , occurred in Kuwait and Spain . The Kuwaiti show , Iftah Ya Simsim , which ran until 1990 , was the first of its kind in the Arab world . It used Modern Standard Arabic ( MSA ) , and was broadcast in 22 Arab countries . The show continued to be well @-@ known decades after it went off the air . It returned in 2013 , and had similar goals and objectives as the original version , including the use of MSA . Barrio Sésamo , made in Spain , featured a snail character who was able to hide a thousand and one things in her shell . One of the show 's Muppet characters , Dr. Valentin <unk> , was based upon Dr. Valentin Fuster , a native Spaniard who worked at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City . Dr. Fuster 's likeness was created to educated children in Spain about exercise and eating healthy . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 Sweden 's version of Sesame Street , Svenska Sesam ( 1981 – 1983 ) , was originally a single season full co @-@ production , but did not integrate puppets . Dubs have aired before and after . Israel filmed its co @-@ production , called <unk> <unk> , in 1983 . It was the first co @-@ production to devote an entire section of its curriculum to educating children about mutual respect , which was a priority due to " profound political tension in the region " . Its curriculum , which was based upon their viewers ' needs , differed from many other countries and exposed Israeli children to children from different cultures . The show 's counterpart of Big Bird was a hedgehog named <unk> . 
 Also in 1983 , the Philippines created <unk> , the first fully bilingual ( Tagalog and English ) version of Sesame Street . In 1989 , <unk> <unk> , a co @-@ production filmed in Turkey , featured versions of Big Bird and an " exuberant little @-@ girl Muppet host " named Simi . There have been three versions of Sesame Street in Portugal , including one co @-@ production created in 1989 . Rua Sésamo was also broadcast in the Portuguese @-@ speaking nations Angola , Mozambique , Guinea , Cape Verde , and São Tomé . Play with Me Sesame is the title of the current version . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Norway 's co @-@ production , entitled Sesam <unk> , began filming in 1991 . Three co @-@ productions premiered in 1996 , in Russia , Canada , and Poland . Russia 's version , <unk> Sezam ( <unk> <unk> ) , debuted in 1996 . No longer on the air , one of its curriculum goals was to prepare Russian children to live in a " new open society " . Poland 's Ulica <unk> has been since replaced by dubs of various Sesame Workshop programs and has changed its name to <unk> <unk> . Canada aired Sesame Street Canada , a combination of locally produced and US @-@ made content from 1972 to 1996 . A French @-@ dubbed version was shown in 1975 , which demonstrated the producers ' commitment to bilingualism , one of their curriculum goals . In 1996 , a half @-@ hour program called Sesame Park was produced by the country 's public broadcasting corporation and consisted of more content created in @-@ country . The series featured a polar bear , an otter , a female bush pilot , and a girl in a wheelchair . 
 In 1998 , the Chinese co @-@ production of Sesame Street , <unk> Jie , was created . An auto mechanic became the head writer of this show , broadcast in Mandarin Chinese , because there were few people with experience in writing for children in the country . It has aired in 40 local markets , comprising forty percent of all Chinese homes . Its curriculum emphasized aesthetics . The Chinese puppeteers were trained by Kevin Clash and Caroll Spinney . Also in 1998 , a fifteen @-@ minute version of the Israeli show was dubbed in Arabic and renamed Shara 'a Simsim ; this Palestinian co @-@ production promoted children 's sense of national identity . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 In 2000 , Egypt 's co @-@ production , entitled Alam Simsim ( <unk> سمسم ) , began to air throughout the Arab World and was broadcast in Arabic . Its curriculum focused on literacy , math , cognitive and social skills , girls ' education , the environment , and health . The show was sponsored by its patron , Egyptian First Lady Suzanne Mubarak . A study conducted in 2004 showed that the show 's efforts to educate Egyptian children about health were substantially influential . 
 South Africa aired Takalani Sesame , also in 2000 ; it focused on AIDS education with the creation of the first HIV @-@ positive Muppet , Kami , who was declared a UNICEF " Champion for Children " in 2003 . The show reached almost 70 percent of children in urban areas and almost 50 percent in rural areas , and its viewers had improvements in HIV / AIDS knowledge , attitudes , and communication . In 2007 , it began airing in almost all of the country 's official languages , and its Muppets were used in health educational campaigns . In 2008 , the show began to focus on diversity within South Africa and technology . Takalani Sesame 's tenth anniversary in 2010 was marked by a series of workshops in South Africa focusing on the future of the show and the needs of the country 's children . Research conducted about the show 's affects showed that viewers gained in four major areas : basic knowledge , blood safety , discrimination , and numeracy skills . They also improved in life skills , such as safety , sounds , nature , emotions , and self @-@ esteem . 
 Hikayat Simsim premiered in 2003 in Jordan . According to its producers , its goal was to " promote respect in the face of conflict " . The show also focused on literacy , numeracy , health and hygiene , emotions , road safety , and the environment . Afghanistan temporarily aired its first version of Sesame Street , called <unk> Sesame in 2004 , to help rebuild its educational system . Although this production filmed its own live @-@ action films , it used Muppet segments filmed in the U.S. , which were dubbed in Dari , one of the country 's two main languages . The show 's producers donated 400 education kits , which included a message from President Hamid Karzai , to schools , orphanages , and TV stations across the country . Its curriculum focused on encouraging awareness of other cultures , increasing opportunities for women and girls , and fostering children 's interests in education . 
 In 2005 , Sisimpur aired in Bangladesh . This co @-@ production 's goal was to improve school achievement and decrease drop @-@ out rates for children before the third grade . This difficult co @-@ production , which was beset by political difficulties and severe flooding that delayed production , was depicted in the 2006 documentary , The World According to Sesame Street . Also in 2005 , the producers of the Kosovo co @-@ production ( Rruga Sesam / Ulica Sezam ) chose to present the languages of the region more evenly . Instead of showing words on screen , children were challenged to label objects verbally , thus learning that there are different ways to say the same thing . The Workshop worked in conjunction with UNICEF to produce this show , to aid in the peace process between Albanians and Serbs . One of its goals was to demonstrate to Albanian and Serbian children that their counterparts were like them . 
 In 2008 , Cambodia produced Sabai Sabai Sesame , a dubbed version of the original US show . It aired twice weekly , and emphasized basic literacy , numeracy , and social skills . Northern Ireland 's production , which was broadcast throughout the U.K. but was " rooted in everyday life in Northern Ireland " , was called Sesame Tree , and was set in and around a whimsical tree . The show 's curriculum focused on mutual respect and understanding . Also in 2008 , Jalan <unk> , the <unk> co @-@ production , premiered . Its focus was the country 's rich diversity . Denmark created <unk> in 2009 , which contained elements of Play With Me Sesame and locally produced segments with Elmo . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Nigeria produced its own version of Sesame Street , called Sesame Square , in 2010 . Previously , they aired the US version . Funded in part by a grant from the US government , the show focused on AIDS , malaria nets , gender equality , and yams . It also featured the HIV @-@ positive Muppet Kami from the South African co @-@ production . 
 After an absence of ten years , and almost 30 years after the 1983 movie Big Bird in China , 53 eleven @-@ minute episodes of Sesame Street 's Big Bird Looks at the World , filmed in Mandarin Chinese , debuted in early 2011 in China . Inspired by the 2008 Sichuan earthquake , the program emphasized emergency preparedness . In the first week of December 2011 , a Pashto and Dari @-@ language version called <unk> @-@ e @-@ Simsim was launched in Afghanistan , and in the same month Pakistan began airing its own Urdu @-@ language version , called SimSim Humara , which was supposed to run for three years . In June 2012 , the United States terminated funding for SimSim Humara due to serious allegations of corruption by the local Pakistani puppet theater working on the initiative . 
 = Up Out My Face = 
 " Up Out My Face " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her twelfth studio album , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) . Written and produced by Carey , Tricky Stewart and The @-@ Dream , it is a club music song which includes a marching band in its instrumentation . It received a mixed response from music critics , but its humorous lyrics attracted praise . Brian Mansfield of USA Today believed that the lyrics were directed at Eminem , whom Carey has a longstanding feud with , at one point singing " I know you 're not a rapper , so you better stop spittin ' it . " Carey released " Up Out My Face " as a remix featuring Nicki Minaj in January 2010 for a proposed Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel remix album called Angels Advocate , which was ultimately shelved . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Up Out My Face " was written and produced by Mariah Carey , Tricky Stewart and The @-@ Dream , for Carey 's twelfth studio album , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) . Copyright is held by Rye Songs ( 2009 ) which is administered by Songs of Universal ( BMI ) / WB Music Publishing ( ASCAP / Songs of Peer / March 9 Publishing ( ASCAP ) . It was recorded by Brian Garten , Chris " Tex " O 'Ryan and Brian " B @-@ Luv " Thomas at The Boom Boom Room in Burbank and Honeywest Studios in New York City . They were assisted by Luis Navarro . It was mixed by Jaycen @-@ Joshua Fowler and Dave Pensado ( for Penua Project / Innersound Management ) at Larrabee Studios in Universal City , and were assisted by Giancarlo Lino . 
 A club music song that lasts for three minutes , forty @-@ one seconds , " Up Out My Face " appears as the ninth track on the album ; track ten is a fifty @-@ one second reprise called " Up Out My Face ( The Reprise ) " . Its instrumentation makes use of a " thumping " marching band coda , while its lyrics are about expressing " anger at an incompatible lover " . Brian Mansfield of USA Today highlights the lyrics " If we were two Lego blocks , even the Harvard University graduating class of 2010 couldn 't put us back together again " as one of the album 's " many funny lines " . Rolling Stone writer Jody Rosen wrote that the singer " gets in touch with her funny bone " on " Up Out My Face " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine described the references to Lego , Harvard University and Humpty Dumpty as " a whole new level of lyrical ridiculousness " . 
 = = Lyrical interpretation = = 
 Brian Mansfield speculated that Carey was addressing Eminem in the lyrics , with whom she has had a longstanding feud . Carey has reportedly been romantically linked with several male celebrities during the course of her career , some of which she has openly spoken about and acknowledged , while others she has denied dating . Eminem has claimed on multiple occasions that he dated Carey , but Carey has always firmly denied that she knew him on a romantic level . In 2001 , Carey contacted Eminem to discuss the possibility of writing a song together for inclusion on Carey 's ninth studio album Charmbracelet ( 2002 ) , and they reportedly started dating soon after . 
 In 2002 , Eminem mentioned the singer twice on The Eminem Show , his fourth studio album , on the tracks " Superman " and " When the Music Stops " , both of which were revealed to have been inspired by their relationship in Eminem 's 2008 autobiography , The Way I Am . The former track contained the lyrics " What you trying be ? My new wife ? / What , you Mariah ? Fly through twice , " while the latter suggested that he begged to be taken back by Carey . Later that year , Eminem confirmed that they had been in a relationship in an interview for Rolling Stone , but claimed to have not been fully committed to it and that he disliked her as a person , while Carey told Maxim that it was never a " sexual relationship " and interviewer Larry King " I hung out with him , I spoke to him on the phone . I think I was probably with him a total of four times . And I don 't consider that dating somebody . " Carey recorded a song called " Clown " for Charmbracelet which " ambiguously addressed the relationship " with the lyrics " Should 've left it at I like your music too " and " You should 've never intimated we were lovers / When you know very well we never even touched each other . " 
 In 2005 , Eminem played voicemails to the audience during his Anger Management Tour allegedly from Carey and reported as saying " Why won 't you see me ? Why won 't you call me ? " . Eminem reiterated his dislike of Carey the following year on a track called " Jimmy Crack Corn " from his compilation album , Eminem Presents : The Re @-@ Up , with the lyrics " Your mind 's on us like mine 's on Mariah / And y 'all are just like her , you 're all fucking liars / But I 'll just keep fucking you like I fucked her / Right in the ass with KY yes sir . " 50 Cent referenced Carey 's denial of the relationship on a track called " All of Me " from his third studio album Curtis in 2007 : " Em predicted it all , I don 't know how he knew it / He said women from Hollywood they liars , liars , liars / You fuck them , they get you heated , deny it like Mariah . " Two years later , Eminem released a song called " Bagpipes from Baghdad " , on which he took aim at Carey 's husband Nick Cannon by calling him a " prick " and wishing him " luck with the fucking whore " . The lead single from Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel was " Obsessed " . Many critics believed the track to be about Eminem , and its accompanying music video portrayed Carey being followed by a male stalker which critics also thought bore a strong resemblance to the rapper . Mansfield thought that the lyrical content of " Up Out My Face " appeared to be a continuation of " Obsessed " and her feud with Eminem , as Carey sings " I know you 're not a rapper , so you better stop spittin ' it . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Bill Lamb of About.com placed " Up Out My Face " in his list of the album 's top four tracks . Although J. Edward Keyes of Newsday described the track as " exuberant " , he was critical of its placement on the album : " The production , courtesy of the reliable Tricky Stewart and The @-@ Dream , feels boilerplate at best . At 17 songs , the record is far too long , and by the time the exuberant ' Up Out My Face ' arrives , it feels like it was grafted on from a better record . " Ann Powers of Los Angeles Times thought that Carey lacked conviction in her approach to the song , writing that despite its aggressive tone , " restraint stops serving her agenda " . 
 = = Remix single featuring Nicki Minaj = = 
 = = = Background and release = = = 
 Carey revealed that she intended to re @-@ release Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel as a remix album in early 2010 , titled Angels Advocate , consisting of remixes of the standard songs with new featured artists , including Mary J. Blige , Snoop Dogg , Trey Songz , R. Kelly , T @-@ Pain , Gucci Mane and OJ da Juiceman . " Angels Cry " and " Up Out My Face " from Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel were released as remix singles with Ne @-@ Yo featuring on the former and Nicki Minaj on the latter . The remix version of " Up Out My Face " featuring Minaj was released to rhythmic contemporary and urban contemporary radio in the United States on January 26 , 2010 . It was made available for digital download on February 16 , 2010 . 
 In an interview for MTV News at Dylan 's Candy Bar , Minaj revealed that she had kept the collaboration a secret from everyone she knew because she was " so surprised " at being asked to work with Carey and did not believe that the collaboration would actually come to fruition . " That one , I didn ’ t believe until I was physically in the studio that I was doing with something with Mariah , " Minaj said . " She ’ s an icon , I ’ ve loved her since I was little , like ’ Vision of Love , ’ ’ Someday . ’ I was one of those little girls in the mirror singing her songs with my mother . ” A release date of February 23 , 2010 , for the album was slated , and then pushed back to March 9 . It was then further pushed back to March 30 . However , it was confirmed in March 2010 that production of Angels Advocate had halted and the project was shelved indefinitely . Island Def Jam stated that the singer was instead working on a new project and " new surprises " . Metro revealed that Carey was possibly recording a Christmas album . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Musically , the remix does not greatly differ from that of the original apart from added rap verses by Minaj interspersed throughout the track . She adds some " spunky rhymes " including " Mariah , I was in the million dollar <unk> ’ s , he was cheatin ' / All up in the church he was <unk> ' with the deacon , " and references Trey Songz 2009 single " LOL : - ) " in a British accent . While the original version is three minutes , forty @-@ one seconds in duration , the remix lasts for four minutes , twenty @-@ three seconds . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Similar to the original track , the remix had a blended reception . The Washington Post Alison Stewart praised the track , writing that the addition of Minaj made it more lively : " Sometime in the past six months , Minaj became the go @-@ to girl for artists who wanted to add some skank to their tracks without <unk> themselves in the process . Here , she enlivens an otherwise polite track from Carey 's upcoming remix disc " . Robbie Daw of Idolator felt that the track was too reminiscent to one of Carey 's previous singles " Don 't Forget About Us " , which he thought in turn was very similar to another preceding single , " We Belong Together " . He contained to add " But still , if Mimi ’ s going to mine from her own extensive back catalog of ballads , those are the primo melodies to go for . " A reviewer for DJ Booth thought that Minaj " ruined " the song . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The accompanying music video for the remix of " Up Out My Face " was directed by Carey 's husband , Nick Cannon . Minaj spoke about filming a video with Carey and how she did not believe that the video would ever be released : " I didn ’ t even tell anyone I shot a video with Mariah , because I didn ’ t even believe . In the back of my mind , I felt like , ’ This video is not gonna come out . There ’ s no way I ’ m gonna do a video with Mariah Carey before I even put out my album . ’ Then , when it came out , I think it was the # 1 video on YouTube in one day , something crazy like that . " It premiered simultaneously with the video for " Angels Cry " with Ne @-@ Yo on Vevo on January 28 , 2010 . Carey and Minaj play different characters , include Barbie dolls who escape from their boxes , sexy nurses in matching outfits , two women in a nail salon and two divas shopping . Carey 's doll box has " She sings " written on the front , while Minaj 's say " She raps " . Cannon makes a cameo appearance in the video , which Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy thought was a reference to the 2002 film , Drumline . According to Anna Pickard of The Guardian , the escape from their packaging demonstrates a theme of being independent women and that they will not be restrained by men . Minaj spoke about the video in an interview for MTV News : " A lot of times , more famous artists or more confident artists take from a younger artist but they ’ ll never include you in that . I feel like she liked the whole doll thing and she wanted to do it with me . But she said that : She said , ’ Everybody ’ s gonna say ' she ’ s doing Nicki . ' But I told her , she ’ s always had a doll persona , like all that ’ doll baby ’ [ stuff ] . So it goes perfect with Barbie and we had fun . That ’ s all that matters . " 
 Melina Newman of HitFix thought that it looked like one of Carey 's lowest @-@ production budgets for a music video to date , but explained that it was not necessarily " a bad thing " , and that Carey looked " adorable " in a nurses outfit . She likened the use of a red and white color scheme for the video to a Target commercial . Anna Pickard commented that Carey and Minaj looked " grumpier " than what dolls usually do because " their men are low @-@ down dirty dogs who should henceforth get up out of Mimi and Nikki 's faces " . She compared the use of a red and white palette to Kylie Minogue 's music video for " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " , Cheryl Fernandez @-@ Versini 's " Fight for This Love " and Lady Gaga 's " Bad Romance " , and that it appeared to be a " go @-@ to device for directors who want their pop video to pop visually , without the need for too much pesky plot to worry about " . Chris Ryan thought that Minaj outshined Carey in the video . In a review of Minaj 's ten best videos in December 2014 , Rolling Stone ranked the video for " Up Out My Face " at number eight , and wrote that Carey and Minaj had " great on @-@ camera chemistry " . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 = Brian Hill ( swimmer ) = 
 Brian David Hill ( born 29 December 1982 ) is a S13 Canadian para @-@ swimmer who has competed in the 2000 , 2004 , 2008 , 2012 Summer Paralympics and the 2007 Parapan American Games . He had won five gold medals , three silver medals and 3 bronze medals in his international career . Hill started swimming as a child and competitive swimming at the age of nine . He has won the Blind Sports Award and also the Athlete of the Year Award . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hill was born on 29 December 1982 in Duncan , British Columbia with a genetic retinal disorder which results in only ten percent vision . Since the 2004 Summer Paralympics , he has resided in Montreal , Quebec . During his childhood , Hill 's parents dug a 17 @-@ metre pool for him to swim in . " It was the first sport where I was able to train and compete with other kids at an equal level , ” he says . He started competitive swimming at the age of nine . Hill 's girlfriend Karine Thomas is a member in Canada 's Olympic synchronized swimming team . After he retires , he wants to have a culinary career . 
 = = Career = = 
 At the age of 17 , Hill participated in six events at the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney , Australia . He won silver in the men 's 100 metre butterfly in 1 : 02 @.@ 79 , finished fourth in the 100 metre backstroke in 1 : 10 @.@ 39 , sixth in the 50 metre freestyle in 27 @.@ 11 , eighth in the 100 metre freestyle in 59 @.@ 23 , eighth in the 400 metre freestyle in 4 : 54 @.@ 96 and tenth in the 200 metre individual medley in 2 : 35 @.@ 39 . Looking back in 2008 on his results , Brian said , " Sydney Games were special because it was my first Paralympic Games and everything . The atmosphere , crowds and facilities were amazing . " 
 At the 2004 Summer Paralympics , Hill won bronze in the 100 metre backstroke in 1 : 06 @.@ 97 , bronze in the 400 metre freestyle in 4 : 39 @.@ 52 , finished equal fourth in the 100 metre butterfly in 1 : 03 @.@ 90 , fifth in the 100 metre freestyle in 59 @.@ 32 , fifth in the 200 metre individual medley in 2 : 31 @.@ 07 and 14th in the 50 metre freestyle in 28 @.@ 09 . About the 2004 Paralympics in Greece , Brian said in 2008 that he " was really able to feel the history of the Olympics " . 
 At the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne , Hill finished ninth in the 50 metre EAD freestyle in 26 @.@ 68 and ninth in the 100 metre EAD freestyle in 59 @.@ 58 . 
 Hill won five medals at the 2007 Parapan American Games including three golds and two silvers . He won gold in 100 metre butterfly where he got a time of 1 : 00 @.@ 52 . He had tied the world record time with Canadian para @-@ swimmer Walter Wu . He had also won another two golds and two silvers . He says " I 'm pretty happy with the result overall . Technically it was very good . " 
 Before going to Beijing for his third Paralympic Games , Hill 's preparation involved swimming about 120 kilometres in two weeks . Hill said , " I completed about eight to nine workouts a week and spent around 18 to 20 hours per week in the pool , " . 
 At the 2008 Summer Paralympics , Hill finished fifth in the 100 metre backstroke in 1 : 05 @.@ 52 , 12th in the 100 metre butterfly in 1 : 03 @.@ 25 , 15th in the 100 metre freestyle in 59 @.@ 80 and 17th in the 50 metre freestyle in 26 @.@ 84 . 
 At the 2009 IPC Swimming World Championships 25 m in Rio , Hill won gold in the 100 metre backstroke in a new record time of 59 @.@ 30 , gold in the 100 metre butterfly in a new record time of 57 @.@ 04 and bronze in the 100 metre freestyle in 54 @.@ 66 . At the 2010 IPC Swimming World Championships , Hill finished fifth in the 100 metre backstroke in 1 : 04 @.@ 65 . 
 At the 2012 Summer Paralympics , Hill finished seventh in the 100 metre backstroke in 1 : 04 @.@ 97 and equal eighth in the heats 100 metre butterfly with Australia 's Sean Russo in 1 : 01 @.@ 61 . In the swim @-@ off , Russo defeated Hill with each posting times of 1 : 01 @.@ 24 and 1 : 02 @.@ 72 respectively . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 In 2002 , Hill won the Athlete of the Year award in the athletes with a disability category . He won again in the next year . In 2003 , Hill was awarded the Blind Sports award from the British Columbia Blind Sports and Recreation Association ( <unk> ) . 
 = Maria Radner = 
 Maria <unk> Radner ( German : [ <unk> ] ; 7 May 1981 – 24 March 2015 ) was a German contralto who performed internationally in opera and in concerts . 
 Radner studied at the Robert Schumann Hochschule in Düsseldorf , Germany . Both Stern magazine and Munich 's <unk> described her as an " extremely talented interpreter of Wagner 's music " . Possessing the " rare pitch of a true alto " , she frequently appeared as Erda in Wagner 's Der Ring des Nibelungen at the Leipzig Opera , <unk> in Die Walküre at the Teatro Comunale di Firenze with Zubin Mehta , and in Mahler 's Symphony No. 2 ( the Resurrection ) conducted by Antonio Pappano in Rome and Milan . Her debut at the Metropolitan Opera in 2012 in Götterdämmerung was part of that company 's documentary Wagner 's Dream . 
 = = Early life and education ( 1981 – 2000 ) = = 
 Radner was born in Düsseldorf and had a brother , <unk> , and a sister , Anna . Her father Klaus Radner and his wife had immigrated from Austria and started a trading company . They were not particularly interested in music . During long drives to Austria , Maria would sing for hours . At school she was a " rather unobtrusive , popular student " who enjoyed music lessons but found mathematics difficult . Her talent for singing remained unnoticed at school , but when she was 14 , her parents introduced her to voice teacher Angelo <unk> , who told her , " I will get you into opera . " As a teen she took part in the Rhenish Carnival and the Largest Fair on the Rhine ( Große <unk> ) . Her father remembered her calling him excitedly after winning first prize in a beer @-@ tent karaoke competition . She attended the St. Ursula Gymnasium in Düsseldorf , finishing in 2000 . 
 = = Vocal education ( 2000 – 2008 ) = = 
 Radner pursued German studies for one semester , but left because she disliked it . She started training in an import – export business and had the best grades at the vocational school , but felt that it did not suit her . She applied to the Robert Schumann Hochschule for music in Düsseldorf and was one of seven selected from 200 applicants . Her voice teacher , Michaela Krämer , considered her to be a mezzo @-@ soprano . Radner 's father obtained additional voice lessons for her with Jeannette <unk> in Düsseldorf , and later with mezzo @-@ soprano Marga <unk> , both of whom are experts in early music and Lieder . They recognized that she was really a contralto . Radner 's mother died in 2003 after a long illness . Almost a year later , Radner earned her diploma . In the 2006 Berlin National Singing Competition , she won the € 3 @,@ 000 third prize in the concert ( not opera ) division and a scholarship from the Richard Wagner Society in Bayreuth to attend the 2007 Bayreuth Festival . In the concert division of the 2007 <unk> Singing Competition , she placed second out of 120 vocalists from 19 countries . In 2008 she played Cornelia in Handel 's Giulio Cesare in Egitto at the Theater Hagen . It was to be her only engagement as an ensemble member at a theatre . She decided that it was " not her world " , not because it was no fun , but because she wanted to earn more , and she went independent . Radner was still a student in 2008 when she made her first public appearance under Zubin Mehta at the Palau de les Arts Reina Sofia in Valencia , singing Martin y Soler 's oratorio <unk> a Jonatha disperse . She gave a recital in June 2008 . 
 In August 2008 Radner performed the title role in Handel 's Solomon at the <unk> <unk> . Local newspapers praised her as " outshining " the other , more established British soloists ( <unk> Nachrichten , 19 August 2008 ) and as possessing the " rare pitch of a true alto , having an impressive charisma and great musicality " ( <unk> Neue Tageszeitung , 20 August 2008 ) . In 2009 she performed in a new production of Parsifal under Lorin Maazel in Valencia and in Arthur Honegger 's Jeanne d 'Arc au <unk> under the direction of Antonio Pappano at Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia in Rome . 
 = = Career ( 2009 – 2015 ) = = 
 After graduating with distinction , Radner performed Schumann 's Faust scenes under Jesús López @-@ Cobos at the Teatro Real Madrid . She sang in Beethoven 's Symphony No. 9 conducted by <unk> <unk> at the Teatro Regio Torino . She performed a recital at Wahnfried on 16 August 2009 with works by Schubert , Brahms , Liszt and Wagner 's Wesendonck Lieder . In December 2009 she sang the third lady in Mozart 's Die Zauberflöte under Tomáš Netopil at the Bayerische Staatsoper in Munich in five performances . The conductor Sir Simon Rattle cast her as First Norn and Flosshilde in Götterdämmerung at the 2009 Festival d ’ Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence and again at the <unk> <unk> in 2010 . 
 In 2009 and 2010 , Radner was part of a new production of Stravinsky 's Rossignol by the Canadian Opera Company in Toronto . She then sang Beethoven 's Missa Solemnis under Philippe Herreweghe at the Concertgebouw Amsterdam . 
 In 2010 , she gave her first performance as Erda in a concert adaptation of Das Rheingold at the Leipzig Opera , a role she performed every year from then until her death . In the same year she sang in Mahler 's Symphony No. 2 ( the Resurrection ) under Pappano in Rome and Milan . In the summer of 2010 she was part of a new production of Elektra at her first summer Salzburg Festival under Daniele Gatti and Die Frau ohne Schatten , conducted by Christian Thielemann . In October 2010 she appeared as Dryad in Ariadne auf Naxos at the Theater an der Wien , conducted by Bertrand de Billy . 
 Radner performed the third lady in Die Zauberflöte at La Scala under Roland <unk> during March and April 2011 , and Rheingold 's Erda in Essen conducted by Stefan <unk> in April . At the Salzburg Festival in July and August she was " a voice from above " and a servant in Richard Strauss 's Die Frau ohne Schatten under Christian Thielemann . She performed Martha in Tchaikovsky 's Iolanta and " death " in Le Rossignol , both under Ivor Bolton . In November 2011 she sang Siegfried 's Erda in Leipzig under Ulf Schirmer . 
 In January 2012 Radner made her debut at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City in Götterdämmerung . The production was documented in the film Wagner 's Dream by Robert Lepage and the 11 February 2012 performance was recorded and broadcast by radio . In March 2012 , she participated in Die Frau ohne Schatten at La Scala under Marc Albrecht . In the fall of 2012 , she was at the Royal Opera House in London performing in three Wagner operas conducted by Pappano : the Erda in Siegfried and Rheingold during September and October , and the first norn in Götterdämmerung during October and November 2012 . She sang in Dvorak 's Requiem under Tomas Netopil in Lyon , and in Mahler 's Symphony No. 3 under Sebastian <unk> in Frankfurt am Main . 
 In January 2013 Radner appeared as the valkyrie <unk> in Die Walküre at the Teatro Comunale di Firenze under Zubin Mehta , and in March she again portrayed Erda in Das Rheingold , conducted by Ingo <unk> at the Grand Théâtre de Genève . She traveled to Bucharest in September , where she sang Erda in a concert performance of Das Rheingold with the Radio Symphony Orchestra Berlin under the direction of Marek Janowski . The 2013 – 2014 season also included Dvorak 's Stabat Mater with Santa Cecilia in Rome under Netopil . 
 From January to May 2014 , in Geneva , Radner performed Erda in Siegfried , and in May in Das Rheingold conducted by <unk> . In April 2014 she performed as Anna in the Berlioz opera Les Troyens at La Scala under Pappano . 
 Radner gave her final performance as the earth goddess Erda on 23 March 2015 in Wagner 's Siegfried at the Gran Teatre del Liceu in Barcelona . She had been scheduled to appear at Bayreuth in the summer of 2015 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Scottish mezzo @-@ soprano Karen Cargill summarized " Maria Radner , my beloved friend " in The Guardian : " She was the most generous @-@ spirited person I have ever met . Hysterical laughter , an obsession with all things Burberry , unadulterated passion for Bayern Munich and the warmest of hugs were things you could always be guaranteed of when you were with her . Her son and partner were her whole life . " Further down Cargill qualified the latter , in that " Music was Maria 's entire life until she met her partner and they had their son . " 
 The authors of an article in the German weekly Stern echoed this sentiment when they wrote that " Radner was a happy mother . Radner had a side , that many internationally successful opera stars are not privy to : her own family . " Stern described photos of her private life , published one week prior in Bild , showing the young woman embraced by her partner Sascha Schenk in the soccer stadium with a scarf of FC Bayern Munich , and him holding their infant son , who is sitting on a motorbike . Stern wrote that " privately Radner was able to simply be Maria , the wife of insurance specialist Sascha S. " 
 According to <unk> " Radner had moved with him [ Schenk ] to Wuppertal @-@ Kronenberg . " Bild wrote " They lived in <unk> . She was travelling a lot professionally , while he looked after his insurance clients in Wuppertal . " Their son Felix Schenk was described as one year old by Bild , and as two years according to the Westdeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung . 
 = = Death = = 
 Radner died on 24 March 2015 along with her husband Sascha Schenk , their two @-@ year @-@ old son Felix , and her colleague Oleg Bryjak , when Germanwings Flight 9525 crashed near <unk> @-@ Haute @-@ <unk> , Alpes @-@ de @-@ Haute @-@ Provence , France . The pilot had a history of depression , had barricaded himself into the cockpit and steered the plane into the mountains . They were en route to Düsseldorf after Radner 's and Bryjak 's two performances in Wagner 's Siegfried at the Gran Teatre del Liceu in Barcelona . Radner 's voice teacher Michaela Krämer said " she was a magnificent artist and yet remained unassuming , helpful and natural " . 
 The Metropolitan Opera issued a brief statement , mourning her " untimely and tragic death " and calling her " a gifted artist who touched the lives of many " . The Deutsche Oper am Rhein expressed sympathy . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Rundfunk @-@ <unk> Berlin Choir / Wagner – Richard Wagner : Das Rheingold . 28 May 2013 . PentaTone Classics . 
 <unk> @-@ Orchester Köln / Markus <unk> , conductor : Gustav Mahler : Symphony No. 8 . <unk> Classics ; recording of a September 2011 live performance in the <unk> Köln . Maria Radner as Maria <unk> ( Part 2 , Acta Sanctorum ) . 
 = France national rugby union team = 
 The France national rugby union team represents France in rugby union . They compete annually against England , Ireland , Italy , Scotland and Wales in the Six Nations Championship . They have won the championship outright sixteen times , shared it a further eight times , and have completed nine grand slams . Eight former French players have been inducted into the World Rugby Hall of Fame . 
 Rugby was introduced to France in 1872 by the British , and on New Years Day 1906 the national side played its first Test match – against New Zealand in Paris . France played sporadically against the Home Nations until they joined them to form a Five Nations tournament ( now the Six Nations Championship ) in 1910 . France also competed in the rugby competitions at early Summer Olympics , winning the gold medal in 1900 and two silver medals in the 1920s . The national team came of age during the 1950s and 1960s , winning their first Five Nations title outright in 1959 . They won their first Grand Slam in 1968 . Since the inaugural World Cup in 1987 , France have qualified for the knock @-@ out stage of every tournament . They have reached the final three times , losing to the All Blacks in 1987 and 2011 and to Australia in 1999 . France hosted the 2007 Rugby World Cup , where , as in 2003 , they were beaten in the semi @-@ finals by England . 
 France traditionally play in blue shirts with white shorts and red socks , and are commonly referred to as les tricolores or les bleus . The French emblem is a golden rooster imposed upon a red shield . Their alternative strip is composed of a white shirt and navy blue shorts and socks . French international matches are played at several venues across the country ; the Stade de France in the Paris suburb of Saint @-@ Denis is used for their games during the Six Nations , and they have a formidable home record at the Stade Vélodrome in Marseille where they have only lost twice , to Argentina in 2004 and to New Zealand in 2009 . 
 = = History = = 
 Rugby was introduced to France in 1872 by English merchants and students . On 26 February 1890 , a French rugby team recruited from the Janson Desailly Lyceum defeated an international team at the Bois de Boulogne . 
 Although France were represented at the 1900 Summer Olympics , their first official test match did not take place till New Year 's Day , 1906 against the New Zealand All Blacks in Paris . France then played intermittently against the Home Nations until they joined them to form the Five Nations tournament in 1910 . In 1913 France faced South Africa 's Springboks for the first time ; losing 38 – 5 . France also competed at the 1920 and 1924 Summer Olympics , and on both occasions lost to the United States in the gold medal match , Vicky <unk> scored the winning goal . 
 France were ejected from the Five Nations in 1932 after being accused of professionalism in the French leagues at a time when rugby union was strictly amateur . Forced to play against weaker opposition , France went on a winning streak ; winning ten games in a row during the years from 1931 to 1936 . France was invited to rejoin the Five Nations in 1939 but did not compete until 1947 as international rugby was suspended during World War II . 
 French rugby came of age during the 1950s and 1960s : they won their first Five Nations championship and completed a successful tour of South Africa . Their first championship was won in 1954 when they shared the title with England and Wales . France won their first outright Five Nations championship in 1959 ; they won with two wins , a draw ( against England ) and a defeat ( against Ireland ) . 
 France first toured South Africa winning the test series in 1958 . The Springboks also visited Paris in 1961 , the test was not completed due to <unk> fighting amongst the players . France also toured New Zealand and Australia in 1961 losing both tests against the All Blacks but defeating Australia 's Wallabies . They won their first Five Nations Grand Slam in 1968 by beating all four other competing teams , and won numerous titles in the following years . 
 In 1977 , France won their second Grand Slam , fielding an unchanged side throughout the tournament and conceding no tries . They also defeated the All Blacks in Toulouse that year , but lost the return match in Paris . On Bastille Day , 1979 they defeated the All Blacks in New Zealand for the first time , at Eden Park in Auckland . 
 In 1981 the French clinched their third Grand Slam ; at Twickenham against England . They again completed a Grand Slam in 1987 on the eve of the first Rugby World Cup hosted by Australia and New Zealand . In that tournament they came from behind numerous times to defeat the Wallabies in their semi @-@ final , and faced the All Blacks in final at Eden Park , Auckland ; France lost 29 – 9 . They shared the Five Nations with Wales the next year , and also won it in 1989 . 
 France hosted some of the tests during the 1991 World Cup , but made their exit from the after being knocked out by England at the Parc des Princes ( Paris ) in their quarter @-@ final . One Five Nations championship was won in the early 1990s , in 1993 . The following year France won a test series 2 – 0 in New Zealand in the 1994 . They were knocked out of the 1995 World Cup semi @-@ finals by eventual champions the Springboks , but did win their third place play @-@ off match against England . France played the All blacks in two tests , winning the first 22 – 15 at Toulouse and lost the second 37 – 12 at Paris . France won back @-@ to @-@ back Grand Slams in 1997 and 1998 . At the 1999 World Cup they defeated tournament favourites the All Blacks in the semi @-@ finals , but lost to the Wallabies in the final . 
 The Five Nations Championship was expanded in 2000 to include Italy . In the now Six Nations Championship France won a Grand Slam in 2002 . At the 2003 World Cup in Australia they qualified for the semi @-@ finals where they were defeated by eventual champions England . In 2004 , they won a second Six Nations Grand Slam , which was followed by a Championship win in 2006 and a successful defence in 2007 . 
 During the opener of the World Cup 2007 , Argentina defeated France 17 – 12 . However , after defeating Ireland 25 – 3 , France qualified for the quarter @-@ finals . After defeating the New Zealand All Blacks 20 – 18 , they lost to England 14 – 9 in the semi @-@ final . France then lost for a second time to Argentina 34 – 10 in the third @-@ place match . In 2010 , France won its ninth Grand Slam . 
 During the 2011 Rugby World Cup , France defeated Wales 9 – 8 in the semi @-@ final at Eden Park in Auckland , New Zealand , on 15 October 2011 and in the following week they lost 8 – 7 to the All Blacks at the final to make it three final defeats . 
 During the 2015 Rugby World Cup France lost 62 @-@ 13 to New Zealand in the Quarter Finals 
 = = Strip = = 
 Until 1912 , the strip ( uniform ) of the French team was white with two rings , one red and one blue . After the first game won by France against Scotland in 1911 , France 's captain Marcel <unk> asked that the team adopt the coq <unk> ( Gallic rooster ) , historical emblem of France , as its symbol . The Gallic rooster was probably chosen partly because it is considered as a proud and combative animal that can be sometimes aggressive , although it had been used previously as a symbol by French teams – a former soccer player , Jean Rigal , wore a uniform with this emblem as early as May 1910 . The badge was initially white and red , but was altered to a multicoloured , embroidered image after 1945 , and has been golden since 1970 . 
 The symbol used by the French rugby team was a great success , and was later adopted by the French delegation at the Olympic Games of 1920 where the rooster was perched on five Olympic rings . The rooster has since become a well @-@ known symbol of French teams . French players are sometimes called les <unk> and some French supporters have been known to release roosters on the playing field before games . 
 The French team traditionally played in blue shirts , white shorts , and red socks , the colors of the national flag , and as such were nicknamed les tricolores . Due to the mostly blue strip the French team currently wears , the team is now often referred to as les Bleus ( the Blues ) , like many other French sporting teams . When this strip clashes with that of their opponents , such as in games against Scotland and Italy , French players wear white . New strips were developed for the 2007 World Cup , one of which is a darker blue . In June 2011 they relaunched another kit which they wear blue shirt , blue shorts and blue socks for their home kit and they wear white shirt , white shorts and white socks for their away kit . 
 In 2011 the French Rugby Federation ( <unk> ) announced that Adidas would be their new partner for a period of six years , with them taking over production of the French national rugby shirt from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2018 . The latest French jersey was unveiled on 6 November 2014 . 
 = = Home grounds = = 
 Historically , France played internationals at venues such as Parc des Princes and the Stade Olympique de Colombes , both in Paris . The Stade Olympique de Colombes was the main venue for the 1924 Summer Olympics , where rugby was a sport . 
 Ever since moving out of Parc des Princes at the end of 1997 , France 's main home venue has been the Stade de France in Saint @-@ Denis , where their home Six Nations matches are played . It has a capacity of 80 @,@ 000 . Since 2005 , France has also played home internationals at the following venues around the country : Stade Chaban @-@ Delmas , Grand Stade Lille Métropole ( now known as Stade Pierre @-@ <unk> ) , Stade Gerland , Stade Vélodrome , Stade de la Mosson , Stade de la Beaujoire , Stade <unk> , Stadium Municipal , Toulouse . 
 In June 2012 , the <unk> announced that plans were under way for a new rugby @-@ dedicated stadium to be constructed in <unk> , 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) south of Paris . The stadium is projected to cost € 600M and have a seating capacity of 82 @,@ 000 . It was originally scheduled for completion by 2017 , but has since been delayed to 2020 . 
 = = = World Cup venues = = = 
 During the 1991 World Cup , Pool D ( which included France ) matches were played throughout France including Béziers , Bayonne , Grenoble , Toulouse , Brive and Agen . Parc des Princes and Stadium Lille @-@ Metropole also hosted a quarter @-@ final each . Pool C fixtures at the 1999 World Cup were played throughout France in Béziers , Bordeaux and Toulouse . A second round match was held at Stade Félix Bollaert , and one quarter final was held at the Stade de France , both 2007 venues . 
 For the 2007 World Cup , France was the primary host , and there were ten venues used for matches throughout the country ( Cardiff in Wales and Edinburgh in Scotland also hosted some games ) . The French cities that hosted matches were Bordeaux ( Stade Chaban @-@ Delmas ) , Lens ( Stade Félix Bollaert ) , Lyon ( Stade Gerland ) , Marseille ( Stade Vélodrome ) , Montpellier ( Stade de la Mosson ) , Nantes ( Stade de la Beaujoire ) , Paris ( Stade de France , Saint @-@ Denis and Parc des Princes ) , Saint @-@ Étienne ( Stade Geoffroy @-@ Guichard ) , and Toulouse ( Stadium de Toulouse ) . The final was played at Stade de France . 
 = = Record = = 
 = = = Six Nations = = = 
 France competes annually in the Six Nations Championship , which is played against five other European nations : England , Ireland , Italy , Scotland and Wales . France first contested the tournament in 1910 when the Home Nations became the Five Nations . France were expelled from the tournament due to rumours of professionalism in the then @-@ amateur sport in 1932 , but rejoined in 1947 . They first won the competition in 1954 , sharing the championship with both England and Wales . France shared with Wales again the following season , and won it outright for the first time in 1959 . France 's longest wait for a championship spanned 37 tournaments ( 1910 – 1954 ) . The Giuseppe Garibaldi Trophy is also contested between France and Italy during the Six Nations . Over the whole history of the Tournament , they are the third most @-@ winning nation , eight wins behind England . However , it should be taken into account that France have been present in 33 fewer tournaments than the Home Nations . France has won almost exactly the same proportion of Six Nations Tournaments in which it has competed as England , and is the most successful nation in the post @-@ World War II era ( 1945 – present ) . 
 = = = World Cup = = = 
 The French have competed at every World Cup since the inaugural tournament in 1987 . Although they have yet to win a World Cup , they have participated in the play @-@ off stage of every tournament , and have reached the final three times . 
 In 1987 France took on pre @-@ tournament favourites Australia at Concord Oval for a place in the final . In one of the greatest World Cup matches , the Australians appeared to be in control , leading 9 – 0 , 15 – 12 and 24 – 21 at various stages of the match , only for the French to keep coming back . With the scores locked at 24 – 24 and the prospect of extra time looming , the French scored one of the most memorable tries in rugby history . Starting an attack from inside their own half , the French passed the ball through 11 pairs of hands before fullback Serge Blanco beat Wallabies hooker Tom Lawton to score a try in the corner . France won 30 – 24 , and would face co @-@ hosts New Zealand in the final at Eden Park . The French had not fully recovered from their magnificent effort in the semi @-@ final , and New Zealand won the anti @-@ climactic decider 29 – 9 . 
 In 1991 France met eternal arch @-@ rivals England in the quarterfinal at Parc des Princes . Earlier in the year at Twickenham the two sides had played off for the Five Nations Grand Slam . The French scored three magnificent tries but were denied by the fearsome English forward pack . In a very tense and brutally physical match , the scores were tied at 10 @-@ all when the French were awarded a scrum five metres out from the tryline . French number eight Marc <unk> looked set to score the try that would have won the game for the French . Suddenly he was hit and driven back in a tackle from opponent Mick Skinner , a tackle which changed the momentum of the match . England went on to win 19 – 10 and eventually reached the Final . At the end of the match , France coach Daniel <unk> angrily assaulted New Zealand referee David Bishop in the players tunnel . He resigned soon afterwards . 
 In 1995 France finished third overall , defeating England 19 – 9 in the third / fourth place play @-@ off after their defeat to South Africa in the semi @-@ finals . After coming from behind to defeat the All Blacks in their 1999 semi @-@ final , France lost to Australia 35 – 12 in the final . In 2003 they finished fourth , losing the third / fourth place game to the All Blacks . At the World Cup 2007 , after defeating New @-@ Zealand 18 – 20 in the quarter @-@ final , France lost out to England in the semi @-@ finals losing 14 – 9 after finishing the break 5 – 6 ahead . France lost to Argentina in the bronze final to finish the tournament fourth . 
 France 's 2011 campaign was marked by turmoil within the camp ; reports before the tournament indicated as many as 25 of the 30 @-@ member squad had turned against head coach Marc Lièvremont . In pool play , France had unimpressive wins over Japan and Canada , an expected loss to New Zealand , and a shock loss to Tonga . During this stage , Lièvremont heavily criticized the team in the media , further angering many of his players , with veteran back @-@ rower Imanol Harinordoquy publicly critical of Lièvremont . Despite the losses , they qualified for the knockout stage . At this time , the players effectively rebelled against Lièvremont ; after the tournament , Harinordoquy would tell the French rugby publication Midi Olympique , " We had to free ourselves from his supervision . " The team responded by defeating England 19 – 12 in the quarter final and controversially beating Wales 9 – 8 in the semi @-@ final after Welsh captain Sam Warburton was sent off . The French proved admirable opponents in the final , however , losing out to New Zealand 8 – 7 to finish second for the third time in a Rugby World Cup 
 France are the third @-@ highest World Cup points scorers of all time , with 1195 points . They are also the third @-@ highest try scorers , and the second @-@ highest penalty scorers . France 's Thierry Lacroix was the top points scorer at the 1995 tournament with 112 points , and Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> was the joint top try scorer in 1991 with six tries ( equal with David Campese ) . 
 = = = Overall = = = 
 When the World Rankings were introduced by World Rugby ( then the International Rugby Board ) in 2003 , France were ranked fifth . During November 2003 France briefly occupied third place before falling to fourth by December that year . After falling to fifth during November 2004 , France rose again to fourth by April 2005 . During early 2006 , France rose again , peaking at second in July that year . France were ranked number two in the world until falling to third in June 2007 after two successive defeats to the All Blacks . They then fell to fifth after losing to Argentina in the opening match of the 2007 World Cup . 
 France have won 398 of their 729 test matches , a win record of 54 @.@ 60 % . 
 Below is a table of the representative rugby matches played by a France national XV at test level up until 25 June 2016 . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 On 6 June , Guy Novès named the first set of players for France 's two @-@ test series against Argentina . The squad did not include any of the six Top 14 play @-@ offs teams , Castres , Clermont , Toulon , Toulouse , Racing or Montpellier ( except François Trinh @-@ Duc who was released by Montpellier for the tour ) due to the play @-@ offs taking place between 11 and 24 June . 
 On 13 June , Novès named a further 11 players on top of the initial 17 , after Toulouse and Castres and were eliminated from the Top 14 quarter @-@ finals . 
 On 19 June , Paul <unk> was called up to the squad following Clermont Auvergne 's elimination from the Top 14 . 
 Head coach : Guy Novès 
 Caps updated : 25 June 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national union for the club / province as defined by World Rugby . 
 = Cleopatra and Caesar ( painting ) = 
 Cleopatra and Caesar ( French : Cléopâtre et César ) , also known as Cleopatra Before Caesar , is an oil on canvas painting by the French Academic artist Jean @-@ Léon Gérôme , completed in 1866 . The work was originally commissioned by the French courtesan La Païva but she was unhappy with the finished painting and returned it to Gérôme . It was exhibited at the Salon of 1866 and the Royal Academy of Arts in 1871 . 
