 Gérôme 's painting is one of the earliest modern depictions of Cleopatra emerging from a carpet in the presence of Julius Caesar , a minor historical inaccuracy that arose out of the translation of a scene from Plutarch 's Life of Caesar and the semantic change of the word " carpet " over time . The work is considered a classic example of Egyptomania and was mass @-@ produced by Goupil , allowing it to reach a wide audience . 
 The painting was held by California banker Darius Ogden Mills and remained in the Mills family art collection for over a century until it was sold to a private collector in 1990 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jean @-@ Léon Gérôme ( 1824 – 1904 ) was a nineteenth century French painter and sculptor . At the age of twenty @-@ three , he came to the attention of the art world at the Salon of 1847 with The Cock Fight ( 1846 ) , a Neo @-@ <unk> painting that was praised by Théophile Gautier . With works informed by his frequent travels throughout the Middle East and visits to Egypt , Gérôme specialized in historical and Orientalist painting and became known as a leader of the Academic art movement . According to historian Charles <unk> , Gérôme 
 painted erotic subjects with a photographic approach and sensual charge , but avoided ' indecency ' by the use of Oriental and historical contexts . . . To us , Gérôme 's nudes seem pornographic , but to contemporaries they were idealized by their removal from contemporary society and their insertion in the Oriental context . 
 French writer Prosper Mérimée first proposed the subject of Cleopatra and Caesar in a letter sent to Gérôme in December 1860 . La Païva , a wealthy French courtesan , later commissioned the painting from Gérôme , intending it for display in the Hôtel de la Païva , her mansion on the Champs @-@ Élysées . According to American art critic Earl Shinn , the work was originally painted on silk and was designed as a " transparency to be lowered or raised midway of a long saloon " in La Païva 's mansion , " which it was desirable to divide occasionally into two " . 
 = = Development = = 
 Gérôme made at least two previous oil paintings and a number of sketches in preparation for the work . One shows Cleopatra lying on the ground stretching out to Julius Caesar with Apollodorus crouching behind her . In one variation before the finished version , Caesar is shown by himself with his hands on the desk ( instead of outstretched ) without his four secretaries . When the work was finished in 1866 , Cleopatra 's position changed to show her standing before Caesar with Apollodorus bent down beside her . 
 Gérôme painted the scene based on the meeting between Cleopatra and Caesar written in the Life of Caesar by Greek historian Plutarch ( c . AD 46 – AD 120 ) more than a century after the incident took place . Even though Gérôme visited Egypt in 1857 , where George W. Whiting of Rice University notes " he acquired numerous abundant local color and exact detail " that informed the painting of Cleopatra and Caesar , the Egyptian background setting in the work is derived from a plate in a volume from the Description de l 'Égypte ( 1809 – 29 ) that depicts a temple at Deir el @-@ Medina . 
 = = Completion and exhibition = = 
 La Païva disliked the finished painting she had commissioned and returned it to Gérôme . Ackerman notes that La Païva felt the work was too expensive . Gérôme modified the painting by adding canvas to the back for strength , and it was subsequently purchased by his father @-@ in @-@ law , Adolphe Goupil ( 1806 – 1893 ) of Goupil & Cie , the leading art dealership in nineteenth @-@ century France . Gérôme first met Goupil in 1859 and married his daughter Marie several years later . Cleopatra and Caesar was one of three works Gérôme presented at the Salon of 1866 where it was exhibited with the title César et Cléopâtre . The painting appeared at the Royal Academy of Arts exhibition in 1871 under the longer name Cléopâtre <unk> à César dans un <unk> ( Cleopatra brought to Caesar in a carpet ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The painting depicts the year 47 BC , when Cleopatra stands before Julius Caesar after Apollodorus , her servant , has just finished smuggling her into the palace inside a rug . The figures are shown approximately half life @-@ size . Since the 1866 exhibition , the work has become known by other titles , such as Cleopatra Before Caesar , and more recently , Cleopatra and Caesar . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The American Egyptomania project at George Mason University describes the painting as a classic example of Egyptomania , containing " sex , slavery , nudity , and decadence " . Lucy H. Hooper called it a companion piece to Gérôme 's earlier work , <unk> before the Areopagus ( 1861 ) . The painting was one of two notable depictions of Cleopatra from the nineteenth century along with Cleopatra and the Peasant ( 1838 ) by Eugène Delacroix . 
 = = Historical inaccuracy = = 
 A translation of Plutarch 's Life of Caesar by John Langhorne and his brother William published in 1770 was the first source to use the word " carpet " to describe the material used by Cleopatra 's servant to sneak her into the palace . Although the original meaning used by Plutarch was more akin to what is today known as a duffel bag , at the time of Langhorne 's translation a carpet meant a type of " thick fabric " , not an actual rug . But by the nineteenth century , semantic change led to the word taking on a different meaning . The legend of Cleopatra hiding in a rug , although historically inaccurate , became the most popular image , with Gérôme one of the first to popularize it in modern art . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Gérôme 's professional relationship with art collector Adolphe Goupil allowed his paintings to become mass @-@ produced in the form of engravings and photographs , reaching more people and impacting the wider culture throughout Britain and the United States . Over time , both theatrical and Hollywood productions about Cleopatra looked to Gérôme 's painting for inspiration . Whiting argues that Gérôme 's work may have influenced Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw 's play Caesar and Cleopatra ( 1898 ) , particularly the carpet scene in Act III . Many of Gérôme 's history paintings influenced the composition of cinematic scenes portraying ancient history . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 The painting was bought by California banker , philanthropist , and New York real estate developer Darius Ogden Mills in the 1870s and remained in the Mills family art collection until it was sold to a private collector in 1990 . 
 = StarCraft : Ghost = 
 StarCraft : Ghost is a unreleased military science fiction stealth @-@ action video game previously under development by Blizzard Entertainment . Part of Blizzard 's StarCraft series , the game was announced on September 20 , 2002 , and was to be developed by Nihilistic Software for the Nintendo GameCube , Xbox , and PlayStation 2 video game consoles . Several delays in development caused Blizzard to move back the release date and the game has not yet materialized . Nihilistic Software ceded development to Swingin ' Ape Studios in 2004 before Blizzard bought the company , and plans for the GameCube version were cancelled in 2005 . 
 Blizzard announced in March 2006 that the game was put on " indefinite hold " while the company investigated seventh generation video game console possibilities . Subsequent public statements from company personnel had been contradictory about whether production was to be renewed or planned story elements worked into other products . The continued delay of Ghost had caused it to be labeled as vaporware , and it was ranked fifth in Wired News ' annual Vaporware Awards in 2005 . In 2014 , Blizzard president Mike Morhaime confirmed that Ghost was officially cancelled . 
 Unlike its real @-@ time strategy predecessor StarCraft , Ghost was to be a third @-@ person shooter , and intended to give players a closer and more personal view of the StarCraft universe . Following Nova , a Terran psychic espionage operative called a " ghost " , the game would have been set four years after the conclusion of StarCraft : Brood War and cover a conspiracy about a secretive military project conducted by Nova 's superiors in the imperial Terran Dominion . Very little of the game 's storyline has been released ; however , in November 2006 after the game 's postponement , a novel was published called StarCraft Ghost : Nova , which covers the backstory of the central character . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 During StarCraft : Ghost 's gameplay , the player 's character Nova must use stealth and darkness to reach objectives and remain undetected . Nova has a cloaking device that allows for temporary concealment , but certain hostile non @-@ player characters can overcome this with special devices and abilities . Nova is also equipped with thermal imaging goggles and a special EMP device for disabling electronic devices and vehicles . In addition to the focus on stealth elements , StarCraft : Ghost includes a complex combat system . Blizzard planned to include a small arsenal of weaponry with assault and sniper rifles , grenades , shotguns , and flamethrowers . Nova can engage in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and uses these skills to eliminate enemy threats quietly . If alerted , enemy characters will hunt for the player , set up traps , and fire blindly to nullify Nova 's cloaking device . 
 Nova is highly agile , acrobatic , and able to perform maneuvers such as mantling and climbing ledges , hanging from pipes , and sliding down ziplines . The player has access to Nova 's psionic powers honed through training as a ghost agent , such as the ability to improve her speed and reflexes drastically . StarCraft : Ghost includes many of the vehicle units featured in StarCraft and StarCraft : Brood War . Some vehicles , such as space battlecruisers and starfighters , only play support roles , while others , such as hoverbikes , scout cars , and futuristic siege tanks , can be piloted by the player . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 The multiplayer mode in StarCraft : Ghost differs from the stealth @-@ based mechanics of the single @-@ player portion . It aims to give players a personal view of the battles from the real @-@ time strategy games of the series . Accordingly , Ghost 's multiplayer is structured around class @-@ based team gameplay and fighting in a variety of game modes . Ghost incorporates traditional game modes from multiplayer video games such as deathmatch , capture the flag , and king of the hill , but also introduces two game modes specifically designed for the StarCraft universe . The first is " Mobile Conflict " , which requires two teams to fight for control of a single Terran military factory with the ability of atmospheric flight . Using vehicles and team tactics , both teams must first board the structure and then capture its control room to fly it to the team 's starting point . The structure must then land and be defended from capture by the opposing team for a set amount of time . 
 The second unique game mode is " Invasion " , in which two teams fight for control of mineral resource nodes . Whenever teams capture a node they gain points that can be used to purchase classes and vehicles . In all of the team @-@ based game modes , teams have access to four Terran unit classes : light infantry , marine , firebat , and ghost . The light infantry class has minimal armor but a larger range of weapons , while the marine is a heavily armored soldier with an assault rifle and grenades . The firebat is a heavy marine armed with a flamethrower and napalm rockets . Finally , the ghost is a variation of Nova 's character in the single @-@ player mode , equipped with a cloaking device , thermal vision , EMP device , and sniper rifle , but lacks the speed ability . Due to the size of the armor worn by marines and <unk> , only ghosts and light infantry can pilot vehicles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ghost takes place in the fictional universe of the StarCraft series . The series is set in a distant part of the galaxy called the Koprulu Sector and begins in the year 2499 . Terran exiles from Earth are governed by a totalitarian empire , the Terran Dominion , that is opposed by several smaller rebel groups . Two alien races discover humanity : the insectoid Zerg , who begin to invade planets controlled by the Terrans ; and the Protoss , an enigmatic race with strong psionic power that attempt to eradicate the Zerg . Ghost takes place four years after the conclusion of StarCraft : Brood War , in which the Zerg become the dominant power in the sector and leave both the Protoss and the Dominion in ruins . The game follows the story of Nova , a young ghost agent — a human espionage operative with psychic abilities — in the employ of the Dominion . 
 Although the game has been indefinitely postponed , the backstory for Nova was released in the novel StarCraft Ghost : Nova by Keith R. A. DeCandido . It was meant to accompany the game 's release , but was published in 2006 after development halted . In the novel , Nova is a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old girl and daughter to one of the ruling families of the Confederacy of Man , an oppressive government featured in StarCraft . The Confederacy is overthrown by rebels , who go on to form the Dominion . Nova has significant psionic potential , but has been kept out of the Confederate ghost operative training program because of her father 's influence . After her family is murdered by rebels , Nova loses control of her mental abilities and accidentally kills 300 people around her home . She flees from her home before she is caught , and is later forced to work for an organized crime boss as an enforcer and executioner . She is rescued by a Confederate agent who is investigating her disappearance during a rebel attack on the Confederate capital that leads to the Confederacy 's destruction . Nova is consequently acquired by the newly formed Terran Dominion , who erase her memory and train her as a ghost agent . 
 Few details have been revealed about Ghost 's plot beyond Nova 's backstory . Under emperor Arcturus Mengsk , the Terran Dominion has rebuilt much of its former strength and controls a new military formed to counter the Zerg . To further bolster the effectiveness of his military , Mengsk initiates a secret research operation codenamed Project : Shadow Blade and places it under the command of his right @-@ hand man , General Horace Warfield . In the program , an experimental and potentially lethal gas called <unk> is used to enhance the genetic structure of the Dominion 's psychic ghost agents . The process is described as changing the agents into " shadowy superhuman beings bent on executing the will of their true master " . It is into the midst of this that Nova finishes her training and is dispatched in operations against the Koprulu Liberation Front , a rebel group that challenges Mengsk 's empire . However , Nova 's mission leads her to uncover a conspiracy that involves Shadow Blade . This revelation causes her to question her loyalty to the Dominion and could upset the balance of power within the galaxy . 
 = = Development and cancellation = = 
 On September 20 , 2002 , Blizzard Entertainment announced the development of StarCraft : Ghost in conjunction with fellow video game company Nihilistic Software . Nihilistic aimed to release the game for the Xbox , PlayStation 2 and Nintendo GameCube video game consoles in late 2003 , which elicited positive reactions from the press . The game was consistently delayed , and during the third quarter of 2004 , Nihilistic discontinued their work on the project . Blizzard stated that Nihilistic had completed the tasks it had been contracted for , and the game would be delivered on time . 
 In July 2004 , Blizzard Entertainment began collaboration with Swingin ' Ape Studios to work on the game , and bought the company in May 2005 . Despite anticipation for the game by industry journalists , Ghost was delayed again and its release date was pushed back to September 2005 . At Electronic Entertainment Expo 2005 , Ghost was officially reannounced , but the GameCube version was canceled by Swingin ' Ape Studios due to the platform 's lack of online support . The game 's release was again delayed until 2006 . Despite the efforts of Swingin ' Ape , Ghost failed to materialize as scheduled , and in March 2006 Blizzard Entertainment announced an indefinite postponement on development of Ghost while the company explored new options with the emerging seventh generation of video game consoles . Despite its long development history , IGN noted that the concept of Ghost still held promise . Although the game 's development was suspended , Keith R. A. DeCandido 's novel StarCraft Ghost : Nova was published several months later in November 2006 . 
 Complementing Nihilistic 's and Swingin Ape Studio 's work on the game , Blizzard 's cinematics team — originally formed to develop StarCraft 's cut scenes — created the cut scenes for Ghost 's single @-@ player campaign , which are integral to the game 's storyline . The team , which originally consisted of six people , grew to 25 , and used newer hardware , software , and cinematics techniques to create higher quality cut scenes than those featured in StarCraft and Brood War . The game 's trailer , composed of the cinematics team 's work , was released in August 2005 . 
 Since Ghost 's production halted , Blizzard Entertainment has sporadically released information about the title . The game 's protagonist , Nova , shows up in one campaign mission of StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty , in which players are given the option to side with her or fight against her forces . She also features in StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm . Metzen further stated that he believed Ghost had an excellent storyline that may be told in future novels following from DeCandido 's Nova . In June 2007 , Rob Pardo , one of the lead developers at Blizzard Entertainment , indicated that there still was interest in finishing Ghost . Later in an interview , Pardo stated that Blizzard had been " stubborn " in persevering with Ghost , but they " were not able to execute [ the game ] at the level we wanted to " . Blizzard 's president Mike Morhaime and Pardo gave a presentation on the company 's history at the D.I.C.E. Summit in February 2008 . During the presentation , they listed games canceled by Blizzard , which did not include Ghost . When questioned about this , Blizzard 's co @-@ founder Frank Pearce explained that the title was never " technically canceled " and that it was not in the company 's focus at the time due to a finite amount of development resources . Morhaime later elaborated that it was the sudden success of World of Warcraft and the concurrent development of StarCraft II that consumed Blizzard 's resources , leading to Ghost being put on hold . Despite Blizzard 's announcements , many of the video games industry 's journalists now list Ghost as canceled and consider it vaporware ; the game was ranked fifth in the 2005 edition of Wired News ' annual Vaporware Awards . 
 On September 23 , 2014 in an interview with Polygon about the cancellation of Blizzard 's next generation MMO Titan , Mike Morhaime confirmed that StarCraft : Ghost was also cancelled . Morhaime said , " It was hard when we canceled Warcraft Adventures . It was hard when we canceled StarCraft : Ghost , but it has always resulted in better @-@ quality work . " In a July 2016 Polygon article , it was suggested that when the game 's production halted the main reasons it was shelved were because the game worked on the PlayStation 2 and Xbox , but it was scheduled to be released in 2005 when the Xbox 360 was about to be released , and it would take a lot of resources to move from the previous console generation to the current generation as well as Blizzard having a lot of success with its then recently released PC @-@ only game World of Warcraft . 
 = 1957 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1957 Atlantic hurricane season was a generally inactive year for tropical cyclogenesis in the North Atlantic basin . There were eight tropical storms – two of which went unnamed – and three hurricanes , two of which intensified further to attain major hurricane intensity . The season officially began on June 15 and ended on November 15 , though the year 's first tropical cyclone developed prior to the start of the season on June 8 . The final storm dissipated on October 27 , well before the official end of the season . The strongest hurricane of the year was Carrie , which reached the equivalent of a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale on two separate occasions in the open Atlantic ; Carrie later caused the sinking of the German ship Pamir southwest of the Azores , resulting in 80 deaths . 
 In total , the season resulted in at least 513 fatalities and $ 152 @.@ 5 million in damages . Hurricane Audrey was the season 's most destructive and deadly storm , causing 416 deaths and about $ 150 million in damages . Audrey made landfall just east of Sabine Pass , Texas , in the U.S. state of Louisiana as a strong Category 3 hurricane in late June . Three other tropical storms in the year made landfalls along the Gulf Coast of the United States , bringing heavy rains that resulted in widespread flooding across much of the Southeastern United States . The highest rainfall total measured associated with a tropical cyclone was 18 @.@ 39 in ( 467 mm ) in Quarantine , Louisiana , during Tropical Storm Esther . However , an unofficial reading of 19 in ( 480 mm ) was measured in an unknown location in the Florida Panhandle during Tropical Storm One . The year 's other tropical systems curved out to sea without causing much impact . After the season , the name Audrey was retired . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 15 , 1957 . It was a below @-@ average season in which eight tropical cyclones formed , of which three became hurricanes . Of these hurricanes , two became major hurricanes . In an average season , ten tropical cyclones form , of which five become hurricanes . Five of the season 's eight tropical cyclones developed in the Gulf of Mexico , the most since the 1936 season , in which six formed in the gulf . The first tropical storm of the season formed on June 8 , a week before the official start of the hurricane season . However , the first named storm , Audrey , formed afterwards , on June 25 ; these two storms were the only to form in June during the season . July featured no Atlantic tropical cyclones . Tropical Storm Bertha was the only system to form during August , developing in the Gulf of Mexico . Despite warm sea surface temperatures ( SSTs ) in the tropical Atlantic , no storms formed during the month , below the climatological average of one . The low monthly activity was in part due to an unfavorable wind pattern which prevailed across the Atlantic for much of the month . In September , however , conditions for tropical cyclogenesis were more favorable , with concomitant cyclonic activity . Four storms formed , of which two attained hurricane strength , higher than the mean activity of the last 70 <unk> . By contrast , only one tropical storm formed in October , below the average of two in the month . This tropical storm dissipated on October 27 , 16 days before the official end of the hurricane season . 
 Five tropical cyclones made landfall during the hurricane season , including one hurricane . All of these storms made landfall on the Gulf Coast of the United States . Property damage that resulted from cyclone @-@ related impacts totaled to $ 152 million in the United States , with most caused by Hurricane Audrey , which made landfall near the border between Texas and Louisiana . 513 deaths were also caused by tropical storms during the season , with 416 deaths attributable to Hurricane Audrey . 
 The season 's activity was reflective with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 84 , which is categorized as being " near normal . " However , this was under the 1950 – 2000 average of 96 @.@ 1 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of hurricanes multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical cyclones with winds exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather accompanied by low barometric pressure was first identified near the Yucatán Peninsula on June 7 . Reports from the following day in the region reported pressures that were indicative of a developing tropical cyclone , and at 06 : 00 UTC , the disturbance attained tropical depression strength , the first of the season . The depression quickly developed into a tropical storm later that day . Though hurricane reconnaissance flights could not locate a well @-@ defined center , ship observations showed that the tropical storm was moving quickly to the northeast . Due to its fast forward motion , the storm gained little in organization and made landfall near Port Leon , Florida , on June 9 with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . However , the system gradually strengthened as it crossed the Florida peninsula , reentering the North Atlantic later that day . On June 10 , the storm reached peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) prior to becoming an extratropical storm . The post @-@ tropical cyclone then strengthened and moved erratically in open seas before entirely dissipating on June 15 . 
 Despite the tropical storm 's fast passage over land , heavy rainfall was reported , officially peaking at 14 @.@ 95 in ( 380 mm ) in Live Oak , Florida . However , unofficial reports of at least 19 in ( 480 mm ) of rain were collected . In Perry , Florida , 100 – 200 families were evacuated due to the floodwater . Field crops , including tobacco and watermelon , were damaged , with flood damage estimated at $ 30 @,@ 000 . The storm also spawned ten tornadoes , with nine in northeastern Florida and one on Georgia 's Jekyll Island . All of these tornadoes were relatively weak and caused minor damage , totaling to $ 12 @,@ 000 . At the coast , the tropical storm 's strong winds generated waves 2 – 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 – 0 @.@ 91 m ) high , which caused moderate damage . Though located south of where the storm made landfall , buildings and roads along the Tampa Bay Area waterfront were flooded by the waves . Thee cabin cruiser <unk> capsized in the Gulf of Mexico due to the waves , and five of the seven crew on board drowned ; these were the only deaths associated with the system . Coastal damages due to storm surge amounted to $ 10 @,@ 000 , and overall the storm caused $ 52 @,@ 000 in damages across the southeastern United States . 
 = = = Hurricane Audrey = = = 
 An ill @-@ defined tropical wave was first identified in the Caribbean Sea on June 20 , and moved westward into the Bay of Campeche . The disturbance slowly strengthened as it developed a low pressure system . A nearby trough aided the intensification of the system , and it developed into a tropical depression on June 25 , while remaining generally stationary in the Bay of Campeche . Situated in an area of favorable upper @-@ air divergence and warm SSTs , the storm quickly organized and strengthened , reaching hurricane strength later that day . Audrey began to accelerate northward due to troughing in the upper @-@ levels in the atmosphere . During this time , the hurricane rapidly intensified , attaining Category 4 hurricane strength . On June 27 , Audrey reached peak intensity with winds of 145 mph ( 235 km / h ) , and made landfall at this intensity near the mouth of the Sabine River later that day . The hurricane quickly weakened as it moved inland , becoming an extratropical cyclone by June 28 . The extratropical remnants of Audrey moved northeastward across the United States , before completely dissipating on June 29 over southern Quebec . 
 Hurricane Audrey caused widespread impacts across a wide swath of the United States and Canada . The storm 's worst effects were felt in Louisiana , where the storm caused $ 120 million in damages . The highest storm surge measured with the hurricane was 12 @.@ 4 ft ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) , reported west of Cameron , Louisiana . The strong surge inundated much of the coast , killing much of the local wildlife and causing widespread property damage . Heavy rainfall also caused flooding , peaking at 10 @.@ 63 in ( 270 mm ) west of Basile , Louisiana . Rainfall was concentrated particularly in the Atchafalaya Basin . In Texas , effects of the storm were much less severe , but the storm still caused $ 8 million in damages , primarily as a result of strong winds . Further inland , the weakening hurricane spawned tornadoes and caused additional flooding in conjunction with a frontal boundary . The effects of Audrey were felt as far north as Canada , where 15 people died due to the strong winds and heavy rain . In total , the storm caused $ 152 million in damages and at least 416 deaths . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Bertha = = = 
 A weak extratropical low entered the Gulf of Mexico on August 6 and drifted slowly westward . The system slowly organized , developing into a tropical storm on August 8 about 100 mi ( 160 km ) south of the Mississippi River Delta . Moving generally northward , Bertha quickly organized ; the system attained its peak intensity with 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) and an estimated minimum pressure of 998 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 47 inHg ) on August 9 . That same day , Bertha came ashore near Cameron , Louisiana at the same intensity . After landfall , the storm moved northward due to a strong high @-@ pressure system and weakened over land , before degenerating into a remnant low at 1800 UTC on August 11 over Oklahoma . The storm 's remnants later moved across the U.S. Interior Highlands before dissipating . 
 In the Gulf of Mexico , 1 @,@ 350 workers on offshore oil drilling platforms were evacuated in preparation for the storm . The oil drilling tender <unk> No. 1 sunk due to the strong waves , though the two people on board at the time were evacuated by helicopter . At the coast , the maximum storm surge height measured was 4 @.@ 7 ft ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) at the Schooner Bayou Control Structure . Bertha dropped heavy rainfall primarily as a remnant low across much of The Ozarks . Rainfall peaked at 13 @.@ 77 in ( 350 mm ) near Damascus , Arkansas , which set a 24 @-@ hour rainfall record for the city and made August 1957 the wettest month on record . Across Arkansas , the heavy rains triggered flash floods after numerous rivers exceeded flood stage . The flash floods caused property damage in cities adjacent to rivers . Though damage estimates were difficult to accurately obtain , four Arkansas counties reported combined losses of $ 925 @,@ 000 , and two deaths were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Carrie = = = 
 Hurricane Carrie formed from an easterly tropical wave off the western coast of Africa on September 2 . Moving to the west , the storm gradually intensified , reaching hurricane strength on September 5 . Carrie intensified further , before reaching peak intensity on September 8 as a Category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) in the open Atlantic Ocean . The hurricane curved northward and fluctuated in intensity before recurving to the west and restrengthening , attaining Category 4 intensity for a second time as it neared Bermuda on September 14 . However , Carrie passed well north of the island and turned to the northeast towards Europe . Weakening as it reached higher latitudes , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on September 23 , prior to affecting areas of the British Isles . 
 Due to its distance away from any major land masses , Carrie caused relatively minor damage along its path . On September 16 , the hurricane passed well north of Bermuda , causing minimal damage despite its intensity at the time , though hurricane reconnaissance flights in the area were postponed due to damage sustained by one of the aircraft . As it was transitioning to an extratropical cyclone southwest of the Azores , the German ship Pamir encountered the storm and capsized on September 21 , resulting in the deaths of 80 crew members on board . As an extratropical storm , Carrie brought strong storm surge and heavy rain to the British Isles , which claimed three lives . The hurricane 's long duration and path in open water also helped it attain a number of Atlantic hurricane records . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Debbie = = = 
 On September 5 , a weak easterly wave moved into the Gulf of Mexico from the Caribbean Sea due to the influence of an upper @-@ level trough . The wave organized and spawned a weak area of circulation which developed into a tropical storm by 0600 UTC on September 7 . Moving steadily towards the northeast at roughly 15 mph ( 25 km / h ) , Debbie only marginally strengthened due to the presence of cooler air entrainment . Early on September 8 , Debbie made landfall near Fort Walton Beach , Florida as a minimal tropical storm with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . A minimum barometric pressure of 1005 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 68 inHg ) was recorded in Pensacola , Florida . The tropical storm weakened as it moved over land , degenerating to a tropical depression on September 9 . The system became increasingly diffuse , and later merged with strong weather systems by 0600 UTC later that day . 
 Offshore , the tropical storm generated high tides 2 @.@ 5 – 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 76 – 1 @.@ 22 m ) above average in Apalachee Bay , located about 150 mi ( 240 km ) east of where Debbie made landfall . The strong surf caused some localized flooding . In St. Marks , Florida , a station recorded maximum sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , the highest measured in association with the storm . However , a station in Tampa , Florida recorded a peak wind gust of 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) in a squall . Heavy rainfall caused widespread flooding , though rainfall was mostly beneficial to crops . Rainfall peaked at 11 @.@ 26 in ( 286 mm ) in <unk> , Florida , while precipitation was reported as far north as Pennsylvania . The tropical storm only caused minor damage , but was indirectly responsible for four deaths . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Esther = = = 
 On September 12 , a mid @-@ level circulation area formed over Nicaragua and slowly drifted northeastward into the Gulf of Mexico . As it entered the Gulf , the system developed thunderstorm activity and an area of low pressure , and as a result the Weather Bureau began initiating advisories on a newly formed tropical depression by 1800 UTC on September 16 . The depression quickly intensified and attained tropical storm strength by the next day . At the time , Esther had a minimum pressure of 1000 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) , as reported by a hurricane reconnaissance flight ; this would be the lowest pressure measured associated with Esther . The large tropical storm intensified to peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) later that day , and held that intensity before making landfall in southeastern Louisiana on the morning on September 18 . Esther weakened over land and later dissipated over the Mississippi Valley by 1200 UTC on September 19 . 
 Like Tropical Storm Debbie , which had made landfall just a week prior in the same area , Esther 's wind impacts were minimal . The strongest gust measured associated with the storm was 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) , as recorded at Pensacola International Airport . Other locations reported similar gusts and strong winds in squalls . Heavy rains persisted in the region well after Esther moved inland , resulting in high rainfall amounts . Rainfall peaked at 18 @.@ 39 in ( 467 mm ) in Quarantine , Louisiana , near the mouth of the Mississippi River . The heavy rains breached several levees , resulting in severe flooding , particularly in Buras , Louisiana . Although rainfall was beneficial in many places due to an existing drought , cotton , pecan , and peanut crops were damaged by the floods . While crop damage amounted to $ 1 million , property damage amounted to $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Esther also caused three indirect deaths , all of which were in Louisiana . 
 = = = Hurricane Frieda = = = 
 On September 20 , a low pressure area developed within the same frontal boundary that had curved Hurricane Carrie towards the Azores . Rapidly developing , the system was classified as a tropical depression at 1200 UTC later that day , southwest of Bermuda . Initially , the depression was ill @-@ defined and was slowly moving to the southwest . The following day , the attached cold front dissipated , allowing for the system to intensify . The system was subsequently upgraded a tropical storm by September 22 , following a reconnaissance flight into the system which reported a minimum pressure of 1001 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 56 inHg ) . At the time , however , Frieda was a small system with minimal shower activity . Gradually strengthening , Frieda reached an initial peak intensity with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) later that day . Following the split of an upper @-@ level ridge to the north , Frieda recurved towards the northeast the next day . As it sped to the northeast , a westerly shortwave progressed eastward , enhancing environmental conditions . As a result , the tropical storm began to quickly strengthen . By 1200 UTC on September 25 , Frieda attained hurricane strength , and reached peak intensity with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 992 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 30 inHg ) , as reported by the Canadian merchant ship <unk> . However , a cold front associated with the shortwave encountered the hurricane , which caused it to transition into an extratropical cyclone on September 26 . Frieda 's extratropical remnants later passed over Newfoundland . Though Frieda remained far from any land masses , a peak rainfall amount of 3 @.@ 26 in ( 83 mm ) was measured in Bermuda . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eight = = = 
 On October 22 , an area of thunderstorm activity developed north of the Lesser Antilles , and barometric pressures fell throughout the region . The following day , a cut @-@ off low developed and strengthened along the edge of a trough extending from Bermuda . This justified the classification of the system as a tropical depression on October 23 , 500 mi ( 800 km ) northeast of Puerto Rico . Moving towards the west , the depression attained tropical storm strength shortly after formation . A ship reported a minimum pressure of 999 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 50 inHg ) in the storm 's vicinity . The large system gradually strengthened the following day , reaching its peak intensity by 1800 UTC on October 24 . A ship reported a minimum pressure of 993 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 33 inHg ) early the next day , the lowest pressure measured in association with the tropical storm . At the same time , the tropical storm also recurved towards the northeast . Heading towards more northerly latitudes , a gradual weakening trend began , due to the presence of an extratropical system . The tropical storm was itself absorbed by the same system on October 27 . This storm may not have been named operationally due to a lack of discernible tropical characteristics . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for tropical cyclones that reached at least tropical storm intensity in the North Atlantic in 1957 . However , two of such storms , the first and last , went unnamed . The name Audrey would later be retired , only the seventh name to do so . Storms were named Audrey , Bertha , Carrie , Debbie , Esther , and Frieda for the first time in 1957 . 
 = Noel F. Parrish = 
 Noel Francis Parrish ( November 11 , 1909 – April 7 , 1987 ) was a Brigadier General in the United States Air Force who was the white commander of a group of black airmen known as the Tuskegee Airmen during World War II . He was a key factor in the program 's success and in their units being assigned to combat duty . Parrish was born and raised in the south @-@ east United States ; he joined the US Army in 1930 . He served in the military from 1930 until 1964 , and retired as a Brigadier General in 1964 . 
 Parrish 's association with the Tuskegee Airmen began when he was assigned to be the Assistant Director of Training of the Eastern Flying Training Command . On December 5 , 1941 , Parrish was promoted to the position of Director of Training at Tuskegee Army Flying School in Alabama . One year later in December 1942 Parrish became the Tuskegee Army Air Field commander . 
 The prestigious " Brigadier General Noel F. Parrish Award " was so named due to Parrish 's efforts to desegregate his troops , reduce overcrowding , increase morale , and improve relations between Tuskegee 's residents and the inhabitants of the base . Tuskegee 's highest award has been named the " Brigadier General Noel F. Parrish Award " in honor of its titular namesake . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Born in Versailles , Kentucky , to a Southern white minister , Parrish spent parts of his youth living in Alabama and Georgia . His birthplace is often listed as being in nearby Lexington , Kentucky . He graduated from Cullman High School , Cullman , Alabama in 1924 and Rice Institute , Houston , Texas in 1928 . He dropped out of graduate school after one year and decided to hitchhike to San Francisco . The lack of work meant hunger , so he chose to join the United States Army 's 11th Cavalry Regiment as a private on July 30 , 1930 , serving in Monterey , California . 
 After a year in the horse cavalry , Parrish became an aviation cadet in June 1931 and subsequently qualified as an enlisted pilot . He completed flight training in 1932 and was assigned to the 13th Attack Squadron at Fort Crockett , near Galveston , Texas . One year later in September 1933 Parrish joined the Air Corps Technical School at Chanute Field , Illinois ; later transferring to the First Air Transport Squadron at Dayton , Ohio . In July 1935 he rejoined the 13th Attack Squadron as assistant operations officer , then located at Barksdale Field , Louisiana . Parrish became a flying instructor at Randolph Field in April 1938 , and by July 1939 he was a supervisor at the Air Corps Flying School in Glenview , Illinois . Commissioned as a lieutenant in 1939 , Parrish attended the Air Command and Staff School at Maxwell Field , Alabama . As a captain , and still a student at Maxwell , his association with the Tuskegee Airmen began as in March 1941 when he was assigned as Assistant Director of Training of the Eastern Flying Training Command . Upon graduation in June 1941 , he chose to remain at Maxwell , and work with the Tuskegee Institute as a primary flight instructor . By doing so , he gave up his own desires for a combat command . On December 5 , 1941 , two days before the attack on Pearl Harbor , he was promoted to Director of Training at Tuskegee Army Flying School in Alabama , assuming command of Tuskegee Army Air Field a year later , in December 1942 . 
 = = Tuskegee Airmen Experiment = = 
 = = = Formation of the Tuskegee Airmen Experiment = = = 
 Black Americans were not permitted to fly for the U.S. armed services prior to 1940 . The Air Corps at that time , which had never had a single black member , was part of an army that possessed exactly two black Regular line officers at the beginning of World War II : Brigadier Generals Benjamin O. Davis , Sr. and Benjamin O. Davis , Jr . The first Civilian Pilot Training Program ( <unk> ) students completed their instruction in May 1940 . 
 The creation of an all @-@ black pursuit squadron resulted from pressure by civil rights organizations and the black press who pushed for the establishment of a unit at Tuskegee , an Alabama base , in 1941 . The Tuskegee Institute was selected by the military for the " Tuskegee ( Airmen ) Experiment " because of its commitment to aeronautical training . Tuskegee had the facilities , engineering and technical instructors , as well as a climate for year @-@ round flying . Eleanor Roosevelt , who was interested in the Tuskegee aviation program , took a 40 @-@ minute flight around the base in a plane piloted by Charles " Chief " Anderson on April 19 , 1941 . Anderson was a self @-@ taught black civilian and experienced aviator who learned how to fly before the war . He was hired by the Tuskegee program to be its Chief Flight Instructor . Anderson has been referred to as the ' Ancient Mariner ' of black aviation , having flown long before many of the new recruits were of age . 
 The Tuskegee program was then expanded and became the center for African @-@ American aviation during World War II . Members of the Tuskegee unit became known as the Tuskegee Airmen . Formation of the black air units was announced by Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson on January 16 , 1941 . On March 19 , 1941 , the 99th Pursuit Squadron ( Pursuit being an early World War II synonym for " Fighter " ) was established at Chanute Field in <unk> , Illinois and activated three days later on March 22 . Over 250 enlisted men formed the first group of black Americans trained at Chanute in aircraft ground support trades . This small number became the core of other black squadrons subsequently formed at Tuskegee and Maxwell Fields in Alabama . Later in 1941 , the 99th Pursuit Squadron moved to Maxwell Field and then Tuskegee Field before deploying to combat in the Mediterranean Theater of Operations in 1943 . Pilots , commanders , instructors , and maintenance and support staff comprised the " Tuskegee ( Airmen ) Experiment . " 
 In December 1941 , Noel F Parrish became the Director of Training at the school . By the end of 1942 Parrish had been promoted to the position of Tuskegee Army Air Field Commander . As Director of Training and later Tuskegee Field commander , Parrish played a key role in the program 's success . There were approximately 14 @,@ 000 ground support personnel at Tuskegee Field during WW II and almost 1 @,@ 000 graduating pilots , of which about 450 saw active combat during the war . 
 Exercises at a Booker T. Washington monument located at the Tuskegee Institute commemorated the beginning of black American pre @-@ flight training for military aviation . The first twelve candidates for officer @-@ flier positions were cited by America 's black press as , " the cream of the country 's colored youth . " The first classes started at the institute , and flying lessons soon began at the Tuskegee Army Air Field ( <unk> ) some approximately ten miles away . After it was built , government press releases recounted that the air field was developed and built by Negro contractors both skilled and unskilled . Of the original class , five students graduated in March 1942 . 
 The <unk> Stearman was the first type of training plane to be used in teaching the new recruits . The <unk> Texan , and P @-@ 40 Warhawk followed as the aircraft of choice over time . Much of the primary flight training was done at Moton Field at Tuskegee . Tuskegee trained over 1 @,@ 000 black aviators during the war , about half of whom served overseas . 
 = = = Initial problems = = = 
 Local white residents of the area objected almost immediately . They complained about black MPs challenging white people and patrolling the town while brandishing their military weapons . The first commanding officer , Major James Ellison , was supportive of his MPs ; however , he was soon relieved of his command . A segregationist colonel replaced Ellison , and enforced segregation both on and off the base . This prompted black newspapers to protest his assignment . The colonel was transferred with a promotion , and Noel Parrish then took command as ' director of training ' . The lack of assignments according to background and training led to an excess of non @-@ aviation black officers without a mission . This became disparaging to morale , as the facility became overcrowded . As there was little in the line of recreation , Parrish began to arrange for celebrities to visit and perform at the base . Lena Horne , Joe Louis , Ella Fitzgerald , Ray Robinson , Louis Armstrong , and Langston Hughes were among the many guests . Parrish also desegregated the base to a much larger extent than his predecessors . 
 Parrish demanded high standards of performance of his men and did not view race as an issue . Parrish felt that what mattered was professionalism and an individual 's capacities , techniques , and judgement . Parrish held his black trainees to the same high standards of performance as whites ; and those who did not meet those standards were failed out of the program . 
 = = = Tuskegee Airmen Experiment results = = = 
 History views the results of the " Tuskegee Airmen Experiment " as a tremendous success , in which Parrish played a significant role , and proved that blacks could perform well in both leadership and combat roles . Parrish felt people should be judged by their capability , not their color . During its development Parrish would often return from Washington DC depressed because of the massive resistance to the Tuskegee program . Decades later at Tuskegee Airmen reunions , when Parrish 's name was called everyone applauded with a standing ovation . The experience of the AAF during World War II necessitated that the military review its policies on the utilization of black servicemembers . Confrontation , discussion , and coordination with both black and white groups led AAF leaders to the conclusion that active commitment , leadership , and equal opportunity produced a more cost @-@ effective , viable military force . In 1948 , President Harry Truman signed an Executive Order on equality of treatment and opportunity in the military , due in no small part to the successes of the Tuskegee Airmen . Parrish was commander of Tuskegee Field from 1942 – 1946 and historians generally give him credit for improving morale , living conditions , relations between blacks and whites , and relations with local citizens . 
 Parrish , stated in his memoirs that he often mediated between the Army officials , whites near Tuskegee who felt that the airmen were uppity , and the aviation trainees themselves . Dr. Frederick D. Patterson , the third president of Tuskegee Institute , wrote to Parrish on September 14 , 1944 : " In my opinion , all who have had anything to do with the development and direction of the Tuskegee Army Air Field and the Army flying training program for Negroes in this area have just cause to be proud . . . . The development had to take place in a period of emergency and interracial confusion . " 
 = = After Tuskegee = = 
 Parrish stayed in command of the Tuskegee Airmen through the end of World War II in 1945 until August 20 , 1946 when he was assigned to the Air University at Maxwell . During this time the war was winding down and the struggle to integrate the United States military heated up . Virtually all commanders submitted reports claiming that blacks took longer to train and performed more poorly than whites . Parrish was one of the few who did not do so . Parrish pointed out instances that showed blatant discrimination occurred against black airmen during the war , such as when there was a shortage of bomber pilots in Europe , white fighter pilots were sent to replace them despite the fact that fully trained black bomber pilots were available , even though flying fighter planes requires skills quite different from flying a bomber . Parrish also commented : " It is a discouraging fact that officers of the Army Air Force , whose scientific achievements are unsurpassed , and whose scientific skill is unquestioned in mechanical matters and in many personnel matters , should generally approach the problem of races and minorities with the most unscientific dogmatic and arbitrary attitudes ... Whether we like or dislike Negroes ... they are citizens of the United States having the same rights and privileges of other citizens ... " 
 In August 1947 he entered the Air War College at Maxwell Field and graduated the following June . He then became deputy secretary of the Air Staff at Air Force Headquarters , Washington , D.C. and became a special assistant to the vice chief of staff there in January 1951 . In September 1954 he became Air Deputy to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Defense College , which was then located in Paris , France . On September 1 , 1956 he became deputy director , Military Assistance Division , United States European Command , also in Paris . In May 1958 he returned to Air Force headquarters and became assistant for coordination to deputy chief of staff for Plans and Programs . 
 He eventually became a Brigadier General — retiring from the Air Force on October 1 , 1964 . His military decorations include the Legion of Merit and Air Medal . He earned a PhD from his alma mater , Rice University , and taught college history in Texas . Parrish died on Tuesday , April 7 , 1987 of cardiac arrest at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Piney Point , Maryland . At the service Lieutenant General Davis Jr. said " He may have been the only white person who believed that blacks could learn to fly airplanes . " 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 Parrish was married twice , the second time to Dr. Florence Tucker Parrish @-@ <unk> , and had three stepsons Joseph Tucker , III of Dallas , Texas , F. Steven Tucker of Bel Air , Maryland and James D. Tucker of Douglasville , Pennsylvania . He wrote magazine articles under a pen name and was interested in music and painting . Parrish was considered charming , witty , and likable . Looking younger than his years , he was also considered to be a ladies ' man . Prior to being assigned to Tuskegee , he had not been actively involved with any of the black Americans ' causes . Parrish had as a youth , however , hiked three miles to see where a black man had been lynched . He later recalled that when people heard of the project to train black pilots and mechanics , he often heard " weird and worried kind of laughter " from white people and that a visiting British flying ace once stated that it was better to have a " Messerschmitt on his tail than to try to teach a Negro to fly . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 According to a 2001 presentation which won top prize at a National History Day competition , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Topeka High School student John Freeman wrote that the Tuskegee Airmen , America 's first black military pilots , helped lay the groundwork for the civil rights movement . The most prestigious award of the association of Tuskegee Airmen which is presented at the Tuskegee Airmen , Inc. annual convention , was named ' the Brigadier General Noel F. Parrish Award ' in his honor . For many years the award was presented in person by his widow , Florence . In recognition Mrs. Parrish received the General Daniel James Jr . Distinguished Service / Achievement / Leadership Award at the 2010 convention . 
 Historians generally give credit to Colonel Noel Parrish , Commander of Tuskegee Field from 1942 to 1946 , for his enlightened leadership and fair treatment of cadets which improved morale by reducing the amount of segregation and overcrowding and improving relations with both blacks and whites in the town of Tuskegee . The record of the Airmen became a driving force for President Harry S Truman 's decision to desegregate the U.S. military in 1948 . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 143 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 143 ( PA 143 ) is a 20 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 32 km ) state highway in Pennsylvania . It runs from PA 662 in Richmond Township , Berks County northeast to PA 309 near New Tripoli in Lehigh County . The route passes through rural areas , intersecting Interstate 78 ( I @-@ 78 ) / U.S. Route 22 ( US 22 ) in Lenhartsville , PA 737 near Kempton , and PA 863 in <unk> . What is now PA 143 north of Lenhartsville was originally designated Legislative Route 285 in 1911 . PA 143 was designated to in 1928 to run from PA 43 in Lenhartsville to PA 29 near New Tripoli . The route was extended slightly east through New Tripoli by 1940 following a realignment of PA 29 . PA 143 was extended south to PA 662 by 1966 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 143 begins at an intersection with PA 662 in Richmond Township , Berks County , heading to the north on two @-@ lane undivided Hard Hill Road . It turns northwest through a mix of hilly farms and woods with some homes , reaching the community of <unk> and becoming Main Street . In <unk> , the road crosses the Maiden Creek into Perry Township , where it runs a short distance to the west of the creek with woods to the east and farm fields to the west as an unnamed road . PA 143 continues through rural surroundings as it passes through Windsor Township and into Greenwich Township . The road enters more wooded surroundings and makes a few sharp turns prior to heading west into Lenhartsville . Here , the road becomes Chestnut Street and passes homes and businesses , making a right turn to the north onto Willow Street as it intersects the former alignment of US 22 . 
 Upon leaving Lenhartsville for Greenwich Township again , PA 143 becomes unnamed and reaches an interchange with I @-@ 78 / US 22 . From this point , the road winds north through more forested areas , still running to the west of Maiden Creek . The route enters Albany Township and enters a mix of woods and farms as it comes to an intersection with the northern terminus of PA 737 near the community of Kempton . Following this intersection , the road passes through more rural areas as it runs to the west of Ontelaunee Creek and the Wanamaker , Kempton and Southern Railroad . 
 PA 143 crosses into Lynn Township , Lehigh County , continuing northeast to the community of <unk> as Kings Highway . At this point , the road turns more to the east and passes the terminus of the Wanamaker , Kempton and Southern Railroad and heads into more agricultural areas with some homes . Upon reaching the community of <unk> , PA 143 comes to the northern terminus of PA 863 . From this intersection , the route continues farther east , passing through New Tripoli as Decatur Street before reaching its northern terminus at PA 309 . 
 PA 143 has a total length of 20 @.@ 039 miles ( 32 @.@ 250 km ) . In 2010 , PA 143 had an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 5 @,@ 400 vehicles between PA 662 and I @-@ 78 / US 22 to a low of 1 @,@ 800 vehicles between PA 737 and PA 863 . None of PA 143 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now PA 143 north of Lenhartsville was designated as part of Legislative Route 285 , a legislative route that ran from Hamburg to New Tripoli , in 1911 . PA 143 was designated in 1928 to follow its current alignment from PA 43 ( now Old Route 22 ) in Lenhartsville northeast to PA 29 west of New Tripoli . The route was originally unpaved between Lenhartsville and Kempton while the section between Kempton and New Tripoli was paved . By 1940 , PA 143 was paved between Lenhartsville and Kempton . Also by this time , PA 143 was extended through New Tripoli to end at PA 29 ( now PA 309 ) to the east of the community following a realignment of PA 29 . PA 143 was extended south from Lenhartsville to its current southern terminus at PA 662 by 1966 , adding 6 @.@ 4 miles ( 10 @.@ 3 km ) to the length of the road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Freedom from Want ( painting ) = 
 Freedom from Want , also known as The Thanksgiving Picture or I 'll Be Home for Christmas , is the third of the Four Freedoms series of four oil paintings by American artist Norman Rockwell . The works were inspired by United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's 1941 State of the Union Address , known as Four Freedoms . 
 The painting was created in November 1942 and published in the March 6 , 1943 issue of The Saturday Evening Post . All of the people in the picture were friends and family of Rockwell in Arlington , Vermont , who were photographed individually and painted into the scene . The work depicts a group of people gathered around a dinner table for a holiday meal . Having been partially created on Thanksgiving Day to depict the celebration , it has become an iconic representation of the Thanksgiving holiday and family holiday gatherings in general . The Post published Freedom from Want with a corresponding essay by Carlos Bulosan as part of the Four Freedoms series . Despite many who endured sociopolitical hardships abroad , Bulosan 's essay spoke on behalf of those enduring the socioeconomic hardships domestically , and it thrust him into prominence . 
 The painting has had a wide array of adaptations , parodies , and other uses , such as for the cover for the 1946 book Norman Rockwell , Illustrator . Although the image was popular at the time in the United States and remains so , it caused resentment in Europe where the masses were enduring wartime hardship . Artistically , the work is highly regarded as an example of mastery of the challenges of white @-@ on @-@ white painting and as one of Rockwell 's most famous works . 
 = = Background = = 
 Freedom from Want is the third in a series of four oil paintings entitled Four Freedoms by Norman Rockwell . They were inspired by Franklin D. Roosevelt 's State of the Union Address , known as Four Freedoms , delivered to the 77th United States Congress on January 6 , 1941 . In the early 1940s , Roosevelt 's Four Freedoms themes were still vague and abstract to many , but the government used them to help boost patriotism . The Four Freedoms ' theme was eventually incorporated into the Atlantic Charter , and it became part of the charter of the United Nations . The series of paintings ran in The Saturday Evening Post accompanied by essays from noted writers on four consecutive weeks : Freedom of Speech ( February 20 ) , Freedom of Worship ( February 27 ) , Freedom from Want ( March 6 ) , and Freedom from Fear ( March 13 ) . Eventually , the series was widely distributed in poster form and became instrumental in the U.S. Government War Bond Drive . 
 = = Description = = 
 The illustration is an oil painting on canvas , measuring 45 @.@ 75 by 35 @.@ 5 inches ( 116 @.@ 2 cm × 90 @.@ 2 cm ) . The Norman Rockwell Museum describes it as a story illustration for The Saturday Evening Post , complementary to the theme , but the image is also an autonomous visual expression . 
 The painting shows an <unk> matriarch presenting a roasted turkey to a family of several generations , in Rockwell 's idealistic presentation of family values . The patriarch looks on with fondness and approval from the head of the table , which is the central element of the painting . Its creased tablecloth shows that this is a special occasion for " sharing what we have with those we love " , according to Lennie Bennett . The table has a bowl of fruit , celery , pickles , and what appears to be cranberry sauce . There is a covered silver serving dish that would traditionally hold potatoes , according to Richard Halpern , but Bennett describes this as a covered casserole dish . The servings are less prominent than the presentation of white linen , white plates and water @-@ filled glasses . The people in the painting are not yet eating , and the painting contrasts the empty plates and vacant space in their midst with images of overabundance . 
 = = Production = = 
 In mid @-@ June Rockwell sketched in charcoal the Four Freedoms and sought commission from the Office of War Information ( OWI ) . He was rebuffed by an official who said , " The last war , you illustrators did the posters . This war , we 're going to use fine arts men , real artists . " However , Saturday Evening Post editor , Ben Hibbs , recognized the potential of the set and encouraged Rockwell to produce them right away . By early fall , the authors for the Four Freedoms had submitted their essays . Rockwell was concerned that Freedom from Want did not match Bulosan 's text . In mid @-@ November , Hibbs wrote Rockwell pleading that he not scrap his third work to start over . Hibbs alleviated Rockwell 's thematic concern ; he explained that the illustrations only needed to address the same topic rather than be in unison . Hibbs pressured Rockwell into completing his work by warning him that the magazine was on the verge of being compelled by the government to place restrictions on four @-@ color printing , so Rockwell had better get the work published before relegation to halftone printing . 
 In 1942 , Rockwell decided to use neighbors as models for the series . In Freedom from Want , he used his living room for the setting and relied on neighbors for advice , critical commentary , and their service as his models . For Freedom from Want , Rockwell photographed his cook as she presented the turkey on Thanksgiving Day 1942 . He said that he painted the turkey on that day and that , unlike Freedom of Speech and Freedom of Worship , this painting was not difficult to execute . Rockwell 's wife Mary is in this painting , and the family cook , Mrs. Thaddeus Wheaton , is serving the turkey , which the Rockwell family ate that day . The nine adults and two children depicted were photographed in Rockwell 's studio and painted into the scene later . The models are ( clockwise from Wheaton ) Lester Brush , Florence Lindsey , Rockwell 's mother Nancy , Jim Martin , Mr. Wheaton , Mary Rockwell , Charles Lindsey , and the Hoisington children . Jim Martin appears in all four paintings in the series . Shirley Hoisington , the girl at the end of the table , was six at the time . 
 After the Four Freedoms series ran in The Saturday Evening Post , the magazine made sets of reproductions available to the public and received 25 @,@ 000 orders . Additionally the OWI , which six months earlier had declined to employ Rockwell to promote the Four Freedoms , requested 2 @.@ 5 million sets of posters featuring the Four Freedoms for its war @-@ bond drive in early 1943 . 
 Rockwell bequeathed this painting to a custodianship that became the Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge , Massachusetts , and it is now part of the museum 's permanent collection . Rockwell lived in Stockbridge from 1953 until his death in 1978 . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 Freedom from Want is considered one of Rockwell 's finest works . Of the four paintings in the Four Freedoms , it is the one most often seen in art books with critical review and commentary . Although all were intended to promote patriotism in a time of war , Freedom from Want became a symbol of " family togetherness , peace , and plenty " , according to Linda Rosenkrantz , who compares it to " a ' Hallmark ' Christmas " . Embodying nostalgia for an enduring American theme of holiday celebration , the painting is not exclusively associated with Thanksgiving , and is sometimes known as I 'll Be Home for Christmas . The abundance and unity it shows were the idyllic hope of a post @-@ war world , and the image has been reproduced in various formats . 
 During the Cold War , Rockwell 's images affirmed traditional American values , depicting Americans as prosperous and free . Rockwell 's work came to be categorized within art movements and styles such as Regionalism and American scene painting . Rockwell 's work sometimes displays an idealized vision of America 's rural and agricultural past . Rockwell summed up his own idealism : " I paint life as I would like it to be . " 
 Despite Rockwell 's general optimism , he had misgivings about having depicted such a large turkey when much of Europe was " starving , overrun [ and ] displaced " as World War II raged . Rockwell noted that this painting was not popular in Europe : " The Europeans sort of resented it because it wasn 't freedom from want , it was overabundance , the table was so loaded down with food . " Outside the United States , this overabundance was the common perception . However , Richard Halpern says the painting not only displays overabundance of food , but also of " family , conviviality , and security " , and opines that " overabundance rather than mere sufficiency is the true answer to want . " He parallels the emotional nourishment provided by the image to that of the food nourishment that it depicts , remarking that the picture is noticeably inviting . However , by depicting the table with nothing but empty plates and white dishes on white linen , Rockwell may have been invoking the Puritan origins of the Thanksgiving holiday . 
 To art critic Robert Hughes , the painting represents the theme of family continuity , virtue , <unk> , and abundance without extravagance in a Puritan tone , as confirmed by the modest beverage choice of water . Historian Lizabeth Cohen says that by depicting this freedom as a celebration in the private family home rather than a worker with a job or a government protecting the hungry and homeless , Rockwell suggests that ensuring this freedom was not as much a government responsibility as something born from participation in the mass consumer economy . 
 One of the notable and artistically challenging elements of the image is Rockwell 's use of white @-@ on @-@ white : white plates sitting on a white tablecloth . Art critic Deborah Solomon describes this as " one of the most ambitious plays of white @-@ against @-@ white since Whistler 's Symphony in White , No. 1 " . Solomon further describes the work as " a new level of descriptive realism . Yet , the painting doesn 't feel congested or fussy ; it is open and airy in the center . Extensive passages of white paint nicely frame the individual faces . " 
 Jim Martin , positioned in the lower right , gives a coy and perhaps mischievous glance back at the viewer . He is a microcosm of the entire scene in which no one appears to be giving thanks in a traditional manner of a Thanksgiving dinner . Solomon finds it a departure from previous depictions of Thanksgiving in that the participants do not lower their heads or raise their hands in the traditional poses of prayer . She sees it as an example of treating American traditions in both sanctified and casual ways . Theologian David Brown sees gratitude as implicit in the painting , while Kenneth <unk> writes that Rockwell was mindful of the Last Supper and that the painting 's perspective echoes its rendition by Tintoretto . 
 = = Essay = = 
 Freedom from Want was published with an essay by Carlos Bulosan as part of the Four Freedoms series . Bulosan 's essay spoke on behalf of those enduring domestic socioeconomic hardships rather than sociopolitical hardships abroad , and it thrust him into prominence . As he neared his thirtieth birthday , the Philippine immigrant and labor organizer Bulosan was experiencing a life that was not consistent with the theme Rockwell depicted in his version of Freedom From Want . Unknown as a writer , he was subsisting as a migrant laborer working intermittent jobs . Post editors tracked down the impoverished immigrant to request an essay contribution . Bulosan rose to prominence during World War II when the Commonwealth of the Philippines , a United States territory , was occupied by Japan . To many Americans , Bulosan 's essay marked his introduction , and his name was thereafter well recognized . The essay was lost by The Post , and Bulosan , who had no carbon copy , had to track down the only draft of the essay at a bar in Tacoma . 
 Freedom From Want had previously been less entwined in the standard liberalism philosophies of the western world than the other three freedoms ( speech , fear , and religion ) ; this freedom added economic liberty as a societal aspiration . In his essay , Bulosan treats negative liberties as positive liberties by suggesting that Americans be " given equal opportunity to serve themselves and each other according to their needs and abilities " , an echo of Karl Marx 's " from each according to his abilities , to each according to his needs " . In the final paragraph of the essay , the phrase " The America we hope to see is not merely a physical but also a spiritual and intellectual world " describes an egalitarian America . In a voice likened to Steinbeck 's in works such as The Grapes of Wrath , Bulosan 's essay spoke up for those who struggled to survive in the capitalist democracy and was regarded as " haunting and sharp " against the backdrop of Rockwell 's feast of plenty . It proposed that while citizens had obligations to the state , the state had an obligation to provide a basic level of subsistence . Unlike Roosevelt , Bulosan presented the case that the New Deal had not already granted freedom from want as it did not guarantee Americans the essentials of life . 
 = = Pop culture = = 
 The painting was used as the 1946 book cover for Norman Rockwell , Illustrator , written during the prime of Rockwell 's career when he was regarded as America 's most popular illustrator . This image 's iconic status has led to parody and satire . New York painter Frank Moore re @-@ created Rockwell 's all @-@ white Americans with an ethnically diverse family , as Freedom to Share ( 1994 ) , in which the turkey platter brims over with health care supplies . Among the better known reproductions is Mickey and Minnie Mouse entertaining their cartoon family with a festive turkey . Several political cartoons and even frozen vegetable advertisements have invoked this image . 
 A snapshot at the end of the 2002 Walt Disney Feature Animation film Lilo & Stitch shows the movie 's characters , including some clearly alien life forms , seated at a Thanksgiving table that echoes the painting . The painting was also featured in the May 16 , 2012 , season 3 " Tableau Vivant " episode of the comedy series , Modern Family . Another well @-@ known imitation of the work is the cover art to Tony Bennett 's 2008 Christmas album , A Swingin ' Christmas ( Featuring The Count Basie Big Band ) . The parody includes all 13 members of Count Basie 's band . 
 = Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? = 
 " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " is the fifteenth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on February 21 , 1991 . In the episode , Grampa confesses that Homer has a half @-@ brother , whom Homer immediately tries to track down . He eventually discovers that his brother is Herbert Powell , a car manufacturer . Herb immediately starts to bond with Bart and Lisa , and he invites Homer to design his own car . Homer 's car design turns out to be a disaster , which causes Herb to become bankrupt . 
 The episode was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Wes Archer . American actor Danny DeVito provided the voice of Herb . The episode features cultural references to cars such as the Edsel , the Tucker Torpedo , the Ford Mustang , and the Lamborghini Cheetah . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 4 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on Fox the week it aired . Some fans were upset with the sad ending of the episode , and as a result the producers decided to write a sequel , " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " , in which Herb regains his fortune and forgives Homer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After watching the latest McBain film , Grampa suffers a mild heart attack . Thinking he might die , he is prompted to confess a long @-@ hidden secret : Homer has a half @-@ brother . Grampa explains that he met a carnival prostitute before marrying Homer 's mother , and they had a son that they left at the Shelbyville Orphanage . Determined to find his brother , Homer and his family go to the orphanage and find out that Grampa 's love child was adopted by a Mr. and Mrs. Powell and named Herbert . 
 Herbert Powell , who looks just like Homer , except he is taller , slimmer and has more hair , is the head of the automobile manufacturer Powell Motors in Detroit , which is in need of new ideas . He is very rich , but is unhappy not knowing who he is and where he comes from . He is overjoyed upon hearing of his half @-@ brother and invites the entire Simpson family to stay at his mansion . Bart , Lisa , and Maggie are enthralled by Herb 's wealthy lifestyle and kind personality , although Marge constantly worries about spoiling her kids . Herb then decides that Homer , being an average American , is the perfect person to design a new car for his company . 
 Homer is given entirely free rein in the design , but is at first too timid to voice an opinion , as Herb 's designers begin to design the car with their own ideas in mind . When Herb gets word of this , he gives Homer a pep talk that sends him back to the designers determined to build the car with all sorts of weird effects like bubble domes , tail fins and several horns that play " La Cucaracha " . At the unveiling of the new car , Herb is horrified to find that the car is a badly @-@ designed and hideously styled monstrosity that costs US $ 82 @,@ 000 , leaving Powell Motors bankrupt and out of business , while Herb 's mansion is foreclosed and he loses everything he ever worked for . As he departs Detroit on a bus , he angrily remarks to Homer that he would have been better off if he never met him and that as far as he is concerned , he has no brother . While Marge tries to console Homer , Lisa agrees with Herb and laments on his life before he discovered he was a " Simpson " . Grampa soon arrives and asks about Herb . Before Homer can even answer what happened , Grampa remarks to Homer that he knew " he 'd blow it " , and leaves in the cab he just arrived in , rather than getting in the car with the rest of the Simpson family . 
 While Homer drives the family home , Bart tells him that the car he built was great , and Homer becomes relieved to discover that at least one person liked it . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Wes Archer . Both Homer 's mother Mona Simpson and Herb make their first appearances on The Simpsons in the episode . Some fans were upset with the sad ending of the episode , and as a result the producers decided to write a sequel in which Herb would be given a kinder fate . The resulting episode , " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " , aired at the end of the third season . In that episode , Herb briefly settled in the Simpson household , despite his intense continuing antipathy toward Homer . Homer loaned Herb US $ 2000 , which Herb used to build an invention that translated infantile speech into comprehensible English , based on observations he made of Maggie . He proceeded to mass @-@ produce his new product and regained his fortune . He then bought each member of the family gifts and paid Homer back with a vibrating chair , along with his forgiveness . 
 The episode was recorded on August 13 , 1990 . The voice of Herb was provided by guest star Danny DeVito , an American actor who was suggested for the role by Simpsons executive producer Sam Simon . Bart 's voice actor , Nancy Cartwright , writes in her autobiography My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy that DeVito had to record his lines quickly because he had another appointment , so the staff focused on recording his scenes only instead of the whole episode at once . Cartwright was a fan of DeVito 's and recalls : " This morning , at the table read , I had just filled my plate with assorted fruits when Bonnie said to my backside , ' Nancy , I want to introduce you to ... ' and I turned and practically knocked over Danny DeVito , all four feet , eleven inches of him . How embarrassing ! " While recording the scenes , Cartwright stood directly across the room from DeVito , which she appreciated since she got to see him in action . She thought DeVito " threw his body and soul " into his performance . While the recording took part , animation director Archer scribbled down some of DeVito 's attitudes , gestures , and facial expressions on a piece of paper as he performed . In one scene of the episode , Herb tells Homer and the rest of the Simpson family to " [ make ] yourselves at home . We have a tennis court , a swimming pool , a screening room ... " Cartwright said of it : 
 This was obviously written with Danny in mind as I have no doubt that he actually has the aforementioned amenities in real life . He has earned his right to stand tall , and it wouldn 't have shocked me to see him spew attitude all over us if he wanted to . But he 's a hard worker and he concentrated on the job [ ... ] As the episode came to its climax , we discovered that all the material things in the world don 't mean as much to Herb as being with family . Somehow I just get the feeling that this part was tailor @-@ made with Danny , the family man , in mind . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The storyline of a controversially styled car causing the company to fail both echoes that of the Edsel and the Tucker Torpedo , as well as the later DMC 12 . The Edsel was a controversially styled car that bore the name of Henry Ford 's son , Edsel Ford , and is now considered one of the biggest car flops in history . Production of the Tucker Torpedo , which introduced many new features , was shut down amidst scandal and accusations of stock fraud in 1949 . Homer wants the horns of the car he is designing to play the traditional Spanish folk corrido " La Cucaracha " . The Pope shows up for the unveiling of Homer 's new car . Herb berates his staff for suggesting that the company name a new car " Persephone " after the Greek goddess of fertility in Greek mythology . Herb tells the staff , " People don 't want cars named after hungry old Greek broads ! They want names like ' Mustang ' and ' Cheetah ' — vicious animal names , " referencing the Ford Mustang and Lamborghini Cheetah cars . 
 The title of the episode is a reference the name of the fictional book " O Brother , Where Art Thou ? " in the 1941 film Sullivan 's Travels . Herb lives in a house that looks like American architect Frank Lloyd Wright 's house in Oak Park , Illinois , works in a studio that looks like the Taliesin school of architecture in Spring Green , Wisconsin , and his factory resembles the Johnson Wax Headquarters in Racine , Wisconsin , all three buildings designed by Wright . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " finished twenty @-@ sixth in the ratings for the week of February 18 – 24 , 1991 . With a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 4 , equivalent to approximately 14 @.@ 1 million viewing households , it was the highest @-@ rated show on Fox that week . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote that although it is " inevitable " that Homer 's car will be a disaster , the " joy of this episode is anticipating exactly what sort of disaster . " A member of the IGN staff wrote in a season two review that " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " is one of the " real winners to be found in the second season . " Dawn Taylor of The DVD Journal thought the most memorable line of the episode was Homer 's idea of the perfect car , " You know that little ball you put on the aerial so you can find your car in a parking lot ? That should be on every car ! And some things are so snazzy they never go out of style — like tail fins ! And bubble domes ! And shag carpeting ! " 
 DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson called the episode a solid episode and said that the introduction of Homer 's brother " could have been gimmicky , especially with a big @-@ name guest star like DeVito , but the concept fared nicely . " Jacobson added that he thought DeVito " brought spark to his part and made Herb fun and lively . The parts in which Homer developed his car were also hilarious and offered some of the show ’ s best bits . The program even showed some great little moments , like the hallmark Simpson five o 'clock shadow on infant Herb . " Jeremy Kleinman of DVD Talk said the episode " features another great guest voice , this time by Danny DeVito as the voice of Homer 's long lost brother Herb , who reenters Homer 's life and solicits his ' common man ' prospective in building a car . Once again , Homer 's sentimentality comes through . " Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked DeVito 's performance as the 10th best guest appearance in the show 's history . 
 On June 29 , 2013 , <unk> Motors debuted a real @-@ life version of " The Homer , " the car that was designed by Homer in this episode , at the 24 Hours of <unk> race in <unk> , California . 
 = Riya Sen = 
 Riya Sen ( born Riya Dev Varma ; 24 January 1981 ) is an Indian film actress and model . Riya , who comes from a family of actors including her grandmother Suchitra Sen , mother Moon Moon Sen and sister Raima Sen , began her acting career in 1991 as a child actress in the film <unk> . Her first commercial success in her film career was with Style , a 2001 Hindi low @-@ budget sex comedy directed by N. Chandra . Some of her other notable films include producer Pritish Nandy 's musical film , <unk> Beats ( 2003 ) in Hinglish , Shaadi No. 1 ( 2005 ) and Malayalam horror film <unk> ( 2005 ) . 
 Riya was first recognised as a model when she performed in Falguni Pathak 's music video Yaad Piya Ki Aane Lagi at the age of sixteen in 1998 . Since then , she has appeared in music videos , television commercials , fashion shows , and on magazine covers . Riya has worked as an activist and appeared in an AIDS awareness music video with the aim of dispelling popular myths about the disease . She also helped raise funds for pediatric eye @-@ care . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 Riya first appeared as a child artist in the film <unk> in 1991 , where she played the role of the young Pooja Bedi . At the age of 19 , she did National Film Awards winning director Bharathiraja 's Tamil film , Taj Mahal ( 2000 ) , which did not achieve commercial success . She was scheduled to make her Bollywood film debut in Love You <unk> , opposite actor Akshaye Khanna ; however , the film was stalled , and she finally made her debut in N. Chandra 's Style in 2001 . This low @-@ budget sex comedy was the first commercial success in over a decade for the director . A launch pad for Riya , cast in the female lead along with fellow @-@ newcomers , Sharman Joshi , Sahil Khan and <unk> Mudgal , the film pioneered a trend of commercial success for small budget films in India . Riya and the second female lead of the film were replaced by aspirant actresses Sonali Joshi and Jaya Seal in <unk> Me ' . 
 Her next success was <unk> Beats , a comedy revolving around the music of legendary composer R D Burman , which saw her playing a small and glamorous role alongside Shayan Munshi , Juhi Chawla , Rahul Bose , Rinke Khanna and Sanjay Suri . Produced by Pritish Nandy , publishing director of The Times of India , the film was made on a budget of Rs . 25 million ( US $ 525 @,@ 000 ) , marking the sixth in a row of small to medium budget films made by Pritish Nandy Communications ( PNC ) . Despite being part of a wave of offbeat films that mostly failed to make an impact at the box office , it drew public attention upon its release , which led to a commercial success among a restricted audience targeted by a selective release in twenty cities . It was one of the first films made in Hinglish , a mixture of Hindi and English . In 2005 , she starred in Shaadi No. 1 , which had no female lead . This comedy , based on the theme of modern marriage , was directed by David Dhawan , a renowned film director from this genre . 
 Although films like Style and <unk> Beats succeeded commercially , most of her later films have generated less revenue . A number of them remained unfinished . While many of her appearances have been item numbers and cameos , few of her leading roles have been in low @-@ budget films . Though she had small roles in Dil Vil Pyar <unk> ( 2002 ) , <unk> ( 2003 ) and Plan ( 2004 ) , attention was drawn to her item numbers in all three , especially the one in <unk> that featured her in a bubble @-@ bath . Besides this , she performed another item number in James ( 2005 ) on director @-@ producer Ram Gopal Varma 's behest , who has a history of casting aspirant actress @-@ models like Sameera Reddy , Isha Koppikar and <unk> Mitra in similar roles . Furthermore , she took part in a dance number for Sajid Khan 's Heyy Babyy ( 2007 ) that featured several mainstream Bollywood actresses . 
 = = = Non @-@ Hindi films = = = 
 Riya has , in addition to Hindi films , appeared in Bengali , Tamil , Telugu , Malayalam and English films . Her film career began in the earnest with Tamil films such as Bharathi Raja 's Taj Mahal , co @-@ starring <unk> <unk> in the male lead , and Manoj <unk> 's Good Luck , opposite <unk> . Both of the films failed commercially , and she had a brief reappearance in Tamil cinema only to perform in a dance number for N. <unk> 's <unk> . 
 Her first English language movie was It Was Raining That Night , a remake of the Bengali film Hei <unk> Raat , scripted by Sudeshna Roy and directed by Mahesh Manjrekar . In the film , she collaborated with mother Moon Moon Sen. Riya was slated to appear in Anjan Dutt 's Bengali @-@ English bilingual film The Bong Connection with her sister , but she was eventually dropped from the project and replaced by <unk> Rai Chaudhary . The two sisters were later cast together in director <unk> Sinha 's The Bachelor , a Bengali film that , as of 2008 , is yet to be finished . 
 Her most successful non @-@ Hindi film has been director Santhosh Sivan 's <unk> ( 2005 ) . The first Malayalam venture for both Riya and Sivan , was both a critical and commercial success . It won five Kerala State Film Awards and surfaced as one of the biggest Malayalam successes that year . She played the role of Bhama in the film , a village girl who is lured by <unk> , the evil magician portrayed by Manoj K. Jayan . In a song @-@ and @-@ dance sequence showing <unk> turning Bhama into a medium for demonic rituals , the choreographer Aparna <unk> made abundant use Kathakali movements . The use of Kathakali has been a high point in the resurgence of the classical dance form in other major Indian films as well , including Shaji Karun 's <unk> ( 1999 ) and Adoor Gopalakrishnan 's <unk> <unk> Nair ( 2005 ) . She made her Telugu Debut with Nenu <unk> <unk> ... ? , in which she was paired opposite Manoj Manchu . 
 In 2012 Sen won the Star Guide Award as best actress for her performance in <unk> . 
 = = Modeling career = = 
 Riya became a popular model when she appeared in numerous music videos for songs by popular singers , including Falguni Pathak 's Yaad Piya Ki Aane Lagi ( alternative title : <unk> Jo <unk> ) , Asha Bhosle 's <unk> Gira Re , Jagjit Singh and Bhosle 's Jab <unk> Tum and Kahin Kahin Se , Lata Mangeshkar , Bhonsle and Singh 's Dil Kahin Hosh Kahin , Sonu Nigam 's <unk> Hai Tere Liye and Shaan 's Sutta Maro . She shot for her first music video , Yaad Piya Ki Aane Lagi , at the age of sixteen . This led to her being identified primarily as a performer for music videos early in her career , an image she aimed to shed in 2005 . Riya has appeared on several magazine covers , including Femina , <unk> , Man 's World , <unk> , Savvy and Indian versions of Elle , Maxim and Cosmopolitan , as well as on the ramp of major fashion shows like Lakmé Fashion Week ( 2005 – 07 ) and Wills Fashion Week ( 2006 – 2007 ) . She participated in fashion shows along with her elder sister , Raima Sen. Besides modelling , Riya has ventured into the advertisement world as well . A high point of her modelling career came in 2006 , when she became the soft drink , Limca 's brand ambassador , replacing Deepika Padukone . Her other notable assignments include Colgate , Dabur Vatika , Reliance Industries , Cadbury Dairy Milk Chocolate , and Nirma . 
 In 2004 , she was featured partially nude in leading Indian photographer <unk> <unk> 's annual calendar , which is a major happening in the Indian glamour industry . According to Daboo , " Her mother saw it much later , after the calendar released . She thought it was too sexy , and Riya shouldn 't have done it . But the response to the photograph was superb . Riya was so thrilled that for her next ad campaign , she asked me to light her up like I did in this . " A career highlight for the model , it led to a three @-@ year contract with <unk> to feature her on his annual calendar . She is the only female face to be featured on the calendar for five consecutive years ( 2003 – 07 ) . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 Born on 24 January 1981 in Kolkata , West Bengal , Riya is the daughter of Moon Moon Sen , a former actress , and granddaughter of Suchitra Sen , a legend in Bengali cinema . Before leaving for Mumbai , she lived in Kolkata with her parents and sister Raima Sen , also an actress . Her father Bharat Dev Varma is a member of the royal family of Tripura . Her paternal grandmother , Ila Devi , was the princess of Cooch Behar , whose younger sister Gayatri Devi was the Maharani of Jaipur . Her paternal great @-@ grandmother Indira was the only daughter of Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III of Baroda . Riya 's maternal great @-@ grandfather Adinath Sen was a prominent Kolkata businessman , whose father <unk> Sen – a relative of former Union Law Minister Ashoke Kumar <unk> was the Diwan or a Minister of the Maharaja of Tripura . The sisters are credited on @-@ screen under their mother 's maiden name , although their official papers carry the surname Dev Varma . 
 Riya completed her schooling at Loreto House and Rani Birla Girls ' College ( a University of Calcutta affiliate ) , both in Kolkata . Thereafter , she studied at the National Institute of Fashion Technology , and she took up jewellery @-@ designing as a hobby . She designs most of the clothes that she wears in films and commercials . Riya is trained in Kathak and is still pursuing it under <unk> Chaudhury . She is taking kickboxing lessons and has completed Level I of the 5 levels in belly dancing . Riya entered the film industry through small @-@ time modelling assignments , commuting between Mumbai and Kolkata and travelling by public transport during her early career . After breaking into the film industry , she shifted from her mother 's house in Ballygunge Circular Road in south Kolkata to Mumbai . There she moved into the family house in Juhu , where she stays with her sister . 
 Riya has suffered a number of untimely incidents . During the filming of Shaadi No. 1 in France , she was knocked unconscious after being accidentally run over by a stuntman 's motorbike , but she was not seriously injured . Shortly before the release of <unk> , in which she starred opposite her boyfriend <unk> Patel , a 90 @-@ second video clip was circulated through Multimedia Messaging Services and the internet , showing the pair in compromising situations in a hotel bedroom . This was one of a number of controversies that erupted when celebrities were caught in similar situations using <unk> . Following this incident , the couple split up , although Riya denied that she was the girl in the MMS clip . One commentator claimed that the footage was an orchestrated publicity stunt . In 2007 , she underwent a brief detoxification session in Bangkok for addiction to chocolate . 
 = = = Public persona = = = 
 Riya 's on @-@ screen performances have established her as a bold youth icon in India . Since entering the film industry , she has gained attention for wearing a bikini in Shaadi No. 1 and sharing on @-@ screen kisses with co @-@ stars <unk> Patel in <unk> and Sharman Joshi in Style , respectively . Such performances garnered negative attention because of the relatively conservative outlook of Indian cinema at that time and her own statements about such practices . In 2008 , Riya Sen was also linked to author Salman Rushdie . Before becoming a film star , she had a reputation for partying , which started at the age of fifteen . Riya 's public persona is compared to her mother Moon Moon , who was seen as a sex symbol of her time , while her sister Raima is mostly compared to their grandmother Suchitra . 
 Although her film career has yet to achieve large @-@ scale success , Riya has generated considerable media attention . She was ranked ninth on Femina 50 Most Beautiful Women , published in the magazine 's September 2007 issue . She was a jury member for the 2008 Final of the Mr. India contest . Riya appeared in Haath Se Haath Mila , an HIV / AIDS awareness music video . She made charity appearances at McDonald 's India to raise money for paediatric eye @-@ care during World Children 's Week ( 14 – 20 November ) in 2003 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Faith Leech = 
 Faith Yvonne Leech ( 31 March 1941 – 14 September 2013 ) was an Australian freestyle swimmer who won a gold medal in the 4 × 100 – metre freestyle relay and bronze in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne . 
 A tall and lean swimmer known for her elegant technique , Leech started swimming as a child to build strength after a series of stomach disorders in her infancy . She quickly rose to prominence after breaking a string of age group records . In 1955 , she became the youngest swimmer to win an Australian title , claiming victory in the 110 @-@ yard freestyle at the age of 13 . She twice broke the Australian record in the 100 @-@ yard freestyle in late 1955 , thereby positioning herself as a leading contender for Olympic selection in 1956 . Leech 's preparation was hindered by illness , which forced her out of the 1956 Australian Championships , but she recovered to gain Olympic selection in both the 100 @-@ metre freestyle and the corresponding relay . Leech produced a late surge to take bronze in the individual event and seal an Australian trifecta , before swimming the second leg in the relay to help secure an Australian victory in world record time . Leech retired after the Olympics at the age of 15 ; she cited anxiety caused by racing as one of the main factors in her decision . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The second child of Johnstone <unk> and Jessie Francis Leech , Leech was born in the inland regional Victoria town of Bendigo in Australia . Leech was given the name Faith after her elder sister , who died from leukaemia at the age of two . As a delicate child , Leech had an aversion to eating in the first two years of her life , so her mother fed her in small hourly doses . Leech was twice rushed from the family home to a Melbourne ] hospital . Conventional medicine failed to rectify Leech 's dietary issues , so her mother put her on a fast for ten days at the recommendation of a naturopath . Leech was later placed on a diet of fruit , salad and vegetables , with an emphasis on beetroot juice and carrot juice . 
 Leech 's health improved , but she remained slight and frail , with a double curvature of the back . In an effort to help her gain muscle control and confidence , her parents sent her to start ballet dancing , before trying swimming , a sport her mother had competed in . Aged six , she was taken to swimming classes while the family holidayed in the Mornington Peninsula . Leech was coached by Gus Froelich , a former European swimming champion and coach of Australian Olympic medallist Judy @-@ Joy Davies . After a difficult start , Leech improved in her second year . At the Victorian Championships , she showed her potential by setting a state record of 17 @.@ 4 seconds ( s ) for the 25 @-@ yard freestyle in the under @-@ 8 division . The following year , she covered 25 yards in 15 @.@ 7 seconds , three seconds faster than Davies had done at the same age . She progressed steadily , sweeping the state age titles from nine to 13 , setting records that were often faster than those by boys of the same age . 
 Living in Bendigo and studying at Camp Hill Primary School , Leech could only travel three times a year to train with Froelich , so she relied heavily on dry land simulations , such as a pulley attached to the kitchen door . When she was 12 , she covered 110 yards in 1 minute ( min ) 7 @.@ 1 seconds , setting an unofficial world record for her age group . This achievement prompted her parents to rent an apartment in Melbourne , so she could train with Froelich on a regular basis . Leech moved there with her mother , while her father stayed to look after the family 's jewellery business . From 1954 , Leech attended St. Michael 's Girls ' Grammar School and trained with Froelich on a daily basis at the City Baths . The regular sessions paid off at the 1955 Victorian Championships ; Leech won the open 110- and 220 @-@ yard freestyle in times of 1 minute 7 @.@ 2 seconds and 2 minutes 39 @.@ 3 seconds , respectively , setting state records in both events . She proceeded to the Australian Championships , winning the 110 @-@ yard freestyle in 1 minute 7 @.@ 6 seconds to become the youngest ever winner of an open title at the age of 13 . Leech also won the national junior 110- and 220 @-@ yard events . 
 Leech 's regimen differed from most swimmers because Froelich was not an advocate of distance training , and designed shorter workouts for his students . She trained once a day , swimming no more than 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . Froelich did not push her to continue swimming laps when she felt tired , but emphasised an efficient stroke mechanism , which Leech implemented with a long and graceful arm action . Leech stood 180 <unk> ( 5 ' 11 " ) , but weighed only 57 kg ( 126 lb ) , with broad shoulders , slim hips and large hands and feet . Her long streamlined action prompted observers to call her a " flying fish " . Spinal problems caused by a back misalignment prevented her from using the optimal flip turn preferred by freestyle swimmers . Instead , she was forced to utilise the touch turn , which was slower . 
 = = National selection = = 
 In August 1955 , Leech set an Australian record of 1 minute 5 @.@ 0 seconds for the 110 @-@ yard freestyle , before lowering it to 1 minute 4 @.@ 8 seconds in October ; this prompted newspapers to trumpet her as a prospect for the Melbourne Olympics . She did not get an opportunity to defend her Australian title in 1956 because she was hospitalised with illness . Leech recovered in time to win the national age title in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle in a time of 1 minute 4 @.@ 6 seconds , just 0 @.@ 1 of a second outside Dawn Fraser 's world record . She then posted a time of 1 minute 4 @.@ 6 seconds to defeat Fraser and Lorraine Crapp at another meeting in the following month . 
 Leech was named in the Olympic squad and the Australian Swimming Union exempted her from travelling to the national training camp in Townsville so she could train with Froelich , who understood her special dietary requirements . She joined the squad for the final race trials in Melbourne in October before the Olympics . Fraser and Crapp were too strong in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with Leech finishing second and third in the two races . After combining with Fraser , Crapp and Margaret Gibson to break the world record for the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle relay , Leech was selected as one of Australia 's three entrants in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle entrants and one of six swimmers for the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle relay squad for the Olympics . 
 = = International career = = 
 Having arrived at the Olympics , Leech made her debut in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , an event in which she , Fraser and Crapp were regarded as the three strongest competitors , although the latter two were considered to be substantially stronger . All three won their heats . Leech won her heat by 1 @.@ 6 second in a time of 1 minute 4 @.@ 9 seconds . She was third fastest qualifier behind Fraser and Crapp , who were over 1 @.@ 5 seconds faster . Drawn in Fraser 's semifinal , Leech finished second in a time of 1 minute 5 @.@ 2 seconds , and was the third fastest qualifier for the final behind her compatriots . The semifinals followed a similar pattern to the heats , with Fraser and Crapp more than two seconds ahead of the six remaining qualifiers , who were separated by just 0 @.@ 8 of a second . 
 This pattern was repeated in the final . Fraser and Crapp were far ahead of the field , finishing in 1 minute 2 @.@ 0 seconds and 1 minute 2 @.@ 3 seconds , respectively . Leech overtook the United States ' Joan <unk> in the final 25 metres to take bronze in 1 minute 5 @.@ 1 seconds . The race for third place had been tight , with just 0 @.@ 7 of a second separating Leech and the final finisher . The youngest swimmer in the field , Leech had come through to claim the last podium position . Leech said that it was an emotional occasion , having seen the Australian men take a trifecta in the corresponding event on the previous night of racing . 
 As the Australians boasted the three fastest swimmers in the individual 100 @-@ metre freestyle event , they were clear favourites for the corresponding relay , especially as Fraser and Crapp were three seconds faster than all of the other swimmers . Leech was not assured of a place in the final quartet . In the heats , Fraser and Crapp were rested and the remaining four swimmers , Sandra Morgan , Elizabeth Fraser , Gibson and Leech qualified the team . Leech swam the second leg in 1 minute 5 @.@ 9 seconds , the second fastest of the Australians , thereby securing her position in the final along with Sandra Morgan , who recorded a time of 1 minute 5 @.@ 4 seconds . Australia won the second heat by 3 @.@ 1 seconds to qualify quickest for the final . They were 1 @.@ 8 and 2 @.@ 3 seconds faster than South Africa and the United States , respectively , both of whom swam in the first heat . The selection of Leech and Morgan generated controversy . They were Australia 's youngest swimmers and lacked experience at open level competition : Morgan had false started twice at the Australian Championships , and both had competed at national level only once . 
 In the final , Australia made a poor start ; Dawn Fraser almost stopped when she heard a second gunshot , believing that a false start had occurred . She finished her leg in 1 minute 4 @.@ 0 seconds , two seconds slower than the world record she set in the individual 100 @-@ metre final , but with a 2 @.@ 3 @-@ <unk> lead over the United States ' Sylvia <unk> . Nevertheless , this meant that Australia had a smaller than expected advantage . Swimming the second leg , Leech maintained the lead in the first 50 metres but faded in the second half and finished with a split of 1 minute 5 @.@ 1 seconds , with the Australian lead cut to 0 @.@ 9 of a second . Even with the advantage of a flying start , Leech 's leg was 0 @.@ 4 of a second slower than her fastest time during the individual competition . 
 Morgan was then overhauled and passed by Nancy Simons . With 25 metres left , Morgan took her head out of the water , and seeing the American a body length in front , dug deep to re @-@ establish a lead of 0 @.@ 7 of a second going into the final changeover . Crapp then extended the lead over the United States to 2 @.@ 2 seconds to secure gold in a world record time of 4 minutes 17 @.@ 1 seconds . The Melbourne Olympics was the only time that Australia has made a clean sweep of the 100 @-@ metre freestyle and the relay events for both men and women . This feat has only been equaled by the Americans at the 1920 Summer Olympics . The victory was Australia 's only victory in a female swimming relay at the Olympics until the 2004 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 After the 1956 Olympics , Leech retired from competitive swimming at the age of 15 . She was the first person from Bendigo to win an Olympic medal and was feted upon returning to her hometown . She regarded the experience of living in the Olympic Village as an unusual one ; in addition to the large crowds and the pressure of an Olympics , it was the first time that she had been away from the family home . Physicians endorsed her decision to retire , feeling that she became too nervous prior to races . Leech briefly worked in Melbourne as a model , before returning to Bendigo to help run the family jewelry business . She took a leading role in the business after the death of her father in the 1970s , before handing control of the firm to her son . 
 Leech married Mitch Tuohy and had two sons , Adam and Troy , whom she discouraged from entering competitive swimming , fearing the pressure and strain of racing . In retirement , she shunned competitive sport , but maintained her fitness and athleticism . She taught swimming to disabled children , some of whom represented Australia at the Special Olympics . 
 Leech continued her involvement with the Olympic movement through volunteer work . In July 1999 , Leech and Australia 's then @-@ oldest man and World War I veteran Jack Lockett were the guests of honor at a countdown celebration to the arrival of the Olympic Torch in Bendigo in July 2000 . In 2001 , she was diagnosed with a cancerous tumor in her neck , which was the size of a 50c coin . The tumor was removed in a seven @-@ hour operation followed by six weeks of radiotherapy treatment . This experience prompted her to become a volunteer for the Cancer Council and help those who were diagnosed with the disease . In February 2003 , Leech phoned quadruple Olympic champion Betty Cuthbert to comfort her during her recovery from a brain hemorrhage . In October 2006 , Leech combined with 1956 teammate John Devitt to launch " 50 Years On — The Melbourne Olympics " , a series of stamps from the Australia Post . 
 Leech is an inductee of the Path of Champions at Sydney Olympic Park Aquatic Centre . She died at her home on 14 September 2013 , aged 72 . 
 = Miles Away ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Miles Away " is a song by American singer and songwriter Madonna from her eleventh studio album , Hard Candy . It was first released as a promotional single in Japan , during June 2008 , as the theme for the Fuji Television Japanese drama , Change . The song was released by Warner Bros. Records , as the third and final single from the album on October 17 , 2008 , and was subsequently included on her compilation album , Celebration ( 2009 ) . Written by Madonna , Justin Timberlake , Timbaland and Nate " Danja " Hills , " Miles Away " is a melancholy electronic ballad , which according to Madonna is autobiographical , and is inspired by her then husband Guy Ritchie . Lyrically , the song deals with long @-@ distance relationships . 
 " Miles Away " has received positive appreciation from music critics for being a harmonious and meaningful ballad . It reached the top forty in most countries , while peaking inside the top ten in Czech Republic , Netherlands , Hungary , Japan , Slovakia and Spain . It became the best @-@ selling digital single of 2008 in Japan and won three trophies at the 23rd Japan Gold Disc Awards . In the United States , the song did not appear on the Billboard Hot 100 , but became Madonna 's seventh consecutive number @-@ one song on the Hot Dance Airplay chart , the most for any artist . The song has been performed by Madonna in the promotional tour for the Hard Candy album and the 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour , during the gypsy segment of the show . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 The music for " Miles Away " was the first song of Hard Candy to be composed . After hearing it , Madonna began singing and writing the lyrics for the song . In an interview with MTV , Madonna said that the song was inspired by her then husband , Guy Ritchie . " So many people have to deal with long @-@ distance relationships . It 's not easy . You have to work hard to make it work . " When asked if the song was autobiographical , she said : 
 Probably in many respects most of the songs [ on Hard Candy ] are [ autobiographical ] . But in more of an unconscious way . I don 't really think about telling personal stories when I 'm writing music . It just comes . And then a lot of times , six months later , eight months later , I go , " Oh , that 's what I wrote that song about . " But that 's when I play the song for lots of people and they all go , ' Oh , I can totally relate to that ' . In ' Miles Away ' I 'm tapping into the global consciousness of people who have intimacy problems . 
 In an interview with The Daily Telegraph Madonna further explained her inspiration behind the song and stated that " [ ' Miles Away ' is ] a song most people who work can relate to . If part of your work is travelling , and the person you are with also works and travels , you find yourself separated a lot and it can be very frustrating , [ ... ] I 'm American and he [ Ritchie ] is British , and I have to come to America all the time . [ ... ] Especially at the beginning of our relationship , that long @-@ distance thing was very frustrating . I also think it 's easier for people to say things from a distance ; it 's safer . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , " Miles Away " is a melancholy song with influences of ballad . The song carries the characteristic sound of Timbaland @-@ Timberlake production . Generally a downtempo , electropop song , " Miles Away " is accompanied by beats and backing vocals , which sing the lines " So far away " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , the song is set in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is written in the key of A minor ; Madonna 's voice spans from the high @-@ note of G3 to the low @-@ note of C5 . " Miles Away " has a basic sequence of Am – Em – G – F – Am – Em – G – F as its chord progression . 
 During recording , Timberlake sat down with Madonna and played a guitar riff composed by him , asking her how she wanted the song to sound . Madonna had " all these thoughts , riddles , poems , feelings , all written in huge notebooks , " Timberlake said , " and she kept handing them over . It was amazing , taking these little bits here and there and putting them together like a puzzle . " In this way , one of the ideas they connected was the universality of long @-@ distance relationships , the pain and heartache of which they were able to incorporate in " Miles Away " . After recording it , Timberlake commented that he had helped in creating a classic Madonna song , saying " I couldn 't do a song like that , [ ... ] I thought it was completely her . That was the trick . " 
 Lyrically , " Miles Away " deals with a relationship in trouble . Madonna said that it 's not difficult to express herself lyrically without giving away too much of her own privacy . Though Madonna has said before that the song is about Guy Ritchie , it has been speculated that lines from the lyrics of the song like : " You always have the biggest heart when we 're 6 @,@ 000 miles apart " , talked about the then failing marriage between Madonna and Guy . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Kerri Mason of Billboard called the song a harmonious ballad which , along with the single " 4 Minutes " , " might be some of her best work yet " . She also said that the song sounded familiar and compared it with Timbaland 's remixed version of the 2008 single " Apologize " . Caryn Ganz from Rolling Stone believed the song has a " melancholy pining " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic held the view that " the icy heartbreak of ' Miles Away ' " was " a worthy successor of Justin Timberlake 's 2006 single ' What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around ' " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said that the song has the typical ensuring quality of the production of Timbaland and Justin Timberlake , and bears the " pair 's distinct , modern stamp , making Hard Candy more than just a throwback to Donna Summer , Anita Ward , and Quaaludes . " Chris William from Entertainment Weekly made the observation that " Miles Away " was one of the " few actual confessions on this dance floor [ Hard Candy ] — enough to give the tabs speculative fodder . " He also compared the song to " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " . Jim Farber of the New York Daily News called it the album 's most beguiling tune . 
 Joan Anderman of The Boston Globe said that Madonna 's journey " from shameless seductress to thoughtful student produces nary a ballad , but some seriously bittersweet tones linger under the surface of these effusive tunes . " He also said that the song has a peace of mind quality in it . Joey Guerra from Houston Chronicle complemented the galloping beats and melodic backing vocals of " Miles Away " and said that it " sounds like late- ' 80s Madonna " . Alexis Petridis from The Guardian said Madonna sings " with the emotional engagement of a sat @-@ nav suggesting a right turn onto the A23 . " Miles Marshall Lewis of The Village Voice said that with " Miles Away " , Madonna comes closest " to reflecting on her married @-@ with @-@ children bliss ( or lack thereof ) . " Tom Young from the BBC called the song " genuinely good , genuinely felt " and compared it with some of Madonna 's other hit songs like " Holiday " , " Into the Groove " , " Ray of Light " and " Music " . Pete Paphides of The Times called the song " excellent " , and describing it as " a collision of acoustic downstrokes and feverishly jaunty rhythm that verges on reggae . " Thomas Hauner of PopMatters said , " At one point the album ’ s tediousness [ ... ] is such that one assumes Ashlee Simpson and Britney have already passed on the material because even they deemed it too redundant . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States " Miles Away " charted on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart and peaked at number two , kept from the top spot by the Pussycat Dolls single " I Hate This Part " . The song became Madonna 's ninth release to top the Hot Singles Sales chart , moving from number 31 to the top , and becoming the first number @-@ one song of the chart for 2009 . It debuted at number fifteen on the Hot Dance Airplay chart and reached number one in its December 27 , 2008 issue . This feat gave Madonna her seventh consecutive number one single on the Hot Dance <unk> chart making her the artist with the most Dance Airplay hits on this chart . On the issue dated December 20 , 2008 , " Miles Away " debuted and peaked at number 99 on the Pop 100 chart but dropped off it the following week . The song debuted at number 90 on the Canadian Hot 100 . The next week it dropped out of the chart , but made a re @-@ entry and climbed up to the top forty , peaking at number 23 for the issue dated December 13 , 2008 . 
 " Miles Away " achieved its strongest commercial reception in Japan , where it was used as the theme for Fuji Television drama Change . It was first released there as a promotional single in 2008 , following " 4 Minutes " . The song peaked at number seven on the Japan Hot 100 on May 30 , 2008 and stayed on the chart for 10 weeks . It became the best @-@ selling digital single of 2008 and received music certifications from the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) — platinum for 250 @,@ 000 PC downloads , and double platinum for 500 @,@ 000 master ringtones . At the 23rd annual Japan Gold Disc Awards , " Miles Away " won three awards as " Mastertone of the Year " , " Mobile Single Track of the Year " and " Online Single Track of the Year " . According to the RIAJ , the song has sold 681 @,@ 000 digital downloads as of April 2009 . 
 On November 30 , 2008 , the song entered the UK Singles Chart at number 39 , selling 5 @,@ 643 digital downloads . It dropped to number 68 the following week and then dropped off the chart . This ended a run of 63 consecutive top 20 UK hits for Madonna , stretching from 1984 through 2008 , as " Miles Away " became Madonna 's first ever single not to crack the UK top twenty . The track debuted at number 39 in the Dutch Top 40 on September 20 , 2008 and reached a peak of number ten on November 15 , 2008 . In Australia , the Thin White Duke Mix charted at number 28 on the Australian Club Charts . In Spain , " Miles Away " became her third consecutive single from Hard Candy to reach number one on the official singles chart . In other countries , " Miles Away " peaked within the top forty of the official charts . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Madonna performed " Miles Away " during the promotional tour for Hard Candy and the 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour . In the promotional tour , Madonna performed " Miles Away " as the second song from the six @-@ song set list . Madonna wore a black dress with black tails , track pants and high @-@ heeled , lace @-@ up boots . She performed the song standing in front of the microphone while playing acoustic guitar . The backdrops showed graphical images of airplanes leaving London and arriving in New York , boarding passes and passports as well as airports . 
 In the Sticky & Sweet Tour , " Miles Away " was performed during the gypsy segment of the show . Madonna wore a gypsy inspired Givenchy long cape , over a black dress , with pink colored ribbons around her neck . She also wore black stockings on her leg . Before starting the song she said , " This is for all who know the struggle of long @-@ distance relationships . I know you 're out there . " While dancers gathered and sat down in a circle around her , Madonna went up on a platform , started playing the acoustic guitar and encouraged the crowd to clap and sing along . The screens give another message to the song , showing a stream of world maps and passport stamps and the history as well as journey of gypsies travelling around the world , adding to the atmosphere of that particular section of the show . 
 After the breakup between Madonna and Guy Ritchie was announced , during a performance of " Miles Away " in the Boston leg of the tour , she dedicated the song to the " emotionally retarded " . She then added , " You may know a few people who fall into that category — God knows I do , " the line being a probable reference to Ritchie himself although this has not been confirmed . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – writer , vocals , producer 
 Timbaland – writer , producer 
 Justin Timberlake – writer , producer , background vocals , guitar 
 Danja – producer , writer 
 Demacio " Demo " Castellon – programming and mixing 
 Ron Taylor – protools 
 Dan Warner – guitar 
 Hannon Lane – additional keyboards 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Ralph Heikkinen = 
 Ralph Isaac “ Hike ” Heikkinen ( May 14 , 1917 – January 12 , 1990 ) was an All @-@ American guard for the University of Michigan Wolverines football team from 1936 @-@ 1938 . He was a consensus All @-@ American in 1938 , the first player from the Gogebic Range area of Michigan ’ s Upper Peninsula to win the honor . His exploits were widely reported in the Upper Peninsula press , where he became a local hero . He played professional football for the NFL Brooklyn Dodgers in 1939 . 
 From 1940 @-@ 1944 , he was the line coach for the Virginia Cavaliers football team while attending the University of Virginia School of Law at the same time . After practicing law in New York for a time , he spent a year as a line coach and law professor at Marquette University in 1947 . After leaving Marquette , Heikkinen worked as executive secretary and attorney for Studebaker @-@ Packard Corporation . He later joined the legal staff at General Motors ( GM ) , retiring in 1978 after 20 years of service in GM ’ s legal department . Heikkinen also helped initiate and implement a corporation @-@ wide alcohol treatment and education program at General Motors . 
 = = Youth in the Upper Peninsula = = 
 Born in Hancock , Michigan in Michigan 's Upper Peninsula , Heikkinen was the son of Finnish immigrants , and grew up in Ramsay , Michigan , a heavily Finnish American community in the Gogebic Range area . 
 He attended A.D. Johnston High School , in Bessemer , Michigan from 1933 @-@ 1935 . As a junior in 1933 , Heikkinen was elected president of the student council . Heikkinen was a superior student who graduated with high honors student , and finished third in his high school class academically . When a new library opened in Bessemer in 1934 , Heikkinen was the first person to check out a book , A.B. <unk> ’ s “ Three English Comedies . ” He was also an officer in the school 's ROTC program , and received honors for his participation in the high school ’ s military , athletics and student affairs programs . 
 Despite weighing only 145 pounds ( 66 kg ; 10 st 5 lb ) , Heikkinen won a spot on his high school football team ; his high school coach Robert Reihsen said he won a spot due to his aggressive play . Local papers reported that Heikkinen ’ s line play during high school was marked by hard tackling and blocking . During his junior season in 1934 , Coach Reihsen recalled Heikkinen played every minute of every game . Coach <unk> 's team was known as the “ Speed Boys , ” and gave up only two points in the first four games , outscoring opponents , 65 – 2 . In November 1934 , Coach Reihsen took Heikkinen to Minneapolis to attend his first Big Ten football game , the Little Brown Jug match between Michigan and Minnesota . Reihsen recalled that , after the game , Heikkinen said : “ Some day I ’ m going to play in this stadium . ” 
 = = University of Michigan = = 
 = = = Heikkinen won an academic scholarship = = = 
 In July 1926 , Heikkinen won an academic scholarship to the University of Michigan . The Bessemer Herald noted : “ It was no surprise to learn that Ralph Heikkinen of Ramsay has been awarded a University of Michigan Alumni scholarship , although only 50 high school seniors in the state can win the honor each year . . . Ralph is a very good student ; he ranked third in scholastic standings in a class of 128 . . . Heikkinen was also an outstanding guard on the <unk> football team for two years and he intends to try out for the Wolverine freshman squad this fall . ” The scholarship was renewed from year to year and covered Heikkinen ’ s tuition . 
 To supplement his income , Heikkinen worked eight @-@ hour days in a Fort Dearborn plant during his freshman year . The president of the Gogebic Range U @-@ M Alumni Club later recalled that Heikkinen won his scholarship by passing a competitive examination . Of those receiving scholarships , Heikkinen was credited with the finest all around record of any undergraduate among the alumni scholarship students . 
 = = = Heikkinen ’ s diminutive stature = = = 
 When Heikkinen graduated from high school , he weighed only 155 pounds ( 70 kg ; 11 @.@ 1 st ) and was thought too light to play Big Ten football . His height was reported variously as 5 feet 8 inches ( 1 @.@ 73 m ) , 5 feet 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 75 m ) , and 5 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) . Heikkinen was described by the Detroit News as a “ pigmy ” compared to Michigan ’ s last great guard , Albert <unk> , who was 6 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 98 m ) and more than 250 pounds ( 110 kg ; 18 st ) . He was also described as “ the stock atom , ” and the “ pint @-@ sized ” lineman . But Heikkinen viewed his size as an asset : “ My size had been a help rather than a hindrance . It is easier for a small man to pull out of the line and run interference than a big one . I had no trouble out @-@ charging big men ; it was the small men who gave me all the trouble . ” 
 = = = Freshman and sophomore years = = = 
 Heikkinen did not excel on the freshman team , but was invited by Coach Harry Kipke to spring practice in 1936 to try out for the varsity team . In April 1936 , the people back in Bessemer gave Heikkinen a vote of confidence ; the school board approved a $ 55 payment to Heikkinen as “ advance payment ” for some form of employment to be given “ during the coming summer months . ” 
 However , Heikkinen did not win a starting spot on the 1936 team and was not even ranked among the top sophomore guards on the team . At the end of the 1936 season , the highest praise Coach Kipke could muster was to call him “ one of the better defensive linemen on the squad . ” Assistant coach Bennie Oosterbaan said Heikkinen had “ the right attitude , ” and coach Wally Weber described him as “ a hard worker . ” However , the Michigan Daily noted : “ The only weakness of the Ramsay boy is his lack of speed . Speedy guards are needed to pull out of the line and lead the interference , and Heikkinen hasn ’ t quite shown that he is fast enough to move in Big Ten competition as yet . ” 
 = = = Role of Hunk Anderson = = = 
 The first person on the Michigan staff to believe in Heikkinen was <unk> “ Hunk ” Anderson . A fellow native of the Upper Peninsula ( Tamarack City , Michigan ) , Anderson played guard at Notre Dame from 1919 – 1921 and was Knute Rockne ’ s successor as Notre Dame ’ s head coach in 1931 . In 1937 , Anderson became Michigan ’ s line coach , and came to the conclusion during spring practice that Heikkinen was Michigan ’ s best football player . After a strong showing in spring practice , Heikkinen “ hardened up ” over the summer working at the Wakefield Iron . 
 = = = 1937 season = = = 
 In 1937 , Heikkinen won the starting job at right guard , but the team finished 4 – 4 , and were outscored by opponents 110 – 54 . They were soundly defeated by Minnesota , 39 – 6 , and Ohio State , 21 – 0 . 
 Heikkinen was the one bright spot in the Wolverines ’ 1937 season . In early November 1937 , Hunk Anderson described Heikkinen as “ the smallest but best lineman in the Michigan forward wall . ” Anderson continued in his praise for Heikkinen : “ Heik has shown the stuff in both of our tough games against Minnesota and Northwestern . . . Minnesota didn ’ t split our guards more than twice during the game . Heik was responsible for a lot of that . My conception of a good guard is one that stops anything that comes his way on defense and leads the blocking on offense . Heik has done just that . When we have the ball he is our fifth man in the backfield . He pulls out most of our plays and bowls over the opposition . We have made most of the gains through the line over his position . ” 
 Heikkinen ’ s interception of a forward pass proved to be the key break in a 7 – 0 win over Penn . He also blocked kicks for points after touchdown in one @-@ point wins over Illinois ( 7 – 6 ) and Chicago ( 13 – 12 ) . Without Heikkinen ’ s big plays against Penn , Illinois and Chicago , the Wolverines likely would have been 1 – 5 – 2 instead of 4 – 4 . Even in a 21 – 0 loss to Ohio State , Heikkinen blocked two kicks . 
 Described at the end of the season as Kipke ’ s “ pride and joy , ” Heikkinen averaged 50 minutes a game in 1937 , and was the only Michigan player selected to the All @-@ Big Ten team ( UP first team ; AP second team ) . He was also voted by his teammates as the team ’ s Most Valuable Player , an honor never before bestowed on a junior . And Hunk Anderson noted , “ if Michigan ’ s record had been better , Heikkinen would have made the All @-@ America . There isn ’ t a better guard in the country ; I don ’ t know another as good . Wait til next year . ” 
 A Detroit newspaper wrote that Heikkinen was the surprise of the 1937 season . “ Heikkinen has no spectacular record as a high school player to show . He was a reserve guard last season and really just started to show up in spring practice this year . ” The Bessemer Herald reported on the impressive turnaround of the first player from the Gogebic Range to be named All @-@ Big Ten : “ Heikkinen , one of the quietest and least boisterous men on the Michigan grid squad , has suddenly shot from obscurity into the Western Conference hall of fame . . . From a lowly bench warmer last year , ‘ Hike ’ became one of the most consistent first @-@ stringers this season . He played many if not more minutes than any other member of the squad . ” 
 After the team ’ s 4 – 4 finish , Michigan dismissed Harry Kipke as head coach . Hunk Anderson , described by Heikkinen as the “ greatest line technician in football today , ” also resigned as line coach . Asked about rumors that players did not like Kipke , Heikkinen said those reports were probably originated by disgruntled players who did not make the squad or were in other ways dissatisfied . However , just over a year later , in February 1939 , Heikkinen led the opposition when Kipke ran for the University ’ s Board of Regents and campaigned actively for Kipke ’ s opponent . 
 = = = Political campaigning in 1938 = = = 
 Heikkinen majored in political science and did political organization work for the Young Republicans during the summer of 1938 in Gogebic and <unk> Counties . He was the Upper Peninsula field representative for gubernatorial candidate Harry S. Toy in 1938 , traveling more than 16 @,@ 000 miles over the course of the summer . 
 = = = 1938 season = = = 
 In 1938 , with Heikkinen returning at guard , a new coach in Fritz Crisler , and sophomores Forest Evashevski and Tom Harmon joining the varsity squad , the Wolverines began to turn things around . They finished with a 6 – 1 – 1 record and were ranked # 16 in the final AP poll . 
 Harmon and Evashevski made immediate contributions , but Heikkinen was once again voted the team ’ s Most Valuable Player . Having been the first junior to win the award in 1937 , he became the first player to receive the award twice in 1938 . Though line coach Hunk Anderson did not return in 1937 , Michigan hired Clarence “ Biggie ” Munn to replace him . Munn was a unanimous All @-@ American guard for Minnesota in 1931 . Under the new coaching staff of Crisler and Munn , Heikkinen became one of the best college football players in the country . After the 1938 season , Heikkinen credited Crisler and Munn for his development . Heikkinen noted that Michigan linemen were taught not to depend on sheer strength . " We have not been taught to rear up and hurl back the opposition . We have not been taught to roll it back by power . We have been schooled to out @-@ block and out @-@ trick the other side . Our method is to be alert . We try to catch the other fellows off balance . " 
 Michigan won the first game of the season against Michigan State , 14 – 0 , and Heikkinen drew attention for playing 59 of 60 minutes in the game . The team 's only loss was a close 7 – 6 defeat to Minnesota in the third game of the season . 
 The fourth game of the season was a 45 – 7 win over Yale . An Ann Arbor newspaper reported that Gerald R. Ford , former Michigan center then serving as a scout for Yale , “ tried to feed Hike a line . . . on how impossibly inferior ” Yale ’ s team would be . According to the report , Heikkinen , “ in his typically pungent manner , nipped Ford ’ s eulogies in the bud with some poignant remarks on who was trying to kid who and how . ” 
 The 1938 Northwestern game ended in a scoreless tie . Heikkinen led a goal @-@ line stand that preserved the tie . Northwestern reached the 11 @-@ yard line on a 51 @-@ yard pass play . A penalty took the ball to the six @-@ yard line . On first down , they drove to the five , then to the two , and then to the one @-@ yard line for a first down . On first down with a yard to go , Heikkinen stopped Northwestern a foot short of the goal line . Heikkinen called time out and encouraged the players when the ball was on the one @-@ foot line , and the Michigan team kept the Wildcats from the end zone in an impressive goal @-@ line stand . In the Ohio State game , his former coach Anderson said : “ He was the fifth man in the Ohio backfield . He pulled out of the line to lead the Michigan interference , blocked , went down under punts , smeared Ohio running plays and what not ! ” 
 Detroit News sports editor H.G. Salsinger wrote : “ He was Michigan ’ s outstanding player for the last two years . He was probably the best offensive guard Michigan ever had , and fitted perfectly into the new Michigan running attack . Fast and powerful , Heikkinen frequently blocked out two defense players . Heikkinen was the fastest charger in the Michigan line . He outmaneuvered opponents . On defense it was impossible to gain through his position , and he had a way of jamming opposing lines and making holes so that his secondary could break through and stop the ball carrier . ” 
 Ann Arbor newspaper writer , Bud Benjamin , wrote about Heikkinen : “ If ever a player deserved national recognition it is the brilliant Ralph Heikkinen , 180 pounds of inspired dynamite in a great Michigan line . . . . He came out of a small town in northern Michigan , Hike , did , a sandy haired , extremely reserved Finnish boy with an irrepressible urge to play football . ” He played between 50 and 60 minutes of every game in 1937 and 1938 and not once was a timeout called on his account or a substitution made for him due to injury . “ He was on his feet – active , explosive , dynamic <unk> the time . ” 
 = = = Selection as an All @-@ American = = = 
 Heikkinen was chosen as a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American by more than 25 sports magazines , newspapers and wire services , including the Associated Press , the United Press , Grantland Rice for Collier 's Weekly , the Newspaper Enterprise Association Service , the New York Sun , and Chesterfield Cigarettes as selected by Eddie Dooley . 
 Heikkinen received 226 points in the United Press poll , the fifth highest total in the balloting . The UP noted : “ He dominated the voting for guards on ballots from the East , West , South and North . He has a trick on defense of jamming the opposition line and making a hole for a teammate to go through and get the ball carrier . On offense he excels in swinging out to lead the interference and often gets in two blocks on a play . Motion pictures of the Ohio State @-@ Michigan game show Heikkinen jamming opposing linesmen back from one to three yards on almost every play . He is so good that professional teams have approached him , but he wants to study law . ” 
 In announcing its selection , the Associated Press noted : “ An all @-@ Big Ten guard for two years , Heikkinen tears down under punts , pulls out of the line to lead interference and tackles hard . He is Michigan ’ s first All @-@ American in five years . A 60 @-@ minute performer , seldom fooled by intricate maneuvers , Heikkinen is regarded by Coach Fritz Crisler as the finest guard he has ever seen . ” The NEA said : “ Ralph Heikkinen , Michigan senior and Ramsay , was small as guards go . He stood only five feet eight and weighed 182 pounds but he was the fastest guard in the Big Ten . . . one of the best Fritz Crisler ever saw . He had a great offensive charge . A corking blocker , especially when pulling out of the line , he was chosen as the Wolverines ’ most valuable player in 1937 . ” Another reporter described Heikkinen as “ Michigan ’ s 182 @-@ pound dynamo , ” who was “ fast as a halfback , and possessing the quickest charge his coach , Fritz Crisler , has seen . ” 
 In addition to the All @-@ American honors , Heikkinen finished second in voting for the Chicago Tribune Silver Football trophy as the Big Ten Conference ’ s Most Valuable Player . He was also chosen to play in the East @-@ West Shrine Game in San Francisco on January 1 , 1939 . And in July 1939 , Heikkinen was elected with 846 @,@ 943 votes ( fourth highest vote count of any player ) to play in the annual game between the College All @-@ Stars and the NFL New York Giants . The Ironwood Daily Globe boasted that residents of Michigan ’ s sparsely populated Gogebic Range had accounted for 25 @,@ 000 of Heikkinen ’ s votes . 
 = = = Heikkinen the poet = = = 
 Many of the articles reporting on Heikkinen ’ s All @-@ American selection focused on his academic performance and on his love of poetry . While at Michigan , Heikkinen was also the president of the undergraduate “ M ” club in 1938 and president of U @-@ M ’ s senior honor society , “ <unk> . ” Detroit News sports editor H.G. Salsinger wrote that Heikkinen “ writes poetry , and one of his poems appeared in a literary publication in 1938 . ” The Associated press noted that Heikkinen was “ a high @-@ ranking student whose hobby is poetry ” An Ann Arbor paper wrote : “ He ’ s extremely intelligent , dabbling in such fields as creative writing , drama , and poetry with considerable vim and no little skill during his spare moments . He is completely unassuming , unusually quiet , and above all a real gentleman . " In August 1939 , Heikkinen was hired by a magazine to write a story on college football . Newspapers reported that Heikkinen was “ collecting dividends on the reputation he made as a poet and writer as an undergraduate . ” In 1937 , Heikkinen was the subject of an article titled , “ But He ’ s No Sissy . ” The articles noted that Heikkinen “ adheres strictly to a liquid diet ” and drank a full quart of milk after every game as part of a special diet due to a stomach disorder . 
 = = = Hero of the Upper Peninsula = = = 
 Heikkinen was the first player from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan to win All @-@ Big Ten honors in 1938 , and he topped that in 1939 as the region ’ s first All @-@ American . His exploits were followed closely both during the summer and during the football season in the Gogebic Range ’ s newspapers , The Ironwood Daily Globe and The Bessemer Herald . When he was named an All @-@ American by the AP , it was front page news , and the sports sections ran banner headlines . The Ironwood Daily Globe reported : “ Football honors are coming so fast for Ralph I. Heikkinen . . . that it ’ s hard for range fans who have watched Ralph ’ s progress on the gridiron to keep up with the latest developments . The latest and greatest tribute came today with the releasing of the Associated Press all @-@ America team on which he was named for a guard position . Heikkinen has twice been named on the all @-@ conference eleven and twice selected as Michigan ’ s most valuable player , the latter award never before having gone to a Michigan man two years in a row . There remains only one greater honor possible – that of being named to Grantland Rice ’ s official all @-@ America team . ” 
 When he was named to the Grantland Rice team the following week , the Globe reported : “ Heikkinen ’ s exceptional analytical ability on defense and his near @-@ perfect blocking on offense this last season has gained him a position on every major all @-@ star team chosen this year . ” On December 8 , 1938 , the Globe announced that a banquet honoring Heikkinen would be held with “ Hike ” himself traveling north to attend . 
 In the week leading up to the banquet , the Globe published an interview with “ Hike ” ’ s high school football coach , Robert Reihsen . On the day of the banquet , the Bessemer Herald ran an editorial urging the city of Ramsay to name a street or park in Heikkinen ’ s honor : “ Ramsay has never received the national publicity that its native son , Ralph Heikkinen , has brought to it this fall . By newspapers , magazines and radio the Gogebic range ’ s first All @-@ American football star has brought renown to himself , his home town and his school . If Ramsay has any street , public building , park or athletic field , that are now without title , or the names of which can be changed , why not dedicate something to Ralph Heikkinen who has so nobly proved himself to be Bessemer township ’ s leading citizen for 1938 ? Other communities have done as much for their heroes . As far as the University of Michigan is concerned Heikkinen has already written his name forever on the athletic scroll of honor . He takes his place with a long line of All @-@ American Wolverines . They are never forgotten at the Ann Arbor institution . ” 
 At the testimonial dinner , Heikkinen ’ s six @-@ year @-@ old brother , Donald Heikkinen , was asked to name the greatest football player in the world and responded , “ Ralph . ” Donald offered that Ralph was best because he used “ proper technique , ” and found it difficult to choose his older brother ’ s greatest play because “ there were so many of them . ” Referring to the Ohio State game , Donald noted , “ Ralph crushed through and smeared ‘ em . ” Heikkinen , or “ Hike ” as he was known to <unk> , was presented with a purse of $ 36 representing the No. 36 he wore for Michigan . 
 Heikkinen ’ s high school coach was the “ toastmaster , ” and the local school superintendent , E.J. <unk> , said that Heikkinen is “ not only all @-@ American , he ’ s all man and all gentleman . ” A nine @-@ piece orchestra played , and led the community in singing . And the local American Legion post presented him with a medal . The Bessemer Herald reported that “ friends and admirers of Ralph Heikkinen . . . came from all parts of the Upper Peninsula last night to pay tribute to the football star . ” The following day , he spoke to students in the assembly room of Bessemer high school where the school band gave a concert and Heikkinen was “ given a boisterous welcome by the students . ” 
 The Upper Peninsula press continued to report on Heikkinen ’ s every move , as he returned home shortly before Christmas , before heading west to play in the East @-@ West Shrine Game . On his departure for California , The Bessemer Herald said : “ Ralph has made every major All America team in the nation this year . . . . Our nation has had many great men to emulate . The children of the Ramsay school not only have these in common with all others , but we have our own local hero who has gained national repute as a gentleman , scholar and last , but not least , a great athlete . To say that we are proud of Ralph is putting it mild . We feel that we are very honored to have had him as a student of the Ramsay school . ” 
 The celebration resumed again in January 1939 when Michigan coach Fritz Crisler accompanied Heikkinen back to the Upper Peninsula for another banquet . Filmed highlights of Michigan ’ s 1938 season , featuring Heikkinen , were shown at the banquet . Even in April 1939 , Heikkinen ’ s appearances at banquets in the Upper Peninsula drew large crowds and wide press coverage . 
 In 1954 , Heikkinen was one of the twenty initial inductees into the Gogebic Range Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = = Professional football = = 
 Heikkinen signed on as an assistant coach at Michigan in the spring 1939 initially expressing ambivalence about playing professional football . Then , on September 9 , 1939 he had accepted an offer to play with the Brooklyn Dodgers of the NFL . Heikkinen had previously refused offers to play pro football , but the persistence of coach <unk> Clark , and Crisler ’ s assurance that a coaching job would be open for him in 1940 , persuaded Heikkinen to try professional football . Heikkinen noted on signing , though , that he would definitely return to law school in 1940 . It was reported that Heikkinen signed a contract for “ at least $ 175 a game ” with the Dodgers . Heikkinen was cut by the Dodgers after playing only three games . 
 When Heikkinen was released , one writer noted that Heikkinen “ was perhaps the biggest disappointment among the highly <unk> players who came up this season . ” Brooklyn ’ coach Clark noted that an “ All @-@ American man doesn ’ t mean a thing to us ” in the NFL . Clark said : “ Heikkinen weighed only 183 pounds and was pretty light for our league . He reported late and didn ’ t give himself a fair chance to show me what he could do . I just didn ’ t think he was in the right physical shape and mental shape . 
 The Upper Peninsula press disputed accounts that Heikkinen had not cut it in the NFL . Heikkinen ’ s friends said that Heikkinen asked for his own release in order to accept the opportunity to study law and coach football at the University of Virginia . One Upper Peninsula paper reported : “ Had Heikkinen wanted to , he still could be a member of the Brooklyn squad . However , the Dodgers moguls co @-@ operated with Ralph and released him from his contract when he informed them of the Virginia offer . ” 
 = = Later years = = 
 In October 1939 , Heikkinen was hired as the line coach at the University of Virginia , where he also studied law . An influential alumnus of Virginia interviewed Heikkinen when the Dodgers played the Detroit Lions and was instrumental in securing Heikkinen ’ s position with Virginia . Heikkinen worked as Virginia ’ s line coach from 1940 – 1944 and graduated first in his class from the University of Virginia School of Law in 1944 . Fellow Michigan All @-@ American , <unk> Slaughter , was also a Virginia coach with Heikkinen . During World War II , in 1943 , Slaughter and Heikkinen turned from coaching to teaching aerial navigation at the University of Virginia Flight Preparatory School . 
 On March 3 , 1941 , Heikkinen married Margaret Jackson , in Davenport , Iowa . In March 1947 , <unk> was appointed line coach at Marquette University in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . Heikkinen was line coach under head coach Frank Murray at Virginia and joined Murray again at Marquette . In between the stints at Virginia and Marquette , Heikkinen was a New York attorney . While serving as Marquette ’ s line coach , Heikkinen also carried a full teaching schedule as an assistant law professor on the faculty of Marquette law school . Heikkinen only stayed one year at Marquette , returning to the practice of law in New York in 1948 . 
 After leaving Marquette , Heikkinen worked as executive secretary and attorney for the Studebaker @-@ Packard Corporation . He later joined the legal staff at General Motors , retiring in 1978 after 20 years of service in GM ’ s legal department . Heikkinen helped initiate and implement a corporation @-@ wide alcohol treatment and education program at GM . 
 In 1987 , Heikkinen was inducted into the University of Michigan Hall of Honor . He died of heart failure in Pontiac , Michigan at age 72 . He was survived by his wife , Margaret Helen Heikkinen , and six children , Ralph Heikkinen , Jr . , James Heikkinen , Peggy <unk> , Elizabeth Heikkinen , Linda Heikkinen , and Pamela <unk> . His funeral was held at St. Paul Methodist Church in Bloomfield Hills , Michigan . 
 = 2008 Chinese Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 Chinese Grand Prix ( formally the V Sinopec Chinese Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 19 October 2008 at the Shanghai International Circuit , Shanghai , China . It was the 17th and penultimate race of the 2008 Formula One season . The 56 @-@ lap race was won by Lewis Hamilton for the McLaren team after starting from pole position . Ferrari driver Felipe Massa finished second , and Kimi Räikkönen was third in the other Ferrari . 
 Hamilton , the eventual Drivers ' Champion , led the Championship going into the race , and started from pole position alongside Räikkönen . Second in the Drivers ' Championship , Massa began from third , next to Fernando Alonso of Renault . The first three drivers retained their positions into the first corner , but Alonso was passed by Hamilton 's McLaren teammate Heikki Kovalainen . Alonso , however , was able to regain the place midway through the first lap . Over the course of the race , Hamilton extended a considerable lead over the two Ferraris . Massa passed Räikkönen with seven laps remaining , to improve his chances of surpassing Hamilton 's points tally at the final race in Brazil . 
 The result extended Ferrari 's lead over McLaren in the Constructors ' Championship from seven to 11 points . Third @-@ placed in the Drivers ' Championship , Robert Kubica 's sixth place at the Grand Prix eliminated his hopes of winning the Championship , and reduced his lead over fourth @-@ placed Räikkönen to six points . Nelson Piquet Jr. scored his last ever world championship points at this race . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by 20 drivers , in ten teams of two . The teams , also known as " constructors " , were Ferrari , McLaren @-@ Mercedes , Renault , Honda , Force India , BMW Sauber , Toyota , Red Bull Racing , Williams and Toro Rosso . As is normal for a Formula One race , Bridgestone brought two different tyre compounds to the race ; the softer of the two marked by a single white stripe down one of the grooves . 
 Prior to the race , McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton led the Drivers ' Championship with 84 points , and Ferrari driver Felipe Massa was second with 79 points . Behind them in the Drivers ' Championship , Robert Kubica was third with 72 points in a BMW Sauber , and Massa 's Ferrari teammate Kimi Räikkönen was fourth with 63 points . Kubica 's teammate Nick Heidfeld was fifth with 56 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading with 142 points , seven points ahead of their rivals McLaren – Mercedes , whom they had overtaken at the previous race . BMW Sauber were third with 128 points . In the battle for fourth place , Renault had 66 points , now 16 points ahead of Toyota . 
 At the previous race in Japan , the gap between Hamilton and Massa had closed by two points . Hamilton had started from pole position ahead of Räikkönen , but had a poor start . At the first corner he braked late , and forced Räikkönen wide . He was later given a penalty , which dropped him down the field from where he was unable to recover to a points scoring position . Massa also received a penalty for a collision with Hamilton on the second lap , but was able to finish in seventh position . The British press described Hamilton 's move as " impetuosity and untamed aggression " , saying that the McLaren driver would have to adopt a more conservative race strategy in China . For his part , Hamilton said that he would be taking no risks : 
 We will approach it the same as always . We won 't be taking risks , but we will be attacking as much as we can to win the race . If I 'm in a position where we are looking to gain good points , and it 's an unnecessary risk to make a manoeuvre , then I won 't be doing that . It 's always important to be fast , but it 's not necessarily the fastest car that wins . Being fast is great for positioning , and maybe getting out in front , and then afterwards trying to stay calm . 
 With ten points on offer for the winner of the Grand Prix , it was possible that Hamilton would clinch the Championship in Shanghai . Massa remained confident , saying that the race was just like any other : " You have a pressure but it is a different pressure , but you have always the pressure on your side . " 
 Renault driver and two @-@ time Championship winner Fernando Alonso created controversy when he said " if I can help , I will help Massa . " Alonso 's departure from McLaren after driving for the British team in 2007 had been acrimonious , and Alonso 's dislike for the rookie Hamilton was well documented . Talking about Hamilton 's penalty in Japan , Alonso said " I don 't know what he did , but it 's good he 's punished anyway . " Hamilton refused to be drawn into the controversy : " I don 't particularly have an opinion on it , " he said , adding that he was interested only in his own race . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and a third on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted 90 minutes . The third session was held on Saturday morning and lasted an hour . All three sessions were held on a dry track . Hamilton was fastest in the first session with a time of 1 : 35 @.@ 630 , 0 @.@ 39 of a second ahead of Massa , who was next quickest . Räikkönen , Heikki Kovalainen of McLaren , Kubica , Alonso and Heidfeld rounded out the top seven . Sébastien Bourdais of Toro Rosso was eighth , having been quickest early in the session . Renault driver Nelson Piquet drove into the gravel beside the pit @-@ lane entry , though managed to rejoin . Hamilton was again quickest in the second session ; his early time of 1 : 35 @.@ 750 was the fastest of the afternoon . The Renaults were next quickest , ahead of Jarno Trulli of Toyota , Red Bull driver Mark Webber , Massa , Bourdais and Räikkönen . Bourdais spun off at turn two late in the session and beached his car in the gravel . Heidfeld was fastest in the final session with a time of 1 : 36 @.@ 061 , ahead of Hamilton , Kubica and Kovalainen . Massa , Räikkönen and Alonso lacked pace , and failed to make the top ten . Webber stopped late in the session when his engine failed on the back straight , requiring an engine change before qualifying . This would give him a ten @-@ place penalty on the grid . 
 The qualifying session on Saturday afternoon was split into three parts . The first part ran for 20 minutes , and cars that finished the session 16th or lower were eliminated from qualifying . The second part of qualifying lasted 15 minutes and eliminated cars that finished in positions 11 to 15 . The final part of qualifying determined the positions from first to tenth , and decided pole position . Cars which failed to make the final session could refuel before the race , so ran lighter in those sessions . Cars which competed in the final session of qualifying were not allowed to refuel before the race , and as such carried more fuel than in the previous sessions . 
 Hamilton clinched his seventh pole position of the season with a time of 1 : 36 @.@ 303 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Räikkönen , who qualified 0 @.@ 342 seconds behind Hamilton 's time . Massa took third place , needing a good result to retain the possibility of a Championship victory . Alonso qualified in fourth ahead of Kovalainen , who took fifth after struggling for tyre grip during the final session . Webber was sixth fastest in the final session , but was demoted to 16th on the grid as a result of his penalty . Heidfeld originally qualified sixth , but was penalised three positions for impeding Red Bull driver David Coulthard in the first session . As a result , Toro Rosso driver Sebastian Vettel inherited sixth position , ahead of Trulli and Bourdais . Piquet took tenth position . Kubica 's eleventh placing was his worst qualifying result to that point in the season , struggling with his car 's set @-@ up throughout his two sessions . Rubens Barrichello of Honda took 13th behind Timo Glock of Toyota , to reach the top 15 for the first time in ten races . Williams driver Nico Rosberg took 14th on the grid . Coulthard failed to move beyond the first session ; the Red Bull driver qualified in 15th and blamed Heidfeld for his poor performance . Kazuki Nakajima of Williams , Jenson Button of Honda and the Force Indias of Adrian Sutil and Giancarlo Fisichella would line up on the back two rows of the grid . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The conditions on the grid were dry before the race . The air temperature was 27 ° C ( 81 ° F ) and the track temperature was 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) ; weather forecasts suggested a small possibility of rain . Hamilton and Alonso began the race on harder compound tyre ; both Ferraris opted for the softer compound . Hamilton accelerated faster than the Ferraris off the line , and retained his lead into the first corner . Kovalainen overtook Alonso to take fourth in the opening corners . However , Alonso pushed Kovalainen hard through the middle sector of the lap , and passed him at the turn 14 hairpin after drafting the McLaren along the back straight . At the end of the first lap , Hamilton led from Räikkönen , Massa , Alonso and Kovalainen . Heidfeld was able to move from ninth on the grid to take sixth , after Bourdais drove into the back of Trulli at the first corner . Bourdais dropped back to 18th ; Trulli pitted at the next opportunity as a result of the damage and retired after the second lap . 
 Webber was able to climb from 16th on the grid to take 12th behind Glock , and passed the Toyota on the second lap . Kubica , further up the field , improved on his grid position , moving from 11th to take eighth behind Vettel . However , Hamilton was the quickest on track , as he set new fastest laps on laps three , six and eight , to extend his lead over Räikkönen to more than four seconds . This trend continued until lap 10 when Räikkönen fought back and closed the gap . However , Hamilton extended his lead when he set the fastest lap of the race , a 1 : 36 @.@ 325 on lap 13 . In the other McLaren , Kovalainen was struggling , running two seconds a lap slower than Hamilton , and dropping back from Alonso to Heidfeld . 
 The Red Bull of Mark Webber was the first to pit , on lap 12 . Webber had passed Barrichello and Piquet in separate manoeuvres to take ninth , but his pit stop dropped him back down to 18th position . Massa and Alonso came in to pit on lap 14 , from third and fourth . Kovalainen took the lead of the Grand Prix when Hamilton and Räikkönen paused their battle to take harder tyres and fuel on lap 15 . By the time Kovalainen and Heidfeld had pitted on laps 17 and 18 , Hamilton had established a commanding lead : 6 @.@ 9 seconds over Räikkönen and 14 @.@ 1 seconds over Massa . Räikkönen began to pull back Hamilton 's lead over the next ten laps , before losing 1 @.@ 4 seconds on lap 30 . 
 At the back of the race , Bourdais began a slow climb back up the field . The Toro Rosso driver passed Sutil ( who later spun out and retired with a gearbox problem ) , Nakajima and Coulthard , to sit in 15th by lap 30 . Rosberg fought Glock for 12th , until he passed the Toyota at the turn 14 hairpin on lap 12 . Rosberg 's pit stop relegated him to 18th , dropping six places . Kubica pitted late , on lap 25 , dropping from third to ninth , one position outside of the points . 
 Kovalainen suffered a puncture on lap 35 . The McLaren limped around the track back to the pit lane on the disintegrating tyre , rejoining in 17th on a replacement . Alonso , Massa , Hamilton and Räikkönen all pitted for the final time over laps 36 to 38 . Coming out of the second round of pit stops , Hamilton led Räikkönen by 13 seconds , Räikkönen more than 2 @.@ 5 seconds ahead of Massa . The gap between the Ferraris began to close , and Massa eased past Räikkönen on the back straight on lap 49 , to take second place on the track . Meanwhile , Kovalainen parked his car in the McLaren garage and retired from the race , his team not taking any chances with a problem which had developed with the engine 's hydraulics . 
 Hamilton took his fifth win of the season when he crossed the line at the end of the 56th lap , almost 15 seconds ahead of the second @-@ placed Massa . Räikkönen took third ahead of Alonso . Heidfeld managed to jump from ninth on the grid to finish in fifth place , just ahead of his teammate Kubica , who climbed from eleventh on the grid . A one @-@ stop pit strategy worked well for Glock as he finished seventh ; Piquet took eighth . Vettel , Coulthard , Barrichello and Nakajima took the next four places ; Bourdais recovered from his early contact with Trulli to take 13th . Webber 's initial success with a two @-@ stop strategy faded as he finished 14th . Rosberg took 15th , ahead of Button and Fisichella . Trulli , Sutil and Kovalainen were the three retirements from the 56 lap race . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three finishers appeared on the podium and in the subsequent press conference , where Hamilton praised his team : " they have done a phenomenal job and the car is really a dream to drive . " Looking ahead to the next race in Brazil , where Hamilton would enter with a seven @-@ point advantage , the Championship leader seemed confident : " It will be tough and [ Ferrari ] will be pushing us hard but hopefully as a team we can pull through . " Massa admitted that McLaren had the stronger car on the day : 
 For us we were completely driving on the limit trying to reduce the gap but it was not possible . I was trying to push as Kimi was trying to push to get closer to Lewis but it was not possible . So today unfortunately Lewis had the better car for the whole weekend . 
 Asked about his pass on Räikkönen in the closing laps , Massa said that " it was the best time for me in the race , I was quite strong and then I caught him and I passed him . " Since the 2002 Austrian Grand Prix , where Barrichello ceded the lead to Michael Schumacher , team orders have been banned in Formula One . Räikkönen appeared unbothered when asked about Massa 's pass : " I mean we know what we want as a team and that 's what we did it . It is normal in these situations . " No investigation was undertaken by the stewards at the race . GrandPrix.com played down the incident , saying " Anyone who understands racing understood what was going on and only the silly people objected . " 
 Kovalainen 's car had apparently been fitted with mismatched tyres at the front of the car during the first stint , meaning that the tyres spun in the opposite direction to which they were designed , causing his understeer . At his first pit stop his team , not realising the cause of the problem , had adjusted his front wing to compensate for the understeer and replaced the tyres correctly . This caused further handling problems , and eventually led to his retirement . 
 Kovalainen 's failure to score , combined with the two Ferraris making the top three , meant that Ferrari extended their lead over McLaren in the Constructors ' Championship from seven to 11 points . Massa said Ferrari had succeeded in the race : " I think for the Drivers ' Championship it was not fantastic but for the Constructors ' it was very good . " Kubica 's sixth place at the Grand Prix ruled out any chance of claiming the Drivers ' Championship . The BMW driver said his focus would now be on getting as good a result as possible in Brazil , saying " There is now one race left , and I shall try hard to defend my third place . " 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Black @-@ headed sugar ant = 
 The black @-@ headed sugar ant ( Camponotus nigriceps ) , also known as the brown sugar ant , is a species of Formicinae ant endemic to Australia . Found throughout most states , the species is a member of the genus Camponotus , a cosmopolitan genus of ants commonly known as carpenter ants . It was formally described and named by British entomologist Frederick Smith in 1858 . These ants are characterised by their black head , reddish @-@ brown mesosoma and black gaster , which can change in colour . 
 The species is polymorphic : workers and soldiers measure 6 to 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 24 to 0 @.@ 47 in ) and males are 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) . The queens are the largest members of the colony , measuring 16 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 63 in ) . Colonies dwell in dry regions , including open areas or in dry sclerophyll woodland , where they nest in soil , large mounds or under stones . Nuptial flight occurs in summer and nests can hold several thousand individuals . Considered a household pest , black @-@ headed sugar ants feed on sweet foods and insects and tend to butterfly larvae . Numerous birds and fish prey on these ants . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The black @-@ headed sugar ant was described from a holotype worker by British entomologist Frederick Smith in his 1858 publication Catalogue of the hymenopterous insects in the collection of the British Museum . Part VI . Formicidae , and was originally placed in the genus Formica . Some years later , the species was assigned to the genus Camponotus by German entomologist Julius Roger . The specific name , nigriceps , is a combination of nigri , which derives from the Latin word nigra , meaning " black " , and ceps , which is derived from the Greek word <unk> , meaning " head " . This references the distinctive black head of the ant . 
 In 1887 , Italian entomologist Carlo Emery described a subspecies , Camponotus nigriceps lividipes , based on collections of smaller ants . In 1933 , William Morton Wheeler classified the black @-@ headed sugar ant as a subspecies of the banded sugar ant ( Camponotus consobrinus ) , but it was later revived as a full species in 1934 . 
 The ant is a member of the Camponotus nigriceps species group , which also includes C. <unk> , C. consobrinus , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. pallidiceps and C. <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Ants of this species are relatively large ; it is a polymorphic species with two castes of workers , known as minor workers and major workers ( soldiers ) . Workers and soldiers range in sizes from 10 to 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 47 in ) . Males measure 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) and queens are the largest , measuring 16 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 63 in ) . Workers and soldiers of the subspecies Camponotus nigriceps lividipes only grow to 6 to 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 24 to 0 @.@ 39 in ) . Workers ' gasters and <unk> can vary in colour ; the gaster can be black , brown or yellowish @-@ brown while the mesosoma is either reddish @-@ brown or yellow . Workers are mostly brown with light patches noticeable on the head and mesosoma , and their clypei and mandibles are even darker ; the legs are either black or brown . 
 A large number of hairs grow from the gaster , mesonotum , pronotum and propodeum . On average , individual hairs are 0 @.@ 35 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 01 in ) long . Golden , erect setae are present under the head and on the mesosoma . The setae on the tibia are short in comparison to setae on the mesosoma . The workers ' eyes bulge while soldiers ' eyes are flat . Within the Camponotus nigriceps species group , the black @-@ headed sugar ant can be easily mistaken for a banded sugar ant due to its similar appearance , but the latter are darker and have a band wrapping around their gaster , a feature absent on the black @-@ headed sugar ant . Minor worker specimens are usually examined when trying to identify similar @-@ looking species . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The black @-@ headed sugar ant can be found in most Australian states . The species is restricted to the north and south @-@ east of Queensland , and is widespread throughout the Australian Capital Territory . The ant is also widespread throughout New South Wales and Victoria , but it is not found in the north @-@ west of New South Wales and south @-@ east of Victoria . In South Australia , it is commonly seen in the south @-@ eastern regions and less encountered in the north @-@ west . Populations are present in Western Australia , but they are not found in either the north regions of the state or in the Northern Territory . 
 Black @-@ headed sugar ants mostly live in dry regions including dry sclerophyll woodland or open areas , particularly in pastures . Other preferred habitats include mallee , eucalyptus woodland and Casuarina cristata woodland , at elevations ranging 241 – 319 metres ( 791 – 1 @,@ 047 ft ) . Nests are found in laterite soil in upland areas , surrounded by tall eucalyptus trees or under groves . Nests can also be found in large mounds or under stones . Sometimes , cedar wood and large mounds occupied by the meat ant ( Iridomyrmex purpureus ) are inhabited by black @-@ headed sugar ants . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Black @-@ headed sugar ants are nocturnal foragers of food . The species is sometimes considered a household pest since ants can enter human homes at night in search of food . During the day , these ants are not active and have exhibited sleep @-@ like behaviours until it is night . The black @-@ headed sugar ant predominantly feeds on sweet secretions and sugar water ; insects and a variety of foodstuffs in human homes are also consumed . 
 Workers use several social techniques during colony movements to other nest sites or to lead others to food sources , which includes a worker carrying another worker , tandem running or laying down an pheromone trail for orientation . They are also attendants to the butterflies Ogyris <unk> and Ogyris genoveva . The larvae will reside in underground areas constructed by attending ants , and during the night they will emerge with them and feed on mistletoe leaves . The species is tolerant to myrmecophiles ; the beetles <unk> morosus and <unk> paradoxus have been found in nests , and the wingless cricket <unk> australis also dwells inside colonies . Other insects which dwell inside nests include froghoppers in the family <unk> . 
 Several birds and other predatory organisms prey on the black @-@ headed sugar ant . Birds such as the black @-@ faced woodswallow , rufous treecreeper , noisy miner , <unk> winter and southern scrub robin prey on this species , as indicated by the fact that workers body parts have been found in the birds ' stomach contents . Other predators of the black @-@ headed sugar ant include the rainbow trout . 
 Nuptial flight most likely begins during summer , as a young mated queen with no brood was found in a freshly built chamber in January . During the early years of colony foundation , there are more soldiers , and older colonies may have a workforce consisting only of minor workers . A typical colony may contain five to seven thousand individuals . Queens of the species can live for an exceptionally long time ; wild queens can live for up to 21 years with one known captive living to 23 years of age , making it the second oldest recorded ant queen . Larvae of this species can grow to be quite large ; collected larvae reach lengths of 16 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 65 in ) . 
 = Javan slow loris = 
 The Javan slow loris ( Nycticebus javanicus ) is a strepsirrhine primate and a species of slow loris native to the western and central portions of the island of Java , in Indonesia . Although originally described as a separate species , it was considered a subspecies of the Sunda slow loris ( N. coucang ) for many years , until reassessments of its morphology and genetics in the 2000s resulted in its promotion to full species status . It is most closely related to the Sunda slow loris and the Bengal slow loris ( N. bengalensis ) . The species has two forms , based on hair length and , to a lesser extent , coloration . 
 Its forehead has a prominent white diamond pattern , which consists of a distinct stripe that runs over its head and forks towards the eyes and ears . The Javan slow loris weighs between 565 and 687 g ( 1 @.@ 25 and 1 @.@ 51 lb ) and has a head @-@ body length of about 293 mm ( 11 @.@ 5 in ) . Like all lorises it is arboreal , and moves slowly across vines and lianas instead of jumping from tree to tree . Its habitat includes primary and secondary forests , but it can also be found in bamboo and mangrove forests , and on chocolate plantations . Its diet typically consists of fruit , tree gum , lizards and eggs . It sleeps on exposed branches , sometimes in groups , and is usually seen alone or in pairs . 
 The Javan slow loris population is in sharp decline because of poaching for the exotic pet trade , and sometimes for traditional medicine . Remaining populations have low densities , and habitat loss is a major threat . For these reasons the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) lists its status as critically endangered , and it has also been included on the 2008 – 2010 list of " The World 's 25 Most Endangered Primates " . It is protected by Indonesian law and , since June 2007 , is listed under CITES Appendix I. Despite these protections , as well as its presence in several protected areas , poaching continues ; the wildlife protection laws are rarely enforced at the local level . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The Javan slow loris ( Nycticebus javanicus ) was first described scientifically in 1812 , by the French naturalist Étienne Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire . The species name javanicus refers to its place of origin . However , the species was not recognized for long ; by 1840 , René Primevère Lesson classified it as one of several varieties of a single species of slow loris , which he called <unk> tardigradus . In 1921 , Oldfield Thomas named a second species of slow loris from Java , Nycticebus ornatus . 
 In his 1971 review of slow loris taxonomy , taxonomist and primatologist Colin Groves recognized the Javan slow loris as a subspecies , Nycticebus coucang javanicus , of the Sunda slow loris ( N. coucang ) , with ornatus as a synonym . It was first recognized as a distinct species again in a 2000 Indonesian field guide on primates by <unk> <unk> and Edy <unk> <unk> . In 2008 , Groves and Ibnu <unk> promoted it to species status , based on an analysis of cranial morphology and characteristics of pelage . Molecular analysis of DNA sequences of the D @-@ loop and cytochrome b genes demonstrated it to be genetically distinct from other slow loris species ; phylogenetically , it is sister to a clade containing the Bengal slow loris ( N. bengalensis ) and the Sunda slow loris . Due to its close resemblance to neighboring slow loris species , even rescue centers have been known to misidentify it . 
 There are two forms of the Javan slow loris , distinguished mainly by differences in hair length . These have occasionally been recognized as separate species , N. javanicus and N. ornatus , but are currently both classified as a single species , although their exact taxonomic status remains unclear . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 The Javan slow loris weighs between 565 and 687 g ( 1 @.@ 25 and 1 @.@ 51 lb ) and is similar in appearance to the largest slow loris , the Bengal slow loris . Its face and back are marked with a distinct stripe that runs over the crown and forks , leading to the eyes and ears , which leaves a white diamond pattern on the forehead . Its color is yellowish @-@ gray . In contrast , its head , neck , and shoulders have cream hues . Like the Bornean slow loris ( N. menagensis ) , it lacks the second incisor ( I2 ) in its dentition . 
 The Javan slow loris is larger than both of the other Indonesian slow lorises , the Sunda slow loris and the Bornean slow loris . Based on averages determined from six specimens obtained from the illegal wildlife trade in Java , other morphometric parameters are as follows : head length , 59 @.@ 2 mm ; muzzle length , 19 @.@ 9 mm ; head breadth , 43 @.@ 6 mm ; body breadth , 250 @.@ 8 mm ; head and body length , 293 @.@ 1 mm ; chest girth , 190 @.@ 8 mm ; dark percentage girth ( girth measurement of zone with dark dorsal hair , measured as a percent of girth circumference ) , 48 @.@ 0 mm ; neck circumference , 136 @.@ 7 mm ; tail length , 20 @.@ 4 mm ; humerus length , 67 @.@ 2 mm ; radius length , 71 @.@ 8 mm ; femur length , 83 @.@ 2 mm ; tibia length , 85 @.@ 9 mm ; hand span , 59 @.@ 1 mm ; foot span , 70 @.@ 3 mm ; and ear length , 16 @.@ 8 mm . 
 The ornatus morphotype is most reliably distinguished by its longer fur , averaging 26 @.@ 8 mm compared to 22 @.@ 4 mm in javanicus . Other distinguishing characteristics include overall color ( generally light brown in ornatus compared with brown to reddish in javanicus ) , and amount of brown coloring in the fur ( ornatus has less brown than javanicus , resulting in a lighter @-@ colored ventral region ) . 
 In the 1860s , the brain of the Javan slow loris was examined by William Henry Flower , a comparative anatomist who specialized in the primate brain . In addition to detailing the organization , shape , and measurements of its brain , he noted that the form and surface markings were comparable to that of lemurs . He argued against grouping strepsirrhines with Insectivora ( a now @-@ abandoned biological grouping ) and noted that the brain had features transitional between other primates and " inferior " mammals such as bats and carnivorans . 
 = = Behavior and ecology = = 
 Like other lorises , the Javan slow loris is nocturnal and arboreal , relying on vines and lianas . However , the animal has been observed moving on the ground to cross open spaces in disturbed habitat . It moves through the canopy at heights between 3 and 22 m ( 9 @.@ 8 and 72 @.@ 2 ft ) and is often encountered at heights between 1 @.@ 5 and 9 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 and 31 @.@ 2 ft ) . 
 The Javan slow loris will eat fruit , lizards , eggs , and chocolate seeds . It is also known to eat the gum of trees of the genus Albizia , in the legume family , Fabaceae , as well as from the palm genus <unk> ( family Arecaceae ) . Javan slow lorises are seen alone or in pairs and are sometimes found sleeping in groups . Instead of sleeping in nest holes , they sleep curled up on branches . Like other slow lorises , the Javan slow loris has a distinctive call that resembles a high @-@ frequency whistle . The species is a host for the parasitic flatworm , <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The species is found only on the western and central portion of the island of Java in Indonesia . Its presence has been confirmed in the Dieng Mountains , and it is known to be found in low densities at Gunung Gede <unk> National Park ( in montane cloud forests ) and Mount <unk> Salak National Park , often only where human disturbance is minimal . It inhabits both primary and secondary disturbed forest , and can be found from sea level to 1 @,@ 600 m ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) , although it is more commonly found at higher elevations since lower elevations tend to be deforested . A study in 2000 showed that in addition to primary and secondary forest , the Javan slow loris could be found in bamboo forests , mangrove forests , and on plantations — particularly chocolate plantations . In 2008 , they were observed in West Java to occupy mixed @-@ crop home gardens , tolerating high levels of human disturbance . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The Javan slow loris is listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) as " critically endangered , " primarily due to a rapid decline in population . For the 21 – 24 years prior to its 2008 assessment by the IUCN — which corresponds to three generations for the species — its numbers had dropped by at least 50 % . Population data for the species is sparse , but a few studies have shown a low population density of 0 @.@ 20 to 0 @.@ 02 individuals per km2 . 
 Its numbers are still decreasing , primarily because of poaching . In Indonesia , it is sometimes used in traditional medicine , because of myths of it having magical and curative properties , but it is more frequently sold as an exotic pet . The species is easily captured because of its slow movement , nocturnal habits , and its tendency to sleep on exposed branches . They are both actively sought for the pet trade and collected opportunistically when felling forests . Its habitat is also in decline , although most of the habitat loss occurred by the mid @-@ 1980s . Within its range , human land use is intense . Environmental niche modelling indicates that the Javan slow loris is more threatened by habitat loss than other slow loris species . For these reasons , the Javan slow loris has been included on " The World 's 25 Most Endangered Primates " published by the IUCN Species Survival Commission Primate Specialist Group ( IUCN / SSC PSG ) , the International <unk> Society ( IPS ) , and Conservation International ( CI ) . 
 Along with all other slow lorises , the Javan slow loris was elevated from CITES Appendix II to CITES Appendix I in June 2007 , offering it increased protection from commercial trade . It is also protected by Indonesian law , but according to loris researchers Nekaris and Jaffe , " effective law enforcement with respect to wildlife protection laws is all but non @-@ existent in Indonesia " . The species can be found in several protected areas , but its numbers are uncertain . Captive collections of the Javan slow loris can be found in Prague , Czech Republic , Jakarta , Indonesia , and Singapore . 
 = John Lloyd Waddy = 
 John Lloyd Waddy , OBE , DFC ( 10 December 1916 – 11 September 1987 ) was a senior officer and aviator in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , and later served as a member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly and Minister of the Crown . As a fighter pilot during World War II , he shot down fifteen enemy aircraft in the Desert War , becoming one of Australia 's top @-@ scoring aces and earning the Distinguished Flying Cross . He went on to command No. 80 Squadron in the South West Pacific , where he was awarded the US Air Medal . He was also one of eight senior pilots who took part in the " Morotai Mutiny " of April 1945 . 
 Discharged from the Permanent Air Force at the end of the war , Waddy took a commission in the RAAF Reserve , leading the organisation as a group captain in the early 1950s . He was active in business and in veterans ' groups , and was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 1955 . As the Liberal Member for Kirribilli from 1962 to 1976 , he held cabinet posts in the New South Wales Parliament , including Minister for Child Welfare and Social Welfare ( later Youth and Community Services ) , Minister for Health , and Minister for Police and Services . He retired from politics in 1976 , and died in 1987 at the age of seventy . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Born in Sydney on 10 December 1916 , Waddy was the son of first @-@ class cricketer Edgar Lloyd Waddy and his wife <unk> , and great @-@ grandson of General Sir Richard Waddy , KCB . His four siblings included a sister and three brothers . Edgar Waddy established the real estate firm of E.L. Waddy & Son in Rose Bay , which John joined as a clerk after completing his education at the King 's School , Parramatta . He married Vera Nellie May ( Ve ) <unk> on 21 July 1938 . The couple had a son , Lloyd , and two daughters , Denise and Rosalind . 
 Waddy enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in late 1940 , learning to fly under the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) in Southern Rhodesia . His two older brothers , Edgar and Richard , were also pilots . Edgar had taken a short @-@ service commission with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) in the 1930s , while Richard trained in Canada with EATS during the war prior to active duty in Britain , where he was killed flying a single @-@ engined fighter in 1941 . Waddy 's elder sister , Lett , was commissioned into the Women 's Volunteer Naval Reserve , and his younger brother Rowen served as an officer with Z Special Unit in the South West Pacific . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 Completing his training in June 1941 , Pilot Officer Waddy was posted to the North African theatre with No. 250 ( Fighter ) Squadron RAF , operating P @-@ 40 Tomahawks and , later , Kittyhawks . He was befriended and mentored by the RAAF 's top @-@ scoring ace , Clive " Killer " Caldwell , who became godfather to Waddy 's daughter . Waddy 's first operational sortie was as Caldwell 's wingman ; he found the ensuing dogfight so fast and confusing that he had no idea what was happening and afterwards had to ask the more experienced pilot how things had gone . On 9 December , he registered his first victory — in a Tomahawk that had previously been Caldwell 's personal mount — when he shared in the destruction of a Messerschmitt Bf 110 twin @-@ engined fighter near El Adem . 
 By the end of April 1942 , Waddy had scored four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half victories over enemy aircraft . Promoted flying officer , he achieved four " kills " in a single sortie on 12 May 1942 , destroying two Junkers Ju 52 cargo planes and two escorting Bf 110s from a German air transport convoy operating between Crete and North Africa . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) for this action , gazetted on 2 October . The citation praised his " masterly airmanship as a fighter pilot " and his " great courage and devotion to duty " . Shortly after claiming a victory over a Messerschmitt Bf 109 on 22 May , Waddy was posted to another RAF unit , No. 260 Squadron , flying Kittyhawks . He accounted for two enemy aircraft in June , before being assigned to No. 4 Squadron , South African Air Force , with which he destroyed a Bf 109 in September . In October , following the award of his DFC , Waddy began flying Spitfire Vs in No. 92 Squadron RAF . He claimed a further three victories with his latest unit before being posted back to Australia on 19 November 1942 . His final tally of fifteen @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half victories made him one of the most successful Allied fighter pilots in the Desert War , and second only to Caldwell among the RAAF contingent . 
 = = = South West Pacific = = = 
 In February 1943 , Waddy took charge of the Spitfire Squadron of No. 2 Operational Training Unit ( No. 2 OTU ) , based at Mildura , Victoria . He was quoted in The Canberra Times that April offering his message of congratulation to the RAF on the 25th anniversary of its foundation : " You should not have many more birthdays before ' Jerry ' and the Japs are shot clean out of the skies . Here 's hoping . " Fellow aces and Desert War veterans Clive Caldwell , Wilf Arthur and Bobby Gibbes were also instructors at No . OTU prior to their combat postings in the South West Pacific ; in December 1943 , Caldwell and Waddy nearly collided when they crossed paths during an aerobatics display at No. 5 Service Flying Training School in Uranquinty , New South Wales . Waddy undertook a staff course the following year , and was promoted to squadron leader . He was posted to Noemfoor in the Dutch East Indies in September 1944 to command No. 80 Squadron ; his unit was part of No. 78 ( Fighter ) Wing of the Australian First Tactical Air Force ( No. 1 TAF ) , led by Air Commodore Harry Cobby . Operating Kittyhawks , No. 80 Squadron undertook dive bombing and strafing missions against Japanese targets , but saw little air combat . 
 In April 1945 , Waddy joined Caldwell , Arthur , Gibbes and four other senior pilots of No. 1 TAF in an action that became known as the " Morotai Mutiny " . The eight attempted to resign their commissions in protest at the relegation of the RAAF 's fighter squadrons to apparently worthless ground attack missions . Earlier that month , Waddy had asked his intelligence officer to produce a " profit and loss statement " for No. 80 Squadron , covering the period 1 October 1944 to 31 March 1945 , in order to " bring out the fact that the expenditure by the squadron was not compensated for by the achievements of the Squadron " . In that time , Waddy had lost eleven pilots with the unit , including seven to enemy action . Arthur had produced a similar " balance sheet " for No. 81 Wing . Both had become frustrated with the lack of attention paid by superior officers to their concerns regarding the usefulness of No. 1 TAF operations . At the subsequent inquiry into events on Morotai , Justice John Vincent Barry cleared the pilots of fault over the incident , finding their motives in tendering their resignations to be sincere . Waddy continued to lead No. 80 Squadron until handing over command on 1 June 1945 . For his service in the Pacific , he was mentioned in despatches and awarded the US Air Medal , the former promulgated on 25 June 1946 and the latter on 1 July 1948 . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 = = = RAAF reservist and businessman = = = 
 With the end of the Pacific War , Waddy was discharged from the Permanent Air Force ( PAF ) as an acting wing commander in September 1945 . He joined the Rose Bay branch of the Liberal Party , and accepted a commission in the RAAF Reserve , also known as the Citizen Air Force ( CAF ) . He also worked as a sales executive in the import @-@ export firm of Falkiner , Caldwell Pty Ltd , run by Clive Caldwell and businessman George Falkiner . Promoted group captain , Waddy led the CAF from 1950 through 1954 , becoming its first member to take a seat on the Air Board , the RAAF 's controlling body that consisted of its most senior officers and which was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff . During his tenure , CAF squadrons continued to operate aircraft and were expected to act as home defence in the absence of PAF forces serving overseas , roles they would lose by the end of the 1950s . 
 Retiring from the CAF in 1954 , Waddy established his own real estate and travel agency , John L. Waddy Pty Ltd , and served as Honorary Aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Queen until 1957 . He was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 1955 New Year Honours . The Australian delegate to the World Veterans Federation from 1956 to 1963 , he was President of the New South Wales Division of the Australian Flying Corps and Royal Australian Air Force Association throughout the 1950s , becoming an honorary life member in 1958 . In October 1956 , he joined former Chiefs of the Air Staff Air Marshals Sir Richard Williams and Sir George Jones in calling for greater investment in the local aircraft industry , warning that unless prompt action was taken the situation would deteriorate to the same level as before World War II . 
 = = = State parliamentarian = = = 
 After an unsuccessful bid to become Lord Mayor of Sydney that saw him defeated by the Labor Party 's Pat Hills , Waddy was elected to the New South Wales Legislative Assembly as the Liberal member for the newly created seat of Kirribilli , on Sydney 's North Shore , in March 1962 . He sold his interest in John L. Waddy Pty Ltd the same year . Appointed Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Education in 1967 , he was an Assistant Minister from February 1969 until March 1971 , when he became a Minister of the Crown in charge of Child Welfare and Social Welfare in Premier Robert Askin 's cabinet , succeeding Frederick Hewitt . His portfolio included responsibility for Aboriginal affairs ; in 1972 he founded the Aboriginal Lands Trust , staffed by a council of nine elected Indigenous Australians , to assume freehold title of former government reserves in New South Wales as a precursor to granting land rights . 
 Waddy 's position was changed to Minister for Youth and Community Services in January 1973 . In September he piloted a bill to reorganise the Ministries of Child Welfare and Social Welfare as the Department of Youth and Community Services ; the move was designed to " revitalise " and re @-@ focus welfare services , and to remove " overtones of charity and paternalism " inherent in the earlier titles . Waddy was succeeded by Dick Healey on 3 December 1973 , and took over as Minister for Health from Harry Jago . On 3 January 1975 , he was appointed Minister for Police and Minister for Services under new Premier Tom Lewis , serving until 23 January the following year . In this portfolio he sponsored an amendment to the Parliamentary <unk> and Elections Bill , including provisions to close polling booths at 6 pm rather than 8 pm to expedite the reporting of results , and to change the term " Christian name " to " Given name " on candidate nominations to reflect changing community attitudes . He also put through a bill to hold a referendum on whether to make daylight saving a permanent fixture in New South Wales , following trials that had commenced in 1971 . 
 Described by one of his parliamentary colleagues as a " mixture of bon vivant and conservatism " , Waddy was also known for an occasionally quick temper ; his staff were said to " start making motions as though they were bombing and strafing the enemy " when their boss got " wound up " . Charles Cutler , New South Wales Deputy Premier from 1965 to 1975 , reflecting on the bond between ex @-@ servicemen in the political arena , recalled Waddy as " a great bloke , but inclined to be a bit pompous when speaking in the house ... " , while John Booth found him to have an " old @-@ fashioned sense of service to the community " . Waddy was named a Freeman of the City of London in 1972 , and Australian Father of the Year in 1973 . Having held his state seat in Kirribilli for fourteen years and four re @-@ election campaigns — in 1965 , 1968 , 1971 and 1973 — he was denied preselection by the Liberal Party for the 1976 contest . He resigned from the party and stood as an Independent , but was defeated by future Liberal leader Bruce McDonald . His parliamentary career was over but , in the words of a later Deputy Premier , Ian Armstrong , Waddy had " refused to retreat to political obscurity " , and " went out fighting " . He was permitted to continue to use the title " Honourable " on his retirement . After eleven years in power in New South Wales , the sitting Liberal government itself lost office in the 1976 poll , to Neville Wran 's Labor Party . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Waddy maintained his interest in aviation during and after his political career . He flew a Beechcraft King Air twin @-@ engined turboprop in the 1969 England @-@ to @-@ Australia Air Race , taking second prize in the New South Wales Government division . As Minister for Child Welfare and Social Welfare with responsibility for Aboriginal affairs in 1971 , he piloted his own light plane on three of the longest legs of his tour of government reserves in rural New South Wales . Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Australian and British Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators in 1977 – 78 , he was an honorary member of the American Fighter Aces Association , and became director of a private airline , Aquatic Airways , in 1979 . He also raised cattle on his farm near Goulburn , New South Wales . 
 Following several bouts of serious illness in his later years , John Waddy died on 11 September 1987 , at the age of seventy . He was survived by his wife and three children , and given a funeral at St Andrew 's Cathedral , Sydney . His pallbearers included Clive Caldwell and Tom Lewis . Waddy 's son Lloyd served in the RAAF Reserve from 1979 to 1995 , and was appointed Queen 's Counsel in 1988 and later a Justice of the Family Court of Australia . He was also a co @-@ founder and National Convenor of Australians for Constitutional Monarchy . Waddy 's widow Ve died in 2006 , at the age of ninety @-@ six . 
 = HMS Garland ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Garland , also known by her Polish designation ORP Garland , was a G @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 the ship spent considerable time in Spanish waters , enforcing the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides of the conflict . Shortly after World War II began , she was badly damaged by the premature explosion of her own depth charges and required over six months of repairs . Before these were completed , Garland was loaned to the Polish Navy in May 1940 . The ship was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet afterwards and escorted convoys there before being assigned to the Western Approaches Command in September for escort duties . She escorted a convoy from Gibraltar to Malta during Operation Halberd in September 1941 and escorted Convoy PQ @-@ 16 from Iceland to Murmansk in May 1942 . She was badly damaged by a near miss from a German bomber during that operation and required three months of repairs . 
 Garland was then assigned to the Mid @-@ Ocean Escort Force in the North Atlantic until December 1943 , when she was transferred to Freetown , Sierra Leone to escort convoys off West Africa . In April 1944 , the ship was transferred to back to the Mediterranean Fleet where she escorted convoys . She sank one German submarine in September before returning to the UK for a lengthy refit that lasted until March 1945 . Garland was then assigned to the Western Approaches Command , but carried emergency supplies to coastal towns in Belgium and the Netherlands immediately after the war ended in May . She was paid off and reclaimed from the Polish Navy in July 1946 . A few months later , the ship was sold to the Royal Netherlands Navy for use as a school ship . Garland was refitted as an anti @-@ submarine training ship in 1948 and renamed HNLMS Marnix in 1950 . Reclassified as a frigate in 1952 , the ship was not decommissioned until 1964 and scrapped afterwards . 
 = = Description = = 
 Garland displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . Garland carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime , but in increased to 146 in wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Garland had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mk III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . By mid @-@ 1940 , this had increased to 44 depth charges . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Most ships of Garland 's class had the rear torpedo tubes replaced by a 12 @-@ pounder AA gun after the evacuation of Dunkirk in 1940 , but it is not known exactly when this modification was made . By 1942 , the ship 's short range AA armament had been augmented by two 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon guns on her searchlight platform and another pair on the wings of the ship 's bridge . ' Y ' gun was also removed to allow her depth charge stowage to be increased . The .50 @-@ calibre machine gun mounts were replaced by a pair of Oerlikons later . The ship 's director @-@ control tower and rangefinder above the bridge were removed in exchange for a Type 271 target indication radar , after 1942 , and ' B ' gun was replaced by a Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine spigot mortar . A Type 286 short @-@ range surface search radar was probably also fitted mid @-@ way through the war . The ship also received a HF / DF radio direction finder mounted on a pole mainmast . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = HMS Garland , 1936 – 1940 = = = 
 Ordered on 5 March 1934 from Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering , Garland was laid down at Govan , Scotland , on 22 August 1934 . She was launched on 24 October 1935 and completed on 3 March 1936 . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament , the ship cost £ 250 @,@ 664 . She was assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning . Garland patrolled Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War enforcing the edicts of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee in 1937 and 1938 . The ship was overhauled at Sheerness between 24 May and 5 July 1937 and 31 May to 28 July 1938 during which her low @-@ pressure turbines were repaired . Garland patrolled off Cyprus in July 1939 . 
 When World War II began , the ship was en route to Alexandria from Aden and arrived there on 6 September . Whilst escorting a convoy to Malta , some of her depth charges detonated prematurely on 17 September and badly damaged the aft end of the ship . Garland had to be towed back to Alexandria where temporary repairs were made . She was towed to Malta for permanent repairs which lasted from 11 October to 8 May 1940 . Shortly before the completion of the repairs , she was loaned to the Polish Navy on 3 May 1940 , the anniversary of the 1791 Polish Constitution of 3 May . 
 = = = ORP Garland , 1940 – 1946 = = = 
 After working up , the ship escorted a convoy to and from Greece in late June 1940 . During Operation Hats , Garland was lightly damaged by Italian aircraft on 31 August whilst escorting a convoy to Malta . She was transferred to the Western Approaches Command in mid @-@ September and was assigned to the 10th Escort Group . On 13 November , Garland was badly damaged by storm whilst escorting the battleship Revenge and required over a month to make repairs . Two men were lost overboard during the storm . In early January 1941 , the ship was fitted with a new ASDIC system . She was transferred to the 14th Escort Group in April and was then briefly attached to the Home Fleet , escorting a tanker , during the Allied landing on Spitsbergen in July . Upon her return , Garland was assigned to Escort Group B3 for escort duties in the North Atlantic . 
 In late September , she joined the Polish @-@ manned destroyer Piorun in Operation Halberd , escorting a large convoy to Malta . The two ships escorted the battleship Nelson back to Gibraltar after she had been torpedoed during the operation . Garland then rejoined Escort Group B3 . The ship was refitted between 28 February and 5 May 1942 in Middlesbrough and was assigned to escort Convoy PQ @-@ 16 in late May after working up . On 27 May , a bomb was dropped by a Junkers Ju 88 bomber 10 yards ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) off the starboard side of the ship , that decimated the crews of ' A ' and ' B ' guns and the starboard Oerlikon and .50 @-@ calibre machine guns ( 22 killed and 37 wounded ) . The ship 's fire @-@ control director and rangefinder were destroyed and she was ordered to proceed independently to Murmansk for temporary repairs . These took over a month to complete and Garland sailed on 4 July for Troon , as part of the escort for Convoy QP 13 , for permanent repairs that were not completed until 21 September . 
 The ship rejoined Escort Group B3 until she began a lengthy refit in May 1943 that lasted until 8 September . Garland was assigned to the 8th Support Group after working up and escorted several small convoys transporting Allied troops to the Azores to build airbases after the Portuguese gave their consent in late September . From November to April 1944 , the ship was based in Freetown to escort convoys between Freetown and Gibraltar . In May she was assigned to the 14th Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet where she escorted convoys and supported Allied operations in the Aegean . On 19 September 1944 , together with two other British destroyers , she sank the German submarine U @-@ 407 off Santorini . The following month Garland supported the Allied liberation of Greece after the German withdrawal . 
 On 20 November , the ship sailed for the UK to begin a lengthy refit at Devonport that lasted until 31 March 1945 . She was assigned to the 8th Destroyer Flotilla in the Western Approaches Command , but had barely finished working up when the war ended in May . The ship transported emergency supplies to Belgium and the Netherlands immediately afterwards . At the end of 1945 , Garland took part in Operation Deadlight , the scuttling of captured German U @-@ boats . In early 1946 , the ship patrolled Norwegian waters and then was assigned to the Polish Squadron at Rosyth through June . In late July she was ordered to be paid off and the loan terminated . The ship was disarmed in late August before entering Category C reserve . 
 = = = HNLMS Marnix , 1946 – 1964 = = = 
 On 14 November 1946 , Garland was sold " as is " to the Royal Netherlands Navy for £ 9 @,@ 000 and was initially used as a school ship . She was refurbished in 1948 as an anti @-@ submarine training ship . This is probably when Garland was rearmed with two 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns in ' A ' and ' X ' positions , a Hedgehog in ' B ' position and six 20 @-@ millimetre Oerlikons . She carried four depth charge throwers and two depth charge rails . The ship was renamed HNLMS Marnix on 16 January 1950 and made port visits in southern British ports the following March . Marnix was reclassified as a frigate in 1952 and received a thorough overhaul in 1955 – 56 . She was decommissioned on 31 January 1964 and later scrapped . 
 = County Route 106 ( Rockland County , New York ) = 
 County Route 106 ( CR 106 ) is a 7 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 12 @.@ 6 km ) east – west county route in Rockland County , New York , in the United States . It serves as an eastward continuation of Orange CR 106 , extending from the Orange County line to U.S. Route 9W ( US 9W ) and US 202 in Stony Point via Harriman State Park . CR 106 intersects with several county highways in Rockland County along the way . The route is only one of two in Rockland County to keep its numbering from Orange County , with the other being CR 72 . CR 106 had one spur route , CR 106A , which was recently decommissioned . 
 The route was originally designated County Highway 416 in the 1920s and 1930s . In 1930 , it became the easternmost part of New York State Route 210 ( NY 210 ) , a state highway continuing westward into Orange County . In 1982 , NY 210 was truncated to end in Greenwood Lake , and its former routing east of NY 17 was replaced by CR 106 in Orange and Rockland counties . 
 = = Route description = = 
 CR 106 begins at the Orange County line in Harriman State Park as a continuation of that county 's CR 106 . The route is only one of two county routes that have the same number in both Rockland and Orange counties ; the other is CR 72 . 
 CR 106 proceeds east from here providing a border between Harriman State Park ( to the west ) and Bear Mountain State Park ( to the east ) . It then intersects Lake Welch Parkway , a seasonal road which provides a route to Lake Welch Beach on the northern side of the lake . Then , CR 106 splits Lake Welch in two different locations on the southern side of the lake . CR 106 then begins its trek out of Harriman State Park and into the town of Stony Point . 
 Immediately after entering Stony Point , CR 106 intersects CR 98 where CR 106 makes a left turn . CR 106 then proceeds east toward its intersection with the Palisades Parkway . This is at exit 15 and is the last residential exit northbound on the PIP , with everything north of this point being exits within Harriman and Bear Mountain . 
 Just after its intersection with the PIP , the road intersects two former Rockland County Routes ( CR 106A & CR 69 ) . Also , at this point CR 106 enters the village limits of Stony Point , and becomes a 55 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 89 km / h ) , highway with extra lanes in some places . The highway intersects CR 108 , CR 47 , and CR 33 as Central Drive . CR 106 comes to an end shortly after these intersections at US 9W and US 202 in downtown Stony Point , about a mile west from the Hudson River and the Stony Point Marina . 
 = = History = = 
 CR 106 originated in 1824 , when the road was chartered for the New Turnpike and headed from Monroe to Haverstraw . Back in the 1820s , what is now Southfields was known as Monroe . The New Turnpike started at a nail factory in Monroe to a crossing over the Ramapo River , and progressed eastward , passing Lake <unk> ( then known as Car Pond ) . The turnpike continued eastward , meeting the Old Turnpike at a fork in the road . At the fork , part of the road became NY 210 in the 1930 New York State Route renumbering . In 1910 , when the park opened , the road became known as the Southfields Road . Three years later , it became part of the Seven Lakes Drive . Three more years later , the route became known as County Highway 416 . In 1919 and 1920 , the western section of the road was reconstructed . After a bridge was built to cross a river in 1923 , a new route , making up part of the original Warwick Turnpike , became NY 17A . 
 The responsibility for maintaining NY 210 was turned over to the county in 1982 . The road was replaced with CR 106 . 
 = = CR 106A = = 
 CR 106A was a 0 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 16 km ) spur which began at CR 106 and ended at a dead end near CR 69 in Stony Point . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Slug and Lettuce = 
 Slug and Lettuce is a chain of bars that operate in the United Kingdom , with a large number located in London and South East England . As of 2013 , there are a total of 70 outlets . Hugh Corbett opened the first Slug and Lettuce opened in Islington in 1984 . Corbett attempted to <unk> the pub experience , at a time when standards were often low . 
 The bars are designed for a youthful clientele , and aim to attract an equal number of women as well as men with " female friendly " designs . The chain has remained relevant by continually re @-@ inventing itself for the contemporary marketplace . The chain has gone through a number of owners throughout its history , and is currently owned by the Stonegate Pub Company , based in Luton , Bedfordshire . 
 All Slug and Lettuce outlets serve food throughout the day , and the meals are English inspired , with offerings including sandwiches , burgers , pasta and salads . Outlets sell a range of cocktails , beer and wine . Since 2011 , outlets have opened early for breakfast . 
 = = History = = 
 Hugh Corbett , an entrepreneur with a background in the hotel industry , opened The Slug and Lettuce pub on Islington Green , North London in 1984 . At the time , Islington was becoming increasingly gentrified due to its proximity to the City of London financial district . Corbett owned a small number of pubs , which he rechristened with humorous or nonsensical names , with the effect of differentiating them from competitors . His pubs had the then notable differential of stripped out carpets and enlarged windows so that people could see inside from the street . Corbett listed his business in 1989 as Fast Forward , by which time it was a nine @-@ strong chain . In 1990 Roger Protz identified the group as an imitation of David Bruce 's Firkin chain pubs . 
 In 1992 , the David Bruce controlled Grosvenor Inns acquired Fast Forward for £ 4 @.@ 46 million , bringing Grosvenor 's total number of pubs to thirty . By this time , Fast Forward owned thirteen pubs , all based around the London area , with seven under the Slug name . The decision was taken to appeal to customers in their 20s and 30s and make the bar " more contemporary " , " more of a bar , less of a pub " , " young and even rowdy " and " not blokey - not a very male environment " , aiming for an equal proportion of both male and female clientele . Sheila McKenzie , who had founded the female @-@ friendly Pitcher & Piano chain , was enlisted to enact these changes , and the Slug and Lettuce concept has been described as her " brainchild " . <unk> felt that the pub chain had " lost its way " , and concentrated on boosting its food operations . 
 In 1995 , Slug and Lettuce was rebranded again , this time as a " contemporary English bar " , designed to occupy the middle ground between a continental cafe and a classic English pub . By this time , food constituted 30 per cent of total sales . In 1997 the chain identified its primary competitors as the All Bar One and Pitcher & Piano bar chains . In 1998 Grosvenor Inns changed its name to The Slug and Lettuce Group , reflecting the fact that the now 22 @-@ strong chain had become the company 's sole focus . The chain also announced that it would not stock the Amusement with Prizes machines common in many other pubs . In 1998 , the chain encountered its first major setback after it expanded into the North of England with five outlets in Nottingham , York , Manchester , Harrogate and Leeds . These all made profit losses in their first six months of operation , which triggered the company 's first profit warning . In 1999 , the chain first entered the Scottish market , with an outlet in Glasgow . Meanwhile , the company board was criticised for a lack of dynamism and being too slow to expand its number of outlets . The chain launched a website in February 2000 . 
 In mid @-@ 2000 , SFI , the owner of the <unk> Tree bar chain , announced a £ 31 @.@ 6 million takeover of Slug and Lettuce , paid for in shares , and McKenzie left the chain in order to pursue new challenges . By this time the chain had 32 outlets . According to analysts , the chain was too small and had too much debt to survive alone . SFI refurbished a number of their existing pubs under the Slug and Lettuce concept , and by 2004 the chain had 56 outlets . In 2005 , SFI attempted to reposition the chain as an upmarket place to eat , in anticipation of the forthcoming smoking ban . In June 2005 SFI went into administration , and sold 98 of its 150 outlets to the Laurel Pub Company , controlled by Robert Tchenguiz , for £ 80 million . In 2008 Laurel itself collapsed , and the Slug chain became a part of the Bay Restaurant Group , later Town & City Pub Company . The chain has withdrawn from a number of locations , including Glasgow and Cardiff , leaving it with only one location in Scotland , and no presence in Wales . In 2010 , Town & City began to refurbish the outlets , switching from a brown colour scheme to aubergine and updating upholstery and lighting . In June 2011 Town & City merged with the Stonegate Pub Company . 
 Since 2011 outlets have opened early in order to serve breakfast . In September 2012 the Stonegate company chairman Ian Payne announced plans to expand the chain , which he claimed had outperformed the high street for the past three years , and was enjoying double digit growth . As of 2012 , outlets are being refurbished with a colour scheme of gold , purple , green and plum . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The menu largely comprises traditional English inspired cuisine , and includes such items as burgers , curries , pasta and salads . In drinks , the chain focuses on beer , wine and spirits based cocktails such as the Long Island Ice Tea and <unk> . Some outlets sell cask ale . In 2006 the chain switched to selling exclusively fair trade coffee . In 2000 , average annual turnover of each site was just below £ 900 @,@ 000 . Outlets typically occupy around 2 @,@ 000 square feet in area , and include converted banks and churches . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1994 The Times described the chain as " a modish hang @-@ out for the stripped pine brigade " . The chain 's interior layout has been described as " minimalist " . The chain has been criticised by some , such as the writer Will Self , for spreading a bland uniformity throughout British high streets , and for removing individual elements from the pubs that it converts . In 1997 , a Slug and Lettuce in a listed building in Islington Green illegally removed its old mahogany bar , which it was later forced to restore . 
 The appeal of the Slug and Lettuce concept has seen it become widely imitated , with Zoe Williams of The Guardian commenting in 2012 , " Does anybody remember in the 90s , when the Slug and Lettuce pub chain deliberately fancied itself up to appeal to the lady drinker ? And wham , two seconds later , that 's where all the men wanted to drink as well , so that all pubs had to become more like Slugs and Lettuces just to survive ? " 
 = Caenorhabditis elegans = 
 Caenorhabditis elegans ( / <unk> <unk> / ) is a free @-@ living ( not parasitic ) , transparent nematode ( roundworm ) , about 1 mm in length , that lives in temperate soil environments . The name is a blend of the Greek <unk> ( recent ) , <unk> ( rod @-@ like ) and Latin elegans ( elegant ) . In 1900 , <unk> initially named it <unk> elegans , <unk> placed it in the subgenus Caenorhabditis in 1952 , and in 1955 , Dougherty raised it to the status of genus . 
 C. elegans is an unsegmented <unk> , and lacks a respiratory and a circulatory system . It possesses gut granules which emit a brilliant blue fluorescence , a wave of which is seen at death in a ' death fluorescence ' . The majority of these nematodes are hermaphrodites . Males have specialised tails for mating that include spicules . 
 In 1963 , Sydney Brenner proposed research into C. elegans primarily in the area of neuronal development . In 1974 , he began research into the molecular and developmental biology of C. elegans , which has since been extensively used as a model organism . 
 C. elegans was the first multicellular organism to have its whole genome sequenced , and as of 2012 , the only organism to have its connectome ( neuronal " wiring diagram " ) completed . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 C. elegans is unsegmented , vermiform , and bilaterally symmetrical . It has a cuticle ( a tough outer covering ) , four main epidermal cords , and a fluid @-@ filled <unk> ( body cavity ) . It also has some of the same organ systems as larger animals . About one in a thousand individuals is male and the rest are hermaphrodites . The basic anatomy of C. elegans includes a mouth , pharynx , intestine , gonad , and collagenous cuticle . Like all nematodes , they have neither a circulatory nor a respiratory system . The four bands of muscles that run the length of the body are connected to a neural system that allows the muscles to move the animal 's body only as dorsal bending or ventral bending , but not left or right , except for the head , where the four muscle quadrants are wired independently from one another . When a wave of dorsal / ventral muscle contractions proceeds from the back to the front of the animal , the animal is propelled backwards . When wave of contractions is initiated at the front and proceeds posteriorly along the body , the animal is propelled forwards . Because of this dorsal / ventral bias in body bends , any normal living , moving individual tends to lie on either its left side or its right side when observed crossing a horizontal surface . A set of ridges on the lateral sides of the body cuticle , the alae , are believed to give the animal added traction during these bending motions . 
 The pharynx is a muscular food pump in the head of C. elegans , which is triangular in cross @-@ section . This grinds food and transports it directly to the intestine . A set of " valve cells " connects the pharynx to the intestine , but how this valve operates is not understood . After digestion , the contents of the intestine are released via the rectum . No direct connection exists between the pharynx and the excretory canal , which functions in the release of liquid urine . 
 Males have a single @-@ lobed gonad , a vas deferens , and a tail specialized for mating , which incorporates spicules . Hermaphrodites have two ovaries , oviducts , spermatheca , and a single uterus . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Numerous gut granules are present in the intestine of C. elegans , the functions of which are still not fully known , as are many other aspects of this nematode , despite the many years that it has been studied . These gut granules are found in all of the <unk> orders . They are very similar to lysosomes in that they feature an acidic interior and the capacity for endocytosis , but they are considerably larger , reinforcing the view of their being storage organelles . A remarkable feature of the granules is that when they are observed under ultraviolet light , they react by emitting an intense blue fluorescence . Another phenomenon seen is termed ' death fluorescence ' . As the worms die , a dramatic burst of blue fluorescence is emitted . This death fluorescence typically takes place in an anterior to posterior wave that moves along the intestine , and is seen in both young and old worms , whether subjected to lethal injury or peacefully dying of old age . Many theories have been posited on the functions of the gut granules , with earlier ones being eliminated by later findings . They are thought to store zinc as one of their functions . Recent chemical analysis has identified the blue fluorescent material they contain as a glycosylated form of <unk> acid ( AA ) . The need for the large amounts of AA the many gut granules contain is questioned . One possibility is that the AA is antibacterial and used in defense against invading pathogens . Another possibility is that the granules provide <unk> : the bursts of AA fluorescence entail the conversion of damaging UV light to relatively harmless visible light . This is seen a possible link to the melanin – containing melanosomes . 
 = = Reproduction and development = = 
 All cells of the germline arise from a single primordial germ cell , called the P4 cell established early in embryogenesis . This germ cell divides to generate two further germ cells and these do not divide further until after hatching . The hermaphrodite , which is considered to be a specialized form of self @-@ fertile female because its soma is female whereas its germline produces male gametes first , lays eggs through its uterus after internal fertilization . Under environmental conditions which are favourable for reproduction , hatched larvae develop through four stages or molts , designated as L1 to L4 . When conditions are stressed as in food insufficiency , C. elegans can enter an alternative third larval stage called the <unk> state . Dauer is German for permanent . Dauer larvae are stress @-@ resistant ; they are thin and their mouths are sealed and cannot take in food , and they can remain in this stage for a few months . Hermaphrodites produce all their sperm in the L4 stage ( 150 sperm per gonadal arm ) and then produce only oocytes . The sperm cells are stored in the same area of the gonad as the oocytes until the first oocyte pushes the sperm into the spermatheca ( a chamber wherein the oocytes become fertilized by the sperm ) . 
 The male can inseminate the hermaphrodite , which will preferentially use male sperm ( both types of sperm are stored in the spermatheca ) . The sperm of C. elegans is <unk> , lacking flagella and <unk> . When self @-@ inseminated , the wild @-@ type worm will lay about 300 eggs . When inseminated by a male , the number of progeny can exceed 1 @,@ 000 . At 20 ° C , the laboratory strain of C. elegans ( N2 ) has an average lifespan around 2 – 3 weeks and a generation time around 4 days . 
 Nematodes have a fixed , genetically determined number of cells , a phenomenon known as <unk> . The male C. elegans , for example , has 1031 cells , a number which does not change after cell division ceases at the end of the larval period . Growth is solely due to an increase in the size of individual cells . 
 C. elegans has five pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes . Sex in C. elegans is based on an X0 sex @-@ determination system . Hermaphrodites of C. elegans have a matched pair of sex chromosomes ( XX ) ; the rare males have only one sex chromosome ( X0 ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The different Caenorhabditis species occupy various <unk> and bacteria @-@ rich environments . They feed on the bacteria that develop in decaying organic matter . Soil lacks enough organic matter to support self @-@ sustaining populations . C. elegans can survive on a diet of a variety of many kinds of bacteria , but its wild ecology is largely unknown . Most laboratory strains were taken from artificial environments such as gardens and compost piles . More recently , C. elegans has been found to thrive in other kinds of organic matter , particularly rotting fruit . Invertebrates such as millipedes , insects , isopods , and gastropods can transport <unk> larvae to various suitable locations . The larvae have also been seen to feed on their hosts when they die . Nematodes can survive desiccation , and in C. elegans , the mechanism for this capability has been demonstrated to be late embryogenesis abundant proteins . C. elegans , as other nematodes , can be eaten by predator nematodes and other omnivores , including some insects . 
 = = Research use = = 
 In 1963 , Sydney Brenner proposed using C. elegans as a model organism for the investigation primarily of neural development in animals . It is one of the simplest organisms with a nervous system . In the hermaphrodite , this system comprises 302 neurons the pattern of which has been comprehensively mapped , in what is known as a connectome , and shown to be a small @-@ world network . Research has explored the neural and molecular mechanisms that control several behaviors of C. elegans , including chemotaxis , <unk> , <unk> , learning , memory , and mating behaviour . Brenner also chose it as it is easy to grow in bulk populations , and convenient for genetic analysis . It is a multicellular eukaryotic organism , yet is simple enough to be studied in great detail . The transparency of C. elegans facilitates the study of cellular differentiation and other developmental processes in the intact organism . The spicules in the male clearly distinguish males from females . Strains are cheap to breed and can be frozen . When subsequently thawed , they remain viable , allowing long @-@ term storage . 
 = = = Notable findings = = = 
 The developmental fate of every single somatic cell ( 959 in the adult hermaphrodite ; 1031 in the adult male ) has been mapped . These patterns of cell lineage are largely invariant between individuals , whereas in mammals , cell development is more dependent on cellular cues from the embryo . The first cell divisions of early embryogenesis in C. elegans are among the best understood examples of asymmetric cell divisions . 
 Programmed cell death ( apoptosis ) eliminates many additional cells ( 131 in the hermaphrodite , most of which would otherwise become neurons ) ; this " apoptotic predictability " has contributed to the elucidation of some apoptotic genes . Cell death @-@ promoting genes and a single cell @-@ death inhibitor have been identified . 
 RNA interference ( RNAi ) is a relatively straightforward method of disrupting the function of specific genes . Silencing the function of a gene can sometimes allow a researcher to infer its possible function ( s ) . The nematode can be soaked in , injected with , or fed with genetically transformed bacteria that express the double @-@ stranded RNA of interest , the sequence of which complements the sequence of the gene that the researcher wishes to disable . RNAi has emerged as a powerful tool in the study of functional genomics . In C. elegans , it has been used to analyse gene functions and the report claims the promise of future findings in the systematic genetic interactions . 
 Environmental RNAi uptake is much worse in other species of worms in the Caenorhabditis genus . Although injecting RNA into the body cavity of the animal induces gene silencing in most species , only C. elegans and a few other distantly related nematodes can take up RNA from the bacteria they eat for RNAi . This ability has been mapped down to a single gene , <unk> @-@ 2 , which , when inserted as a transgene in other species , allows them to take up RNA for RNAi as C. elegans does . 
 Research into meiosis has been considerably simplified since every germ cell nucleus is at the same given position as it moves down the gonad , so is at the same stage in meiosis . In an early phase of meiosis , the oocytes become extremely resistant to radiation and this resistance depends on expression of genes <unk> and atm that have key roles in recombinational repair . Gene <unk> @-@ 11 also plays a crucial role in recombinational repair of DNA damage during meiosis . A study of the frequency of outcrossing in natural populations showed that selfing is the predominant mode of reproduction in C. elegans , but that infrequent outcrossing events occur at a rate around 1 % . <unk> that result in selfing are unlikely to contribute significantly to beneficial genetic variability , but these <unk> may provide the adaptive benefit of recombinational repair of DNA damages that arise , especially under stressful conditions . 
 Nicotine dependence can also be studied using C. elegans because it exhibits behavioral responses to nicotine that parallel those of mammals . These responses include acute response , tolerance , withdrawal , and sensitization . 
 As for most model organisms , scientists that work in the field curate a dedicated online database and the WormBase is that for C. elegans . The WormBase attempts to collate all published information on C. elegans and other related nematodes . Their website has advertised a reward of $ 4000 for the finder of a new species of closely related nematode . Such a discovery would broaden research opportunities with the worm . 
 C. elegans has been a model organism for research into ageing ; for example , the inhibition of an insulin @-@ like growth factor signaling pathway has been shown to increase adult lifespan threefold . Moreover , extensive research on C. elegans has identified RNA @-@ binding proteins as essential factors during germline and early embryonic development . 
 C. elegans is notable in animal sleep studies as the most primitive organism to display sleep @-@ like states . In C. elegans , a <unk> phase occurs shortly before each moult . 
 = = = Spaceflight research = = = 
 C. elegans made news when specimens were discovered to have survived the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in February 2003 . Later , in January 2009 , live samples of C. elegans from the University of Nottingham were announced to be spending two weeks on the International Space Station that October , in a space research project to explore the effects of zero gravity on muscle development and physiology . The research was primarily about genetic basis of muscle atrophy , which relates to spaceflight or being bed @-@ ridden , geriatric , or diabetic . Descendants of the worms aboard Columbia in 2003 were launched into space on Endeavour for the STS @-@ 134 mission . 
 = = Genome = = 
 C. elegans was the first multicellular organism to have its whole genome sequenced . The sequence was published in 1998 , although some small gaps were present ; the last gap was finished by October 2002 . The C. elegans genome is about 100 million base pairs long and consists of six chromosomes and a mitochondrial genome . Its gene density is about one gene per five kilo @-@ base pairs . Introns make up 26 % and intergenic regions 47 % of the genome . Many genes are arranged in clusters and how many of these are operons is unclear . C. elegans and other nematodes are among the few eukaryotes currently known to have operons ; these include trypanosomes , flatworms ( notably the trematode Schistosoma <unk> ) , and a primitive chordate tunicate Oikopleura dioica . Many more organisms are likely to be shown to have these operons . 
 The genome contains an estimated 20 @,@ 470 protein @-@ coding genes . About 35 % of C. elegans genes have human homologs . Remarkably , human genes have been shown repeatedly to replace their C. elegans homologs when introduced into C. elegans . Conversely , many C. elegans genes can function similarly to mammalian genes . The number of known RNA genes in the genome has increased greatly due to the 2006 discovery of a new class of <unk> @-@ RNA genes , and the genome is now believed to contain more than 16 @,@ 000 RNA genes , up from as few as 1 @,@ 300 in 2005 . Scientific curators continue to appraise the set of known genes ; new gene models continue to be added and incorrect ones modified or removed . 
 In 2003 , the genome sequence of the related nematode C. <unk> was also determined , allowing researchers to study the comparative genomics of these two organisms . The genome sequences of more nematodes from the same genus e.g. , C. <unk> , C. japonica and C. <unk> ( named after Brenner ) , have also been studied using the shotgun sequencing technique . These sequences have now been completed . 
 The reference C. elegans genome sequence continues to change as new evidence reveals errors in the original sequencing . Most changes are minor , adding or removing only a few base pairs of DNA . For example , the <unk> release of WormBase ( April 2009 ) added two base pairs to the genome sequence . Sometimes , more extensive changes are made as noted in the <unk> release of December 2008 , which added a region of over 4 @,@ 300 bp to the sequence . 
 = = Scientific community = = 
 In 2002 , the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Sydney Brenner , H. Robert Horvitz , and John <unk> for their work on the genetics of organ development and programmed cell death in C. elegans . The 2006 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Andrew Fire and Craig C. Mello for their discovery of RNA interference in C. elegans . In 2008 , Martin Chalfie shared a Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on green fluorescent protein ; some of the research involved the use of C. elegans . 
 Many scientists who research C. elegans closely connect to Sydney Brenner , with whom almost all research in this field began in the 1970s ; they have worked as either a postdoctoral or a postgraduate researcher in Brenner 's lab or in the lab of someone who previously worked with Brenner . Most who worked in his lab later established their own worm research labs , thereby creating a fairly well @-@ documented " lineage " of C. elegans scientists , which was recorded into the WormBase database in some detail at the 2003 International Worm Meeting . 
 = Walter Krueger = 
 Walter Krueger ( 26 January 1881 – 20 August 1967 ) was an American soldier and general officer in the first half of the 20th century . He is best known for his command of the Sixth United States Army in the South West Pacific Area during World War II . He rose from the rank of private to general in the United States Army . 
 Born in Flatow , West Prussia , Krueger migrated to the United States as a boy . He enlisted for service in the Spanish – American War and served in Cuba , and then re @-@ enlisted for service in the Philippine – American War . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant in 1901 . In 1914 he was posted to the Pennsylvania Army National Guard . His regiment was mobilized on 23 June 1916 and served along the Mexican border . After the United States commenced hostilities with Germany in April 1917 , Krueger was assigned to the 84th Infantry Division as its Assistant Chief of Staff G @-@ 3 ( Operations ) , and then its chief of staff . In February 1918 , he was sent to Langres to attend the American Expeditionary Force General Staff School , and in October 1918 , he became Chief of Staff of the Tank Corps . 
 Between the wars , Krueger served in a number of command and staff positions , and attended the Naval War College at his own request . In 1941 , he assumed command of the Third Army , which he led in the Louisiana Maneuvers . He expected , in view of his age , to spend the war at home training troops , but in 1943 he was sent to General Douglas MacArthur 's Southwest Pacific Area as commander of the Sixth Army and Alamo Force , which he led in a series of victorious campaigns against the Japanese . As an army commander , Krueger had to grapple with the problems imposed by vast distances , inhospitable terrain , unfavorable climate , and an indefatigable and dangerous enemy . He had to balance MacArthur 's need to speed up the tempo of operations in order to win campaigns with the more cautious approach of subordinates who often found themselves confronted by unexpectedly large numbers of Japanese troops . In the Battle of Luzon in 1945 , his largest , longest and last battle , he was finally able to maneuver his army as he had in 1941 against a Japanese army under Tomoyuki Yamashita . 
 Krueger retired to San Antonio , Texas , where he bought a house and wrote From Down Under to Nippon , an account of his campaigns in the Southwest Pacific . His retirement was marred by family tragedies . His son James was dismissed from the Army in 1947 for conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman . His wife 's health deteriorated , and she died of cancer in 1956 . His daughter Dorothy stabbed her husband to death in 1952 . She was sentenced to life imprisonment by a court @-@ martial , but was freed by the Supreme Court in 1957 . 
 = = Education and early life = = 
 Walter Krueger was born in Flatow , West Prussia , then part of the German Empire , but now part of Poland . He was the son of Julius Krüger , a Prussian landowner who had served as an officer in the Franco @-@ Prussian War , and his wife , Anna , formerly Hasse . Following Julius 's death , Anna and her three children emigrated to the United States to be near her uncle in St. Louis , Missouri . Walter was then eight years old . In St. Louis , Anna married Emil Carl Schmidt , a Lutheran minister . The family subsequently settled in Madison , Indiana . Krueger was educated at the Upper Seminary School in Madison , and the Cincinnati Technical High School in Cincinnati , Ohio . As a teenager , he wanted to become a naval officer , but when his mother objected he decided to become a blacksmith instead . 
 = = Early military service = = 
 On 17 June 1898 , Krueger , along with many of his fellow high @-@ school students , enlisted for service in the Spanish – American War with the 2nd Volunteer Infantry . He reached Santiago de Cuba a few weeks after the Battle of San Juan Hill , and spent eight months there on occupation duties , rising to the rank of sergeant . <unk> out of the volunteers in February 1899 , he returned home to Ohio , planning to become a civil engineer . 
 However , many of his comrades were re @-@ enlisting for service in the Philippine – American War and in June 1899 Krueger re @-@ enlisted as a private in M Company of the 12th Infantry . Soon he was on his way to fight Emilio Aguinaldo 's Insurrectos as part of Major General Arthur MacArthur , Jr . ' s 2nd Infantry Division . He took part in the advance from Angeles City to Tarlac City , Aguinaldo 's capital . But Aguinaldo had fled , and the 12th Infantry pursued him vainly all the way through Luzon 's central plain to Dagupan City . While serving in an infantry unit in the Philippines , he was promoted to sergeant . On 1 July 1901 , he was commissioned a second lieutenant and posted to the 30th Infantry on Marinduque . 
 Krueger returned to the United States with the 30th Infantry in December 1903 . The regiment moved to Fort Crook , Nebraska . In September 1904 , he married Grace Aileen Norvell , whom he had met in the Philippines . They had three children : James Norvell , born on 29 July 1905 ; Walter Jr . , born on 25 April 1910 ; and Dorothy Jane , who was born on 24 January 1913 . Both James and Walter Jr. attended the United States Military Academy , James graduating with the class of 1926 , and Walter Jr. with the class of 1931 . Dorothy married an Army officer , Aubrey D. Smith , of the class of 1930 . 
 In 1904 , Krueger attended and graduated from the Infantry @-@ Cavalry School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas . This was followed by the Command and General Staff College in 1907 . He then joined the 23rd Infantry at Fort Ontario , New York . After a second tour in the Philippines , he returned to the United States in June 1909 , and was assigned to Department of Languages at Fort Leavenworth as an instructor in Spanish , French and German , which he could speak fluently . He also taught National Guard officers at Camp Benjamin Harrison , Indiana , and Pine Camp , New York . He published translations of several German military texts , most notably William Balck 's Tactics . The book attracted the attention of the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , Major General Leonard Wood , and was widely read . 
 = = World War I = = 
 With the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Krueger was offered a post as an observer with the German Army but was forced to turn it down due to familial commitments . Instead , he was posted to the 10th Infantry of the Pennsylvania Army National Guard . The regiment was mobilized on 23 June 1916 and served along the Mexican border for five months as part of the Mexican Punitive Expedition under Major General John J. Pershing , although no National Guard units fought Mexican troops . The unit was mustered out in October 1916 . Afterwards , Krueger remained with the National Guard . He trained units , and helped establish a school for officers at the University of Pennsylvania . In an article in the Infantry Journal , he called for a large , national , conscript army similar to those of European countries , arguing that this would be in accord with America 's democratic values . 
 After the United States commenced hostilities against Germany in April 1917 , Krueger was assigned to the 84th Infantry Division at Camp Zachary Taylor as its Assistant Chief of Staff G @-@ 3 ( Operations ) . He became its chief of staff , with the rank of major as of 5 August 1917 . In February 1918 , he was sent to Langres , France , to attend the American Expeditionary Force General Staff School . All officers from divisions that were not under orders for France were ordered to return home in May 1918 , but Krueger stayed on as G @-@ 3 of the 26th Infantry Division . The French Army requested that Krueger be sent home due to his German origin , and Krueger was re @-@ posted to the 84th Division , but he soon returned to France , as the 84th Division embarked for France in August 1918 . In October , he became Chief of Staff of the Tank Corps . After the Armistice with Germany ended the fighting in November 1918 , he became assistant chief of staff of VI and IV Corps on occupation duty , advancing to the rank of temporary colonel . For his service in the war , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal in 1919 . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 With the end of the war , Krueger returned to the United States on 22 June 1919 and was initially posted to the Infantry School at Fort Benning , Georgia . In 1920 , he assumed command of the 55th Infantry Regiment at Camp Funston , Kansas . He reverted to his permanent rank of captain on 30 June 1920 but was promoted to the permanent rank of major the next day . He attended the Army War College , graduating in 1921 , and remaining for a year as an instructor , where he taught such classes as the " Art of Command " . He paid a four @-@ month visit to Germany in 1922 as part of the War College 's Historical Section , during which he examined documents related to World War I in the German War Archives . These informed his lectures on the war , and he argued that much of the German Army 's effectiveness was attributable to its system of decentralized command . Krueger urged that American commanders in the field should be given wider latitude in carrying out their orders . 
 From 1922 to 1925 , Krueger served in the War Plans Division of the War Department General Staff in Washington , DC . Krueger worked on the United States color @-@ coded war plans , particularly War Plan Green , for another war with Mexico , and War Plan Blue , for another civil war in the United States . He traveled to the Panama Canal Zone in January 1923 to report on the state of the defenses there . After he returned , he was assigned to the Joint Army and Navy Planning Committee , an organ of the Joint Army and Navy Board responsible for coordinating war plans between the two services . While with the Joint Planning Committee , he worked on War Plan Orange , the plan for a war with Japan , and War Plan Tan , for a war with Cuba . Krueger considered the problems of inter @-@ service cooperation . At his own request , he attended the Naval War College at Newport , Rhode Island , in 1925 and 1926 . He continued to ruminate on the nature of command . " Doctrine " , he wrote , " knits all the parts of the military force together in intellectual bonds . " 
 Krueger came to feel that the prospects for promotion in the infantry were very poor , and in 1927 he tried to transfer to the United States Army Air Corps . He attended the Air Corps Primary Flying School at Brooks Field , Texas , but suffered an attack of neuritis in his right arm , and his flight instructor , Lieutenant Claire Lee Chennault , failed him . In December 1927 , he was offered a position as an instructor at the Naval War College , where he taught classes on World War I , and on joint operations . 
 In June 1932 , Krueger became commander of the 6th Infantry Regiment at Jefferson Barracks , Missouri , where he was promoted to colonel again on 1 August 1932 . Now aged 51 , he became resigned to retiring as a colonel , but in 1934 he returned to the War Plans Division , becoming chief of the division in May 1936 , and was promoted to temporary brigadier general in October 1936 . In September 1938 , Krueger went to Fort George G. Meade , Maryland , as commander of the 16th Infantry Brigade . He was promoted to temporary major general in February 1939 , when he became commander of the 2nd Infantry Division at Fort Sam Houston , Texas . The 2nd Infantry Division was at the time being used as a test of the US Army 's new triangular division concept . As a result , Krueger made a series of suggestions as to how the organization could be improved . He became interested in the possibilities of mechanization and fast @-@ paced modern warfare , which were tested in maneuvers with his division . His troops called themselves the " <unk> " . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Training in the United States = = = 
 Krueger became commander of IX Corps on 31 January 1940 . This corps was created to control units of the Third Army engaged in large scale maneuvers in 1940 , in which Krueger 's IX Corps conducted a series of mock battles against Walter Short 's IV Corps . On 27 June , Krueger became commander of the VIII Corps . On 16 May 1941 , he was promoted to lieutenant general , in command of the Third Army . He also became commander of the Southern Defense Command on 16 July 1941 . Krueger asked for — and got — Colonel Dwight D. Eisenhower assigned to him as his chief of staff . 
 The Louisiana Maneuvers pitted Krueger 's Third Army against Lieutenant General Ben Lear 's Second Army . The maneuvers were a test ground for doctrine and equipment , and gave senior commanders experience in maneuvering their formations . In the first phase , Krueger quickly proved himself to be the more modern general . He responded adroitly to a changed battle situation by re @-@ orienting his front from northeast to northwest , and was able to inflict a series of reverses on Lear 's forces . In the second phase , Krueger had a superior force , and had to advance on Shreveport , Louisiana . Lear 's forces conducted a stubborn withdrawal , demolishing bridges in order to slow Krueger down . Krueger responded by sending Major General George S. Patton , Jr . ' s 2nd Armored Division on a wide flanking maneuver through Texas . Afterwards , Eisenhower became the head of the War Plans Division , and was replaced by Colonel Alfred M. Gruenther . After he too was transferred , Krueger replaced him with Colonel George B. Honnen . 
 Krueger wrote to a friend that 
 There 's nothing that I should like better than to have a command at the front . I should love to try to " <unk> " Rommel . However , I am sure that younger men will be selected for tasks of that nature , in fact for all combat commands . I shall be 62 this coming January [ 1943 ] , and though I am in perfect health , can stand a lot of hardship and people tell me I look and act ten years younger , I do not delude myself . 
 = = = Sixth Army = = = 
 It therefore came as a surprise when Krueger was informed that a theater commander had requested his services . General Douglas MacArthur , the Supreme Commander of the Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , said that he was " especially anxious to have Krueger due to my long and intimate association with him " . This too came as a surprise to Krueger ; while the two men had known each other for forty years , and Krueger had been chief of the War Plans Division when MacArthur was Chief of Staff , the two had never been close . 
 The War Department approved Krueger 's transfer to SWPA , but did not approve MacArthur 's request for Third Army headquarters . There were only three American divisions in SWPA : the 32nd Infantry Division at Rockhampton , Queensland , the 41st Infantry Division in the Buna area in Papua , and the 1st Marine Division in Melbourne , Victoria . The 1st Cavalry Division and the 24th Infantry Division were scheduled to arrive in 1943 , and other divisions would follow in 1944 , but for the time being there were much fewer troops than an army would normally control . The War Department therefore saw no need for a full strength army headquarters . Instead , Krueger had to make do with him a skeleton staff of a new Sixth Army , which was activated in January 1943 , with less than half the establishment strength of an army headquarters . 
 Krueger took with him several key members of the Third Army staff , including Brigadier General George Honnen as Chief of Staff , Colonel George H. Decker as Deputy Chief of Staff , Colonel George S. Price as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 1 ( Personnel ) , Colonel Horton V. White as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 2 ( Intelligence ) , Clyde Eddleman as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 ( Operations ) and Colonel Kenneth Pierce as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 4 ( Supply ) . Honnen had health problems , and spent much of April , May and June 1943 in hospital before being ordered home on 18 June . He was replaced by Brigadier General Edwin D. Patrick , who had served on the staff of Admiral William F. Halsey in the South Pacific Area . Patrick did not get along smoothly with Krueger or the rest of the Sixth Army staff , and in May 1944 Patrick was appointed to command the 158th Regimental Combat Team , and Decker became chief of staff . 
 Command in the Southwest Pacific Area was complicated . Instead of operations being conducted by the Sixth Army , its headquarters was used for what became Alamo Force . As a task force , Alamo Force came directly under MacArthur , rather than under the Allied Land Forces . Krueger noted that " the inherent difficulties faced by my dual headquarters in planning and administration were aggravated by the command setup , which was a novel one to say the least . " Because Alamo Force was a purely operational entity , administration was handled by the United States Army Forces in the Far East . Although there was only one army staff , Alamo Force was in New Guinea while the main body of Sixth Army headquarters was in Brisbane until February 1944 , when the two were finally brought together . They still had a dual role as Alamo Force and Sixth Army until September , when Alamo Force was discontinued and the Sixth Army became directly responsible for operations . 
 = = = Bismarck Archipelago = = = 
 The geographical , engineering and logistical difficulties of conducting operations in SWPA were driven home by Alamo Force 's first operation , Operation Chronicle , the occupation of Woodlark and Kiriwina Islands in June 1943 . Despite the fact that the operation was unopposed by the Japanese , it was subject to delays . Krueger visited Kiriwina , where road work and airbase development were held up by heavy rains , on 11 July . He was dissatisfied with the rate of progress and relieved the task force commander . The arrival of additional engineers sped up the base development effort , and No. 79 Squadron RAAF commenced operations from Kiriwina on 18 August . 
 He was also concerned by reports of the invasion of Kiska in the Aleutian Islands in August 1943 , in which a large Allied force invaded an island that had already been evacuated by the Japanese . If this could happen , it was also possible that a force might attack where the Japanese were unexpectedly strong . Different levels of command sometimes came up with widely varying estimates of Japanese strength because they used different methods to estimate it . 
 An attempt to obtain information for Operation Dexterity , the attack on New Britain , with a joint Army @-@ Navy reconnaissance team raised issues of inter @-@ service cooperation . The Navy was mainly interested in gathering hydrographic data rather than information on the state of the Japanese defenders . Because of a breakdown in communications , the PT boat that was supposed to collect the team was unable to rendezvous with it , and the team had to spend eleven more days on the island . Finally , the Navy tried to prevent the Army commander from briefing Alamo Force headquarters on what had occurred . 
 Krueger decided that he needed to have his own strategic reconnaissance capability . In November 1943 , he formed the Alamo Scouts as a special unit for reconnaissance and raiding . An Alamo Scout Training Center for volunteers was established on Fergusson Island , not far from Alamo Force 's headquarters on Goodenough Island , under the command of Colonel Frederick W. Bradshaw , whom Krueger had first encountered during the Louisiana maneuvers . The top graduates of the six @-@ week training course were assigned to the Alamo Scouts ; the other graduates were returned to their units where they could be used for similar work . By the end of the war , Alamo Scouts teams had conducted 106 missions . 
 In what became a standard procedure in SWPA , MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) nominated the objectives , set the target date , and allocated the troops to the operation , leaving Alamo Force to work out the details . MacArthur was not inflexible , however , and allowed Krueger to alter the staging areas , and postpone the operation by a month . Krueger 's concerns about the possibility of high casualties in securing the Gasmata area , and doubts as to whether the area was suitable for airbase development , led to it being dropped as a target . Arawe was substituted , and the size of the whole operation was scaled back . Krueger hoped to observe the 1st Marine Division 's landing at Cape Gloucester in December 1943 , but was unable to do so until the planning for the January 1944 landing at Saidor was complete . He crossed the Dampier Strait in a PT boat in stormy weather . PBY Catalinas sent to bring him back were unable to land , and he had to return on the destroyer USS Mullany . 
 Krueger accepted reports of a Japanese counterattack at Saidor , and sent reinforcements in response , but the attack did not eventuate . Because the 32nd Infantry Division was required for the upcoming Hansa Bay operation , he was initially reluctant to authorize it to block the trails behind the American beachhead . When he finally did so , it was too late . The retreating Japanese made good their escape , thereby defeating the whole purpose of the operation . The next operation , the Admiralty Islands campaign in February 1944 , played out differently . Based on Fifth Air Force reports that the islands were unoccupied , MacArthur accelerated his timetable and ordered an immediate reconnaissance in force of the islands . Krueger sent in the Alamo Scouts , who confirmed that the islands were still well @-@ defended . 
 Krueger did what he could to accelerate the movement of units of Major General Innis P. Swift 's 1st Cavalry Division to the Admiralty Islands in response to urgent pleas from Brigadier General William C. Chase , who managed to defeat the numerically superior Japanese forces . Krueger was unimpressed with Chase . " His task " , Krueger wrote to Swift , " was undoubtedly a difficult one , but did not , in my judgment , warrant the nervousness apparent in some of his despatches . This , and his failure to obey repeated positive orders to furnish detailed information of his situation and his losses , his closing his radio station during long periods , and his evident ignorance that reinforcements could not reach him by the times he demanded , were not calculated to inspire confidence . " 
 = = = New Guinea Campaign = = = 
 Over the next few months , the tempo of operations increased , forcing the Sixth Army to plan and execute multiple operations simultaneously . Operations Reckless and Persecution in April 1944 together comprised the largest operation yet in SWPA , with the 24th and 41st Infantry Divisions of Lieutenant General Robert L. Eichelberger 's I Corps landing at Tanahmerah and Humboldt bays near Hollandia , while the 163rd Regimental Combat Team landed at Aitape . Eichelberger was Krueger 's most senior subordinate , but when he did not meet Krueger 's expectation , Krueger let him know in no uncertain terms . " In my more than 40 years as an officer " , Krueger told one of his staff , " I have never raised my voice to an enlisted man , but a corps commander should know better . " 
 Krueger visited the beachhead with MacArthur and Eichelberger on the first day . After inspecting the beachhead , they went to the USS Nashville for ice cream sodas , whereupon MacArthur suggested , in view of the victory at Hollandia , they could accelerate the campaign timetable by moving on to Wakde @-@ Sarmi immediately . Krueger was willing to consider the idea , although he had already ordered the troops designated for Wakde @-@ Sarmi , the 32nd Infantry Division , to reinforce the position at Aitape , where he expected a major Japanese counterattack . Eichelberger was vehemently opposed , and the matter was dropped . 
 Krueger moved his headquarters to Hollandia in May 1944 . The swampy area with its restricted anchorages proved unsuitable for a major airbase complex , although fighter strips were constructed , and it was developed as a staging area . MacArthur was compelled to press on with the Wakde @-@ Sarmi project lest his troops become stranded without adequate air cover . A shortage of shipping meant that the operation had to be carried out by the troops in the Hollandia area , so Krueger nominated the 163rd Regimental Combat Team for Wakde , while the rest of the 41st Infantry Division captured Sarmi . However , with only days to go , doubts surfaced about the viability of construction in the Sarmi area , and Biak was substituted . In view of the difficulties involved in changing plans , and moving the troops around , MacArthur agreed to postpone both operations , Wakde until 17 May and Biak to 27 May . 
 As a result , Alamo Force became involved in desperate fighting on three different fronts simultaneously . The landing at Wakde was opposed by nearly twice as many Japanese troops than had been expected . When Krueger discovered that the Japanese were massing for an assault on the American position , he ordered a pre @-@ emptive attack . " Krueger " , wrote Edward Drea , " was too good a soldier to stand pat and wait for a Japanese attack . " Official historian Robert Ross Smith noted that " This decision , based upon the scanty , incomplete information concerning Japanese strength and dispositions available to General Krueger at the time , was destined to precipitate a protracted and bitter fight . " However , even if Krueger had known the true size of the Japanese force , he might still , under the circumstances , have taken the same approach . 
 The estimates of the number of Japanese troops on Biak were out by a similar margin , resulting in heavy casualties . In the Battle of Biak , stubborn Japanese resistance halted the 41st Infantry Division , and forced its commander , Major General Horace H. Fuller , to appeal to Krueger for reinforcements . In response , Krueger sent the 163rd Regimental Combat Team from Wakde . MacArthur soon grew impatient , as he needed the airstrips on Biak to support Admiral Chester Nimitz 's Invasion of Saipan . Nimitz 's operation ultimately drew Japanese attention away from Biak . MacArthur put pressure on Krueger for results , and Krueger in turn put pressure on Fuller . Krueger decided that Fuller had too many responsibilities as both task force commander and division commander , and decided to supersede him by sending Eichelberger to take over the task force . Fuller then submitted his resignation . Eichelberger 's chief of staff , Brigadier General Clovis Byers , offered to have Decker intercept and destroy the resignation before Krueger saw it , but Fuller decided against this . The battle raged for nearly a month . Afterwards , Krueger demanded an explanation from Eichelberger as to why he had allowed Fuller to quit . 
 Meanwhile , Japanese forces under Lieutenant General Hatazō Adachi attacked Alamo Force 's position at Aitape in the Battle of Driniumor River . Krueger called for an energetic defense , but the cautious commander of XI Corps , Major General Charles P. Hall , retained nine battalions around the airbase at Tadji . This left Brigadier General Clarence A. Martin without the resources to implement Krueger 's strategy , and he conducted a fighting withdrawal instead . Krueger travelled to Aitape where Hall presented him a counterattack plan , which he approved . By August , the fighting had ended and Adachi had been defeated . 
 = = = Philippines Campaign = = = 
 MacArthur accelerated his timetable yet again in September 1944 , and brought forward the planned invasion of Leyte to October 1944 . That this was the worst time of the year for campaigning on Leyte was not overlooked . Typhoons and heavy rains hampered the efforts to construct and rehabilitate airbases , and without them , large numbers of aircraft could not operate from Leyte . This meant not only that few air strikes could be flown in support of the Sixth Army , but that the Allied Air Forces could not prevent the Japanese from reinforcing Leyte . An additional five Japanese divisions and two mixed brigades were sent to Leyte , and the battle became one of grinding attrition . Able to view his troops in action more often than hitherto , Krueger found much to criticize . He noted that tanks were employed poorly , that the infantry were not aggressive enough , and saw poor sanitation and meals as a sign that officers were not taking adequate care of their men . Krueger 's generalship has also been questioned , with Ronald Spector criticizing " Krueger 's disastrous decision to delay the push into the mountains west of <unk> in favor of beach defense . " Krueger based his cautious appreciation of the situation on various intelligence sources rather than relying solely on Ultra . 
 In January 1945 , the Sixth Army embarked on its largest , longest and last campaign , the invasion of Luzon . Krueger intended to make " maximum utilization of America 's materiel and industrial superiority " . Once again , intelligence estimates of Japanese strength were questionable . MacArthur 's intelligence officer , Brigadier General Charles A. Willoughby , basing his estimates on Ultra , believed that there were about 172 @,@ 000 Japanese troops on Luzon . Krueger 's intelligence officer , Colonel Horton V. White , reckoned that there were 234 @,@ 000 . MacArthur did not believe there were anywhere near that number . In fact , General Tomoyuki Yamashita had 287 @,@ 000 troops on Luzon . For the first time since Louisiana in 1941 , Krueger was able to maneuver his army as a single body instead of having elements employed on multiple battles on scattered islands . He regarded Yamashita 's employment of armor as poor . Instead of using the 2nd Armored Division for a decisive counterattack against the vulnerable flank , Yamashita frittered away its strength in piecemeal efforts . 
 As the campaign unfolded , Krueger was pressured by MacArthur to capture Manila . He sent messages reporting what he saw was a lack of drive among the troops , and even moved his theater headquarters forward of Krueger 's . MacArthur tried to exploit Krueger 's rivalry with Eichelberger by allowing the latter 's Eighth Army to conduct its own drive on Manila from the south . Krueger eventually sent a flying column from the 1st Cavalry Division , but MacArthur 's expectation that the Japanese would not defend Manila was proven incorrect . Weeks of ferocious fighting were required to capture the city . 
 Krueger was promoted to general on 5 March 1945 . MacArthur recommended Krueger for the rank , even as he clashed with him over the drive on Manila , and rated Krueger 's generalship higher than that of Patton or Omar Bradley . Krueger 's campaign on Luzon continued until 30 June 1945 , when he handed over responsibility to Eichelberger in order to prepare for Operation Olympic , the invasion of Kyushu . 
 This proved unnecessary when Japan surrendered , and in September 1945 the Sixth Army took up occupation duty in Japan . Krueger established his headquarters in Kyoto , and assumed responsibility for Kyushu , Shikoku and southern Honshu . The Sixth Army remained in Japan until it handed over its occupation responsibilities to the Eighth Army on 31 December 1945 . It was deactivated on 25 January 1946 , and Krueger retired in July . For his service as commander of the Sixth Army in World War II , Krueger was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , an oak leaf cluster to his Distinguished Service Medal , and the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . He was awarded a second oak leaf cluster to his Distinguished Service Medal for his part in the Occupation of Japan . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Krueger retired to San Antonio , Texas , where , in February 1946 , he bought a house for the first time . Because of a large income tax bill left over from the war , he was unable to buy it outright and so some of his friends established the Krueger Fund Committee , which paid for much of the house . In retirement , Krueger was involved in a number of charity and community organizations , including the United Service Organization , the Red Cross , and the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis , and he served as director of civil defense for San Antonio and Bexar County . 
 Colonel Horton White , Krueger 's former intelligence officer , approached him with an offer from George Edward Brett of Macmillan to publish his memoirs . Krueger did not wish to write an autobiography , which he felt was " invariably apt to be an apologia " , but was willing to write up an account of the Sixth Army 's exploits . He commenced work in 1947 , but the project proceeded slowly . The result was From Down Under to Nippon : The Story of the 6th Army In World War II , which was published in 1953 . Historians were disappointed with the book , as it recounted what was known from the Sixth Army 's reports , but provided little insight into the reasons why operations were conducted the way they were . Krueger kept in contact with his wartime colleagues . He was proud of the subsequent accomplishments of members of his wartime staff , and traveled to New York each year to celebrate MacArthur 's birthday with MacArthur and other former senior commanders of the Southwest Pacific Area . He lectured at Army Schools and civic organizations , offering opinions on subjects such as the value of training , the benefit of universal military service , and the need for a unified defense establishment . 
 Krueger 's retirement was marred by family tragedies . His son James was dismissed from the Army in 1947 for conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman after a drunken incident . Grace 's health deteriorated , and she suffered from heart disease and high blood pressure . She was diagnosed with cancer in 1955 , and died on 13 May 1956 . Most dramatically , on 3 October 1952 , a lonely and depressed Dorothy fatally stabbed her husband , Colonel Aubrey D. Smith , with a hunting knife while he slept in their Army quarters in Japan . Dorothy , who felt that her husband now regarded her no more than " a clinging handicap to his professional career " , had turned to alcohol and drugs . 
 By six votes to three , a U.S. Army court @-@ martial found Dorothy Krueger guilty of first @-@ degree murder and sentenced her " to be confined at hard labor for the rest of her natural life " . A unanimous verdict of guilty would have made the death sentence mandatory . She was flown back to the United States in a Military Air Transport Service plane and was imprisoned at the Federal Prison Camp , Alderson , in West Virginia . The United States Court of Military Appeals rejected an appeal filed by Krueger 's lawyers that argued that Dorothy was not sane at the time of the incident , and that the testimony that the court @-@ martial had heard to the contrary was military rather than medical . 
 However , in 1955 , in a similar case involving another woman , Mrs. Clarice B. Covert , who had killed her husband in England with an axe , Federal District Court Judge Edward A. Tamm ruled that civilians who accompany military forces overseas could not be imprisoned by military courts . The two cases , Kinsella v. Krueger and Reid v. Covert , went to the US Supreme Court , which affirmed that military trials of civilians were indeed constitutional , only to reverse itself a year later in a review of the decisions . Dorothy was released , and went to live with Krueger in San Antonio . 
 When his old friend Fay Babson wrote a letter in 1960 complaining about not being promoted before retirement , Krueger replied that : 
 I wish you would compare your situation with mine for a moment . You are fortunate in having a loving wife by your side and three wonderful children . I , on the other hand , have lost my precious wife , my son Jimmie 's career ended in disgrace and my only daughter 's tragic action broke my heart . All the promotions and honors that have come to me cannot possibly outweigh these heartaches and disappointments . If true happiness is the aim of life — and I believe it is — then you are more fortunate than I and I would gladly trade with you . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Krueger 's health began to decline in the late 1950s . He developed glaucoma in his right eye , and sciatica in his left hip . In 1960 , he had a hernia operation , followed by kidney surgery in 1963 . Nonetheless , he continued to attend MacArthur 's birthday in New York . He died from pneumonia at Valley Forge , Pennsylvania , on 20 August 1967 , and was buried in Section 30 of Arlington National Cemetery , among a number of family members . His papers are in the Cushing Memorial Library at Texas A & M University . 
 Although Krueger led a large force in operations over a large area for over two years , appearing on the cover of Time magazine on 20 January 1945 , and Krueger Middle School was named after him in San Antonio , Texas , in 1962 , he never became a well @-@ known figure like MacArthur . Krueger 's forte was what is today termed the operational level of war , transforming MacArthur 's strategic vision into reality . Krueger has usually been characterised as " an overly cautious commander who impeded MacArthur 's fast @-@ paced strategy . " William Manchester speculated that " the General knew his plodding subordinate was a useful counterweight to his own bravura " , and Edward Drea noted that at the Battle of the <unk> , Krueger 's actions were " entirely out of keeping with his otherwise methodical and plodding generalship " . MacArthur wrote : 
 History has not given him due credit for his greatness . I do not believe that the annals of American history have shown his superior as an Army commander . Swift and sure in the attack , tenacious and determined in defense , modest and restrained in victory — I do not know what he would have been in defeat , because he was never defeated . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Dates of promotion = = 
 = GE steam turbine locomotives = 
 The General Electric steam turbine locomotives were two steam turbine locomotives built by General Electric ( GE ) for Union Pacific ( UP ) in 1938 . The two units were streamlined , 90 feet 10 inches ( 27 @.@ 69 m ) in length , capable of producing 2 @,@ 500 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 900 kW ) , and reputedly able to attain speeds of 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) . Stylistically , they resembled contemporary Electro @-@ Motive Corporation ( EMC ) diesel designs , especially the UP 's M @-@ 10003 through M @-@ 10006 trainsets . 
 The two locomotives were delivered to UP in April 1939 , and they completed test runs and participated in a variety of publicity events for the railroad , including the grand opening of the Los Angeles Union Passenger Terminal , the world premier of Cecil B. DeMille 's film Union Pacific , and even an inspection by President Franklin D. Roosevelt . While the locomotives displayed excellent acceleration and an ability to maintain schedules better than conventional steam locomotives , they also demonstrated serious reliability problems and relatively high maintenance costs ; they never entered regular revenue service . 
 In June 1939 , UP returned the locomotives to GE ; by December 1941 , the railroad had given up on the project . In 1941 , the GE steam turbine locomotives were tested by the New York Central , and they were operated by the Great Northern in 1943 during the World War II " power crunch " ( a lack of sufficient locomotives to sustain regular operations ) before being retired from service later that year . Ultimately , they were scrapped before the end of World War II . 
 = = Background = = 
 Development of the General Electric ( GE ) steam turbine locomotives began in late 1936 , when GE and the Union Pacific ( UP ) began collaborating on an oil @-@ powered steam turbine @-@ electric design that they termed a " steam @-@ electric locomotive " . To produce an altogether new type of locomotive , GE hoped to adopt mature steam turbine technology from maritime and stationary applications for railroad use . Early GE specifications detailed a streamlined shape , 2 + C @-@ C + 2 wheel arrangement , and production of 2 @,@ 500 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 900 kW ) and 81 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 360 @,@ 000 N ) of starting tractive effort ( the force generated by a locomotive 's prime mover in order to generate motion through tractive force ) . 
 While GE had initially hoped to deliver a prototype steam turbine locomotive to UP in 1937 , none were completed until December 1938 , which were then delivered for testing in spring 1939 . In total , the two prototype locomotives had taken almost two years to complete . 
 = = Design = = 
 GE 's new steam turbine locomotives featured streamlined bodies with appearances somewhat similar to contemporary EMC diesel streamliner designs . The GE locomotives had lightweight bodies consisting of steel frames covered with riveted sheet metal , most of which was made of aluminum . They also had elevated cabs , similar to those of EMC 's M @-@ 10003 through M @-@ 10006 , which afforded greater visibility . The noses were significantly longer than the <unk> , at nine feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) , which afforded safety for operating crews . In total , each unit measured 90 feet 10 inches ( 27 @.@ 69 m ) in length , 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in width ( at the cab ) , and 15 feet 3 ⁄ 4 inch ( 4 @.@ 591 m ) in height . 
 The February 1939 issue of General Electric Review claimed that each of the steam turbine locomotives could attain speeds of 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) and that they had two times a conventional steam locomotive 's thermal efficiency . The two units built for UP were streamlined and capable of producing 2 @,@ 500 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 900 kW ) , and had been designed to operate together " elephant style " , nose to tail . Fully loaded , each of the two locomotives weighed 548 @,@ 000 pounds ( 249 @,@ 000 kg ) . Each could produce 86 @,@ 500 pounds @-@ force ( 385 @,@ 000 N ) of starting tractive effort , and between 32 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 140 @,@ 000 N ) and 40 @,@ 500 pounds @-@ force ( 180 @,@ 000 N ) of continuous tractive effort , depending on the amount of cooling . 
 Both of the locomotives had Babcock & Wilcox water @-@ tube boilers , as well as specialized Bailey Meter Company equipment designed to automatically fire and regulate the boiler . Each boiler regularly operated at 920 ° F ( 493 ° C ) and 1 @,@ 500 psi ( 10 @,@ 000 kPa ) to 1 @,@ 600 psi ( 11 @,@ 000 kPa ) , a boiler pressure higher than that of any extant steam locomotive and much higher than contemporary conventional steam locomotives . The GE locomotives stored enough oil to give them an operating range of 500 miles ( 800 km ) to 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) . 
 The turbines were designed to operate at 12 @,@ 500 rpm and were paired with a generator set with a 10 : 1 reduction gearing . A twin @-@ armature DC generator was used to power the traction motors , while a three @-@ phase , 220 @-@ volt AC generator provided auxiliary functions such as powering the traction motor blowers and providing head @-@ end power ; the latter , which was used to provide lighting , heating , and air conditioning to passenger cars , was incredibly unusual in 1939 and would not become standard until the 1970s . 
 Another feature that was ahead of its time was the use of dynamic brakes , where some ( or most ) of the braking effect is created by running the traction motors in reverse as generators , and then dissipating the generated electrical power in resistors to produce heat . In this case , the heat was generated in the locomotive as opposed to the more typically roof @-@ top open @-@ air coolers seen on most modern locomotives . The resistors were themselves cooled by the water from the steam loop , heating it . This allowed the braking energy to be recuperated , or as it is more typically known , offered regenerative braking . 
 The locomotives also used a gear ratio of 65 : 31 , as well as driving wheels with a diameter of 44 inches ( 1 @,@ 100 mm ) and 36 @-@ inch ( 910 mm ) -diameter guide and trailing wheels . Each also had a 2 + C @-@ C + 2 wheel arrangement , or 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 4T in Whyte notation . Although sold to UP together and promoted as a single 5 @,@ 000 @-@ horsepower ( 3 @,@ 700 kW ) locomotive , the two units were capable of operation individually and independently of each other . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The locomotives were in operation only for six months , among the shortest operational careers in recorded railroading . After being completed in December 1938 , they were first tested by GE at its Erie , Pennsylvania facility , and then road tested on New York Central tracks between January and March 1939 . They were then delivered to UP in April 1939 at Omaha , Nebraska , in time for the 70th anniversary of the completion of the First Transcontinental Railroad in May , and given road numbers 1 and 2 . According to UP historians William <unk> and Harold Ranks , the new locomotives were hoped to be the " replacement to steam " and the " successor of diesels " . After completing test runs , UP put the locomotives on public display with tour trains , a national tour , and even an inspection by President Franklin D. Roosevelt . They were present at the grand opening of the Los Angeles Union Passenger Terminal and were on display in Omaha for the world premier of Cecil B. DeMille 's film Union Pacific on April 28 . 
 During test runs , the locomotives displayed excellent acceleration and an ability to maintain schedules better than conventional steam engines , although they also demonstrated serious reliability problems and relatively high maintenance costs . On one occasion , the two locomotives broke down while hauling a train from Colorado to Omaha , necessitating a 2800 @-@ class Pacific steam locomotive to pull them along with the rest of the train for the remainder of the journey . The locomotives worked on several routes in a variety of different capacities , including both passenger and perishable freight service , although they never entered regular revenue service ; in June 1939 , the railroad returned them to GE in Chicago for what UP president W. M. Jeffers called " necessary modification and / or reconstruction " . 
 While UP retained interest in the concept of steam turbine locomotives for the next two years , in December 1941 it decided to end its agreement with GE . Rail transport author Brian Solomon opines that this was due to the development of other types of locomotives , particularly the 4 @-@ 8 @-@ 8 @-@ 4 " Big Boy " steam locomotives , EMD E @-@ units , and EMD FT freight diesels , as well as a potential personnel change in the railroad 's motive power department in 1939 . 
 GE continued to work on its steam turbine locomotives after UP lost interest . In 1941 , the New York Central tested them along its Water Level Route in New York . During the " power crunch " on American railroads caused by World War II , in 1943 the steam turbine locomotives were operated by the Great Northern between Spokane and Wenatchee , Washington . By that point , they had been repainted a dark gray and renumbered GE @-@ 1 and GE @-@ 2 . According to a number of sources , including The <unk> , they provided satisfactory service for GN . By late 1943 , the locomotives were retired from service and returned to GE . Ultimately , they were scrapped before the end of World War II . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The GE steam turbine locomotives were both the first turbine locomotives to be built in North America as well as GE 's only steam @-@ powered locomotives . 
 In the words of history professor and author Jeffrey W. Schramm , the locomotives " were the most ambitious and technologically advanced locomotives to have traveled American rails to that point . " UP historian Alfred Bruce described the design as " one of the most exceptional steam locomotives ever built " . 
 UP steam turbine locomotives # 1 and # 2 have been reproduced in model form by Overland Models . 
 = HMS Caradoc ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Caradoc was a C @-@ class light cruiser built for the Royal Navy during World War I. She was one of the four ships of the Caledon sub @-@ class . Assigned to the Grand Fleet during the war , the ship participated in the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight in late 1917 . Caradoc was briefly deployed to the Baltic in late 1918 supporting anti @-@ Bolshevik forces during the British campaign in the Baltic and then was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in early 1919 and spent the next year and a half doing the same thing in the Black Sea during the Russian Civil War . The ship was withdrawn from the Black Sea in mid @-@ 1920 to observe the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1919 – 22 and the Chanak Crisis of late 1922 . Caradoc spent most of the rest of her time between the World Wars overseas or in reserve with deployments to the Far East and the North America and West Indies Station . 
 Recommissioned before the start of World War II in September 1939 , she returned to the North American Station where she helped to intercepted two German blockade @-@ runners . The ship was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in early 1942 , but saw no action before she was converted into a training ship in mid @-@ 1943 in South Africa . Caradoc was sent to Ceylon where she became an accommodation ship in 1944 . She briefly became the fleet flagship in August 1945 before returning home later in the year . The ship was placed in reserve at the end of the year and sold for scrap in early 1946 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The C @-@ class cruisers were intended to escort the fleet and defend it against enemy destroyers attempting to close within torpedo range . The Caledon sub @-@ class was a slightly larger and improved version of the preceding Centaur sub @-@ class with a more powerful armament . The ships were 450 feet 6 inches ( 137 @.@ 3 m ) long overall , with a beam of 42 feet 3 inches ( 12 @.@ 9 m ) and a deep draught of 18 feet 9 inches ( 5 @.@ 7 m ) . Displacement was 4 @,@ 238 long tons ( 4 @,@ 306 t ) at normal and 4 @,@ 911 long tons ( 4 @,@ 990 t ) at deep load . Caradoc was powered by two geared Parsons steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , which produced a total of 40 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) . The turbines used steam generated by six Yarrow boilers which gave her a speed of about 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . She carried 935 long tons ( 950 t ) tons of fuel oil . The ship had a crew of about 400 officers and other ranks ; this increased to 437 when serving as a flagship . 
 The main armament of the Caledon @-@ class ships consisted of five BL 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Mk XII guns that were mounted on the centreline . One gun was forward of the bridge , two were fore and aft of the two funnels and the last two were in the stern , with one gun superfiring over the rearmost gun . The two QF 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 20 @-@ cwt anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were positioned abreast the fore funnel . The torpedo armament of the Caledons was four times more powerful than that of the Centaurs , with eight 21 in ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes in four twin mounts , two on each broadside . The Caledons were protected by a waterline belt : 1 @.@ 5 – 3 in ( 38 – 76 mm ) thick and had a protective deck that was 1 in ( 25 mm ) thick over the steering gear . The walls of the conning tower had a thickness of 3 inches . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Caradoc , the second ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy , was ordered in December 1915 as part of the 1915 – 16 War Programme . The ship was laid down by Scotts Shipbuilding and Engineering Company at their Greenock shipyard on 21 February 1916 . She was launched on 23 December 1916 and completed on 15 June 1917 . She was assigned to the 6th Light Cruiser Squadron ( LCS ) of the Grand Fleet together with three other C @-@ class cruisers . With her sister Cassandra , she ran aground on Fair Isle on 15 August , but both ships were successfully refloated . 
 Caradoc was back in action by 17 November when she participated in the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight . This was a successful attempt by the British to intercept German minesweeping forces that were clearing British minefields in the North Sea . The 6th LCS screened the two light Courageous @-@ class battlecruisers of the 1st Cruiser Squadron during the battle together with the 1st Light Cruiser Squadron . The British lost the German minesweepers in the smoke screen laid by the four German light cruisers and pursued the latter ships for most of the battle , although they inflicted little damage in the poor visibility caused by the German smoke . Caradoc , being the rear ship in her squadron , fired the least . She did not score any hits on her opponents , nor did they damage her . 
 In 1917 – 18 , her conning tower was replaced by an enlarged bridge and her 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinders were exchanged for 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) models . In November 1918 , the ship was based at Rosyth and escorted the German High Seas Fleet as they sailed to Scapa Flow on 21 November to be interned . A few days later , the 6th LCS was ordered to the Baltic Sea to support the Baltic States as they attempted to secure their independence from Russia . While stopped in Copenhagen , Denmark , en route , Caradoc pulled off the collier , SS <unk> , after she had run aground . Together with her half @-@ sister Cardiff and five destroyers , the ship bombarded Bolshevik positions with 155 six @-@ inch shells east of Reval ( Tallinn ) , Estonia , on 14 December and brought the Russian offensive to a halt after they destroyed the one bridge connecting them with Petrograd . Almost two weeks later , she helped to capture the Russian destroyer <unk> near Reval on 27 December , which was later turned over to the Estonians . At the beginning of January 1919 , Caradoc and her sister Calypso ferried 500 Finnish volunteers from Helsingfors ( Helsinki ) to Reval and then bombarded the Bolsheviks in conjunction with an Estonian offensive on 4 January . The 6th LCS was recalled immediately afterwards and arrived back in Rosyth on 10 January . 
 The ship was transferred to the 3rd Light Cruiser Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet on 29 February . By 19 April she was stationed in the Crimea in support of the anti @-@ Bolshevik Volunteer Army . On 22 April , aerial reconnaissance reported that the Red Army was massing at Kaffa Bay in the town of <unk> . The Greek battleship Lemnos and Caradoc bombarded the town , forcing the Soviet forces to withdraw . Joined by her half @-@ sister Centaur , and the destroyer Parthian , Caradoc and Lemnos again bombarded Soviet troops two days later , this time in the village of <unk> . On 2 May , Caradoc and the newly arrived battleship Emperor of India helped to break up a Bolshevik attack . Three months later , she was hit by three 3 @-@ inch shells as she engaged Bolshevik coastal artillery at Ochakov , but suffered no casualties or damage . Later that month , she supported an amphibious landing by the Volunteer Army near Odessa . In mid @-@ October , the ship supported a Volunteer Army offensive near Yalta . 
 By April 1920 , Caradoc was deployed off the coast of Georgia supporting the Volunteer Army against the Bolsheviks and continued to do so through May . She was withdrawn from Georgia in June in response to the Greek offensives during the Greco @-@ Turkish War and arrived in Istanbul on 18 June . During the Chanak Crisis of September 1922 , the ship was deployed to watch the Gulf of Smyrna . Caradoc participated in the withdrawal of ships from Turkish waters in December 1922 as the Treaty of Lausanne that ended the war was being negotiated . The ship remained in the Mediterranean until December 1926 when she was briefly transferred to the China Station . Around 1924 – 26 , she was fitted with a pair of 2 @-@ pounder ( 40 mm ) Mk II " pom @-@ pom " AA guns . After returning home , Caradoc began a lengthy refit from 15 September 1927 to October 1928 when she was assigned to the North America and West Indies Station . The ship remained there until February 1930 when she returned to the UK and was briefly placed in reserve . Caradoc was recommissioned in July for service on the China Station with the 5th Cruiser Squadron . She returned home four years later and was again placed in reserve on 17 October 1934 . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 At the beginning of the war on 3 September 1939 , Caradoc was at Portland Harbour and was reassigned to operate off the North American coast shortly afterwards . The following month , she ferried £ two million of gold to Halifax , Nova Scotia . On 23 October the light cruiser Orion and the Canadian destroyer Saguenay spotted the German oil tanker Emmy Friedrich in the Yucatan Channel . When Caradoc stopped the ship , the Germans scuttled her ship to prevent her capture . On 11 December 1940 the German blockade runner Rhein was intercepted by the Dutch sloop Van Kinsbergen west of the Florida Strait . Rhein was set on fire by her own crew to prevent her capture and the wreck was sunk later that day by Caradoc . The ship was refitted in New York City between 28 October 1941 – 26 February 1942 where her " pom @-@ pom " s were exchanged for five 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon light AA guns on single mounts . In addition Caradoc was fitted with a Type 271 and Type 290 surface @-@ search radars . 
 The ship was then assigned to the Eastern Fleet where she remained until 1943 . She was converted into a gunnery training ship in Durban , South Africa , between 21 June – 3 July , and was transferred to Colombo , Ceylon , in 1944 . Caradoc became an accommodation ship in April 1944 and then the flagship of the East Indies Fleet , as the Eastern Fleet had been renamed , in August 1945 . She was placed in reserve in December 1945 after she returned home . The ship was sold for scrap on 5 April 1946 and subsequently broken up at Briton Ferry , Wales . 
 = Extratropical cyclone = 
 Extratropical cyclones , sometimes called mid @-@ latitude cyclones or wave cyclones , are low @-@ pressure areas , which along with the anticyclones of high @-@ pressure areas , drive the weather over much of the Earth . Extratropical cyclones are capable of producing anything from cloudiness and mild showers to heavy gales and thunderstorms . These types of cyclones are defined as large scale ( synoptic ) low pressure weather systems that occur in the middle latitudes of the Earth . In contrast with tropical cyclones , they produce rapid changes in temperature and dew point along broad lines about the center of the cyclone called weather fronts . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 The term " cyclone " applies to numerous types of low pressure areas , one of which is the extratropical cyclone . The descriptor extratropical signifies that this type of cyclone generally occurs outside the tropics in the middle latitudes of Earth between 30 ° and 60 ° latitude . They are termed mid @-@ latitude cyclones if they form within those latitudes , or post @-@ tropical cyclones if a tropical cyclone has intruded into the mid latitudes . Weather forecasters and the general public often describe them simply as " depressions " or " lows " . Terms like frontal cyclone , frontal depression , frontal low , extratropical low , non @-@ tropical low and hybrid low are often used as well . 
 Extratropical cyclones are classified mainly as baroclinic , because they form along zones of temperature and dewpoint gradient known as frontal zones . They can become barotropic late in their life cycle , when the distribution of heat around the cyclone becomes fairly uniform with its radius . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Extratropical cyclones form anywhere within the extratropical regions of the Earth ( usually between 30 ° and 60 ° latitude from the equator ) , either through cyclogenesis or extratropical transition . A study of extratropical cyclones in the Southern Hemisphere shows that between the 30th and 70th parallels , there are an average of 37 cyclones in existence during any 6 @-@ hour period . A separate study in the Northern Hemisphere suggests that approximately 234 significant extratropical cyclones form each winter . 
 = = = Cyclogenesis = = = 
 Extratropical cyclones form along linear bands of temperature / dewpoint gradient with significant vertical wind shear , and are thus classified as baroclinic cyclones . Initially , cyclogenesis , or low pressure formation , occurs along frontal zones near a favorable quadrant of a maximum in the upper level jetstream known as a jet streak . The favorable quadrants are usually at the right rear and left front quadrants , where divergence ensues . The divergence causes air to rush out from the top of the air column . This in turn forces convergence in the low @-@ level wind field and increased upward motion within the column . The increased upward motion causes atmospheric pressure at ground level to lower . This is because the upward air motion counteracts gravity , lessening the weight of the atmosphere in that location . The lowered pressure strengthens the cyclone ( a low pressure system ) . As the cyclone strengthens , the cold front sweeps towards the equator and moves around the back of the cyclone . Meanwhile , its associated warm front progresses more slowly , as the cooler air ahead of the system is denser , and therefore more difficult to dislodge . Later , the cyclones occlude as the poleward portion of the cold front overtakes a section of the warm front , forcing a tongue , or trowal , of warm air aloft . Eventually , the cyclone will become <unk> cold and begin to weaken . 
 Atmospheric pressure can fall very rapidly when there are strong upper level forces on the system . When pressures fall more than 1 millibar ( 0 @.@ 030 inHg ) per hour , the process is called explosive cyclogenesis , and the cyclone can be described as a ( weather ) bomb . These bombs rapidly drop in pressure to below 980 millibars ( 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) under favorable conditions such as near a natural temperature gradient like the Gulf Stream , or at a preferred quadrant of an upper level jet streak , where upper level divergence is best . The stronger the upper level divergence over the cyclone , the deeper the cyclone can become . Hurricane @-@ force extratropical cyclones are most likely to form in the northern Atlantic and northern Pacific oceans in the months of December and January . On 14 and 15 December 1986 , an extratropical cyclone near Iceland deepened to below 920 hectopascals ( 27 inHg ) , which is a pressure equivalent to a category 5 hurricane . In the Arctic , the average pressure for cyclones is 980 millibars ( 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) during the winter , and 1 @,@ 000 millibars ( 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) during the summer . 
 = = = Extratropical transition = = = 
 Tropical cyclones often transform into extratropical cyclones at the end of their tropical existence , usually between 30 ° and 40 ° latitude , where there is sufficient forcing from upper @-@ level troughs or <unk> riding the Westerlies for the process of extratropical transition to begin . During this process , a cyclone in extratropical transition ( known across the eastern North Pacific and North Atlantic oceans as the post @-@ tropical stage ) , will invariably form or connect with nearby fronts and / or troughs consistent with a baroclinic system . Due to this , the size of the system will usually appear to increase , while the core weakens . However , after transition is complete , the storm may re @-@ strengthen due to baroclinic energy , depending on the environmental conditions surrounding the system . The cyclone will also distort in shape , becoming less symmetric with time . 
 During extratropical transition , the cyclone begins to tilt back into the colder airmass with height , and the cyclone 's primary energy source converts from the release of latent heat from condensation ( from thunderstorms near the center ) to baroclinic processes . The low pressure system eventually loses its warm core and becomes a cold @-@ core system . 
 The peak time of subtropical cyclogenesis ( the midpoint of this transition ) in the North Atlantic is in the months of September and October , when the difference between the temperature of the air aloft and the sea surface temperature is the greatest , leading to the greatest potential for instability . On rare occasions , an extratropical cyclone can transit into a tropical cyclone if it reaches an area of ocean with warmer waters and an environment with less vertical wind shear . An example of this happening is in the 1991 Perfect Storm . The process known as " tropical transition " involves the usually slow development of an <unk> cold core vortex into a tropical cyclone . 
 The Joint Typhoon Warning Center uses the extratropical transition ( XT ) technique to subjectively estimate the intensity of tropical cyclones becoming extratropical based on visible and infrared satellite imagery . Loss of central convection in transitioning tropical cyclones can cause the Dvorak technique to fail ; the loss of convection results in unrealistically low estimates using the Dvorak technique . The system combines aspects of the Dvorak technique , used for estimating tropical cyclone intensity , and the Hebert @-@ Poteat technique , used for estimating subtropical cyclone intensity . The technique is applied when a tropical cyclone interacts with a frontal boundary or loses its central convection while maintaining its forward speed or accelerating . The XT scale corresponds to the Dvorak scale and is applied in the same way , except that " XT " is used instead of " T " to indicate that the system is undergoing extratropical transition . Also , the XT technique is only used once extratropical transition begins ; the Dvorak technique is still used if the system begins dissipating without transition . Once the cyclone has completed transition and become cold @-@ core , the technique is no longer used . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Surface pressure and wind distribution = = = 
 The <unk> of an extratropical cyclone constricts with distance in relation to surface level pressure , with the lowest pressure being found near the center , and the highest winds typically just on the cold / poleward side of warm fronts , occlusions , and cold fronts , where the pressure gradient force is highest . The area poleward and west of the cold and warm fronts connected to extratropical cyclones is known as the cold sector , while the area equatorward and east of its associated cold and warm fronts is known as the warm sector . 
 The wind flow around an extratropical cyclone is counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere , and clockwise in the southern hemisphere , due to the Coriolis effect ( this manner of rotation is generally referred to as cyclonic ) . Near this center , the pressure gradient force ( from the pressure at the center of the cyclone compared to the pressure outside the cyclone ) and the Coriolis force must be in an approximate balance for the cyclone to avoid collapsing in on itself as a result of the difference in pressure . The central pressure of the cyclone will lower with increasing maturity , while outside of the cyclone , the sea @-@ level pressure is about average . In most extratropical cyclones , the part of the cold front ahead of the cyclone will develop into a warm front , giving the frontal zone ( as drawn on surface weather maps ) a wave @-@ like shape . Due to their appearance on satellite images , extratropical cyclones can also be referred to as frontal waves early in their life cycle . In the United States , an old name for such a system is " warm wave " . 
 In the northern hemisphere , once a cyclone occludes , a trough of warm air aloft — or " trowal " for short — will be caused by strong southerly winds on its eastern periphery rotating aloft around its northeast , and ultimately into its northwestern periphery ( also known as the warm conveyor belt ) , forcing a surface trough to continue into the cold sector on a similar curve to the occluded front . The trowal creates the portion of an occluded cyclone known as its comma head , due to the comma @-@ like shape of the mid @-@ tropospheric cloudiness that accompanies the feature . It can also be the focus of locally heavy precipitation , with thunderstorms possible if the atmosphere along the trowal is unstable enough for convection . 
 = = = Vertical structure = = = 
 Extratropical cyclones slant back into colder air masses and strengthen with height , sometimes exceeding 30 @,@ 000 feet ( approximately 9 km ) in depth . Above the surface of the earth , the air temperature near the center of the cyclone is increasingly colder than the surrounding environment . These characteristics are the direct opposite of those found in their counterparts , tropical cyclones ; thus , they are sometimes called " cold @-@ core lows " . Various charts can be examined to check the characteristics of a cold @-@ core system with height , such as the 700 millibars ( 20 @.@ 67 inHg ) chart , which is at about 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 048 meters ) in height . Cyclone phase diagrams are used to tell whether a cyclone is tropical , subtropical , or extratropical . 
 = = Cyclone evolution = = 
 There are two models of cyclone development and lifecycles in common use — the Norwegian model and the Shapiro @-@ Keyser Model . 
 = = = Norwegian cyclone model = = = 
 Of the two theories on extratropical cyclone structure and life cycle , the older is the Norwegian Cyclone Model , developed during World War I. In this theory , cyclones develop as they move up and along a frontal boundary , eventually occluding and reaching a <unk> cold environment . It was developed completely from surface @-@ based weather observations , including descriptions of clouds found near frontal boundaries . This theory still retains merit , as it is a good description for extratropical cyclones over continental landmasses . 
 = = = Shapiro @-@ Keyser model = = = 
 A second competing theory for extratropical cyclone development over the oceans is the Shapiro @-@ Keyser model , developed in 1990 . Its main differences with the Norwegian Cyclone Model are the fracture of the cold front , treating warm @-@ type occlusions and warm fronts as the same , and allowing the cold front to progress through the warm sector perpendicular to the warm front . This model was based on oceanic cyclones and their frontal structure , as seen in surface observations and in previous projects which used aircraft to determine the vertical structure of fronts across the northwest Atlantic . 
