 On November 6 , 2012 , Obama won 332 electoral votes , exceeding the 270 required for him to be reelected as president . With 51 @.@ 1 percent of the popular vote , Obama became the first Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to twice win the majority of the popular vote . President Obama addressed supporters and volunteers at Chicago 's McCormick Place after his reelection and said : " Tonight you voted for action , not politics as usual . You elected us to focus on your jobs , not ours . And in the coming weeks and months , I am looking forward to reaching out and working with leaders of both parties . " 
 = = Presidency ( since 2009 ) = = 
 = = = First days = = = 
 The inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th President took place on January 20 , 2009 . In his first few days in office , Obama issued executive orders and presidential memoranda directing the U.S. military to develop plans to withdraw troops from Iraq . He ordered the closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp , but Congress prevented the closure by refusing to appropriate the required funds and preventing moving any Guantanamo detainee into the U.S. or to other countries . Obama reduced the secrecy given to presidential records . He also revoked President George W. Bush 's restoration of President Ronald Reagan 's Mexico City Policy prohibiting federal aid to international family planning organizations that perform or provide counseling about abortion . 
 = = = Domestic policy = = = 
 The first bill signed into law by Obama was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 , relaxing the statute of limitations for equal @-@ pay lawsuits . Five days later , he signed the reauthorization of the State Children 's Health Insurance Program ( SCHIP ) to cover an additional 4 million uninsured children . In March 2009 , Obama reversed a Bush @-@ era policy which had limited funding of embryonic stem cell research and pledged to develop " strict guidelines " on the research . 
 Obama appointed two women to serve on the Supreme Court in the first two years of his Presidency . Sonia Sotomayor , nominated by Obama on May 26 , 2009 , to replace retiring Associate Justice David Souter , was confirmed on August 6 , 2009 , becoming the first Hispanic Supreme Court Justice . Elena Kagan , nominated by Obama on May 10 , 2010 , to replace retiring Associate Justice John Paul Stevens , was confirmed on August 5 , 2010 , bringing the number of women sitting simultaneously on the Court to three , for the first time in American history . 
 On March 30 , 2010 , Obama signed the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act , a reconciliation bill which ends the process of the federal government giving subsidies to private banks to give out federally insured loans , increases the Pell Grant scholarship award , and makes changes to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act . 
 In a major space policy speech in April 2010 , Obama announced a planned change in direction at NASA , the U.S. space agency . He ended plans for a return of human spaceflight to the moon and development of the Ares I rocket , Ares V rocket and Constellation program , in favor of funding Earth science projects , a new rocket type , and research and development for an eventual manned mission to Mars , and ongoing missions to the International Space Station . 
 President Obama 's 2011 State of the Union Address focused on themes of education and innovation , stressing the importance of innovation economics to make the United States more competitive globally . He spoke of a five @-@ year freeze in domestic spending , eliminating tax breaks for oil companies and reversing tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans , banning congressional earmarks , and reducing healthcare costs . He promised that the United States would have one million electric vehicles on the road by 2015 and would be 80 percent reliant on " clean " electricity . 
 = = = = LGBT rights = = = = 
 On October 8 , 2009 , Obama signed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr . Hate Crimes Prevention Act , a measure that expands the 1969 United States federal hate @-@ crime law to include crimes motivated by a victim 's actual or perceived gender , sexual orientation , gender identity , or disability . 
 On December 22 , 2010 , Obama signed the Don 't Ask , Don 't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 , fulfilling a key promise made in the 2008 presidential campaign to end the Don 't ask , don 't tell policy of 1993 that had prevented gay and lesbian people from serving openly in the United States Armed Forces . 
 In 1996 , as a candidate for the Illinois state senate , Obama had said that he favored legalizing same @-@ sex marriage ; but by the time of his Senate run in 2004 , he said that while he supported civil unions and domestic partnerships for same @-@ sex partners , for strategic reasons he opposed same @-@ sex marriages . On May 9 , 2012 , shortly after the official launch of his campaign for reelection as president , Obama said his views had evolved , and he publicly affirmed his personal support for the legalization of same @-@ sex marriage , becoming the first sitting U.S. president to do so . 
 During his second inaugural address on January 21 , 2013 , Obama became the first president to call for full equality for gay Americans : " Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law – for if we are truly created equal , then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well . " This was the first time that a president mentioned gay rights or the word " gay " in an inaugural address . In 2013 , the Obama administration filed briefs urging the Supreme Court to rule in favor of same @-@ sex couples in the cases of Hollingsworth v. Perry ( regarding same @-@ sex marriage ) and United States v. Windsor ( regarding the Defense of Marriage Act ) . Then , following the Supreme Court 's 2015 decision in Obergefell v. Hodges ( ruling same @-@ sex marriage to be a fundamental right ) , Obama asserted that , " This decision affirms what millions of Americans already believe in their hearts : When all Americans are treated as equal we are all more free . " 
 = = = = White House advisory and oversight groups = = = = 
 On March 11 , 2009 , Obama created the White House Council on Women and Girls , which forms part of the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs , having been established by Executive Order <unk> with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to the welfare of American women and girls . The Council is currently chaired by Senior Advisor to the President Valerie Jarrett . Obama also established the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault through an official United States government memorandum on January 22 , 2014 with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to sexual assault on college and university campuses throughout the United States . The current co @-@ chairs of the Task Force are Vice President Joe Biden and Jarrett . The Task Force has been a development out of the White House Council on Women and Girls and Office of the Vice President of the United States , and prior to that , the 1994 Violence Against Women Act that was first @-@ drafted by Biden . 
 = = = = Economic policy = = = = 
 On February 17 , 2009 , Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 , a $ 787 billion economic stimulus package aimed at helping the economy recover from the deepening worldwide recession . The act includes increased federal spending for health care , infrastructure , education , various tax breaks and incentives , and direct assistance to individuals . 
 In March , Obama 's Treasury Secretary , Timothy Geithner , took further steps to manage the financial crisis , including introducing the Public @-@ Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets , which contains provisions for buying up to two trillion dollars in depreciated real estate assets . Obama intervened in the troubled automotive industry in March 2009 , renewing loans for General Motors and Chrysler to continue operations while reorganizing . Over the following months the White House set terms for both firms ' bankruptcies , including the sale of Chrysler to Italian automaker Fiat and a reorganization of GM giving the U.S. government a temporary 60 percent equity stake in the company , with the Canadian government taking a 12 percent stake . In June 2009 , dissatisfied with the pace of economic stimulus , Obama called on his cabinet to accelerate the investment . He signed into law the Car Allowance Rebate System , known colloquially as " Cash for Clunkers " , that temporarily boosted the economy . 
 Spending and loan guarantees from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department authorized by the Bush and Obama administrations totaled about $ 11 @.@ 5 trillion , but only $ 3 trillion was spent by the end of November 2009 . Obama and the Congressional Budget Office predicted the 2010 budget deficit would be $ 1 @.@ 5 trillion or 10 @.@ 6 percent of the nation 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) compared to the 2009 deficit of $ 1 @.@ 4 trillion or 9 @.@ 9 percent of GDP . For 2011 , the administration predicted the deficit will shrink to $ 1 @.@ 34 trillion , and the 10 @-@ year deficit will increase to $ 8 @.@ 53 trillion or 90 percent of GDP . The most recent increase in the U.S. debt ceiling to $ 17 @.@ 2 trillion took effect in February 2014 . On August 2 , 2011 , after a lengthy congressional debate over whether to raise the nation 's debt limit , Obama signed the bipartisan Budget Control Act of 2011 . The legislation enforces limits on discretionary spending until 2021 , establishes a procedure to increase the debt limit , creates a Congressional Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to propose further deficit reduction with a stated goal of achieving at least $ 1 @.@ 5 trillion in budgetary savings over 10 years , and establishes automatic procedures for reducing spending by as much as $ 1 @.@ 2 trillion if legislation originating with the new joint select committee does not achieve such savings . By passing the legislation , Congress was able to prevent a U.S. government default on its obligations . 
 As it did throughout 2008 , the unemployment rate rose in 2009 , reaching a peak in October at 10 @.@ 0 percent and averaging 10 @.@ 0 percent in the fourth quarter . Following a decrease to 9 @.@ 7 percent in the first quarter of 2010 , the unemployment rate fell to 9 @.@ 6 percent in the second quarter , where it remained for the rest of the year . Between February and December 2010 , employment rose by 0 @.@ 8 percent , which was less than the average of 1 @.@ 9 percent experienced during comparable periods in the past four employment recoveries . By November 2012 , the unemployment rate fell to 7 @.@ 7 percent , decreasing to 6 @.@ 7 percent in the last month of 2013 . During 2014 , the unemployment rate continued to decline , falling to 6 @.@ 3 percent in the first quarter . GDP growth returned in the third quarter of 2009 , expanding at a rate of 1 @.@ 6 percent , followed by a 5 @.@ 0 percent increase in the fourth quarter . Growth continued in 2010 , posting an increase of 3 @.@ 7 percent in the first quarter , with lesser gains throughout the rest of the year . In July 2010 , the Federal Reserve noted that economic activity continued to increase , but its pace had slowed , and chairman Ben Bernanke said the economic outlook was " unusually uncertain " . Overall , the economy expanded at a rate of 2 @.@ 9 percent in 2010 . 
 The Congressional Budget Office and a broad range of economists credit Obama 's stimulus plan for economic growth . The CBO released a report stating that the stimulus bill increased employment by 1 – 2 @.@ 1 million , while conceding that " It is impossible to determine how many of the reported jobs would have existed in the absence of the stimulus package . " Although an April 2010 survey of members of the National Association for Business Economics showed an increase in job creation ( over a similar January survey ) for the first time in two years , 73 percent of 68 respondents believed that the stimulus bill has had no impact on employment . The economy of the United States has grown faster than the other original NATO members by a wider margin under President Obama than it has anytime since the end of World War II . The OECD credits the much faster growth in the United States to the stimulus in the United States and the austerity measures in the European Union . 
 Within a month of the 2010 midterm elections , Obama announced a compromise deal with the Congressional Republican leadership that included a temporary , two @-@ year extension of the 2001 and 2003 income tax rates , a one @-@ year payroll tax reduction , continuation of unemployment benefits , and a new rate and exemption amount for estate taxes . The compromise overcame opposition from some in both parties , and the resulting $ 858 billion Tax Relief , Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization , and Job Creation Act of 2010 passed with bipartisan majorities in both houses of Congress before Obama signed it on December 17 , 2010 . 
 In December 2013 , Obama declared that growing income inequality is a " defining challenge of our time " and called on Congress to bolster the safety net and raise wages . This came on the heels of the nationwide strikes of fast @-@ food workers and Pope Francis ' criticism of inequality and trickle @-@ down economics . 
 = = = = Environmental policy = = = = 
 On September 30 , 2009 , the Obama administration proposed new regulations on power plants , factories , and oil refineries in an attempt to limit greenhouse gas emissions and to curb global warming . 
 On April 20 , 2010 , an explosion destroyed an offshore drilling rig at the Macondo Prospect in the Gulf of Mexico , causing a major sustained oil leak . Obama visited the Gulf , announced a federal investigation , and formed a bipartisan commission to recommend new safety standards , after a review by Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar and concurrent Congressional hearings . He then announced a six @-@ month moratorium on new deepwater drilling permits and leases , pending regulatory review . As multiple efforts by BP failed , some in the media and public expressed confusion and criticism over various aspects of the incident , and stated a desire for more involvement by Obama and the federal government . 
 In July 2013 , Obama expressed reservations and stated he " would reject the Keystone XL pipeline if it increased carbon pollution " or " greenhouse emissions " . Obama 's advisers called for a halt to petroleum exploration in the Arctic in January 2013 . On February 24 , 2015 , Obama vetoed a bill that would authorize the pipeline . It was the third veto of Obama 's presidency and his first major veto . 
 = = = = Health care reform = = = = 
 Obama called for Congress to pass legislation reforming health care in the United States , a key campaign promise and a top legislative goal . He proposed an expansion of health insurance coverage to cover the uninsured , to cap premium increases , and to allow people to retain their coverage when they leave or change jobs . His proposal was to spend $ 900 billion over 10 years and include a government insurance plan , also known as the public option , to compete with the corporate insurance sector as a main component to lowering costs and improving quality of health care . It would also make it illegal for insurers to drop sick people or deny them coverage for pre @-@ existing conditions , and require every American to carry health coverage . The plan also includes medical spending cuts and taxes on insurance companies that offer expensive plans . 
 On July 14 , 2009 , House Democratic leaders introduced a 1 @,@ 017 @-@ page plan for overhauling the U.S. health care system , which Obama wanted Congress to approve by the end of 2009 . After much public debate during the Congressional summer recess of 2009 , Obama delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress on September 9 where he addressed concerns over the proposals . In March 2009 , Obama lifted a ban on using federal funds for stem cell research . 
 On November 7 , 2009 , a health care bill featuring the public option was passed in the House . On December 24 , 2009 , the Senate passed its own bill — without a public option — on a party @-@ line vote of 60 – 39 . On March 21 , 2010 , the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) passed by the Senate in December was passed in the House by a vote of 219 to 212 . Obama signed the bill into law on March 23 , 2010 . 
 The ACA includes health @-@ related provisions to take effect over four years , including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level ( FPL ) starting in 2014 , subsidizing insurance premiums for people making up to 400 percent of the FPL ( $ 88 @,@ 000 for family of four in 2010 ) so their maximum " out @-@ of @-@ pocket " payment for annual premiums will be from 2 to 9 @.@ 5 percent of income , providing incentives for businesses to provide health care benefits , prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on pre @-@ existing conditions , establishing health insurance exchanges , prohibiting annual coverage caps , and support for medical research . According to White House and Congressional Budget Office figures , the maximum share of income that enrollees would have to pay would vary depending on their income relative to the federal poverty level . 
 The costs of these provisions are offset by taxes , fees , and cost @-@ saving measures , such as new Medicare taxes for those in high @-@ income brackets , taxes on indoor tanning , cuts to the Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional Medicare , and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies ; there is also a tax penalty for those who do not obtain health insurance , unless they are exempt due to low income or other reasons . In March 2010 , the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the net effect of both laws will be a reduction in the federal deficit by $ 143 billion over the first decade . 
 The law faced several legal challenges , primarily based on the argument that an individual mandate requiring Americans to buy health insurance was unconstitutional . On June 28 , 2012 , the Supreme Court ruled by a 5 – 4 vote in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius that the mandate was constitutional under the U.S. Congress 's taxing authority . In Burwell v. Hobby Lobby the Court ruled that " closely @-@ held " for @-@ profit corporations could be exempt on religious grounds under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act from regulations adopted under the ACA that would have required them to pay for insurance that covered certain contraceptives . In June 2015 , the Court ruled 6 – 3 in King v. Burwell that subsidies to help individuals and families purchase health insurance were authorized for those doing so on both the federal exchange and state exchanges , not only those purchasing plans " established by the State , " as the statute reads . 
 = = = = Energy policy = = = = 
 Prior to June 2014 , Obama offered substantial support for a broadly based " All of the above " approach to domestic energy policy which Obama has maintained since his first term and which he last confirmed at his State of the Union speech in January 2014 to a mixed reception by both parties . In June 2014 , Obama made indications that his administration would consider a shift towards an energy policy more closely tuned to the manufacturing industry and its impact on the domestic economy . Obama 's approach of selectively combining regulation and incentive to various issues in the domestic energy policy such as coal mining and oil fracking has received mixed commentary for not being as responsive to the needs of the domestic manufacturing sector as needed , following claims that the domestic manufacturing sector utilizes as much as a third of nation 's available energy resources . 
 = = = = Gun control = = = = 
 On January 16 , 2013 , one month after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting , President Obama signed 23 executive orders and outlined a series of sweeping proposals regarding gun control . He urged Congress to reintroduce an expired ban on military @-@ style assault weapons , such as those used in several recent mass shootings , impose limits on ammunition magazines to 10 rounds , introduce background checks on all gun sales , pass a ban on possession and sale of armor @-@ piercing bullets , introduce harsher penalties for gun @-@ traffickers , especially unlicensed dealers who buy arms for criminals and approving the appointment of the head of the federal Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives for the first time since 2006 . On January 5 , 2016 , Obama announced new executive actions extending background check requirements to more gun sellers . In a 2016 editorial in the New York Times , Obama compared the struggle for what he termed " common @-@ sense gun reform " to women 's suffrage and other civil rights movements in American history . 
 = = = = 2010 midterm elections = = = = 
 Obama called the November 2 , 2010 election , where the Democratic Party lost 63 seats in , and control of , the House of Representatives , " humbling " and a " shellacking " . He said that the results came because not enough Americans had felt the effects of the economic recovery . 
 = = = = Cybersecurity and Internet policy = = = = 
 On November 10 , 2014 , President Obama recommended the Federal Communications Commission reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality . On February 12 , 2013 , President Obama signed Executive Order <unk> , " Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity " . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 In February and March 2009 , Vice President Joe Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton made separate overseas trips to announce a " new era " in U.S. foreign relations with Russia and Europe , using the terms " break " and " reset " to signal major changes from the policies of the preceding administration . Obama attempted to reach out to Arab leaders by granting his first interview to an Arab cable TV network , Al Arabiya . 
 On March 19 , Obama continued his outreach to the Muslim world , releasing a New Year 's video message to the people and government of Iran . In April , Obama gave a speech in Ankara , Turkey , which was well received by many Arab governments . On June 4 , 2009 , Obama delivered a speech at Cairo University in Egypt calling for " A New Beginning " in relations between the Islamic world and the United States and promoting Middle East peace . 
 On June 26 , 2009 , in response to the Iranian government 's actions towards protesters following Iran 's 2009 presidential election , Obama said : " The violence perpetrated against them is outrageous . We see it and we condemn it . " On July 7 , while in Moscow , he responded to a Vice President Biden comment on a possible Israeli military strike on Iran by saying : " We have said directly to the Israelis that it is important to try and resolve this in an international setting in a way that does not create major conflict in the Middle East . " 
 On September 24 , 2009 , Obama became the first sitting U.S. president to preside over a meeting of the United Nations Security Council . 
 In March 2010 , Obama took a public stance against plans by the government of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to continue building Jewish housing projects in predominantly Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem . During the same month , an agreement was reached with the administration of Russian President Dmitry Medvedev to replace the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with a new pact reducing the number of long @-@ range nuclear weapons in the arsenals of both countries by about one @-@ third . Obama and Medvedev signed the New START treaty in April 2010 , and the U.S. Senate ratified it in December 2010 . 
 In December 2011 , Obama instructed agencies to consider LGBT rights when issuing financial aid to foreign countries . He criticized Russia 's law discriminating against gays in August 2013 , stopping short of advocating a boycott of the 2014 Winter Olympics held in Sochi , Russia . 
 In December 2014 , Obama announced that he intended to normalize relationships between Cuba and the United States . The countries ' respective " interests sections " in one another 's capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20 , 2015 . 
 In March 2015 , Obama declared that he had authorized U.S. forces to provide logistical and intelligence support to the Saudis in their military intervention in Yemen , establishing a " Joint Planning Cell " with Saudi Arabia . 
 = = = = War in Iraq = = = = 
 On February 27 , 2009 , Obama announced that combat operations in Iraq would end within 18 months . His remarks were made to a group of Marines preparing for deployment to Afghanistan . Obama said , " Let me say this as plainly as I can : by August 31 , 2010 , our combat mission in Iraq will end . " The Obama administration scheduled the withdrawal of combat troops to be completed by August 2010 , decreasing troop 's levels from 142 @,@ 000 while leaving a transitional force of about 50 @,@ 000 in Iraq until the end of 2011 . On August 19 , 2010 , the last U.S. combat brigade exited Iraq . Remaining troops transitioned from combat operations to counter @-@ terrorism and the training , equipping , and advising of Iraqi security forces . On August 31 , 2010 , Obama announced that the United States combat mission in Iraq was over . On October 21 , 2011 President Obama announced that all U.S. troops would leave Iraq in time to be " home for the holidays " . 
 In June 2014 , following the capture of Mosul by Daesh , Obama sent 275 troops to provide support and security for U.S. personnel and the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad . Daesh continued to gain ground and to commit widespread massacres and ethnic cleansing . 
 In August 2014 , during the Sinjar massacre , Obama ordered a campaign of U.S. airstrikes against Daesh . 
 By the end of 2014 , 3 @,@ 100 American ground troops were committed to the conflict and 16 @,@ 000 sorties were flown over the battlefield , primarily by U.S. Air Force and Navy pilots . 
 In the Spring of 2015 , with the addition of the " Panther Brigade " of the 82nd Airborne Division the number of U.S. ground troops in Iraq surged to 4 @,@ 400 , and by July American @-@ led coalition air forces counted 44 @,@ 000 sorties over the battlefield . 
 = = = = War in Afghanistan = = = = 
 Early in his presidency , Obama moved to bolster U.S. troop strength in Afghanistan . He announced an increase to U.S. troop levels of 17 @,@ 000 in February 2009 to " stabilize a deteriorating situation in Afghanistan " , an area he said had not received the " strategic attention , direction and resources it urgently requires " . He replaced the military commander in Afghanistan , General David D. McKiernan , with former Special Forces commander Lt. Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal in May 2009 , indicating that McChrystal 's Special Forces experience would facilitate the use of counterinsurgency tactics in the war . On December 1 , 2009 , Obama announced the deployment of an additional 30 @,@ 000 military personnel to Afghanistan and proposed to begin troop withdrawals 18 months from that date ; this took place in July 2011 . David Petraeus replaced McChrystal in June 2010 , after McChrystal 's staff criticized White House personnel in a magazine article . In February 2013 , Obama said the U.S. military would reduce the troop level in Afghanistan from 68 @,@ 000 to 34 @,@ 000 U.S. troops by February 2014 . 
 In October 2015 , in light of the deteriorating security situation , the White House announced a plan to keep U.S. Forces in Afghanistan indefinitely . 
 = = = = Israel = = = = 
 In 2011 , the United States vetoed a Security Council resolution condemning Israeli settlements , with the United States being the only nation to do so . Obama supports the two @-@ state solution to the Arab – Israeli conflict based on the 1967 borders with land swaps . 
 In June 2012 , Obama said that the bond between the United States and Israel is " unbreakable . " During the initial years of the Obama administration , the U.S. increased military cooperation with Israel , including increased military aid , re @-@ establishment of the <unk> Joint Political Military Group and the Defense Policy Advisory Group , and an increase in visits among high @-@ level military officials of both countries . The Obama administration asked Congress to allocate money toward funding the Iron Dome program in response to the waves of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel . 
 In 2013 , Jeffrey Goldberg reported that , in Obama 's view , " with each new settlement announcement , Netanyahu is moving his country down a path toward near @-@ total isolation . " 
 In 2014 , President Obama likened the Zionist movement to the Civil Rights Movement in the United States . He said that both movements seek to bring justice and equal rights to historically persecuted peoples . He explained , " To me , being pro @-@ Israel and pro @-@ Jewish is part and parcel with the values that I 've been fighting for since I was politically conscious and started getting involved in politics . " 
 = = = = Libya = = = = 
 In February 2011 , protests in Libya began against long @-@ time dictator Muammar Gaddafi as part of the Arab Spring . They soon turned violent . In March , as forces loyal to Gaddafi advanced on rebels across Libya , calls for a no @-@ fly zone came from around the world , including Europe , the Arab League , and a resolution passed unanimously by the U.S. Senate . In response to the unanimous passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 on March 17 , Gaddafi — who had previously vowed to " show no mercy " to the rebels of Benghazi — announced an immediate cessation of military activities , yet reports came in that his forces continued shelling Misrata . The next day , on Obama 's orders , the U.S. military took part in air strikes to destroy the Libyan government 's air defense capabilities to protect civilians and enforce a no @-@ fly @-@ zone , including the use of Tomahawk missiles , B @-@ 2 Spirits , and fighter jets . Six days later , on March 25 , by unanimous vote of all of its 28 members , NATO took over leadership of the effort , dubbed Operation Unified Protector . Some Representatives questioned whether Obama had the constitutional authority to order military action in addition to questioning its cost , structure and aftermath . 
 = = = = Syrian Civil War = = = = 
 On October 18 , 2011 , during the early stages of the Syrian Civil War , Obama said that " Assad must go " , saying that this was for the sake of the Syrian people . He reaffirmed that belief on November 19 , 2015 . To that end , Obama authorized an effort to train anti @-@ Assad rebels . The program achieved minimal results , and the Obama Administration abandoned it in 2015 . In the wake of a chemical weapons attack in Syria in 2013 widely blamed on the Assad regime , Obama insisted that Assad must give up his chemical weapons . This led to an agreement which resulted in Assad giving up many such weapons , but attacks with chlorine gas continued . In 2014 , Obama authorized an air campaign aimed primarily at Daesh , but repeatedly promised that the U.S. would put " no boots on the ground " in Syria . 
 = = = = Osama bin Laden = = = = 
 Starting with information received in July 2010 , intelligence developed by the CIA over the next several months determined what they believed to be the location of Osama bin Laden in a large compound in Abbottabad , Pakistan , a suburban area 35 miles from Islamabad . CIA head Leon Panetta reported this intelligence to President Obama in March 2011 . Meeting with his national security advisers over the course of the next six weeks , Obama rejected a plan to bomb the compound , and authorized a " surgical raid " to be conducted by United States Navy SEALs . The operation took place on May 1 , 2011 , resulting in the death of bin Laden and the seizure of papers , computer drives and disks from the compound . DNA testing identified bin Laden 's body , which was buried at sea several hours later . Within minutes of the President 's announcement from Washington , DC , late in the evening on May 1 , there were spontaneous celebrations around the country as crowds gathered outside the White House , and at New York City 's Ground Zero and Times Square . Reaction to the announcement was positive across party lines , including from former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush , and from many countries around the world . 
 = = = = Iran nuclear talks = = = = 
 In November 2013 , Obama 's administration opened negotiations with Iran to prevent it from acquiring nuclear weapons , which included an interim agreement . Negotiations took two years with numerous delays , with a deal being announced July 14 , 2015 . The deal , titled Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action , saw the removal of sanctions in exchange for measures that would prevent Iran from producing nuclear weapons . While Obama hailed the agreement as being a step towards a more hopeful world , the deal drew strong criticism from Republican and conservative quarters , and from Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu . 
 = = = = Relations with Cuba = = = = 
 Since the spring of 2013 , secret meetings were conducted between the United States and Cuba in the neutral locations of Canada and Vatican City . The Vatican first became involved in 2013 when Pope Francis advised the U.S. and Cuba to exchange prisoners as a gesture of goodwill . On December 10 , 2013 , Cuban President Raúl Castro , in a significant public moment , greeted and shook hands with Obama at the Nelson Mandela memorial service in Johannesburg . 
 In December 2014 , after the secret meetings , it was announced that Obama , with Pope Francis as an intermediary , had negotiated a restoration of relations with Cuba , after nearly sixty years of détente . Popularly dubbed the Cuban Thaw , The New Republic deemed the Cuban Thaw to be " Obama 's finest foreign policy achievement . " On July 1 , 2015 , President Barack Obama announced that formal diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States would resume , and embassies would be opened in Washington and Havana . The countries ' respective " interests sections " in one another 's capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20 and August 13 , 2015 , respectively . 
 Obama has visited Havana , Cuba for two days in March 2016 , becoming the first sitting U.S. President to arrive since Calvin Coolidge in 1928 . 
 = = = = Africa = = = = 
 Obama spoke in front of the African Union in Addis Ababa , Ethiopia , on July 29 , 2015 , the first sitting U.S. president to do so . He gave a speech encouraging the world to increase economic ties via investments and trade with the continent , and lauded the progresses made in education , infrastructure , and economy . He also criticized the lack of democracy and leaders who refuse to step aside , discrimination against minorities ( LGBT people , religious groups and ethnicities ) , and corruption . He suggested an intensified democratization and free trade , to significantly improve the quality of life for Africans . During his July 2015 trip , Obama also was the first U.S. president ever to visit Kenya , which is the homeland of his father . 
 = = = = Japan = = = = 
 On May 27 , 2016 , the 71st anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima by America , Obama became the first sitting American president to visit Hiroshima , Japan . Accompanied by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe , Obama paid tribute to the victims of the bombing at the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum . 
 = = Cultural and political image = = 
 Obama 's family history , upbringing , and Ivy League education differ markedly from those of African @-@ American politicians who launched their careers in the 1960s through participation in the civil rights movement . Expressing puzzlement over questions about whether he is " black enough " , Obama told an August 2007 meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists that " we 're still locked in this notion that if you appeal to white folks then there must be something wrong . " Obama acknowledged his youthful image in an October 2007 campaign speech , saying : " I wouldn 't be here if , time and again , the torch had not been passed to a new generation . " 
 Obama is frequently referred to as an exceptional orator . During his pre @-@ inauguration transition period and continuing into his presidency , Obama has delivered a series of weekly Internet video addresses . Former presidential campaign surrogate and Georgetown professor , Michael Eric Dyson , is both critical and sympathetic of President Obama 's leadership in race relations indicating that speeches and action on racial disparity and justice have been somewhat reactive and reluctant when in the later part of his second term , racial violence demanded immediate presidential action and conversation . 
 According to the Gallup Organization , Obama began his presidency with a 68 percent approval rating before gradually declining for the rest of the year , and eventually bottoming out at 41 percent in August 2010 , a trend similar to Ronald Reagan 's and Bill Clinton 's first years in office . He experienced a small poll bounce shortly after the death of Osama bin Laden on May 2 , 2011 . This bounce lasted until around June 2011 , when his approval numbers dropped back to where they were previously . His approval ratings rebounded around the same time as his reelection in 2012 , with polls showing an average job approval of 52 percent shortly after his second inauguration . Despite him dropping to 39 percent in his approval ratings in late @-@ 2013 due to the ACA roll @-@ out , he has climbed to 50 percent in late January 2015 according to Gallup . Polls show strong support for Obama in other countries , and before being elected President he met with prominent foreign figures including former British Prime Minister Tony Blair , Italy 's Democratic Party leader and Mayor of Rome Walter <unk> , and French President Nicolas Sarkozy . 
 In a February 2009 poll conducted in Western Europe and the U.S. by Harris Interactive for France 24 and the International Herald Tribune , Obama was rated as the most respected world leader , as well as the most powerful . In a similar poll conducted by Harris in May 2009 , Obama was rated as the most popular world leader , as well as the one figure most people would pin their hopes on for pulling the world out of the economic downturn . 
 Obama won Best Spoken Word Album Grammy Awards for abridged audiobook versions of Dreams from My Father in February 2006 and for The Audacity of Hope in February 2008 . His concession speech after the New Hampshire primary was set to music by independent artists as the music video " Yes We Can " , which was viewed 10 million times on YouTube in its first month and received a Daytime Emmy Award . In December 2008 and in 2012 , Time magazine named Obama as its Person of the Year . The 2008 awarding was for his historic candidacy and election , which Time described as " the steady march of seemingly impossible accomplishments " . On May 25 , 2011 , Obama became the first President of the United States to address both houses of the UK Parliament in Westminster Hall , London . This was only the 5th occurrence since the start of the 20th century , of a head of state being extended this invitation , following Charles de Gaulle in 1960 , Nelson Mandela in 1996 , Queen Elizabeth II in 2002 and Pope Benedict XVI in 2010 . 
 On October 9 , 2009 , the Norwegian Nobel Committee announced that Obama had won the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize " for his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples " . Obama accepted this award in Oslo , Norway on December 10 , 2009 , with " deep gratitude and great humility . " The award drew a mixture of praise and criticism from world leaders and media figures . Obama 's peace prize was called a " stunning surprise " by The New York Times . Obama is the fourth U.S. president to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and the third to become a Nobel laureate while in office . Obama 's Nobel Prize has been viewed skeptically in subsequent years , especially after the director of the Nobel Institute , Geir Lundestad , said Obama 's Peace Prize did not have the desired effect . 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 In a 2006 interview , Obama highlighted the diversity of his extended family : " It 's like a little mini @-@ United Nations " , he said . " I 've got relatives who look like Bernie Mac , and I 've got relatives who look like Margaret Thatcher . " Obama has a half @-@ sister with whom he was raised ( Maya Soetoro @-@ Ng , the daughter of his mother and her Indonesian second husband ) and seven half @-@ siblings from his Kenyan father 's family — six of them living . Obama 's mother was survived by her Kansas @-@ born mother , Madelyn Dunham , until her death on November 2 , 2008 , two days before his election to the Presidency . Obama also has roots in Ireland ; he met with his Irish cousins in <unk> in May 2011 . In Dreams from My Father , Obama ties his mother 's family history to possible Native American ancestors and distant relatives of Jefferson Davis , President of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War . 
 Besides his native English , Obama speaks some basic Indonesian , having learned the language during his four childhood years in Jakarta . He plays basketball , a sport he participated in as a member of his high school 's varsity team ; he is left @-@ handed . 
 Obama is a supporter of the Chicago White Sox , and he threw out the first pitch at the 2005 ALCS when he was still a senator . In 2009 , he threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the All @-@ Star Game while wearing a White Sox jacket . He is also primarily a Chicago Bears football fan in the NFL , but in his childhood and adolescence was a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers , and rooted for them ahead of their victory in Super Bowl XLIII 12 days after he took office as President . In 2011 , Obama invited the 1985 Chicago Bears to the White House ; the team had not visited the White House after their Super Bowl win in 1986 due to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster . 
 In June 1989 , Obama met Michelle Robinson when he was employed as a summer associate at the Chicago law firm of Sidley Austin . Assigned for three months as Obama 's adviser at the firm , Robinson joined him at several group social functions , but declined his initial requests to date . They began dating later that summer , became engaged in 1991 , and were married on October 3 , 1992 . The couple 's first daughter , Malia Ann , was born on July 4 , 1998 , followed by a second daughter , Natasha ( " Sasha " ) , on June 10 , 2001 . The Obama daughters attended the private University of Chicago Laboratory Schools . When they moved to Washington , D.C. , in January 2009 , the girls started at the private Sidwell Friends School . The Obamas have two Portuguese Water Dogs , the first , a male named Bo , a gift from Senator Ted Kennedy . In August 2013 , Bo was joined by Sunny , a female . 
 Applying the proceeds of a book deal , the family moved in 2005 from a Hyde Park , Chicago condominium to a $ 1 @.@ 6 million house in neighboring Kenwood , Chicago . The purchase of an adjacent lot — and sale of part of it to Obama by the wife of developer , campaign donor and friend Tony <unk> — attracted media attention because of <unk> 's subsequent indictment and conviction on political corruption charges that were unrelated to Obama . 
 In December 2007 , Money estimated the Obama family 's net worth at $ 1 @.@ 3 million . Their 2009 tax return showed a household income of $ 5 @.@ 5 million — up from about $ 4 @.@ 2 million in 2007 and $ 1 @.@ 6 million in 2005 — mostly from sales of his books . On his 2010 income of $ 1 @.@ 7 million , he gave 14 percent to non @-@ profit organizations , including $ 131 @,@ 000 to Fisher House Foundation , a charity assisting wounded veterans ' families , allowing them to reside near where the veteran is receiving medical treatments . As per his 2012 financial disclosure , Obama may be worth as much as $ 10 million . 
 Obama tried to quit smoking several times , sometimes using nicotine replacement therapy , and , in early 2010 , Michelle Obama said that he had successfully quit smoking . 
 = = = Religious views = = = 
 Obama is a Protestant Christian whose religious views developed in his adult life . He wrote in The Audacity of Hope that he " was not raised in a religious household " . He described his mother , raised by non @-@ religious parents , as being detached from religion , yet " in many ways the most spiritually awakened person that I have ever known . " He described his father as a " confirmed atheist " by the time his parents met , and his stepfather as " a man who saw religion as not particularly useful . " Obama explained how , through working with black churches as a community organizer while in his twenties , he came to understand " the power of the African @-@ American religious tradition to spur social change . " 
 In January 2008 , Obama told Christianity Today : " I am a Christian , and I am a devout Christian . I believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of Jesus Christ . I believe that faith gives me a path to be cleansed of sin and have eternal life . " On September 27 , 2010 , Obama released a statement commenting on his religious views saying " I 'm a Christian by choice . My family didn 't – frankly , they weren 't folks who went to church every week . And my mother was one of the most spiritual people I knew , but she didn 't raise me in the church . So I came to my Christian faith later in life , and it was because the precepts of Jesus Christ spoke to me in terms of the kind of life that I would want to lead – being my brothers ' and sisters ' keeper , treating others as they would treat me . " 
 Obama met Trinity United Church of Christ pastor Rev. Jeremiah Wright in October 1987 , and became a member of Trinity in 1992 . He resigned from Trinity in May 2008 during his first presidential campaign after some of Wright 's statements were criticized . The Obama family has attended several Protestant churches since moving to Washington , D.C. in 2009 , including Shiloh Baptist Church and St. John 's Episcopal Church . After a prolonged effort to find a church to attend regularly in Washington , Obama announced in June 2009 that his primary place of worship would be the Evergreen Chapel at Camp David . 
 = Leicester City F.C. = 
 Leicester City Football Club ( / <unk> ˈsɪti / ) , also known as the Foxes , is an English professional football club based at the King Power Stadium in Leicester . They play in the Premier League , having been promoted as champions of the Football League Championship in 2013 – 14 , signalling a return to the top flight of English football after a decade away . Their home stadium , the King Power Stadium , is the 20th largest football ground in England , with a capacity of 32 @,@ 312 . 
 The club was founded in 1884 as Leicester Fosse F.C. , playing on a field near Fosse Road . They moved to Filbert Street in 1891 , were elected to the Football League in 1894 and adopted the name Leicester City in 1919 . They moved to the nearby Walkers Stadium in 2002 , which was renamed the King Power Stadium after a change of ownership in 2011 . 
 Leicester won the 2015 – 16 Premier League , their first top @-@ level football championship . By some measures it was the greatest sporting upset ever : multiple bookmakers had never paid out at such long odds for any sport . Prior to this , their highest ever finish was second place in the top flight , in Division One in 1928 – 29 . Throughout Leicester 's history , they have spent all but one season within the top two tiers of English football . The club holds a joint @-@ highest seven second @-@ tier titles ( six Second Division and one Championship ) . City have several promotions to their name , as well as one League One title . 
 In 1971 , they won the FA Community Shield . They have also won the League Cup three times , were runners up in 1999 , and have been FA Cup finalists four times , a tournament record for the most defeats in the final without having won the competition . Leicester will feature in the 2016 @-@ 17 UEFA Champions League as their fourth time playing European football . They will also play in the 2016 International Champions Cup , as a pre season tournament . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 Formed in 1884 by a group of old boys of <unk> School as " Leicester Fosse " , the club joined the Football Association in 1890 . Before moving to Filbert Street in 1891 , the club played at five different grounds , including Victoria Park south @-@ east of the city centre and the Belgrave Road Cricket and Bicycle Grounds . The club also joined the Midland League in 1891 , and were elected to Division Two of the Football League in 1894 after finishing second . Leicester 's first ever Football League game was a 4 – 3 defeat at Grimsby Town , with a first League win the following week , against Rotherham United at Filbert Street . The same season also saw the club 's largest win to date , a 13 – 0 victory over Notts Olympic in an FA Cup qualifying game . In 1907 – 08 the club finished as Second Division runners @-@ up , gaining promotion to the First Division , the highest level of English football . However , the club were relegated after a single season which included the club 's record defeat , a 12 – 0 loss against Nottingham Forest . 
 In 1919 , when League football resumed after World War I , Leicester Fosse ceased trading due to financial difficulties of which little is known . The club was reformed as " Leicester City Football Club " , particularly appropriate as the borough of Leicester had recently been given city status . Following the name change , the club enjoyed moderate success in the 1920s ; under the management of Peter Hodge , who left in May 1926 to be replaced two months later by Willie Orr , and with record goalscorer Arthur Chandler in the side , they won the Division Two title in 1924 – 25 and recorded their second @-@ highest league finish in 1928 – 29 as runners @-@ up by a single point to Sheffield Wednesday . However the 1930s saw a downturn in fortunes , with the club relegated in 1934 – 35 and , after promotion in 1936 – 37 , another relegation in 1938 – 39 would see them finish the decade in Division Two . 
 = = = Post @-@ World War II = = = 
 City reached the FA Cup final for the first time in their history in 1949 , losing 3 – 1 to Wolverhampton Wanderers . However , the club was celebrating a week later when a draw on the last day of the season ensured survival in Division Two . Leicester won the Division Two championship in 1954 , with the help of Arthur Rowley , one of the club 's most prolific strikers . Although they were relegated from Division One the next season , under Dave Halliday they returned in 1957 , with Rowley scoring a club record 44 goals in one season . Leicester remained in Division One until 1969 , their longest period ever in the top flight . 
 Under the management of Matt Gillies and his assistant Bert Johnson , Leicester reached the FA Cup final on another two occasions , but lost in both 1961 and 1963 . As they lost to double winners Tottenham in 1961 , they were England 's representatives in the 1961 – 62 European Cup Winners ' Cup . In the 1962 – 63 season , the club led the First Division during the winter , thanks to a sensational run of form on icy and frozen pitches the club became nicknamed the " Ice Kings " eventually placed fourth , the club 's best post @-@ war finish . Gillies guided Leicester to their first piece of silverware in 1964 , when Leicester beat Stoke 4 – 3 on aggregate to win the League Cup for the first time . Leicester also reached the League Cup final the following year , but lost 3 – 2 on aggregate to Chelsea . Gillies and Johnson received praise for their version of the " whirl " and the " switch " system , a system that had previously been used by the Austrian and Hungarian national teams . After a bad start to the season , Matt Gillies resigned in November 1968 . His successor , Frank O 'Farrell was unable to prevent relegation , but the club reached the FA Cup final in 1969 for the last time to date , losing to Manchester City 1 – 0 . 
 In 1971 , Leicester were promoted back to Division One , and won the Charity Shield for the only time . Unusually , due to Double ( association football ) winners Arsenal 's commitments in European competition , Division Two winners Leicester were invited to play FA Cup runners up Liverpool , beating them 1 – 0 . Jimmy Bloomfield was appointed for the new season , and his team remained in the First Division for his tenure . No period since Bloomfield has seen the club remain in the top division for so long . Leicester reached the FA Cup semi @-@ final in 1973 – 74 . 
 Frank McLintock , a noted player for seven years for Leicester in a successful period from the late Fifties to the mid Sixties , succeeded Jimmy Bloomfield in 1977 . City were relegated at the end of the 1977 – 78 season and McLintock resigned . Jock Wallace resumed the tradition of successful Scottish managers ( after Peter Hodge and Matt Gillies ) by steering Leicester to the Division Two championship in 1980 . Unfortunately , Wallace was unable to keep Leicester in Division One , but they reached the FA Cup semi @-@ final in 1982 . Under Wallace , one of City 's most famous home @-@ grown players , Gary Lineker , emerged into the first team squad . Leicester 's next manager was Gordon Milne , who achieved promotion in 1983 . Lineker helped Leicester maintain their place in the First Division but was sold to Everton in 1985 and two years later Leicester were relegated , having failed to find a suitable replacement to partner Alan Smith , who was sold to Arsenal after Leicester went down . 
 Milne left in 1986 and was replaced in 1987 by David Pleat , who was sacked in January 1991 with Leicester in danger of relegation to the Third Division . Gordon Lee was put in charge of the club until the end of the season . Leicester won their final game of the season , which guided them clear of relegation to the third tier of the football league . 
 Brian Little took over in 1991 and by the end of the 1991 – 92 season Leicester had reached the playoff final for a place in the new FA Premier League , but lost to Blackburn Rovers and a penalty from former Leicester striker Mike Newell . The club also reached the playoff final the following year , losing 4 – 3 to Swindon Town , having come back from 3 – 0 down . In 1993 – 94 City were promoted from the playoffs , beating Derby County 2 – 1 in the final . Little quit as Leicester manager the following November to take charge at Aston Villa , and his successor Mark McGhee was unable to save Leicester from finishing second from bottom in the 1994 – 95 season . 
 McGhee left the club unexpectedly in December 1995 whilst Leicester were top of the First Division to take charge of Wolverhampton Wanderers . McGhee was replaced by Martin O 'Neill . Under O 'Neill , Leicester qualified for the 1996 Football League play @-@ offs and beat Crystal Palace 2 – 1 in the final through a 120th minute Steve Claridge goal to gain promotion to the Premier League . Following promotion , Leicester established themselves in the Premier League with four successive top ten finishes . O 'Neill ended Leicester 's 33 @-@ year wait for a major trophy , winning the League Cup twice , in 1997 and 2000 , and Leicester were runners @-@ up in 1999 . Thus the club qualified for the UEFA Cup in 1997 – 98 and 2000 – 01 , the club 's first European competition since 1961 . In June 2000 , O 'Neill left Leicester City to take over as manager of Celtic . 
 = = = Decline in the early 21st Century = = = 
 O 'Neill was replaced by former England U @-@ 21 coach Peter Taylor . During this time , one of Leicester 's European appearances ended in a 3 – 1 defeat to Red Star Belgrade on 28 September 2000 in the 2001 UEFA Cup . Leicester began well under Taylor 's management , topping the Premier League for two weeks in the autumn and remaining in contention for a European place for most of the campaign , before a late season collapse dragged them down to a 13th @-@ place finish . 
 Taylor was sacked after a terrible start to the 2001 – 02 season , and his successor Dave Bassett lasted just six months before being succeeded by his assistant Micky Adams , the change of management being announced just before relegation was confirmed . Leicester won just five league games all season . 
 Leicester moved into the new 32 @,@ 500 @-@ seat Walkers Stadium at the start of the 2002 – 03 season , ending 111 years at Filbert Street . Walkers , the Leicestershire @-@ based crisp manufacturers , acquired the naming rights for a ten @-@ year period . In October 2002 , the club went into administration with debts of £ 30 million . Some of the reasons were the loss of TV money ( ITV Digital , itself in administration , had promised money to First Division clubs for TV rights ) , the large wage bill , lower than expected fees for players transferred to other clubs and the £ 37 million cost of the new stadium . Adams was banned from the transfer market for most of the season , even after the club was rescued with a takeover by a consortium led by Gary Lineker . Adams guided Leicester to runners @-@ up spot in Division One and automatic promotion back to the Premiership with more than 90 points . Leicester only lasted one season in the top flight and were relegated to the newly labelled Championship , previously known as Division One . 
 When Adams resigned as manager in October 2004 Craig Levein was appointed boss . This would prove to be an unsuccessful period and after 15 months in charge Levein was sacked , having failed to get the Foxes anywhere near the promotion places . Assistant manager Rob Kelly , took over as caretaker manager , and after winning three out of four games was appointed to see out the rest of the season . Kelly steered Leicester to safety and in April 2006 was given the manager 's job on a permanent basis . 
 In October 2006 , ex @-@ Portsmouth chairman Milan Mandarić was quoted as saying he was interested in buying the club , reportedly at a price of around £ 6 million with the current playing squad valued at roughly £ 4 @.@ 2 million . The takeover was formally announced on 13 February 2007 . On 11 April 2007 , Rob Kelly was sacked as manager and Nigel Worthington appointed as caretaker manager until the end of the season . Worthington saved the club from relegation , but was not offered the job on a permanent basis . On 25 May 2007 the club announced former MK Dons manager Martin Allen as their new manager with a three @-@ year contract . Allen 's relationship with Mandarić became tense and after only four games Allen left by mutual consent on 29 August 2007 . On 13 September 2007 , Mandarić announced Gary Megson as the new manager of the club , citing Megson 's " wealth of experience " as a deciding factor in the appointment . However , Megson left on 24 October 2007 after only six weeks in charge , following an approach made for his services by Bolton Wanderers . Mandarić placed Frank Burrows and Gerry Taggart in the shared position as caretaker managers until a professional manager was appointed . 
 On 22 November , Ian Holloway was appointed manager , and he became the first Leicester manager in over 50 years to win his first league game in charge , beating Bristol City 2 – 0 . This initial success did not last , and Leicester were relegated from the Championship at the end of the 2007 – 08 season . 
 = = = 2009 – 2016 : Third tier to English Champions = = = 
 2008 – 09 was Leicester 's first ever season outside the top two levels of English football , but the appointment of Nigel Pearson to replace Holloway , who left by mutual consent a few weeks after relegation was confirmed , sparked a rebuilding of the club that would culminate in the fastest rise to the peak of the English football league system since Ipswich Town F.C. in 1962 . Leicester returned to the Championship league at the first attempt , finishing as champions of League One after a 2 – 0 win at Southend United , with two games in hand . The 2009 – 2010 season saw Leicester 's revival under Pearson continue , as the club finished fifth and reached the Championship play @-@ offs in their first season back in the second tier . Though coming from 2 – 0 down on aggregate , away to Cardiff City , to briefly lead 3 – 2 , they eventually lost to a penalty shoot @-@ out in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final . At the end of the season Pearson left Leicester to become the manager of Hull City , claiming that he felt that the club seemed reluctant to keep him , and that Paulo Sousa had been the club 's guest at both play @-@ off games , hinting at a possible replacement . On Wednesday 7 July 2010 , Sousa was confirmed as Pearson 's replacement . 
 In August 2010 , following agreement on a three @-@ year shirt sponsorship deal with duty @-@ free retailers the King Power Group , Mandarić sold the club to Thai @-@ led consortium Asian Football Investments ( AFI ) fronted by King Power Group 's <unk> <unk> . Mandarić , an investor in AFI , was retained as club chairman . On 1 October 2010 , after a poor start that saw Leicester bottom of the Championship with only one win out of the first 9 league games , Paulo Sousa was sacked by the club with immediate effect . Two days later , Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson , who had been approached by the club after the 6 – 1 loss to then bottom @-@ of @-@ the @-@ table Portsmouth two weeks earlier , was appointed as his replacement , signing a two @-@ year contract with the club . On 10 February 2011 , <unk> <unk> , part of the Thai @-@ based Asia Football Investments consortium , was appointed new chairman of the club after Mandarić left in November to take over Sheffield Wednesday . 
 Leicester were viewed as one of the favourites for promotion in the 2011 – 12 season , but on 24 October 2011 , following an inconsistent start with the Foxes winning just 5 out of their first 13 games , Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson left the club by mutual consent . Three weeks later Nigel Pearson returned to the club as Eriksson 's successor . Pearson would go on to lead The Foxes to a 6th @-@ place finish in the 2012 – 2013 season , ensuring Leicester City were in the Championship play offs . Leicester lost the playoff semifinal 3 – 2 on aggregate to Watford after Anthony <unk> missed a late penalty and Troy <unk> scored right at the end after a swift counterattack from a Manuel Almunia double save . 
 In 2014 , Leicester 's march up the league system hit a breakthrough . Their 2 – 1 win over Sheffield Wednesday , combined with losses by Queens Park Rangers and Derby County , allowed Leicester City to clinch a promotion to the Premier League after a 10 @-@ year absence . Later that month , a win at Bolton saw Leicester become the champions of the 2013 – 14 Football League Championship – the seventh time they had been champions of England 's second tier . 5th May 2014 saw 35 @,@ 000 fans in Leicester line the streets for a parade , in celebration of the team 's success . 
 = = = = Return to Premier League = = = = 
 Leicester started their first season in the Premier League since 2004 with a good run of results in their first five league games , starting with a 2 – 2 draw on the opening day against Everton . The Foxes then claimed their first Premier League win since May 2004 , with a 1 – 0 win at Stoke City . On 21 September 2014 , Leicester went on to produce one of the greatest comebacks in Premier League history to beat Manchester United 5 – 3 at the King Power Stadium after coming back from 3 – 1 down with 30 minutes left to score four goals . They also made Premier League history by becoming the first team to beat United from a two @-@ goal deficit since the league 's launch in 1992 . 
 During the 2014 – 15 season , a dismal run of form saw the team slip to the bottom of the league table with only 19 points from 29 games . By 3 April 2015 they were 7 points adrift from safety . This could have brought a sudden end to Leicester 's seven @-@ year rise , but seven wins from their final nine league games meant that the Foxes finished the season in 14th place with 41 points . They finished the season with a 5 – 1 thrashing of relegated Queens Park Rangers . Their upturn in results was described as one of the Premier League 's greatest ever escapes from relegation . They also became only the third team in Premier League history to survive after being bottom at Christmas ( the others were West Brom in 2005 and Sunderland in 2014 ) , and no team with fewer than 20 points from 29 games had previously stayed up . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 Premier League champions = = = = 
 On 30 June 2015 , however , Pearson was sacked , with the club stating that " the working relationship between Nigel and the Board is no longer viable . " The sacking was linked to a number of PR issues involving Pearson throughout the season , with the final straw involving his son James ' role in a racist sex tape made by three Leicester City reserve players in Thailand during a post @-@ season goodwill tour . Leicester City reacted by appointing former Chelsea manager Claudio Ranieri as their new manager for the new 2015 – 16 Premier League season . Under Ranieri , the club made an exceptional start to the season . Striker Jamie Vardy scored 13 goals over 11 consecutive games from August to November , breaking Ruud van Nistelrooy 's Premier League record of scoring in 10 consecutive games . On 19 December , Leicester defeated Everton 3 – 2 at Goodison Park to top the Premier League on Christmas Day , having been bottom exactly 12 months earlier . A 2 – 0 victory at Sunderland on 10 April , coupled with Tottenham 's 3 – 0 win over Manchester United , ensured Leicester 's qualification for the Champions League for the first time in their history . 
 Leicester won the Premier League on 2 May 2016 , after Tottenham Hotspur failed to secure a win against Chelsea after only drawing the match 2 – 2 . This completed the fastest seven @-@ year rise to the title except for Ipswich Town in 1962 , and Leicester faced a far more unequal top tier than Ipswich did back then . Nottingham Forest also won the title in 1978 in their first season after promotion . Bookmakers thought Leicester 's victory was so unlikely that Ladbrokes and William Hill offered odds of 5 @,@ 000 @-@ 1 for it at the start of the season . Neither bookmaker had ever paid out such long odds , and the trophy resulted in the largest payout in British sporting history with total winnings of £ 25 million . The scale of the surprise attracted global attention for the club and the city of Leicester . The Economist declared it would be ' pored over for management lessons ' . Several commentators have viewed it as an inspiration to other clubs and as fundamentally transforming the expectations similar sized clubs face in English football . The Executive Chairman of the Premier League , Richard Scudamore , pointed out , ' if this was a once in every 5 @,@ 000 year event , then we 've effectively got another 5 @,@ 000 years of hope ahead of us ' . A film has even been planned of the story , centred on Jamie Vardy . 
 On 16 May 2016 , over 240 @,@ 000 Leicester City fans turned out on the streets of Leicester and Victoria Park to celebrate their team 's historic achievement . 
 = = Colours , crest and traditions = = 
 The club 's home colours of royal blue and white have been used for the team 's kits throughout most of its history . The first sponsorship logo to appear on a Leicester shirt was that of Ind Coope in 1983 . British snack food manufacturer Walkers Crisps held a long association with the club , sponsoring them from 1987 to 2001 . 
 An image of a fox was first incorporated into the club crest in 1948 , as Leicestershire is known for foxes and fox hunting . This is the origin of the nickname " The Foxes " . The club mascot is a character called " Filbert Fox " . There are also secondary characters " Vickie Vixen " and " Cousin Dennis " . On 11 June 2016 , the club announced they were looking for young supporters to design a new mascot , to be alongside " Filbert Fox " at home games . The current shirt badge has been used since 1992 and features a fox 's head overlaid onto a <unk> , the <unk> is similar to the one used on the coat of arms of Leicester . In the 2009 – 10 season which was the 125th anniversary the home kit featured no sponsor and a new central crest with " 125 Years " below . The crest was slightly changed , this change included the fox in the crest to have a white area under its nose . The circles in the crest were also moved around . 
 In homage to Leicestershire 's tradition of hunting , the club adopted the playing of the Post Horn Galop in 1941 prior to home matches . It was played over the PA system as the teams came out of the tunnel at all home games . The club since replaced it with a modern version , which is now played as teams emerge for the second half . For the first half , the post horn has been played live on pitch by Paul Hing since 2009 . ' Foxes Never Quit ' is the club 's motto , which is placed above the tunnel entrance as the teams head out onto the pitch . 
 8th July 2016 saw the club launch their new 3rd away kit for the 2016 @-@ 17 Premier League season . It will feature in their 2016 @-@ 17 UEFA Champions League campaign , and will also be in use for Leicester 's debut match in the competition . The design took inspiration from the 1983 / 84 kit , and boasts a clean white design with thin blue pinstripes on the shirt , as well as a textured form stripe design across both the shirt and shorts . 
 = = = Kit manufacturers and sponsors = = = 
 Since 2012 Leicester City 's kit has been manufactured by Puma . Previous manufacturers have included Bukta ( 1962 – 64 , 1990 – 92 ) , Admiral ( 1976 – 79 , 1983 – 88 ) , Umbro ( 1979 – 83 ) , Scoreline ( 1988 – 90 ) , Fox Leisure ( 1992 – 2000 ) , Le Coq Sportif ( 2000 – 05 ) , JJB ( 2005 – 07 ) , <unk> ( 2007 – 09 ) , Joma ( 2009 – 10 ) , and <unk> ( 2010 – 12 ) . The current shirt sponsors are King Power , a company also owned by the club 's owners . The first sponsorship logo to appear on a Leicester shirt was that of Ind Coope in 1983 . British snack food manufacturer Walkers Crisps held a long association with the club , sponsoring them from 1987 to 2001 . Other sponsors have included John Bull ( 1986 – 87 ) , LG ( 2001 – 03 ) , Alliance & Leicester ( 2003 – 07 ) , Topps Tiles ( 2007 – 09 ) , <unk> ( 2009 – 10 ) , and <unk> ( 2009 – 10 ) . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 In their early years , Leicester played at numerous grounds , but have only played at two since they joined the Football League . When first starting out they played on a field by the Fosse Road , hence the original name Leicester Fosse . They moved from there to Victoria Park , and subsequently to Belgrave Road . Upon turning professional the club moved to Mill Lane . After eviction from Mill Lane the club played at the County Cricket ground while seeking a new ground . The club secured the use of an area of ground by Filbert Street , and moved there in 1891 . 
 Some improvements by noted football architect Archibald Leitch occurred in the Edwardian era , and in 1927 a new two tier stand was built , named the Double Decker , a name it would keep till the ground 's closure in 2002 . The ground wasn 't developed any further , apart from compulsory seating being added , till 1993 when work began on the new Carling Stand . The stand was impressive while the rest of the ground was untouched since at least the 1920s ; this led manager Martin O 'Neill to say he used to " lead new signings out backwards " so they only saw the Carling Stand . 
 The club moved away from Filbert Street in 2002 to a new 32 @,@ 500 all @-@ seater stadium . The stadium was originally named Walkers Stadium in a deal with food manufacturers Walkers , whose brand logo used to be found at various points around the outside of the stadium . The first match the Walkers hosted was a friendly against Athletic Bilbao , the game was drawn 1 – 1 with Tiko of Bilbao being the first scorer at the stadium and Jordan Stewart being the first City player to score , and the first competitive match was a 2 – 0 victory against Watford . The stadium has since hosted an England international against Serbia and Montenegro which finished 2 – 1 to England , as well as internationals between Brazil and Jamaica , and Jamaica and Ghana . More recently the stadium has been used to host the Heineken Cup European Rugby semi finals for the Leicester Tigers rugby club , itself based within a mile of the Walkers Stadium ( now King Power Stadium ) . 
 On 19 August 2010 , it emerged that the new owners King Power wanted to rename the stadium The King Power Stadium , and had plans to increase the capacity to 42 @,@ 000 should Leicester secure promotion . On 7 July 2011 , Leicester City confirmed that the Walkers Stadium would now be known as the King Power Stadium . 
 The King Power Stadium has also honoured past greats of the club , by naming suites and lounges inside the stadium after the club 's former players Gordon Banks , Adam Black , Arthur Chandler , Gary Lineker , Arthur Rowley , Sep Smith , Keith Weller and former manager Jimmy Bloomfield . 
 = = Support = = 
 The club 's anthem is When You 're Smiling , and supporters are often referred to as the Blue Army . Fans travel in numbers to watch the club home and away . According to Football League attendance statistics , the 2009 @-@ 10 season showed Leicester to have the 3rd best home & away support . Two seasons later in the 2011 @-@ 12 campaign , Leicester had the 3rd best home support , and the 4th best away support . The 2013 @-@ 14 season also supports the same attendance figures as 2011 @-@ 12 . At home matches , Leicester have gained notability for their passionate crowd & vocal atmosphere . Since 2010 , their biggest away following was at an FA Cup match against Nottingham Forest at the City Ground in 2012 . 8 @,@ 000 travelling Foxes fans went to the match , with the scoreline finishing 0 – 0 . Since City moved to their new stadium in 2002 following the exit of Filbert Street , average home gates have never dropped below 20 @,@ 000 , even when they were relegated to League 1 in 2008 for the first time in the club 's history . 
 The club have several supporter groups in England , and alongside the support in the UK , Leicester City also have fans around the world . Since being bought by the King Power group in 2011 , Leicester have developed a following in Thailand , the home of their owners , and in Algeria , the nation of 2015 – 16 title winner Riyad Mahrez . In Thailand , Singha Corporation is an Official Club Partner . Leicester also have a good following in New York , USA . So much so , that there is a dedicated supporter group called The New York Foxes , where fans of the club can gather together to support the team for both home and away matches . The group were established in 2011 , and have been featured on UK media . 
 = = Rival clubs = = 
 Main articles : Leicester City F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. rivalry , Derby County F.C. and Leicester City F.C. rivalry , M69 derby 
 Leicester fans consider the double European Cup Winners Nottingham Forest to be their main rivals . The club 's other rivals are Derby County . An East Midlands Derby is any match involving two of these three clubs . 
 Leicester also have a rivalry with Coventry City , 24 miles away . The game between the two clubs has become known as the M69 derby after the motorway connecting the two cities . 
 = = European record = = 
 Leicester score first , to the left . Opposition score to the right . 
 Notes 
 PR : Preliminary round 
 1R : First round 
 GS : Group stage 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Domestic competitions = = = 
 Cups won throughout Leicester City 's history . 
 = = = = League = = = = 
 Premier League 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 2015 – 16 
 Football League Championship 
 Champions ( 7 ) : 1924 – 25 , 1936 – 37 , 1953 – 54 , 1956 – 57 , 1970 – 71 , 1979 – 80 , 2013 – 14 
 Play @-@ off winners ( 2 ) : 1993 – 94 , 1995 – 96 
 Football League One 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 2008 – 09 
 = = = = Cup = = = = 
 Football League Cup 
 Winners ( 3 ) : 1963 – 64 , 1996 – 97 , 1999 – 2000 
 FA Charity Shield / FA Community Shield 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1971 
 = = = Regional competitions = = = 
 War League South 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 1942 
 Football League War Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1941 
 = = Managerial history = = 
 Up until Peter Hodge was hired after World War I , the club had no official manager . A nominal role of secretary / manager was employed , though the board and the selection committee took control of most team affairs . It was Hodge who instated a system at the club for the manager having complete control over player and staff recruitment , team selection and tactics . Though Hodge was originally also titled " secretary / manager " he has retrospectively been named as the club 's first official " manager " . 
 Leicester have had a total of 9 permanent secretary / managers and 34 permanent managers ( not including caretakers ) . Nigel Pearson and Peter Hodge have both had two separate spells in charge the club . Dave Bassett also had a second spell as caretaker manager after his spell as permanent manager . Listed below is Leicester 's complete managerial history ( permanent managers and secretary / managers only , caretakers are not included ) . 
 = = = Managers = = = 
 ( Note : During the 1986 – 87 season both Gordon Milne and Bryan Hamilton shared managerial duties with Milne assuming the title " General Manager " and Hamilton assuming the title " Team Manager " ) 
 = = Records and statistics = = 
 Graham Cross holds the record for the most Leicester appearances , with the defender playing 599 games between 1960 – 1976 , although Adam Black holds the record for the most appearances in the league with 528 between 1920 – 1935 . 
 Striker Arthur Chandler is currently the club 's all @-@ time record goal scorer , netting 273 in his 12 years at the club ; he also found the net in 8 consecutive matches in the 1924 – 25 season . The most goals managed in a single season for the club is 44 by Arthur Rowley , in the 1956 – 57 season . The fastest goal in the club 's history was scored by Matty Fryatt , when he netted after just nine seconds against Preston North End in April 2006 . Jamie Vardy broke the Premier League record for most consecutive league games with a goal ( 11 games ) in the 2015 / 16 season . 
 The record transfer fee paid by Leicester City for a player was around £ 16 million for CSKA Moscow striker Ahmed Musa with second highest being that for <unk> Mendy , a midfielder , from <unk> Nice for a fee of around £ 13 million . The highest transfer fee received for a Leicester City player was approximately £ 30 million from Chelsea for midfielder N <unk> <unk> . 
 The club 's record attendance is 47 @,@ 298 against Tottenham Hotspur at Filbert Street , in a fifth round FA Cup clash in 1928 . The highest league record at their current home , the King Power Stadium , was 32 @,@ 242 for a competitive match against Sunderland on 8 August 2015 . The highest ever attendance for a non @-@ competitive game of 32 @,@ 188 , was seen at a pre @-@ season friendly against Spanish giants Real Madrid on 30 July 2011 . 
 Leicester 's highest ever league finish is 1st in the Premier League in 2015 – 16 . Their lowest ever league finish was 1st in Football League One in 2008 – 09 . Leicester City are joint equal with Manchester City for having won the most English second tier titles ( 7 ) . The club has reached four FA Cup finals , yet lost them all . This is the record for the most FA Cup final appearances without winning the trophy . 
 Leicester 's longest ever unbeaten run in the league was between 1 November 2008 and 7 March 2009 , to which they remained unbeaten for 23 games on their way to the League One title . ( This was their only ever season in the third tier of English football ) . Their longest run of consecutive victories in the league is 9 , which they achieved between 21 December 2013 and 1 February 2014 ( in The Championship ) . 
 = = League history = = 
 Since their election to the football league in 1894 Leicester have spent much of their history yo @-@ yoing between the top two tiers in English football . Leicester have played outside the top two tiers only once in their history to date : during the 2008 – 09 season they played in League One , the third tier of English football , after relegation from the Championship the season prior , but were promptly promoted back as champions . Leicester have never played lower than the third tier of English football . 
 L1 
 = Level 1 of the football league system ; L2 = 
 Level 2 of the football league system ; L3 = Level 3 of the football league system . 
 Seasons spent at Level 1 of the football league system : 48 
 Seasons spent at Level 2 of the football league system : 62 
 Seasons spent at Level 3 of the football league system : 1 
 Seasons spent at Level 4 of the football league system : 0 
 ( up to and including 2015 – 16 ) 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First @-@ team squad = = = 
 As of 16 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Academy = = = 
 = = = Past players = = = 
 = = Club staff = = 
 As of 8 August 2015 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 = = = Captains = = = 
 = = = Player of the Year = = = 
 Leicester City 's Player of the Year award is voted for by the club 's supporters at the end of every season . 
 = = = English Hall of Fame members = = = 
 The following have played for Leicester and have been inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame : 
 Gordon Banks 2002 ( Inaugural Inductee ) 
 Peter Shilton 2002 ( Inaugural Inductee ) 
 Gary Lineker 2003 
 Don Revie 2004 ( Inducted as a manager ) 
 Frank McLintock 2009 
 = = = Football League 100 Legends = = = 
 The Football League 100 Legends is a list of " 100 legendary football players " produced by The Football League in 1998 , to celebrate the 100th season of League football . It also included Premier League players , and the following former Leicester City players were included : 
 Arthur Rowley 
 Gordon Banks 
 Frank McLintock 
 Peter Shilton 
 Gary Lineker 
 = = = World Cup players = = = 
 The following players have been selected by their country in the World Cup Finals , while playing for Leicester . 
 John Anderson ( 1954 ) 
 Willie Cunningham ( 1958 ) 
 Ken Leek ( 1958 ) 
 Gordon Banks ( 1966 ) – Won the 1966 World Cup while at Leicester 
 John O 'Neill ( 1982 , 1986 ) 
 Paul Ramsey ( 1986 ) 
 Gary McAllister ( 1990 ) 
 David Kelly ( 1990 ) 
 Matt Elliott ( 1998 ) 
 Kasey Keller ( 1998 ) 
 Muzzy Izzet ( 2002 ) 
 Riyad Mahrez ( 2014 ) 
 = = = Players with over 300 appearances for Leicester = = = 
 Includes competitive appearances only . Current players in bold . 
 = = = Players with 50 or more goals for Leicester = = = 
 Includes competitive appearances only . Current players in bold . 
 = = Personnel honours and awards = = 
 = = = European Footballer of the Year nominee = = = 
 The following players have been nominated for the Ballon d 'Or award for European footballer of the year ( World footballer of the year since 1995 ) while playing for Leicester : 
 Gordon Banks ( 1966 ) 
 = = = PFA Player of the Year = = = 
 The following players have been named the PFA Player of the Year whilst playing for Leicester : 
 2016 - Riyad Mahrez 
 = = = FWA Footballer of the Year = = = 
 The following players have been named the FWA Footballer of the Year whilst playing for Leicester : 
 2016 - Jamie Vardy 
 = = = English Golden Boot = = = 
 The following players have won the English Golden Boot for being the country 's top goalscorer , while at Leicester ( Note : This applies only to players playing in the top tier of English football ) : 
 Gary Lineker ( 1984 – 85 ) ( joint winner ) 
 = = = English Second Division Golden Boot = = = 
 The following players have won the golden boot for being the top goalscorer in the second tier of English football while at Leicester : 
 David <unk> ( 1894 – 95 ) 
 Arthur Chandler ( 1924 – 25 ) 
 Jack Bowers ( 1936 – 37 ) 
 Arthur Rowley ( 1952 – 53 ) , ( 1956 – 57 ) 
 Willie Gardiner ( 1955 – 56 ) 
 Gary Lineker ( 1982 – 83 ) 
 = = = Football League Awards Player of the Year = = = 
 The following players have been named the best player in their division in the Football League Awards while at Leicester : 
 Matty Fryatt ( League One , 2009 ) 
 = = = LMA Manager of the Year = = = 
 The following managers have been named the LMA Manager of the Year or won their division award while at Leicester : 
 Nigel Pearson ( Championship , 2014 ) 
 Claudio Ranieri ( Overall , 2016 ; Premier League , 2016 ) 
 = = = PFA Team of the Year = = = 
 The following players have been named the PFA Team of the Year while at Leicester : 
 1979 – Second Division – Mark Wallington 
 1982 – Second Division – Mark Wallington 
 1989 – Second Division – Gary McAllister 
 1990 – Second Division – Gary McAllister 
 1996 – First Division – Garry Parker , Steve Claridge 
 2003 – First Division – Muzzy Izzet , Paul Dickov 
 2009 – League One – Jack Hobbs , Matt Oakley , Matty Fryatt 
 2011 – Championship – Kyle Naughton , Andy King 
 2013 – Championship – Kasper Schmeichel , Wes Morgan 
 2014 – Championship – Kasper Schmeichel , Wes Morgan , Danny Drinkwater 
 2016 – Premier League – Wes Morgan , N <unk> <unk> , Riyad Mahrez , Jamie Vardy 
 = Swift fox = 
 The swift fox ( Vulpes velox ) is a small light orange @-@ tan fox around the size of a domestic cat found in the western grasslands of North America , such as Montana , Colorado , New Mexico , Oklahoma and Texas . It also lives in Manitoba , Saskatchewan and Alberta in Canada , where it was previously extirpated . It is closely related to the kit fox and the two species are sometimes known as subspecies of Vulpes velox because hybrids of the two species occur naturally where their ranges overlap . 
 The swift fox lives primarily in short @-@ grass prairies and deserts . It became nearly extinct in the 1930s as a result of predator control programs , but was successfully reintroduced later . Currently , the conservation status of the species is considered by the IUCN as Least Concern owing to stable populations elsewhere . 
 Like most canids , the swift fox is an omnivore , and its diet includes grasses and fruits as well as small mammals , carrion , and insects . In the wild , its lifespan is three to six years , and it breeds once annually , from late December to March , depending on the geographic region . Pups are born anywhere from March to mid @-@ May , and are weaned at six to seven weeks old . 
 The swift fox is closely related genetically to the kit fox ( Vulpes macrotis ) , but occupies a different geographical range . The two have historically been regarded as different species for reasons basically related to size : the kit fox is slightly smaller than the swift fox , and the former has a narrower snout . However , hybrids between the two occur naturally where their ranges overlap , and some mammalogists classify the two as subspecies of a single species , usually treated as Vulpes velox ( with the swift fox being described as V. velox velox and the kit fox as V. velox macrotis ) . The molecular genetics evidence is not conclusive however , and some of those who have used it continue to treat the swift fox and kit fox as separate species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The swift fox has a dark , grayish , tan coloration that extends to a yellowish tan color across its sides and legs . The throat , chest , and belly range from pale yellow to white in color . Its tail is black @-@ tipped , and it has black patches on its muzzle . Its ears are noticeably large . It is about 12 inches ( 30 cm ) in height , and 31 inches ( 79 cm ) long , measuring from the head to the tip of the tail , or about the size of a domestic cat . Its weight ranges from around five to seven pounds . Males and females are similar in appearance , although males are slightly larger . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The swift fox resides primarily in deserts and short @-@ grass prairies . They form their dens in sandy soil on open prairies , in plowed fields , or along fences . It is native to the Great Plains region of North America , and its range extends north to the central part of Alberta , Canada , and south to Texas . It reaches from western Iowa to Colorado , Kansas , Wyoming , Nebraska , and Montana . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The swift fox was once a severely endangered species , due to predator control programs in the 1930s that were aimed mostly at the gray wolf and the coyote . The species was extirpated from Canada by 1938 , but a reintroduction program started in 1983 has been successful in establishing small populations in southeast Alberta and southwest Saskatchewan , despite the fact that many reintroduced individuals do not survive their first year . In May 1999 , the Species at Risk Act listed the swift fox as an endangered species in Canada . 
 Exact population numbers of the swift fox are unknown , but it is known that they currently inhabit only 40 % of their historic range . In addition to its populations in Canada , there are also swift fox populations in the United States , ranging from South Dakota to Texas . In 1995 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service determined that the fox warranted an endangered listing , but other higher priority species precluded its listing . This prompted state wildlife agencies within the fox 's range to create the Swift Fox Conservation Team , which worked to implement better swift fox management and monitoring programs . Populations in the United States are stable in the central part of its range , and it is not considered endangered in the United States . The IUCN Red List characterizes it as of Least Concern . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 In the wild , the swift fox usually lives 3 – 6 years , but may live up to 14 years in captivity . It is primarily nocturnal , spending only evenings and nighttime above ground in the summer . Daytime activities are usually confined to the den , but it has been known to spend the warm midday period above ground during the winter . The swift fox is more heavily dependent on its den than most North American canids , using them as shelter from predators . These dens are usually underground burrows that are two to four meters in length . It has been known to run very fast , at speeds of over 50 km / h ( 30 mph ) . or up to 60 km / h ( 40 mph ) The coyote is the swift fox 's main predator , but often chooses not to consume the swift fox . Other predators include the badger , golden eagle , and bobcat . It is also vulnerable to trapping and poisoning , as well as death on highways . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The adult swift fox 's breeding season varies with region . In the southern United States , it mates between December and February with pups born in March and early April , while in Canada , the breeding season begins in March , and pups are born in mid @-@ May . The male swift fox matures and may mate at one year , while the female usually waits until her second year before breeding . Adults live in pairs , and although some individuals mate for life , others choose different partners each year . Gestation takes around 51 days , and four to five kits are born . 
 The swift fox only has one litter annually , but may occupy up to thirteen dens in one year , moving because prey is scarce or because skin parasites build up inside the den . Sometimes it makes other burrows from other bigger animals , even though it is completely capable of digging one on its own . Pups are born in the den and typically remain there for approximately one month . A newborn pup 's eyes and ears remain closed for ten to fifteen days , leaving it dependent on the mother for food and protection during this time . It is usually weaned around six or seven weeks old and remains with its parents until fall . Recent research has shown that social organization in the swift fox is unusual among canids , since it is based on the females . Females maintain territories at all times , but males emigrate if the resident female is killed or removed . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Like most canids , the swift fox is an omnivore . Rabbits , mice , ground squirrels , birds , insects and lizards are staples . Grasses and fruits round out its diet . However , like any efficient forager , the swift fox takes advantage of seasonal foods . During the summer , adults eat large amounts of insects , including beetles and grasshoppers , and feed their young with larger prey items . Deer and other carrion killed by other animals may also be important food sources . 
 = Whiplash ( Selena Gomez & the Scene song ) = 
 " Whiplash " is a song by American band Selena Gomez & the Scene , from their third studio album When the Sun Goes Down ( 2011 ) . The song was originally written by Britney Spears ; after she started working on her sixth studio album Circus ( 2008 ) , Spears contacted Nicole Morier to write songs with her . Together , they wrote " Mmm Papi " , " Rock Me In " and " Whiplash " . The latter , which was produced by co @-@ writer Greg Kurstin , failed to make the album . In 2011 , Selena Gomez recorded the song with her band for When the Sun Goes Down . 
 " Whiplash " is a dance song with influences of electro , relying heavily on the usage of synthesizers . The pre @-@ chorus has a sing @-@ rap section in which Gomez delivers the lyrics in a thick British accent . " Whiplash " is musically different and much more aggressive than the rest of the album , and its lyrics speak of a blossoming romance ; it has been compared to the work of Spears . " Whiplash " received mixed to positive reviews . While some critics called it one of the standout tracks of When the Sun Goes Down , others dismissed its rap sections and lyrics . Selena Gomez & the Scene performed the song at shows while on the We Own the Night Tour ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Whiplash " was written and produced by Greg Kurstin , with additional writing by Nicole Morier and Britney Spears . The latter had recorded " Heaven on Earth " , written by Morier and songwriting team <unk> , for her fifth studio album Blackout ( 2007 ) . During an interview with On Air with Ryan Seacrest , Spears named the song her favorite from the album . When she started recording her sixth studio album Circus ( 2008 ) , she contacted Morier to write songs with her . When the two were in the studio , they asked Kurstin to give them tracks . Among the songs they worked on were " Mmm Papi " , " Rock Me In " and " Whiplash " . Both wanted to do something that Spears had not done before . " Mmm Papi " and " Rock Me In " were included in Circus ; however , " Whiplash " failed to make the cut . Morier explained , " There ’ s a couple songs we started that were great ideas but just incomplete . Maybe we ’ ll hear them with fresh ears someday and put them out , but I usually just like to start anew . " 
 On April 11 , 2011 , it was reported by MTV News that " Whiplash " would be recorded by Selena Gomez & the Scene for their third studio album When the Sun Goes Down . Lead singer Selena Gomez is a Spears fan , and after Kurstin played her the track for the first time , she " fell in love with it " , unaware of Spears 's contribution to the song . Gomez explained , " I came and sang and saw that she had co @-@ written it , so I was very excited . [ ... ] It was an honor and I 'm completely stoked . " The song leaked online in early June 2011 , several weeks prior to the album 's release . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Whiplash " is a dance song with influences of electro . It features a heavy usage of synthesizers , which were compared to those in Christina Aguilera 's " Not Myself Tonight " ( 2010 ) . During the pre @-@ chorus , there is a sing @-@ rap section in which Gomez delivers several phrases in a thick British accent , before the pulsating chorus begins . " Whiplash " has a much more aggressive vibe than the typical teen pop sound . According to the digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing Group , it is written in the key of D minor . The song runs through a shuffle beat and maintains a tempo of 138 beat per minute . Gomez 's vocal range spans from the high @-@ tone of A3 to the lower register of B ♭ 4 . It is also musically different and a departure from other songs in When the Sun Goes Down which are more straightforward pop , such as " Who Says " and " Bang Bang Bang " . 
 Several critics compared the song to the works of Spears . James Dinh of MTV News said that " Gomez , who has gushed to us about her Spears fandom , shows off her best impersonation " in the song . While reviewing the We Own the Night Tour , Kevin C. Johnson of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch said the song " sound [ s ] as if it was ripped directly from Spears ' catalog . " Blair Kelly of musicOMH compared it to the music of Circus , and more specifically to " Womanizer " ( 2008 ) . It was also compared by Tim Sendra of Allmusic to the " electro glam " sound of Goldfrapp . The lyrics of " Whiplash " speak of a blossoming romance . Gomez sings in the chorus , " Come on and take me to the other side / I 'm blown away , when I look into your eyes / I 'm so in love , I think I 'm going to crash / And get whiplash , whiplash , whiplash . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Whiplash " has received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . Tim Sendra of Allmusic selected it as one of the ' track picks ' of When the Sun Goes Down , calling it a " stomping jam " and one of the surprises of the album . He stated that the song " adds some welcome weirdness to an otherwise straightforward record . " In a positive review , Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post suggested that " Whiplash " was better than at least five songs from Spears 's seventh studio album Femme Fatale ( 2011 ) , saying " what I can 't figure out is why in the world would [ Spears ] give up this hot track " . Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly commented that " the top @-@ shelf collaborators don 't hurt — see : the grinding ' Whiplash , ' co @-@ penned by one Britney Spears . " Scott Shetler of PopCrush gave the song four stars out of five , explaining that it " possesses a hook that will send people running for the dance floor " , although " Gomez 's vocal is pretty flat [ ... ] but then again , this isn 't the kind of song to show off any sort of vocal gymnastics . " 
 Blair Kelly of musicOMH was divided in his review of " Whiplash " , calling it one of the best uptempo tracks from the album , although dismissing its " horrendous rap sections " , elaborating that " Selena Gomez should never be allowed to rap again , especially if she ’ s going to break into a horrific Queen 's English accent midway through . " Some reviews of the song were negative , with Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone stating that Gomez " brings nothing in the way of personality to her songs " , adding that " the swaggering ' sex ' song ' Whiplash ' would be comical if it wasn 't so tedious . " In another broadly negative review , PopMatters writer John Bergstrom suggested that Spears did not write any songs on Femme Fatale " to avoid the embarrassment of overwrought , fake @-@ British @-@ accent @-@ flaunting would @-@ be come @-@ ons like ' Whiplash ' . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Selena Gomez & the Scene performed " Whiplash " on shows at the We Own the Night Tour ( 2011 ) . The band performed the song after a medley of Britney Spears covers , including versions of " ... Baby One More Time " , " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " , " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " , " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , " Toxic " , " Hold It Against Me " , " Till the World Ends " , and " I Wanna Go " . After " Whiplash " , the band continued with a performance of Gomez 's " Tell Me Something I Don 't Know " ( 2008 ) . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Selena Gomez – lead vocals 
 Greg Kurstin – songwriter , producer , audio engineering , instrumentation , audio mixing at Echo Studios in Los Angeles , California 
 Nicole Morier – songwriter , background vocals 
 Britney Spears – songwriter 
 Jesse <unk> – audio engineering 
 Credits adapted from When The Sun Goes Down album liner notes . 
 = Gilles Villeneuve = 
 Joseph Gilles Henri Villeneuve ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> ] ; January 18 , 1950 – May 8 , 1982 ) , known as Gilles Villeneuve , was a Canadian racing driver . Villeneuve spent six years in Grand Prix racing with Ferrari , winning six races and widespread acclaim for his performances . 
 An enthusiast of cars and fast driving from an early age , Villeneuve started his professional career in snowmobile racing in his native province of Quebec . He moved into single seaters , winning the US and Canadian Formula Atlantic championships in 1976 , before being offered a drive in Formula One with the McLaren team at the 1977 British Grand Prix . He was taken on by reigning world champions Ferrari for the end of the season and from 1978 to his death in 1982 drove for the Italian team . He won six Grand Prix races in a short career at the highest level . In 1979 , he finished second by four points in the championship to teammate Jody Scheckter . 
 Villeneuve died in a 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) crash caused by a collision with the March of Jochen Mass during qualifying for the 1982 Belgian Grand Prix at Zolder . The accident came less than two weeks after an intense argument with his teammate , Didier Pironi , over Pironi 's move to pass Villeneuve at the preceding San Marino Grand Prix . At the time of his death , Villeneuve was extremely popular with fans and has since become an iconic figure in the history of the sport . His son , Jacques Villeneuve , became Formula One world champion in 1997 and , to date , the only Canadian to win the Formula One World Championship . 
 = = Personal and early life = = 
 Villeneuve was born in Richelieu , a small town just outside Montreal , in the largely French @-@ speaking province of Quebec in Canada and grew up in Berthierville . In 1970 , he married Joann Barthe , with whom he had two children , Jacques and Mélanie . During his early career Villeneuve took his family on the road with him in a motorhome during the racing season , a habit which he continued to some extent during his Formula One career . He often claimed to have been born in 1952 . By the time he got his break in Formula One , he was already 27 years old and took two years off his age to avoid being considered too old to make it at the highest level of motorsports . 
 Niki Lauda said of him : " He was the craziest devil I ever came across in Formula 1 ... The fact that , for all this , he was a sensitive and lovable character rather than an out @-@ and @-@ out hell @-@ raiser made him such a unique human being " . 
 His younger brother Jacques also had a successful racing career in Formula Atlantic , Can Am and CART . Gilles ' son , also named Jacques , won the Indianapolis 500 and CART championships in 1995 and became Formula One World Champion in 1997 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Villeneuve started competitive driving in local drag @-@ racing events , entering his road car , a modified 1967 Ford Mustang . He was soon bored by this and entered the Jim Russell Racing School at Le Circuit Mont <unk> to gain a racing licence . He then had a very successful season in Quebec regional Formula Ford , running his own two @-@ year @-@ old car and winning seven of the ten races he entered . The next year he progressed to Formula Atlantic , competing there for four years , running his own car again for one of those seasons . He won his first Atlantic race in 1975 at Gimli <unk> Park in heavy rain . In 1976 , teamed with Chris Harrison 's <unk> Canada and factory March race engineer Ray Wardell , he dominated the season by winning all but one of the races and taking the US and Canadian titles . He won the Canadian championship again in 1977 . 
 Money was very tight in Villeneuve 's early career . He was a professional racing driver from his late teens , with no other income . In the first few years the bulk of his income actually came from snowmobile racing , where he was extremely successful . He could demand appearance money as well as race money , especially after winning the 1974 World Championship Snowmobile Derby . His second season in Formula Atlantic was part @-@ sponsored by his snowmobile manufacturer , <unk> . He credited some of his success to his snowmobiling days : " Every winter , you would reckon on three or four big spills — and I 'm talking about being thrown on to the ice at 100 miles per hour . Those things used to slide a lot , which taught me a great deal about control . And the visibility was terrible ! Unless you were leading , you could see nothing , with all the snow blowing about . Good for the reactions — and it stopped me having any worries about racing in the rain . " 
 = = Formula One career = = 
 After Villeneuve impressed James Hunt by beating him and several other Grand Prix stars in a non @-@ championship Formula Atlantic race at Trois @-@ Rivières in 1976 , Hunt 's McLaren team offered Villeneuve a Formula One deal for up to five races in a third car during the 1977 season . Villeneuve made his debut at the 1977 British Grand Prix , where he qualified 9th in McLaren 's old M23 , splitting the regular drivers Hunt and Jochen Mass who were driving newer <unk> . In the race he set fifth fastest lap and finished 11th after being delayed for two laps by a faulty temperature gauge . The British press coverage of Villeneuve 's performance was generally complimentary , including John <unk> 's comment in The Times that " Anyone seeking a future World Champion need look no further than this quietly assured young man . " 
 Despite this , shortly after the British race McLaren 's experienced team manager Teddy Mayer decided not to continue with Villeneuve for the following year . His explanation was that Villeneuve " was looking as though he might be a bit expensive " and that Patrick Tambay , the team 's eventual choice for 1978 , was showing similar promise . Villeneuve was left with no solid options for 1978 , although Canadian Walter Wolf , for whom Villeneuve had driven in Can @-@ Am racing , considered giving him a drive at Wolf Racing and also recommended him to the Ferrari team 's founder , Enzo Ferrari . Rumours circulated that Villeneuve was one of several drivers in whom the Italian team was interested , and in August 1977 he flew to Italy to meet Ferrari , who was immediately reminded of the pre @-@ war European champion Tazio Nuvolari : " When they presented me with this ' piccolo <unk> ' ( little Canadian ) , this minuscule bundle of nerves , I immediately recognised in him the physique of Nuvolari and said to myself , let 's give him a try . " Ferrari was satisfied with Villeneuve 's promise after a session at Ferrari 's Fiorano test track , despite the Canadian making many mistakes and setting relatively slow times , and Villeneuve signed to drive for Ferrari in the last two races of the 1977 season and the 1978 season . Villeneuve later remarked that : " If someone said to me that you can have three wishes , my first would have been to get into racing , my second to be in Formula 1 , my third to drive for Ferrari ... " 
 Villeneuve 's arrival was prompted by Ferrari driver Niki Lauda quitting the team at the penultimate race of the 1977 season , the Canadian Grand Prix at <unk> Park near Toronto , having already clinched his second championship with the Italian team . Villeneuve retired from his home race after sliding off the track on another competitor 's oil . He also raced in the last race of that season , the Japanese Grand Prix at the Fuji Speedway near Tokyo but retired on lap five when he tried to <unk> the Tyrrell <unk> of Ronnie Peterson . The pair banged wheels causing Villeneuve 's Ferrari to become airborne . It landed on a group of spectators watching the race from a prohibited area , killing one spectator and a race marshal and injuring ten people . After an investigation into the incident no blame was apportioned and , although he was " terribly sad " at the deaths , Villeneuve did not feel responsible for them . 
 The 1978 season saw a succession of retirements for Villeneuve , often after problems with the new Michelin radial tyres . Early in the season , he started on the front row at the United States Grand Prix West , but crashed out of the lead on lap 39 . Despite calls in the Italian press for him to be replaced , Ferrari persisted with him . Towards the end of the season , Villeneuve 's results improved . He finished second on the road at the Italian Grand Prix , although he was penalised a minute for jumping the start , and ran second at the United States Grand Prix before his engine failed . Finally at the season @-@ ending Canadian Grand Prix , this time at the Circuit Île Notre @-@ Dame in Montreal ( a circuit that was eventually named after him ) Villeneuve scored his first Grand Prix win after Jean @-@ Pierre Jarier 's Lotus stopped with engine trouble . To date , he remains the only Canadian to win his home race . 
 Villeneuve was joined by Jody Scheckter in 1979 after Carlos Reutemann moved to Lotus . Villeneuve won three races during the year . The 1979 French Grand Prix is remembered for Villeneuve 's wheel @-@ banging duel with René Arnoux in the last laps of the race . Arnoux passed Villeneuve for second place with three laps to go , but Villeneuve re @-@ passed him on the next lap . On the final lap Arnoux attempted to pass Villeneuve again , and the pair ran side @-@ by @-@ side through the first few corners of the lap , making contact several times . Arnoux took the position but Villeneuve attempted an outside pass one corner later . The cars bumped hard , Villeneuve slid wide but then passed Arnoux on the inside at a hairpin turn and held him off for the last half of the lap to secure second place . Villeneuve commented afterwards , " I tell you , that was really fun ! I thought for sure we were going to get on our heads , you know , because when you start interlocking wheels it 's very easy for one car to climb over another . " At the Dutch Grand Prix a slow puncture collapsed Villeneuve 's left rear tyre and put him off the track . He returned to the circuit and limped back to the pits on three wheels , losing the damaged wheel on the way . On his return to the pits Villeneuve insisted that the team replace the missing wheel , and had to be persuaded that the car was beyond repair . Villeneuve might have won the World Championship by ignoring team orders to beat Scheckter at the Italian Grand Prix , but chose to finish behind him , ending his own championship challenge . The pair finished first and second in the championship , with Scheckter beating Villeneuve by just four points . During the extremely wet Friday practice session for the season @-@ ending United States Grand Prix , Villeneuve set a time variously reported to be either 9 or 11 seconds faster than any other driver . His teammate Jody Scheckter , who was second fastest , recalled that " I scared myself rigid that day . I thought I had to be quickest . Then I saw Gilles 's time and — I still don 't really understand how it was possible . Eleven seconds ! " 
 The 1980 season was a complete disaster for Ferrari . Villeneuve had been considered favourite for the drivers championship by UK bookmakers , but only scored six points in the whole campaign in the <unk> which had only partial ground effects . Scheckter scored only two points and retired at the end of the season . 
 For the 1981 season , Ferrari introduced their first turbo engined F1 car , the 126C , which produced tremendous power but was let down by its poor handling . Villeneuve was partnered with Didier Pironi who noted that Villeneuve " had a little family [ at Ferrari ] but he made me welcome and made me feel at home overnight ... [ He ] treated me as an equal in every way . " Villeneuve won two races during the season . At the Spanish Grand Prix Villeneuve kept five quicker cars behind him for most of the race using the superior straight @-@ line speed of his car . After an hour and 46 minutes of racing Villeneuve led second @-@ placed Jacques Laffite by only 0 @.@ 22 seconds . Fifth @-@ placed Elio de Angelis was only just over a second further back . Harvey Postlethwaite , who was hired by Ferrari to design the follow @-@ on and much more successful <unk> that won the Constructors ' Championship in 1982 , later commented on the 126C : " That car ... had literally one quarter of the downforce that , say Williams or Brabham had . It had a power advantage over the <unk> for sure , but it also had massive throttle lag at that time . In terms of sheer ability I think Gilles was on a different plane to the other drivers . To win those races , the 1981 GPs at Monaco and Jarama — on tight circuits — was quite out of this world . I know how bad that car was . " At the 1981 Canadian Grand Prix Villeneuve damaged the front wing of his Ferrari and drove for most of the race in heavy rain with the wing obscuring his view ahead . There was a risk of being black flagged but eventually the wing became detached and Villeneuve drove on to finish third with the nose section of his car missing . 
 The first few races of the 1982 season were promising . Villeneuve led in Brazil in the new <unk> , before spinning into retirement , and finished third at the United States Grand Prix West although he was later disqualified for a technical infringement . The Ferraris were handed an unexpected advantage at the San Marino Grand Prix as an escalation of the FISA @-@ FOCA war saw the FOCA teams boycott the race , effectively leaving Renault as Ferrari 's only serious opposition . With Renault driver Prost retiring from fourth place on lap 7 followed by his teammate Arnoux on the 44th lap Ferrari seemed to have the win guaranteed . In order to conserve fuel and ensure the cars finished the Ferrari team ordered both drivers to slow down . Villeneuve believed that the order also meant that the drivers were to maintain position but Pironi passed Villeneuve . A few laps later Villeneuve re @-@ passed Pironi and slowed down again , believing that Pironi was simply trying to entertain the Italian crowd . On the last lap Pironi passed and aggressively chopped across the front of Gilles in Villeneuve corner and took the win . Villeneuve was irate as he believed that Pironi had disobeyed the order to hold position . Meanwhile , Pironi claimed that he had done nothing wrong as the team had only ordered the cars to slow down , not maintain position . Villeneuve stated after the race " I think it is well known that if I want someone to stay behind me and I am faster , then he stays behind me . " Feeling betrayed and angry Villeneuve vowed never to speak to Pironi again . 
 In 2007 , former Marlboro marketer John Hogan disputed the claim that Pironi had gone back on a prior arrangement with Villeneuve . He said : " Neither of them would ever have agreed to what effectively was throwing a race . I think Gilles was stunned somebody had out @-@ driven him and that it just caught him so much by surprise . " Hogan 's company sponsored Pironi while he was at Ferrari . A comparison of the lap times of the two drivers showed that Villeneuve lapped far slower when he was in the lead , suggesting that he had indeed been trying to save fuel . 
 = = Death = = 
 On May 8 , 1982 , Villeneuve died after an accident during the final qualifying session for the Belgian Grand Prix at Zolder . At the time of the crash , Pironi had set a time <unk> faster than Villeneuve for sixth place . Villeneuve was using his final set of qualifying tyres ; some say he was attempting to improve his time on his final lap , while others suggest he was specifically aiming to beat Pironi . However , Villeneuve 's biographer Gerald Donaldson quotes Ferrari race engineer Mauro <unk> as saying that the Canadian , although pressing on in his usual fashion , was returning to the pits when the accident occurred . If so , he would not have set a time on that lap . 
 With eight minutes of the session left , Villeneuve came over the rise after the first chicane and caught Jochen Mass travelling much more slowly through Butte , the left @-@ handed bend before the <unk> double right @-@ hand section . Mass saw Villeneuve approaching at high speed and moved to the right to let him through on the racing line . At the same instant Villeneuve also moved right to pass the slower car . The Ferrari hit the back of Mass ' car and was launched into the air at a speed estimated at 200 – 225 km / h ( 120 – 140 mph ) . It was airborne for more than 100 m before <unk> into the ground and disintegrating as it <unk> along the edge of the track . Villeneuve , still strapped to his seat , but without his helmet , was thrown a further 50 m from the wreckage into the catch fencing on the outside edge of the <unk> corner . 
 Several drivers stopped and rushed to the scene . John Watson and Derek Warwick pulled Villeneuve , his face blue , from the catch fence . The first doctor arrived within 35 seconds to find that Villeneuve was not breathing , although his pulse continued ; he was intubated and ventilated before being transferred to the circuit medical centre and then by helicopter to University St Raphael Hospital where a fatal fracture of the neck was diagnosed . Villeneuve was kept alive on life support while his wife travelled to the hospital and the doctors consulted specialists worldwide . He died at 21 : 12 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 At the funeral in Berthierville former teammate Jody Scheckter delivered a simple eulogy : " I will miss Gilles for two reasons . First , he was the most genuine man I have ever known . Second , he was the fastest driver in the history of motor racing . But he has not gone . The memory of what he has done , what he achieved , will always be there . " 
 Villeneuve is still remembered at Grand Prix races , especially those in Italy . At the Autodromo Enzo e Dino Ferrari , the venue of the San Marino Grand Prix , a corner was named after him and a Canadian flag is painted on the third slot on the starting grid , from which he started his last race . There is also a bronze bust of him at the entrance to the Ferrari test track at Fiorano . At Zolder the corner where Villeneuve died has been turned into a chicane and named after him . 
 The racetrack on Île Notre @-@ Dame , Montreal , host to the Formula One Canadian Grand Prix , was named Circuit Gilles Villeneuve in his honour at the Canadian Grand Prix of 1982 . His homeland has continued to honour him : In Berthierville a museum was opened in 1992 and a lifelike statue stands in a nearby park which was also named in his honour . Villeneuve was inducted into the Canadian Motorsport Hall of Fame at their inaugural induction ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel , Toronto , Ontario on August 19 , 1993 . He was also inducted into Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame in 1983 . In June 1997 Canada issued a postage stamp in his honour . 
 There is still a huge demand for Villeneuve memorabilia at the race @-@ track shops and several books have been written about him . The number 27 , the number of his Ferrari in 1981 and 1982 , is still closely associated with him by fans . Jean Alesi , whose aggression and speed in the wet were compared to Villeneuve 's , also used the number at Ferrari . Villeneuve 's son , Jacques , drove the # 27 during his IndyCar and Indianapolis 500 winning season with Barry Green and has also used the number for occasional drives in NASCAR and the <unk> Series . Canadian driver and 2011 IndyCar Rookie of the Year James Hinchcliffe adopted the number 27 for the 2012 season . 
 A film based on the biography by Gerald Donaldson was announced in 2005 , intended for release in 2007 , but as of 2014 has not emerged . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The popular French comics series Michel Vaillant by Jean Graton is set in the world of motor racing and , although largely fictional , often includes real @-@ life figures including drivers , officials and journalists . Villeneuve appears in a number of stories , and in Steve <unk> contre Michel Vaillant ( fr : " Steve <unk> versus Michel Vaillant " ) becomes the 1980 World Champion ( though in the 1981 season , covered in Rififi en F1 ( " F1 in Chaos " ) , Graton acknowledges Alan Jones as the real Champion ) and Quebec prog @-@ rock / pop group The Box based their 1984 song " Live on TV " inspired by Villeneuve 's televised death . 
 = = Helmet = = 
 Villeneuve 's helmet carried a stylised ' V ' in red on either side — an effect he devised with his wife Joann . The base colour was black . His son , Jacques , used the same basic design , but like his contemporary , Christian Fittipaldi , he has changed the colours . British driver Perry McCarthy also used this design and color scheme on his helmet , but with the design in reverse . 
 = = Complete Formula One World Championship results = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Donaldson , Gerald ( 2003 ) . Gilles Villeneuve : The Life of the Legendary Racing Driver . London : Virgin . ISBN 0 @-@ 7535 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , Ian ( 1983 ) . Automobile Sport 82 @-@ 83 . City : Haynes Manuals . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 01 @-@ 9 . 
 Lang , Mike ( 1992 ) . Grand Prix ! <unk> <unk> : Foulis . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 733 @-@ 2 . 
 Roebuck , Nigel ( 1986 ) . Grand Prix Greats . Cambridge : P. Stephens . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 792 @-@ 7 . 
 Roebuck , Nigel ( 1999 ) . Chasing the Title . City : Haynes Publications . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 604 @-@ 0 . 
 Watkins , Sid ( 1997 ) . Life at the Limit : Triumph and Tragedy in Formula One . City : Pan Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 330 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Villeneuve 1982 - Allan de la Plante Villeneuve a Racing Legend 1995 - Allan de la Plante 
 = = = Magazines = = = 
 Fearnley , Paul ( August 2006 ) . " Profile : Ferrari <unk> " . Motor Sport ( Haymarket ) . pp. 52 – 61 . 
 Fearnley , Paul ( May 2007 ) . " It 's war . Absolutely war . " . Motor Sport ( Haymarket ) . pp. 52 – 61 . 
 Jenkinson , Denis ( June 1982 ) . " Grote Prijs van <unk> " . Motor Sport ( Motor Sport Magazine Ltd . ) . pp. 708 – 712 . 
 Walker , Rob ( January 1980 ) . " US GP Report " . Road & <unk> pp. 104 – 107 . 
 All Formula One race and championship results are taken from : 
 Official Formula 1 website . Archive : Results for 1977 — 1982 seasons <unk> Retrieved 6 February 2009 
 All Pre @-@ Formula One race and championship results are taken from : 
 Donaldson ( 2003 ) pp. 310 – 315 
 = Series 8 , Episode 1 ( Spooks ) = 
 The series eight premiere is the first episode in the eighth series of the British espionage television series Spooks , and the 65th episode in total . It was originally broadcast on BBC One on 4 November 2009 . The episode was written by Ben Richards and directed by Alrick Riley . It continues from the seventh series finale , where Sir Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) is willingly captured by Viktor Sarkisiian ( Peter Sullivan ) . In this episode , Harry is taken by Amish Mani ( Ace Bhatti ) , a former Indian intelligence officer , who wants Harry to reveal the location of a secret uranium shipment he knows the location of , in order to build nuclear weapons . 
 The episode marks the return of Nicola Walker as Ruth Evershed , who departed in the fifth series . Although there was media coverage on her return months before the broadcast of the episode , the producers were confident that only the " die hard " fans would be aware of this . It also marked the last appearance of Hugh Simon as Malcolm Wynn @-@ Jones . The episode was filmed in April 2009 and was partially shot on location in Deià , Majorca . The episode was seen by over six million viewers in the United Kingdom , a quarter of the television audience during its time slot . Critics praised Ruth 's return , though reactions towards the overall episode were mixed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following his abduction , Viktor Sarkisiian sells Harry to Amish Mani in order to start a new life outside the FSB . However , Mani does not hold his end of the deal and kills Sarkisiian and his team . His men then pose as members of extremist group , the Sacred Army for Righteous Vengeance , and supposedly execute him . When MI5 later intercepts the footage of his execution from the Internet , the team are divided between those who believe it is genuine , and those who believe it is faked . Malcolm later discovers that one of the " terrorists " said a curse word in Malayalam , the language of the Indian state of Kerala . Because there is no history with <unk> from that particular region , the team question whether or not the terrorists are from <unk> . Furthermore , when they find the house where the execution was filmed , forensics find several traces of blood , none of which match Harry 's DNA , indicating he is still alive . 
 Meanwhile in Polis , Cyprus , Ruth is living at peace with husband George ( Daniel <unk> ) and stepson Nico ( Luke Tzortzis ) . When she notices men are out to capture her , she and her family flee to London . Upon returning to the Grid , Ruth believes Harry was kidnapped because of a secret operation in which he , MI6 officer Stephen Hillier ( Andrew Scarborough ) , former CIA liaison Libby McCall ( Paul Birchard ) and Mani intend to vindicate the Iraq War by planting weapons @-@ grade uranium in Baghdad and later " discover " it , though Harry would later pull the operation and safeguard the shipment at a secret location only he and Ruth know ; those who kidnapped Harry wish to acquire the uranium to create nuclear weapons . Soon , while being transferred to a safe house , Ruth is captured and brought to Harry , while George and Nico are taken to the safe house unaware of what is happening . To save them , Ruth reveals the uranium is at a base in Norfolk , however Mani reveals he searched the base and it is no longer there , and hence orders George 's execution . 
 Ros Myers ( Hermione Norris ) confronts Hillier , but the latter is assassinated by McCall before he can divulge the location of the safe house . Malcolm finds the safe house and arrives there , offering himself in exchange for Nico . Meanwhile , Lucas North ( Richard Armitage ) persuaded McCall 's replacement , Sarah Caufield ( Genevieve O 'Reilly ) , to have a tracker implanted on McCall . The team follow him to the warehouse and arrest him . Witnessing this , Mani tells his man to kill Nico , though Malcolm is able to talk him out of it . As Mani prepares to kill Ruth , Lucas arrives in time to kill him . In the end , Malcolm wishes to retire , telling Harry he is " dog tired " ; Harry allows it . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 The episode marks the return of Ruth Evershed since her departure halfway through series five . Actress Nicola Walker left the series to raise her baby . When Walker was asked to return , she took " about half a second to say yes . " Upon returning , she noticed that the Grid set changed since her initial departure . Because there was media coverage reporting Walker 's return , the producers believed that the shock of her return would be hindered somewhat , but also believed only the " die hard " fans of the series would be aware of it . Ace Bhatti , who portrayed the episode 's primary antagonist Amish Mani , was cast because the producers were impressed by his highly convincing and relaxed acting style , which they felt would establish his role in the episode . 
 Paul Birchard was cast as Libby McCall because the producers believed he acted like a " dinosaur " from the former Bush administration . Child actor Luke Tzortzis was cast as Nico since they were impressed with his intelligence and the fact he is a " strong " actor ; children are often hard to work with in the series , but in Tzortzis ' case , he would ask the production crew several questions between takes in order to do understand what he is to do in the episode . It was also Tzortzis ' first performance as an actor , having no past experiences . 
 Ben Richards wrote the episode . The main focus for the first ten minutes of the episode was the debate of whether Harry would be dead or alive . The producers decided to tease the audience by showing Harry alive , but then show him apparently executed before the main title sequence , which would make them question whether or not he survived . The producers also wanted to reflect this to the characters , and divide them between if the execution was real or fake . This development was not originally included in the script , and filming was already completed at the time . However , according to director Alrick Riley , Richards was quickly able to write those new scenes " seamlessly " into the rest of the episode , which is usually a difficult task to perform . Richards also added hints in the script that Malcolm would be leaving by the end . The primary plot of the episode were hard to do , but producer Chris Fry noted that Richards was able to execute the plot very well . Elsewhere , the episode would show Ruth living happily in Cyprus and then be quickly drawn back into the world of MI5 back at a " dark " and " grim " London . The conversations between Malcolm and Ruth were all automated dialogue replacement . Following the writing , Walker and Peter Firth were highly looking forward to play their scenes together again . 
 = = = Filming and post @-@ production = = = 
 Filming took place throughout April 2009 . Before it began , production designer Anthony Ainsworth partly reconstructed the Grid set to give it more of a concrete , underground bunker , feel . Though more television series in the UK are adopting high @-@ definition cameras , the Spooks producers decided to continue using hand held standard @-@ definition ones , which were more compact and flexible ; the producers felt that using high @-@ definition cameras would sacrifice the filming style of the series . For instance , a hand held camera would allow the crew to film one long take following cast members through tight spaces , like an average London flat . High @-@ definition cameras would lose that ability . 
 Two days were dedicated towards shooting the pre @-@ title sequence . It was filmed on location at <unk> House in Buckinghamshire . The helicopter scenes took place inside an actual helicopter taking flight with some cast members on board , which would make the sequence more genuine as opposed to having the cast members sitting inside next to a green screen . The fight sequences between Sarkisiian 's and Mani 's men were orchestrated and performed by stunt coordinator <unk> <unk> and his stunt team , as there was very little time to train conventional actors . Director Alrick Riley wanted the fight sequences to be performed in the same style as in the Jason Bourne films . The abandoned warehouse used to hold Harry and Ruth were filmed in an abandoned leather factory near London Bridge . One of the meetings between Lucas and Sarah Caufield were originally intended to be shot on the London Eye , a location the producers had never used before . However , due to restrictions the filming crew felt they could not follow , it was shot in South Bank , opposite the Houses of Parliament , instead . 
 The scenes set in Cyprus were filmed on location in Deià , a coastal village in the island of Majorca . Previously working on a film using the same location , producer Chris Fry chose the village because he felt it was the closest to the UK the crew can get to mimic the hot , Mediterranean feel of Cyprus . Because filming abroad tend to be costly for a BBC budget , the producers kept costs down as much as possible by using a limited crew with some local help . Much of the original script was to take place inside a house , but because there were no <unk> responsible for lighting , and that the weather was decent , filming took place primarily outside because of the natural sunlight . The filming crew spent four days at the end of April shooting in Majorca . 
 Jamie Pearson was responsible for editing the episode . The sequence where Lucas rescues Harry and Ruth near the end were made in slow motion , because the producers felt it would add to the tension . The incidental music was composed by Paul Leonard @-@ Morgan . The computer graphics on the episode were designed by Mark Doman . The producers ended up being receptive of both Morgan and Doman 's work , because of their ability to help interpret the story via the music , and computers , respectively . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast on BBC One , during the 9 pm to 10 pm time slot on Wednesday , 4 November 2009 , and later repeated on BBC Three at 12 : 15 am on 5 November . Upon its original broadcast , the episode received unofficial overnight viewing figures of 6 million and an audience share of 25 per cent . Spooks won its time slot against ITV1 's UEFA Champions League game , which attracted 5 @.@ 1 million viewers . According to the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board , the episode received final figures of 6 @.@ 549 million viewers , placing Spooks the sixth most seen programme on BBC One the week it aired . The repeat on BBC Three attracted 602 @,@ 000 viewers . In addition , 446 @,@ 900 viewed the episode from BBC iPlayer , an Internet television service ; as a result the episode became the seventeenth best performed iPlayer broadcast of 2009 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Gerard O 'Donovan of The Daily Telegraph lamented the eleven months that passed since the series seven cliffhanger , and stated that " for all its square @-@ jawed silliness and bonkers conspiracies , Spooks still delivers high @-@ class escapism at its slickest , most glamorous and entertaining . " Adam Sweeting of The Arts Desk felt that the episode 's plot was " mere background noise , " and that the series " is about hilariously artificial encounters between the characters , clumsily manufactured dramatic tension , and a denouement involving someone being prevented in the nick of time from detonating something / killing somebody / triggering a global economic collapse . " Andrea Mullaney of The Scotsman said that the plot was " all gibberish , " but cited the episode was really about the return of Ruth , a development Mullaney praised , stating Ruth " has been much missed since she was framed and sent into faked @-@ death exile . " Mullaney also praised the performance of the cast , including " Walker 's gulping hysteria when Ruth 's husband was executed , " which was " perfectly done , " and Malcolm 's " doughty attempts to comfort a small boy in danger were touching . " 
 Robert McLaughlin of Den of Geek believed that it is " equivalent to 24 , " " far more engaging than the last James Bond movie , " and that it is " good to see [ Ruth Evershed ] again , " seeing how " the re @-@ introduction of an old character will work with the new additions . " While also reviewing Channel 4 's The Family , Tom Sutcliff of The Independent stated that family values were " relevant in Spooks too , " citing Ruth being " on the rack , " after having her see her husband killed and adoptive son threatened . Though Sutcliff did not see the series with " great diligence recently , " he though the intelligence " is not the quality you would attribute to some of the strategies employed " in the episode . Vicky Frost of The Guardian was overly critical of the episode , criticising it for the reunion between Ruth and Harry , which she stated " wasn 't quite the romantic occasion [ I would have ] liked , " and Malcolm 's method to convince a " trained killer not to shoot Nico . " Overall , Frost thought the episode was " medium " and rated it five out of ten on the " ridiculous @-@ o @-@ meter " . 
 = 1999 – 2000 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 1999 – 2000 season was the 102nd season of competitive football played by Arsenal . The club ended the campaign second in the league , 18 points behind Manchester United . Arsenal exited both domestic cup competitions on penalties , being eliminated by Leicester City in a FA Cup fourth round replay and by Middlesbrough at the same stage of the Football League Cup . For the second consecutive season Arsenal failed to progress past the group stage of the UEFA Champions League ; a third @-@ place finish however earnt them a consolation place in the UEFA Cup . Arsenal eventually reached the final to play Galatasaray in Copenhagen – the match was overshadowed by altercations between both sets of supporters . The team lost 4 – 1 on penalties after a goalless draw . 
 A number of signings were made by Arsenal in the summer transfer window , namely defenders Sylvinho and Oleg Luzhny , and striker Thierry Henry , who joined from Juventus on a club record fee . Davor Šuker departed Real Madrid to sign for Arsenal , following Nicolas Anelka 's move in the opposite direction . Steve Bould left Arsenal to play for Sunderland , while Stephen Hughes signed for Everton in the spring . 
 Inconsistent performances in the league , particularly away from home , meant Arsenal never posed a serious threat to Manchester United , the reigning champions . Midfielder Patrick Vieira was suspended from playing for much of late autumn after a confrontation with West Ham United player Neil Ruddock . In October , Arsenal notably staged a comeback against Chelsea , with Nwankwo Kanu scoring a hat @-@ trick in the final 15 minutes of the game . A run of eight straight wins between March and May propelled Arsenal from fifth to second and the team finished on 73 points . 
 = = Background = = 
 Arsenal ended the previous season as runners @-@ up to Manchester United in the Premier League . The club made an indifferent start to the campaign as reigning league champions and failed to progress past the group stages of the UEFA Champions League . After defeat to Aston Villa in December 1998 , Arsenal embarked on a 19 match unbeaten run ( 21 in all competitions ) to climb up the league table . The run in all competitions ended against Manchester United in a FA Cup semi @-@ final replay . In April Arsenal moved to the top of the Premier League after beating Middlesbrough 6 – 1 , albeit having played a match more than Manchester United . A 3 – 1 away win against Tottenham Hotspur put Arsenal three points clear as United lost to Liverpool on the same night . Going into the final two matches of the season both clubs were on the same points , but Arsenal 's defeat to Leeds United all but ended their chances of retaining the title . 
 At the start of the 1999 – 2000 season , Arsenal ended its long @-@ standing kit sponsorship with JVC . The club signed a three @-@ year deal with SEGA as replacement , worth £ 10 million . The SEGA Dreamcast name was carried on the home kit , while SEGA was embroidered on the new yellow away kit . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 Frenchman Rémi Garde retired from career football at the end of the 1998 – 99 season . Kaba <unk> left Arsenal six months after joining to sign for Olympique de Marseille . Defender Steve Bould moved to Sunderland for an estimated fee of £ 500 @,@ 000 , which ended his 11 @-@ year association with Arsenal . The player felt it was the " right decision " as he wanted first @-@ team football . 
 In May 1999 , Nicolas Anelka stated his desire to leave Arsenal and cited the English media as a reason for wanting to leave the club as they caused him " enormous problems on a personal level . " S.S. Lazio was interested in signing the player , but the Italian club refused to pay Arsenal 's asking price of £ 23 million . After Real Madrid reopened negotiations with Arsenal and Anelka , a deal was finally reached on 1 August 1999 and the player signed for the club , the next day . Arsenal sought to strengthen the squad 's attacking options first by signing Davor Šuker from Real Madrid ; the player was prepared to take a pay cut to join the club . The club then signed Juventus forward Thierry Henry for a club record fee of £ 11 million . Wenger , who served as the player 's protégé at Monaco believed his best position was as a goalscorer : " He was the top scorer in the Under @-@ 17s for France when I first had him and I think that , as well as having the qualities of youth , pace and power , he is a good finisher . That is something he has not worked on enough in the last two years because he has played more wide , but I think he can become a central striker again . That is what we will try to develop together . " 
 Other additions to the squad included Sylvinho and Oleg Luzhny . Striker Luís Boa Morte moved to Southampton in August 1999 , while midfielder Stephen Hughes completed his transfer to Everton in March 2000 . 
 = = = = In = = = = 
 = = = = Out = = = = 
 = = = = Loan out = = = = 
 = = Pre @-@ season and friendles = = 
 In preparation for the forthcoming season , Arsenal played a series of friendles . The club also staged a testimonial for defender Lee Dixon once the season commenced against Real Madrid . 
 = = FA Charity Shield = = 
 The 1999 edition of the FA Charity Shield was contested between Manchester United and Arsenal . The game took place at Wembley Stadium on 1 August . Manchester United went ahead seven minutes before the end of the first half , but late goals from Kanu and Ray Parlour gave Arsenal victory in the match . Wenger believed the result showed that his team were " ready for the season " and thought it was " ... psychologically important to beat United , especially after the great run they have had " . 
 = = Premier League = = 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal began the league season with a home fixture against Leicester City . Henry started the match on the substitutes ' bench along with Overmars and Upson , while Šuker was absent as he was unfit . After a quiet first half , Leicester scored the opening goal when Neil Lennon 's intervention prompted striker Tony Cottee to " gleefully pounce from inside the six @-@ yard box " . Dennis Bergkamp equalised for Arsenal in the 65th minute and with time running out , the home team scored the winner in unexpected circumstances . Defender Frank Sinclair headed the ball into the back of his team 's goal net , after Leicester failed to deal with a corner . Three days later , Emmanuel Petit and Bergkamp scored in Arsenal 's win against Derby County ; the team 's performance was described by Wenger as " more resilient than brilliant " . Arsenal drew 0 – 0 with newly promoted Sunderland on 14 August 1999 , in a match where Petit and Bergkamp both suffered injuries . A week after the team faced Manchester United at Highbury . It was billed as " the world 's first live interactive match " , allowing viewers of Sky Digital access to statistics and alternative camera angles . United midfielder Roy Keane scored twice to overturn Arsenal 's 41st @-@ minute lead and inflict the home team 's first defeat since December 1997 . Arsenal recovered three days later to defeat Bradford City by two goals to nil , but lost to Liverpool at Anfield in their final game of August . 
 September saw Arsenal win all of their league matches . At home to Aston Villa , Šuker scored his first goals for the club and earnt the praise of his manager Wenger : “ He is just obsessed by goals . You feel when he is inside the box he hits the target . ” Away to Southampton , it was the other signing Henry who scored his first goal for Arsenal . The player , on as a substitute , received the ball from Tony Adams and with his back to goal " some 20 yards out " , turned and curled it past goalkeeper Paul Jones . Henry later admitted his failure to score for Arsenal before then was getting him down : “ My goal today was very important for me . I have missed at least 14 or 15 chances for Arsenal and my confidence was low . ” Kanu scored the only goal of the match against Watford , which moved Arsenal in third position , two points behind leaders Manchester United . 
 Arsenal faced West Ham United in the first weekend of October . Dixon , Nigel Winterburn and Overmars were rested for the match , replaced by Luzhny , <unk> and Šuker . In spite of general dominance from Arsenal , West Ham striker Paolo di Canio scored in each half to win his team the match . Patrick Vieira was dismissed during play for a foul on Di Canio . A confrontation soon after occurred between the player and Neil Ruddock . Vieira was subsequently charged , banned for six matches and fined a record £ 45 @,@ 000 by The Football Association . Šuker scored twice against Everton at Highbury on 16 October 1999 . Arsenal then travelled to Stamford Bridge to face Chelsea . Goals from Tore André Flo and Dan Petrescu seemed to have given the home side victory , before Kanu scored a hat @-@ trick in the space of 15 minutes . His first involved extending his legs and stabbing the ball past goalkeeper Ed de Goey , once it fell kindly in his direction . The equaliser came in the 83rd minute : Kanu received the ball from Overmars , which took him away from goal but hit the ball to the left of De Goey ’ s dive . In injury time Kanu , in the downpour , chased down the ball and dribbled past the stranded Chelsea goalkeeper on the byline , before curling the ball over Frank Leboeuf and into the far corner of the goal net . Kanu 's teammate Šuker described the third goal as " beautiful " , while Bergkamp added : " The skills he has got , the moves he makes , are something you like to watch and learn from . I watch him in training and it is a joy . " The month ended with a goalless draw at home to Newcastle United , which left Arsenal fourth , three points behind league leaders Leeds United . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 Arsenal 's first fixture of November was the North London derby against Tottenham Hotspur . After 20 minutes , Tottenham were 2 – 0 up after goals from Steffen Iversen and Tim Sherwood . Vieira scored for Arsenal from a header , but there were no further goals in the game . In the second half Ljungberg was sent off , as was Keown in stoppage time , to reduce Arsenal to nine men . The team responded with a 5 – 1 win against Middlesbrough , in which Overmars scored three goals . Arsenal then came from behind to beat Derby County on 28 November 1999 ; they ended the month in third , three points behind Leeds United in first . 
 Gilles Grimandi , Dixon and Overmars scored a goal apiece in Arsenal 's victory at Leicester City in early December . Matthew Upson was forced to come off the pitch before the half @-@ hour mark , after suffering a knee injury . Arsenal only managed a draw against Wimbledon on 18 December 1999 ; Henry 's second half goal cancelled out Wimbledon 's opener – a cross by Marcus Gayle met Carl Cort , whose shot hit goalkeeper Alex Manninger 's left leg and went in . The poor form over Christmas continued : Arsenal lost 3 – 2 to Coventry City on Boxing Day . Rob Hughes of The Times noted his concerns about Arsenal 's defence , which : " ... conceded 17 goals last season but now , at the halfway stage , [ ... ] have already let in 20 " , but did go on to add " there was nothing lacking in the tenacity of Arsenal . " Vieira made his return for the match against league leaders Leeds United , who were eight points in front of Arsenal . Wenger reshuffled the defence , dropping Dixon and Winterburn for Luzhny and Sylvinho , while Grimandi replaced Keown who was injured . Ljungberg and Henry scored for Arsenal in their 2 – 0 win to put the team third at the end of 1999 . Adams suggested after the Leeds match that his opponents ' inexperience and thin squad would jeopardise their chances of winning the league : “ They are still involved in the UEFA Cup and the FA Cup as well . So come February time they will start to feel that pressure – and you don 't know what it is like until you have been through it . " 
 On 3 January 2000 , Arsenal played Sheffield Wednesday at Hillsborough and were held to a 1 – 1 draw . Two concerns for Arsenal were Overmars ' ankle injury sustained during the match and the absence of Kanu , who left to represent his country in the African Nations Cup . Arsenal recorded a 4 – 1 win against Sunderland to move level on points with Manchester United in second , though the champions had three games in hand . The first was against Arsenal at Old Trafford on 24 January 2000 . Wenger selected five midfielders in his starting team , as injuries limited his forward options . Arsenal began the match the better of the two teams and led 1 – 0 after 11 minutes , after good play from Ljungberg . United as the game went on looked " fresher " , with substitute Teddy Sheringham equalising in the second half . 
 February saw Arsenal 's title challenge take a turn for the worse , with consecutive defeats . The first came at Valley Parade , away to Bradford City . Striker Dean Saunders scored the match winner in the 57th minute , which marked Arsenal 's fifth defeat in a dozen away league games . The team then lost to Liverpool at home a week later , who moved into third place . Wenger said it " had been a very bad week " for Arsenal , and noted " qualification for third place [ was ] not over … it 's still possible if we get our players back in the right shape " . The month ended with a 3 – 1 win against Southampton , in which Bergkamp and Kanu returned to the starting line @-@ up . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 Dixon 's late goal earnt Arsenal a point against Aston Villa on 5 March 2000 . The team , without Adams , Keown and Overmars , lost to Middlesbrough a week later . Wenger conceded afterwards his team were paying for their participation in the UEFA Cup , as “ … the recovery time is too short . We only had two and a half days , which is not enough , especially when you are travelling " . Arsenal beat their rivals Tottenham a week later . Henry , Grimandi and Kanu each scored in Arsenal 's 3 – 0 victory against Coventry City . After 30 games , Arsenal were in fourth position , two points behind Liverpool in third and 13 away from leaders Manchester United . 
 In spite of playing the second half against Wimbledon with ten men after the dismissal of Luzhny , Arsenal defeated their London rivals by three goals to one . Before the game away to Leeds United on 16 April 2000 , both clubs observed a minute 's silence to honour the two Leeds fans who were murdered in Istanbul . Wenger and his players then presented bouquets of flowers to their counterparts . Arsenal went ahead in the 21st minute – Henry beat defender Jonathan Woodgate for pace and scored his 20th goal of the season . Further goals by Keown , Kanu and Overmars resulted in a 4 – 0 win and lifted Arsenal above Leeds into third , with a better goal difference . Arsenal beat Watford and continued their strong finish to the season with a 1 – 0 win at Everton to move into second place . Wenger believed Manchester United , who retained their status as champions in April , had benefited from the league being " organised " in their favour : " They had a winter break . They didn 't play in the FA Cup . It was all wrong from the start . The break was good for them because at the same time we dropped points and so did the other teams . So when they came back they had the psychological advantage . " 
 Petit scored a 90th @-@ minute winner for Arsenal against West Ham United and a further win against Chelsea ensured Arsenal finished second , as Leeds and Liverpool failed to win their respective matches . Arsenal played out a 3 – 3 draw against Sheffield Wednesday , which relegated their opponents in the process . Arsenal ended their league campaign against Newcastle United at St James ' Park . Wenger rested several first @-@ team players to prioritise the 2000 UEFA Cup Final the following week . Arsenal lost 4 – 2 , with Newcastle striker Alan Shearer notably scoring the 300th goal of his career . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : Ground : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the competition in the third round , by virtue of their Premier League status . Their opening match was a 3 – 1 win against Second Division Blackpool , where Grimandi , Adams and Overmars got themselves on the scoresheet . In the fourth round , Arsenal faced Leicester City at Highbury . The match ended goalless , meaning a replay was staged at Filbert Street . With neither side able to score in the 90 minutes and extra time , the game was settled on penalties . Leicester goalkeeper <unk> <unk> blocked Dixon and Grimandi 's spot @-@ kicks to help his side win . Wenger said he was " upset " with the loss , adding " the most important thing is the championship and we have to concentrate on it . " 
 = = Football League Cup = = 
 Together with the other clubs playing in European competitions , Arsenal entered the Football League Cup in the third round . The team were drawn to face First Division Preston North End , on the week of 11 October 1999 . Kanu and Stefan <unk> scored a goal apiece to ensure Arsenal progressed into the fourth round , where they played Middlesbrough away . The team exited the competition on penalties , after a score draw . 
 = = UEFA Champions League = = 
 = = = Group stage = = = 
 Finishing second in Premier League the previous season ensured Arsenal 's qualification into the UEFA Champions League . For the second season running , Arsenal played their home matches at Wembley Stadium . The club were drawn in Group B , along with Italian club Fiorentina , Barcelona of Spain and Sweden 's AIK . In the opening match against Fiorentina , Arsenal dominated possession and created the better chances of the game , but earnt no more than a point after Kanu 's late penalty miss . The team defeated AIK at Wembley a week after and drew with Barcelona at the Camp Nou . In the reverse fixture , Barcelona defeated Arsenal 4 – 2 and Wenger rued afterwards : " The defence did not have a good day . They were exposed and didn 't get any protection . " Arsenal progressed no further in competition after the team were beaten by Fiorentina ; Gabriel Batistuta scored the only goal of the match . Overmars scored twice in Arsenal 's final group game away to AIK . 
 = = UEFA Cup = = 
 As Arsenal finished third in their Champions League group , they entered the UEFA Cup . Wenger said he intended to take the competition seriously given the team 's poor UEFA coefficient . Arsenal played their home games at Highbury instead of Wembley . 
 = = = Knockout stages = = = 
 Third round 
 Arsenal faced French club Nantes and won the first leg 3 – 0 ; Winterburn scored the pick of the three – " a rare but brilliantly struck goal “ . The team drew the second leg 3 – 3 , though it was enough to see them progress on aggregate score . 
 Fourth round 
 At home to Deportivo La Coruña , Arsenal opened the scoring in the fifth minute through Dixon and further goals from Henry , Kanu and Bergkamp ensured it was the club 's first victory over Spanish opposition in Europe . Although the team were defeated in the second leg , Arsenal won 6 – 3 on aggregate . 
 Quarter @-@ finals 
 Against Werder Bremen , Arsenal won the first leg 2 – 0 with goals from Henry and Ljungberg . Parlour scored a hat @-@ trick in the return leg – the first of his career . 
 Semi @-@ finals 
 Arsenal faced French club Lens in the final four and won the first leg by a solitary goal , scored by Bergkamp in the second minute . Victory in the second leg ensured passage to the final . Wenger commented afterwards : “ People say we should not have come into this competition , but we have not got the final the easy way – we have played 14 games to get this far . ” 
 = = = Final = = = 
 In the lead up to the final against Galatasaray in Copenhagen , scuffles took place between British and Turkish supporters at City Hall Square after an Arsenal fan was stabbed . The incident , dubbed the " Battle of Copenhagen " by the media led to 19 civilians injured and 60 arrests . The match itself was a lacklustre affair ; neither side scored after 90 minutes and in extra time Gheorghe Hagi was sent off . It was decided on penalties and Arsenal lost after Šuker and Patrick Vieira missed their spot @-@ kicks . Wenger was disappointed with the manner of the defeat and criticised Spanish referee Antonio López Nieto for not tossing a coin to decide where the shoot @-@ out would take place like UEFA promised him . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 Arsenal used a total of 32 players during the 1999 – 2000 season and there were 15 different goalscorers . There were also six squad members who did not make a first @-@ team appearance in the campaign . Kanu featured in 50 matches whereas Vieira started the most games for Arsenal – 47 in total . 
 The team scored a total of 106 goals in all competitions . The highest goalscorer was Henry , with 26 goals , followed by Kanu who scored 17 goals . Six Arsenal players were sent off during the season : Vieira , Keown , Henry , Grimandi ( twice ) and Luzhny . 
 Key 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . Players with number struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Source : 
 = = Reserves = = 
 The following players were contracted to Arsenal , but did not make a competitive appearance during the season . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = Ancestry of the Godwins = 
 Very little is known for certain of the ancestry of the Godwins , the family of the last Anglo @-@ Saxon King of England , Harold II . When King Edward the Confessor died in January 1066 his closest relative was his great @-@ nephew , Edgar the Ætheling , but he was young and lacked powerful supporters . Harold was the head of the most powerful family in England and Edward 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , and he became king . In September 1066 Harold defeated and killed King Harald Hardrada of Norway at the Battle of Stamford Bridge , and Harold was himself defeated and killed the following month by William the Conqueror at the Battle of Hastings . 
 The family is named after Harold 's father , Earl Godwin , who had risen to a position of wealth and influence in the 1020s under Danish King Cnut the Great . In 1045 Godwin 's daughter , Edith , married King Edward the Confessor , and by the mid @-@ 1050s Harold and his brothers had become dominant , almost monopolising the English earldoms . Godwin 's origin is obscure . He was probably the son of Wulfnoth Cild , a South Saxon thegn , but Wulfnoth 's ancestry is disputed . A few genealogists and historians argue that he was descended from Alfred the Great 's elder brother , King Æthelred I ( 865 – 71 ) , but almost all historians of Anglo @-@ Saxon England reject this theory . 
 = = Background = = 
 Earl Godwin is probably first recorded in 1014 , when Godwin , son of Wulfnoth , was left land at a place called Compton in the will of King Æthelred the Unready 's son Æthelstan Ætheling . As Earl Godwin was later recorded as holding land at Compton in Sussex it is likely that he was the Godwin mentioned in Æthelstan Ætheling 's will . Historians think that he was probably the son of the outlawed Saxon thegn Wulfnoth Cild . In 1009 Wulfnoth was accused of unknown crimes at a muster of King Æthelred 's fleet , and fled with twenty ships ; a force sent in pursuit was destroyed in a storm . 
 According to the twelfth @-@ century chronicler John of Worcester , Godwin was the son of a Wulfnoth who was the son of Æthelmær , brother of Eadric Streona , both sons of an otherwise unknown Æthelric , but in the view of the historian Ann Williams this is chronologically impossible . If the relationship were true , the pedigree would result in a significant generational displacement , with two children of Æthelred the Unready marrying the son and great @-@ great @-@ granddaughter of Æthelric . Æthelred 's daughter Eadgyth married Æthelric 's son Eadric Streona , while Eadgyth 's half @-@ brother Edward the Confessor married Godwin 's daughter Edith . If Godwin was Æthelric 's great @-@ grandson , then Edith was his great @-@ great @-@ granddaughter . David Kelley , however , argues that Edward , being a child of a later marriage , could have been almost a generation younger than his sister , and if both he and Eadric married much younger wives and if Eadric was among the youngest brothers of Æthelmær , this could close up the chronological differences . John of Worcester also stated that Wulfnoth 's rebellion was provoked by unjust charges brought by Eadric Streona 's brother , <unk> . 
 The Life of Edward the Confessor , commissioned by his widow Edith , who was Harold 's sister , is silent on her family 's origin . In a section designed to eulogise her family , Godwin is described as " blessed in his ancestral stock " , but nothing further is said of this stock . In the view of the historian Frank Barlow : " There is massive evasion here . " Historians generally discount a later medieval tradition that he was the son of a churl or a farmer . In her Oxford Dictionary of National Biography ( ODNB ) article on Godwin 's son , King Harold Godwinson , Robin Fleming says of Godwin : " The origins of this parvenu are extremely obscure . " He was " the quintessential new man " . However , Williams says that the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle 's reference to " Wulfnoth <unk> the South Saxon " implies a man of rank ( <unk> means child , young man , warrior ) ; his ability to detach twenty ships from the royal fleet suggests a man of at least local importance . Frank Barlow goes further , arguing that Godwin must have been of aristocratic origin , and that the family 's massive land holdings in Sussex are indisputable evidence that the Wulfnoth who was Godwin 's father was the Saxon thegn . 
 = = Æthelred I theory = = 
 A few scholars have claimed that the Godwins were descended from Alfred the Great 's elder brother , King Æthelred I of Wessex , and that King Harold therefore had a hereditary claim to the English throne . The theory was first put forward by the historian Alfred Anscombe in 1913 , and advocated by the genealogist Lundie W. Barlow in 1957 and the Mayanist scholar and genealogist David H. Kelley in 1989 . 
 The theory depends on tracing the ownership of certain estates , especially Compton in West Sussex , which was probably the Compton which was left to Æthelred 's son Æthelhelm in Alfred the Great 's will . It was later in the possession of Wulfnoth , presumably confiscated after his rebellion , and left to his son Godwin in 1014 in Æthelstan Ætheling 's will . Immediately before the bequest to Godwin is one to an " Ælfmær " . Anscombe identifies Ælfmær as Ealdorman Æthelmær the Stout , in his view the father of Wulfnoth Cild . However , according to Williams , although it is true that there was confusion between the names Ælfmær and Æthelmær , this did not occur until after the Norman Conquest . Ealdorman Æthelmær was the son of Æthelweard the Historian , whose own writings record that he was descended from Æthelred I , although the exact nature of this descent has been debated . Frank Barlow cites Lundie Barlow as suggesting that Wulfnoth may have been descended from Æthelred I through his mother . 
 In his 2002 book The Godwins , Frank Barlow sympathetically examined the arguments put forward by Anscombe and Lundie Barlow . He included a family tree based on their work , showing Godwin 's descent from Æthelred I , and at one point described Wulfnoth Cild as the son of Æthelmær the Stout . Elsewhere he was more cautious , describing Wulfnoth as the probable son of Æthelmær , and questioning whether a family which had used names for seven generations almost all starting with <unk> or <unk> would suddenly have thrown up a Wulfnoth , particularly as Æthelmær the Stout 's known sons continued the tradition . He stated nevertheless that " This pedigree , even if mistaken , is of the right type . " 
 Frank Barlow is almost alone among modern scholars in taking the theory seriously . Hubert Grills in his life of Godwin sceptically examines the arguments put forward by Anscombe and Lundie Barlow , although he concludes that it is just possible that the theory could have some value . Peter Rex , in his biography of Harold , describes Godwin as one of Cnut 's new men , and dismisses claims that the family had aristocratic ancestry . Emma Mason , in her history of the Godwin family , describes Wulfnoth as a mystery man who was probably a minor figure at court in the late tenth century , and Ian Walker in his biography of Harold gives a similar description of Wulfnoth as " a relatively minor figure who attended court only infrequently " . Williams in her ODNB article on Godwin , and Robin Fleming in her ODNB article on Harold , do not mention the theory when discussing Godwin 's ancestry , and according to Stenton : " Of his origin nothing can be said with any assurance . " 
 = = Succession to the throne = = 
 Even if Harold was descended from Æthelred I , it would not have given him a hereditary claim to the throne according to the rules of royal succession in later Anglo @-@ Saxon England . Eligibility was confined to <unk> , that is <unk> princes of the royal house . In earlier Anglo @-@ Saxon times , eligibility depended on descent from the fifth- or sixth @-@ century founder of each kingdom , but it later became more restricted . According to David Dumville : " The Anglo @-@ Saxon ætheling in the period from the ninth @-@ century Scandinavian settlements to the Norman Conquest was a prince of the royal house . He shared with the reigning king descent from a common grandfather at least " . All known West Saxon <unk> after 900 were the sons of kings except for Harold 's rival for the throne in 1066 , Edgar the Ætheling , who was the grandson of King Edmund Ironside . Edgar was thus an ætheling according to Dumville 's definition , but in the view of Pauline Stafford , only the son of a present or former king could be an ætheling , and when Edward the Confessor gave this designation to his great @-@ nephew Edgar , it was a form of adoption without known recent precedent , because for the first time since the beginning of the ninth century there was no living ætheling in the strict sense of a son of a king . 
 = = Danish ancestry = = 
 Godwin 's wife , and the mother of his children including Harold and Edith , was Gytha <unk> . Her father was <unk> <unk> , a Dane whose origin is unknown , although he was probably a Dane from Scania , which was then in Denmark but is now part of Sweden . Gytha was very well connected as her brother Ulf married King Cnut 's sister <unk> . Cnut probably arranged the marriage between Godwin and Gytha in about 1022 . 
 = Action of 9 July 1806 = 
 The Action of 9 July 1806 was a minor engagement between a French privateer frigate and British forces off Southern Ceylon during the Napoleonic Wars . French privateers operating from the Indian Ocean islands of Île Bonaparte and Île de France were a serious threat to British trade across the Indian Ocean during the Wars , and the British deployed numerous methods of intercepting them , including disguising warships as merchant vessels to lure privateers into unequal engagements with more powerful warships . Cruising near the Little Basses Reef on the Southern coast of Ceylon , the 34 @-@ gun privateer Bellone was sighted by the 16 @-@ gun British brig HMS Rattlesnake , which began chasing the larger French vessel . At 15 : 15 , a third ship was sighted to the south , which proved to be the 74 @-@ gun ship of the line HMS Powerful , disguised as an East Indiaman . 
 Although Bellone would normally be much faster than the large British warship , the light winds and Rattlesnake 's determined pursuit prevented the privateer from escaping and at 17 : 00 , Powerful was close enough to open fire . Despite the uneven nature of the combat , Bellone unexpectedly resisted the British attack for another hour and 45 minutes , causing more damage to Powerful than she received herself . The privateer was later taken into British service as a sixth rate frigate and prize money was paid for the captured vessels , but the action prompted questions in subsequent histories about the lack of efficiency in British gunnery . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars that followed them , British dominance in the Indian Ocean was repeatedly challenged by the depredations of French vessels sailing from the isolated and well protected French colonies of Réunion ( later Île Bonaparte ) and Île de France . Although French Navy cruisers were periodically stationed on the islands , the majority of ships that preyed on British commerce from the islands were privateers , independently funded armed ships issued with letters of marque giving them permission to attack military and civilian ships belonging to the enemies of France . French naval strategy in the Indian Ocean was so reliant on privateers that entire squadrons developed , including a powerful force under the wealthy privateer captain Robert Surcouf . Although most privateers were small , carrying only a few cannon , some could be very large , rivalling professional warships in size . One such ship was the Bellone , which carried 34 @-@ guns , a crew of nearly 200 men and was commanded by Captain Jacques François Perroud , a notorious privateer who had caused significant damage to British trade in the Indian Ocean . In 1803 , Perroud had gained significant notoriety with the capture of the valuable East Indiaman Lord Nelson on 14 August 1803 . 
 The principal target of the privateers were the East Indiamen , huge and well @-@ armed merchant vessels operated by the Honourable East India Company , which controlled British mercantile operations to the east of Africa . These ships often weighed over 1 @,@ 000 tons and carried as many as 30 cannon , although their crews were not military men and they could not usually resist a determined attack by a well @-@ trained warship . Despite the size and power of these vessels , they were a primary target for French ships operating in the Indian Ocean as they often carried goods worth thousands of pounds : the annual convoy from China alone was worth over $ 8 million in 1804 . To combat these ships , the British naval authorities at Madras tried a number of solutions , including blockades of the French island colonies which failed due to the huge distances involved , armed military convoys escorting the most valuable ships and small fast cruisers patrolling the most dangerous trade routes . One solution tried in 1806 was to disguise Royal Navy warships as the East Indiamen they superficially resembled in the hope of luring French ships into attacking them , unaware of their true identity . 
 In December 1805 , two French squadrons departed Brest under orders to disrupt British trade in the Atlantic Ocean , beginning the Atlantic campaign of 1806 . Several British squadrons were despatched in pursuit , including one under Vice @-@ Admiral Sir John Thomas Duckworth originally assigned to blockade Cadiz . On 25 December , Duckworth discovered one of the French squadrons , under Vice @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Willaumez , in the mid @-@ Atlantic and gave chase . For the next two days the squadrons sailed westwards across the Atlantic , until Duckworth abandoned the pursuit , believing that his dispersed squadron was in danger of piecemeal defeat by Willaumez 's force . In the aftermath of the pursuit , Willaumez turned towards the South Atlantic while Duckworth , in urgent need of supplies , turned northwest towards the British West Indies . Duckworth was concerned that Willaumez might attempt to pass the Cape of Good Hope and operate in the Indian Ocean , and so despatched one of his ships to augment Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Edward Pellew 's small squadron at Madras . This ship was HMS Powerful , a 74 @-@ gun ship of the line commanded by Captain Robert Plampin . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 9 July 1806 , the small British brig HMS Rattlesnake under Commander John Bastard was cruising off the Southern coast of the British colony of Ceylon in search of French privateers that had been attacking small British traders , known as country ships , in the region . Most notorious of these was the Bellone , known to be operating in the area . In the early afternoon , lookouts on Rattlesnake spotted sails near the Little Basses Reef and approached the ship , which turned with the wind and fled to the southwest . Bastard immediately gave chase , and soon came close enough to identify the vessel as the Bellone . Although Bellone was much larger than the British warship , Captain Perroud was unwilling to risk his vessel in an unprofitable confrontation with Rattlesnake and seemed to be making an effective withdrawal when , at 15 : 15 , a large ship came within sight directly ahead . 
 Although it was not immediately obvious to the men on Bellone , the new arrival was Plampin 's Powerful , which had arrived in Indian waters on 13 June 1806 . Finding no trace of Willaumez , who had elected to remain in the Atlantic , Plampin briefly anchored at Madras and subsequently cruised off Ceylon . There , following intelligence sent by Pellew , he captured the 20 @-@ gun French privateer Henriette near Trincomalee after an 11 @-@ hour chase . From information possibly supplied by prisoners removed from Henriette or possibly from a merchant ship sailing from Colombo , Plampin learned of Perroud 's operations and had arranged to meet Rattlesnake off the Little Basses Reef . In the hope of luring the privateer into a confrontation , he disguised his large warship to look like an East Indiaman . Perroud rapidly saw through the disguise , and also noticed that while the wind remained strong off the coast , Powerful was further out to sea and appeared becalmed . Realising that his only option was to sail between Powerful and the shore , Perroud turned eastwards , but the wind gradually strengthened for Powerful and by 17 : 00 the ship of the line was within range of Bellone with her bow chasers . 
 Although faced with overwhelming opposition , Perroud did not surrender , maintaining a steady cannonade on the approaching ship of the line with Bellone 's own stern chasers and occasionally turning to release a full broadside . The variable winds prevented Rattlesnake joining the battle and also delayed Powerful 's approach ; Bellone succeeded in causing casualties on Plampin 's deck but failed to damage the ship of the line 's rigging or sails , which would have facilitated her own escape . For an hour and 45 minutes the battle continued with neither ship able to land a decisive blow on the other , until , at 18 : 45 , it was clear that Powerful would soon be within range with her main broadside . Perroud surrendered rather than see his ship destroyed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although the defeat of Bellone by such an overwhelming force of professional warships would seem inevitable , the resistance given by the French privateer was considered impressive both at the time and by subsequent historians . Although largely undamaged , Powerful had suffered two men killed and 11 wounded , compared to French losses of one dead and six or seven wounded . Bellone was also largely undamaged , only surrendering when Powerful was in position to open a full broadside . After the battle , Bellone was taken into port and subsequently commissioned as HMS Blanche albeit with a reduction in class to a 28 @-@ gun sixth rate frigate . Head @-@ money , a reward for the men captured or killed aboard enemy ships , was subsequently paid to the men of Powerful and Rattlesnake , as was head money for Henriette , although in both cases there was a delay in payment until January 1814 . Pellew especially was delighted by the capture of Bellone , writing " I reflect with much pleasure on the capture of La Bellone in particular , as from her superior sailing , as her uncommon success in the present and preceding war against the commerce , in the Indian and European seas " . 
 Historical reaction to the engagement has focused on two aspects : Perroud 's bravery in attempting to combat a vastly superior British force and the inaccuracy of Plampin 's gunnery . Contemporary historian William James described Perroud 's actions as " extraordinary " and notes that this was the second engagement in the Indian Ocean during 1806 in which British gunnery had proven ineffective , citing an inconclusive engagement on 21 April in which the 74 @-@ gun HMS Tremendous had been outgunned by the French frigate <unk> , the frigate escaping pursuit by damaging the larger vessel 's rigging . He also notes that Powerful was able to being six guns into regular use during the engagement as opposed to Bellone 's four , concluding that Plampin " might have made a better use of [ the extra cannon ] " . Later historian William Laird Clowes , writing in 1900 , agreed with James ' assessment , commenting that " This action serves to again illustrate the lamentable decline in British gunnery " . 
 = Ridge Route = 
 The Ridge Route , officially the Castaic @-@ Tejon Route , was a two @-@ lane highway between Los Angeles and Kern counties , California . Opened in 1915 and paved with 15 @-@ ft concrete between 1917 and 1921 , the road was the first paved highway directly linking the Los Angeles Basin with the San Joaquin Valley over the Tejon Pass and the rugged Sierra Pelona Mountains ridge south of Gorman . Much of the old road runs through the Angeles National Forest , and passes by many historical landmarks , including the National Forest Inn , Reservoir Summit , Kelly 's Half Way Inn , Tumble Inn , and Sandberg 's Summit Hotel . North of the forest , the Ridge Route passed through Deadman 's Curve before ending at Grapevine . 
 Most of the road was bypassed in 1933 – 34 by the three @-@ lane Ridge Route Alternate , then U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) , to handle increased traffic and remove many curves . The four @-@ lane US 99 was completed in 1953 and replaced by a freeway , Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) around 1968 . The portion of the road within the Angeles National Forest was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1997 , following the efforts of Harrison Scott . Much of the road has been closed by the U.S. Forest Service ; other remnants of the road are used by local traffic . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Ridge Route was officially the Castaic @-@ Tejon Route . The official limits of the Ridge Route , as built in the 1910s , were SR 126 at Castaic Junction and the bottom of the grade at Grapevine . Until 1930 @-@ 31 the road from San Fernando to Castaic Junction ran through the Newhall Tunnel at San Fernando Pass and along San Fernando Road , Magic Mountain Parkway ( both part of SR 126 until the early 2000s ) and <unk> Road to a former bridge over the Santa Clara River . A 1930 bypass of the tunnel and Newhall through Weldon Canyon is now part of The Old Road . 
 From Castaic Junction north to Castaic the Ridge Route has been largely buried by the Ridge Route Alternate and Interstate 5 . At Castaic the Ridge Route Alternate turned northwest from the old road at 34 @.@ <unk> ° N 118 @.@ 617 ° W ﻿ / 34 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> , now the intersection of Castaic Road and Neely Street . The first piece of Ridge Route Road out of Castaic has been realigned as recently as the late 1990s when the North Lake housing development was built . The road begins to climb after passing North Lake ; a portion was straightened in 1924 and now is next to the southbound lanes of I @-@ 5 . In this area , known as the Five @-@ Mile Grade , the four @-@ lane Ridge Route Alternate became the northbound lanes of I @-@ 5 , while the added four @-@ lane alignment , built to the east ( next to the old Ridge Route ) , had lower grades and became the southbound ( downhill ) lanes to cut down on runaway trucks . Two bridges were built to allow traffic to cross to the left side . Near the north end of this area , the Ridge Route curves away from the newer bypass . The road enters the Angeles National Forest about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of Templin Highway , with the Forest Service road designation <unk> . 
 Establishments in the forest included the National Forest Inn , Kelly 's Half Way Inn , Tumble Inn , and Sandberg 's Summit Hotel . 
 The National Forest Inn was on the west side of the road . A popular place along the route , composed of white clapboard buildings , it was described in a 1932 highway beautification pamphlet as " the sort of filling station that gets into a national forest and is no addition thereto " . On October 14 , 1932 , a fire began in the garage , and took over a day to put out . When the Ridge Route Alternate bypassed the site to the west , the inn was not rebuilt , and all that remains are concrete steps . 
 About two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of the National Forest Inn is Serpentine Drive , where the road curves around the sides of hills as it climbs out of a low point in the route ( about 3 @,@ 200 feet ( 980 m ) above sea level ) . North of the curves , the road passes through Swede 's Cut , also called Big Cut , Culebra Excavation , or Castaic Cut . The cut was the largest on the route , with a depth of 110 feet ( 34 m ) . 
 Reservoir Summit , also called Reservoir Hill , is 3 @,@ 883 feet ( 1 @,@ 184 m ) above sea level . The Reservoir Summit Café was a popular high @-@ class restaurant on the east side of the road , closed in the late 1920s ; the foundation remains . The summit was named after a now @-@ dry reservoir , one of three probably built for the concrete used in paving the road . 
 Kelly 's Half Way Inn was roughly halfway between Los Angeles and Bakersfield . Located on a small knoll with a single tree on the east side of the road , all that remains is remnants of the foundation . 
 The Tumble Inn , later Mountain View Lodge , was on the west side of the road , and closed when the Ridge Route Alternate opened in 1933 . Steps , including the top step with " <unk> INN " in the concrete , and a retaining wall remain . 
 The Sandberg 's Summit Hotel , later Sandberg 's Lodge , was located just north of Liebre Summit , the highest point ( 4 @,@ 233 feet ( 1 @,@ 290 m ) ) on the road , at 4 @,@ 170 feet ( 1 @,@ 270 m ) above sea level . The hotel was built in 1914 , and thus served travelers from the opening of the road in 1915 . Built of logs , it was a high @-@ class hotel . The place , which had become a ceramics factory , burned down on April 29 , 1961 , from a fire started by the new owner — who was converting it into a " camp @-@ type operation " for underprivileged children — burning trash in the fireplace . The lease from the U.S. Forest Service was canceled in 1963 , and only portions of the foundation and a rock wall remain . The name " Sandberg " is still used by the National Weather Service for an automated weather station a short distance to the north at Pine Canyon Road . Pine Canyon Road ( CR N2 ) marks the end of the forest and the beginning of county maintenance , and CR N2 uses the old Ridge Route alignment to reach SR 138 near Quail Lake . 
 The Ridge Route crosses the West Branch California Aqueduct with SR 138 , splitting to the northwest on Gorman Post Road . It rejoins the path of I @-@ 5 at Gorman , and , from Gorman to the end at Grapevine , most of the old road has been covered over by the Ridge Route Alternate or I @-@ 5 . The path of the Ridge Route is now named Peace Valley Road and Lebec Road , passing over Tejon Pass and past Lebec and Fort Tejon . Past Fort Tejon , the route descends through Grapevine Canyon to Grapevine ( named for grapevines in the area ) . The best @-@ known curve on the road , Deadman 's Curve or Death Curve , is visible from <unk> Road on the west side of I @-@ 5 . The next part of the old road that still exists is near the bottom of the grade , where a number of curves brought the road down to Grapevine . The original plan was to build the road nearer to the center of the canyon , but a March 1914 flood destroyed the work , and the grading was redone higher up . Deadman 's Curve and the Grapevine loops were both bypassed by the Ridge Route Alternate , which was built directly over most of the old road in this area . At Grapevine , the land suddenly flattens out , and the road north of Grapevine was the longest straight section of road in the state — 17 miles ( 27 km ) — in 1926 . Most of this road lies under I @-@ 5 and SR 99 , but the southernmost piece in Grapevine was bypassed by the Alternate , and is now in the median of I @-@ 5 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before the Ridge Route = = = 
 Before the Ridge Route , passage between Los Angeles and the San Joaquin Valley was more indirect . For example , El Camino Real ( Spanish , " the King 's road " ) , the first major road in California , connected Los Angeles and the various missions , presidios and settlements with San Francisco and Sonoma . The San Joaquin Valley route split from the El Camino Real at present @-@ day Universal City , the western leg running along the Pacific Coast and coastal valleys and the eastern El Camino Viejo , ( Spanish , " the old road " ) laid out via the San Joaquin Valley to San Antonio , now East Oakland . 
 An alternate route between Los Angeles and Bakersfield followed the southern approach to the Ridge Route to Saugus , but took a longer route between Saugus and Gorman , heading northeast through the San Francisquito Canyon to the Antelope Valley and west to Gorman . The rest of the route , from Gorman toward Bakersfield via the Tejon Pass , followed the same path as the Ridge Route . 
 The Butterfield Overland Stage , the first overland mail service to California , went from Tipton , Missouri and Memphis to San Francisco via Los Angeles . From October 1858 , when the first stage passed through Tejon Pass , until April 1861 , the route was identical to El Camino Viejo , running via San Francisquito Canyon . In order to keep the stages from running directly northwest from San Bernardino and bypassing Los Angeles , the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors spent $ 8000 in 1858 ( about $ 3 @.@ 28 million in 2015 ) to deepen the cut — later Beale 's Cut — at San Fernando Pass , south of Saugus and Newhall ( east of Sierra Highway , west of the Antelope Valley Freeway or State Route 14 ) . The path followed by the stages was changed to pass along the Pacific Coast from Los Angeles in April 1861 . 
 Similarly , the residents of the City of Los Angeles approved the expenditure of a good deal of money towards the building of the Southern Pacific Railroad , which had originally planned to bypass the city . The line to San Francisco , including the 6 @,@ 966 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 123 m ) San Fernando Tunnel through San Fernando Pass , was completed on September 5 , 1876 . The railroad 's route between Saugus and Bakersfield was even longer than that of El Camino Viejo and the Butterfield Overland Stage , heading east through Soledad Canyon before turning north via Palmdale to Mojave and northwest over Tehachapi Pass . 
 In the 1910s , several power companies built lines through the area . The General Pipe Line Company completed an oil pipeline connecting the San Joaquin Valley 's Midway @-@ Sunset Oil Field with the port at San Pedro in 1913 . Its alignment followed the Ridge Route north of Gorman and south of Reservoir Summit , a longer distance than any of the earlier transportation routes , but from Gorman south to the present location of Pyramid Lake , where it turned east to Reservoir Summit , it roughly followed the later Ridge Route Alternate . That same year , the Midway Gas Company opened a natural gas line , and the Pacific Light and Power Company opened a power line , both staying fairly close to the entire Ridge Route . 
 The two general routes followed by the Butterfield Overland Stage and the Southern Pacific Railroad — known respectively as the Tejon Pass Route and the Tehachapi or Midway Route - were the main automobile routes between Los Angeles and the San Joaquin Valley around the start of the 20th century . The State Bureau of Highways recommended in 1895 that a more direct route be built to shorten this distance . A bond issue was approved in 1909 and 1910 to build a state highway system , including the Ridge Route . The new California Highway Commission was unable to raise funds in the East , but Los Angeles again contributed funds to ensure that construction would go forward . 
 These routes all shared the roadway south of Saugus , which was generally flat but included the crossing of San Fernando Pass . As discussed earlier , this was deepened at the county 's expense in 1858 . The California State Legislature authorized a turnpike in 1861 , and it was completed in 1863 , then owned by Edward Fitzgerald Beale . The cut , which came to be known as Beale 's Cut , was deepened by Beale , and lowered once more by the county in 1904 . To improve the crossing , the county bypassed the cut with the narrow 435 @-@ foot ( 133 m ) Newhall Tunnel , for railroad traffic only , which opened in October 1910 . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The California Highway Commission considered several easterly routes between Saugus and Gorman : Soledad Canyon ( used by the Southern Pacific ) had frequent washouts ; Mint Canyon ( used by the Midway Route ) was too long and cost too much ; Bouquet Canyon ( used by both automobile routes ) had bad drainage ; and San Francisquito Canyon ( used by the Tejon Pass Route ) was steep and narrow . Another possible route , through Piru Canyon to the west , was rejected because of a proposal for a dam . This route was later chosen for the Ridge Route Alternate , but had to be abandoned in the 1970s due to the construction of Pyramid Lake . 
 Thus , the route chosen was a direct line between Saugus and Gorman , over the top of the ridge for many miles . Due to cost and drainage concerns , and a desire to reduce altering the terrain , the road was built with 697 curves , high in the mountains . Construction on the Ridge Route , officially considered to run from Castaic Junction ( west of Saugus on the road to Ventura ) to the bottom of the grade at Grapevine , began in 1914 . The highway was one of the earliest projects completed by the California Highway Commission . To construct the road , horse @-@ drawn scrapers were used . 
 The new road , designed with an ideal grade of 6 percent ( but with several 7 percent grades , including at Grapevine , ) cut the distance by 24 miles ( 39 km ) over the Tejon Pass Route or 58 miles ( 93 km ) over the Midway Route . A speed limit of 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) was enforced between Castaic and Quail Lake , making the trip from Los Angeles to Bakersfield take about 12 hours . On the 48 @-@ mile ( 77 km ) Ridge Route , between Castaic Junction and Grapevine , the curves added up to a total of about 109 @.@ 5 complete circles , with a minimum radius of 70 feet ( 21 m ) . The unpaved road , which had cost $ 450 @,@ 000 ( about $ 64 @.@ 6 million in 2015 ) , opened in October 1915 . 
 In addition to being part of the state highway system ( as a portion of the unsigned Sacramento @-@ Los Angeles Legislative Route 4 ) , the road was also part of the National Park to Park Highway , a privately designated auto trail , and became part of US 99 in 1926 . The continuation south via Saugus and the Newhall Tunnel towards Los Angeles , also part of Route 4 , was added to the state highway system in 1917 . 
 According to the San Francisco Chronicle , the new route was " one of the most remarkable engineering feats accomplished by the State Highway Commission . It is Southern California 's Magnus Opus [ sic ] in mountain highway construction . " It was also credited with stopping efforts to split California into two states , by linking its two halves over the rugged terrain separating them . 
 Work on paving the Ridge Route with 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide and 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) thick reinforced concrete began in 1917 , but was delayed until 1919 by the U.S. entry into World War I. During work on the road , traffic was detoured via Mint and Bouquet Canyons . The road was reopened on November 15 , 1919 , completely paved except north of Lebec , including the grade at Grapevine , which was only oiled . After a bond issue was passed in July 1919 , this portion was paved from September 1919 to May 1921 ; the dangerous detour included a 20 percent grade . This paving added about $ 1 million to the cost , for a total price of about $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( about $ 122 million in 2015 ) , which was not paid off until 1965 . Asphalt was added on top of the concrete for 20 miles ( 32 km ) south from Swede 's Cut in 1922 , and in 1924 a number of dangerous blind curves were widened and straightened . 
 = = = Bypasses and the fate of the bypassed road = = = 
 In 1929 , the state decided to build a new bypass of the central portion through Piru Canyon , and to upgrade the northern portion over Tejon Pass and down the hill at Grapevine . This Ridge Route Alternate , or Ridge Alternate Highway , shortened the route by 9 @.@ 6 miles ( 15 @.@ 4 km ) and increased the minimum curve radius from 70 to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 21 to 305 m ) . This was done over concerns regarding the safety of the road , which had a high number of traffic accidents , as well as the highway 's increased use . The old highway was to be relinquished to Los Angeles County , and incorporated into the county road system . Construction began in 1930 , and the road south of Tejon Pass was officially opened on October 29 , 1933 ; replacement of the Grapevine grade was completed by 1936 . The road , which included a center " suicide " passing lane , cost $ 3 @.@ 5 million ( about $ 295 million in 2015 ) , paid for by the state gas tax . It was estimated that it would pay itself off in 2 @.@ 5 years with the savings in time and gas . A new bypass of the Newhall Tunnel , through Weldon Canyon , had been opened on May 28 , 1930 , thus giving drivers a better route all the way from Los Angeles to Bakersfield . The roadway was widened to an expressway by 1952 at a cost of $ 13 @.@ 5 million ( about $ 321 million in 2015 ) , providing two lanes in each direction and a center median , but retaining at @-@ grade intersections . 
 Even this four @-@ lane Ridge Route Alternate was not adequate for the volume of traffic using the road , and construction of the eight @-@ lane freeway I @-@ 5 with a minimum curve radius of 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) began in June 1963 . Large parts of the Ridge Route Alternate were incorporated into the new roadway , but the area through the present Pyramid Lake was completely bypassed . I @-@ 5 over the mountains between Castaic Junction and Grapevine was completed on August 24 , 1970 , at a cost of $ 103 million ( about $ 1 @.@ 1 billion in 2015 ) . 
 Meanwhile , portions of the old road continued to exist in as a county road . The longest preserved segment was the part completely bypassed by the Ridge Route Alternate , between Castaic and SR 138 near Sandberg , including the portion through the Angeles National Forest . The road for about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south from SR 138 is part of CR N2 . 
 Harrison Scott , a retired engineer , was traveling north on I @-@ 5 with his son in 1991 , when his son speculated about the difficulty of driving over the first road through the rugged terrain . Having some extra time , and recalling a drive on the old road in 1955 , they left the freeway and traveled along most of the abandoned section . Near SR 138 , Scott asked a county road crew which was resurfacing the road if it was still maintained by the county , and the crew replied that they didn 't know who maintained it through the desert . It turned out that the county officially owned it but did not maintain it ; Scott has since convinced the county and forest to exchange ownership with the Santa Anita Canyon Road , then a county road . 
 For the next six years , Scott worked on getting the road added to the National Register of Historic Places , and finally succeeded when , on September 25 , 1997 , the National Park Service added the 17 @.@ 6 miles ( 28 @.@ 3 km ) within the forest to the National Register . He subsequently wrote a book , Ridge Route : The Road That United California , from the research he had done for the National Register application , that was published in 2002 . 
 The route was repaired in 2005 following heavy rainfall , but the road was not reopened as of early 2013 , due to objections from Angeles National Forest officials . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Aboriginal title in California = 
 Aboriginal title in California refers to the aboriginal title land rights of the indigenous peoples of California . The state is unique in that no Native American tribe in California is the counterparty to a ratified federal treaty . Therefore , all the Indian reservations in the state were created by federal statute or executive order . 
 California has experienced less possessory land claim litigation than other states . This is primarily the result of the Land Claims Act of 1851 ( following the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ) that required all claims deriving from the Spanish and Mexican governments to be filed within two years . Three U.S. Supreme Court decisions and one Ninth Circuit ruling have held that the Land Claims Act applied to aboriginal title , and thus extinguished all aboriginal title in the state ( as no tribes filed claims under the Act ) . Two Deputy Attorneys General of California have advocated this view . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Spanish rule = = = 
 Spain established twenty @-@ one missions , indigenous peoples ( the so @-@ called Mission Indians ) lived and worked under the supervision of missionaries . However , approximately 80 % of the approximately 100 @,@ 000 to 300 @,@ 000 indigenous population of California remained outside the Missions . Spanish law fully recognized the customary title of indigenous peoples . Spanish @-@ era land grants are referred to as the Ranchos of California . 
 = = = Mexican rule = = = 
 Mexico declared independence from Spain in 1824 . Mexico secularized the Mission system , and granted some of these tribes their land in fee simple . 
 = = = U.S. territory = = = 
 Mexico ceded California to the US in 1848 pursuant to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo . Under Article Eight of that treaty , the United States agreed to respect the hundreds of land grants , many quite substantial , granted by the Spanish and Mexican governments to private landowners . Articles Nine and Ten guaranteed the property rights of Mexican nationals . The United States established procedures to review the validity of such land grants . 
 That same year gold was discovered in California , rapidly accelerating migration to California . Reports commissioned by the federal government during this period uniformly downplayed the extent of indigenous land rights under Spanish and Mexican rule . 
 = = = Statehood = = = 
 = = = = The eighteen unratified treaties = = = = 
 California was admitted as a U.S. state on September 9 , 1850 . The admission act made no reference to Native American land rights . On their second day in office as California 's first Senators , John Fremont and William M. Gwin introduced bills to extinguish all aboriginal title in California . On September 30 , 1850 , Congress passed an amended version of Fremont 's bill appropriating $ 25 @,@ 000 and authorizing the President to appoint three commissioners to negotiate treaties with the tribes of California . By January 1852 , eighteen treaties had been negotiated , representing about one @-@ third of the tribes and bands in the state . The state legislature strongly opposed the Indian reservation policy pursued by the treaty and lobbied the federal government to instead remove the Indians from the state entirely . Because Fremont and Gwin represented the key swing votes between the Whig and Democratic parties , none of the treaties were ever ratified and all were classified . 
 Federal agents had already persuaded nearly all of the Indians to remove to their would @-@ be reservations while the treaties were pending ; soon , " starvation , disease , and murder " reduced their population to 17 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = The Land Claims Act = = = = 
 On March 3 , 1851 , Congress enacted the Land Claims Act , requiring " each and every person claiming lands in California by virtue of any right or title derived by the Mexican government " to file their claim with a three @-@ member Board of Land Commissioners within two years . The Commissioners were to issue patents to the claims they found meritorious and the other lands were to pass into the public domain at the end of the two years . Two years later , Congress passed an act to survey those lands that had passed into the public domain under the first statute , but exempted " land in the occupation or possession of any Indian tribe . " That act also authorized the President to create five military reservations in California for Indian purposes . 
 The effect of these acts on aboriginal title in California has been a subject of litigation for 150 years . Regardless , the United States never again pursued treaty negotiations with California Indians , instead favoring legislation and executive orders . By statute , Congress created several Indian reservations . Congress gave the executive the discretion to create further reservations . By 1986 , Presidents had used this discretion to create 117 reservations totalling 632 @,@ 000 acres . 
 = = = = Claims Court litigation = = = = 
 In 1927 , the California legislature passed a statute authorizing the California Attorney General to bring claims on behalf of the tribes in the Court of Claims . The next year , Congress passed a statute granting that court jurisdiction for such claims . California Attorney General Earl Warren ( future Chief Justice ) finally argued the case in 1941 . The court found liability but indicated it would not award pre @-@ judgment interest , and the Supreme Court declined to grant certiorari . Warren negotiated a $ 5M settlement . After the passage of the Indian Claims Commission Act , the same group of tribes struggled to bring a single action for recovery under the broader claims allowed under the ICCA , which settled for $ <unk> . 
 = = Effect of the Land Claims Act of 1851 = = 
 = = = Early California Supreme Court decisions = = = 
 The earliest cases heard by the Supreme Court under the Land Claims Act involved non @-@ Indians . Therefore , in Thompson v. <unk> ( 1886 ) , the California Supreme Court considered the application of the Act to Indians as a matter of first impression . The court upheld a quiet title judgment for the plaintiff , holding : " If defendants [ Indians belonging to the Big Meadows tribe ] had any right to the land , it should have been asserted in the land department pending the application for patent , or by direct proceeding on the part of the government to set aside the patent . " 
 Two years later , Byrne v. Alas ( 1888 ) , the court distinguished its holding by reversing a quiet title judgment against a group of Mission Indians . Byrne , in distinguishing <unk> , held that the fact of a third party validating title to certain lands was conclusive of the fact that those lands were not in the public domain , and thus , that the aboriginal title was not extinguished . 
 There , the Mission Indians did not claim fee simple by any Mexican grant , but rather " by virtue of their possession , and the continuous , open , and exclusive use and occupancy by their predecessors and ancestors ever since the year 1815 . " Further , the court interpreted the language in the Land Claims Act requiring the Commissioner to investigate the status of indigenous tenure as evidence that " Congress did not intend that the rights of the Indians should be cut off by a failure on their part to present their claims . " 
 = = = Barker v. Harvey ( 1901 ) = = = 
 In Barker v. Harvey ( 1901 ) , the Supreme Court heard the consolidated appeals of a group of Mission Indians who had lost a quiet title action by several non @-@ Indians . The appeal to the Supreme Court was brought by the federal government in its trustee capacity . Justice Brewer , for a unanimous Court ( White recused ) , affirmed . 
 Barker has two independent holdings . First , the Court reaffirmed its holding from <unk> v. Dominguez ( 1889 ) that even perfect title was subject to the requirements of the Land Claims Act . Barker rejected in part the reasoning of the California Supreme Court from Byrne , noting : " Surely a claimant would have little reason for presenting to the land commission his claim to land , and securing a confirmation of that claim , if the only result was to transfer the naked fee to him , burdened by an Indian right of permanent occupancy . " Thus , Barker has since been cited by the Court as the source of the rule that the Land Claims Act itself extinguished aboriginal title . 
 Second , the Court held that the plaintiff 's title had been extinguished before the Mexican Cession . To determine this , the Court examined and quoted extensively the specific text of the plaintiff 's grants . From this , the Court concluded that the aboriginal title had long been extinguished by abandonment : 
 It thus appears that prior to the cession the Mexican authorities , upon examination , found that the Indians had abandoned the land ; that the only adverse claim was vested in the mission of San Diego and made an absolute grant , subject only to the condition of satisfying whatever claims the mission might have . How can it be said therefore that when the cession was made by Mexico to the United States there was a present recognition by the Mexican government of the occupancy of these Indians ? On the contrary , so far as any official action is disclosed , it was distinctly to the contrary , and carried with it an affirmation that they had abandoned their occupancy , and that whatever of title there was outside of the Mexican nation was in the mission , and an absolute grant was made subject only to the rights of such mission . 
 = = = United States v. Title Ins . & Trust Co . ( 1923 ) = = = 
 More than two decades later , the Court reconsidered the meaning and propriety of its Barker decision in United States v. Title Ins . & Trust Co . ( 1923 ) . There , the federal government sued on behalf of a group of Mission Indians holding an 1842 Mexican grant . The court cited reliance considerations of stare decisis in declining the government 's request to overrule Barker : 
 The decision was given 23 years ago , and affected many tracts of land in California , particularly in the southern part of the state . In the meantime there has been a continuous growth and development in that section , land values have enhanced , and there have been many transfers . Naturally there has been reliance on the decision . The defendants in this case purchased 15 years after it was made . It has become a rule of property , and to disturb it now would be fraught with many injurious results . Besides , the government and the scattered Mission Indians have adjusted their situation to it in several instances . 
 = = = Super v. Work ( 1926 ) = = = 
 Super v. Work ( 1926 ) involved a challenge in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia ( now known as the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ) to the construction of federal hydroelectric dams in California . The plaintiffs , members of the Karuk and Peh @-@ <unk> tribes , alleged both that the dams would violate their aboriginal title rights and their rights under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo . The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia held that both rights ( if they existed ) were extinguished by the 1851 statute . Unlike the plaintiffs in Barker , who were Mission Indians , the plaintiffs here were nomadic at the time of the relevant times . 
 In a one @-@ sentence per curiam opinion , the Court affirmed the D.C. Circuit , citing Barker , Title Insurance , Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock ( 1903 ) , and Conley v. Ballinger ( 1910 ) . The Karuk attempt to re @-@ assert their claims decades later based upon the federal government 's general trust relationship and other statutes were unsuccessful . Since Super , the Court has twice interpreted the Land Claims Act to also have imposed the requirement to file upon the state of California itself . 
 = = = United States ex rel . <unk> v. <unk> ( 1986 ) = = = 
 In United States ex rel . <unk> v. <unk> ( 1986 ) , the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit considered the trespass and conversion claims of Chumash tribe ( joined by the federal government ) over the ownership of the Channel Islands of California ( and the channel beds surrounding the Santa Cruz and Santa Rosa islands ) in California . The Ninth Circuit held that , although the Chumash 's aboriginal title survived the issuance of Mexican land grants to the same islands , the tribe 's title was extinguished by its failure to file under the Land Claims Act . 
 First , the Ninth Circuit disagreed with the District Court 's holding that Mexican land grants had extinguished the Chumash 's title . Instead , the court applied the same standards to Mexican land grants as would have been applied to federal land grants : the grants were presumed to grant an interest subject to the tribe 's aboriginal title . Next , the Ninth Circuit rejected the tribe 's arguments that the islands were not within the land ceded by the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo . Third , the court rejected the Chumash 's argument that the Treaty converted the tribe 's aboriginal title into recognized title . 
 Finally , the court reached the question of the Land Claims Act . The Ninth Circuit examined the rule of Barker , Title Insurance , and Super . As for Barker , the court conceded that " the precise basis for this holding is not clear . " With respect to Title Insurance , the court noted that it is " not entirely clear in the opinion " that the case involved aboriginal title , but inferred such from subsequent interpretations of that decision . 
 The Chumash attempted to distinguish these cases by relying on Cramer v. United States ( 1923 ) , the case that established the existence of " individual aboriginal title " ( as opposed to tribal ) ; Cramer , after all , had distinguished Barker . Thus , " [ g ] iven the line of Supreme Court decisions recognizing the extensive reach of the Act of 1851 , " the Ninth Circuit stated that Cramer could only avail those whose individual aboriginal title post @-@ dated 1851 . The court also rejected the Chumash 's attempt to interpret the Act according to canons of international law . 
 The Supreme Court denied certiorari . 
 = = Individual aboriginal title = = 
 = = = Cramer v. United States ( 1923 ) = = = 
 Cramer v. United States ( 1923 ) involved would @-@ be Indian reservations ( as provided for in the aforementioned unratified treaties ) that had subsequently been granted to railroads by the federal government . The United States District Court for the Northern District of California canceled the railroad 's land patents based upon the actual use and occupation of the Indians since 1855 . The Ninth Circuit agreed with the District Court , but cancelled the entirety of the patents at issue . 
 The Supreme Court considered six arguments by the railroad . First , it rejected the railroad 's argument that the exceptions to the grant did not specifically mention Indians ; instead , the court held that all land grants are presumed to be granted subject to aboriginal title . 
 Next , the Court considered the Act of 1851 . The Court held that it was irrelevant : 
 The act plainly has no application . The Indians here concerned do not belong to any of the classes described therein and their claims were in no way derived from the Spanish or Mexican governments . Moreover , it does not appear that these Indians were occupying the lands in question when the act was passed . 
 Third , the Court rejected the argument that the federal government could not bring suit on behalf of the tribe . Fourth , the Court rejected the statute limiting the time in which the government could challenge the validity of its land patents , holding that did not apply to suits on behalf of Indians . Fifth , the Court rejected estoppel : " Since these Indians with the implied consent of the government had acquired such rights of occupancy as entitled them to retain possession as against the defendants , no officer or agent of the government had authority to deal with the land upon any other theory . " Finally , however , the Court reversed the Ninth Circuit 's voiding of the entire patents , holding that only the portions possessed by the Indians should be void . 
 The holding in Cramer lay dormant for many years . Decade later , Justice Douglas dissented to the denial of certiorari where the lower court had denied a California Indian defendant the ability to defend a criminal prosecution for illegal logging on the basis of individual aboriginal title as recognized in Cramer . The Court has since elaborated on the basis for its holding in Cramer : 
 This holding was based upon the well @-@ understood governmental policy of encouraging the Indian to forgo his wandering habits and adopt those of civilized life ; and it was said that to hold that by so doing he acquired no possessory rights to the lands occupied , to which the government would accord protection , would be contrary to the whole spirit of the traditional American policy toward these dependent wards of the nation . The fact that such right of occupancy finds no recognition in any statute or other formal governmental action is not conclusive . 
 = = = United States v. Dann ( 1989 ) = = = 
 United States v. Dann ( 1989 ) is the most in @-@ depth consideration of individual aboriginal title since Cramer . There , although the relevant tribal aboriginal title had been extinguished , and an ordinance prohibited entry onto the federal lands in question , the Court found that the defendants could and did establish individual aboriginal title based on their use of the lands before the ordinance . The Ninth Circuit ( in an appeal from Nevada , not California ) held : 
 [ An individual ] establish [ es ] aboriginal title in much the same manner that a tribe does . An individual might be able to show that his or her lineal ancestors held and occupied , as individuals , a particular tract of land , to the exclusion of all others , from time immemorial , and that this title had never been extinguished . 
 However , the Ninth Circuit concluded that the federal policies in place at the time of Cramer had changed and thus : 
 In short , an Indian cannot today gain a right of occupancy simply by occupying public land , as the Indians did in Cramer . Under current law , that occupancy could not be viewed as undertaken with the implied consent of the government , as was the occupancy in Cramer . We therefore conclude that any individual occupancy rights acquired by the <unk> must have had their inception prior to November 26 , 1934 , the date that the lands in question were withdrawn from entry by Executive Order No. <unk> . 
 Individual aboriginal title is a fact @-@ specific and fact @-@ intensive defense , which is difficult to raise as a criminal affirmative defense , for which the defendant has the burden of proof . 
 = Lionel Messi = 
 Lionel Andrés " Leo " Messi ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; born 24 June 1987 ) is an Argentine professional footballer who plays as a forward for Spanish club FC Barcelona . Often considered the best player in the world and rated by many in the sport as the greatest of all time , Messi is the only football player in history to win five FIFA Ballons d 'Or , four of which he won consecutively , and the first player to win three European Golden Shoes . With Barcelona he has won eight La Liga titles and four UEFA Champions League titles , as well as four Copas del Rey . Both a prolific goalscorer and a creative playmaker , Messi holds the records for most goals scored in La Liga , a La Liga season ( 50 ) , a football season ( 82 ) , and a calendar year ( 91 ) , as well as those for most assists made in La Liga and the Copa América . 
 Born and raised in central Argentina , Messi was diagnosed with a growth hormone deficiency as a child . At age 13 , he relocated to Spain to join Barcelona , who agreed to pay for his medical treatment . After a fast progression through Barcelona 's youth academy , Messi made his competitive debut aged 17 in October 2004 . Despite being injury @-@ prone during his early career , he established himself as an integral player for the club within the next three years , finishing 2007 as a finalist for both the Ballon d 'Or and FIFA World Player of the Year award , a feat he repeated the following year . His first uninterrupted campaign came in the 2008 – 09 season , during which he helped Barcelona achieve the first treble in Spanish football . At 22 years old , Messi won the Ballon d 'Or and FIFA World Player of the Year award by record voting margins . 
 Three successful seasons followed , with Messi winning three consecutive FIFA Ballons d 'Or , including an unprecedented fourth . His personal best campaign to date was the 2011 – 12 season , in which he set the La Liga and European records for most goals scored in a single season , while establishing himself as Barcelona 's all @-@ time top scorer in official competitions in March 2012 . He again struggled with injury during the following two seasons , twice finishing second for the Ballon d 'Or behind Cristiano Ronaldo , his perceived career rival . Messi regained his best form during the 2014 – 15 campaign , breaking the all @-@ time goalscoring records in both La Liga and the Champions League in November 2014 , and led Barcelona to a historic second treble . 
 A former Argentine international , Messi is his country 's all @-@ time leading goalscorer . At youth level , he won the 2005 FIFA World Youth Championship , finishing the tournament with both the Golden Ball and Golden Shoe , and an Olympic gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics . His style of play as a diminutive , left @-@ footed dribbler drew comparisons with compatriot Diego Maradona , who declared the teenager his successor . After making his senior debut in August 2005 , Messi became the youngest Argentine to play and score in a FIFA World Cup during the 2006 edition , and reached the final of the 2007 Copa América , where he was named young player of the tournament . As the squad 's captain from August 2011 , he led Argentina to three consecutive finals of the 2014 World Cup , for which he won the Golden Ball , and the 2015 and 2016 Copas América . Following his fourth final defeat , Messi retired from international football aged 29 , having represented his country in seven major tournaments . He was then convicted of tax fraud committed from 2007 to 2009 , for which he received a fine and a suspended prison sentence . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lionel Andrés Messi was born on 24 June 1987 in Rosario , Santa Fe , the third of four children of Jorge Messi , a steel factory manager , and his wife Celia <unk> , who worked in a magnet manufacturing workshop . On his father 's side , he is of Italian and Spanish heritage , the great @-@ grandson of immigrants from Marche and Catalonia , and on his mother 's side , he is of primarily Italian descent . Growing up in a tight @-@ knit , football @-@ loving family , " Leo " developed a passion for the sport from an early age , playing constantly with his older brothers , Rodrigo and Matías , and his cousins , Maximiliano and Emanuel <unk> , both of whom became professional footballers . At the age of four years , he joined local club <unk> , where he was coached by his father , though his earliest influence as a player came from his maternal grandmother , Celia , who accompanied him to training and matches . He was greatly affected by her death , shortly before his eleventh birthday ; since then , as a devout Catholic , he has celebrated his goals by looking up and pointing to the sky in tribute of his grandmother . 
 A lifelong supporter of Newell 's Old Boys , Messi joined the Rosario club when he was six years old . During the six years he played for Newell 's , he scored almost 500 goals as a member of " The Machine of ' 87 " , the near @-@ unbeatable youth side named for the year of their birth , and regularly entertained crowds by performing ball tricks during half @-@ time of the first team 's home games . However , his future as a professional player was threatened when , at age 10 , he was diagnosed with a growth hormone deficiency . As his father 's health insurance covered only two years of growth hormone treatment , which cost at least $ 1 @,@ 000 per month , Newell 's agreed to contribute , but later reneged on their promise . He was scouted by Buenos Aires club River Plate , whose playmaker , Pablo Aimar , he idolised , but they were also unable to pay for his treatment due to the country 's economic collapse . 
 As the Messi family had relatives in Catalonia , they sought to arrange a trial with Barcelona in September 2000 . First team director Charly Rexach immediately wanted to sign him , but the board of directors hesitated ; at the time it was highly unusual for European clubs to sign foreign players of such a young age . On 14 December , an ultimatum was issued for Barcelona to prove their commitment , and Rexach , with no other paper at hand , offered a contract on a paper napkin . In February 2001 , the family relocated to Barcelona , where they moved into an apartment near the club 's stadium , Camp Nou . During his first year in Spain , Messi rarely played with the <unk> due to a transfer conflict with Newell 's ; as a foreigner , he could only be fielded in friendlies and the Catalan league . Without football , he struggled to integrate into the team ; already reserved by nature , he was so quiet that his teammates initially believed he was mute . At home , he suffered from homesickness after his mother moved back to Rosario with his brothers and little sister , María Sol , while he stayed in Barcelona with his father . 
 After a year at Barcelona 's youth academy , La Masia , Messi was finally enrolled in the Royal Spanish Football Federation in February 2002 . Now playing in all competitions , he befriended his teammates , among whom were Cesc Fàbregas and Gerard Piqué . After completing his growth hormone treatment aged 14 , Messi became an integral part of the " Baby Dream Team " , Barcelona 's greatest @-@ ever youth side . During his first full season , in 2002 – 03 , he was top scorer with 36 goals in 30 games for the <unk> A , who won an unprecedented treble of the league and both the Spanish and Catalan cups . The Copa Catalunya final , a 4 – 1 victory over Espanyol , became known in club lore as the <unk> de la <unk> , the final of the mask . A week after suffering a broken cheekbone during a league match , Messi was allowed to start the game on the condition that he wear a plastic protector ; soon hindered by the mask , he took it off and scored two goals in 10 minutes before his substitution . At the close of the season , he received an offer to join Arsenal , his first from a foreign club , but while Fàbregas and Piqué soon left for England , he chose to remain in Barcelona . 
 = = Barcelona = = 
 = = = 2003 – 05 : Rise to the first team = = = 
 During the 2003 – 04 season , his fourth with Barcelona , Messi rapidly progressed through the club 's ranks , debuting for a record five teams in a single campaign . After being named player of the tournament in four international pre @-@ season competitions with the Juveniles B , he played only one official match with the team before being promoted to the Juveniles A , where he scored 18 goals in 11 league games . Messi was then one of several youth players called up to strengthen a depleted first team during the international break . At 16 years , four months , and 23 days old , he made his first team debut when he came on in the 75th minute during a friendly against José Mourinho 's Porto on 16 November 2003 . His performance , creating two chances and a shot on goal , impressed the technical staff , and he subsequently began training daily with the club 's reserve side , Barcelona B , as well as weekly with the first team . After his first training session with the senior squad , Barça 's new star player , Ronaldinho , told his teammates that he believed the 16 @-@ year @-@ old would become an even better player than himself . Ronaldinho soon befriended Messi , whom he called " little brother , " which greatly eased his transition into the first team . 
 To gain further match experience , Messi joined Barcelona C in addition to the Juveniles A , playing his first game for the third team on 29 November . He helped save them from the relegation zone of the Tercera División , scoring five goals in 10 games , including a hat @-@ trick in eight minutes during a Spanish Cup match while man @-@ marked by Sevilla 's Sergio Ramos . His progress was reflected in his first professional contract , signed on 4 February 2004 , which lasted until 2012 and contained an initial buyout clause of € 30 million . A month later , on 6 March , he made his debut for Barcelona B in the Segunda División B , and his buyout clause automatically increased to € 80 million . He played five games with the B team that season but did not score . Physically he was weaker than his opponents , who were often much older and taller , and in training he worked on increasing his muscle mass and overall strength in order to be able to shake off defenders . Towards the end of the season , he returned to both youth teams , helping the Juveniles B win the league . He finished the campaign having scored for four of his five teams with a total of 36 goals in all official competitions . 
 During the 2004 – 05 season , Messi was a guaranteed starter for the B team , playing 17 games throughout the campaign and scoring on six occasions . Since his debut the previous November , he had not been called up to the first team again , but in October 2004 , the senior players asked manager Frank Rijkaard to promote him . Since Ronaldinho already played on the left wing , Rijkaard moved Messi from his usual position onto the right flank , though initially against the player 's wishes , allowing him to cut into the centre of the pitch and shoot with his dominant left foot . Messi made his league debut during the next match on 16 October , against Espanyol , coming on in the 82nd minute . At 17 years , three months , and 22 days old , he was at the time the youngest player to represent Barcelona in an official competition . As a substitute player , he played only 77 minutes in nine matches for the first team that season , including his debut in the UEFA Champions League against Shakhtar Donetsk . He scored his first senior goal on 1 May 2005 , against Albacete , from an assist by Ronaldinho , becoming at that time the youngest @-@ ever scorer for the club . Barcelona , in their second season under Rijkaard , won the league for the first time in six years . 
 = = = 2005 – 08 : Making the starting eleven = = = 
 On 24 June 2005 , his 18th birthday , Messi signed his first contract as a senior team player . It made him a Barcelona player until 2010 , two years less than his previous contract , but his buyout clause increased to € 150 million . His breakthrough came two months later , on 24 August , during the Joan Gamper trophy , Barcelona 's pre @-@ season competition . A starter for the first time , he gave a well @-@ received performance against Fabio Capello 's Juventus , receiving an ovation from the Camp Nou . While Capello requested to loan Messi , a bid to buy him came from Inter Milan , who were willing to pay his buyout clause and triple his wages . According to then @-@ president Joan Laporta , it was the only time the club faced a real risk of losing Messi , but he ultimately decided to stay . On 16 September , his contract was updated for the second time in three months and extended to 2014 . 
 Due to issues regarding his legal status in the Spanish Football Federation , Messi missed the start of La Liga , but on 26 September , he acquired Spanish citizenship and became eligible to play . Wearing the number 19 shirt , he gradually established himself as the first @-@ choice right winger , forming an attacking trio with Ronaldinho and striker Samuel Eto 'o . He was in the starting line @-@ up in major matches like his first clásico against rivals Real Madrid on 19 November , as well as their away victory over Chelsea in the last 16 round of the Champions League , where he played his best match to that point . After he had scored 8 goals in 25 games , including his first in the Champions League , his season ended prematurely during the return leg against Chelsea on 7 March 2006 , when he suffered a torn hamstring . Messi worked to regain fitness in time for the Champions League final , but was told the day of the final , 17 May , that he was not fit enough to play . He was so disappointed that he did not celebrate their victory over Arsenal in Paris , something he later came to regret . 
 While Barcelona began a gradual decline , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Messi established himself as one of the best players in the world during the 2006 – 07 campaign . Already an idol to the <unk> , the club 's supporters , he scored 17 goals in 36 games across all competitions . However , he continued to be plagued by major injuries ; a metatarsal fracture sustained on 12 November 2006 kept him out of action for three months . He recovered in time for the last 16 round of the Champions League against Liverpool , but was effectively marked out of the game ; Barcelona , the reigning champions , were out of the competition . In the league , his goal contribution increased towards the end of the season ; 11 of his 14 goals came from the last 13 games . On 10 March 2007 , he scored his first hat @-@ trick in a clásico , the first player to do so in 12 years , equalizing after each goal by Real Madrid to end the match in a 3 – 3 draw in extra time . His growing importance to the club was reflected in a new contract , signed that month , which greatly increased his wages . 
 Already frequently compared to compatriot Diego Maradona , Messi proved their similarity when he nearly replicated Maradona 's two most famous goals in the span of three weeks . During a Copa del Rey semi @-@ final against Getafe on 18 April , he scored a goal remarkably similar to Maradona 's goal in the quarter @-@ finals of the 1986 FIFA World Cup , known as the Goal of the Century . Messi collected the ball on the right side near the halfway line , ran 60 metres ( 200 ft ) , and beat five defenders before scoring with an angled finish , just as Maradona had done . A league match against Espanyol on 9 June saw him score by launching himself at the ball and guiding it past the goalkeeper with his hand in similar fashion to Maradona 's Hand of God goal in the same World Cup match . As Messi continued his individual rise , Barcelona faltered ; the team failed to reach the Copa del Rey final after Messi was rested during the second leg against Getafe and lost the league to Real Madrid on goal average . 
 After Ronaldinho lost form , Messi became Barça 's new star player at only 20 years old , receiving the nickname " Messiah " from the Spanish media . His efforts in 2007 also earned him award recognition ; journalists voted him the third @-@ best player of the year for the Ballon d 'Or , behind Kaká and runner @-@ up Cristiano Ronaldo , while international managers and national team captains voted him second for the FIFA World Player of the Year award , again behind Kaká . Although he managed to score 16 goals during the 2007 – 08 campaign , the second half of his season was again marred by injuries after he suffered a torn hamstring on 15 December . He returned to score twice in their away victory against Celtic in the last 16 round of the Champions League , becoming the competition 's top scorer at that point with six goals , but reinjured himself during the return leg on 4 March 2008 . Rijkaard had fielded him despite warning from the medical staff , leading captain Carles Puyol to criticise the Spanish media for pressuring Messi to play every match . Barcelona finished the season without trophies , eliminated in the Champions League semi @-@ finals by the eventual champions , Manchester United , and placed third in the league . 
 = = = 2008 – 09 : Winning the sextuple = = = 
 After two unsuccessful seasons , Barcelona were in need of an overhaul , leading to the dismissals of Rijkaard and Ronaldinho . Upon the latter 's departure , Messi was given the number 10 shirt . He signed a new contract in July 2008 on an annual salary of € 7 @.@ 8 million , becoming the club 's highest @-@ paid player . Ahead of the new season , a major concern remained his frequent muscular injuries , which had left him side @-@ lined for a total of eight months between 2006 and 2008 . To combat the problem , the club implemented new training , nutrition , and lifestyle regimens , and assigned him a personal physiotherapist , who would travel with him during call @-@ ups for the Argentina national team . As a result , Messi remained virtually injury @-@ free during the next four years , allowing him to reach his full potential . In his first uninterrupted campaign , the 2008 – 09 season , he scored 38 goals in 51 games , contributing alongside Eto 'o and winger Thierry Henry to a total of 100 goals in all competitions , a record at the time for the club . Despite his injuries early in the year , his performances in 2008 saw him again voted runner @-@ up for the Ballon d 'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year award , both times behind Cristiano Ronaldo . 
 During his first season under Barcelona 's new manager , former captain Pep Guardiola , Messi played mainly on the right wing , like he had under Rijkaard , though this time as a false winger with the freedom to cut inside and roam the centre . During a clásico on 2 May 2009 , however , he played for the first time as a false nine , positioned as a centre @-@ forward but dropping deep into midfield to link up with Xavi and Andrés Iniesta . He assisted with a chip his side 's first goal and scored twice to end the match in an emphatic 6 – 2 victory , their greatest @-@ ever score at Real Madrid 's Bernabéu stadium . Returning to the wing , he played his first final since breaking into the first team on 13 May , scoring once and assisting a second goal as they defeated Athletic Bilbao 4 – 1 to win the Copa del Rey . With 23 league goals from Messi that season , they were crowned La Liga champions three days later to win their fifth double . 
 As the season 's Champions League top scorer with nine goals , the youngest in the tournament 's history , Messi scored two goals and assisted two more to ensure a 4 – 0 quarter @-@ final victory over Bayern Munich . He returned as a false nine during the final on 27 May in Rome , where they faced Manchester United . When he headed the ball over goalkeeper Edwin van der Sar to make the end score 2 – 0 , Barcelona were champions of Europe , achieving the first treble in the history of Spanish football . Their success was reflected in a new contract , signed on 18 September , which committed Messi to the club through 2016 with a new buyout clause of € 250 million , while his salary increased to € 12 million . Barça 's prosperity continued into the second half of 2009 , as they became the first club to achieve the sextuple , winning six top @-@ tier trophies in a single year . After victories in the Supercopa de España and UEFA Super Cup in August , they won the FIFA Club World Cup against Estudiantes on 19 December , with Messi scoring the winning 2 – 1 goal with his chest . At 22 years old , Messi won the Ballon d 'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year award , both times by the greatest voting margin in each trophy 's history . 
 = = = 2010 – 11 : Continued success = = = 
 Unsatisfied with his position on the right wing , Messi resumed playing as a false nine in early 2010 , beginning with a Champions League last 16 round match against Stuttgart . After a first @-@ leg draw , they won the second leg 4 – 0 with two goals and an assist from Messi . At that point , he effectively became the tactical focal point of Guardiola 's team , and his goalscoring rate increased . Messi scored a total of 47 goals in all competitions that season , equal to Ronaldo 's club record from the 1996 – 97 campaign . He notably scored all of his side 's four goals in the Champions League quarter @-@ final against Arsène Wenger 's Arsenal on 6 April , a rare achievement , while becoming Barcelona 's all @-@ time top scorer in the competition . Although they were eliminated in the Champions League semi @-@ finals by the eventual champions , Inter Milan , Messi finished the season as top scorer , with eight goals , for the second consecutive year . As league top scorer in Spain and Europe with 34 goals , again tying Ronaldo 's record , he helped Barcelona win La Liga with only a single defeat . 
 Messi secured their first trophy of the 2010 – 11 campaign , the Supercopa de España , by scoring a hat @-@ trick in their 4 – 0 victory over Sevilla , after a first @-@ leg defeat . Assuming a playmaking role , he was again instrumental in a clásico on 29 November 2010 , the first with José Mourinho in charge of Real Madrid , as Barcelona defeated their rivals 5 – 0 . Messi helped the team achieve 16 consecutive league victories , a record in Spanish football , concluding with another hat @-@ trick against Atlético Madrid on 5 February 2011 . His club performances in 2010 earned him the inaugural FIFA Ballon d 'Or , an amalgamation of the Ballon d 'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year award , though his win was met with some criticism due to his lack of success with Argentina at the 2010 FIFA World Cup . Under the award 's old format , he would have placed just outside the top three , owing his win to the votes from the international coaches and captains . 
 Towards the end of the season , Barcelona played four controversial <unk> in the span of 18 days . A league match on 16 April ended in a draw after a penalty from Messi , securing their third consecutive La Liga title . In addition to his 31 goals , Messi was the league 's top assist provider with 18 assists . After they lost the Copa del Rey final four days later , he scored both goals in their 2 – 0 win in the first leg of the Champions League semi @-@ finals , the second of which — a dribble past three players — was acclaimed as one of the best ever in the competition . Although he did not score , he was again important in the second @-@ leg draw that sent them through to the Champions League final , where they faced Manchester United in a repeat of the final two years earlier . As the competition 's top scorer for the third consecutive year , with 12 goals , Messi gave a man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match performance at Wembley on 28 May , scoring the match @-@ winning goal of their 3 – 1 victory . He finished the season with 53 goals and 24 assists in all competitions , becoming Barcelona 's all @-@ time single @-@ season top scorer and the first player in Spanish football to reach the 50 @-@ goal benchmark . 
 As Messi developed into a combination of a number eight ( a creator ) , a nine ( scorer ) , and a 10 ( assistant ) , he scored an unprecedented 73 goals and provided 29 assists in all club competitions during the 2011 – 12 season , producing a hat @-@ trick or more on 10 occasions . He began the campaign by helping Barcelona win both the Spanish and European super cups ; in the Supercopa de España , he scored three times to achieve a 5 – 4 aggregate victory over Real Madrid , overtaking Raúl as the competition 's all @-@ time top scorer with eight goals . At the close of the year , on 18 December , he scored twice in the FIFA Club World Cup final , a 4 – 0 victory over Santos , winning the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament , as he had done two years previously . For his efforts in 2011 , he again received the FIFA Ballon d 'Or , becoming only the fourth player in history to win the Ballon d 'Or three times , after Johan Cruyff , Michel Platini , and Marco van Basten . Additionally , he won the inaugural UEFA Best Player in Europe Award , a revival of the old @-@ style Ballon d 'Or . By then , Messi was widely considered one of the best players in history , alongside legends like Diego Maradona and Pelé . 
