 = = = 2012 : A record @-@ breaking year = = = 
 As Messi maintained his goalscoring form into the second half of the season , the year 2012 saw him break several longstanding records . On 7 March , two weeks after scoring four goals in a league fixture against Valencia , he scored five times in a Champions League last 16 round match against Bayer Leverkusen , an unprecedented achievement in the history of the competition . In addition to being the joint top assist provider with five assists , this feat made him top scorer with 14 goals , tying José Altafini 's record from the 1962 – 63 season , as well as becoming only the second player after Gerd Müller to be top scorer in four campaigns . Two weeks later , on 20 March , Messi became the top goalscorer in Barcelona 's history at 24 years old , overtaking the 57 @-@ year record of César Rodríguez 's 232 goals with a hat @-@ trick against Granada . 
 Despite Messi 's individual form , Barcelona 's four @-@ year cycle of success under Guardiola — one of the greatest eras in the club 's history — drew to an end . Although they won the Copa del Rey against Athletic Bilbao on 25 May , their fourteenth title of that period , they had lost the league to Real Madrid and were eliminated in the Champions League semi @-@ finals by the eventual champions , Chelsea , with Messi sending a crucial second @-@ leg penalty kick against the crossbar . In their last home league match on 5 May , against Espanyol , Messi scored all four goals before approaching the bench to embrace Guardiola , who had announced his resignation as manager . He finished the season as league top scorer in Spain and Europe for a second time , with 50 goals , an all @-@ time La Liga record , while his 73 goals in all competitions surpassed Gerd Müller 's 67 goals in the 1972 – 73 Bundesliga season , making him the single @-@ season top scorer in the history of European club football . 
 Under manager Tito Vilanova , who had first coached him aged 14 at La Masia , Messi helped the club achieve their best @-@ ever start to a La Liga season during the second half of the year , amassing 55 points by the competition 's midway point , a record in Spanish football . A double scored on 9 December against Real Betis saw him break two longstanding records : he surpassed César Rodríguez 's record of 190 league goals , becoming Barcelona 's all @-@ time top scorer in La Liga , and Gerd Müller 's record of most goals scored in a calendar year , overtaking his 85 goals scored in 1972 for Bayern Munich and Germany . He sent Müller a number 10 Barcelona shirt , signed " with respect and admiration " , after breaking his 40 @-@ year record . At the close of the year , Messi had scored an unprecedented 91 goals in all competitions for Barcelona and Argentina . Although FIFA did not acknowledge the achievement , citing verifiability issues , he received the Guinness World Records title for most goals scored in a calendar year . As the odds @-@ on favourite , Messi again won the FIFA Ballon d 'Or , becoming the only player in history to win the Ballon d 'Or four times . 
 = = = 2013 – 14 : <unk> = = = 
 Barcelona had virtually secured their La Liga title by the start of 2013 , eventually equalling Real Madrid 's 100 @-@ point record of the previous season . However , their performances deteriorated in the second half of the 2012 – 13 campaign , concurrently with Vilanova 's absence due to ill health . After losing successive <unk> , including the Copa del Rey semi @-@ finals , they were nearly eliminated in the first knockout round of the Champions League by A.C. Milan , but a revival of form in the second leg led to a 4 – 0 comeback , with two goals and an assist from Messi . Now in his ninth senior season with Barcelona , Messi signed a new contract on 7 February , committing himself to the club through 2018 , while his fixed wage rose to € 13 million . He wore the captain 's armband for the first time a month later , on 17 March , in a league match against Rayo Vallecano ; by then , he had become the team 's tactical focal point to a degree that was arguably rivalled only by former Barcelona legends Josep Samitier , László Kubala , and Johan Cruyff . Since his evolution into a false nine three years earlier , his input into the team 's attack had increased exponentially ; from 24 percent in their treble @-@ winning campaign , his goal contribution rose to more than 40 percent that season . 
 After four largely injury @-@ free seasons , the muscular injuries that had previously plagued Messi reoccurred . After he suffered a hamstring strain on 2 April , during the first quarter @-@ final against Paris Saint @-@ Germain , his appearances became sporadic . In the second leg against PSG , with an underperforming Barcelona down a goal , Messi came off the bench in the second half and within nine minutes helped create their game @-@ tying goal , which allowed them to progress to the semi @-@ finals . Still unfit , he proved ineffective during the first leg against Bayern Munich and was unable to play at all during the second , as Barcelona were defeated 7 – 0 on aggregate by the eventual champions . These matches gave credence to the notion of <unk> , Barcelona 's perceived tactical and psychological dependence on their star player . 
 Messi continued to struggle with injury throughout 2013 , eventually parting ways with his long @-@ time personal physiotherapist . Further damage to his hamstring sustained on 12 May ended his goalscoring streak of 21 consecutive league games , a worldwide record ; he had netted 33 goals during his run , including a four @-@ goal display against Osasuna , while becoming the first player to score consecutively against all 19 opposition teams in La Liga . With 60 goals in all competitions , including 46 goals in La Liga , he finished the campaign as league top scorer in Spain and Europe for the second consecutive year , becoming the first player in history to win the European Golden Shoe three times . Following an irregular start to the new season under manager Tata Martino , formerly of his boyhood club Newell 's Old Boys , Messi suffered his fifth injury that year when he tore his hamstring on 10 November , leaving him side @-@ lined for two months . Despite his injuries , he was voted runner @-@ up for the FIFA Ballon d 'Or , relinquishing the award after a four @-@ year monopoly to Cristiano Ronaldo . 
 During the second half of the 2013 – 14 season , doubts persisted over Messi 's form , leading to a perception among the <unk> that he was reserving himself for the 2014 FIFA World Cup . Statistically , his contribution of goals , shots , and passes had dropped significantly compared to previous seasons . He still produced fine moments , as he did when he broke two longstanding records in seven days : a hat @-@ trick on 16 March against Osasuna saw him overtake Paulino Alcántara 's 369 goals to become Barcelona 's top goalscorer in all competitions including friendlies , while another hat @-@ trick against Real Madrid on 23 March made him the all @-@ time top scorer in El Clásico , ahead of the 18 goals scored by Real Madrid legend Alfredo Di Stéfano . Messi finished the campaign with his worst output in five seasons , though he still managed to score 41 goals in all competitions . For the first time in five years , Barcelona ended the season without a major trophy ; they were defeated in the Copa del Rey final by Real Madrid and lost the league in the last game to Atlético Madrid , causing Messi to be booed by sections of fans at the Camp Nou . 
 After prolonged speculation over his future with the club , Messi signed a new contract on 19 May 2014 , only a year after his last contractual update ; his salary increased to € 20 million , or € 36 million before taxes , the highest wage ever in the sport . Under their new manager , former captain Luis Enrique , Messi experienced a largely injury @-@ free start to the 2014 – 15 season , allowing him to break three more longstanding records towards the end of the year . A hat @-@ trick scored against Sevilla on 22 November made him the all @-@ time top scorer in La Liga , as he surpassed the 59 @-@ year record of 251 league goals held by Telmo Zarra . Three days later , he scored another hat @-@ trick against APOEL , overtaking Raúl 's 71 goals to become top scorer in the history of the Champions League . A third hat @-@ trick , scored against city rivals Espanyol on 7 December , allowed him to surpass César Rodríguez as the all @-@ time top scorer in the Derbi <unk> with 12 goals . Messi again placed second in the FIFA Ballon d 'Or behind Cristiano Ronaldo , largely owing to his second @-@ place achievement with Argentina at the World Cup . 
 = = = 2015 : A historic treble = = = 
 At the start of 2015 , Barcelona were perceived to be headed for another disappointing end to the season , with renewed speculation in the media that Messi was leaving the club . A turning point came on 11 January during a 3 – 1 victory over Atlético Madrid , the first time Barça 's attacking trident of Messi , Luis Suárez , and Neymar , dubbed MSN , each scored in a match , marking the beginning of a highly successful run . After five years of playing in the centre of the pitch , Messi had returned to his old position on the right wing late the previous year , by his own suggestion according to Suárez , their striker . From there , he regained his best — arguably his best @-@ ever — form , while Suárez and Neymar ended the team 's attacking dependency on their star player . With 58 goals from Messi , the trio scored a total of 122 goals in all competitions that season , a record in Spanish football . 
 Towards the end of the campaign , Messi scored the only goal in a 1 – 0 away win over Atlético Madrid on 17 May , securing the La Liga title . Among his 43 league goals that season was a hat @-@ trick scored in 11 minutes against Rayo Vallecano on 8 March , the fastest of his senior career ; it was his thirty @-@ second hat @-@ trick overall for Barcelona , allowing him to overtake Telmo Zarra as the player with the most hat @-@ tricks ever in Spanish football . Additionally , as the season 's top assist provider with 18 assists , he surpassed Luís Figo as the player with the most assists in La Liga ; he made his record 106th assist in a fixture against Levante on 15 February , which he also scored a hat @-@ trick . Messi then scored twice as Barcelona defeated Athletic Bilbao 3 – 1 in the Copa del Rey final on 30 May , achieving the sixth double in their history . His opening goal was hailed as one of the greatest in his career ; he collected the ball near the halfway line and beat four opposing players , before feinting the goalkeeper to score in a tight space by the near post . The goal was later named one of the three final nominees for the 2015 FIFA Puskás Award . 
 In the Champions League , Messi scored twice and assisted on another in their 3 – 0 semi @-@ final victory over Bayern Munich , now under the stewardship of Guardiola . His second goal , which came only three minutes after his first , saw him chip the ball over goalkeeper Manuel Neuer after his dribble past Jérôme Boateng had made the defender drop to the ground ; it went viral , becoming the year 's most tweeted about sporting moment , and was named the best goal of the season by UEFA . Despite a second @-@ leg loss , Barcelona progressed to the final on 6 June in Berlin , where they defeated Juventus 3 – 1 to win their second treble , becoming the first club in history to win the league , domestic cup , and European cup twice . Although Messi did not score , he participated in each of his side 's goals , particularly the second as he forced a parried save from goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon from which Suárez scored the match @-@ winning goal on the rebound . In addition to being the top assist provider with 6 assists , Messi finished the competition as the joint top scorer , with 10 goals , which earned him the distinction of being the first player ever to achieve the top scoring mark in five Champions League seasons . For his efforts that season , he received the UEFA Best Player in Europe award for a second time . 
 Messi opened the 2015 – 16 season by scoring twice from free kicks in Barcelona 's 5 – 4 victory over Sevilla in the UEFA Super Cup . A subsequent 5 – 1 aggregate defeat against Athletic Bilbao in the Supercopa de España ended their expressed hopes of a second sextuple , with Messi scoring his side 's only goal . On 16 September , he became the youngest player to make 100 appearances in the UEFA Champions League in a 1 – 1 away draw to Roma . On 26 September , Messi sustained an injury in Barcelona 's match against Las Palmas ; tests later confirmed that he suffered a tear in the medial collateral ligament of his left knee , ruling him out for six to eight weeks . He finally returned to the pitch on 21 November , making a substitute appearance in Barcelona 's 4 – 0 away win over rivals Real Madrid in El Clásico . Messi capped off the year by opening the scoring in the 36th minute of the 2015 FIFA Club World Cup Final on 20 December , collecting his fifth club trophy of 2015 as Barcelona went on to defeat River Plate 3 – 0 in Yokohama , and winning the tournament 's Silver Ball , despite missing the semi @-@ final . On 30 December , Messi scored on his 500th appearance for Barcelona , in a 4 – 0 home win over Real Betis . 
 = = = 2016 = = = 
 On 6 January 2016 , recording Barcelona 's first goal of the new year , Messi scored two goals and assisted the other two in a 4 – 1 derby win over Espanyol at the Camp Nou , in the first leg of the Round of 16 of the 2015 – 16 Copa del Rey . Five days later , Messi won the FIFA Ballon d 'Or for a record fifth time in his career . On 3 February , he scored a hat @-@ trick in Barcelona 's 7 – 0 win against Valencia CF in the first leg of the Copa del Rey semi @-@ final at the Camp Nou , also scoring his 500th career goal in the process , including youth competitions . With teammate Luis Suárez scoring the other four goals in the same match , this was the first time that two players had scored at least three goals each at Camp Nou , and the first time since Luis Suárez <unk> and Justo Tejada in 1956 . The feat had only occurred three times before in the club 's history , all at Camp de Les Corts . The next league match at Camp Nou , a 6 – 1 win against Celta Vigo , Messi assisted Suárez from a penalty kick . Some people saw it as " a touch of genius " , while others criticised it as being disrespectful to the opponent . However , the Celta players never complained and their coach defended the penalty , stating : " Barca 's forwards are very respectful " . The penalty routine has been compared to that of Barça icon Johan Cruyff in 1982 , who was battling lung cancer , leading many fans to indicate that the penalty was a tribute to him . Cruyff himself was " very happy " with the play , insisting " it was legal and entertaining " . 
 On 17 February , Messi reached his 300th league goal in a 1 – 3 away win against Sporting Gijon . A few days later , he scored both goals in Barcelona 's 0 – 2 win against Arsenal at the Emirates Stadium , in the first leg of the 2015 – 16 UEFA Champions League Round of 16 , with the second goal being Barcelona 's 10,000th in official competitions . On 17 April , Messi ended a five @-@ match scoring drought with his 500th senior career goal for club and country in Barcelona 's 2 – 1 home loss to Valencia . Messi finished the 2015 – 16 season by setting up both goals in Barcelona 's 2 – 0 extra time win over Sevilla in the 2016 Copa del Rey Final , at the Vicente Calderón Stadium , on 22 May 2016 , as the club celebrated winning the domestic double for the second consecutive season . In total , Messi scored 41 goals and provided 23 assists , as Barcelona 's attacking trio managed a Spanish record of 131 goals throughout the season , breaking the record they had set the previous season . 
 = = Argentina national team = = 
 = = = 2004 – 05 : Success at youth level = = = 
 As a dual Argentine – Spanish national , Messi was eligible to play for the national team of both countries . Selectors for Spain 's Under @-@ 17 squad began pursuing him in 2003 after Barcelona 's director of football , Carles Rexach , alerted the Royal Spanish Football Federation to their young player . Messi declined the offer , having aspired to represent La <unk> since childhood . To further prevent Spain from taking him , the Argentine Football Association organised two Under @-@ 20 friendlies in June 2004 , against Paraguay and Uruguay , with the purpose of finalising his status as an Argentina player in FIFA . Five days after his seventeenth birthday , on 29 June , he made his debut for his country against Paraguay , scoring once and providing two assists in their 8 – 0 victory . He was subsequently included in the squad for the South American Youth Championship , held in Colombia in February 2005 . As he lacked the stamina of his teammates , the result of his former growth hormone deficiency , he was used as a substitute in six of the nine games , proving more effective when coming on in the second half . After being named man of the match against Venezuela , he scored the winning 2 – 1 goal in the crucial last match against Brazil , thereby securing their third @-@ place qualification for the FIFA World Youth Championship . 
 Aware of his physical limitations , Messi employed a personal trainer to increase his muscle mass , returning to the squad in improved condition in time for the World Youth Championship , hosted by the Netherlands in June 2005 . After he was left out of the starting line @-@ up in their first match against the United States , a 1 – 0 defeat , the squad 's senior players asked manager Francisco Ferraro to let Messi start , as they considered him their best player . After helping the team defeat Egypt and Germany to progress past the group stage , Messi proved decisive in the knockout phase as he scored their equalizer against Colombia , provided a goal and an assist against title favourites Spain , and scored their opening goal against reigning champions Brazil . Ahead of the final , he was awarded the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament . He scored two penalties in their 2 – 1 victory over Nigeria , clinching Argentina 's fifth championship and finishing the tournament as top scorer with 6 goals . His performances drew comparisons with compatriot Diego Maradona , who had led Argentina to the title in 1979 . 
 = = = 2005 – 06 : Senior and World Cup debuts = = = 
 In recognition of his achievements with the Under @-@ 20 side , senior manager José Pékerman gave Messi his first call @-@ up for a friendly against Hungary on 17 August 2005 . Aged 18 , Messi made his senior debut for Argentina when he came on in the 63rd minute , only to be sent off after two minutes for a perceived foul against Vilmos <unk> who had grabbed his shirt . He had struck the defender with his arm while trying to shake him off , which the referee interpreted as an intentional elbowing , a contentious decision . Messi was reportedly found weeping in the dressing room after his sending @-@ off . He returned to the team on 3 September in their World Cup qualifier defeat to Paraguay , which he had declared his " re @-@ debut " ahead of the match . Messi started his first game in the next qualifying match against Peru , in which he was able to win a crucial penalty that secured their victory ; after the match Pékerman described him as " a jewel " . He subsequently made regular appearances for the team ahead of Argentina 's participation in the 2006 FIFA World Cup , scoring his first goal in a friendly against Croatia on 1 March 2006 . A hamstring injury sustained a week later jeopardised his presence in the World Cup , but he was nevertheless selected for Pékerman 's squad and regained fitness in time for the start of the tournament . 
 During the World Cup in Germany , Messi witnessed their opening match victory against Ivory Coast from the substitutes ' bench . In the next match against Serbia and Montenegro , he became the youngest player to represent Argentina at a World Cup when he came on as a substitute in the 74th minute . He assisted their fourth strike within minutes and scored the final goal in their 6 – 0 victory , making him the youngest scorer in the tournament and the sixth @-@ youngest goalscorer in the history of the World Cup . As their progression to the knockout phase was secured , several starters were rested during the last group match . Messi consequently started the game against the Netherlands , a 0 – 0 draw , as they won their group on goal differential . In the round of 16 match against Mexico , played on his nineteenth birthday , Messi came on in the 84th minute , with the score tied at 1 – 1 . He appeared to score a goal , but it was contentiously ruled offside , with the team needing a late goal in extra time to proceed . He did not play in the quarter @-@ final against Germany , during which Argentina were eliminated 4 – 2 in a penalty shootout . Back home , Pékerman 's decision to leave him on the bench against Germany led to widespread criticism from those who believed Messi could have changed the outcome of the match in Argentina 's favour . 
 = = = 2007 – 08 : Copa América final and Olympic gold = = = 
 As Messi evolved into one of the best players in the world , he secured a place in Coco Basile 's starting line @-@ up , as part of a team considered favourites to win the 2007 Copa América , held in Venezuela . He set up the game @-@ winning goal of their 4 – 1 victory over the United States in the opening match , before winning a penalty that led to the game @-@ tying first strike of their 4 – 2 win in the next match against Colombia . As they had secured their place in the knockout phase , Messi started the next game on the bench , coming on in the last 25 minutes with the score at 0 – 0 to help his team defeat Paraguay by assisting their only goal . At the quarter @-@ final stage , where the group winners faced Peru , he scored the second goal of a 4 – 0 victory that saw them through to the semi @-@ final , during which he chipped the ball over Mexico 's goalkeeper to ensure another 3 – 0 win . In a surprise defeat , Argentina lost the final 3 – 0 to a Brazil that lacked several of their best players . Their unexpected loss was followed by much criticism in Argentina , though Messi was mostly exempt due to his young age and secondary status to star player Juan Román Riquelme . He was named the best young player of the tournament by CONMEBOL . 
 Ahead of the 2008 Summer Olympics , Barcelona legally barred Messi from representing Argentina at the tournament as it coincided with their Champions League qualifying matches . After interference from newly appointed manager Pep Guardiola , who had won the tournament in 1992 , Messi was permitted to join Sergio Batista 's Under @-@ 23 squad in Beijing . During the first match , he scored the opening goal and assisted another in their 2 – 1 victory over Ivory Coast . Following a 1 – 0 win in the next group match against Australia , ensuring their quarter @-@ final qualification , Messi was rested during the game against Serbia , while his side won the match to finish first in their group . Against the Netherlands , he again scored the first goal and assisted a second strike to help his team to a 2 – 1 win in extra time . After a 3 – 0 semi @-@ final victory over Brazil , Messi assisted the only goal in the final as Argentina defeated Nigeria to claim Olympic gold medals . Along with Riquelme , Messi was singled out by FIFA as the stand @-@ out player from the tournament 's best team . 
 = = = 2008 – 11 : Collective decline = = = 
 From late 2008 , the national team experienced a three @-@ year period marked by poor performances . Under manager Diego Maradona , who had led Argentina to World Cup victory as a player , the team struggled to qualify for the 2010 FIFA World Cup , securing their place in the tournament only after defeating Uruguay 1 – 0 in their last qualifying match . Maradona was criticised for his strategic decisions as he played Messi out of position , positioned too deep for him to be able to contribute to the attack to his full ability . In eight qualifying matches under Maradona 's stewardship , Messi scored only one goal , netting the opening goal in the first such match , a 4 – 0 victory over Venezuela . During that game , played on 28 March 2009 , he wore Argentina 's number 10 shirt for the first time , following the international retirement of Riquelme . Overall , Messi scored four goals in 18 appearances during the qualifying process . Ahead of the tournament , Maradona visited Messi in Barcelona to request his tactical input ; Messi then outlined a 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 1 @-@ 2 formation with himself playing behind the two strikers , a playmaking position known as the <unk> in Argentine football , which had been his preferred position since childhood . 
 Despite their poor qualifying campaign , Argentina were considered title contenders at the World Cup in South Africa . At the start of the tournament , the new formation proved effective ; Messi managed at least four attempts on goal during their opening match but was repeatedly denied by Nigeria 's goalkeeper , resulting in a 1 – 0 win . During the next match against Korea , he excelled in his playmaking role , participating in all four goals of his side 's 4 – 1 victory . As their place in the knockout phase was guaranteed , most of the starters were rested during the last group match , but Messi reportedly refused to be benched . He wore the captain 's armband for the first time in their 2 – 0 win against Greece ; as the focal point of their play , he helped create their second goal to see Argentina finish as group winners . In the round of 16 , they defeated Mexico 3 – 1 , with Messi assisting their first goal , a controversial strike that stood despite being offside . 
 Argentina 's unstructured defence had proved a liability throughout the World Cup and finally led to their elimination in the quarter @-@ final against Germany , at the same stage of the tournament and by the same opponent as four years earlier . Their 4 – 0 loss was their worst margin of defeat since 1974 . FIFA subsequently identified Messi as one of the tournament 's 10 best players , citing his " outstanding " pace and creativity and " spectacular and efficient " dribbling , shooting , and passing . Back home , however , Messi was the subject of far harsher judgement . As the perceived best player in the world , he had been expected to lead an average team to the title , as Maradona arguably did in 1986 , but he had failed to replicate his performances at Barcelona with the national team , leading to the accusation that he cared less about his country than his club . 
 Maradona was replaced by Sergio Batista , who had orchestrated their Olympic victory . Batista publicly stated that he intended to build the team around Messi , employing him as a false nine within a 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 system , as used to much success by Barcelona . Although Messi scored a record 53 goals during the 2010 – 11 club season , he had not scored for Argentina in an official match since March 2009 . Despite the tactical change , his goal drought continued during the 2011 Copa América , hosted by Argentina . Their first two matches , against Bolivia and Colombia , ended in draws , with Messi underperforming by his standards . Media and fans noted that he did not combine well with striker Carlos Tévez , who enjoyed far greater popularity among the Argentine public ; Messi was consequently booed by his own team 's supporters for the first time in his career . During the crucial next match , with Tévez on the bench , he gave a well @-@ received performance , assisting two goals in their 3 – 0 victory over Costa Rica . After the quarter @-@ final against Uruguay ended in a 1 – 1 draw following extra time , with Messi having assisted their equaliser , Argentina were eliminated 4 – 5 in the penalty shootout by the eventual champions . 
 = = = 2011 – 13 : Assuming the captaincy = = = 
 After Argentina 's unsuccessful performance in the Copa América , Batista was replaced by Alejandro Sabella . Upon his appointment in August 2011 , Sabella awarded the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Messi the captaincy of the squad , in accord with then @-@ captain Javier Mascherano . Reserved by nature , Messi went on to lead his squad by example as their best player , while Mascherano continued to fulfil the role of the team 's on @-@ field leader and motivator . In a further redesign of the team , Sabella dismissed Tévez and brought in players with whom Messi had won the World Youth Championship and Olympic Games . Now playing in a free role in an improving team , Messi finally ended his goal drought by scoring during their first World Cup qualifying match against Chile on 7 October , his first official goal for Argentina in two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years . 
 Under Sabella , his goalscoring rate drastically increased ; where he had scored only 17 goals in 61 matches under his previous managers , he scored 25 times in 32 appearances during the following three years . Messi netted a total of 12 goals in nine games for Argentina in 2012 , equalling the record held by Gabriel Batistuta , Argentina 's all @-@ time top scorer , for the most goals scored in a calendar year for their country . His first hat @-@ trick with the <unk> came in a friendly against Switzerland on 29 February 2012 , followed by two more hat @-@ tricks over the next year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half in friendlies against Brazil and Guatemala . Messi then helped the team secure their place in the 2014 FIFA World Cup with a 5 – 2 victory over Paraguay on 10 September 2013 ; in addition to providing an assist , he scored twice from a penalty kick , taking his international tally to 37 goals to become Argentina 's second @-@ highest goalscorer behind only Batistuta . Overall , he had scored a total of 10 goals in 14 matches during the qualifying campaign . Concurrently with his bettered performances , his relationship with his compatriots improved , as he gradually began to be perceived more favourably in Argentina . 
 = = = 2014 – 15 : World Cup and Copa América finals = = = 
 Ahead of the World Cup in Brazil , doubts persisted over Messi 's form , as he finished an unsuccessful and injury @-@ plagued season with Barcelona . At the start of the tournament , however , he gave strong performances , being elected man of the match in their first four matches . In his first World Cup match as captain , he led them to a 2 – 1 victory over Bosnia and Herzegovina ; he helped create their early opening goal and scored their second strike after a dribble past three players , his first World Cup goal since his debut in the tournament eight years earlier . During the second match against Iran , he scored an injury @-@ time goal from 23 metres out to end the game in a 1 – 0 win , securing their qualification for the knockout phase . He scored twice in the last group match , a 3 – 2 victory over Nigeria , his second goal from a free kick , as they finished first in their group . Messi assisted a late goal in extra time to ensure a 1 – 0 win against Switzerland in the round of 16 , before starting the play that led to their match @-@ winning 1 – 0 goal in the quarter @-@ final against Belgium , helping Argentina progress to the semi @-@ final of the World Cup for the first time since 1990 . Following a 0 – 0 draw in extra time , they eliminated the Netherlands 4 – 2 in a penalty shootout to reach the final . 
 Billed as Messi versus Germany , the world 's best player against the best team , the final was a repeat of the 1990 final featuring Diego Maradona . Within the first half @-@ hour , Messi had started the play that led to a goal , but it was ruled offside . He missed several opportunities to open the scoring throughout the match , in particular at the start of the second half when his breakaway effort went wide of the far post . Substitute Mario Götze finally scored in the 113th minute , followed in the last minute of extra time by a free kick that Messi sent over the net , as Germany won the match 1 – 0 to claim the World Cup . At the conclusion of the final , Messi was awarded the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament . In addition to being the joint third @-@ highest goalscorer , with four goals and an assist , he created the most chances , completed the most dribbling runs , made the most deliveries into the penalty area , and produced the most <unk> in the competition . However , his selection drew criticism due to his lack of goals in the knockout round ; FIFA president Sepp Blatter expressed his surprise , while Maradona suggested that Messi had undeservedly been chosen for marketing purposes . 
 Another final appearance , the third of Messi 's senior international career , followed in the 2015 Copa América , held in Chile . Under the stewardship of former Barcelona manager Tata Martino , Argentina entered the tournament as title contenders due to their second @-@ place achievement at the World Cup . During the opening match against Paraguay , they were ahead two goals by half @-@ time but lost their lead to end the match in a 2 – 2 draw ; Messi had scored from a penalty kick , netting his only goal in the tournament . Following a 1 – 0 win against defending champions Uruguay , Messi earned his hundredth cap for his country in the final group match , a 1 – 0 win over Jamaica , becoming only the fifth Argentine to achieve this milestone . In his 100 appearances , he had scored a total of 46 goals for Argentina , 22 of which came in official competitive matches . 
 As Messi evolved from the team 's symbolic captain into a genuine leader , he led Argentina to the knockout stage as group winners . In the quarter @-@ final , they created numerous chances , including a rebound header by Messi , but were repeatedly denied by Colombia 's goalkeeper , and ultimately ended the match scoreless , leading to a 5 – 4 penalty shootout in their favour . At the semi @-@ final stage , Messi excelled as playmaker as he provided three assists and helped create three more goals in his side 's 6 – 1 victory over Paraguay , receiving applause from the initially hostile crowd . Argentina started the final as the odds @-@ on title favourites , but were defeated by Chile 4 – 1 in a penalty shootout after an 0 – 0 extra @-@ time draw . Faced with aggression from opposing players , including taking a boot to the midriff , Messi played below his standards , though he was the only Argentine to successfully convert his penalty . At the close of the tournament , he was reportedly selected to receive the Most Valuable Player award but rejected the honour . As Argentina continued a trophy drought that began in 1993 , the World Cup and Copa América defeats again brought intense criticism for Messi from Argentine media and fans . 
 = = = 2016 : Copa América Centenario and retirement = = = 
 Messi 's place in Argentina 's Copa América Centenario squad was initially put in jeopardy when he sustained a back injury in a 1 – 0 friendly win over Honduras in a pre @-@ Copa América warm @-@ up match on 27 May 2016 . It was later reported that he had suffered a deep bruise in his lumbar region , but that he would remain in Martino 's squad for the tournament , although he was later left on the bench in Argentina 's 2 – 1 opening win over defending champions Chile on 6 June due to concerns regarding his fitness . Although Messi was declared match @-@ fit for his nation 's second group match against Panama on 10 June , Martino left him on the bench once again ; he replaced Augusto Fernández in the 61st minute and subsequently scored a hat @-@ trick in 19 minutes , also starting the play which led to Agüero 's goal , as the match ended in a 5 – 0 victory , sealing Argentina 's place in the quarter @-@ finals of the competition ; he was elected man of the match for his performance . 
 On 18 June 2016 , in the quarter @-@ final of the Copa América against Venezuela , Messi produced another man of the match performance , assisting two goals and scoring another in a 4 – 1 victory , which enabled him to equal Gabriel Batistuta 's national record of 54 goals in official international matches . This record was broken three days later when Messi scored in a 4 – 0 win in the semi @-@ final of the Copa América against hosts the United States ; he also assisted two goals during the match as Argentina sealed a place in the final of the competition for a second consecutive year , and was named man of the match once again . 
 During a repeat of the previous year 's final on 26 June , Argentina once again lost to Chile on penalties after a 0 – 0 deadlock , resulting in Messi 's third consecutive defeat in a major tournament final with Argentina , and his fourth overall . After the match , Messi , who had missed his penalty in the shootout , announced his retirement from international football . Sources reported that other Argentine players , Sergio Agüero , Javier Mascherano , Gonzalo Higuaín , Lucas <unk> , <unk> Banega , Ezequiel <unk> and Ángel Di María could follow their captain in retiring from international football . The Chile coach , Argentine Juan Antonio Pizzi , said after the match : " My generation can ’ t compare him to Maradona that ’ s for my generation , because of what Maradona did for Argentine football . But I think the best player ever played today here in the United States . " Messi finished the tournament as the second highest scorer , behind Eduardo Vargas , with five goals , and was the highest assist provider with four assists , also winning more Man of the Match awards than any other player in the tournament ( 3 ) ; he was named to the team of the tournament for his performances , but missed out on the Golden Ball Award for best player , which went to Alexis Sánchez . 
 = = = = " Don 't go , Leo " = = = = 
 Following the announcement , a campaign began in Argentina by the fans and many big names in football and society for Messi to change his mind about retiring . He was greeted by fans with signs reading " Don 't go , Leo " when the team landed in Buenos Aires . Argentina 's President Mauricio Macri urged Messi not to quit , stating : " We are lucky , it is one of life 's pleasures , it is a gift from God to have the best player in the world in a footballing country like ours ... Lionel Messi is the greatest thing we have in Argentina and we must take care of him . " The Buenos Aires mayor Horacio Rodríguez <unk> unveiled a statue of Messi in the capital to convince him reconsider retirement . On social networks , <unk> became a global trending topic , and even a playlist on Spotify . The campaign also continued in the streets and avenues of the Argentine capital , with about 50 @,@ 000 supporters going to the <unk> de Buenos Aires on 2 July , using the same slogan . 
 Just a week after Messi announced his international retirement , Argentine newspaper La Nación reported that he is reconsidering playing for Argentina at the FIFA World Cup 2018 qualifiers in November . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 = = = Style of play = = = 
 Due to his short stature , Messi has a lower centre of gravity than taller players , which gives him greater agility , allowing him to change direction more quickly and evade opposing tackles . For that , the Spanish media calls him La <unk> <unk> ( " The Atomic Flea " ) . Despite being physically unimposing , he possesses significant upper @-@ body strength , which , combined with his low centre of gravity and resulting balance , aids him in withstanding physical challenges from opponents ; he has consequently been noted for his lack of diving in a sport rife with playacting . His short , strong legs allow him to excel in short bursts of acceleration while his quick feet enable him to retain control of the ball when dribbling at speed . His former Barcelona manager , Pep Guardiola , once stated : " Messi is the only player that runs faster with the ball than he does without it . " Although he has improved his ability with his weaker foot since his mid @-@ 20s , Messi is predominantly a left @-@ footed player ; with the outside of his left foot , he usually begins dribbling runs , while he uses the inside of his foot to finish and provide passes and assists . 
 A prolific goalscorer , Messi is known for his finishing , positioning , quick reactions , and ability to make attacking runs to beat the defensive line . He also functions in a playmaking role , courtesy of his vision and precise passing , and is an accurate free kick and penalty kick taker . His pace and technical ability enable him to undertake individual dribbling runs towards goal , in particular during counterattacks , usually starting from the halfway line or the right side of the pitch . Widely considered to be the best dribbler in the world , and one of the greatest of all time , with regard to this ability , his former Argentina manager Diego Maradona has said of him : " The ball stays glued to his foot ; I 've seen great players in my career , but I 've never seen anyone with Messi 's ball control . " Beyond his individual qualities , he is also a well @-@ rounded , hard @-@ working team player , known for his creative combinations , in particular with Barcelona midfielders Xavi and Andrés Iniesta . 
 Tactically , Messi plays in a free attacking role ; a versatile player , he is capable of attacking on either wing or through the centre of the pitch . His favoured position in childhood was the playmaker behind two strikers , known as the <unk> in Argentine football , but he began his career in Spain as a left @-@ winger or left @-@ sided forward . Upon his first @-@ team debut , he was moved onto the right wing by manager Frank Rijkaard ; from this position , he could more easily cut through the defence into the middle of the pitch and curl shots on goal with his left foot , rather than predominantly cross balls for teammates . Under Guardiola and subsequent managers , he most often played in a false nine role ; positioned as a centre @-@ forward or lone striker , he would roam the centre , often moving deep into midfield and drawing defenders with him , in order to create and exploit spaces for passes , dribbling runs or combinations with Xavi and Iniesta . Under the stewardship of Luis Enrique , he returned to playing in the right @-@ sided position that characterised much of his early career . With the Argentina national team , Messi has similarly played anywhere along the frontline ; under various managers , he has been employed on the right wing , as a false nine , or in a deeper , creative role as a classic number 10 or attacking midfielder . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 A prodigious talent as a teenager , Messi established himself among the world 's best players before age 20 . Diego Maradona considered the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Messi the best player in the world alongside Ronaldinho , while the Brazilian himself , shortly after winning the Ballon d 'Or , commented : " I 'm not even the best in Barça , " in reference to his protégé . Four years later , after Messi had won his first Ballon d 'Or by a record margin , the public debate regarding his qualities as a player moved beyond his status in contemporary football to the possibility that he was the greatest player in history . An early proponent was his then @-@ manager , Pep Guardiola , who had as early as August 2009 declared Messi to be the best player he had ever seen . In the following years , this opinion gained greater acceptance among pundits , managers , former and current players , and by the end of Barça 's second treble @-@ winning season , Messi 's superiority , ahead of Maradona and Pelé , had become the predominant view among insiders in continental Europe . A frequent dismissal , however , has centred on the fact that Messi has not won the FIFA World Cup with Argentina , leading some in the sport to instead cite him as the best club player in history . 
 Throughout his career , Messi has been compared with his compatriot Diego Maradona , due to their similar playing styles as diminutive , left @-@ footed dribblers . Initially , he was merely one of many young Argentine players , including his boyhood idol Pablo Aimar , to receive the " New Maradona " moniker , but as his career progressed , Messi proved his similarity beyond all previous contenders , establishing himself as the greatest player Argentina had produced since Maradona . Jorge <unk> , who won the 1986 World Cup alongside Maradona , said in October 2013 : " Messi is Maradona every day . For the last five years , Messi has been the Maradona of the World Cup in Mexico . " César Menotti , who as manager orchestrated their 1978 World Cup victory , echoed this sentiment when he opined that Messi plays " at the level of the best Maradona . " Other notable Argentines in the sport , such as Osvaldo Ardiles , Javier Zanetti , and Diego Simeone , have expressed their belief that Messi has overtaken Maradona as the best player in history . 
 In Argentine society , Messi is generally held in lesser esteem than Maradona , a consequence of not only his uneven performances with the national team , but also of differences in class , personality , and background . Messi is in some ways the antithesis of his predecessor : where Maradona was an extroverted , controversial character who rose to greatness from the slums , Messi is reserved and unassuming , an unremarkable man outside of football . An enduring mark against him is the fact that , although through no fault of his own , he never proved himself in the Argentine Primera División as an upcoming player , achieving stardom overseas from a young age , while his lack of outward passion for the <unk> shirt — he does not sing the national anthem and is disinclined to emotional displays — have in the past led to the false perception that he felt Catalan rather than truly Argentine . Despite having lived in Spain since age 13 , Messi has said : " Argentina is my country , my family , my way of expressing myself . I would change all my records to make the people in my country happy . " 
 = = = Comparisons to Cristiano Ronaldo = = = 
 Among his contemporary peers , Messi is most often compared and contrasted with Portuguese forward Cristiano Ronaldo , as part of an ongoing rivalry that has been compared to past sports rivalries like the Muhammad Ali – Joe Frazier rivalry in boxing , the Björn Borg – John McEnroe rivalry in tennis , and the Ayrton Senna – Alain Prost rivalry from Formula One . Although Messi has at times denied any rivalry , they are widely believed to push one another in their aim to be the best player in the world : since 2008 , Ronaldo has won three Ballons d 'Or to Messi 's five , and four European Golden Shoes to Messi 's three . Pundits and fans regularly argue the individual merits of both players ; beyond their playing styles , the debate also revolves around their differing physiques — Ronaldo is 1 @.@ 85 m ( 6 ft 1 in ) with a muscular build — and contrasting public personalities , with Ronaldo 's self @-@ confidence and theatrics a foil to Messi 's humility . Messi faces Ronaldo at least twice every season in El Clásico , which ranks among the world 's most viewed annual sports events . Off the pitch , Ronaldo is his direct competitor in terms of salary , sponsorships , and social media fanbase . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 According to France Football , Messi was the world 's highest @-@ paid footballer for five years out of six between 2009 and 2014 ; he was the first player to exceed the € 40 million benchmark , with earnings of € 41 million in 2013 , and the € 50 – € 60 million points , with income of € 65 million in 2014 . In 2016 , Messi was second on Forbes list of the world 's highest @-@ paid athletes ( after Cristiano Ronaldo ) with income of $ 81 @.@ 4 million from his salary and endorsements in 2015 – 16 . Since 2008 , he has been Barcelona 's highest @-@ paid player , receiving a salary that increased incrementally from € 7 @.@ 8 million to € 13 million over the next five years . His current salary of € 20 million net ( € 36 million before taxes ) , established in 2014 , is the highest ever in the sport . In addition to his salary and multimillion @-@ euro bonuses , much of his income derives from endorsements ; <unk> has consequently cited him as one of the world 's most marketable athletes every year since their research began in 2010 . His main sponsor since 2006 is the sportswear company Adidas . As Barça 's leading youth prospect , he had been signed with Nike since age 14 , but transferred to Adidas after they successfully challenged their rival 's claim to his image rights in court . Over time , Messi established himself as their leading brand endorser ; from 2008 , he had a long @-@ running signature collection of Adidas <unk> boots , and in 2015 , he became the first footballer to receive his own sub @-@ brand of boots , the Adidas Messi . 
 As a commercial entity , Messi 's marketing brand has been based exclusively on his talents and achievements as a player , in contrast to arguably more glamorous players like Cristiano Ronaldo and David Beckham . At the start of his career , he thus mainly held sponsorship contracts with companies that employ sports @-@ oriented marketing , such as Adidas , Pepsi , and Konami . From 2010 onwards , concurrently with his increased achievements as a player , his marketing appeal widened , leading to long @-@ term endorsement deals with luxury brands Dolce & Gabbana and Audemars Piguet . Messi is also a global brand ambassador for Gillette , Turkish Airlines , <unk> , and Tata Motors , among other companies . Additionally , Messi was the face of Konami 's video game series Pro Evolution Soccer , appearing on the covers of PES 2009 , PES 2010 , and PES 2011 . He subsequently signed with rival company EA Sports to become the face of their series FIFA and has since appeared on four consecutive covers from FIFA 13 to FIFA 16 . 
 Messi 's global popularity and influence are well documented . He was among the Time 100 , an annual list of the world 's most influential people as published by Time , in 2011 and 2012 . His fanbase on the social media website Facebook is among the largest of all public figures : within seven hours of its launch in April 2011 , his Facebook page had nearly seven million followers , and by November 2013 , he had become only the second sportsperson , after Cristiano Ronaldo , to amass over 50 million followers . According to a 2014 survey by sports research firm <unk> in 15 international markets , Messi was familiar to 87 % of respondents around the world , of whom 78 % perceived him favourably , making him the second @-@ most recognized player globally , behind Ronaldo , and the most likable of all contemporary players . 
 Other events have illustrated Messi 's presence in popular culture . A solid gold replica of his left foot , weighing 25 kg ( 55 lb ) and valued at $ 5 @.@ 25 million , went on sale in Japan in March 2013 to raise funds for victims of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . A 2013 Turkish Airlines advertisement starring Messi , in which he engages in a selfie competition with Los Angeles Lakers star Kobe Bryant , was the most @-@ watched ad on YouTube in the year of its release , receiving 137 million views , and was subsequently voted the best advertisement of the 2005 – 15 decade to commemorate YouTube 's founding . World Press Photo selected " The Final Game " , a photograph of Messi facing the World Cup trophy after Argentina 's final defeat to Germany , as the best sports image of 2014 . Messi , a documentary about his life by filmmaker Álex de la Iglesia , premiered at the Venice Film Festival in August 2014 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family and relationships = = = 
 Since 2008 , when he was 20 , Messi has been in a relationship with Antonella Roccuzzo , a fellow native of Rosario . He has known Roccuzzo since he was five years old , as she is the cousin of his best friend since childhood , Lucas Scaglia , who is also a football player . After keeping their relationship private for a year , Messi first confirmed their romance in an interview in January 2009 , before going public a month later during a carnival in Sitges after the Barcelona – Espanyol derby . He had previously been romantically linked with Argentine models Macarena Lemos and Luciana Salazar . 
 Messi and Roccuzzo have two sons : Thiago ( born 2012 ) and Mateo ( born 2015 ) . To celebrate his partner 's first pregnancy , Messi placed the ball under his shirt after scoring in Argentina 's 4 – 0 win against Ecuador on 2 June 2012 , before confirming the pregnancy in an interview two weeks later . Thiago was born in Barcelona on 2 November 2012 , with Messi attending the birth after being given permission by Barcelona to miss training . He announced his son 's arrival on his Facebook page , writing : " Today I am the happiest man in the world , my son was born and thanks to God for this gift ! " Thiago 's name and handprints are tattooed on his left calf . In April 2015 , Messi confirmed on Facebook that they were expecting another child . He missed training ahead of a match against Atlético Madrid to attend the birth of his second son , Mateo , on 11 September 2015 in Barcelona . 
 Messi enjoys a close relationship with his immediate family members , particularly his mother , Celia , whose face he has tattooed on his left shoulder . His professional affairs are largely run as a family business : his father , Jorge , has been his agent since he was 14 , and his oldest brother , Rodrigo , handles his daily schedule and publicity . His mother and other brother , Matías , manage his charitable organisation , the Leo Messi Foundation , and take care of personal and professional matters in Rosario . 
 Since leaving for Spain at age 13 , Messi has maintained close ties to his hometown of Rosario , even preserving his distinct <unk> accent . He has kept ownership of his family 's old house , although it has long stood empty ; he maintains a penthouse apartment in an exclusive residential building for his mother , as well as a family compound just outside the city . Once when he was in training with the national team in Buenos Aires , he made a three @-@ hour trip by car to Rosario immediately after practice to have dinner with his family , spent the night with them , and returned to Buenos Aires the next day in time for practice . Messi keeps in daily contact via phone and text with a small group of confidants in Rosario , most of whom were fellow members of " The Machine of ' 87 " at Newell 's Old Boys . Although considered a one @-@ club man , he has long planned to return to Rosario to end his playing career at Newell 's . He was on bad terms with the club after his transfer to Barcelona , but by 2012 their public feud had ended , with Newell 's embracing their ties with Messi , even issuing a club membership card to his newborn son . 
 = = = Charity = = = 
 Throughout his career , Messi has been involved in charitable efforts aimed at vulnerable children , a commitment that stems in part from the medical difficulties he faced in his own childhood . Since 2004 , he has contributed his time and finances to the United Nations Children 's Fund ( UNICEF ) , an organisation with which Barcelona also have a strong association . Messi has served as a UNICEF goodwill ambassador since his appointment in March 2010 , completing his first field mission for the organisation four months later as he travelled to Haiti to bring public awareness to the plight of the country 's children in the wake of the recent earthquake . He has since participated in UNICEF campaigns targeting HIV prevention , education , and the social inclusion of disabled children . To celebrate his son 's first birthday , in November 2013 , Messi and Thiago were part of a publicity campaign to raise awareness of mortality rates among disadvantaged children . 
 In addition to his work with UNICEF , Messi founded his own charitable organisation , the Leo Messi Foundation , which supports access to health care , education , and sport for children . It was established in 2007 following a visit Messi paid to a hospital for terminally ill children in Boston , an experience that resonated with him to the point that he decided to reinvest part of his earnings into society . Through his foundation , Messi has awarded research grants , financed medical training , and invested in the development of medical centres and projects in Argentina , Spain , and elsewhere in the world . In addition to his own fundraising activities , such as his global " Messi and Friends " football matches , his foundation receives financial support from various companies to which he has assigned his name in endorsement agreements , with Adidas as their main sponsor . 
 Messi has also invested in youth football in Argentina : he financially supports Sarmiento , a football club based in the Rosario neighbourhood where he was born , committing in 2013 to the refurbishment of their facilities and the installation of all @-@ weather pitches , and funds the management of several youth players at Newell 's Old Boys and rival club Rosario Central , as well as at River Plate and Boca Juniors in Buenos Aires . At Newell 's Old Boys , his boyhood club , he funded the 2012 construction of a new gymnasium and a dormitory inside the club 's stadium for their youth academy . His former youth coach at Newell 's , Ernesto Vecchio , is employed by the Leo Messi Foundation as a talent scout for young players . In February 2016 , Messi utilized social media and UNICEF to track down an <unk> boy in a photo that went viral , which showed him wearing a homemade shirt made from a striped blue plastic bag with " Messi 10 " etched on the back , imitating the Argentina strip . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 His financial affairs came under investigation in 2013 for suspected tax evasion . Offshore companies in tax havens Uruguay and Belize were allegedly used to evade € 4 @.@ 1 million in taxes related to sponsorship earnings between 2007 and 2009 . An unrelated shell company in Panama , set up in 2012 , was subsequently identified as belonging to the <unk> in the Panama Papers data leak . Messi , who pleaded ignorance of the alleged scheme , voluntarily paid arrears of € 5 @.@ 1 million in August 2013 . He stood trial alongside his father on three counts of tax evasion in May 2016 . On 6 July 2016 , Messi and his father were both found guilty of tax fraud and were handed suspended 21 @-@ month prison sentences , and respectively ordered to pay € 1 @.@ 7 million and € 1 @.@ 4 million in fines . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 22 May 2016 
 Notes 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 26 June 2016 
 Notes 
 = = Honours and achievements = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 La Liga : 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 , 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 , 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Copa del Rey : 2008 – 09 , 2011 – 12 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Supercopa de España : 2006 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2013 
 UEFA Champions League : 2005 – 06 , 2008 – 09 , 2010 – 11 , 2014 – 15 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2009 , 2011 , 2015 
 FIFA Club World Cup : 2009 , 2011 , 2015 
 = = = International = = = 
 FIFA World Youth Championship : 2005 
 Olympic Gold Medal : 2008 
 Runner @-@ up FIFA World Cup : 2014 
 Runner @-@ up Copa América : 2007 , 2015 , 2016 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 = = = = Awards = = = = 
 Ballon d 'Or : 2009 
 FIFA World Player of the Year : 2009 
 UEFA Club Footballer of the Year : 2009 
 UEFA Club Forward of the Year : 2009 
 FIFA Ballon d 'Or : 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2015 
 IFFHS World 's Best Top Goalscorer : 2011 , 2012 
 IFFHS World 's Best Top Division Goalscorer : 2012 , 2013 
 IFFHS World 's Best Playmaker : 2015 
 UEFA Best Player in Europe : 2011 , 2015 
 European Golden Shoe : 2010 , 2012 , 2013 
 La Liga Best Player : 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2015 
 La Liga Best Forward : 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2015 
 La Liga Player of the Month : January 2016 
 Olimpia de Plata ( Argentine Footballer of the Year ) : 2005 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2015 
 Olimpia de Oro ( Argentine Sportsperson of the Year ) : 2011 
 FIFA Club World Cup Golden Ball : 2009 , 2011 
 FIFA Club World Cup Silver Ball : 2015 
 FIFA World Cup Golden Ball : 2014 
 Copa América Most Valuable Player : 2015 ( rejected ) 
 FIFA FIFPro World XI : 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 
 UEFA Team of the Year : 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2014 , 2015 
 La Liga Team of the Year : 2015 
 AFA Team of All Time ( published 2015 ) 
 FIFA World Cup Dream Team : 2014 
 Copa América Dream Team : 2007 , 2011 , 2015 , 2016 
 UEFA Goal of the Year : 2007 , 2015 
 Copa América Best Goal : 2007 
 FIFPro Young World Player of the Year : 2006 , 2007 , 2008 
 Golden Boy ( Young European Footballer of the Year ) : 2005 
 FIFA World Youth Championship Golden Ball : 2005 
 FIFA World Youth Championship Golden Shoe : 2005 
 Copa América Best Young Player : 2007 
 La Liga top goalscorer : 2009 – 10 , 2011 – 12 , 2012 – 13 
 La Liga top assist provider : 2010 – 11 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Copa del Rey top goalscorer : 2008 – 09 , 2010 – 11 , 2013 – 14 , 2015 – 16 
 UEFA Champions League top goalscorer : 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 , 2010 – 11 , 2011 – 12 , 2014 – 15 
 UEFA Champions League top assist provider : 2011 – 12 , 2014 – 15 
 FIFA Club World Cup top goalscorer : 2011 
 FIFA World Youth Championship top goalscorer : 2005 
 Copa América top assist provider : 2011 , 2015 , 2016 
 = = = = Records = = = = 
 As of 21 June 2016 
 Most FIFA Ballons d 'Or : 5 ( 2009 – 12 , 2015 ) 
 Most consecutive FIFA Ballons d 'Or : 4 
 Youngest two @-@ time and three @-@ time FIFA Ballon d 'Or winner : 23 and 24 years old 
 Most UEFA Best Player in Europe awards : 3 ( 2009 , 2011 , 2015 ) 
 Most La Liga Best Player awards : 6 ( 2009 – 13 , 2015 ) 
 Top goalscorer in La Liga : 312 goals 
 Top assist provider in La Liga : 127 assists 
 Top goalscorer in the Supercopa de España : 11 goals 
 Top goalscorer in El Clásico : 21 goals 
 Top goalscorer in the Derbi <unk> : 16 goals 
 Top goalscorer in the UEFA Super Cup : 3 goals ( shared with Arie Haan , Oleg <unk> , Gerd Müller , Rob <unk> , François Van der <unk> , Terry McDermott , and Radamel Falcao ) 
 Top goalscorer in the FIFA Club World Cup : 5 goals ( shared with César Delgado and Luis Suárez ) 
 Top goalscorer for club and country in a calendar year : 91 goals in 2012 
 Top goalscorer in all club competitions in a calendar year : 79 goals in 2012 
 Top goalscorer in all club competitions in a season : 73 goals in 2011 – 12 
 Longest goalscoring run in a domestic league : 21 matches , 33 goals in 2012 – 13 
 Top goalscorer in a La Liga season : 50 goals in 2011 – 12 
 Most hat @-@ tricks scored in a La Liga season : 8 in 2011 – 12 ( shared with Cristiano Ronaldo ) 
 Only player to score consecutively against all opposition teams in La Liga : 19 matches , 30 goals in 2012 – 13 
 Only player to have won more than one FIFA Club World Cup Golden Ball . 
 Youngest player to score 200 goals in La Liga : 25 years in 2013 
 Only player to be top goalscorer in five UEFA Champions League seasons ( 2008 – 09 to 2011 – 12 , 2014 – 15 ) 
 Only player to be top goalscorer in four consecutive UEFA Champions League seasons 
 Most hat @-@ tricks scored in the UEFA Champions League : 5 
 Most goals scored in a UEFA Champions League match : 5 in 2012 ( shared with Luiz Adriano ) 
 Youngest player to make 100 appearances in the UEFA Champions League : 28 years , 84 days in 2015 
 Most titles won with Barcelona : 28 ( shared with Andrés Iniesta ) 
 Top goalscorer for Barcelona in official competitions : 448 goals 
 Top goalscorer for Barcelona including friendlies : 477 goals 
 Top goalscorer for Barcelona in the UEFA Champions League : 82 goals 
 Most hat @-@ tricks scored in all competitions by a Barcelona player : 35 
 Most hat @-@ tricks scored in La Liga by a Barcelona player : 26 
 Only Barcelona player to be top goalscorer in three La Liga seasons ( 2009 – 10 , 2011 – 12 , 2012 – 13 ) 
 All @-@ time top assist provider in Copa América : 11 assists 
 Argentina all @-@ time top goalscorer : 55 goals 
 Top goalscorer for Argentina in a calendar year : 12 goals in 2012 ( shared with Gabriel Batistuta ) 
 Youngest player to play for Argentina in a FIFA World Cup : 18 years , 357 days in 2006 
 Youngest player to score for Argentina in a FIFA World Cup : 18 years , 357 days in 2006 
 Youngest player to reach 100 caps for a country under CONMEBOL 's jurisdiction : 27 years , 361 days in 2015 
 = Ice Ice Baby = 
 " Ice Ice Baby " is a hip hop song written by American rapper Vanilla Ice and DJ Earthquake , but based on the bassline of " Under Pressure " by Queen and David Bowie , who did not initially receive songwriting credit or royalties until after it had become a hit . Originally released on Vanilla Ice 's 1989 debut album Hooked and later on his 1990 national debut To the Extreme , it is his most well known song . It has appeared in remixed form on Platinum Underground and Vanilla Ice Is Back ! A live version appears on the album Extremely Live , while a rap rock version appears on the album Hard to Swallow , under the title " Too Cold " . 
 " Ice Ice Baby " was initially released as the B @-@ side to Vanilla Ice 's cover of " Play That Funky Music " , but the single was not initially successful . When disc jockey David Morales played " Ice Ice Baby " instead , it began to gain success . " Ice Ice Baby " was the first hip hop single to top the Billboard charts . Outside the United States , the song topped the charts in Australia , Belgium , the Netherlands , New Zealand , the Republic of Ireland and the United Kingdom , thus helping the song diversify hip hop by introducing it to a mainstream audience . The song came fifth in VH1 and Blender 's 2004 list of the " 50 Most Awesomely Bad Songs Ever . " 
 = = Lyrics and music = = 
 Robert Van Winkle , better known by his stage name Vanilla Ice , wrote " Ice Ice Baby " in 1983 at the age of 16 , basing its lyrics upon his experiences in South Florida . The lyrics describe a shooting and Van Winkle 's rhyming skills . The chorus of " Ice Ice Baby " originates from the signature chant of the national African American fraternity Alpha Phi Alpha . Of the song 's lyrics , Van Winkle states that " If you released ' Ice Ice Baby ' today , it would fit in today 's lyrical respect among peers , you know what I 'm sayin ' ? [ ... ] My lyrics aren 't , ' Pump it up , go ! Go ! ' At least I 'm sayin ' somethin ' . " 
 The song 's hook samples the bassline of the 1981 song " Under Pressure " by Queen and David Bowie , who did not receive credit or royalties for the sample . In a 1990 interview , Van Winkle said the two melodies were slightly different because he had added an additional note , an <unk> ( " pickup " ) between odd @-@ numbered and subsequent even @-@ numbered iterations of the Under Pressure sample . In later interviews , Van Winkle readily admitted he sampled the song and claimed his 1990 statement was a joke ; others , however , suggested he had been serious . Van Winkle later paid Queen and Bowie and as a result , Bowie and all members of Queen have since been given songwriting credit for the sample . In December 1990 , Van Winkle told British youth music magazine Smash Hits where he came up with the idea of sampling " Under Pressure " : 
 Van Winkle described himself as the first rapper to cross into the pop market and said that although his pioneer status forced him to " take the heat for a lot of people " for his music 's use of samples , the criticism he received over sample use allowed sampling to become acceptable in mainstream hip hop . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Ice Ice Baby " was initially released by Ichiban Records as the B @-@ side to Van Winkle 's cover of " Play That Funky Music " . The 12 @-@ inch single featured the radio , instrumental and a cappella versions of " Play That Funky Music " and the radio version and " Miami Drop " remix of " Ice Ice Baby " . When a disc jockey played " Ice Ice Baby " instead of the single 's A @-@ side , the song gained more success than " Play That Funky Music " . A music video for " Ice Ice Baby " was produced for $ 8000 . The video was financed by Van Winkle 's manager , Tommy Quon , and shot on the roof of a warehouse in Dallas , Texas . In the video , Van Winkle is shown rapping the lyrics while he and others dance to the song . Heavy airplay of the video by The Box while Van Winkle was still unknown increased public interest in the song . " Ice Ice Baby " was given its own single , released in 1990 by SBK Records in the United States , and EMI Records in the United Kingdom . The SBK single contained the " Miami Drop " , instrumental and radio mixes of " Ice Ice Baby " and the album version of " It 's A Party " . The EMI single contained the club and radio mixes of the song , and the shortened radio edit . The single was quickly pulled from the American market soon after the song reached number one , in a successful attempt to drive consumers to buy the album instead . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Ice Ice Baby " garnered critical acclaim , and was the first hip hop single to top the Billboard charts . It has been credited for helping diversify hip hop by introducing it to a mainstream audience . 
 Entertainment Weekly reviewer Mim Udovitch wrote that " [ Vanilla Ice ] probably would have scored with his hit rap single ' Ice Ice Baby ' even if he hadn 't been white . There 's just something about the way its hook – a sample from Queen and David Bowie 's ' Under Pressure ' — grabs you and flings you out onto the dance floor . " 
 Following the song 's success , California rapper Mario " Chocolate " Johnson , an associate of record producer Suge Knight , claimed that he had helped in writing the song , and had not received credit or royalties . Knight and two bodyguards arrived at The Palm in West Hollywood , where Van Winkle was eating . After shoving Van Winkle 's bodyguards aside , Knight and his own bodyguards sat down in front of Van Winkle , staring at him before finally asking " How you doin ' ? " Similar incidents were repeated on several occasions before Knight showed up at Van Winkle 's suite on the fifteenth floor of the Bel Age Hotel , accompanied by Johnson and a member of the Los Angeles Raiders . According to Van Winkle , Knight took him out on the balcony by himself , and implied that he would throw Van Winkle off unless he signed the rights to the song over to Knight . In 2012 , Mario " Chocolate " Johnson told to LA Weekly that this story is false . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After audiences began to view Van Winkle as a novelty act and a pop star rather than a legitimate rapper , his popularity began to decline . Detroit @-@ based rapper Eminem states that when he first heard " Ice Ice Baby " , " I felt like I didn 't want to rap anymore . I was so mad , because he was making it real hard for me . " Van Winkle lost some credibility among hip hop fans , but later began to regain some success , attracting a new audience outside of the mainstream audience that had formerly accepted him , and then rejected him . " Ice Ice Baby " continues to be the song that Van Winkle is best known for internationally , although Van Winkle states that his American fans like his newer music better . 
 A live version appeared on the album Extremely Live . " Ice Ice Baby " was rerecorded in a rap rock version titled " Too Cold " . Originally intended to be released as a hidden track or B @-@ side , " Too Cold " was featured on Van Winkle 's 1998 album Hard to Swallow , and became a radio hit in some markets . In 2000 , a remix titled " Ice Ice Baby 2001 " was released in Europe as a single , with a newly produced music video . The remix generated new international interest in Van Winkle 's music . 
 VH1 and Blender ranked " Ice Ice Baby " fifth on its list of the " 50 Most Awesomely Bad Songs Ever " . It was also given the distinction by the Houston Press as being the worst song ever to emanate from Texas . In 1999 , the song 's music video was " retired " on the MTV special 25 Lame , in which Van Winkle himself appeared to destroy the video 's master tape . Given a baseball bat , Van Winkle ended up destroying the show 's set . In December 2007 , the song was ranked No. 29 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Songs of the 90 's . 
 In 1991 , Alvin and the Chipmunks released a cover version entitled " Ice Ice Alvin " for their album The Chipmunks Rock the House . " Weird Al " Yankovic included the chorus as the final song in " Polka Your Eyes Out " , the polka medley from his 1992 album Off the Deep End . In 2010 , the song was featured in the Glee episode " Bad Reputation " as performed by Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = = 1990 release = = = 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = Other uses = = 
 In 2013 , a parody of the song titled " Rice Rice Baby " was created for an advert from Müller involving a 7 @-@ foot bear who disrupts a hungry co @-@ worker whilst singing the parody . Two versions were created , a 30 @-@ second version and a 10 @-@ second version . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Lyrics of this song at <unk> 
 = The Guardian of Education = 
 The Guardian of Education was the first successful periodical dedicated to reviewing children 's literature in Britain . It was edited by 18th @-@ century educationalist , children 's author , and Sunday school advocate Sarah Trimmer and was published from June 1802 until September 1806 by J. Hatchard and F. C. and J. Rivington . The journal offered child @-@ rearing advice and assessments of contemporary educational theories , and Trimmer even proffered her own educational theory after evaluating the major works of the day . 
 Fearing the influence of French Revolutionary ideals , particularly those of philosopher Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , Trimmer emphasized orthodox Anglicanism and encouraged the perpetuation of the contemporary social and political order . Despite her conservatism , however , she agreed with Rousseau and other progressive educational reformers on many issues , such as the damaging effects of rote learning and the irrationalism of fairy tales . 
 The Guardian of Education was the first periodical to review children 's books seriously and with a distinctive set of criteria . Trimmer 's reviews were carefully thought out ; they influenced publishers and authors to alter the content of their books , helped to define the new genre of children 's literature , and greatly affected the sales of children 's books . The Guardian also offered the first history of children 's literature ; establishing a list of landmark books , which scholars still use today . 
 = = Founding and structure = = 
 Sarah Trimmer was prompted to publish The Guardian of Education by the flood of new children 's books on the market early in the nineteenth century and by her fear that those books might contain French Revolutionary values . The 1790s had been one of the most tumultuous decades in Europe 's history , with the French revolution , increased demands for reform in Britain , and the French Revolutionary Wars . Following this upsurge in radicalism , a conservative backlash erupted in Britain ; the Guardian was , in many ways , a part of this movement . In its pages , Trimmer denounced the Revolution and the philosophers whose works she believed were responsible for it , particularly Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau . She argued that there existed a vast conspiracy , organized by the atheistic and democratic revolutionaries of France , to undermine and overthrow the legitimate governments of Europe . From her perspective , the conspirators were attempting to overturn traditional society by " endeavouring to infect the minds of the rising generation , through the medium of Books of Education and Children 's Books " [ emphasis Trimmer 's ] . She intended to combat this conspiracy by pointing parents towards properly Christian books . 
 Each issue of Trimmer 's Guardian was divided into three sections : 1 ) extracts from texts which Trimmer thought would edify her adult readers ( grouped under " Memoirs " and " Extracts from Sermons " ) ; 2 ) an essay by Trimmer commenting on educational issues ( contained in sections such as " Original Essays " and " Systems of Education Examined " ) ; 3 ) and reviews of children 's books . Trimmer herself wrote all of the essays listed under her name and all of the reviews , but she was not the author of the texts she extracted . The issues did not always consist of the same sections ; for example , beginning in 1804 Trimmer started including an " Essay on Christian Education " and in 1805 occasionally reviewed " School books " . Beginning a tradition that persists to this day , she divided the books she reviewed by age group : " Examination of Books for Children " ( for those under fourteen ) and " Books for Young Persons " ( for those between fourteen and twenty @-@ one ) . 
 Matthew Grenby , the foremost expert on Trimmer , estimates that the Guardian 's circulation was between 1 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 500 copies per issue . Thus the Guardian 's circulation was probably comparable to political periodicals such as the Tory Critical Review and the British Critic , which both reached 3 @,@ 500 by 1797 , or the Analytical Review , which reached about 1 @,@ 500 , but not to the Monthly Review , which reached approximately 5 @,@ 000 . From June 1802 until January 1804 , the Guardian appeared monthly ; from then until it ceased publication in September 1806 , it was issued quarterly . There were 28 issues in all . 
 Trimmer undertook a challenging task in publishing her periodical . According to Grenby , she aimed " to assess the current state of educational policy and praxis in Britain and to shape its future direction " . To do so , she evaluated the educational theories of Rousseau , John Locke , Mary Wollstonecraft , Hannah More , Madame de Genlis , Joseph Lancaster , and Andrew Bell , among others . In her " Essay on Christian Education " , subsequently published separately as a pamphlet , she proposed her own comprehensive educational program . 
 = = Reviewing criteria and values = = 
 The Guardian of Education was the first periodical to take the reviewing of children 's books seriously . Trimmer 's over four hundred reviews constituted a set of distinct and identifiable criteria regarding what was valuable in this new genre . As a high @-@ church Anglican , she was intent on protecting Christianity from secularism as well as evangelicalism , particularly as the latter manifested itself in Methodism . Her reviews also reveal her to be a staunch monarchist and opponent of the French Revolution . As Grenby puts it , " her initial questions of any children 's books that came before her were always first , was it damaging to religion and second , was it damaging to political loyalty and the established social hierarchy " . Religion was Trimmer 's first priority and her emphasis on the doctrine of Biblical inerrancy illustrated her fundamentalism . She wrote to a friend : " I will only say , that the more I reflect on the subject , the more I am convinced that it is not right to supersede the figurative style in which they speak of God and divine things , my opinion is , that whoever attempts to teach the truths of divine revelation , should follow the method of the inspired writers as nearly as possible " [ emphasis Trimmer 's ] . For Trimmer , the truth of the Bible was not only in its content , but also in its style , and some of her harshest reviews were written against texts that altered both the style and the substance of the Bible . 
 Trimmer 's fundamentalism , Grenby argues , does not necessarily mark her as a rigid thinker . Grenby points out that Trimmer , like Rousseau , believed children were naturally good . In this view , she was arguing against centuries of tradition , particularly Puritanical attitudes towards raising children ( exemplified in the doctrine of original sin ) . Although she attacked Rousseau 's works , Grenby argues that she agreed with " Rousseau 's key idea , later taken up by the Romantics , that children should not be forced to become adults too early " , in particular that they should not be exposed to political issues too soon . Trimmer also maintained that mothers and fathers should share the responsibility of caring for the family . Like the progressive educational reformers and children 's authors Maria Edgeworth and Thomas Day and even Rousseau himself , Trimmer opposed rote learning and advocated flexible and conversational lessons that encouraged critical thinking in children . She also promoted breastfeeding ( a controversial position at the time ) and parental involvement in childhood education . 
 In his analysis of her reviews , Grenby comes to the conclusion " Trimmer was ... not nearly so vitriolic in her reviewing as her reputation suggests .... fewer than 50 [ of the reviews ] were chiefly negative , and of these only 18 were thoroughly excoriating . These were easily outweighed by the positive notices , although most of her reviews were mixed or – more surprisingly given her reputation for always impassioned appraisal – ambivalent . " She objected primarily to texts that altered the Bible , such as William Godwin 's Bible Stories ( 1802 ) , and secondarily to books that promoted ideas she associated with the French Revolution . She also criticized the inclusion of scenes of death , characters who were insane , and representations of sexuality , as well as books that might frighten children . She typically praises books that encourage intellectual instruction , such as Anna Barbauld 's Lessons for Children ( 1778 – 79 ) . 
 = = = Fairy tales = = = 
 Trimmer is perhaps most famous now for her condemnation of fairy tales , such as the various translations of Charles Perrault 's Histoires ou Contes du Temps passé ( 1697 ) . She disliked fairy tales because they endorsed an irrational view of the world and success without work . Trimmer 's view of fairy tales , although often ridiculed by modern critics , was widespread at the end of the eighteenth century , in part because most educators accepted John Locke 's theory that the mind was a tabula rasa and therefore particularly sensitive to impressions early in life . Trimmer was opposed to fairy tales that were not grounded in reality and which would " excite an unregulated sensibility " in the reader . Without a proper moral or a moralizing narrator , fairy tales could lead a reader astray . Above all , she was concerned about " unmediated " , unknown , and unsupervised feelings in the child reader . One of the reasons Trimmer believed fairy tales were dangerous was because they led child readers into a fantasy world where adults could not follow and control their exposure to harmful experiences . She was just as horrified by the graphic illustrations included with some fairy tale collections , complaining that " little children , whose minds are susceptible of every impression ; and who from the liveliness of their imaginations are apt to convert into realities whatever forcibly strikes their fancy " should not be allowed to see such scenes as Blue Beard hacking his wife 's head off . 
 Fairy tales were often found in chapbooks — cheap , disposable literature — which contained sensational stories such as Jack the Giant Killer along with <unk> tales such as How to restore a lost Maidenhead , or solder a <unk> one . <unk> were the literature of the poor and Trimmer attempted to separate children 's literature from texts she associated with the lower classes . Trimmer criticized the values associated with fairy tales , accusing them of perpetuating irrationality , superstition , and unfavorable images of <unk> . Rather than seeing Trimmer as a censor of fairy tales , therefore , children 's literature scholar Nicholas Tucker has argued , " by considering fairy tales as fair game for criticism rather than unthinking worship , Mrs Trimmer is at one with scholars today who have also written critically about the ideologies found in some individual stories " . 
 = = = French Revolution and religion = = = 
 Trimmer 's views of the French philosophes were shaped by Abbé Barruel 's Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism ( 1797 – 98 ) ( she extracted large sections from this text into the Guardian itself ) but also by her fears of the ongoing wars between France and Britain during the 1790s . Trimmer emphasized Christianity above all in her writings and maintained that one should to turn to God in times of trial . As children 's literature scholar M. Nancy Cutt argues , Trimmer and writers like her " claimed emphatically that the degree of human happiness was in direct proportion to the degree of submission to the divine Will . Thus they repudiated the moralists ' view that learning should exalt reason and work to the temporal happiness of the individual , which was governed by the best interests of society . " Trimmer and her allies contended that French pedagogical theories led to an immoral nation , specifically , " deism , infidelity and revolution " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Although one previous attempt had been made to regularly review British children 's books it was not as comprehensive , did not last as long , and was not nearly as influential as Trimmer 's Guardian . Grenby suggests , for example , that Godwin changed the name of his Bible Stories to Sacred Histories after Trimmer 's attack on it and the publishers of John Newbery 's Tom Telescope and the Philosophy of Tops and Balls immediately removed the material Trimmer found offensive . Other scholars have argued that authors wrote with Trimmer 's reviewing criteria in mind , one going so far as to call it " a manual for prospective writers " . However , Trimmer 's reviews were not always heeded ; for example , her negative review of the sentimental works of Edward Augustus Kendall , such as Keeper 's Travels in Search of His Master , did little to dampen the sales of his works . 
 With its four hundred reviews , The Guardian of Education , as Grenby writes , " contributed to the establishment of children 's literature as a secure , permanent and respectable literary genre " . By excluding novels , chapbooks , tracts , ballads , and fairy tales , it effectively decided what counted as children 's literature and what did not . Furthermore , in one of her early essays , " Observations on the Changes which have taken place in Books for Children and Young Persons " , Trimmer wrote the first history of children 's literature . Its landmark books , such as Sarah Fielding 's The Governess ( 1749 ) and John Newbery 's The History of Little Goody Two Shoes ( 1765 ) , are still cited today by scholars as important in the development of children 's literature . 
 It was not until the last quarter of the nineteenth century , with the publication of the work of children 's author and literary critic Charlotte Yonge , that any sustained reviewing or <unk> of children 's literature took place again . 
 = Hoedown Throwdown = 
 " Hoedown Throwdown " is a song performed by American recording artist Miley Cyrus . It was released as a single from the soundtrack for Hannah Montana : The Movie . It was then released via iTunes Store on March 10 , 2009 as a Radio Disney exclusive that had an interview as a B @-@ side . A karaoke version is available in the soundtrack 's karaoke series . " Hoedown Throwdown " is an instructional dance song with a hybrid of country and hip hop . The choreography was designed by Jamal Sims and incorporates line dance influences . 
 The song received mixed critical reception , but enjoyed commercial success and became a top twenty hit in various nations including Australia , Canada , Ireland , Norway , the United Kingdom , and the United States . " Hoedown Throwdown " reached its highest international peak in the Irish Singles Chart , at number ten . The single never received an official music video , but an excerpt from Hannah Montana : The Movie was used for promotion . Cyrus incorporated " Hoedown Throwdown " into the set list of her first worldwide concert tour , the Wonder World Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Hoedown Throwdown " was created for the 2009 musical film Hannah Montana : The Movie , in which Cyrus stars as a famous pop star sent to reconnect with her Southern roots and family . The film 's director , Peter Chelsom , felt the movie needed a big dance @-@ number , similar to the " Macarena " ( 1995 ) or the " Funky Chicken " ( 1950s ) . Chelsom knew he wanted a song in which Cyrus ' character , Miley Stewart , called dance steps that captured Cyrus ' " real silliness physically " and her " great abandon " . In addition , Chelsom wanted the song to represent the two worlds of Stewart , the main theme of the film , by " combin [ ing ] Miley Stewart ’ s L.A. hip @-@ hop / pop style with her country roots " . Because the song is an instructional dance song , it became an ongoing collaboration between Chelsom , choreographer Jamal Sims , Cyrus , and the song 's songwriters , Adam Anders and Nikki <unk> . According to Chelsom , the collaborators referred to the song by the working title " The Project " " for the longest time " before naming it the " Hoedown Throwdown " . The song was also nick @-@ named " Miley 's Macarena " . " Hoedown Throwdown " was first released as a promotional single from the soundtrack to Hannah Montana : The Movie on March 10 , 2009 . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Hoedown Throwdown " merges from a hybrid of country and hip hop . It is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 104 beats per minute . " Hoedown Throwdown " is written in the key of E ♭ major . Cyrus ' vocals span two octaves , from B ♭ 3 to F5 . The song begins with an intro in which Cyrus repeats " Boom Boom clap , boom di @-@ clap di @-@ clap " four times . This line is reused in the song 's outro . Allmusic described the song as a tribute to " down @-@ home family times " . Cyrus stated " Hoedown Throwdown " was one of those on the film 's soundtrack that " is all about " her Nashville roots and " the reason why [ she is who she is ] . " 
 = = Dance = = 
 The dance for " Hoedown Throwdown " is heavily influenced by line dancing and merges some hip @-@ hop . A video starring Cyrus and Hannah Montana : The Movie 's choreographer Jamal Simms entitled " How to Do the Hoedown Throwdown " , premiered on Disney Channel on February 20 , 2009 . The video features Cyrus and Simms , accompanied by several back @-@ up dancers , in a pink room and sporting workout attire . Throughout the evening , Cyrus and Simms executed and explained each dance move . At the end of the night , Cyrus and Simms put together all of the dance steps at once into a competition entitled " Hoedown Throwdown Showdown " . Cyrus explained the dance required " semi @-@ <unk> [ ion ] " . Ann Donahue of Billboard said that she discovered " exactly how Cyrus ' legion of preteen female fans is learning the dance : YouTube onscreen , phone to ear , someone on phone offering encouragement amid occasional peals of laughter . " She also drew similarities to Billy Ray Cyrus ' choreography for " Achy Breaky Heart " . Reported by MTV News , the " Hoedown Throwdown , " caused a sizable younger audience " jumping on the country bandwagon " . In an interview with Just Jared , Cyrus said 
 " I have all these different kids at events who say , ' Oh yeah , I know the " Hoedown Throwdown " now , ' and that 's really cool that they 're getting to dance to it . In the theaters , I think if they danced to it , it would be kind of cool . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mixed reviews . Warren Truitt from About.com described the song as Cyrus ' " only misstep " in the Hannah Montana : The Movie soundtrack because of its " weird " merge of country and hip @-@ hop " that sound [ ed ] like Disney 's trying a <unk> [ sic ] bit too hard to cover all genres " . Heather Phares of Allmusic stated the song was the exception to Cyrus ' usual husky and natural songs . Phares added that " Hoedown Throwdown " was " goofy " and " feels more like a parody of down @-@ home fun than a tribute to it " . The Baltimore Sun reviewer Chris <unk> wrote that the song is " catchy as the law allows " . Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe praised the " Hoedown Throwdown " was " an epic line dance " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly described the song as " deep @-@ fried [ ... ] sort of goofy Hee [ sic ] Haw " . However , Owen Gleiberman , also of Entertainment Weekly , called Cyrus a " professional charmer " and found that " it 's hard to resist when she leads a hip @-@ hop hoedown " . The Hollywood Reporter reviewer Michael Rechtshaffen wrote that the song was a " misguided attempt at marrying Hannah 's contemporary pop / hip @-@ hop sound with the Grand Ole Opry " and that it was " squirm @-@ inducing " . Meanwhile , Mary McNamara , writing for the Los Angeles Times , called the " Hoedown Throwdown " one of the few " flashes of inspiration " in Hannah Montana : The Movie and Variety magazine 's Lael Lowenstein referred to it as a " pleasing , rousing , toe @-@ tapping , line @-@ dancing hoedown . " The song was included on the short list for Best Original Song at the 82nd Academy Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Due to digital sales , the song debuted at number sixty @-@ eight in the Billboard Hot 100 for the week ending March 21 , 2009 . The song then found new peaks at number forty @-@ six and twenty @-@ eight on the chart , respectively . For the week ending May 2 , 2009 , " Hoedown Throwdown " peaked at number eighteen on the Billboard Hot 100 due to digital downloads that placed it at number eight on Hot Digital Songs . The song also peaked at number twenty @-@ nine in the canceled Pop 100 chart . In Canada , the song peaked at number fifteen . In the Australian Singles Chart , the song debuted at number forty and peaked at number twenty after three weeks of finding new peaks . " Hoedown Throwdown " was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for the sales of over 35 @,@ 000 digital downloads . " Hoedown Throwdown " debuted and peaked at number forty in the New Zealand Singles Chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number sixty @-@ two for the week ending March 18 , 2009 . It peaked at number eighteen for the week ending May 16 , 2009 . The song reached its highest international peak in Ireland . It entered the Irish Singles Chart on the week ending May 7 , 2009 , both debuting and peaking at number ten . In mainland Europe , " Hoedown Throwdown " peaked at number fifty in the European Hot 100 and at number seventeen in the Norwegian Singles Chart . The song also reached charts in Austria , Germany , and Switzerland . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video , directed by Peter Chelsom , is an excerpt from Hannah Montana : The Movie which premiered on February 16 , 2009 on Disney Channel . 
 The video begins with a black background and blue printed letters that spell " boom " . Other words appear , ultimately spelling the phrase " boom , clap , boom dee clap " . A quick montage of Hannah Montana and Miley Stewart are played . It then skips to the video 's main setting . Cyrus is at a crowded barn , wearing a plaid blouse , jean skirt , and boots , on top of a stage . Blue printed letters that spell the lyrics then make an appearance , as Cyrus attempts to teach the crowd the dance . After the crowd learns the dance routine , scenes of Mitchel Musso , Moises Arias , Vanessa Williams , Tyra Banks , Jason <unk> , and Emily Osment doing the " Hoedown Throwdown " are played . When Cyrus ' scene reappears she is off the stage and performing with the rest of the crowd . In the conclusion , Cyrus finishes singing onstage and the audience applauds . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus never sang " Hoedown Throwdown " live during televised events , but often performed the dance with the track on playback . On April 3 , 2009 , Cyrus performed " Hoedown Throwdown " on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . Cyrus performed the dance on Good Morning America on April 8 , 2009 . On April 10 , 2009 , Cyrus danced to the track with some of the movie 's castmates on The Tyra Banks Show . Preceded by a performance of " Let 's Get Crazy " as herself and succeeded by " These Four Walls " , Cyrus performed " Hoedown Throwdown " as part of her set list in her first worldwide concert tour , the Wonder World Tour . For the performances Cyrus dressed in a short white tutu @-@ like dress and performed the dance with her background dancers . Mid @-@ way through the song , will.i.am appeared on the screens to congratulate Cyrus and continued speaking as she left the stage . When he finished , the dancers performed to a remix of " Boom Boom Pow " by The Black Eyed Peas . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 1948 Cleveland Browns season = 
 The 1948 Cleveland Browns season was the team 's third in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . After winning the AAFC crown in 1946 and 1947 , the league 's first two years of existence , the Browns repeated as champions in 1948 and had a perfect season , winning all of their games . 
 The season began with a number of roster moves , including the addition of linebacker Alex Agase and halfbacks Ara Parseghian and Dub Jones . Following training camp and two preseason games , the Browns began the regular season with a win against the Buffalo Bills . Led by quarterback Otto Graham , fullback Marion Motley and ends Mac Speedie and Dante Lavelli , the Browns followed with a string of victories leading up to a November matchup with the San Francisco 49ers . Both teams had perfect records to that point , the 49ers relying heavily on the offensive production of quarterback Frankie Albert and end Alyn Beals to win their first 10 games . The Browns beat the 49ers 14 – 7 , and followed two weeks later with another narrow victory over San Francisco , their closest competition in the AAFC in 1948 . 
 By the end of the season , the Browns had a perfect 14 – 0 record and led the league 's Western Division , setting up a championship @-@ game matchup with the Bills , who had won a playoff to take the Eastern Division . Cleveland beat Buffalo 49 – 7 in December to win the championship and preserve its unbeaten record . After the season , Graham , Motley and Speedie were included in many news organizations ' All @-@ Pro teams , alongside several other teammates . Graham was named the co @-@ Most Valuable Player of the league alongside Albert . Browns games were televised for the first time in 1948 . 
 The season is recognized as perfect by the Pro Football Hall of Fame , although the National Football League ( NFL ) , which absorbed the Browns when the AAFC dissolved in 1949 , does not recognize it . Ohio senator Sherrod Brown wrote a letter to NFL commissioner Roger Goodell in 2008 asking the league to officially recognize AAFC team statistics , including the perfect season . The New England Patriots were vying to complete a 19 – 0 season at the time and join the 1972 Miami Dolphins as the only teams to register a perfect record . 
 = = Offseason and roster moves = = 
 Cleveland finished the 1947 season with a 12 – 1 – 1 win @-@ loss @-@ tie record and beat the New York Yankees to win its second straight AAFC championship . While the team was successful in those first two years of existence , head coach Paul Brown made numerous roster changes before the 1948 season . He brought in linebacker Alex Agase and defensive tackle Chubby Grigg via a trade with the Chicago Rockets . Tommy James , a defensive back who stayed with the team through the 1955 season , came from the National Football League 's Detroit Lions . Defensive back Warren Lahr also joined the team but did not play in 1948 after breaking a leg in the preseason . 
 Offensive additions included halfback Ara Parseghian and quarterback George <unk> , but the most significant signing of the year was Dub Jones . Brown got Jones – who had a long and successful career in Cleveland – in a trade with the Brooklyn Dodgers for the rights to draft Bob Chappuis . Author Andy <unk> describes this trade as one of the most astute in Browns history . The Browns also signed quarterback Y.A. Tittle from Louisiana State University , but were forced to send him to the Baltimore Colts as part of an effort to balance talent among the AAFC 's teams during the league 's third year of play . 
 Browns center Mike Scarry left before the season to become the head coach at Western Reserve . Frank Gatski took over at the position after Scarry 's retirement . Don Greenwood , a halfback who featured in the team 's first two seasons , retired after sustaining a serious cheekbone injury in 1947 and accepted a job as head football coach at Cuyahoga Falls High School in Cuyahoga Falls , Ohio . Browns games were televised for the first time in 1948 on 84 stations across the country . Only away games were shown in northeast Ohio ; they were presented by Bob Neal and Stan Gee , who had announced Browns games on WGAR @-@ AM radio in 1946 and 1947 . 
 The entry of a new ownership group of the Brooklyn Dodgers in the offseason that included Branch Rickey had an impact on the Browns ' schedule in 1948 . Rickey , an executive for baseball 's Brooklyn Dodgers , convinced Brown to schedule a late @-@ season road trip during which Cleveland would play three teams in eight days : the New York Yankees , the Los Angeles Dons and the San Francisco 49ers . The plan was part of an effort to bring more attention to the AAFC and help attendance by sending its most successful team on a cross @-@ country road trip , a strategy that had worked in baseball . 
 = = Roster and coaching staff = = 
 = = Preseason results = = 
 = = Preseason game summaries = = 
 Cleveland held its training camp at the campus of Bowling Green State University , as it had the previous two years . Two preseason games were scheduled , one against the Buffalo Bills at the Rubber Bowl in Akron , Ohio and a second against the Baltimore Colts at the Glass Bowl in Toledo , Ohio . 
 = = = Week 1 : vs. Buffalo Bills = = = 
 Cleveland 's first preseason game was a victory over the Bills in Akron . The Browns scored three touchdowns in the first quarter , first on an interception return by Cliff Lewis and then on a pair of passes from quarterback Otto Graham to Dean <unk> and Mac Speedie . <unk> scored another touchdown in the second quarter on a pass from Lewis , who came in to substitute for Graham . By the time fullback Marion Motley ran for a short touchdown in the third quarter to make the score 35 – 0 , coach Paul Brown had pulled most of the team 's starters . Buffalo proceeded to mount a comeback , scoring one touchdown in the third quarter and two in the fourth . Buffalo 's final score came on a punt return received by Rex Bumgardner . As he was about to be tackled at the Cleveland 20 @-@ yard line , Bumgardner pitched the ball to teammate Bill Heywood , who ran the rest of the way for the touchdown . Cleveland and Buffalo both had 12 first downs and 206 yards of rushing , but the Browns had 159 yards of passing to Buffalo 's 127 , helping secure the 35 – 21 win . 
 = = = Week 2 : vs. Baltimore Colts = = = 
 Cleveland lost its second preseason game , played against the Baltimore Colts in 100 @-@ degree heat in Toledo , Ohio . Browns placekicker Lou Groza opened the scoring with an 18 @-@ yard field goal in the first quarter , and a touchdown by fullback Ollie Cline later in the period put the Browns up 10 – 0 . Baltimore responded in the second quarter with a touchdown pass by quarterback Y.A. Tittle to receiver Jake <unk> . Cline ran for another touchdown soon thereafter , however , once more giving the Browns a 10 @-@ point lead . Colts receiver Lamar Davis caught a 25 @-@ yard touchdown pass at the end of the second quarter . Cleveland led 17 – 14 at halftime . Neither team scored again until the fourth quarter , when Baltimore 's Bus <unk> ran for a 38 @-@ yard touchdown and secured the 21 – 17 win . A number of Cleveland players suffered injuries during the game . Graham hurt his hand , Motley strained his back and end Dante Lavelli suffered a broken leg . Lavelli 's injury sidelined him for the first seven games of the regular season . During the game , Baltimore players Hub <unk> and Lew Mayne , a former Brown , tapped a phone line that went from Cleveland 's press box to its sideline . This allowed the Colts to listen in on coaches ' conversations and anticipate the Browns ' play @-@ calling . 
 = = Regular season results = = 
 = = Game summaries = = 
 = = = Week 1 : vs. Los Angeles Dons = = = 
 The Browns opened the regular season with a win at home against the Los Angeles Dons . The Dons had beaten the Chicago Rockets in their season opener the week before , but they struggled against the Browns . Cleveland built a 19 – 0 lead after the first three quarters on touchdowns by Ara Parseghian and Bill Boedeker , a Lou Groza field goal and a safety . The Dons , however , almost pulled off a comeback with just 30 seconds remaining in the game . Los Angeles fullback John Kimbrough scored a touchdown on a short run with time ticking down , and the Dons recovered an onside kick on the ensuing kickoff . Dons quarterback Glenn Dobbs then threw a long pass to end Joe Aguirre . It fell incomplete , but Cleveland was called for pass interference , and the ball was placed on the Browns ' nine @-@ yard line . Dobbs then threw a completion to Aguirre for a second touchdown with five seconds left to play . Time expired on the ensuing kickoff , however , and Cleveland won 19 – 14 . Groza 's 51 @-@ yard field goal matched a professional football record he set two years earlier . 
 = = = Week 2 : vs. Buffalo Bills = = = 
 The Browns beat the Bills in the second game of the regular season . Cleveland dominated the game from beginning to end , scoring 42 points and amassing 504 total yards on offense . The scoring began with touchdowns in the first quarter by halfback Bob Cowan and Marion Motley . End Mac Speedie caught another touchdown in the second quarter , giving the Browns three scores in a span of just 18 minutes . Buffalo scored two touchdowns of its own in the second period , however , and the score stood at 21 – 13 at halftime . The Browns pulled away in the second half , scoring three more unanswered touchdowns . Otto Graham ran for a score in the third period , but was taken out of the game when the Browns ' lead widened . Motley ran for 136 yards on 17 carries , and Speedie matched an AAFC single @-@ game record by recording 10 receptions for 151 yards . Despite the loss , Bills backs Vic <unk> and Julie <unk> ran for 187 yards combined . The final score was 42 – 13 . 
 = = = Week 3 : vs. Chicago Rockets = = = 
 The Browns beat the Chicago Rockets in Chicago for their third straight victory . The matchup was a messy one , marked by turnovers and rough play by both sides . The teams combined for eight fumbles and four interceptions , and play was stopped several times to break up fights . Chicago was penalized 30 yards for unnecessary roughness , while Cleveland was penalized 15 yards . Despite the interruptions and frequent turnovers , Cleveland quarterback Otto Graham had his best game of the season , throwing three touchdowns and rushing for a fourth . Bob Cowan caught two of the touchdowns . Chicago , meanwhile , scored just one touchdown – a short pass to Elroy Hirsch from quarterback Angelo <unk> in the second quarter . Chicago successfully contained Marion Motley , Cleveland 's most productive back , who finished the game with 49 yards on 14 carries . The final score was 28 – 7 . 
 = = = Week 4 : vs. Chicago Rockets = = = 
 The Browns next played the Rockets for a second time in as many weeks , this time in Cleveland . The Rockets opened the scoring with a 74 @-@ yard pass from quarterback Jesse Freitas to receiver Eddie Prokop in the first four minutes of the game , and added a field goal by Jim McCarthy near the end of the second quarter . The Browns did not score in the first half , but came back to win the game in the second . Rockets defenders were double @-@ teaming Cleveland 's ends , and the Browns adjusted by sending halfbacks out to receive deep passes . Cleveland halfbacks Dub Jones and Bill Boedeker both caught long touchdown passes from Graham in the third quarter . Boedeker ran in for another touchdown in the fourth quarter to make the final score 21 – 10 . As in the previous game , there were several cases of rough play : tackle Lou Rymkus was ejected from the game for hitting Jim <unk> of the Rockets . A Rockets player picked up a handful of sand from the stadium 's baseball infield and threw it in Mac Speedie 's face during the game , temporarily blinding him . Hirsch was accidentally kicked by a Browns player and suffered a skull fracture . 
 = = = Week 5 : vs. Baltimore Colts = = = 
 The Browns won their fifth game of the season against the Baltimore Colts on a muddy field during a rainstorm . Led by quarterback Y.A. Tittle , the Colts began the scoring on the fourth play of the game with a 78 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Billy Hillenbrand . A few minutes later , the Browns evened the score after a pass from Graham set up a short touchdown run by Edgar Jones . The Colts retook the lead in the second quarter with a field goal by Rex Grossman and led 10 – 7 at the half . Focusing on the running game because of the muddy conditions , the Browns scored a touchdown in the third quarter that put them in the lead for good . Jones , who was returning from a rib injury , finished the day with 61 yards and two touchdowns , while Motley ran for 130 yards . The slippery and windy conditions caused miscues on both sides . Tittle and Motley had fumbles , and Cleveland botched a fake field goal attempt in the second quarter . The final score was 14 – 10 . While the Browns had won their first five games , the San Francisco 49ers were at the top of the AAFC 's eastern division standings , having won all six of their games . 
 = = = Week 6 : vs. Brooklyn Dodgers = = = 
 The Browns beat the Brooklyn Dodgers in the sixth game of the season . While the Dodgers had not won a game all season , they started off strong against Cleveland . The Browns took a 10 – 0 lead in the first quarter , but the Dodgers answered with 10 points of their own in the second quarter to tie the score at halftime . Edgar Jones ran for Cleveland 's first touchdown , which Groza followed with a 53 @-@ yard field goal , the longest of his career at the time . Brooklyn 's Mickey Colmer ran in the team 's second @-@ quarter touchdown after a 66 @-@ yard drive . The Browns came back with another touchdown in the third quarter , aided by two long Horace Gillom receptions , but the Dodgers again evened the score after a Groza field goal was blocked and returned by Hank <unk> for a touchdown . Cleveland pulled away in the fourth quarter , however , with a fumble recovery for a touchdown by George Young and a short run by Motley . The Browns had 23 first downs in the game , setting a team record . Groza missed an extra point after one of Cleveland 's touchdowns , breaking a long streak . He also narrowly missed a 57 @-@ yard field goal attempt that would have set a professional football record if it were good . 
 = = = Week 7 : vs. Buffalo Bills = = = 
 The Browns won their seventh game in a row against the Bills in Cleveland . Edgar Jones scored the Browns ' first touchdown on the team 's third offensive play on a 35 @-@ yard pass from Graham . Motley fumbled on the Browns ' next possession , however , and the Bills capitalized on the mistake . After several running plays brought the ball to the Browns ' 22 @-@ yard line , quarterback Jim Still threw to Al Baldwin for a touchdown that evened the score . A Groza field goal and a short touchdown run by Motley later in the first quarter put the Browns up by 10 points at halftime . Cleveland retained the lead for the rest of the game as end Mac Speedie caught touchdown passes in the third and fourth quarters . Graham ended the game with 11 completions for 189 yards and two touchdowns . Speedie , who was leading the league in receiving , added seven receptions for 140 yards . While the Bills lost , second @-@ string quarterback George Ratterman , who came in for Still in the second quarter , put in a strong performance , completing 13 passes for 174 yards . His totals included a touchdown throw to Lou <unk> in the fourth quarter , when the game was out of reach . 
 = = = Week 8 : vs. New York Yankees = = = 
 End Dante Lavelli returned to the lineup for the Browns ' week @-@ eight game against the New York Yankees after recovering from a broken leg sustained in the preseason . Lavelli 's return had an immediate impact . He caught a 29 @-@ yard pass from Graham for the Browns ' first touchdown in the first quarter . Graham then threw two more touchdowns in the second quarter to Bob Cowan and Mac Speedie . Cowan scored after catching Graham 's pass behind New York 's defenders and running 35 yards for the end zone . Receptions by Cowan and Lavelli set up Speedie 's 9 @-@ yard touchdown . Lavelli caught another touchdown at the beginning of the third quarter to give the Browns a 28 – 0 lead . Graham ran 22 yards for a fifth Browns touchdown in the fourth quarter after a pass play broke down . The Yankees avoided a shutout in the final minute of the game , when end Buddy Young got behind Cleveland 's defenders and caught a 34 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Pete Layden . The Browns had 486 total yards in the game , including 337 yards of passing . While Cleveland remained undefeated , the San Francisco 49ers continued to hold the best record in the AAFC with nine straight wins to begin the season . 
 = = = Week 9 : vs. Baltimore Colts = = = 
 Cleveland beat Baltimore for the second time during the regular season for its ninth straight victory . A Baltimore turnover on downs early in the game set up the Browns ' first score , a short touchdown run by Edgar Jones in the first quarter . Baltimore 's Y.A. Tittle drove deep into Cleveland territory early in the second quarter , but another turnover on downs gave the ball back to the Browns . Passes from Graham to Lavelli and Speedie took the Browns to the Colts ' 22 @-@ yard line , and Motley ran from there for a touchdown to make the score 14 – 0 at halftime . Jones scored Cleveland 's third touchdown to cap an 85 @-@ yard drive at the start of the third quarter . Ara Parseghian ran for another touchdown in the fourth quarter . The Colts avoided a shutout later in the period when Tittle threw a screen pass to Billy Hillenbrand , who ran 69 yards for a touchdown . The final score was 28 – 7 . The win gave the Browns 12 victories in a row extending to the previous season , setting a new AAFC record . Lou Groza missed two field goals during the game . 
 = = = Week 10 : vs. San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 A victory over San Francisco gave the Browns 10 wins in a row to start the regular season . The game was eagerly anticipated by both sides : San Francisco had started the season with 10 victories , while the Browns had won their first nine games . The 49ers relied heavily on their offense , which featured quarterback Frankie Albert and end Alyn Beals . The team came into the matchup with the Browns averaging 35 @.@ 9 points per game . The Browns , meanwhile , were more proficient than the 49ers on defense and in placekicking : the team ranked first in the AAFC in fewest points allowed , and Groza held the league record for the longest field goal . The game began with a San Francisco fumble of Cleveland 's opening kickoff that was recovered by Lou Saban . Several plays later , Graham ran 14 yards for a touchdown , giving the Browns their first points . San Francisco responded later in the period with a rushing touchdown by Joe Perry to tie the score . Cleveland struck back with an Edgar Jones touchdown in the third quarter , however , and held on to win the game 14 – 7 . Ara Parseghian was a standout on both offense and defense , batting down several of Albert 's passes . The crowd of 82 @,@ 769 set a professional football record . While Cleveland won , several key players suffered injuries . Speedie had a separated shoulder , while linebacker Bill Willis was kicked in the face and Tommy James hurt his ankle . Graham had his hand stepped on , and guard Weldon Humble suffered a chin injury . 
 = = = Week 11 : vs. New York Yankees = = = 
 The Browns beat the Yankees in the eleventh game of the season . It was the first of three road games the Browns were scheduled to play in a span of eight days . The Browns opened the scoring early in the first quarter with a screen pass from Graham to Motley , who ran 78 yards for a touchdown . An interception by Parseghian on the Yankees ' next possession set up another Browns touchdown , a one @-@ yard run by Edgar Jones . The Yankees responded with two touchdowns of their own in the second quarter . The first was a long pass from Pete Layden to Bruce Alford early in the period . On Cleveland 's next possession , Graham threw a pass to John Yonakor , but as Yonakor was waiting for the ball to arrive , New York 's Otto Schnellbacher jumped in front of him and made an interception . Schnellbacher had a clear shot at Cleveland 's end zone and ran it in for a touchdown that tied the game at 14 points . An interception by Yonakor later in the quarter set up a Groza field goal , and the Browns pulled away as halfback Bob Cowan ran for a touchdown and Groza added another field goal before halftime . Another touchdown by Motley in the third quarter put the Browns ahead by 20 points . The Yankees scored a final touchdown in the fourth quarter to cap a 45 @-@ yard drive , but the Browns won the game 34 – 21 . Lavelli was hit in the eye early in the game and had to sit out . Tackle Chubby Grigg and Edgar Jones were also hurt in the game , adding to Cleveland 's long list of injured players . 
 = = = Week 12 : vs. Los Angeles Dons = = = 
 A victory against Los Angeles in the twelfth week of the season preserved Cleveland 's undefeated record . The Dons began the scoring in the first quarter with a 75 @-@ yard drive engineered by quarterback Glenn Dobbs . The series ended with a short touchdown run by halfback Walt Clay . The Browns came back to tie the game in the second quarter after a 71 @-@ yard drive that features several completions from Graham to Lavelli . Lavelli caught a 49 @-@ yard pass from Graham for the score . On the next possession , Los Angeles converted a fourth down deep in their own territory , extending a long drive that ended with another touchdown by Clay . Cleveland again evened the score with under two minutes left in the first half on a touchdown pass to Edgar Jones . The Browns pulled away in the third quarter , when Graham ran a quarterback sneak for a touchdown . Groza later kicked a 36 @-@ yard field goal , and an interception by Cliff Lewis set up a run by Tony Adamle for a final touchdown . The final score was 31 – 14 . Graham twisted his knee in the fourth quarter , and Edgar Jones , Parseghian and Bob Gaudio also had injuries . The Browns planned to stay at the hot springs in Boyes , California to recover as they prepared to face the 49ers for a second time in San Francisco three days later . 
 = = = Week 13 : vs. San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 Three days after beating the Dons , the Browns played the 49ers in San Francisco . While the Browns had won their first 12 games , the rematch against the 49ers was significant because the 49ers held an 11 – 1 record , their only loss coming against the Browns two weeks earlier . The teams were both in the AAFC 's Western Division , and a loss would have put the Browns in a tie with the 49ers for the lead . The teams ' combined 23 – 1 record was the best ever for two professional squads in one game , and as of 2007 , has not been surpassed . Graham was initially considered doubtful for the game because of the knee injury he suffered against the Dons , but team trainer Wally Bock cleared him to play . The game began with a 49ers fumble on their first play from scrimmage . Tony Adamle recovered the ball , and Graham threw a 41 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Lavelli on the Browns ' first play . A field goal by Groza later in the first quarter put the Browns up 10 – 0 , but the 49ers came back in the second period and scored two touchdowns . The first was a short run by halfback Joe Perry and the second was a pass from Albert to Beals . San Francisco widened its lead in the third quarter with another touchdown catch by Beals . Graham , however , engineered three drives in the space of eight minutes that gave the browns three touchdowns and a 10 @-@ point advantage . Motley ran in the first score , while Dub Jones and Edgar Jones caught Graham passes for the other two . The 49ers scored a touchdown in the final quarter , but the Browns won the game 31 – 28 . After the game , Paul Brown called it " Otto 's greatest performance " given his injury . 
 = = = Week 14 : vs. Brooklyn Dodgers = = = 
 The Browns ended their regular season with a win over the Dodgers and an undefeated record . The Browns began the game by scoring 31 unanswered points . The first score came on a short Dub Jones run that followed an 80 @-@ yard drive in the first quarter . The next score came on a 76 @-@ yard drive in the second quarter . After a pair of passes and a 14 @-@ yard run by Edgar Jones , Graham completed a long touchdown pass to Lavelli , who sped away from defender Monk Gafford on the right sideline . Graham engineered another long drive just before the end of the first half , completing 18- and 20 @-@ yard passes to Speedie . The 90 @-@ yard march ended with a short touchdown run by Graham , giving Cleveland a 21 – 0 advantage at the half . Groza kicked a field goal at the beginning of the third quarter , and a fumble by Gafford on the ensuing kickoff led to a touchdown pass from Graham to Gillom , putting the Browns up by 31 points . With a comfortable lead , Brown took out his starters and substituted third @-@ string players . The Dodgers proceeded to score three touchdowns , two of which came on long passes from Bob Chappuis , but the Browns won the game 31 – 21 . The win left the Browns on top of the standings in the AAFC 's Western Division ahead of San Francisco , which had lost only two games , both to the Browns . The perfect regular season record was the first in professional football since 1942 , when the National Football League 's Chicago Bears won all of their games . Chicago , however , lost the NFL championship that year . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = AAFC championship game = = 
 The Browns won the AAFC 's Western Division with their perfect record and faced the Buffalo Bills , the winners of the Eastern Division , in the AAFC championship game . The Bills had tied with the Colts for the lead in the Eastern , forcing a playoff that the Buffalo won on December 12 in Baltimore . The championship game took place in Cleveland in 35 @-@ degree weather and was sparsely attended . The Browns were expected to win the game , having beaten the Bills twice in the regular season and possessing a significantly better record than the 7 – 7 Bills . The scoring began with a late @-@ first @-@ quarter Edgar Jones touchdown run , followed by a fumble return for a touchdown by George Young in the second period that put the Browns ahead 14 – 0 at halftime . Cleveland scored two more touchdowns in the third quarter on runs by Jones and Motley before Buffalo scored its first points . Aided by a roughing the kicker penalty on the Browns , the Bills capped an 80 @-@ yard drive with a short touchdown pass from Jim Still to Al Baldwin . Motley scored two more touchdowns in the fourth quarter , however , and Lou Saban ran back an interception for a third to make the final score 49 – 7 . Motley and Edgar Jones led the Browns offense in the game , accounting for a large share of the team 's offensive production . Graham had an uncharacteristically quiet day , passing for just 118 yards on 11 completions . The victory made the Browns the first professional team to win three league championships in a row , following AAFC titles they won in 1946 and 1947 . It was also the first time a professional football team finished a full season unbeaten and untied since a championship game was instituted in the NFL in 1933 . The Chicago Bears had finished with perfect records in 1934 and 1942 , but lost the NFL championship both times . The Browns had won 18 consecutive games stretching to the 1947 season , a professional record that stood until 2004 . 
 In the NFL , the Philadelphia Eagles won the championship 7 – 0 during a blizzard in Philadelphia 's Shibe Park . Following the win , Eagles owner Alexis Thompson advocated a championship game between the top teams in the NFL and the AAFC , in part because he was losing money and felt an inter @-@ league championship would draw large crowds . Thompson was also a leading proponent among NFL owners of negotiation with the AAFC over a deal to ease the leagues ' competition for talent , which had driven up salaries and was eating into owners ' profits . Thompson met with Browns owner Mickey McBride and agreed to a playoff – either one game in Yankee Stadium or a best @-@ of @-@ three series with games in Philadelphia , Cleveland and possibly New York . Thompson 's proposal was shot down by other NFL owners , however , and he was given a reprimand by commissioner Bert Bell for suggesting the NFL @-@ AAFC championship . Frustrated with his financial losses and lack of support among the owners , Thompson sold the Eagles shortly after the season ended . 
 = = Season leaders and postseason = = 
 Graham finished the season with the most receiving yards in the AAFC and was named the league 's Most Valuable Player , sharing the honor with Frankie Albert of the 49ers . Motley led the league in rushing , and Groza scored the most field goals in the league for the second year in a row . Speedie , meanwhile , had the most overall receptions and receptions per game of all receivers in the AAFC and NFL for the second year running . The Associated Press named Graham , Speedie and Motley to the first team of its combined AAFC @-@ NFL All @-@ Pro team , while Lou Rymkus and Bill Willis made the second team . The magazine Sporting News put Motley and Speedie on its first @-@ team All @-@ Pro list and put Graham and Willis on its second team . Cleveland 's top players also made All @-@ Pro teams assembled by the New York Daily News , United Press International and the AAFC itself . 
 The Browns ' perfect season and third championship victory came during a strong year for Cleveland sports teams . That April , the Cleveland Barons , the city 's American Hockey League team , won the Calder Cup championship . The Cleveland Indians , the city 's Major League Baseball club , set an all @-@ time season attendance record and won the World Series . The Browns ' success was also a major draw for fans : the team led professional football in attendance in 1948 with an average of 45 @,@ 517 people per game , although that was still 10 @,@ 000 lower than the year before . The distribution of talent and fortune among AAFC 's teams was unbalanced , however , and while the Browns , the 49ers and the Dons were successes at the gate , teams including the Rockets and Colts languished financially . The NFL was also facing major financial trouble – nine of its ten teams lost money that year – and the two leagues ' competition for talent led to talks about a merger . Discussions centered around how many AAFC teams the NFL would absorb ; most owners favored four teams , but the talks broke down when powerful owners George Preston Marshall of the Washington Redskins and Tim Mara of the New York Giants intervened and suggested only Cleveland and San Francisco should be absorbed . The AAFC continued play in 1949 , but was disbanded after that season . The Browns , 49ers and Colts were merged into the NFL starting in 1950 . 
 = = Perfect season controversy = = 
 In winning all of their regular season games and the AAFC championship , the Browns recorded the first perfect season in professional football since the advent of NFL championships in 1933 . The feat has been duplicated only once since , by the Miami Dolphins in 1972 . When the AAFC faltered and dissolved after the 1949 season and the NFL absorbed the Browns , their new league did not recognize AAFC statistics , including the perfect season . The Pro Football Hall of Fame , however , recognizes it as a perfect season . In 2008 , United States Senator Sherrod Brown , who represents Ohio in the United States Congress , sent a letter to NFL commissioner Roger Goodell asking the league to recognize AAFC championships and team records including the perfect season . At the time , the New England Patriots were undefeated as they prepared for the Super Bowl against the New York Giants , a game they went on to lose . Dante Lavelli also advocated for the NFL to adopt AAFC records . 
 = Psilocybe hoogshagenii = 
 Psilocybe hoogshagenii is species of psilocybin mushroom in the Strophariaceae family . The mushroom has a brownish conical or bell @-@ shaped cap up to 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide that has an extended papilla up to 4 mm long . The stem is slender ( up to 3 mm thick ) and 5 to 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 5 in ) long . The variety P. hoogshagenii var. convexa lacks the long papilla . 
 The species is found in Mexico , where it grows singly or in small groups in clayey soils in subtropical coffee plantations , and from Colombia and Brazil in South America . The mushroom contains the psychedelic compounds psilocybin and psilocin , and all parts will stain blue or bluish black when handled or injured . P. hoogshagenii is used for divinatory purposes by some indigenous groups in Mexico . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by French mycologist Roger Heim in 1958 . It was one of several species described and illustrated in the popular American weekly magazine Life ( " Seeking the Magic Mushroom " ) , in which R. Gordon Wasson recounted the psychedelic visions that he experienced during the divinatory rituals of the Mixtec people , thereby introducing psilocybin mushrooms to Western popular culture ; it was however , mislabeled as Psilocybe <unk> . Similarly , Psilocybe specialist Gastón Guzmán suggests that P. <unk> , as described by Rolf Singer in 1958 , is misidentified as it agrees well with the type of P. hoogshagenii . The species Psilocybe caerulipes var. <unk> , described by Singer in 1958 , is a synonym of P. hoogshagenii . 
 The species is named in honor of American anthropologist Searle <unk> , who helped Heim and Wasson in their search for entheogenic mushrooms in Mexico . The mushroom is known locally by several common names . In Spanish , it is called los niños or los <unk> ( " the little boys " ) , in Mazatec as <unk> de monte ( " little birds of the woods " ) , in Nahuatl as <unk> or <unk> ( " divine mushroom that describes or paints " ) , and in Mixe as <unk> : t ( " judge " ) or <unk> mush ( " mushrooms of the earth " ) . 
 The variety P. hoogshagenii var. convexa was described by Guzmán in 1983 to account for mushrooms without an acute papilla that were otherwise roughly the same as the type variety . Psilocybe <unk> , described by Heim and Roger <unk> in 1958 , was later determined by Guzmán to be synonymous with P. hoogshagenii var. convexa . The varietal epithet convexa refers to the convex shape of the cap . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap ranges in shape from conical to bell @-@ shaped to convex , reaching diameters of 0 @.@ 7 – 3 in ( 18 – 76 mm ) , although a range of 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) is most usual . It has a long , sharp papilla that is up to 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) . The cap surface is smooth , somewhat sticky when wet , and often has ridges extending halfway to the center of the cap . Its color is reddish brown to orangish brown to yellowish , and it is hygrophanous , fading when dry to a straw or fulvous color . The brownish gills have an adnate to adnexed attachment to the stem ; mature gills become purplish black because of the spores . The hollow stem measures 50 to 90 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 – 3 mm thick . It is roughly equal in width throughout its length or slightly thicker at the base , and sometimes twisted . A thin rudimentary cortina @-@ like partial veil covers the gills of immature fruit bodies , but it is fragile and disappears soon after the cap expands . The flesh in the cap is whitish , but more yellow in the stem . Both the odor and taste of the mushroom are farinaceous ( similar to freshly ground flour ) . As is characteristic of psilocybin mushrooms , all parts of the fruit body bruise blue when handled or injured . P. hoogshagenii var. convexa lacks an acute papilla , although it occasionally has a small , rounded papilla . Its cap ranges in width from 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 20 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) , and it is convex to roughly bell @-@ shaped . All other macroscopic and microscopic features are identical to the type variety . 
 The spore print is dark purplish brown . Spores are rhomboid or nearly so in face view , and more or less ellipsoid when viewed from the side . They are thick @-@ walled , with dimensions of 6 @.@ 5 – 4 – 5 @.@ 6 μm , and feature a broad germ pore . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are usually four @-@ spored , hyaline ( translucent ) , roughly cylindrical or with a central constriction , and measure 12 – 22 by 5 @.@ 5 – 9 μm . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are relatively abundant ; they are ventricose ( swollen ) , club @-@ shaped or irregularly shaped , measuring 16 – 36 by 8 – 12 μm . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are also abundant . They are 19 – 35 by 4 @.@ 4 – 6 @.@ 6 μm , lageniform ( flask @-@ shaped ) , narrowing into a long neck with a width of 1 – 3 μm , and either acute or somewhat capitate ( ending in a roughly globular tip ) . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Fruit bodies of Psilocybe hoogshagenii grow solitarily or in small groups in humus or in muddy clay soils in subtropical coffee plantations . According to the natives of the San Agustin <unk> region of Mexico , the fungus tends to fruit simultaneously in large flushes . In Mexico , fruiting occurs in June and July , whereas in Argentina , fruiting is in February . The mushroom has been reported from Mexico in the states of Puebla , Oaxaca , and Chiapas , where it grows at elevations of 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 800 m ( 3 @,@ 300 to 5 @,@ 900 ft ) . In South America , the species is known from Brazil and Colombia . P. hoogshagenii var. convexa has been found in grasslands in Hidalgo , and <unk> , but is most common in Puebla . It fruits from June to August . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Psilocybe hoogshagenii mushrooms are used for entheogenic , or spiritual , purposes by some <unk> @-@ speaking curanderos of the Ixtlán District in <unk> . The mushrooms are primarily used to diagnose and <unk> illness , and , to a lesser extent , to divine the location of objects or animals that have been lost or stolen . Guzmán also indicates contemporary ceremonial usage by Mixe and Zapotec people . Paul Stamets , in his Psilocybe Mushrooms of the World , rates the psychoactive potency of the mushroom as " moderately active " , and reports psilocybin levels of 0 @.@ 6 % ( milligrams per gram of dried mushroom ) , and psilocin of 0 @.@ 1 % . In comparison , Stamets indicates that the commonly cultivated species P. cubensis contains 0 @.@ 63 % and 0 @.@ 60 % ( psilocybin and psilocin ) , while the widespread P. semilanceata has 0 @.@ 98 % and 0 @.@ 02 % . Chemical analysis of P. hoogshagenii specimens from Brazil yielded up to 0 @.@ 3 % psilocybin and 0 @.@ 3 % psilocin . 
 = Feminism in Russia = 
 Feminism in Russia originated in the 18th century , influenced by the Western European Enlightenment and mostly confined to the aristocracy . Throughout the 19th century , the idea of feminism remained closely tied to revolutionary politics and to social reform . In the 20th century Russian feminists , inspired by socialist doctrine , shifted their focus from philanthropic works to organizing among peasants and factory workers . After the February Revolution of 1917 , feminist lobbying gained suffrage and nominal equality for women in education and the workplace ; however , in the 1960s and 1970s , women continued to experience discrimination in certain career @-@ paths ( including politics ) as well as income inequality and a greater burden of household work . In spite of this , the concern with feminism waned during this period . 
 After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 , feminist circles arose among the intelligentsia , though the term continues to carry negative connotations among contemporary Russians . In the 21st century some Russian feminists , such as the punk @-@ rock band Pussy Riot , have again aligned themselves with revolutionary anti @-@ government movements , as in the 2012 demonstrations against President Vladimir Putin , which led to a lawyer representing the Russian Orthodox Church calling feminism a " mortal sin " . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 Russian feminism originated in the 18th century , influenced by the Western European Enlightenment and the prominent role of women as a symbol for democracy and freedom in the French Revolution . Notable Russian intellectual figures like Alexander Pushkin and Alexander Herzen wrote positively about the increased power and independence of women in their society and supported the growing concern for gender equality . In his influential novel What is to be Done ? , the writer Nikolai <unk> embodied the new feminist ideas in the novel 's heroine , Vera Pavlovna , who dreams of a future utopian society with perfect equality among the sexes . 
 In aristocratic Russian society , the greater freedoms allowed to women led to the rise of the powerful , socially @-@ connected woman , including such iconic figures as Catherine the Great , Maria Naryshkina , and Countess Maria <unk> . Women also began to compete with men in the literary sphere , with Russian women authors , poets , and memoirists increasing in popularity . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The loosening of restrictions on women 's education and personal freedom that were enacted by Peter the Great in the 18th century created a new class of educated women , such as Princess Natalia Sheremeteva , whose 1767 Notes was the first autobiography by a woman in Russia . In the 19th century , Sheremeteva was one of the " Decembrist women , " the female relatives of the <unk> . The male <unk> were a group of aristocratic revolutionaries who in 1825 were convicted of plotting to overthrow Emperor Nicholas I , and many of whom were sentenced to serve in labor camps in Siberia . Though the wives , sisters , and mothers of the Decembrist men shared the same liberal democratic political views as their male relatives , they were not charged with treason because they were women ; however , 11 of them , including Sheremeteva and Princess Mariya <unk> , still chose to accompany their husbands , brothers , and sons to the labor camps . Though they were portrayed as heroes in popular culture , the Decembrist women insisted that they were simply doing their duty to their family . While in Siberia , some of them cared not only for their own relatives , but also for the other prisoners . They also set up important institutions like libraries and clinics , as well as arranging lectures and concerts . 
 In the historical writing of the time , the humble devotion of the Decembrist women was contrasted with the intrigues and hedonism of female aristocrats of the 18th century , like Catherine the Great , whose excesses were seen as the danger of too @-@ sudden liberation for women . Although they did not explicitly espouse a feminist agenda , the Decembrist women were used as an example by later generations of Russian feminists , whose concern for gender equality was also tied to revolutionary political agendas . 
 In the late 19th century , other aristocratic women began to turn away from refined society life and focused on feminist reform . Among them was Anna Pavlovna <unk> , a woman from an aristocratic Moscow family married to a high @-@ ranking bureaucrat , who devoted her energy to various societies and projects to benefit the poor and underprivileged in Russian society , including women . Together with Maria <unk> and Nadezhda <unk> , she lobbied the Emperor to create and fund higher education courses for women . She was also a founding member of the Russian Women 's Mutual Philanthropic Society and responsible for helping to organize the All @-@ Women 's Congress of 1908 . 
 At the end of the century , some of the most widely read Russian literary figures focused on feminist motifs in their works . In his later years , Leo Tolstoy argued against the traditional institution of marriage , comparing it to forced prostitution and slavery , a theme that he also touched on in his novel Anna Karenina . In his plays and short stories , Anton Chekhov portrayed a variety of working female protagonists , from actresses to governesses , who sacrificed social esteem and affluence for the sake of financial and personal independence ; in spite of this sacrifice , these women are among the few Chekhovian characters who are truly satisfied with their lives . 
 = = The Revolution and Soviet era = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Revolution = = = 
 At the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century , the focus of Russian feminism shifted from the aristocracy to the peasants and working class . Imbued with socialist ideology , young women began to organize all @-@ women unions among female factory workers , who tended to be ignored or marginalized by male socialists . 
 Between 1907 and 1917 , the League for Women 's Equal Rights was the most important feminist organization in Russia . Like the Russian Women 's Mutual Philanthropic Society , it was focused on education and social welfare , but it also pushed for equal rights for women , including suffrage , equal inheritance , and an end to passport restrictions . The 1917 Revolution , catalyzed in part by women workers ' demonstrations , generated a surge of membership in the organization . In the same year , because of the society 's continued lobbying , Russia became the first major world power to grant women the right to vote . 
 = = = Feminism in Soviet society = = = 
 Vladimir Lenin , who led the Bolsheviks to power in the October Revolution , recognized the importance of women 's equality in the Soviet Union ( USSR ) they established . " To effect [ woman 's ] emancipation and make her the equal of man , " he wrote in 1919 , two years after the Revolution , following the Marxist theories that underlaid Soviet communism , " it is necessary to be socialized and for women to participate in common productive labor . Then woman will be the equal of man . " 
 In practice , Russian women saw mixed gains in their rights under Communism . Women 's suffrage was granted , though voting meant little in Soviet society owing to the Communist Party 's monopoly on power . This monopoly also meant that many independent feminist organizations and journals were shut down . Abortion was legalized in 1920 , making the Soviet Union the first country to do so ; however , it was banned again between 1936 and 1955 . Generous maternity leave was legally required , and a national network of child @-@ care centers was established . The country 's first constitution recognized the equal rights of women . 
 Though the prevailing Soviet ideology stressed gender equality in labor and education , and many Soviet women held jobs and advanced degrees , they did not participate in core political roles and institutions . Above the middle levels , political and economic leaders were overwhelmingly male . While propaganda claimed , accurately , that more women sat in the Supreme Soviet than in most democratic countries ' legislative bodies combined , only two women , Yekaterina Furtseva and ( in its last year of existence ) Galina <unk> , were ever members of the party 's Politburo , in practice the country 's real leadership . 
 By the 1970s , while women 's liberation was a mainstream term in American public discourse , no comparable movement existed in the Soviet Union , despite gender @-@ based income inequality and a rate of additional work in the household greater than that experienced by American women . There were also double standards in social norms and expectations . " A man can fool around with other women , drink , even be lackadaisical toward his job , and this is generally forgiven , " wrote Hedrick Smith , former Russian correspondent for The New York Times , but " if a woman does the same things , she is criticized for taking a light @-@ hearted approach toward her marriage and her work . " In an open letter to the country 's leadership shortly before he was expelled from it in 1974 , the dissident writer Alexander Solzhenitsyn pointed out the heavy burden placed on women to do the menial work in Soviet society : " How can one fail to feel shame and compassion at the sight of our women carrying heavy barrows of stones for paving the street ? " 
 Smith wrote that many women he talked to complained that their emancipation had in fact been exploitation , since economic circumstances effectively compelled them to work while they retained their domestic responsibilities at home , and they were often tired ; and that in contrast to Western women , Soviet women regularly saw their idea of liberation as working less and having more opportunity to stay at home . He recounted a popular joke : 
 Under capitalism , women are not liberated because they have no opportunity to work . They have to stay at home , go shopping , do the cooking , keep house and take care of the children . But under socialism , women are liberated . They have the opportunity to work all day and then go home , go shopping , do the cooking , keep house and take care of the children . 
 Sexist attitudes still prevailed across Soviet society . Men in the leadership often did not take women or their ideas seriously , and excluded them from many discussions . Domestic violence and sexual harassment continued to exist . Yet , sociological studies at the time found that Soviet women tended not to see their inequality as a problem . 
 = = Glasnost and post @-@ Soviet Russia = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s Mikhail Gorbachev instituted glasnost , allowing greater freedom of speech and organization than ever before in the USSR . This openness generated a burst in women ’ s political action , academic research , and artistic and business ventures . Additionally , women were aware that the new government would offer little assistance with their economic and social struggles . Citizens of the Soviet Union could file complaints and receive redress through the Communist Party , but the post @-@ Soviet government had not developed systems of state recourse . Women began to form their own networks of resource sharing and emotional support , which sometimes developed into grassroots organizations . 
 During glasnost and after the fall of the Soviet Union , feminist circles began to emerge among intelligentsia women in major cultural centers like Moscow and St. Petersburg . In the 1990s , Russian women were hesitant to use the term " feminist " to describe themselves , because they believed it to have negative connotations throughout Russian history , and especially after the Revolution , when it was equated with the " proletariat " woman who only cares for her career , not her family . Russian women ’ s activism in the 1990s was not explicitly feminist ; women attempted to improve their financial and social conditions through any practical means . From this struggle emerged female communities which empowered many women to assert themselves in their pursuit of work , equitable treatment and political voice . 
 Political and economic transformation in post @-@ Soviet Russia caused deep economic decline in the 1990s and particular financial struggles for women . Although many held jobs , women were also expected to be homemakers . Soviet working women often received extensive employment benefits , such as long child @-@ care leaves , which pushed women into the role of housewife . In the 1990s domestic work grew increasingly demanding as acquiring goods became more time @-@ consuming in the restructured economy . Women ’ s benefits also made them less attractive employees , and during privatization many companies fired women . While 90 % of women were in the labor market in the 1980s , by 1991 women made up 70 – 80 % of unemployed Russians . Those jobs available to women in the 1990s were often in low @-@ wage sectors , and many job descriptions specified that only young , attractive women need apply . Employed women often received significantly less pay than men doing the same work . 
 = = 21st Century = = 
 In the 2000s , women started entering local governments , if only at low @-@ level positions . In 2003 , 43 percent of local administrators in St. Petersburg were women . 
 In 2012 , the feminist punk rock band Pussy Riot performed publicity stunts to show their opposition to Vladimir Putin , and have faced criticism from the Russian Orthodox Church and the Putin administration . Three members of the group were arrested in March 2012 after performing a " punk @-@ prayer " against Putin in the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow . During their trial for hooliganism , they talked about being feminists and stated that this was not incompatible with Russian Orthodoxy . However , Larisa Pavlova , the lawyer representing the Church , insisted this view " does not correspond with reality " and called feminism a " mortal sin . " 
 = Ardennes horse = 
 The Ardennes or Ardennais is one of the oldest breeds of draft horse , and originates from the Ardennes area in Belgium , Luxembourg and France . They are heavy @-@ boned with thick legs and are used for draft work . The Ardennes is found in many colors , although black horses are very rare and are not allowed to be registered with the breed registry . Their history reaches back to Ancient Rome , and throughout the years blood from several other breeds has been added to the Ardennes , although only the Belgian breed had any significant impact . The first Ardennes were imported to the United States in the early 20th century , and the first breed registry was established in Europe in 1929 . The horses have been used throughout history as war horses , both as cavalry mounts and to draw artillery , and are used today mainly for heavy draft and farm work , meat production and competitive driving events . They have also been used to influence or create several other horse breeds throughout Europe and Asia . 
 = = Description = = 
 In France , Ardennes stallions stand about 1 @.@ 62 metres ( 16 hands ) high , and mares about 1 @.@ 60 m ( 15 @.@ 3 hands ) , while in Belgium these are the maximum allowable heights . They weigh 700 to 1 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 200 lb ) . Their heads are heavy , with a broad face and a straight or slightly convex profile . Their conformation is broad and muscular , with a compact body , short back , and short , sturdy legs with strong joints . Their fetlocks are feathered . Their coats may be bay , roan , chestnut , gray , or palomino . Bay and roan are the two most common colors . Black is very rare and is excluded from registration . White markings are small , usually restricted to a star or blaze . The breed matures early , and they are said to be easy keepers , economical to feed despite their size . The Ardennes is a free @-@ moving , long @-@ striding breed , despite their compact body structure . 
 = = History = = 
 The Ardennes breed could be a direct descendent of the prehistoric <unk> horse , and is thought to be descended from the type of horse described by Julius Caesar in his Commentarii de Bello Gallico . Caesar described these horses of Belgium as " rustic , hard and tireless " , and recommended them for use in heavy cavalry units . The early type was used by many later Roman emperors for military applications . The breed 's ancestors are thought to have been bred for 2 @,@ 000 years on the Ardennes plains , and it is one of the oldest documented European heavy draft breeds . In the Roman era , the breed stood only around 14 hands ( 56 inches , 142 cm ) high . Later , Napoleon added Arabian blood to increase stamina and endurance and used the breed in his Russian campaign . In 1780 , the breed still stood only 1 @.@ 42 to 1 @.@ 52 metres ( 14 @.@ 0 to 15 @.@ 0 hands ) and weighed around 500 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) . 
 Percheron , Boulonnais and Thoroughbred blood were also added , although they had little impact . In the 19th century , Belgian draft blood was added to give the breed the heavier conformation it has today . The extra weight and size was desired to turn the breed into a very heavy draft breed , after their role as an artillery horse had diminished through the advent of mechanization , as well as a desire for a meat animal . The breed increased in size from an average of 550 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 210 lb ) to their current weight , which at the same time had the consequence of reducing their vigor and endurance . Breed registries have been in existence since 1929 . Today there are three separate studbooks in France , Belgium and Luxembourg , although there is extensive interbreeding between the three . The Ardennes Horse Society of Great Britain was also formed in the late 20th century to preserve and promote the horses of that country , but today is not recognized as a studbook or passport issuing organization by the British government and may not exist in any form . 
 It is difficult to determine when the first Ardennes horses were imported to the United States because originally , when imported to the United States , Ardennes horses were eligible for registration with the now @-@ defunct National French Draft Horse Association of America or French Draft Horse Society . This organization published a stud book and registered six individual French draft breeds as one breed , combining the information so that no totals of individual breeds are known . Many of these horses were imported to the United States with their breed being considered simply " French draft " and no individual type being specified . Some Ardennes horses imported to the United States before 1917 were called Belgians when they were imported and subsequently registered as Belgians . Ardennes horses have continued to be imported into the United States from Belgium , with imports occurring as late as 2004 . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Horses from the Ardennes region were used in the Crusades in the 11th century by knights led by Godfrey of Bouillon . They were used during the 17th century by Marshal Turenne as remounts for his cavalry . In the French Revolution , they were considered to be the best artillery horse available , due to their temperament , stamina and strength . Napoleon used large numbers of Ardennes horses to pull artillery and transport supplies during his 1812 Russian campaign . They were said to be the only breed used by Napoleon that was hardy enough to withstand the winter retreat from Moscow , which they did while pulling a large amount of the army 's wagon train . They were also used to pull artillery in World War I , when they were depended upon by the French and Belgian armies . Their calm , tolerant disposition , combined with their active and flexible nature , made them an ideal artillery horse . The breed was considered so useful and valuable that when the Germans established the Commission for the Purchase of Horses in October 1914 to capture Belgian horses , the Ardennes was one of two breeds specified as important , the other being the Brabant . 
 Today , the breed is used mainly for meat , due to its extensive musculature . Horse meat is a dietary staple in many European countries , including France , Belgium , Germany and Switzerland . However , they are increasingly used for farm , forest and leisure work . Their nimble action , stamina and good temper make them increasingly used for competitive driving across Europe , and they have also been used as mounts for therapeutic horseback riding . The breed is known for its ability to work in rough , hilly terrain . 
 Ardennes horses have been used as foundation bloodstock to develop several other draft horse breeds and subgroups . These include the Baltic Ardennes and Russian Heavy Draft . The Swedish Ardennes is well established in that country , where it is in demand for use in forestry . It was first recognized as a separate sub @-@ group in the 19th century , but today is considered a separate breed , even though its ancestry is entirely from the Ardennes horses of Belgium and France . Another closely related breed is the Auxois . Ardennes horses were also used in the 1920s to improve the <unk> by adding size . Along with the Breton and the Anglo @-@ Norman , the Ardennes horse was used to create the Sokolsky horse . Similarly , the Trait Du Nord was created through a mixture of Ardennes and Belgian blood . 
 = Lesopoval = 
 Lesopoval ( Russian : <unk> ́ л pronounced [ <unk> ] , translated as " tree felling " or " logging camp " , a symbol of Siberian labor camps and also of the forced labor within the camps ) is a Russian band formed in 1990 by Mikhail Tanich and Sergey Korzhukov . Their music is in the style of Russian chanson , which is music from the perspective of the criminal underworld . The hero of many of their songs is often a criminal or ex @-@ convict , and their songs contain many references to the way such " marginalized " persons live . The songs in many way romanticize the life of criminals , many of them taking place in and concerning labor camps and prison . 
 Mikhail Tanich wrote the lyrics to every song the group performed until his death on April 17 , 2008 . In writing the lyrics to the songs Lesopoval performed , Mikhail Tanich drew on the six years he spent in a Soviet labor camp , during which time he came to empathize with criminals from all walks of life . In total , the group released at least 19 albums , including one after Mikhail Tanich 's death . Until his death in 1994 , Sergey Korzhukov wrote the musical melodies and performed most of the songs ; after his death , other artists wrote and performed the melodies . Musically , most songs feature a guitar , drums , accordions , and are often performed with strong vocals . 
 = = History = = 
 Mikhail Tanich , the co @-@ founder and lead songwriter of Lesopoval , was born on September 15 , 1923 in Taganrog , Russia . After being accused of " anti @-@ Soviet agitation " due to his praise of the German radio Telefunken while at the Rostov Civil Engineering Institute , he served six years in the Soviet labor camps from 1947 to 1953 in the Siberian city of <unk> . This was the same labor camp where his father served and was executed . When Joseph Stalin died , Tanich was granted amnesty , and he would leave to become a Russian poet . 
 He wrote many poems that would , after he met Sergey Korzhukov in 1990 , become the music of Lesopoval . The two met while Tanich was searching for a soloist to sing his songs ; Tanich 's wife had recommended Korzhukov . Sergey Korzhukov turned the poems into music by incorporating a melody , musical notes and a guitar accompaniment . He also sang the early songs of Lesopoval . The reason they named their musical group " Lesopoval " was that this was the term that people commonly used to refer to the Soviet Siberian labor camps , and the musical group was created from Tanich 's experience in these Siberian camps . 
 Together , Mikhail Tanich and Sergey Korzhukov wrote the early songs of Lesopoval . In 1994 , Sergey Korzhukov died at the age of 35 after falling from the balcony of his house , but he was still listed as a co @-@ author of all the songs through the 1996 album " New Lineup " ( <unk> <unk> . ) 
 After the death of Sergey Korzhukov , many other writers and singers helped write the music for the songs , including Aleksandr <unk> . In 2008 , Tanich died in the hospital from kidney disease . Until his death , Mikhail Tanich continued to write the lyrics for all the Lesopoval songs , including the latest album - " Our life , " ( <unk> <unk> ) which was produced and released after his death . In his honor , the group performed in the Kremlin to memorialize his death . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The music of Lesopoval places great importance on lyrical content , which tends to focus on freedom , labor camps , criminal life , and occasionally other topics such as peace and love . Mikhail Tanich has stated that his six years in the Russian labor camps gave him an inside perspective of all kinds of criminal life , and that his goal was to find the good in all sorts of criminals . Mikhail Tanich was a political prisoner , but he came to sympathize with many of the other prisoners who were serving in the camps , some who were falsely accused and some who were there for petty crimes . He has stated that Chanson music " blossomed wildly in Soviet times when the entire country was in camps , when these zones , barbed wire , guard towers with guards and machine guns , were everywhere , " and he has said that he feels that everyone in Russia is in some way connected to the camps and to criminal life . 
 In his songs , Mikhail Tanich often touches on universal themes of Soviet life , focusing on criminal elements ( the camps , the buses that took people to camp , the life of ex @-@ convicts , etc . ) Some of his songs also deal with the political themes of the Soviet era , often with a humorous take . For example , the song " Tax " focuses on the tax on childlessness imposed during the Soviet Union , which was a 6 % tax on every adult who did not have a child . The hero of the song laments that he is forced to pay this tax while doing time in jail , yet the prison guards refuse to provide him any woman with which to reproduce . 
 The songs often include criminal slang , jargon and vulgarities , which the group says is necessary in order to accurately represent criminal life in Russia . However , official Governmental sources have denounced bands that sing in the style of Russian Chanson , with Vladimir Ustinov , the former prosecutor general , calling it " propaganda of the criminal subculture . " 
 Musically , the group builds upon the style of Russian bard music , which features strong vocals with a guitar accompaniment . The music mixes these more traditional instruments with an accordion , synthesizer , and drums . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Due to the propensity of Russian piracy , it is difficult to measure how many Lesopoval records have been sold . Furthermore , the genre is typically relegated to late @-@ night broadcasts due to governmental pressure , and is not typically played on the radio , where Russian pop is more popular . However , Lesopoval regularly performs concerts , and is one of the most popular current Chanson bands in Russia . 
 Critically , the band has received positive reviews from critics . The Russian website Pravda positively reviewed their recent concerts , but stated that the group 's first hit -- " I will buy you a house " ( sung by Sergey Korzhukov ) -- remains their most popular and well @-@ sung song . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Ya <unk> <unk> dom / I will buy you a house ( 1993 ) 
 <unk> ya <unk> / When I come ( 1993 ) 
 <unk> <unk> / Law of thieves ( 1993 ) 
 <unk> <unk> s <unk> <unk> / The final concert with Sergey Korzhukov ( 1994 ) 
 <unk> / Amnesty ( 1995 ) 
 <unk> <unk> / New composition ( 1996 ) 
 <unk> Margo / Queen Margo ( 1996 ) 
 101 @-@ j <unk> / 101st kilometer ( 1998 ) 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> tom / Legends of Russian Chanson Volume ( 2000 ) 
 <unk> / The Feeder ( 2000 ) 
 <unk> <unk> / <unk> visit ( 2001 ) 
 Ya - <unk> / I am from there ( 2002 ) 
 <unk> net / No rumble ( 2003 ) 
 <unk> , <unk> ! / Freedom , darn it ! ( 2005 ) 
 <unk> / The Rifle ( 2006 ) 
 <unk> , Rossiya ! / Smile , Russia ! ( 2006 ) 
 Mama - <unk> / Mother Street ( 2007 ) 
 Nasha Zhizn / Our Life ( 2008 ) 
 = Ontario Highway 410 = 
 King 's Highway 410 , also known as Highway 410 and colloquially as the four @-@ ten , is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that connects Highways 401 and 403 to Brampton . North of Brampton , the freeway connects to Highway 10 , which continues north through Caledon as a four lane arterial road . The route is patrolled by the Ontario Provincial Police and has a speed limit of 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) . 
 Highway 410 was built along the alignment of Heart Lake Road south of Bovaird Drive , while north of Bovaird Drive it was built along a new alignment . The highway was designated in 1978 between Highway 401 and Bovaird Drive ( later Highway 7 ) , though it was only two lanes wide and did not feature any interchanges . It was widened throughout the 1980s and completed as a freeway in 1991 . In 2003 , construction began on a northward extension of the freeway that was completed in November 2009 . 
 A notable feature of Highway 410 is the four @-@ level interchange with Highways 401 and 403 which includes a large flyover ramp from Highway 401 eastbound to Highway 410 northbound , constructed in 1990 . The majority of the freeway features a grass median as opposed to an Ontario Tall Wall like neighbouring freeways . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 410 is a commuter freeway and a bypass of Brampton , acting as the southward continuation of Highway 10 . The highway is also a continuation of Highway 403 ( eastern segment ) from the south , which ends at the Queen Elizabeth Way . The freeway begins as several ramps converge from Highway 401 north of the large interchange . Maintaining a straight north @-@ westward course , it passes beneath Courtney Park Drive and Derry Road , with a slight jog to the right between the two underpasses . The freeway then intersects Highway 407 as it crosses into Brampton and passes beneath an electrical corridor . Veering to the right once again , the freeway enters a second industrialized area and returns to its northwest – southeast orientation . It passes beneath Steeles Avenue East and later Queen Street East , the former Highway 7 , now Peel Regional Road 107 . Until it was decommissioned across the Greater Toronto Area , Highway 7 was concurrent between Queen Street East and Bovaird Drive . Passing north of Queen Street , the highway exits the industrial area and enters residential subdivisions . 
 Throughout this section , Highway 410 is located within a cutting below grade . It passes beneath several roads until Bovaird Drive East . The more recently completed extension begins at this point , as Highway 410 passes to the west of Trinity Common and diverges from its straight path into greenspace and alongside the Heart Lake Conservation Area . As it passes beneath Mayfield Road , the highway makes a sharp turn to the west and descends through the Etobicoke Creek valley . After rising back to level ground , it curves north , passing beneath <unk> Drive . The central concrete median and high @-@ mast lighting end as the freeway becomes Highway 10 , which continues north as a four @-@ lane undivided road to Orangeville , Shelburne and eventually Owen Sound . 
 = = History = = 
 Planning for highway 410 began during the late 1960s as a result of the rapid suburbanization of Brampton . On May 25 , 1965 , the Department of Highways ( DHO ) unveiled the Toronto Region Western Section Highway Planning Study . The plan designated several new highway corridors and widening projects through Peel and Halton , including Highway 10 . However , it did not include a truck bypass that was desired by Brampton city council . In 1969 , William H. Brydon would encourage the DHO to construct this bypass utilizing Heart Lake Road , and announced the plans at his final city council meeting as mayor , claiming that it may be known as the Brampton Expressway and would connect with Highway 401 . Successor Jim <unk> announced in the new year that he would meet with highways minister George Gomme to discuss the route of the bypass . The DHO studied the corridor over the next several months before releasing a report in late August . 
 Ontario Premier Bill Davis , who was known as " Brampton Billy " , formally initiated the construction of Highway 410 along the Heart Lake Road corridor during his administration . Prior to the construction of Highway 410 , Heart Lake Road was flanked by the industrial lands of Brampton and Bramalea north of Steeles Avenue . Between Steeles and Highway 401 was agricultural lands . In 1975 , construction began on the widening of Highway 401 between Highway 10 ( Hurontario Street ) and Highway 427 . During this expansion from six to eight lanes , a directional and loop ramp were constructed at Heart Lake Road to allow access to and from Toronto . Heart Lake Road was rebuilt over the next several years , and reopened as a two lane expressway on November 15 , 1978 . It was at this point that the road was designated Highway 410 as far north as Queen Street . 
 Construction to twin the highway began in 1983 , following the completion of a culvert over the east branch of the Etobicoke Creek ; the interchange with Clark Boulevard was built at the same time . The City of Brampton constructed the West Drive Extension , between Orenda Road and <unk> Road , as a detour in 1983 . The following year , contracts were awarded to build the two structures over the Canadian National Railway south of Orenda Road , as well as an interchange at Queen Street ; the former was completed by the end of the year while the latter took until late 1985 . Construction of the interchange at Bovaird Drive began in 1985 and was completed the following summer . With the construction of each interchange , the future northbound lanes of the freeway were constructed and opened to two @-@ way traffic . By 1988 , two lanes were open between Steeles Avenue and Bovaird Drive . 
 In 1987 , construction began south of the future Highway 407 interchange , expanding the two lane Heart Lake Road to a six lane freeway . In addition , work began on the future southbound lanes north of Steeles Avenue . In 1990 , work began on an interchange with Courtney Park Drive . By mid @-@ 1991 , Highway 410 was complete from north of Highway 401 to Bovaird Drive , and work was underway on two large flyover ramps . The interchange with Highway 401 was rebuilt alongside the widening of that highway to a collector @-@ express system and opened to traffic ramp @-@ by @-@ ramp beginning August 28 , 1990 and continuing through the end of the year . 
 In the fall of 1991 , alongside the widening of Highway 410 into a full freeway , construction began on the connecting ramps between Highway 403 and Highway 410 , which pass under the existing bridge structures for Highway 401 collector traffic , while new overpasses were constructed for the Highway 401 express lanes . The 2 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) link opened on November 2 , 1992 , at a cost of $ 7 @.@ 3 million . 
 = = = Extension = = = 
 The extension beyond Bovaird Drive to Hurontario was conceived as part of the ultimate plan for Highway 410 when it was under construction in 1982 . It would take until 2003 for construction to begin . Planning for the 8 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 5 @.@ 3 mi ) freeway began with the submitting of an Environmental Assessment by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) in October 1995 . The assessment was approved without a hearing by the Minister of Environment and Energy on March 5 , 1997 . The next several years were spent on engineering and design . The new section , planned and built as a four lane freeway , was constructed on a new alignment in order to bypass the Heart Lake Conservation Area . It was completed in phases : initially to the new eastward extension of Sandalwood Parkway , later to Mayfield Road and finally to Highway 10 north of Sandalwood . 
 Premier of Ontario Ernie Eves officially announced the extension on June 23 , 2003 ; construction subsequently began on the first phase . On May 15 , 2006 construction began on the second phase between Sandalwood Parkway and Mayfield Drive . The first two phases were built by Dufferin Construction and opened together in mid – late 2007 ; the northbound lanes were opened by the beginning of September and the southbound lanes by the end of the month . Upon its opening , trucks were prohibited from driving along it due to concerns of them travelling on the two lane Mayfield Road ; this ban has since been lifted . Construction on the third phase between Mayfield Road and Highway 10 began in August 2007 . The entire extension was completed and opened to traffic on November 16 , 2009 . Additional work continued in the months that followed to clean up the land surrounding the new freeway . 
 = = Future = = 
 On September 9 , 2014 , the MTO announced that Highway 410 would be widened to ten lanes from south of Highway 401 to Queen Street in Brampton by 2018 . A C $ 156 @.@ 7 million contract was awarded to <unk> Construction to expand the freeway by adding one general purpose and one High @-@ occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lane in each direction . In addition , two new ramps will be built at the partial interchange with Highway 401 and Highway 403 , thereby providing access to and from all directions . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 410 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in the Regional Municipality of Peel . 
 = Supporters of FC Barcelona = 
 FC Barcelona is a Catalan club based in Barcelona , formed in 1899 by a group of Swiss , English and local players led by Joan Gamper . It has been part of the Spanish top @-@ flight , La Liga , since the league 's inception in 1928 and has won La Liga 23 times , along with 28 Copas del Rey and 5 UEFA Champions League victories . The supporters of Barcelona have played an important part in the formation of the club 's Catalan identity during the club 's 116 @-@ year existence . From the authoritarian rule of Spain under Miguel Primo de Rivera in 1923 , which later ended with the autocratic rule of Franco , various forms of cultural oppression were enacted against Catalonia and FC Barcelona in particular , causing the club to become a symbol of rebellion , although this has been disputed . After Spain 's transition to democracy in 1978 , several support groups of FC Barcelona evolved , most notably the Boixos Nois , who later mixed their support of the club with a demand of secession from Spain . 
 The arrival of Ronaldinho in 2003 , and Barcelona 's subsequent success in La Liga and Champions League , has been seen as crucial to an increase in the national , and worldwide , fan @-@ base of the club . This development of a larger national fan @-@ base has created friction between the Catalan nationalist supporters , who wish to secede from Spain , and the club 's other Spanish supporters . 
 There exist four different types of supporters of Barcelona ; one is the <unk> or club @-@ member , who is eligible to vote in the presidential election of the club and other matters . The penyes , who are closely affiliated with the socis , are fan @-@ clubs , which in the past have been responsible for large donations to the club . Also , there are Barça Fans and this term refers to the official online fan community of the club where these registered fans participate in games and other activities . Lastly there are the ordinary fans of the club , the <unk> , who do not possess any formal membership . 
 = = History = = 
 Before 1909 , Barcelona played in various stadiums , none of which were owned by the club . On 14 March 1909 , the club moved to the Camp de la Indústria which had a capacity of 6 @,@ 000 people , and it was the first ground owned by the club . Barcelona moved to Les Corts in 1922 , which had an initial capacity of 20 @,@ 000 , which was later enlarged 3 @-@ fold to 60 @,@ 000 . The top @-@ row of Les Corts was the origin of the nickname <unk> , derived from the Catalan cul ( English : arse ) , as the spectators at the first stadium , Camp de la Indústria , sat with their culs over the stand . The English author , Phil Ball , notes that " all you could see was row upon row of bums " . 
 In the mid @-@ 1940s , the club invented the notion of penyes , a mix between a fan club and a financial support club , during a time when the club was in need of financial and public support in face of the hostility of Francisco Franco 's dictatorship . The first <unk> Solera , was formed in 1944 by a group of supporters and former players of the team . The penyes would later exhibit their financial prowess in 1953 , when they proposed the building of the Camp Nou . Inspiration was drawn from the financial plan Athletic Bilbao , a rival team , used to build San Mamés , where an association of penyes pledged to finance the construction . As a result , the subsequent construction of the stadium put the club into its supporters ' hands , giving the penyes political influence over the club , which still lasts today . 
 During the same period , Franco 's oppression of Catalonia caused the relationship between the club and its supporters to change . For the supporters , FC Barcelona became synonymous with Catalonia , a feeling incorporated in the club 's Més que un club motto ( English : More than a club ) . The socio @-@ political impulse <unk> el Barça ( Long live Barça ) , gradually evolved into <unk> el Barça i <unk> Catalunya ( Long live Barça and Catalonia ) and was the same as a protest @-@ song against the central government in Madrid . 
 In 1975 , the death of Franco marked the beginning of Spain 's transition into a democracy and four years later , Josep Lluís Núñez became the first elected president of FC Barcelona . Since then , the members of Barcelona , called socios , have elected a club president . 
 In the early 1980s , one of the most notorious penyes , the Boixos Nois ( English : Crazy Boys ) was founded . The peña who identified with left @-@ wing separatism , repeatedly demanded the resignation of president Núñez , openly defying his presidency through chants and banners at matches . At the same time , the city of Barcelona experienced a rise in the number of skinheads , who identified with right @-@ wing separatism . The skinheads slowly moved the Boixos Nois ' political ideology from liberalism to fascism , which caused fractions within the group . Inspired by British hooligans , the remaining Boixos Nois became violent , which often lead to mass @-@ scale arrests . 
 According to the protest organisation L <unk> Blau ( English : The Blue Elephant ) , formed in part by later @-@ president Joan Laporta in 1998 , the former president Núñez promoted the emergence of skinheads among the Boixos and gave them permission to roam freely around the stadium , using them for his own political gain . When Núñez resigned in 2000 , his vice @-@ president Joan Gaspart took over as president . Gaspart publicly expressed his sympathies for Boixos Nois , claiming that he would join the group as soon as he resigned as chairman . The comment caused the Boixos Nois members to occasionally be referred to as ' the chairman 's boys ' . 
 The same year saw the controversial transfer of the Barcelona vice @-@ captain Luís Figo to arch @-@ rivals Real Madrid . When Figo returned to the Camp Nou with his new club in November 2002 , the Boixos responded to Figo 's perceived treachery by whistling and jeering whenever he went near the ball . The abuse peaked when the Boixos threw a severed pig 's head at him , while he was taking a corner . The match has since been known in Spain as the " Partido de la <unk> " ( English : The Game of Shame ) . It was suspended for 13 minutes by the referee , who took the players off the pitch because of fears for their safety . It ended in a 0 – 0 draw . 
 During the first decade of the new millennium , president Joan Laporta , a supporter of Catalonian nationalism , repeatedly expressed his support of Catalonia 's secession from Spain and characterised the club as the symbol for Catalonian separatism . The <unk> of the club drew criticism from several club members who accused Laporta of alienating Barcelona fans , both within and outside of Catalunya . By 2003 Barcelona had 1 @,@ 200 penyes around the world , causing other Spanish clubs to copy the concept . With each individual peña ( <unk> Spanish spelling ) having different names and rules , it has become a custom in Spain to name a new peña after their favourite player or match , and in turn the player usually attends to the inaugural supper . 
 In the presidential election of 2010 , the rise in club @-@ members during the last seven years caused the campaign to focus on whether to allow votes from non @-@ Catalan members , through internet or post . The balloting committee decided to only allow votes from members who registered at the home stadium on the day of the election . 
 As of November 2010 , membership of the club is no longer open to the public . Only close relatives to current and former FC Barcelona members can join the club as well as previous members with at least a two @-@ year history of membership . This ruling however will not apply to children under the age of 15 . 
 = = Fan base = = 
 In Spain , 26 percent of the population supports Barcelona as their primary club , with another 7 % supporting Barcelona while having another club as their primary . Throughout Europe many fans regard Barcelona as their second club . Since the 2003 – 04 season , the club 's membership figures have risen from 100 @,@ 000 to 170 @,@ 000 socis in September 2009 , a 70 percent increase . The sharp rise was attributed to the influence of Ronaldinho and then @-@ president Joan Laporta 's media @-@ strategy , which focused on online media in Spanish and English . As of June 2010 there are 1 @,@ 335 officially registered penyes around the world , representing an 11 percent increase since 2003 . 
 Many prominent people are recognised as Barcelona supporters , including the former Pope John Paul II , who was an honorary member , former Prime Minister of Spain , José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero , Spanish actor Javier Bardem , and Belgian actor Matthias Schoenaerts . 
 = Chris Gragg = 
 Chris Gragg ( born June 30 , 1990 ) is an American football tight end who plays for the Buffalo Bills of the National Football League ( NFL ) . Selected by the Bills in the seventh round of the 2013 NFL Draft from the University of Arkansas , Gragg accumulated 5 receptions for 53 yards in his first NFL season . His first professional touchdown came against the Pittsburgh Steelers on November 10 , 2013 . 
 After he graduated from Warren High School in Arkansas , where he played football as a wide receiver , Gragg committed to the University of Arkansas along with three other Warren players . Although he spent his freshman season as a receiver on the Arkansas Razorbacks football squad , the coaching staff converted Gragg into a tight end in 2010 . In his sophomore and junior seasons , the Razorbacks made appearances in Bowl Championship Series games and defeated the Kansas State Wildcats in the 2012 Cotton Bowl Classic , which culminated the 2011 season . A knee injury caused Gragg to miss eight games in his senior season as the Arkansas team finished with a losing record . Invited to participate in the NFL Scouting Combine , an evaluative competition among prospective NFL players , Gragg ran the fastest 40 @-@ yard dash time and had the second @-@ highest vertical jump among tight ends in attendance ; in the draft , the Bills chose Gragg with the 222nd overall selection , a pick Buffalo acquired from a trade with the St. Louis Rams . One of five tight ends in spring training , he made Buffalo 's regular @-@ season roster and played in nine regular @-@ season games during the 2013 NFL season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Chris Gragg was born on June 30 , 1990 , in Pine Bluff , Arkansas , to Kelvin and <unk> Gragg , both of whom worked as educators . Kelvin coached the Warren High School football team , and Chris served as the team 's water boy until he was in junior high school . For the Warren squad , Gragg played football as a wide receiver alongside future NFL players <unk> Wright and Greg Childs . During his senior year , Gragg accumulated 420 receiving yards and caught 8 touchdowns . Recruiting website Rivals.com evaluated him as a 2 @-@ star prospect on a 1 – 5 star scale and ranked Gragg as the 15th best player in Arkansas at his position , while Scout.com ranked him as the 148th best receiver in the nation . In July 2007 , Gragg committed to the University of Arkansas , as did three other players from Warren . 
 = = Collegiate career = = 
 In his freshman season , Gragg played in all 12 of the Arkansas Razorbacks ' games as the team finished with a 5 – 7 win – loss record . During the second game of the season , against the Louisiana – Monroe Warhawks , Gragg caught a 25 @-@ yard pass from quarterback Casey Dick on fourth down and one to continue a drive that ended with the game @-@ winning touchdown . The catch was Gragg 's only reception in 2008 . After he dislocated his ankle in a preseason practice , he was given a medical redshirt and did not play for the 2009 season . 
 In 2010 , Gragg was converted into a tight end , which made three slots at the position on the Razorbacks ' depth chart . Garrick McGee , the offensive coordinator for the team , observed that " he 's a really big receiver in a tight end body " , and expected opponents to have " matchup problem [ s ] " against Gragg . When Arkansas faced the Georgia Bulldogs on September 18 , Gragg caught a touchdown from a 57 @-@ yard pass for his first reception of the year . The 2010 Arkansas Razorbacks ended the year with a 10 – 3 record , and were invited to play in the Sugar Bowl against the Ohio State Buckeyes , a game that Arkansas lost 31 – 26 after Ohio State defensive end Solomon Thomas intercepted a pass from quarterback Ryan Mallett in the final minute of the game . Gragg made one catch in the contest for 16 yards ; he finished the year with 8 receptions for 171 yards and two touchdowns . 
 Prior to the 2011 season , a writer for Arkansas Business predicted that Gragg " will figure prominently into the offense if he improves his blocking " : Gragg replaced D. J. Williams , the first @-@ string tight end who graduated in 2010 . In the Razorbacks ' eleventh game of the season , Gragg caught 8 passes for 119 yards , both single @-@ game career highs , as the team defeated the Mississippi State Bulldogs and moved to a 10 – 1 record . The Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) system subsequently ranked Arkansas as the third @-@ best team in the nation , behind the Louisiana State University Tigers and the Alabama Crimson Tide , with the former scheduled as the Razorbacks ' next opponent . Brett Martel of Associated Press stated that the November 25 matchup , a part of the Arkansas – LSU football rivalry , " could be even more important than the so @-@ called ' Game of the Century ' " between the Tigers and the Crimson Tide earlier in the year , as both teams in the rivalry competed for a position in the BCS National Championship Game . Though Arkansas opened with a 14 – 0 lead , the Tigers regained the lead by halftime and won , 41 – 17 . Out of contention for the National Championship Game , the team finished the year ranked sixth in the BCS standings and were invited to play in the 2012 Cotton Bowl Classic , where they defeated the Kansas State Wildcats 29 – 16 : with the victory , Arkansas tied a team record for most wins in a season . Over the season , Gragg caught 41 receptions , third most on the team , for 518 yards and two touchdowns . 
 In July 2012 , Gragg was listed as a preseason nominee for the John Mackey Award , a recognition presented annually by the Nassau County Sports Commission to the best tight end in college football . Though voted to the second @-@ team of the Coaches Preseason All @-@ Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) squad , an honorific roster composed of the second @-@ best players in the SEC , ESPN writers Edward <unk> and Chris Low ranked Gragg as the best tight end in the conference . In Arkansas ' season opener against the Jacksonville State Gamecocks , Gragg accumulated 110 yards and two touchdowns over 7 catches , a performance for which he earned the John Mackey Tight End of the Week award . On September 9 , Gragg suffered a bone bruise in his knee against the Rutgers Scarlet Knights which caused him to miss the next three games ; upon return , Gragg <unk> the injury and missed the rest of the season 's matches . He finished his final season at Arkansas with 22 receptions for 289 yards and three touchdowns , while the team ended with a 4 – 8 record ; academically , he graduated with a degree in sports management . After his senior year , Gragg participated in the NFL Scouting Combine , where he ran the fastest 40 @-@ yard dash time , the third @-@ fastest 3 cone drill , had the third @-@ longest broad jump , and the second @-@ highest vertical jump of all tight ends in attendance . In an overview of his Combine performance , a writer for the NFL praised his speed and " receiver @-@ like hands " , but criticized him for a lack of agility and occasional dropped passes . The writer compared Gragg to tight end Daniel Fells . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 The Buffalo Bills selected Gragg with the 222nd overall selection in the 2013 NFL Draft , a slot they obtained from a trade with the St. Louis Rams . When he was drafted , Gragg became the second tight end Buffalo had ever selected out of Arkansas , and the first Arkansas player to be selected by the Bills since 1973 . Gragg was the first rookie out of the 2013 Bills ' draft class to sign a contract . In preseason practice , Gragg was one of five tight ends on the Buffalo team as he tried to earn one of the 53 positions available on the active roster . While the team trained at St. John Fisher College , Buffalo head coach Doug Marrone praised Gragg for his knowledge of the Bills ' playbook and his vertical running speed . In four preseason games , he totaled 5 receptions for 38 yards . When the Bills cut their roster to 53 players , Gragg made the team ; on an " A – F " scale , ESPN columnist Mike Rodak gave the Bills a " C " grade in tight end depth and stated that Gragg " would be in the bottom 10 percent of NFL starters at [ the position ] " . Gragg made his regular season NFL debut on October 13 against the Cincinnati Bengals , and caught his first career reception and touchdown against the Pittsburgh Steelers four games later . When Buffalo faced the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on December 8 , Gragg started in a game for the first time during the regular season . By the end of 2013 , Gragg caught 5 receptions for 53 yards and a touchdown in nine career games played . Collectively , the Bills finished last in the AFC East with a 6 – 10 record . 
 Prior to the Bills ' 2014 training camp , Rodak gave Gragg a " 45 % " chance to make Buffalo 's 53 @-@ man roster : Rodak described him as " the most athletic tight end " with the Bills , but also wrote that " there might not be a spot for Gragg " with tight ends Tony Moeaki , Scott Chandler , and Lee Smith on the team as well . During the preseason , Gragg was hospitalized with heat cramps , but returned to practice on July 30 . The Bills faced the New York Giants in their first preseason game , a Pro Football Hall of Fame Game , and according to Jay <unk> of The Buffalo News , Gragg " [ had ] a chance to impress " with Moeaki and Chandler injured and unable to play : in the game , Gragg had 4 catches for 24 yards and a fumble . He finished the preseason with 10 receptions for 66 yards , and made the regular season roster . In the fourth quarter of the Bills ' October 5 matchup against the Detroit Lions , Gragg caught a touchdown pass that , with an added two @-@ point conversion , tied the game ; Buffalo won the contest , 17 – 14 , and moved to a 3 – 2 record . When he attempted to catch a low @-@ thrown pass in the second half of a game against the New York Jets on November 24 , Gragg injured his right knee , which caused him to miss the remainder of the Bills ' season . During 2014 , over the ten games in which he played , Gragg accumulated 7 receptions for 53 yards and a touchdown as Buffalo finished with a 9 – 7 record , second in the AFC East behind the New England Patriots . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Chris 's brother , Will , also plays football as a tight end : Will said that Chris taught him how to catch , and that when Chris learned something new in Buffalo or at Arkansas , Chris taught it to him . Will transferred to Dumas High School when Kelvin accepted a position as the superintendent of the school district . Will , who received offers from forty @-@ five collegiate schools , committed to the University of Arkansas in September 2014 and signed with the institution in December . 
 = 2002 Scottish Challenge Cup Final = 
 The 2002 Scottish Challenge Cup Final , also known as the Bell 's Cup Final for sponsorship reasons , was an association football match between Brechin City and Queen of the South on 20 October 2002 at Broadwood Stadium in Cumbernauld . It was the 12th final of the Scottish Challenge Cup since it was first organised in 1990 to celebrate the centenary of the Scottish Football League . 
 Both teams progressed through four knock @-@ out rounds to reach the final . The match was Brechin City 's first national cup final in its 96 @-@ year history whilst it was Queen of the South 's second appearance in the final of the tournament having lost in 1997 . The tournament was contested by clubs below the Scottish Premier League ; Queen of the South from the First Division and Brechin City from the Second Division . 
 Queen of the South dominated most of the game with John O 'Neill scoring the first goal in the 33rd minute . Two minutes into the second half , Derek Lyle scored a header to take a 2 – 0 lead . Brechin City had few chances to score and Queen of the South held on to win the tournament and a national cup competition for the first time . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 The competition is a knock @-@ out tournament and in 2002 was contested by the 30 teams that played in the First , Second and Third Divisions of the Scottish Football League . Teams were paired at random and the winner of each match progressed to the next round and the loser was eliminated . The first round was contested by 28 of the teams and two received random byes into the second round . 
 = = = Brechin City = = = 
 Brechin City entered the first round and were drawn to play Elgin City of the Third Division at Borough Briggs . Elgin took the lead in the 31st minute with a goal from David Ross but was short @-@ lived ; Chris Templeman equalised the score to 1 – 1 ten minutes later and Marc Millar scored early in the second half to give Brechin a 2 – 1 lead . Two minutes later , Templeman scored his second goal of the game and Charlie King concluded the win with a goal in the 90th minute to make it 4 – 1 and progress to the next round . Brechin played First Division club St Johnstone in the second round at home at Glebe Park . Grant Murray scored first for St Johnstone after seven minutes to take a 1 – 0 lead . Roddy Grant equalised for Brechin against his former club on 35 minutes before Peter MacDonald scored for St Johnstone to regain a 2 – 1 lead two minutes before half time . Brechin scored two goals in the second half ; an own goal by Darren Dods and a second goal from Grant to produce a " shock " 3 – 2 win and advance to the quarter @-@ finals . 
 In the quarter @-@ finals , Brechin faced another home game against a First Division club , this time against Falkirk . The score was 0 – 0 for most of the game before Falkirk took the lead with only three minutes left to play with a goal from Craig McPherson . However , Brechin scored one minute before the end through Kevin Fotheringham to force extra time . The score remained equal after extra time so the winner was decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out ; Brechin winning 5 – 3 . With four clubs left in the tournament , Brechin were drawn against Third Division club Queen 's Park at Hampden Park . Queen 's Park scored first through James Allan after 26 minutes but Brechin equalised before half time with a goal from Marc Millar . The rest of the game 's five goals came during a nine @-@ minute period in the second half ; Brechin took a two @-@ goal lead courtesy of Chris Jackson and Kevin Fotheringham to make the score 3 – 1 before goals from John Gemmell and Jonny Whelan for Queen 's Park and Roddy Grant for Brechin made the scoreline 4 – 3 in favour of Brechin . Both teams had chances to score again before the end but the score stayed the same ensuring Brechin qualified for the first national cup final in the club 's history . 
 = = = Queen of the South = = = 
 Queen of the South also entered the first round and were drawn to play Third Division club Peterhead away from home at <unk> Stadium . Queen of the South dominated the majority of the game and scored two late goals in the second half from John O 'Neill and Peter Weatherson to progress to the next round as 2 – 0 winners . In the second round Queen of the South played another Third Division club , Greenock Morton , at home at Palmerston Park . The game was marred with incidents with Dean Keenan , Colin Reilly and Alex Williams all being sent off for Greenock Morton . Sean O 'Connor scored the winning goal for Queen of the South with only seven minutes left to play but shortly before the end sustained an injury from a tackle by Reilly which resulted in his sending off . Queen of the South won the game 1 – 0 and advanced to the quarter @-@ finals . 
 In the quarter @-@ finals , Queen of the South played Second Division club Dumbarton , also at Palmerston Park . John O 'Neill scored his second goal of the tournament to give Queen of the South the lead after 25 minutes . Dumbarton had opportunities to score an equaliser for the remainder of the game but were denied by the home team 's goalkeeper , Colin Scott . Despite Dumbarton 's efforts , Queen of the South sealed the victory with a goal from Derek Lyle in the final minute of the match to win 2 – 0 and progress to the semi @-@ finals . With four teams left in the tournament , Queen of the South travelled to Love Street to face fellow First Division club St Mirren . Paul Shields scored first for Queen of the South in the seventh minute but was cancelled out five minutes later with a goal from Brian McGinty to make it 1 – 1 before Derek Lyle put Queen of the South back in front shortly before half time . Early in the second half , both teams scored again ; Martin Cameron for St Mirren and Steve Bowey for Queen of the South to make the scoreline 3 – 2 to the away team . With ten minutes left to play , Gerhard Fellner equalised for St Mirren to make it 3 – 3 but late goals in the final two minutes from a Peter Weatherson free kick and Shields ' second goal of the game won the match 5 – 3 and sent Queen of the South into the final for the second time in its history . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 = = = Venue = = = 
 The 2002 final was hosted at Broadwood Stadium in Cumbernauld which had been Clyde 's home since it was opened in 1994 . The stadium hosted the final on three previous occasions ; twice in the past two seasons and for the first time in 1996 . The venue had a capacity of 8 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 500 tickets were allocated to Queen of the South who had a larger fan base and average home support than Brechin City , who were allocated around 2 @,@ 500 tickets . Dumfries @-@ based Queen of the South travelled approximately 77 miles ( 123 @.@ 9 km ) to the venue whereas Brechin City travelled around 94 miles ( 151 @.@ 3 km ) . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 In order to reach the final , both Brechin City and Queen of the South played two matches at home and two away . Brechin scored twelve goals and conceded seven compared with Queen of the South 's ten goals scored and only three conceded . Queen of the South kept a clean sheet in the first three rounds and were favourites to win the match being the higher ranked club as a competitor in the First Division , one tier above Brechin who were in the Second Division . At the time of the final Queen of the South were in bad league form , ranking second @-@ last in the First Division with only two wins and eight points from 10 games . Brechin were in slightly better form , ranking 6th in the Second Division with four wins and 13 points from nine games before the cup final . 
 Brechin and Queen of the South were both aiming to win their second trophy in less than six months , having been crowned champions of the Third and Second Divisions respectively the previous season . Despite recent league success , Brechin had never reached the final of a national cup competition in its 96 @-@ year history whilst Queen of the South were making only their second appearance in a cup final since losing the 1997 final to Falkirk in the same competition . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Queen of the South started the game as the livelier team , pushing forward early on ; however , Brechin City had the first goal scoring opportunity of the final when Graham Gibson 's long range shot was saved by Queen of the South goalkeeper Andy Goram . Peter Weatherson had a similar opportunity for Queen of the South after a pass from Derek Lyle but was also saved by Brechin 's goalkeeper , David Hay . Hay made another save 10 minutes later after another Weatherson attempt from Steve Bowey 's pass . After 28 minutes , Brechin player Chris Jackson was booked for a foul on Bowey and Queen of the South scored the first goal of the game shortly after in the 33rd minute but with controversy ; John O 'Neill rebounded the ball into the goal after Bowey 's initial shot was saved by the goalkeeper but Brechin defender Greg McCulloch claimed to have cleared the ball off the line , however , referee John Underhill awarded the goal . Weatherson almost scored again shortly before half time when he headed the ball into goalkeeper Hay 's hands after a Robbie Neilson cross . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 From the beginning of the second half the match was dominated by Queen of the South and they extended their lead after only two minutes . Defender Andy Aitken made a long pass to Joe McAlpine who crossed the ball from the left to the unmarked Derek Lyle near the six @-@ yard box who headed the ball past the goalkeeper to score his third goal of the tournament . Brechin made the first substitution of the match three minutes after the second goal , replacing Graham Gibson with Chris Templeman . Brechin 's best chance of the game came in the 58th minute when Charlie King 's 20 @-@ yard shot forced goalkeeper Goram to make his first proper save of the match . In the 62nd minute , Brechin made their last substitution with Marc Millar replacing Paul Riley in the midfield . With three minutes left to play , Queen of the South had an opportunity to extend their lead further when Sean O 'Connor 's attempted header was hit wide from a corner kick by McAlpine . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Queen of the South goalkeeper Colin Scott , who had played in all rounds before the final , was ruled out of playing because of injury . However , manager John Connolly stated that he would not have played Scott even if he had been fully fit and opted with Andy Goram instead , saying : " I was not convinced of Colin 's fitness " , and " I told Colin there was never a chance of him playing in the Cup final " . As a result of Goram 's inclusion in the squad , he became the first player to win every domestic trophy in Scotland . 
 The match remains Brechin City 's only appearance in a major national cup final . However , Queen of the South have made two further appearances in the final of the tournament since the match ; losing to Ross County in 2010 and beating Partick Thistle in 2013 . Queen of the South also reached the final of Scotland 's main cup competition , the Scottish Cup in 2008 , losing to Rangers . 
 = Hurricane Jimena ( 2009 ) = 
 Hurricane Jimena / <unk> / was the second strongest hurricane of the 2009 Pacific hurricane season and tied with Hurricane Norbert as the strongest tropical cyclone to make landfall on western portion of the Baja California Peninsula . Forming from a tropical wave late on August 28 , 2009 off Mexico 's Pacific coast , the system rapidly intensified into a Category 2 hurricane the next day . Two days after developing , it strengthened into a Category 4 hurricane . After peaking close to Category 5 intensity on September 1 , it encountered cold water and began to weaken . When the hurricane made landfall on the Baja California Peninsula on September 3 , it was only a Category 2 hurricane . The next day , the cyclone entered the Gulf of California , only to dissipate after turning back east towards Baja California . 
 When the storm made landfall , Jimena caused $ 173 @.@ 9 million USD in damage . The system killed four people across the peninsula . In Baja California Sur , the town of Mulege was devastated with other areas in the region also receiving major damage . In Sonora , record rainfall fell , with some areas receiving more than 20 in ( 510 mm ) . Statewide damage totaled at $ 37 million USD while five people were killed and two others were listed as missing . The remnants also moved into the Southwestern United States , causing minor damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Jimena originated from a tropical wave that moved off the western coast of Africa on August 15 . The tropical wave traversed the Atlantic Ocean with little or no convective development . On August 25 , the National Hurricane Center began monitoring a broad area of low pressure , while the system was located over Central America . The system moved westbound and entered the eastern Pacific Ocean later that day . Initially , there were no signs of additional development . However , shower and thunderstorm activity began to increase and an area of low pressure developed within the wave on August 27 . Around 1800 UTC on August 28 , the low had become sufficiently organized for the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to designate the system as Tropical Depression Thirteen @-@ E. Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression was situated roughly 220 miles ( 355 km ) south of Acapulco . Tracking westward in response to a mid @-@ level ridge over Mexico , the depression intensified into a tropical storm on 0000 UTC August 29 . In real time , however , it was not classified until early on August 29 while located 250 mi ( 400 km ) west of Acapulco . 
 Tropical Storm Jimena featured only a small area of gale @-@ force winds upon being named ; however , the small size of the storm allowed for its subsequent intensification . Deep convection developed around the center of circulation and well @-@ defined convective feeder band to the north . Rapid intensification began to take place early on August 29 as extremely deep convection developed and microwave satellite imagery depicted a developing eye feature within the center of the storm . Jimena turned towards the northwest by this time , and moved over very warm sea surface temperatures , averaging 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) . The hurricane was upgraded to Category 2 intensity in the late evening hours on August 30 , and was upgraded to the season 's third major hurricane – a storm with winds of 111 mph ( 179 km / h ) or greater – on the morning of August 30 when the eye became visible on satellite imagery . Continuing to intensify , it was upgraded to a Category 4 hurricane just six hours after becoming a major hurricane and 24 hours after becoming a tropical storm . Meanwhile , the eye became better defined . 
 Late on August 29 , the cyclone leveled off in intensity as a mid @-@ level Category 4 hurricane due to an eyewall replacement cycle , where one eye gets replaced by another . The cycle continued for another 24 hours , only to start another burst of intensification . By the evening of August 31 , Hurricane Hunters measured winds of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) and a pressure of 931 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 49 inHg ) while the powerful cyclone began to turn to the north due to nearby Tropical Storm Kevin and a low pressure area west of Baja California . Wind shear increased as the hurricane moved over progressively cooler water . Despite weakening slightly , Jimena was anticipated by meteorologists to still remain a major hurricane as the storm moved ashore . This did not occur and Jimena steadily weakened . On September 1 , Hurricane Hunters found Jimena weaker , reporting winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a pressure of 940 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . About 12 hours after the flight , the winds of Jimena dropped below major hurricane intensity despite an increase of convection . 
 On 1200 UTC September 2 , Jimena made landfall on Isla San Margarita , Baja California del Sur with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a pressure of 971 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 67 inHg ) . An hour later , Jimena made a second landfall ( after re @-@ entering the Pacific ) at the same intensity near Cabo San Lazaro . It then moved over land , weakening into a Category 1 later that day , only to move back offshore as a Category 1 hurricane . The hurricane made a third landfall near San <unk> with 85 mph ( 150 km / h ) winds . After its third landfall , Jimena returned to tropical storm status over land . After emerging into the Gulf of California , steering currents collapsed and increased wind shear continued to weaken Jimena . By late on September 3 , Jimena was just a minimal tropical storm . It turned to the west , weakening into a tropical depression the next day . With winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) , the system made a fourth and final landfall near Santa Rosalía , Baja California Sur . Within five hours , the depression degenerated into a remnant low . Midday on September 5 , the remnant low had dissipated , but the remnant circulation of Jimena tracked westwards into the Pacific for a few more days . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon crossing Central America , the NHC noted the possibility locally heavy rainfall spreading across much of Central America and in extreme Southwestern Mexico . As the storm moved parallel to the Mexican coast , interests in the region were asked to watch the progress of the system and officials in the area opened shelters due to the risk of high winds . The Sonora state government issued a blue ( initial ) alert for 14 municipalities on the southern portion of the state the afternoon of August 31 . Later on the day , the blue alert was upgraded to a green alert , citing the risk of large rainfall amounts . 
 Early on August 31 , about 54 hours prior to landfall , the Government of Mexico issued a hurricane watch from Bahia Magdalena to San Evaristo in the southern Baja California peninsula . A state of emergency was declared in five districts of Baja California Sur requested via the local government . In La Paz , residents rushed to get groceries before the stores closed and residents boarded up windows . In Los Cabos , residents frantically stocked up on supplies before the tropical cyclone struck . On August 31 , civil defense authorities in Los Cabos announced that they would have to evacuate 20 @,@ 000 families from their homes . Officials urged a total of 10 @,@ 000 people to evacuate from shacks . Most people evacuated ; however , they feared that there items would be stolen if they had left . While they did struggle with evacuations , officials managed to evacuate 15 @,@ 000 people living in hurricane prone areas . However , many people such as tourists and the poor failed to evacuate , though 2 @,@ 000 foreigners did leave the Los Cobos area . On August 30 , Robbie Berg from the National Hurricane Center noted that the hurricanes remnants may help fire relief in California and also interests Baja California should monitor the progress of the system . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Southwestern Mexico = = = 
 In Acapulco , the storm produced overcast skies , but ports in the area remained open . In addition , the states of Guerrero , Colima , and Jalisco suffered mudslides , landslides , and heavy rain from outer rainbands related to the system . 
 = = = Baja California Sur = = = 
 When the tropical cyclone passed over the Baja California Peninsula , storm chasers in Puerto San Carlos reported a minimum pressure of 973 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 73 inHg ) . Ciudad Constitucion reported peak winds of 71 mph ( 114 km / h ) , with a peak gust of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) , and a statewide peak of 13 @.@ 12 in ( 333 mm ) . A secondary peak rainfall occurred at Santa Rosalia . However , no reports of storm surge or storm tide were received by the National Hurricane Center . 
 When the storm was over , Jimena 's winds and heavy rain brought devastation across the Baja peninsula . One man was reported killed in Mulege . Most of the homes and businesses there received extensive damage and water was 24 in ( 610 mm ) deep . Damage there was considered worse than Hurricane John in 2006 . One bridge in Mulege was under 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of water . The downtown area of Santa Rosalia was severely damaged with flash floods . Hurricane @-@ force winds battered the area for hours before diminishing to 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) the next day . Water supplies ran low and two bridges were washed out . In a nearby canyon , floodwaters washed out many cars and livestock . 
 In Cabo San Lucas , Jimena produced little damage . However , the entire town of Punta <unk> were flooded and damaged , with some being destroyed . In addition , 75 % of homes were damaged in Puerto San Carlos , and power was lost in many areas including Comondú and Loreto . In the town of Puerto Lopez Mateos , half of the cannery buildings were destroyed and every wood home was destroyed , thus leaving a quarter of the population homeless . Nearby , the storm nearly destroyed two isolated villages , Punta Abreojos village and Laguna San Ignacio . Both areas got hit by Jimena at its first landfall . Although in Bahia Asuncion damages was minor , the villages of Abreojos and San Ignacio Lagoon were badly damaged . Seventy percent of the electric network form Santa Rosalia to <unk> Constitucion was damaged due to power outages . In both of the towns , the Mexican Red Cross branches received some damage . The roads from San José del Cabo to Tijuana was affected because any nearby creeks overflowed their banks . The airports in Los Cabos , La Paz and Loreto and ports were briefly closed , but were later re @-@ opened after the storm passed since the airports received only minimal damage . 
 A total of 35 @,@ 000 people were reported homeless and hit 29 transmission lines in the cites Cabo San Lucas , San José del Cabo , La Paz and Ciudad Constitución affecting 50 @,@ 000 customers . The worst was in the former , with a total of 27 @,@ 000 customers affected and 17 transmission lines . Severe damage also occurred in the agricultural sector ; 400 hectares of citrus was lost , 80 hectares of greenhouses was destroyed . Losses in the sector were estimated to be at least MXN $ 500 million ( US $ 37 @.@ 3 million ) . Damages to infrastructure amounted to MXN $ 300 million ( US $ 12 @.@ 5 million ) . Total losses related to Hurricane Jimena reached 2 @.@ 3 billion pesos ( $ 173 @.@ 9 million ) . Local water authorities reported that 14 @,@ 000 people were waterless , because eight pipelines broke . The worst damage occurred in the aqueduct in Santa Rosalia . The officials estimated that the repair would cost about $ 652 @,@ 224 . A total of 72 @,@ 000 people were affected and four people were reported dead . 
 = = = Sonora = = = 
 Jimena produced record rainfall in Sonora . By September 3 , rainfall had reached 18 in ( 460 mm ) and the state newspaper then noted the possible of a dam overflowing . A few days later , in Guaymas , rainfall from the storm had reached 21 @.@ 92 in ( 557 mm ) , thus setting a state rainfall record . The peak 24 @-@ hour rainfall record was set by Jimena as it ultimately topped out at 26 @.@ 1 in ( 660 mm ) while 43 @.@ 39 inches ( 711 ml ) of rain was reported in 36 hours . 
 The towns of Guaymas and Empalme became unreachable from the rest of the state because Mexico Federal Highway 15 was closed due to flooding . Some river channels overflowed due to flooding . In addition , a total of 15 people were stuck on the roof of a middle school and was later rescued by air . A total of 775 people were evacuated in Bahia Kino , Guaymas , Navojoa , and Álamos . Major highways were impassable because of bridges that had washed out . The main highway in San Carlos was washed away due to flash floods . Marina Seca was badly damaged , with boats being washed out over the highway onto to the beaches , where there was no water , telephone , or internet services for over 15 days . In all , the damages associated with Hurricane Jimena in Guaymas and San Carlos totaled over $ 37 million . More than 200 @,@ 000 houses were destroyed or damaged so severely that people could not return to them for several months , mainly in the poorest areas . School was suspended for over two months in most areas . Hundreds of local stores were destroyed ; over 2800 acres of farm land were severely damaged . 
 Due to the damage caused by the hurricane , a state of emergency was declared in southern Sonora . Two people died near Guaymas during a car accident ; two others were reported missing . According to a report by Mexico 's Centro Nacional de Prevención de Desastres , the magnitude of the event was analyzed to be a once in 2000 year occurrence . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 While the storm was weakening , a cold front lifted deep tropical moisture that triggered flash flooding and severe weather in the Mojave Desert . In San Diego County , California , a severe thunderstorm rolled through the area midday on September 5 , breaking 19 pipelines and causing $ 100 @,@ 000 in damage . Major flooding also occurred east of Barnwell on <unk> Canyon Road . South of Barnwell , hail and rainfall up to 1 in ( 25 mm ) was reported . At the <unk> trading post , water and debris flowed on the roads . Flooding occurred on Interstate 15 , forcing the local highway patrol to escort cars on to the highway while part of U.S. Highway 95 was closed for 2 hours , and 17 minutes . Near the town of Ocotillo Wells , flash flooding was reported due to heavy rainfall , causing an additional $ 20 @,@ 000 in damage . Strong winds associated with the thunderstorms downed power lines and resulted in dust storms across the Imperial Valley , some of which reduced visibility by up to 25 % . 
 In Valle Vista , Arizona , water , rock , and other debris covered many roads . In addition , several power lines were down at the Bullhead City Airport . Northwest of Golden Valley , severe thunderstorms produced golf ball sized hail , roughly 1 @.@ 75 in ( 44 mm ) in diameter , that broke windows . In Riviera , seven mobile homes were blown over by winds up to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , resulting in four injuries . North of Mohave Valley , mudslides destroyed two homes and damaged twenty @-@ five others , resulting in roughly $ 600 @,@ 000 in losses . Heavy Rain near Sedona caused flooding along Highway 179 . In <unk> , washes overflowed their banks , flooding nearby areas . In <unk> , about 1 in ( 25 mm ) of rain fell in 30 minutes , resulting in flash flooding that washed out a road and damaged a business . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Shortly after the hurricane made landfall , Mexico 's natural disaster fund provided $ 1 @.@ 45 million in aid to repair pipelines , highways , and buildings . The United Methodist Committee on Relief distributed food baskets to 720 survivors and provided 180 families with wood for rebuilding their homes . In addition , the Civil Protection Agency in Baja California , the Baja bush Pilots , and the Mexican Red Cross asked for donations of such as utensils , flashlights , lanterns , batteries , clothing , and light bedding . Following the hurricane , a riot in Santa Rosalia broke out due to lack of water . There was also a lack for shelter , as such this left many people sleeping in their cars . Within a week , the Mexican government assessed the damage form the hurricane , with 15 of them begin sent to Santa Rosalia and shortly thereafter , the Mexican Red Cross sent out relief efforts to the devastated area , especially in Santa Rosalia . A total of 4 @,@ 460 food kits were sent , 1 @,@ 152 hygiene kits , 765 cleaning kits , 225 children 's kits , and 181 kitchen kits . 
 = Charlie Don 't Surf ( Veronica Mars ) = 
 " Charlie Don 't Surf " is the fourth episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the forty @-@ eighth episode overall . Co @-@ written by executive producer Diane Ruggiero and Jason Elen and directed by Jason Bloom , the episode premiered on The CW on October 24 , 2006 . 
 The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . In this episode , Veronica and her father , Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) take on three cases — they figure out who is taking Logan 's ( Jason Dohring ) trust fund money while Veronica gets involved in the accusing of the Pi Sigma fraternity in the rapist case and Keith helps a woman , Harmony Chase ( Laura San Giacomo ) track down her possibly cheating husband . 
 " Charlie Don 't Surf " featured several notable guest stars , including Matt Czuchry , Ryan Eggold , and San Giacomo , who plays Harmony Chase , a romantic interest for Keith . Actor Enrico Colantoni , who plays Keith , wanted San Giacomo to play the role of Harmony because of the actors ' ongoing friendship since their show Just Shoot Me ! Both actors enjoyed the guest appearance so much that they lobbied the show 's production team to continue the characters ' romantic storyline in the future . The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Logan comes over for dinner at Veronica ’ s house , and Keith becomes increasingly annoyed when Logan refuses to answer some questions . Veronica goes into Parker Lee 's ( Julie Gonzalo ) room , where Veronica reveals that she was raped as well . A journalist interviews Parker , while Logan discusses finances with his accountant . Logan asks Veronica for help in searching through records in an attempt to catch the accountant . Meanwhile , a woman asks Keith to investigate her husband , who may be having an affair . Wallace informs Veronica that there was a Pi Sigma fraternity party the night of every rape . Later , Dick ( Ryan Hansen ) asks Veronica to prove that the fraternity is innocent , and Veronica agrees just to infiltrate the fraternity . Keith sees the husband getting into a car with several other women . He contacts Harmony , the woman , and presents the evidence . 
 Veronica talks to the fraternity boys , and one of them tells her information that leads to her suspecting a boy named Chip . Keith and Harmony flirt , and Harmony shows a good amount of true romantic interest in Keith . Logan ’ s family has been donating $ 10 @,@ 000 a month to “ Aaron ’ s Kids ” , which Veronica learns is not actually a charity . Veronica talks to Chip , who says that he was with another girl , who admits it while saying that she ’ ll never say so openly . Veronica turns her suspicion on Dick . After doing more digging , Veronica says that the money is going to Logan ’ s illegitimate brother , Charlie Stone . Parker insults Veronica for supposedly working with the fraternity . Keith catches Harmony ’ s husband kissing another woman . After talking to one of the other rape victims , Veronica discusses Claire with a slightly offbeat clerk , who says that Claire went in with a guy . Logan meets Charlie ( Matt Czuchry ) , and they connect over surfing . However , Veronica notices some inconsistencies at Charlie ’ s private school job . 
 Veronica learns that “ Charlie ” is in fact a reporter who is doing a story on Logan , and Logan punches him . Keith tells Harmony that her husband was not in fact cheating after all . Veronica obtains proof that another person , not one of the fraternity members , was with Claire the night she was raped . While retrieving Logan ’ s watch , Veronica learns that Logan actually has a half @-@ brother . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by executive producer Diane Ruggiero and Jason Elen and directed by Jason Bloom , marking Ruggiero 's fourteenth writing credit , Elen 's first and only writing credit for the show , and Bloom 's third directing credit for the series . The episode features several notable guest stars . Matt Czuchry appears as Vanity Fair reporter Norman Phipps , who poses as Logan 's half @-@ brother for a story . Czuchry was a series regular at the time for Gilmore Girls , the lead @-@ in show for Veronica Mars . Ryan Eggold appears as Charlie Stone , Logan 's actual half brother . According to Variety , the role was initially scheduled to be a recurring one . Series regular Tina Majorino filmed scenes for the episode , although they were deleted in post @-@ production . 
 In her first appearance , Laura San Giacomo plays Harmony Chase , a woman who hires Keith to investigate her cheating husband . The two were both series regulars on the NBC sitcom Just Shoot Me ! . The two actors had maintained a close friendship after their sitcom was cancelled , and when Rob Thomas brought up a romantic storyline for Keith to Colantoni , he suggested Giacomo for the role . Giacomo accepted the role , later stating , " It was kind of a no @-@ brainer situation for me . I love Rico , love working with him , and it was just as much fun as I thought it would be . " In addition to sharing in @-@ jokes about Just Shoot Me ! while on set , Colantoni also remembered what a good actress he thought she was in their earlier days . After the first appearance , both Colantoni and Giacomo lobbied for more storylines together . Thomas was open to the possibility , saying , " I wouldn 't hesitate to go back to this , because I was really happy with how it played out . " Giacomo would go on to appear on three episodes of the show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Charlie Don 't Surf " was viewed by 3 @.@ 33 million viewers , ranking 97th of 104 in the weekly rankings . This figure was an increase in 0 @.@ 21 million viewers from the previous episode , " Wichita Linebacker " , which received 3 @.@ 12 million . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews . Eric Goldman of IGN gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , indicating that it was a " good " episode . He was positive towards the Logan and Keith storylines , writing " the other main storylines , featuring Logan and Keith , were nice ones for the respective characters , " calling the half @-@ brother plotline " interesting " . On the advancing of the rapist plot , Goldman praised the increase in Veronica 's personal involvement with the case , while continuing to criticize the portrayal of the feminists in the episode . " At this point , neither we , nor Veronica , seem to be meant to have nearly any sympathy for them . And yet , shouldn 't we all naturally be able to connect more to a group of girls who are passionately seeking to stop a serial rapist on campus ? " Price Peterson of TV.com gave the episode a very positive review , lauding the Logan 's half @-@ brother storyline , calling it " Top quality stuff . I loved the moment when Veronica realized Logan 's brother was an imposter and in the next scene we saw the two guys surfing together . So much suspense ! " Television Without Pity gave " Charlie Don 't Surf " a " B + " . The reviewer was very positive towards the plot involving Logan and his supposed half @-@ brother , writing , " since Logan actually knows how to find Charlie in person , perhaps this all doesn 't have to be quite as tragic as it 's coming off . Still , in my opinion ? Best episode of the season so far . " 
 Alan Sepinwall was very positive towards the episode on his blog What 's Alan Watching , calling Czuchry 's casting " genius " and that " the heavier focus on the rape storyline was welcome , though the amount of time spent on Logan Squared robbed it of some urgency . " In addition , he wrote that " The ' Just Shoot Me ' reunion gave an interesting twist to the usual private eye infidelity case . " Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club , gave a mostly positive review , writing that it struck a good balance in a storyline that could go wrong very quickly . " This happens with emotionally charged criminal cases . Mass public scapegoating is an all @-@ too @-@ human reaction , one studied by a bunch of social sciences ( Salem Witch Trials , anyone ? ) . And it ’ s certainly interesting to have Veronica trying to be the voice of reason . I think that largely works here , but it ’ s a delicate balance . This could easily go so very wrong . " 
 = Chalukya dynasty = 
 The Chalukya dynasty ( [ <unk> ] ) was an Indian royal dynasty that ruled large parts of southern and central India between the 6th and the 12th centuries . During this period , they ruled as three related yet individual dynasties . The earliest dynasty , known as the " Badami Chalukyas " , ruled from Vatapi ( modern Badami ) from the middle of the 6th century . The Badami Chalukyas began to assert their independence at the decline of the Kadamba kingdom of Banavasi and rapidly rose to prominence during the reign of Pulakeshin II . After the death of Pulakeshin II , the Eastern Chalukyas became an independent kingdom in the eastern Deccan . They ruled from Vengi until about the 11th century . In the western Deccan , the rise of the Rashtrakutas in the middle of the 8th century eclipsed the Chalukyas of Badami before being revived by their descendants , the Western Chalukyas , in the late 10th century . These Western Chalukyas ruled from Kalyani ( modern Basavakalyan ) until the end of the 12th century . 
 The rule of the Chalukyas marks an important milestone in the history of South India and a golden age in the history of Karnataka . The political atmosphere in South India shifted from smaller kingdoms to large empires with the ascendancy of Badami Chalukyas . A Southern India @-@ based kingdom took control and consolidated the entire region between the Kaveri and the Narmada rivers . The rise of this empire saw the birth of efficient administration , overseas trade and commerce and the development of new style of architecture called " Chalukyan architecture " . Kannada literature , which had enjoyed royal support in the 9th century Rashtrakuta court found eager patronage from the Western Chalukyas in the Jain and Veerashaiva traditions . The 11th century saw the birth of Telugu literature under the patronage of the Eastern Chalukyas . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = Natives of Karnataka = = = 
 While opinions vary regarding the early origins of the Chalukyas , the consensus among noted historians such as John Keay , D.C. Sircar , Hans Raj , S. Sen , Kamath and <unk> is the founders of the empire at Badami were native to the modern Karnataka region . 
 A theory that they were descendants of a 2nd @-@ century chieftain called <unk> <unk> , a feudatory of the Andhra Ikshvaku ( from an Ikshvaku inscription of the 2nd century ) was put forward . This according to Kamath has failed to explain the difference in lineage . The <unk> feudatory call themselves <unk> of the <unk> . The Chalukyas , however , address themselves as <unk> of <unk> in their inscriptions , which is the same lineage as their early overlords , the Kadambas of Banavasi . This makes them descendants of the Kadambas . The Chalukyas took control of the territory formerly ruled by the Kadambas . 
 A later record of Eastern Chalukyas mentions the northern origin theory and claims one ruler of Ayodhya came south , defeated the Pallavas and married a Pallava princess . She had a child called Vijayaditya who is claimed to be the Pulakeshin I 's father . However , according to the historians K. V. Ramesh , Chopra and Sastri , there are Badami Chalukya inscriptions that confirm Jayasimha was Pulakeshin I 's grandfather and <unk> , his father . Kamath and Moraes claim it was a popular practice in the 11th century to link South Indian royal family lineage to a Northern kingdom . The Badami Chalukya records themselves are silent with regards to the Ayodhya origin . 
 While the northern origin theory has been dismissed by many historians , the epigraphist K. V. Ramesh has suggested that an earlier southern migration is a distinct possibility which needs examination . According to him , the complete absence of any inscriptional reference of their family connections to Ayodhya , and their subsequent Kannadiga identity may have been due to their earlier migration into present day Karnataka region where they achieved success as chieftains and kings . Hence , the place of origin of their ancestors may have been of no significance to the kings of the empire who may have considered themselves natives of the Kannada speaking region . The writing of 12th century Kashmiri poet Bilhana suggests the Chalukya family belonged to the Shudra caste while other sources claim they were Kshatriyas . 
 The historians Jan Houben and Kamath , and the epigraphist D.C. Sircar note the Badami Chalukya inscriptions are in Kannada and Sanskrit . According to the historian N. L. Rao , their inscriptions call them <unk> and their names use indigenous Kannada titles such as <unk> and <unk> . The names of some Chalukya princes end with the pure Kannada term <unk> ( meaning " king " or " chief " ) . The Rashtrakuta inscriptions call the Chalukyas of Badami Karnatabala ( " Power of Karnata " ) . It has been proposed by the historian S. C. <unk> that the word " Chalukya " originated from <unk> or <unk> which is a Kannada word for an agricultural implement . 
 = = = Historical sources = = = 
 Inscriptions in Sanskrit and Kannada are the main source of information about the Badami Chalukya history . Among them , the Badami cave inscriptions of Mangalesha ( 578 ) , Kappe Arabhatta record of c . 700 , <unk> inscription of Pulakeshin II , the Kanchi Kailasanatha Temple inscription and Pattadakal Virupaksha Temple inscription of Vikramaditya II ( all in Kannada language ) provide more evidence of the Chalukya language . The Badami cliff inscription of Pulakeshin I ( 543 ) , the Mahakuta Pillar inscription of Mangalesha ( 595 ) and the Aihole inscription of Pulakeshin II ( 634 ) are examples of important Sanskrit inscriptions written in old Kannada script . The reign of the Chalukyas saw the arrival of Kannada as the predominant language of inscriptions along with Sanskrit , in areas of the Indian peninsula outside what is known as <unk> ( Tamil country ) . Several coins of the Badami Chalukyas with Kannada legends have been found . All this indicates that Kannada language flourished during this period . 
 Travelogues of contemporary foreign travellers have provided useful information about the Chalukyan empire . The Chinese traveller Xuanzang had visited the court of Pulakeshin II . At the time of this visit , as mentioned in the Aihole record , Pulakeshin II had divided his empire into three <unk> or great provinces comprising 99 @,@ 000 villages each . This empire possibly covered present day Karnataka , Maharashtra and coastal Konkan . Xuanzang , impressed with the governance of the empire observed that the benefits of king 's efficient administration was felt far and wide . Later , Persian emperor Khosrau II exchanged ambassadors with Pulakeshin II . 
 = = = Legends = = = 
 Court poets of the Western Chalukya dynasty of Kalyani narrate : 
 " Once when Brahma , the creator , was engaged in the performance of the <unk> ( twilight ) rituals , Indra <unk> and beseeched him to create a hero who could put to an end the increasing evil on earth . On being thus requested , Brahma looked steadily into the <unk> @-@ <unk> ( the water of oblation in his palm ) and out sprang thence a great warrior , the progenitor of the Chalukyas " . The Chalukyas claimed to have been nursed by the Sapta Matrikas ( " seven divine mothers " ) and were worshippers of many gods including Siva , Vishnu , Chamundi , Surya , Kubera , Parvati , Vinayaka and Kartikeya . 
 Some scholars connect the Chalukyas with the <unk> of Gujarat . According to a myth mentioned in latter manuscripts of Prithviraj <unk> , <unk> were born out of fire @-@ pit ( <unk> ) at Mount Abu . However it has been reported that the story of <unk> is not mentioned at all in the original version of the Prithviraj <unk> preserved in the Fort Library at Bikaner . 
 According to the <unk> inscription of King Vikramaditya VI ( 11th century or later ) , the Chalukyas originally hailed from Ayodhya where fifty @-@ nine kings ruled , and later , sixteen more of this family ruled from South India where they had migrated . This is repeated by his court poet Bilhana , who claims that the first member of the family , " Chalukya " , was so named as he was born in the " hollow of the hands " of God Brahma . 
 According to a theory put forward by Lewis , the Chalukya were descendants of the " <unk> " tribe of Iraq and that their conflict with the Pallava of Kanchi was , but a continuation of the conflict between ancient <unk> and " Parthians " , the proposed ancestors of Pallavas . However , this theory has been rejected by Kamath as it seeks to build lineages based simply on similar sounding clan names . 
 = = Periods in Chalukya history = = 
 The Chalukyas ruled over the Deccan plateau in India for over 600 years . During this period , they ruled as three closely related , but individual dynasties . These are the " Chalukyas of Badami " ( also called " Early Chalukyas " ) , who ruled between the 6th and the 8th century , and the two sibling dynasties , the " Chalukyas of Kalyani " ( also called Western Chalukyas or " Later Chalukyas " ) and the " Chalukyas of Vengi " ( also called Eastern Chalukyas ) . 
 = = = Chalukyas of Badami = = = 
 In the 6th century , with the decline of the Gupta dynasty and their immediate successors in northern India , major changes began to happen in the area south of the Vindyas – the Deccan and <unk> . The age of small kingdoms had given way to large empires in this region . The Chalukya dynasty was established by Pulakeshin I in 543 . Pulakeshin I took Vatapi ( modern Badami in Bagalkot district , Karnataka ) under his control and made it his capital . Pulakeshin I and his descendants are referred to as " Chalukyas of Badami " . They ruled over an empire that comprised the entire state of Karnataka and most of Andhra Pradesh in the Deccan . 
 Pulakeshin II , whose <unk> name was <unk> , commanded control over the entire Deccan and is perhaps the most well @-@ known emperor of the Badami dynasty . He is considered one of the notable kings in Indian history . His queens were princess from the Alupa Dynasty of South Canara and the Western Ganga Dynasty of Talakad , clans with whom the Chalukyas maintained close family and marital relationships . Pulakeshin II extended the Chalukya Empire up to the northern extents of the Pallava kingdom and halted the southward march of Harsha by defeating him on the banks of the river Narmada . He then defeated the <unk> in the southeastern Deccan . Pallava Narasimhavarman however reversed this victory in 642 by attacking and occupying Badami temporarily . It is presumed Pulakeshin II , " the great hero " , died fighting . 
 The Badami Chalukya dynasty went into a brief decline following the death of Pulakeshin II due to internal feuds when Badami was occupied by the Pallavas for a period of thirteen years . It recovered during the reign of Vikramaditya I , who succeeded in pushing the Pallavas out of Badami and restoring order to the empire . Vikramaditya I took the title " <unk> " ( lit " Sovereign of the <unk> " or Pallavas ) . The thirty @-@ seven year rule of Vijayaditya ( 696 – 733 ) was a prosperous one and is known for prolific temple building activity . 
 The empire was its peak again during the rule of the illustrious Vikramaditya II ( 733 – 744 ) who is known not only for his repeated invasions of the territory of Tondaimandalam and his subsequent victories over Pallava Nandivarman II , but also for his benevolence towards the people and the monuments of Kanchipuram , the Pallava capital . He thus avenged the earlier humiliation of the Chalukyas by the Pallavas and engraved a Kannada inscription on the victory pillar at the Kailasanatha Temple . During his reign Arab intruders of the Umayyad Caliphate invaded southern Gujarat which was under Chalukya rule but the Arabs were defeated and driven out by Pulakesi , a Chalukya governor of <unk> . He later overran the other traditional kingdoms of Tamil country , the Pandyas , the Cholas and the Cheras in addition to subduing a Kalabhra ruler . The last Chalukya king , Kirtivarman II , was overthrown by the Rashtrakuta King Dantidurga in 753 . At their peak , the Chalukyas ruled a vast empire stretching from the Kaveri in the south to the Narmada in the north . 
 = = = Chalukyas of Kalyani = = = 
 The Chalukyas revived their fortunes in 973 after over 200 years of dormancy when much of the Deccan was under the rule of the Rashtrakutas . The genealogy of the kings of this empire is still debated . One theory , based on contemporary literary and inscriptional evidence plus the finding that the Western Chalukyas employed titles and names commonly used by the early Chalukyas , suggests that the Western Chalukya kings belonged to the same family line as the illustrious Badami Chalukya dynasty of the 6th century while other Western Chalukya inscriptional evidence indicates they were a distinct line unrelated to the Early Chalukyas . 
 Tailapa II , a Rashtrakuta feudatory ruling from Tardavadi – 1000 ( Bijapur district ) overthrew Karka II , re @-@ established the Chalukya rule in the western Deccan and recovered most of the Chalukya empire . The Western Chalukyas ruled for over 200 years and were in constant conflict with the Cholas , and with their cousins , the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi . Vikramaditya VI is widely considered the most notable ruler of the dynasty . Starting from the very beginning of his reign , which lasted fifty years , he abolished the original Saka era and established the Vikrama Era . Most subsequent Chalukya inscriptions are dated in this new era . Vikramaditya VI was an ambitious and skilled military leader . Under his leadership the Western Chalukyas were able to end the Chola influence over Vengi ( coastal Andhra ) and become the dominant power in the Deccan . The Western Chalukya period was an important age in the development of Kannada literature and Sanskrit literature . They went into their final dissolution towards the end of the 12th century with the rise of the Hoysala Empire , the Pandyas , the Kakatiya and the Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri . 
 = = = Chalukyas of Vengi = = = 
 Pulakeshin II conquered the eastern Deccan , corresponding to the coastal districts of modern Andhra Pradesh in 616 , defeating the remnants of the <unk> kingdom . He appointed his brother <unk> Vishnuvardhana as Viceroy in 621 . Thus the Eastern Chalukyas were originally of Kannada stock . After the death of Pulakeshin II , the Vengi Viceroyalty developed into an independent kingdom and included the region between Nellore and Visakhapatnam . 
 After the decline of the Badami Chalukya empire in the mid @-@ 8th century , territorial disputes flared up between the Rashtrakutas , the new rulers of the western <unk> , and the Eastern Chalukyas . For much of the next two centuries , the Eastern Chalukyas had to accept subordination towards the Rashtrakutas . Apart from a rare military success , such as the one by Vijayaditya II ( <unk> @-@ 847 ) , it was only during the rule of Bhima I ( <unk> @-@ 921 ) that these Chalukyas were able to celebrate a measure of independence . After the death of Bhima I , the Andhra region once again saw succession disputes and interference in Vengi affairs by the Rashtrakutas . 
 The fortunes of the Eastern Chalukyas took a turn around 1000 . Danarnava , their king , was killed in battle in 973 by the Telugu <unk> King Bhima who then imposed his rule over the region for twenty @-@ seven years . During this time , Danarnava 's two sons took refuge in the Chola kingdom . <unk> Bhima ' s invasion of Tondaimandalam , a Chola territory , and his subsequent death on the battlefield opened up a new era in Chola – Chalukya relations . <unk> I , the elder son of Danarnava was crowned as the ruler of Vengi in 1000 , though under the control of king Rajaraja Chola I. This new relationship between the Cholas and the coastal Andhra kingdom was unacceptable to the Western Chalukyas , who had by then replaced the Rashtrakutas as the main power in the western Deccan . The Western Chalukyas sought to brook the growing Chola influence in the Vengi region but were unsuccessful . 
 Initially , the Eastern Chalukyas had encouraged Kannada language and literature , though , after a period of time , local factors took over and they gave importance to Telugu language . Telugu literature owes its growth to the Eastern Chalukyas . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Badami Chalukya era was an important period in the development of South Indian architecture . Their style of architecture is called " Chalukyan architecture " or " Karnata Dravida architecture " . Nearly a hundred monuments built by them , rock cut ( cave ) and structural , are found in the Malaprabha river basin in modern Bagalkot district of northern Karnataka . The building material they used was a reddish @-@ golden Sandstone found locally . Though they ruled a vast empire , the Chalukyan workshops concentrated most of their temple building activity in a relatively small area within the Chalukyan heartland – Aihole , Badami , Pattadakal and Mahakuta in modern Karnataka state . 
 Their temple building activity can be categorised into three phases . The early phase began in the last quarter of the 6th century and resulted in many cave temples , prominent among which are three elementary cave temples at Aihole ( one Vedic , one Jain and one Buddhist which is incomplete ) , followed by four developed cave temples at Badami ( of which cave 3 , a Vaishnava temple , is dated accurately to 578 CE ) . These cave temples at Badami are similar , in that , each has a plain exterior but an exceptionally well finished interior consisting of a pillared verandah , a columned hall ( mantapa ) and a cella ( shrine , cut deep into rock ) which contains the deity of worship . In Badami , three caves temples are Vedic and one in Jain . The Vedic temples contain large well sculpted images of Harihara , <unk> , Varaha , Narasimha , Trivikrama , Vishnu seated on Anantha ( the snake ) and Nataraja ( dancing Shiva ) . 
 The second phase of temple building was at Aihole ( where some seventy structures exist and has been called " one of the cradles of Indian temple architecture " ) and Badami . Though the exact dating of these temples has been debated , there is consensus that the beginnings of these constructions are from c . 600 . These are the Lad Khan Temple ( dated by some to c . 450 but more accurately to 620 ) with its interesting perforated stone windows and sculptures of river goddesses ; the <unk> Jain Temple ( 634 ) which shows progress in structural design ; the Durga Temple with its northern Indian style tower ( 8th century ) and experiments to adapt a Buddhist <unk> design to a brahminical one ; the <unk> Gudi Temple with a new inclusion , a vestibule , connecting the sanctum to the hall . Other dravida style temples from this period are the <unk> Temple at <unk> ; the <unk> Temple , the <unk> Temple and the Mallikarjuna Temple at Mahakuta ; and the Lower <unk> Temple , the <unk> <unk> Temple ( upper ) and the <unk> Temple at Badami . 
 The structural temples at Pattadakal , built in the 8th century and now a UNESCO World Heritage Site , marks the culmination and mature phase of Badami Chalukyan architecture . The <unk> group of temples at Badami are also from this period . There are ten temples at Pattadakal , six in southern dravida style and four in the northern nagara style . Well known among these are the <unk> Temple ( 725 ) , the Virupaksha Temple ( 740 – 745 ) and the Mallikarjuna Temple ( 740 – 745 ) in the southern style . The <unk> temple ( 680 ) and <unk> Temple ( 740 ) are early attempts in the nagara – dravida fusion style . Inscriptional evidence suggests that the Virupaksha and the Mallikarjuna Temples were commissioned by the two queens of King Vikramaditya II after his military success over the Pallavas of Kanchipuram . Some well known names of Chalukyan architects are <unk> <unk> , <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 The reign of Western Chalukyas was an important period in the development of Deccan architecture . Their architecture served as a conceptual link between the Badami Chalukya architecture of the 8th century and the Hoysala architecture popularised in the 13th century . The centre of their cultural and temple @-@ building activity lay in the Tungabhadra region of modern Karnataka state , encompassing the present @-@ day Dharwad district ; it included areas of present @-@ day Haveri and Gadag districts . Here , large medieval workshops built numerous monuments . These monuments , regional variants of pre @-@ existing dravida temples , defined the Karnata dravida tradition . 
 The most notable of the many buildings dating from this period are the Mahadeva Temple at Itagi in the Koppal district , the Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi in the Gadag district , the Mallikarjuna Temple at Kuruvatti , and the Kallesvara Temple at Bagali , both in the Davangere district . Other notable constructions are the Dodda Basappa Temple at Dambal ( Gadag district ) , the Siddhesvara Temple at Haveri ( Haveri district ) , and the Amrtesvara Temple at Annigeri ( Dharwad district ) . The Eastern Chalukyas built some fine temples at <unk> , in modern eastern Andhra Pradesh . 
 = = Literature = = 
 The Aihole inscription of Pulakeshin II ( 634 ) written by his court poet Ravikirti in Sanskrit language and Kannada script is considered as an classical piece of poetry . A few verses of a poet named <unk> who describes herself as the " dark Sarasvati " have been preserved . It is possible that she may have been a queen of prince <unk> ( a son of Pulakeshin II ) . Famous writers in Sanskrit from the Western Chalukya period are Vijnaneshwara who achieved fame by writing Mitakshara , a book on Hindu law , and King Someshvara III , a noted scholar , who compiled an encyclopedia of all arts and sciences called Manasollasa . 
 From the period of the Badami Chalukyas , references are made to the existence of Kannada literature , though not much has survived . Inscriptions however refer to Kannada as the " natural language " . The Kappe Arabhatta record of c . 700 in tripadi ( three line ) metre is the earliest available work in Kannada poetics . <unk> Katha , which was quoted later by <unk> , is believed to be a eulogy of Pulakeshin II and to have belonged to this period . Other probable Kannada writers , whose works are not extant now but titles of which are known from independent references are <unk> ( 650 ) , who is said to have authored the <unk> , and <unk> ( also called <unk> , 650 or earlier ) , the possible author of the Chudamani ( " Crest Jewel " ) , a lengthy commentary on logic . 
 The rule of the Western and Eastern Chalukyas , however , is a major event in the history of Kannada and Telugu literatures respectively . By the 9th – 10th centuries , Kannada language had already seen some of its most notable writers . The " three gems " of Kannada literature , Adikavi Pampa , Sri Ponna and Ranna belonged to this period . In the 11th century , Telugu literature was born under the patronage of the Eastern Chalukyas with <unk> Bhatta as its first writer . 
 = = Badami Chalukya country = = 
 = = = Army = = = 
 The army was well organised and this was the reason for Pulakeshin II 's success beyond the Vindyas . It consisted of an infantry , a cavalry , an elephant corps and a powerful navy . The Chinese traveller Hiuen @-@ Tsiang wrote that the Chalukyan army had hundreds of elephants which were intoxicated with liquor prior to battle . It was with their navy that they conquered <unk> ( Goa ) , and Puri on east coast of India . Rashtrakuta inscriptions use the term Karnatabala when referring to the powerful Chalukya armies . 
 = = = Land governance = = = 
 The government , at higher levels , was closely modelled after the <unk> and Satavahana administrative machinery . The empire was divided into <unk> ( provinces ) , then into smaller <unk> ( Mandala ) , Vishaya ( district ) , <unk> ( group of 10 villages ) which is similar to the <unk> unit used by the Kadambas . At the lower levels of administration , the Kadamba style prevailed fully . The Sanjan plates of Vikramaditya I even mentions a land unit called <unk> . In addition to imperial provinces , there were autonomous regions ruled by feudatories such as the Alupas , the Gangas , the Banas and the <unk> . Local assemblies and guilds looked after local issues . Groups of <unk> ( learned brahmins ) looked after agraharas ( called <unk> or " place of higher learning " ) such as at Badami which was served by 2000 <unk> and Aihole which was served by 500 <unk> . Taxes were levied and were called the <unk> – tax on loads , the <unk> – tax on retail goods in transit , the <unk> – sales tax , the <unk> – betel tax , <unk> – land tax and the <unk> – tax levied to support royalty . 
 = = = Coinage = = = 
 The Badami Chalukyas minted coins that were of a different standard compared to the coins of the northern kingdoms . The coins had Nagari and Kannada legends . The coins of Mangalesha had the symbol of a temple on the obverse and a ' sceptre between lamps ' or a temple on the reverse . Pulakeshin II 's coins had a caparisoned lion facing right on the obverse and a temple on the reverse . The coins weighed 4 grams and were called , in old @-@ Kannada , hun ( or <unk> ) and had fractions such as fana ( or <unk> ) and the quarter fana ( the modern day Kannada equivalent being hana – which literally means " money " ) . A gold coin called <unk> is mentioned in a record at the <unk> Temple at Pattadakal , which later came to be known as varaha ( their royal emblem ) . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Both Shaivism and Vaishnavism flourished during the Badami Chalukya period , though it seems the former was more popular . Famous temples were built in places such as Pattadakal , Aihole and Mahakuta , and priests ( <unk> ) were invited from northern India . Vedic sacrifices , religious vows ( vrata ) and the giving of gifts ( <unk> ) was important . The Badami kings were initially followers of Vedic <unk> and dedicated temples to popular Hindu deities in Aihole . Sculptures of deities testify to the popularity of Hindu Gods such as Vishnu , Shiva , Kartikeya , Ganapathi , Shakti , Surya and Sapta Matrikas ( " seven mothers " ) . The Badami kings also performed the Ashwamedha ( " horse sacrifice " ) . The worship of <unk> Gauri , a fertility goddess is known . Jainism too was a prominent religion during this period . The kings of the dynasty were however secular and actively encouraged Jainism . One of the Badami Cave temples is dedicated to the Jain faith . Jain temples were also erected in the Aihole complex , the temple at <unk> being one such example . Ravikirti , the court poet of Pulakeshin II was a Jain . Queen <unk> consecrated a temple for the Trimurti ( " Hindu trinity " ) at Badami . Sculptures of the Trimurti , Harihara ( half Vishnu , half Shiva ) and <unk> ( half Shiva , half woman ) provide ample evidence of their tolerance . Buddhism was on a decline , having made its ingress into Southeast Asia . This is confirmed by the writings of Hiuen @-@ Tsiang . Badami , Aihole , <unk> and Puligere ( modern Lakshmeshwar in the Gadag district ) were primary places of learning . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 The Hindu caste system was present and devadasis were recognised by the government . Some kings had concubines ( <unk> ) who were given much respect , and Sati was perhaps absent since widows like <unk> and <unk> are mentioned in records . Devadasis were however present in temples . Sage Bharata 's <unk> , the precursor to Bharatanatyam , the classical dance of South India , was popular and is seen in many sculptures and is mentioned in inscriptions . Some women from the royal family enjoyed political power in administration . Queen <unk> was a noted Sanskrit poetess , <unk> , the younger sister of Vijayaditya ( and queen of Alupa King <unk> ) made several grants and had a Jain basadi called <unk> constructed at Puligere , and the queens of Vikramaditya II , <unk> and <unk> made grants and possibly consecrated the <unk> Temple ( now called Virupaksha temple ) but also and the Mallikarjuna temple respectively at Pattadakal . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Chalukya era may be seen as the beginning in the fusion of cultures of northern and southern India , making way for the transmission of ideas between the two regions . This is seen clearly in the field of architecture . The Chalukyas spawned the Vesara style of architecture which includes elements of the northern nagara and southern dravida styles . During this period , the expanding Sanskritic culture mingled with local Dravidian vernaculars which were already popular . Dravidian languages maintain these influences even today . This influence helped to enrich literature in these languages . The Hindu legal system owes much to the Sanskrit work Mitakshara by Vijnaneshwara in the court of Western Chalukya King Vikramaditya VI . Perhaps the greatest work in legal literature , Mitakshara is a commentary on Yajnavalkya and is a treatise on law based on earlier writings and has found acceptance in most parts of India . Englishman Henry Thomas Colebrooke later translated into English the section on inheritance , giving it currency in the British Indian court system . It was during the Western Chalukya rule that the Bhakti movement gained momentum in South India , in the form of Ramanujacharya and Basavanna , later spreading into northern India . 
 A celebration called Chalukya <unk> , a three @-@ day festival of music and dance , organised by the Government of Karnataka , is held every year at Pattadakal , Badami and Aihole . The event is a celebration of the achievements of the Chalukyas in the realm of art , craft , music and dance . The program , which starts at Pattadakal and ends in Aihole , is inaugurated by the Chief Minister of Karnataka . Singers , dancers , poets and other artists from all over the country take part in this event . In the 26 February 2006 celebration , 400 art troupes took part in the festivities . Colorful cut outs of the Varaha the Chalukya emblem , Satyashraya Pulakeshin ( Pulakeshin II ) , famous sculptural masterpieces such as Durga , <unk> ( Durga killing demon Mahishasura ) were present everywhere . The program at Pattadakal is named <unk> <unk> after the famous architect of the Virupaksha temple , Gundan <unk> . At Badami it is called Chalukya <unk> Vedike and at Aihole , Ravikirti Vedike after the famous poet and minister ( Ravikirti ) in the court of Pulakeshin II . <unk> <unk> , a Kannada movie of the 1960s starring Dr. Rajkumar celebrates the life and times of the great king . 
 = Delaware Route 52 = 
 Delaware Route 52 ( DE 52 ) is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from U.S. Route 13 Business ( US 13 Bus . ) in downtown Wilmington north to Pennsylvania Route 52 ( PA 52 ) at the Pennsylvania border near Centerville . DE 52 runs through the city of Wilmington and passes through areas of the Brandywine Valley north of Wilmington . DE 52 intersects Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) / US 202 and DE 2 in Wilmington and DE 100 / DE 141 and DE 82 in Greenville . The entire route is designated as part of the Brandywine Valley National Scenic Byway , a National Scenic Byway and Delaware Byway while most of the route is also designated as part of the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Byway of the Delaware Byways system . The road was built as the Kennett Pike , a turnpike , between 1811 and 1813 at a cost of $ 30 @,@ 000 . The Kennett Pike was bought by Pierre S. du Pont , II in 1919 and upgraded to a state highway ; which he paved at a cost of $ 85 @,@ 000 per mile . Pierre S. du Pont , II later sold it to the State of Delaware for $ 1 . The road received the DE 52 designation by 1936 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 52 begins at US 13 Bus . , which is routed on the one @-@ way pair of North Walnut Street northbound and North King Street southbound near Rodney Square in downtown Wilmington . From here , DE 52 follows the one @-@ way pair of East 11th Street eastbound and East 12th Street westbound to the northwest , becoming West 11th Street and West 12th Street at the North Market Street intersection . The one @-@ way pair heads northwest past downtown high @-@ rise buildings , carrying three lanes in each direction . Both directions of DE 52 merge onto Delaware Avenue , an eight @-@ lane divided highway , and the route reaches an interchange with I @-@ 95 / US 202 . Past this interchange , the route narrows to six lanes and leaves downtown Wilmington . DE 52 splits from Delaware Avenue by continuing northwest on Pennsylvania Avenue , a four @-@ lane undivided road that heads to the north of the Ursuline Academy and passes through urban areas of homes and businesses . The road intersects the eastern terminus of DE 2 in a commercial area and passes under CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision . The route runs through more residential areas north of the <unk> Park neighborhood , passing to the northeast of the Wilmington Campus of the University of Delaware . 
 DE 52 leaves Wilmington and becomes Kennett Pike , heading through wooded areas of suburban homes . The road heads into Greenville and widens into a divided highway as it comes to an interchange with the DE 100 / DE 141 freeway . Past this interchange , the route continues into business areas , crossing an East Penn Railroad line before passing to the east of Alexis I. duPont High School . DE 52 leaves Greenville and narrows to a two @-@ lane undivided road as it heads into wooded areas then open fields to the west and Twin Lakes Farm and Twin Lakes Brewing Company , intersecting the southern terminus of DE 82 . The road continues through more forested suburban areas , passing to the west of the Wilmington Country Club and to the east of the Delaware Museum of Natural History . The route passes to the west of the Winterthur Museum and Country Estate and heads into the community of Centerville . DE 52 continues northwest to its northern terminus at the Pennsylvania border , where it continues into that state as PA 52 to Longwood Gardens and West Chester . 
 The entire length of DE 52 is part of the Brandywine Valley National Scenic Byway , a National Scenic Byway and Delaware Byway . The route between Washington and West streets in Wilmington and the Pennsylvania border is also part of the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Byway of the Delaware Byways system . DE 52 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 37 @,@ 694 vehicles at the Dupont Road intersection to a low of 5 @,@ 654 vehicles at the southern terminus at US 13 Bus . All of DE 52 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 On January 21 , 1811 , the Wilmington and Kennett Turnpike Company was incorporated to build a turnpike from Wilmington to the Pennsylvania border at Centreville . The road was built between 1811 and 1813 at a cost of $ 30 @,@ 000 . The charter of the turnpike gave Christiana Hundred the option to purchase the road in 1820 and remove the tolls . The Kennett Pike had two toll gates north of Wilmington . In 1919 , Pierre S. du Pont bought the road and the toll gates were removed . The road was widened and paved following the sale and eventually sold to the Delaware State Highway Department . When Delaware designated state highways by 1936 , DE 52 was designated onto its current alignment . In 1939 , the route was widened to four lanes between Rising Sun Lane and Barley Mill Road to alleviate traffic congestion during peak hours . The portion of DE 52 along Delaware Avenue was widened to four lanes in November 1940 . In 2002 , DE 52 was designated as part of the Brandywine Valley Scenic Highway in the Delaware Scenic and Historic Highways system ; it was designated a National Scenic Byway in 2005 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Mileposts run from north to south . The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Ariel ( moon ) = 
 Ariel is the fourth @-@ largest of the 27 known moons of Uranus . Ariel orbits and rotates in the equatorial plane of Uranus , which is almost perpendicular to the orbit of Uranus , and so has an extreme seasonal cycle . 
 It was discovered in October 1851 by William Lassell , and named for a character in two different pieces of literature . As of 2012 , much of the detailed knowledge of Ariel derives from a single flyby of Uranus performed by the spacecraft Voyager 2 in 1986 , which managed to image around 35 % of the moon 's surface . There are no active plans at present to return to study the moon in more detail , although various concepts such as a Uranus orbiter and probe are proposed from time to time . 
 After Miranda , Ariel is the second @-@ smallest of Uranus ' five major rounded satellites , and the second @-@ closest to its planet . Among the smallest of the Solar System 's 19 known spherical moons ( it ranks 14th among them in diameter ) , it is believed to be composed of roughly equal parts ice and rocky material . Like all of Uranus ' moons , Ariel probably formed from an accretion disc that surrounded the planet shortly after its formation , and , like other large moons , it is likely differentiated , with an inner core of rock surrounded by a mantle of ice . Ariel has a complex surface consisting of extensive cratered terrain cross @-@ cut by a system of scarps , canyons , and ridges . The surface shows signs of more recent geological activity than other Uranian moons , most likely due to tidal heating . 
 = = Discovery and name = = 
 Discovered on 24 October 1851 by William Lassell , it is named for a sky spirit in Alexander Pope 's The Rape of the Lock and Shakespeare 's The Tempest . 
 Both Ariel and the slightly larger Uranian satellite Umbriel were discovered by William Lassell on 24 October 1851 . Although William Herschel , who discovered Uranus 's two largest moons Titania and Oberon in 1787 , claimed to have observed four additional moons , this was never confirmed and those four objects are now thought to be spurious . 
 All of Uranus 's moons are named after characters from the works of William Shakespeare or Alexander Pope 's The Rape of the Lock . The names of all four satellites of Uranus then known were suggested by John Herschel in 1852 at the request of Lassell . Ariel is named after the leading sylph in The Rape of the Lock . It is also the name of the spirit who serves Prospero in Shakespeare 's The Tempest . The moon is also designated Uranus I. 
 = = Orbit = = 
 Among Uranus 's five major moons , Ariel is the second closest to the planet , orbiting at the distance of about 190 @,@ 000 km . Its orbit has a small eccentricity and is inclined very little relative to the equator of Uranus . Its orbital period is around 2 @.@ 5 Earth days , coincident with its rotational period . This means that one side of the moon always faces the planet ; a condition known as tidal lock . Ariel 's orbit lies completely inside the Uranian magnetosphere . The trailing hemispheres ( those facing away from their directions of orbit ) of airless satellites orbiting inside a magnetosphere like Ariel are struck by magnetospheric plasma co @-@ rotating with the planet . This bombardment may lead to the darkening of the trailing hemispheres observed for all Uranian moons except Oberon ( see below ) . Ariel also captures magnetospheric charged particles , producing a pronounced dip in energetic particle count near the moon 's orbit observed by Voyager 2 in 1986 . 
 Because Ariel , like Uranus , orbits the Sun almost on its side relative to its rotation , its northern and southern hemispheres face either directly towards or directly away from the Sun at the solstices . This means it is subject to an extreme seasonal cycle ; just as Earth 's poles see permanent night or daylight around the solstices , so Ariel 's poles see permanent night or daylight for half a Uranian year ( 42 Earth years ) , with the Sun rising close to the zenith over one of the poles at each solstice . The Voyager 2 flyby coincided with the 1986 southern summer solstice , when nearly the entire northern hemisphere was dark . Once every 42 years , when Uranus has an equinox and its equatorial plane intersects the Earth , mutual occultations of Uranus 's moons become possible . A number of such events occurred in 2007 – 2008 , including an occultation of Ariel by Umbriel on 19 August 2007 . 
 Currently Ariel is not involved in any orbital resonance with other Uranian satellites . In the past , however , it may have been in a 5 : 3 resonance with Miranda , which could have been partially responsible for the heating of that moon ( although the maximum heating attributable to a former 1 : 3 resonance of Umbriel with Miranda was likely about three times greater ) . Ariel may have once been locked in the 4 : 1 resonance with Titania , from which it later escaped . Escape from a mean motion resonance is much easier for the moons of Uranus than for those of Jupiter or Saturn , due to Uranus 's lesser degree of oblateness . This resonance , which was likely encountered about 3 @.@ 8 billion years ago , would have increased Ariel 's orbital eccentricity , resulting in tidal friction due to time @-@ varying tidal forces from Uranus . This would have caused warming of the moon 's interior by as much as 20 K. 
 = = Composition and internal structure = = 
 Ariel is the fourth largest of the Uranian moons , and may have the third greatest mass . The moon 's density is 1 @.@ 66 g / cm3 , which indicates that it consists of roughly equal parts water ice and a dense non @-@ ice component . The latter could consist of rock and carbonaceous material including heavy organic compounds known as tholins . The presence of water ice is supported by infrared spectroscopic observations , which have revealed crystalline water ice on the surface of the moon . Water ice absorption bands are stronger on Ariel 's leading hemisphere than on its trailing hemisphere . The cause of this asymmetry is not known , but it may be related to bombardment by charged particles from Uranus 's magnetosphere , which is stronger on the trailing hemisphere ( due to the plasma 's co @-@ rotation ) . The energetic particles tend to sputter water ice , decompose methane trapped in ice as clathrate hydrate and darken other organics , leaving a dark , carbon @-@ rich residue behind . 
 Except for water , the only other compound identified on the surface of Ariel by infrared spectroscopy is carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) , which is concentrated mainly on its trailing hemisphere . Ariel shows the strongest spectroscopic evidence for CO2 of any Uranian satellite , and was the first Uranian satellite on which this compound was discovered . The origin of the carbon dioxide is not completely clear . It might be produced locally from carbonates or organic materials under the influence of the energetic charged particles coming from Uranus 's magnetosphere or solar ultraviolet radiation . This hypothesis would explain the asymmetry in its distribution , as the trailing hemisphere is subject to a more intense magnetospheric influence than the leading hemisphere . Another possible source is the outgassing of primordial CO2 trapped by water ice in Ariel 's interior . The escape of CO2 from the interior may be related to past geological activity on this moon . 
 Given its size , rock / ice composition and the possible presence of salt or ammonia in solution to lower the freezing point of water , Ariel 's interior may be differentiated into a rocky core surrounded by an icy mantle . If this is the case , the radius of the core ( 372 km ) is about 64 % of the radius of the moon , and its mass is around 56 % of the moon 's mass — the parameters are dictated by the moon 's composition . The pressure in the center of Ariel is about 0 @.@ 3 GPa ( 3 kbar ) . The current state of the icy mantle is unclear , although the existence of a subsurface ocean is considered unlikely . 
 = = Surface = = 
 = = = Albedo and color = = = 
 Ariel is the most reflective of Uranus 's moons . Its surface shows an opposition surge : the reflectivity decreases from 53 % at a phase angle of 0 ° ( geometrical albedo ) to 35 % at an angle of about 1 ° . The Bond albedo of Ariel is about 23 % — the highest among Uranian satellites . The surface of Ariel is generally neutral in color . There may be an asymmetry between the leading and trailing hemispheres ; the latter appears to be redder than the former by 2 % . Ariel 's surface generally does not demonstrate any correlation between albedo and geology on the one hand and color on the other hand . For instance , canyons have the same color as the cratered terrain . However , bright impact deposits around some fresh craters are slightly bluer in color . There are also some slightly blue spots , which do not correspond to any known surface features . 
 = = = Surface features = = = 
 The observed surface of Ariel can be divided into three terrain types : cratered terrain , ridged terrain , and plains . The main surface features are impact craters , canyons , fault scarps , ridges , and troughs . 
 The cratered terrain , a rolling surface covered by numerous impact craters and centered on Ariel 's south pole , is the moon 's oldest and most geographically extensive geological unit . It is intersected by a network of scarps , canyons ( graben ) , and narrow ridges mainly occurring in Ariel 's mid @-@ southern latitudes . The canyons , known as chasmata , probably represent graben formed by extensional faulting , which resulted from global tensional stresses caused by the freezing of water ( or aqueous ammonia ) in the moon 's interior ( see below ) . They are 15 – 50 km wide and trend mainly in an east- or northeasterly direction . The floors of many canyons are convex ; rising up by 1 – 2 km . Sometimes the floors are separated from the walls of canyons by grooves ( troughs ) about 1 km wide . The widest graben have grooves running along the crests of their convex floors , which are called valles . The longest canyon is Kachina Chasma , at over 620 km in length ( the feature extends into the hemisphere of Ariel that Voyager 2 did not see illuminated ) . 
 The second main terrain type — ridged terrain — comprises bands of ridges and troughs hundreds of kilometers in extent . It bounds the cratered terrain and cuts it into polygons . Within each band , which can be up to 25 to 70 km wide , are individual ridges and troughs up to 200 km long and between 10 and 35 km apart . The bands of ridged terrain often form continuations of canyons , suggesting that they may be a modified form of the graben or the result of a different reaction of the crust to the same extensional stresses , such as brittle failure . 
 The youngest terrain observed on Ariel are the plains : relatively low @-@ lying smooth areas that must have formed over a long period of time , judging by their varying levels of cratering . The plains are found on the floors of canyons and in a few irregular depressions in the middle of the cratered terrain . In the latter case they are separated from the cratered terrain by sharp boundaries , which in some cases have a lobate pattern . The most likely origin for the plains is through volcanic processes ; their linear vent geometry , resembling terrestrial shield volcanoes , and distinct topographic margins suggest that the erupted liquid was very viscous , possibly a supercooled water / ammonia solution , with solid ice volcanism also a possibility . The thickness of these hypothetical <unk> flows is estimated at 1 – 3 km . The canyons must therefore have formed at a time when endogenic resurfacing was still taking place on Ariel . A few of these areas appear to be less than 100 million years old , suggesting that Ariel may still be geologically active in spite of its relatively small size and lack of current tidal heating . 
 Ariel appears to be fairly evenly cratered compared to other moons of Uranus ; the relative paucity of large craters suggests that its surface does not date to the Solar System 's formation , which means that Ariel must have been completely resurfaced at some point of its history . Ariel 's past geologic activity is believed to have been driven by tidal heating at a time when its orbit was more eccentric than currently . The largest crater observed on Ariel , <unk> , is only 78 km across , and shows signs of subsequent deformation . All large craters on Ariel have flat floors and central peaks , and few of the craters are surrounded by bright ejecta deposits . Many craters are polygonal , indicating that their appearance was influenced by the preexisting crustal structure . In the cratered plains there are a few large ( about 100 km in diameter ) light patches that may be degraded impact craters . If this is the case they would be similar to palimpsests on Jupiter 's moon Ganymede . It has been suggested that a circular depression 245 km in diameter located at 10 ° S 30 ° E is a large , highly degraded impact structure . 
 = = Origin and evolution = = 
 Ariel is thought to have formed from an accretion disc or subnebula ; a disc of gas and dust that either existed around Uranus for some time after its formation or was created by the giant impact that most likely gave Uranus its large obliquity . The precise composition of the subnebula is not known ; however , the higher density of Uranian moons compared to the moons of Saturn indicates that it may have been relatively water @-@ poor . Significant amounts of carbon and nitrogen may have been present in the form of carbon monoxide ( CO ) and molecular nitrogen ( N2 ) , instead of methane and ammonia . The moons that formed in such a subnebula would contain less water ice ( with CO and N2 trapped as clathrate ) and more rock , explaining the higher density . 
 The accretion process probably lasted for several thousand years before the moon was fully formed . Models suggest that impacts accompanying accretion caused heating of Ariel 's outer layer , reaching a maximum temperature of around 195 K at a depth of about 31 km . After the end of formation , the subsurface layer cooled , while the interior of Ariel heated due to decay of radioactive elements present in its rocks . The cooling near @-@ surface layer contracted , while the interior expanded . This caused strong extensional stresses in the moon 's crust reaching estimates of 30 MPa , which may have led to cracking . Some present @-@ day scarps and canyons may be a result of this process , which lasted for about 200 million years . 
 The initial accretional heating together with continued decay of radioactive elements and likely tidal heating may have led to melting of the ice if an antifreeze like ammonia ( in the form of ammonia hydrate ) or some salt was present . The melting may have led to the separation of ice from rocks and formation of a rocky core surrounded by an icy mantle . A layer of liquid water ( ocean ) rich in dissolved ammonia may have formed at the core – mantle boundary . The eutectic temperature of this mixture is 176 K. The ocean , however , is likely to have frozen long ago . The freezing of the water likely led to the expansion of the interior , which may have been responsible for the formation of the canyons and obliteration of the ancient surface . The liquids from the ocean may have been able to erupt to the surface , flooding floors of canyons in the process known as cryovolcanism . 
 Thermal modeling of Saturn 's moon Dione , which is similar to Ariel in size , density , and surface temperature , suggests that solid state convection could have lasted in Ariel 's interior for billions of years , and that temperatures in excess of 173 K ( the melting point of aqueous ammonia ) may have persisted near its surface for several hundred million years after formation , and near a billion years closer to the core . 
 = = Observation and exploration = = 
 The apparent magnitude of Ariel is 14 @.@ 8 ; similar to that of Pluto near perihelion . However , while Pluto can be seen through a telescope of 30 cm aperture , Ariel , due to its proximity to Uranus 's glare , is often not visible to telescopes of 40 cm aperture . 
 The only close @-@ up images of Ariel were obtained by the Voyager 2 probe , which photographed the moon during its flyby of Uranus in January 1986 . The closest approach of Voyager 2 to Ariel was 127 @,@ 000 km ( 79 @,@ 000 mi ) — significantly less than the distances to all other Uranian moons except Miranda . The best images of Ariel have a spatial resolution of about 2 km . They cover about 40 % of the surface , but only 35 % was photographed with the quality required for geological mapping and crater counting . At the time of the flyby the southern hemisphere of Ariel ( like those of the other moons ) was pointed towards the Sun , so the northern ( dark ) hemisphere could not be studied . No other spacecraft has ever visited the Uranian system , and no mission to Uranus and its moons is planned . The possibility of sending the Cassini spacecraft to Uranus was evaluated during its mission extension planning phase . It would take about twenty years to get to the Uranian system after departing Saturn . 
 = = = Transits = = = 
 On 26 July 2006 , the Hubble Space Telescope captured a rare transit made by Ariel on Uranus , which cast a shadow that could be seen on the Uranian cloud tops . Such events are rare and only occur around equinoxes , as the moon 's orbital plane about Uranus is tilted 98 ° to Uranus 's orbital plane about the Sun . Another transit , in 2008 , was recorded by the European Southern Observatory . 
