 If property has not been transferred , the potential trustees and beneficiaries are volunteers , and an equitable maxim is that " equity will not assist a volunteer " ; the courts will not look at the case . To get around this , the courts have developed exceptions to this rule for situations when the settlor has done " all that he could do " , the trustees or beneficiaries have acquired the property in a different way , or where the gift was made <unk> mortis causa . Formality refers to the specific language or forms used when transferring property . For chattels , no formal language or documentation is needed , unless it is made as a will . For land , the transfer must be drafted in line with the Law of Property Act 1925 and the Law of Property ( Miscellaneous Provisions ) Act 1989 . When disposing of an equitable interest , the Law of Property Act 1925 must also be followed ; much of the case law in this area has centred on the meaning of " dispose " , with many cases involving people attempting to avoid tax . 
 = = Capacity = = 
 The first requirement of an express trust is capacity ; the person creating the trust must be legally capable of doing so . Generally speaking , anyone capable of holding property can form a trust , although there are exceptions . A minor cannot hold land , and therefore cannot create a trust of land ; in addition , unless they are soldiers or " mariners at sea " , they cannot form a valid will . Where a minor tries to create a trust , it will be held <unk> , and can be repudiated by him when he reaches majority , or soon after . Where the trust is clearly of detriment to the minor , the courts may decide to take it as void ; the individual , when he reaches majority , could alternately plead non est <unk> if he had been too young to appreciate the nature of forming a trust . People who are considered mentally disordered ( under the Mental Health Act 1983 ) and have a receiver appointed cannot have trusts directly enforced against them , as they no longer have control over their property . Where there is no receiver , the mentally disordered person 's trust will be held void , unless it was made during a lucid period when the person was capable of understanding their actions . Corporations and statutory bodies only have the powers granted to them by their memorandum of association or authorising statute ; if these do not authorise the creation of trusts , any such trust will be held to be ultra vires . 
 = = Three certainties = = 
 For an express trust to be valid , the trust instrument must show certainty of intention , subject matter and object . Certainty of intention means that it must be clear that the settlor or testator wishes to create a trust ; this is not dependent on any particular language used , and a trust can be created without the word " trust " being used , or even the settlor knowing he is creating a trust . Since the 1950s , the courts have been more willing to conclude that there was intention to create a trust , rather than hold that the trust is void . Certainty of subject matter means that it must be clear what property is part of the trust . Historically the property must have been segregated from non @-@ trust property ; more recently , the courts have drawn a line between tangible and intangible assets , holding that with intangible assets there is not always a need for segregation . Certainty of objects means that it must be clear who the beneficiaries , or objects , are . The test for determining this differs depending on the type of trust ; it can be that all beneficiaries must be individually identified , or that the trustees must be able to say with certainty , if a claimant comes before them , whether he is or is not a beneficiary . 
 Uncertainty comes in four categories : conceptual uncertainty , evidential uncertainty , ascertainability and administrative unworkability . Conceptual uncertainty arises when the language is unclear , which leads to the trust being declared invalid . Evidential uncertainty is where a question of fact , such as whether a claimant is a beneficiary , cannot be answered ; this does not always lead to invalidity . Ascertainability is where a beneficiary cannot be found , and administrative unworkability arises when the nature of the trust is such that it cannot realistically be carried out . Trustees and the courts have developed various ways of resolving uncertainties , including the appointment of experts to work out evidential uncertainty , and giving trustees the power to decide who is or is not a beneficiary . 
 = = Constitution = = 
 The trust must then be formally constituted , by the transfer of its property to the trustees . For chattels , merely handing the property to the trustees is sufficient , assuming it comes with the relevant intention to create a trust . In some circumstances , providing the intention and telling the trustees where to find the property is sufficient , as in Thomas v Times Books . Where the property is land or an equitable interest in land , it must be transferred by writing in accordance with Sections 52 @-@ 3 of the Law of Property Act 1925 . When dealing with shares , the transfer is not complete until a transfer document has been completed and the company has entered the change of ownership in its books . One of the equitable maxims is that " equity will not assist a volunteer " ; if someone does not have an interest in property , they cannot bring a court case . When trusts are not properly constituted , the trustees and beneficiaries have no equitable interest in the property , and so are volunteers . There are several exceptions to this maxim . The courts are willing to hear cases where the transfer was not completed , providing the intended beneficiaries or trustees have gained an interest through being made executor of the settlor 's estate ( the rule in Strong v Bird ) , or the gift was given <unk> mortis causa , or where the settlor did all he could do , as in Re Rose , or where it would be " unconscionable " to hold the gift invalid , as in Pennington v <unk> . 
 = = Formality = = 
 As a general rule , there is no requirement for particular formalities in trust instruments , they can be oral or written . The only requirement is that they show an intention to create a trust . The exceptions are where it is a transfer of land , the transfer of existing equitable interests , or where the trust is made in a will . 
 = = = Land = = = 
 Trusts over land must comply with Section 53 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the Law of Property Act 1925 , which provides that : 
 ( b ) a declaration of trust respecting any land or any interest therein must be manifested and proved by some writing signed by some person who is able to declare such trust or by his will . 
 This means that there must be evidence of the trust 's existence should someone choose to enforce it , and does not necessarily mean it need be in existence at the trust 's creation . Contracts for disposing of land , including the transfer of land into trusts , must follow the Law of Property ( Miscellaneous Provisions ) Act 1989 , Section 2 of which provides that : 
 ( i ) A contract for the sale or other disposition of an interest in land can only be made in writing , and only by incorporating all the terms which the parties have expressly agreed in one document or , where contracts are exchanged , in each . 
 ( ii ) The terms may be incorporated in the document either being set out in it or by reference to some other document . 
 ( iii ) The document incorporating the terms or , where contracts are exchanged , one of the documents incorporating them ( but not necessarily the same one ) must be signed by or on behalf of each party to the contract . 
 = = = Equitable interests = = = 
 For disposing of existing equitable interests , the Law of Property Act 1925 provides in Section 53 ( 1 ) ( c ) that : 
 ( c ) A disposition of an equitable interest or trust subsisting at the time of the disposition , must be in writing signed by the person disposing of the same , or his agent thereunto lawfully authorised in writing or by will . 
 Much of the debate in this area is over the definition of " disposition " , and unsurprisingly almost all of the cases involve people trying to avoid tax . In Grey v IRC , the House of Lords gave disposition its " natural meaning " , saying that it meant " a transaction whereby a beneficiary who has a beneficial interest at the beginning of the transaction no longer has it at the end of the transaction " . Under the rule established in <unk> v IRC , if the owner of a sole beneficial interest instructs his trustees to transfer the property , and this is done to transfer the beneficial interest and not simply to change the trustees , this does not fall under Section 53 ( 1 ) ( c ) and requires no specific formalities . 
 Simply disclaiming a beneficial interest does not fall within Section 53 ( 1 ) ( c ) , as in Re Paradise Motor Co . Nominating somebody to receive benefits of a pension fund should the pensioner die is also not a valid disposition , as in Re Danish Bacon Co Ltd Staff Pension Fund , and neither is nominating a beneficiary under a life insurance policy , as in Gold v Hill . Where a beneficiary declares he is holding the property on behalf of another , this would be the creation of a sub @-@ trust and not subject to specific formalities . However , under <unk> v Wilberforce , such a sub @-@ trust will only be held to be valid if there is some difference between the trust and sub @-@ trust , and if the trustee @-@ beneficiary has some duties to perform . 
 = = = Wills = = = 
 For a will to be valid ( and therefore , for a trust made in a will to be valid ) it must comply with Section 9 of the Wills Act 1837 . This provides that no will is valid unless : 
 ( a ) it is in writing , and signed by the testator , or by some other person in his presence and by his direction ; and 
 ( b ) it appears that the testator intended by his signature to give effect to the will ; and 
 ( c ) the signature is made or acknowledged by the testator in the presence of two or more witnesses present at the same time ; and 
 ( d ) each witness either - 
 ( i ) attests and signs the will ; or 
 ( ii ) acknowledges his signature , in the presence of the testator ( but not necessarily in the presence of any other witnesses . 
 = USS Tecumseh ( 1863 ) = 
 USS Tecumseh was a Canonicus @-@ class monitor built for the United States Navy during the American Civil War . Although intended for forthcoming operations against Confederate fortifications guarding Mobile Bay with Rear Admiral David Farragut 's West Gulf Blockading Squadron , Tecumseh was temporarily assigned to the James River Flotilla in April 1864 . The ship helped to plant obstacles in the river and engaged Confederate artillery batteries in June . 
 Tecumseh was sunk on 5 August during the Battle of Mobile Bay when she struck a mine . The ship capsized and rests upside down northwest of Fort Morgan . The Smithsonian Institution surveyed her wreck in 1967 with the intent of raising it , but ultimately decided against the project when proffered funding was withdrawn . Several other plans to raise the wreck have been made , but all have fallen through . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 The ship was 223 feet ( 68 @.@ 0 m ) long overall , had a beam of 43 feet 4 inches ( 13 @.@ 2 m ) and had a maximum draft of 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 1 m ) . Tecumseh had a tonnage of 1 @,@ 034 tons burthen and displaced 2 @,@ 100 long tons ( 2 @,@ 100 t ) . Her crew consisted of 100 officers and enlisted men . 
 Tecumseh was powered by a two @-@ cylinder horizontal vibrating @-@ lever steam engine that drove one propeller using steam generated by two Stimers horizontal fire @-@ tube boilers . The 320 @-@ indicated @-@ horsepower ( 240 kW ) engine gave the ship a top speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . She carried 140 – 150 long tons ( 140 – 150 t ) of coal . Tecumseh 's main armament consisted of two smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading , 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) Dahlgren guns mounted in a single gun turret . Each gun weighed approximately 43 @,@ 000 pounds ( 20 @,@ 000 kg ) . They could fire a 350 @-@ pound ( 158 @.@ 8 kg ) shell up to a range of 2 @,@ 100 yards ( 1 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of + 7 ° . 
 The exposed sides of the hull were protected by five layers of 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) wrought iron plates , backed by wood . The armor of the gun turret and the pilot house consisted of ten layers of one @-@ inch plates . The ship 's deck was protected by armor 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick . A 5 @-@ by @-@ 15 @-@ inch ( 130 by 380 mm ) soft iron band was fitted around the base of the turret to prevent shells and fragments from jamming the turret as had happened to the older Passaic @-@ class monitors during the First Battle of Charleston Harbor in April 1863 . The base of the funnel ( ship ) was protected to a height of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) by 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of armor . A " rifle screen " of 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ inch ( 13 mm ) armor 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) high was installed on the top of the turret to protected the crew against Confederate snipers based on a suggestion by Commander Tunis A. M. Craven . 
 The contract for Tecumseh , named after the Indian chief , was awarded to Charles Secor & Co . ; the ship was laid down in 1862 by the primary subcontractor Joseph Colwell at his Jersey City , New Jersey shipyard . She was launched on 12 September 1863 and commissioned on 19 April 1864 with Craven in command . The ship 's construction was delayed by multiple changes ordered while she was being built that reflected battle experience with earlier monitors . This included the rebuilding of the turrets and pilot houses to increase their armor thickness from 8 inches ( 203 mm ) to 10 inches and to replace the bolts that secured their armor plates together with rivets to prevent them from being knocked loose by the shock of impact from shells striking the turret . Other changes included deepening the hull by 18 inches ( 457 mm ) to increase the ship 's buoyancy , moving the position of the turret to balance the ship 's trim and replacing all of the ship 's deck armor . 
 = = Service = = 
 After commissioning , the ship was ordered to join the North Atlantic Blockading Squadron at Newport News and arrived there on 28 April . Tecumseh was ordered to protect the transports conveying Major General Benjamin Butler 's Army of the James up the James River at the beginning of the Bermuda Hundred Campaign on 4 May . To prevent Confederate warships from coming down from the James , the Union forces blocked the channel in mid @-@ June 1864 . Tecumseh sank four hulks and a schooner and laid several boom across the river as part of this effort . On 21 June , Commander Craven spotted a line of breastworks that the enemy was building at Howlett 's Farm and the ship opened fire at the workers . The Confederates replied with a battery of four guns near the breastworks and her sisters Canonicus and Saugus joined in the bombardment . A half @-@ hour later , Confederate ships near Dutch Gap joined in , but their fire was ineffective because they were firing blindly at the Union monitors . During the engagement , Tecumseh fired forty @-@ six 15 @-@ inch shells and was not hit by any Confederate shells . Craven claimed the destruction of one gun emplacement . 
 Two days after the battle , Tecumseh sailed down the James for Norfolk , but ran aground en route when her wire steering ropes broke after having been burned half way through by the heat of her boilers . She was refloated four hours later and spend a week in Norfolk making repairs and taking on supplies . On 5 July , the ship got underway for Pensacola , Florida to join the West Gulf Blockading Squadron , towed by the side @-@ wheel gunboats Augusta and Eutaw . The ship 's engine had overheated en route and required a week 's repairs at Port Royal , South Carolina and Augusta had to turn back with engine problems , but Eutaw and Tecumseh arrived in Pensacola on 28 July . Towed by the side @-@ wheel gunboat Bienville , the monitor arrived off Mobile Bay on the evening of 4 August . 
 Farragut briefed Craven on his ship 's intended role in the battle . She and her sister Manhattan were to keep the ironclad ram CSS Tennessee away from the vulnerable wooden ships while they were passing Fort Morgan and then sink her . The river monitors Winnebago and Chickasaw were to engage the fort until all of the wooden ships had passed . The four monitors would form the starboard column of ships , closest to Fort Morgan , with Tecumseh in the lead , while the wooden ships formed a separate column to port . The eastern side of the channel closest to Fort Morgan was free of obstacles , but " torpedoes " were known to be present west of a prominent black buoy in the channel . 
 At 06 : 47 Tecumseh opened fire on Ft . Morgan 's lighthouse to test her guns . The Confederates held their fire until 07 : 05 when they began to shoot at the ships in both columns . By this time the Confederate ships had positioned themselves across the mouth of the channel , with Tennessee facing the unprotected side , and they started shooting as well . By 07 : 30 Tecumseh was about 600 yards ( 550 m ) away from Tennessee and Craven did not think that he could intercept the Confederate ironclad before Hartford entered the channel unless he passed through the field of " torpedoes " , as mines were called at the time , because of his ship 's poor maneuverability . He ordered the pilot to steer directly for Tennessee . Ten minutes later , Tecumseh struck a " torpedo " 100 yards from the Tennessee and sank in less than 30 seconds . Craven and the pilot , John Collins , arrived at the foot of the ladder leading to the main deck simultaneously with water up to their waists . Craven stepped back , saying " After you , pilot " , but was unable to follow him to safety before the monitor capsized . Including Craven , 94 of the crew went down with the ship . Commander James Jouett of the gunboat Metacomet dispatched a boat commanded by Acting Ensign Henry C. Nields to rescue any survivors . They successfully rescued ten men , including the pilot , and delivered them to Winnebago . Seven other survivors reached one of Tecumseh 's boats and four other men swam ashore and were captured . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 The ship capsized as she sank and rests upside down in 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) of water some 300 yards ( 270 m ) northwest of Fort Morgan . On 3 August 1873 , salvage rights for the wreck of Tecumseh were sold by the Department of the Treasury to James E. Slaughter for $ 50 . After the purchase , Slaughter announced that he intended to use explosives to blast the wreck into salvageable pieces . In 1876 , the relatives of the men lost on Tecumseh petitioned Congress to stop the salvage . Congress quickly passed Joint Resolution No. 23 on 15 August directing the Secretary of the Treasury to return the $ 50 to Slaughter , with 6 % interest . The Secretary of the Navy was to assume control of the wreck and was empowered to protect Tecumseh . Congress stipulated that any salvage efforts must provide for the proper removal and burial of the vessel 's dead crewmen . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , the Smithsonian Institution formed the Tecumseh Project Team , which was intended to raise the ship as the centerpiece of a planned National Armed Forces Museum Park in Washington , D. C. The team found the wreck in February 1967 , capsized and buried just off Fort Morgan , but the primary donor was forced to rescind the funding , so the project was suspended . " In a 1993 survey , archaeologists from East Carolina University reported the hull to be covered by a calcareous crust with only nominal surface deterioration present . " 
 In 1974 , Jack Friend – a Mobile naval historian – was commissioned to examine the feasibility of raising Tecumseh and concluded that it would cost an estimated $ 10 million . More modern estimates have determined a salvage and conservation cost of $ 80 million . Divers from the Smithsonian Institution recovered an anchor , dishes from the ship 's dining hall and a variety of other artifacts during their 1967 expedition . Tecumseh 's engine room gong was also removed and is currently on display at the Hampton Roads Naval Museum . The wreck site is marked and under US Coast Guard surveillance pending continued preservation efforts . She is considered a war grave and may not be disturbed without permission of the Secretary of the Navy . 
 = AASM = 
 The <unk> Air @-@ Sol <unk> ( Air @-@ to @-@ Ground Modular Weapon ) ( AASM ) " Hammer " is a French Precision @-@ Guided Munition developed by Sagem Défense Sécurité . AASM comprises a frontal guidance kit and a rear @-@ mounted range extension kit matched to a dumb bomb . The weapon is modular because it can integrate different types of guidance units and different types of bombs . 
 The basic version features a 250 @-@ kilogram ( 550 lb ) bomb plus hybrid inertial navigation system ( INS ) / Global Positioning System ( GPS ) guidance . Other variants add infrared homing or laser guidance to increase accuracy ; there are also versions with 125 @-@ kilogram ( 276 lb ) , 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) or 1 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) bomb bodies . 
 It entered service in 2007 with the French Air Force and Naval Aviation , from Rafale and Mirage 2000 . In 2011 , AASM was given the name HAMMER ( Highly Agile Modular Munition Extended Range ) . Chosen for commercial reasons , the English acronym is also used in French . The French pronunciation of " AASM " was deux @-@ A @-@ S @-@ M or A @-@ deux @-@ S @-@ M. 
 = = Development = = 
 The program started in 1997 , when the <unk> Générale pour l <unk> ( DGA ) , the French defense procurement agency , launched an international competition on the design for the weapon . In 2000 , a contract was awarded to SAGEM for an initial lot of AASM GPS / INS bomb kits , expected at the time to be delivered from 2004 and to enter service the following year . 
 = = = Validation = = = 
 A test campaign to validate in flight the main performances of this AASM variant started on December 6 , 2004 and ended on July 26 , 2005 . 
 While demonstrating excellent results , this campaign showed the need to change some of the aerodynamic features of the weapon . To compensate for delays in AASM deliveries in 2008 France ordered dual @-@ mode ( <unk> and GPS / INS @-@ guided ) GBU @-@ 49 Enhanced Paveway II kits for integration with Mirage <unk> and Rafale fighter @-@ bombers . The GPS / INS + IIR guided version completed its qualification tests on July 9 , 2008 after three firings at the DGA 's missile test range in <unk> . This 250 kg IR version performed a night launch from a Rafale fighter @-@ bomber at DGA 's <unk> test range in December 2010 . 
 According to Sagem , the weapon was launched at a range of more than 50 km from the target , which was hit within one meter . A 125 kg version was successfully test fired on January 27 , 2009 , and a laser guided variant was air @-@ launched for the first time on June 17 , 2010 . 
 = = = Cost = = = 
 According to French Senate 's Comité des Prix de <unk> des fabrications d <unk> ( <unk> ) cited by the daily La Tribune , the total cost of the AASM program including development costs and the delivery of <unk> kits is € <unk> . On that basis the per @-@ weapon cost is $ 300 @,@ 000 or twelve times the cost of the comparable American JDAM , although the latter has been manufactured in much larger quantities ( ~ 250 @,@ 000 kits ) and would be reasonable to expect a drastic reduction of the price of the French munition if larger contracts are signed and economies of scale are achieved . 
 The 2012 defence budget presented to the Senate reported the project had cost € <unk> ( ~ US $ 800m ) with a unit cost of € 164 @,@ 000 , or € 252 @,@ 000 including development costs . 
 = = Variants = = 
 AASM comes in several variants according to its size and the type of guidance used . 
 The current model features a 250 kg bomb matched to a nose @-@ mounted guidance kit and a rear @-@ mounted range extension kit , containing a rocket booster and enlarged fins . There is also a 125 kg , first tested in 2009 , and a proposed 1000 kg version . 
 As for guidance , the basic version combines data from a Global Positioning System ( GPS ) receiver and an inertial navigation system ( INS ) unit through Kalman filtering , achieving a 10 metres ( 32 ft 10 in ) circular error probability ( CEP ) . This " decametric " all @-@ weather variant is complemented by a " metric " day / night fair weather version which adds infrared homing ( IIR ) guidance that matches the target area with a target model stored in its memory for a 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) CEP . 
 A third version uses laser guidance instead of IIR allowing it to hit moving targets with more precision . It was qualified in April 2013 . 
 On October 2010 , these versions were given alphanumeric designations with the INS / GPS version becoming the SBU @-@ 38 ( SBU = Smart Bomb Unit ) , the INS / GPS / IIR version becoming the SBU @-@ 54 and the INS / GPS / <unk> version becoming the SBU @-@ 64 ; the system as a whole was renamed Hammer to make it more appealing to export customers . 
 = = Operational use = = 
 The first order for AASM was placed by the DGA in 2000 for a total of 744 units ; deliveries started in 2007 after a two @-@ year delay in development . In 2009 a second order for 680 units was placed , by the end of that year deliveries had reached 334 . 
 = = = Afghanistan = = = 
 AASM made its combat debut on April 20 , 2008 , during the War in Afghanistan when a Rafale fighter fired two in support of ground troops . 
 = = = Libya = = = 
 On 24 March 2011 it was reported that an AASM missile fired from a Dassault Rafale was used to destroy a Libyan Air Force G @-@ 2 / Galeb light ground attack / trainer jet , the first Libyan warplane to challenge the no @-@ fly zone during the 2011 Libyan civil war , on the runway just after the plane had landed at Misrata Airport . 
 On 6 April 2011 , it was reported that a AASM missile fired from a Dassault Rafale was used to destroy a Libyan tank at a range of 55 km . 
 In Libya , 225 AASM bombs have been fired 
 " Also referred to as the Hammer , the AASM weapon has impressed during the campaign to date . Incorporating a precision guidance kit and propulsion system , the design will eventually be available for use with standard bombs weighing between <unk> and <unk> , although a <unk> version is the only one currently in service . Sagem cites a range capability of more than <unk> from high altitude , or <unk> from low level . Launches can also be made from an off @-@ axis angle of up to 90 ° , while up to six weapons can be fired against individual targets in a single pass and with just one trigger press . " And " Libya represents the first opportunity for the French air force to employ the Thales Damocles targeting pod , although the Navy gave the system its combat debut over Afghanistan in late 2010 . " 
 = = Operators = = 
 = = = Current operators = = = 
 Egypt 
 France 
 Morocco 
 Qatar 
 = Manchester and Bolton Railway = 
 The Manchester and Bolton Railway was a railway in the historic county of Lancashire , England , connecting Salford to Bolton . It was built by the proprietors of the Manchester , Bolton and Bury Canal Navigation and Railway Company who had in 1831 converted from a canal company . The 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) long railway was originally to have built upon most of the line of the canal , but it was eventually built alongside the Salford and Bolton arms of the canal . The Act of Parliament also allowed the construction of a connection to Bury , but technical constraints meant that it was never built . 
 The railway required significant earthworks , including a 295 @-@ yard ( 270 m ) tunnel . The railway termini were at Salford railway station and Trinity Street station in Bolton . The railway was opened in 1838 to passenger and freight services . In 1841 it was extended to Preston , and in 1844 to Victoria railway station in Manchester . It amalgamated with the Manchester and Leeds Railway in 1846 . 
 The railway is in use today as part of the Manchester to Preston Line , although some of the original stations are no longer in use . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the 1820s a number of proposals for a railway between Manchester and Bolton were made , some well advanced enough to be submitted to Parliament . One , in 1825 , was for a line from New Bailey in Salford , to Park Field in Bolton , and included a branch line to the Mersey and Irwell Navigation . The plan included the use of an inclined plane at Clifton to allow the railway to access the higher ground from thereon . Another scheme was to connect with the planned Liverpool and Manchester Railway near Eccles , and would reach Bolton via Moorside and Farnworth . Neither of these schemes progressed beyond the early stages of planning . In 1830 two more proposals to connect the towns were made . The Manchester to Preston Railway was unsuccessful , leaving open the way for the second scheme , which would become known as the Manchester and Bolton Railway . 
 = = = Manchester , Bolton & Bury Canal Company = = = 
 In 1830 the Manchester , Bolton & Bury Canal Company , led by chairman John Tobin , began to promote the construction of a railway along the line of their canal , from Salford to Bolton and Bury . Alexander Nimmo was employed to assess the proposal , and reported that it was possible " so far as he expressed himself capable of judging from his present cursory view of the canal " . The shareholders then sought a bill for a railway from Bolton to Manchester and on 23 August 1831 obtained an Act of Parliament to become the " Company of Proprietors of the Manchester , Bolton and Bury Canal Navigation and Railway Company " . The act authorised the abandonment of the canal between the Irwell basin and Prestolee , and empowered the company to build a line from Manchester to Bolton and Bury , " upon or near the line of ... the Canal " . Two branch lines were also authorised , one from Clifton Aqueduct through to Great Lever , and the other from Giants Seat through to Radcliffe and Bury . Due mainly to the objections of local mine owners who would have lost access to the canal and therefore their supply route , and who also would not have had branch railways built for them , the company agreed to an amending bill which would keep the canal and allow the new railway to be constructed alongside it . In 1832 the company obtained an Act that allowed it to build the railway along the new alignment . The Act also allowed for an extension of the railway to New Bailey Street in Salford , and from Church Wharf ( the terminus of the canal at Bolton ) to Bridge Street . Smaller branches in Bolton and Salford were also allowed . 
 Construction of the railway started in 1833 , from Salford . The company attempted to alter the route of the Bury branch , and also to extend it to Rawtenstall , but they did not receive Parliamentary approval for this . In July 1834 the committee of management applied to Parliament for " an act to amend the line of the railway between Manchester and Bolton " . The amendment would take the railway along much the same course as that proposed by the Manchester to Preston Railway and was authorised by Parliament in 1835 . Work proceeded so slowly that further clauses were added to the proposed act , including a continuation of the railway from Bolton , to Liverpool . Although this continuation was never built , the Liverpool and Bury Railway built such a connection in 1848 . A line from Clifton to Bolton , authorised in 1835 , did not materialise . The connection to Bury was never built , due mainly to the objections of the company 's engineer , Jesse Hartley . The Bury branch would have required a 1 @,@ 100 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) tunnel on a gradient of 1 in 100 , at the time a difficult and expensive proposition . 
 Initially there were to have been three tracks , one for goods and another two for passengers , but only two were built . Work proceeded at a slow pace , in a piecemeal fashion , with contracts awarded for portions of the work as occasion demanded . Advertisements in the Bolton Chronicle appealed to Quarrymen for quantities of stone blocks to support the rails , and for excavators to construct parts of a proposed addition to the embankment from Agecroft towards Clifton Hall . Another advertisement in November that year advertised for tenders for contracts for the construction of bridges , viaducts , culverts and other structures to finish the line from Irwell Street in Salford , to Bolton . A difficult section of the railway was at Farnworth , where a tunnel was required to cut through the hillside . A double @-@ bore tunnel 295 yards ( 270 m ) long was built between 1835 and 1838 , driven from both sides , with a large vertical shaft in the centre . This was later joined by a narrower single @-@ bore tunnel , through which the down line was routed . Traffic along the <unk> was routed through the original tunnel . 
 Four acts of parliament were required to raise the necessary funds , and the line opened on 28 May 1838 . From a report of the Directors on 9 January 1839 , the railway had carried 228 @,@ 799 passengers since its inception . In 1841 the company had 10 locomotive engines . 
 In 1845 William Hurst took over as Railway Superintendent for the company . 
 A branch line was also " to join and communicate with the ... Bolton and Leigh Railway " , at a junction near the <unk> Stationary Engine , this line was however , not built . The company later shared their railway , including their station at Salford , with the Manchester , Bury and Rossendale Railway Company ( MB & RRC ) and both worked together to construct a junction at Clifton Junction railway station . In 1846 the company was taken over by the Manchester and Leeds Railway , which itself became the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway the following year . In 1922 it amalgamated into the London and North Western Railway , and in 1923 this company amalgamated into the London , Midland and Scottish Railway . This company was nationalised in 1948 under the Transport Act 1947 , and became part of British Railways . 
 = = Route = = 
 The original terminus was at Salford railway station on New Bailey Street in Salford . Passing through Pendleton , Dixon Fold , Stoneclough and Farnworth the line ended at Bolton railway station . In 1841 the line was extended to Preston by the Bolton and Preston Railway . The route northwards to Blackburn followed four years later , whilst the Liverpool and Bury Railway 's arrival in 1848 gave Bolton links eastward to Bury and Rochdale and westwards to Wigan and Liverpool . From Salford , the line was extended 1 @,@ 290 yards ( 1 @,@ 180 m ) via several bridges and across Chapel Street , to Victoria Station in 1844 . These lines had all become part of the expanding Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway system by 1858 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The rails were of broad @-@ based parallel form and weighed 55 pounds ( 25 kg ) per 1 yard ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) . Gauge was 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) 8 inches ( 20 cm ) . These rails were later replaced with 68 pound per yard ( 34 kg / m ) rails when the former were discovered to be insufficient to carry the weight of the trains using them . Significant earthworks were required along the route , and the 295 yards ( 270 m ) tunnel at Farnworth was constructed in favour of a cutting . The tunnels were built through clay , and lined entirely with brick or masonry . Turntables were placed at each terminus . 
 Thirty three bridges were constructed , along with stone drainage facilities to keep water from the cuttings . The railway company was forced to change the design of some of these bridges , as insufficient room was given for the locomotives and carriages on the track to pass between the bridge supports , which were only 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) wide . With only 12 inches ( 30 cm ) of space between some vehicles and the bridge supports , a report by the Inspector of Railways on 11 December 1846 concluded that they were dangerous . On 19 November 1842 a guard named William Parker was killed on the railway , his skull found fractured , and on 26 July 1844 a guard named James Cook was killed as he leant out and was struck by a support . It was also reported that the distance between rails at these bridges was only 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) , whereas the normal distance was 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . 
 = = Locomotive types and coaches = = 
 The company purchased four Bury Type locomotives from Bury , Curtis and Kennedy , two from George Forrester and Company , and two from William Fairbairn & Sons . Two further Bury 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 0s were acquired by the railway in 1844 @-@ 45 . Coaches were first and second class ; each first class carriage held 18 passengers , and each second class carriage held 32 passengers . Third class carriages were introduced on 11 June 1838 but discontinued on 1 December 1838 after the company found that many passengers were vacating first and second class , for the cheaper third class . The company had 15 first class carriages , and 22 second class carriages . 
 = = Fares and services = = 
 Initially , first class passenger fares were two shillings and six pence ( 2s 6d - " half @-@ a @-@ crown " ) for the entire ten mile journey , or 3d per mile . This is the equivalent of at least £ 10 in 2011 values . Second class was 2s , or <unk> per mile . On 11 June 1838 , a new pricing structure was introduced , with first class costing 2s , second class 1s 6d , and third class 1s . Passenger tickets were taken in transit . 
 Freight was charged at a maximum rate of <unk> , and a minimum of 3d per ton per mile respectively . 
 The first train to use the new line was pulled by the Victoria . It left Manchester at 8 : 00 am , and arrived in Bolton 26 minutes 30 seconds later . The second train was pulled by the Fairfield . The trains originally ran on the right hand set of rails , an unusual practice in England , however the railway later changed to left @-@ hand running with the connection of the MB & RRC at Clifton . Ten trains ran in each direction per weekday , and two on Sundays . The journey from Salford to Bolton took about 35 minutes . 
 = Miami Vice ( video game ) = 
 Miami Vice is an action video game developed by Canvas and published by Ocean Software . It was first released in the United Kingdom for the Amstrad CPC , Commodore 64 , and ZX Spectrum in 1986 . It was later re @-@ released in Germany and Italy for the Commodore 64 in 1989 . The game is based on the television series of the same name and follows the two central characters , James " Sonny " Crockett and Ricardo Tubbs , as they attempt to derail a Miami drug ring which is led by series antagonist " Mr J " . 
 The game was published by Ocean Software , who were renowned for developing video games related to their respective films and television shows . The main objective of the game is to apprehend criminals throughout the streets of Miami , which is accomplished by driving to various locations around the city . Miami Vice received mixed reviews upon release ; the game was mainly criticised due to its poor mechanics and graphics , though some reviewers praised the overall experience . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is presented in a top @-@ down perspective with elements of 2D side @-@ scrolling gameplay . The main objective of the game is to derail various shipments of drugs controlled by the Miami Vice series antagonist , Mr J. The player assumes control of series protagonists James " Sonny " Crockett and Ricardo Tubbs , in which they must eliminate gangsters throughout Miami . To accomplish this end , Crockett and Tubbs can drive their car through the streets of Miami in order to get to various destinations , such as City Hall , Vines Bar , State Hotel , Shark Club , Joes Bar , Flag Hotel , Grand Casino , Palm Club , Murk Club , Ocean Warehouse , Acme Warehouse and Sierra Hotel , quicker . If the player collides into a wall or another car whilst driving , a small explosion will occur and a life will be deducted . 
 At a labelled building , the player can get out of the car and enter , though enemies will only appear during certain times of the day . If the player arrives too early , the enemy gangsters will attempt to escape . If the player arrives too late , the building will be found vacant . A timetable of all meetings are included in the game 's instruction manual . The aesthetic interior of buildings include two rooms , with limited decorations such as a pool table and chairs . Some buildings contain evidence bags which can be collected for extra points . Once the player comes into contact with an enemy , a separate window will appear which will display his name . The player can apprehend him by either catching or trapping him . Once caught , the player may take him to the city hall to interrogate him in order to receive information such as the location of the next gangster meetup . Points are gained by apprehending criminals , returning evidence bags or destroying cars . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ocean Software was founded in Manchester by David Ward and Jon Woods in 1984 . The company were known for developing titles such as Platoon , Top Gun and Jurassic Park , which were usually based on the films of the same name . During the late 1980s and early 1990s , Ocean primarily focused on developing games related to best @-@ selling B @-@ movies or porting other commercially successful games onto different platforms . 
 In 1996 , the company was purchased by French holding company Infogrames for £ 100 million and was later merged into Atari , in 2004 . In 2004 , both founders of Ocean Software received the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association Hall of Fame award , for their recognition in " transforming " the British video games industry into a multi @-@ national business . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mixed to negative reviews upon release . Pete Shaw of Your Sinclair praised the overall experience of the game , including the " fast paced " gameplay and lack of an intrusive plot , however he criticised the " terrible " attribute clash issues in the ' Frankie goes to Florida ' mode , in which he states that the mode causes graphical errors . Three reviewers of Zzap ! 64 stated that the graphics were " simplistic " , but found them to be crisp and colourful . Chris Bourne of Crash , however , criticised the graphics as " dodgy " and " drab " . Jim Lloyd of Computer and Video Games praised the music and its ability to change once the player moves from a car to building , however theorised that the game would sell due to " its name " . Bourne criticised the game 's lack of music for the Amstrad port and limited range of sound effects . 
 Miami Vice received particular criticism at the difficulty of manoeuvring the car . Edward Drury of Computer Gamer , though finding the game to be enjoyable at times , stated that his only dislike was the manoeuvrability of the car , remarking that the game " gets boring " due to the amount of collisions . Bourne was highly critical of the mechanics of the car , finding it to be " ludicrous " and taking " at least half an hour to get used to " . He concluded that the game was " very bad " . Jim Lloyd of Computer and Video Games and a reviewer of Zzap ! 64 concurred that the controlling the car was a major issue . 
 = A Dog and Pony Show ( Homicide : Life on the Street ) = 
 " A Dog and Pony Show " is the sixth episode of the first season of the American police drama television series Homicide : Life on the Street . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 10 , 1993 . In the episode , Pembleton and Bayliss investigate the murder of a police dog , Crosetti helps his friend adjust after a serious injury , and Felton and Howard suspect a drug dealer for a brutal murder . 
 The episode was written James Yoshimura based on a story by executive producer Tom Fontana , and was directed by Alan Taylor , who Homicide executive director Barry Levinson chose after being impressed by Taylor 's short film That Burning Question ( 1988 ) . Elements of the episode , including the shooting of patrolman Chris Thormann , were adapted from David Simon 's non @-@ fiction crime book , Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets . " A Dog and Pony Show " included guest appearances by actors Michael Constantine , Larry Gilliard , Jr . , Lisa Gay Hamilton and Edie Falco . 
 Since ratings for Homicide had gradually declined throughout the season , NBC announced a decision about whether the series would be renewed would depend on the Nielsen ratings of the final four episodes , starting with " A Dog and Pony Show " . Before it aired , Barry Levinson appeared in a commercial making a direct appeal to viewers to watch . Nevertheless , it was seen by 8 @.@ 47 million household viewers , which was considered relatively low , although it was an improvement over the previous episode " Three Men and Adena " . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Bayliss ( Kyle Secor ) continues to despair over the murder case of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Adena Watson , which he failed to solve . When Gee ( Yaphet Kotto ) orders Bayliss and Pembleton to move on and take new cases , they are assigned to solve the murder of Jake , a police dog . Bayliss thinks it is a waste of time , but according to municipal law , the death of a city @-@ owned animal is treated as an official investigation , and Pembleton decides to take the case seriously . The dog 's gums are extremely red , and Pembleton believes he may have been poisoned or gassed . They question local dog pound employee Penny ( Joy Ehrlich ) , who admits she accidentally killed Jake with carbon monoxide after mixing him up with another dog , then dumped the body in a panic . John Kuehn ( Nick Olcott ) , Jake 's human " partner " , scatters Jake 's ashes in a lake and Bayliss , reminded of Adena Watson , reacts emotionally . 
 Felton ( Daniel Baldwin ) and Howard ( Melissa Leo ) respond to the murder of a young woman named <unk> Keene , who is found cut and tortured to death in a bedroom . They determine the victim likely knew her killer , and the next day they question " Pony " Johnson ( Geoffrey Ewing ) , a drug dealer who was having an affair with Keene . Johnson denies killing Keene , but Johnson 's other girlfriend ( Lisa Gay Hamilton ) tells the detectives Johnson abruptly left a party with a fellow drug pusher named William Lyness ( Larry Gilliard , Jr . ) the night of the murder . Later , Lewis ( Clark Johnson ) reports William 's mother , Alexandra Lyness , was killed the same way as Keene . Felton , Howard and Lewis interrogate William Lyness , who confesses he sat in the car while Johnson killed his mother for taking drugs away from William . 
 Medical examiner Blythe ( Wendy Hughes ) leaves her visiting son Danny ( <unk> <unk> ) with her boyfriend Bolander ( Ned Beatty ) for the day , with the hopes they will get to know each other better . Danny rides along with Bolander and Munch ( Richard Belzer ) on their murder investigations , but acts very wild and constantly asks inappropriate questions . At dinner later , Danny asks Bolander about his sex life with Danny 's mother , making Bolander extremely uncomfortable . Bolander later tells Blythe he believes her son is crazy . Meanwhile , Crosetti ( Jon Polito ) spends a lot of time with his friend Officer Chris Thormann ( Lee Tergesen ) , who is recovering from a recent shooting that has left him blind . At one point , Thormann defecates on himself and is humiliated , but Crosetti helps him clean up . Thormann 's wife , Eva ( Edie Falco ) , tells Crosetti she is pregnant , but that her husband reacted angrily to the news . Thormann tells Crosetti he should have died at the hospital and can never be a good father , but Crosetti encourages him . 
 Gee attends a retirement party for his best friend and fellow shift commander , Lt. John Scinta ( Michael Constantine ) . Police brass keep Scinta 's possible replacement a secret from Gee . After returning drunk from the party , the two reminisce about old times , but Scinta also warns Gee that police brass could end up forcing him into retirement , just as they did to Scinta . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Dog and Pony Show " was written by James Yoshimura based on a story by executive producer Tom Fontana , and was directed by Alan Taylor . Barry Levinson , executive producer of Homicide : Life on the Street , hand @-@ picked Taylor to direct the episode after watching Taylor 's 1988 half @-@ hour film , That Burning Question , which Taylor made as a thesis for a seminar taught by film director Martin Scorsese . The episode establishes the vacancy of the homicide unit 's second shift commander position , which is offered to Pembleton in the first season episode , " And the Rockets Dead Glare " , before it is ultimately given to Megan Russert in the beginning of the third season . Taylor said of directing Homicide , " I hadn 't even learned the rules of filmmaking , or TV for that matter , and I was being put in a position where I was supposed to break them all . " 
 The shooting of Officer Thormann was adapted from true @-@ life events in chronicled in Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , the 1991 David Simon non @-@ fiction book about a Baltimore Police Department , which was adapted into the Homicide series . Homicide writers added the twist of Crosetti taking the case personally based on his close friendship with the victim . As the first season of Homicide progressed , NBC officials complained to the show 's producers about the large number of protracted , interwoven subplots going on during each given episode . " A Dog and Pony Show " in particular refers to the Adena Watson murder , which was featured in five previous episodes and resolved in " Three Men and Adena " , as well as the romance between Bolander and Blythe , which had been progressing throughout the first season . Additionally , the " Pony " Johnson subplot started in " A Dog and Pony Show " would not become resolved until the next episode , " And the Rockets Dead Glare . " By the beginning of the second season , the Homicide producers bowed to network pressure and were forced to reduce the number of subplots in each episode . 
 " A Dog and Pony Show " included guest appearances by actors Michael Constantine , Larry Gilliard , Jr . , Lisa Gay Hamilton and Edie Falco . Tom Fontana cast Falco as Officer Thormann 's wife Eva after watching her performance in Laws of Gravity . Fontana said of her , " She 's an actress who 's unadorned by any embroidery . She does everything with such simplicity and honesty , it 's breathtaking . " Falco was a struggling actor at the time , and said her salary from one Homicide episode paid for one month 's worth of rent . Fontana cast Falco as a regular in his HBO series Oz based on her work in the Homicide episodes . Larry Gilliard , Jr. later starred in a leading role as drug dealer D 'Angelo Barksdale in The Wire , another Baltimore police drama created by Homicide producer and writer David Simon . Lisa Gay Hamilton later starred in the legal drama The Practice , making her the second future Practice star to appear on Homicide , after Steve Harris in " Gone for Goode " . Hamilton also later starred in the 2009 comedy @-@ drama series Men of a Certain Age as the on @-@ screen wife of a character played by Homicide co @-@ star , Andre Braugher . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Ratings for Homicide : Life on the Street gradually declined since the series first premiered . In response , NBC announced to fans that a decision about whether Homicide would be renewed or canceled would depend on how the last four episodes of the season fared in the ratings , starting with " A Dog and Pony Show " . The week before the episode aired , the network started airing a television commercial with Barry Levinson making a direct appeal to viewers to watch the show , in which he said : 
 If you 're wondering when we 're on , remember the Michael Jackson special ? We were opposite that . And when the president spoke ? Pre @-@ empted for it . And the Grammys ? You got it - we were opposite that . So where are we , exactly ? Well there 's a show called Home Improvement - and as soon as you get there , then quickly switch to NBC . 
 In its original American broadcast on March 10 , 1993 , " A Dog and Pony Show " was watched by 8 @.@ 47 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , earning the episode a 9 @.@ 1 rating . This constituted an increase in viewership compared to the previous week 's episode , " Three Men and Adena " , which was seen by 7 @.@ 08 million household viewers and received a 7 @.@ 6 rating . Nevertheless , Homicide ranked relatively low in the Nielsen ratings compared to other shows , ranking 67th for the week of March 8 to 14 , with the ABC comedy series Home Improvement ranking number one with 22 @.@ 6 million household viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The Scripps Howard News Service praised the episode , calling it one of their strongest television recommendations for the week and declaring Homicide " the best new drama of the season " . " A Dog and Pony Show " and the rest of the first and second season episodes were included in the four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 for $ 69 @.@ 95 . 
 = J. Robert Oppenheimer = 
 Julius Robert Oppenheimer ( April 22 , 1904 – February 18 , 1967 ) was an American theoretical physicist and professor of physics at the University of California , Berkeley . As the wartime head of the Los Alamos Laboratory , Oppenheimer is among those who are called the " father of the atomic bomb " for their role in the Manhattan Project , the World War II project that developed the first nuclear weapons used in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The first atomic bomb was detonated on July 16 , 1945 , in the Trinity test in New Mexico ; Oppenheimer remarked later that it brought to mind words from the Bhagavad Gita : " Now I am become Death , the destroyer of worlds . " 
 After the war Oppenheimer became chairman of the influential General Advisory Committee of the newly created United States Atomic Energy Commission , and used that position to lobby for international control of nuclear power to avert nuclear proliferation and a nuclear arms race with the Soviet Union . After provoking the ire of many politicians with his outspoken opinions during the Second Red Scare , he suffered the revocation of his security clearance in a much @-@ publicized hearing in 1954 , and was effectively stripped of his direct political influence ; he continued to lecture , write and work in physics . Nine years later President John F. Kennedy awarded ( and Lyndon B. Johnson presented ) him with the Enrico Fermi Award as a gesture of political rehabilitation . 
 Oppenheimer 's achievements in physics include the Born – Oppenheimer approximation for molecular wavefunctions , work on the theory of electrons and positrons , the Oppenheimer – Phillips process in nuclear fusion , and the first prediction of quantum tunneling . With his students he also made important contributions to the modern theory of neutron stars and black holes , as well as to quantum mechanics , quantum field theory , and the interactions of cosmic rays . As a teacher and promoter of science , he is remembered as a founding father of the American school of theoretical physics that gained world prominence in the 1930s . After World War II , he became director of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Oppenheimer was born in New York City on April 22 , 1904 , the son of Julius Oppenheimer , a wealthy Jewish textile importer who had immigrated to the United States from Germany in 1888 , and Ella Friedman , a painter . Julius came to America with no money , no baccalaureate studies , and no knowledge of the English language . He got a job in a textile company and within a decade was an executive with the company . Ella was from Baltimore . The <unk> were non @-@ observant Ashkenazi Jews . In 1912 the family moved to an apartment on the 11th floor of 155 Riverside Drive , near West 88th Street , Manhattan , an area known for luxurious mansions and town houses . Their art collection included works by Pablo Picasso and Édouard Vuillard , and at least three original paintings by Vincent van Gogh . Robert had a younger brother , Frank , who also became a physicist . 
 Oppenheimer was initially schooled at Alcuin Preparatory School , and in 1911 entered the Ethical Culture Society School . This had been founded by Felix Adler to promote a form of ethical training based on the Ethical Culture movement , whose motto was " Deed before Creed " . His father had been a member of the Society for many years , serving on its board of trustees from 1907 to 1915 . Oppenheimer was a versatile scholar , interested in English and French literature , and particularly in mineralogy . He completed the third and fourth grades in one year , and skipped half the eighth grade . During his final year , he became interested in chemistry . He entered Harvard College a year late , at age 18 , because he suffered an attack of colitis while prospecting in Joachimstal during a family summer vacation in Europe . To help him recover from the illness , his father enlisted the help of his English teacher Herbert Smith who took him to New Mexico , where Oppenheimer fell in love with horseback riding and the southwestern United States . 
 In addition to majoring in chemistry , he was also required by Harvard 's rules to study history , literature , and philosophy or mathematics . He compensated for his late start by taking six courses each term and was admitted to the undergraduate honor society Phi Beta Kappa . In his first year he was admitted to graduate standing in physics on the basis of independent study , which meant he was not required to take the basic classes and could enroll instead in advanced ones . A course on thermodynamics taught by Percy Bridgman attracted him to experimental physics . He graduated summa cum laude in three years . 
 = = = Studies in Europe = = = 
 In 1924 Oppenheimer was informed that he had been accepted into Christ 's College , Cambridge . He wrote to Ernest Rutherford requesting permission to work at the Cavendish Laboratory . Bridgman provided Oppenheimer with a recommendation , which conceded that Oppenheimer 's clumsiness in the laboratory made it apparent his forte was not experimental but rather theoretical physics . Rutherford was unimpressed , but Oppenheimer went to Cambridge in the hope of landing another offer . He was ultimately accepted by J. J. Thomson on condition that he complete a basic laboratory course . He developed an antagonistic relationship with his tutor , Patrick Blackett , who was only a few years his senior . While on vacation , as recalled by his friend Francis Fergusson , Oppenheimer once confessed that he had left an apple doused with noxious chemicals on Blackett 's desk . While Ferguson 's account is the only detailed version of this event , Oppenheimer 's parents were alerted by the university authorities who considered placing him on probation , a fate prevented by his parents successfully lobbying the authorities . 
 A tall , thin chain smoker , who often neglected to eat during periods of intense thought and concentration , Oppenheimer was marked by many of his friends as having self @-@ destructive tendencies . A disturbing event occurred when he took a vacation from his studies in Cambridge to meet up with his friend Francis Fergusson in Paris . Fergusson noticed that Oppenheimer was not well and to help distract him from his depression told Oppenheimer that he ( Fergusson ) was to marry his girlfriend Frances Keeley . Oppenheimer did not take the news well . He jumped on Fergusson and tried to strangle him . Although Fergusson easily fended off the attack , the episode convinced him of Oppenheimer 's deep psychological troubles . Plagued throughout his life by periods of depression , Oppenheimer once told his brother , " I need physics more than friends " . 
 In 1926 he left Cambridge for the University of Göttingen to study under Max Born . Göttingen was one of the world 's leading centers for theoretical physics . Oppenheimer made friends who went on to great success , including Werner Heisenberg , Pascual Jordan , Wolfgang Pauli , Paul Dirac , Enrico Fermi and Edward Teller . He was known for being too enthusiastic in discussion , sometimes to the point of taking over seminar sessions . This irritated some of Born 's other students so much that Maria Goeppert presented Born with a petition signed by herself and others threatening a boycott of the class unless he made Oppenheimer quiet down . Born left it out on his desk where Oppenheimer could read it , and it was effective without a word being said . 
 He obtained his Doctor of Philosophy degree in March 1927 at age 23 , supervised by Born . After the oral exam , James Franck , the professor administering , reportedly said , " I 'm glad that 's over . He was on the point of questioning me . " Oppenheimer published more than a dozen papers at Göttingen , including many important contributions to the new field of quantum mechanics . He and Born published a famous paper on the Born – Oppenheimer approximation , which separates nuclear motion from electronic motion in the mathematical treatment of molecules , allowing nuclear motion to be neglected to simplify calculations . It remains his most cited work . 
 = = Early professional work = = 
 = = = Educational work = = = 
 Oppenheimer was awarded a United States National Research Council fellowship to the California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) in September 1927 . Bridgman also wanted him at Harvard , so a compromise was reached whereby he split his fellowship for the 1927 – 28 academic year between Harvard in 1927 and Caltech in 1928 . At Caltech he struck up a close friendship with Linus Pauling , and they planned to mount a joint attack on the nature of the chemical bond , a field in which Pauling was a pioneer , with Oppenheimer supplying the mathematics and Pauling interpreting the results . Both the collaboration and their friendship were nipped in the bud when Pauling began to suspect Oppenheimer of becoming too close to his wife , Ava Helen Pauling . Once , when Pauling was at work , Oppenheimer had arrived at their home and invited Ava Helen to join him on a tryst in Mexico . Though she refused and reported the incident to her husband , the invitation , and her apparent nonchalance about it , disquieted Pauling and he ended his relationship with Oppenheimer . Oppenheimer later invited him to become head of the Chemistry Division of the Manhattan Project , but Pauling refused , saying he was a pacifist . 
 In the autumn of 1928 , Oppenheimer visited Paul Ehrenfest 's institute at the University of Leiden , the Netherlands , where he impressed by giving lectures in Dutch , despite having little experience with the language . There he was given the nickname of <unk> , later anglicized by his students as " <unk> " . From Leiden he continued on to the ETH in Zurich to work with Wolfgang Pauli on quantum mechanics and the continuous spectrum . Oppenheimer respected and liked Pauli and may have emulated his personal style as well as his critical approach to problems . 
 On returning to the United States , Oppenheimer accepted an associate professorship from the University of California , Berkeley , where Raymond T. Birge wanted him so badly that he expressed a willingness to share him with Caltech . 
 Before his Berkeley professorship began , Oppenheimer was diagnosed with a mild case of tuberculosis and , with his brother Frank , spent some weeks at a ranch in New Mexico , which he leased and eventually purchased . When he heard the ranch was available for lease , he exclaimed , " Hot dog ! " , and later called it Perro Caliente , literally " hot dog " in Spanish . Later he used to say that " physics and desert country " were his " two great loves " . He recovered from the tuberculosis and returned to Berkeley , where he prospered as an advisor and collaborator to a generation of physicists who admired him for his intellectual virtuosity and broad interests . His students and colleagues saw him as mesmerizing : hypnotic in private interaction , but often frigid in more public settings . His associates fell into two camps : one that saw him as an aloof and impressive genius and aesthete , the other that saw him as a pretentious and insecure poseur . His students almost always fell into the former category , adopting his walk , speech , and other mannerisms , and even his inclination for reading entire texts in their original languages . Hans Bethe said of him : 
 Probably the most important ingredient he brought to his teaching was his exquisite taste . He always knew what were the important problems , as shown by his choice of subjects . He truly lived with those problems , struggling for a solution , and he communicated his concern to the group . In its heyday , there were about eight or ten graduate students in his group and about six Post @-@ doctoral Fellows . He met this group once a day in his office , and discussed with one after another the status of the student 's research problem . He was interested in everything , and in one afternoon they might discuss quantum electrodynamics , cosmic rays , electron pair production and nuclear physics . 
 He worked closely with Nobel Prize @-@ winning experimental physicist Ernest O. Lawrence and his cyclotron pioneers , helping them understand the data their machines were producing at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory . In 1936 Berkeley promoted him to full professor at a salary of $ 3300 per annum . In return he was asked to curtail his teaching at Caltech , so a compromise was reached whereby Berkeley released him for six weeks each year , enough to teach one term at Caltech . 
 = = = Scientific work = = = 
 Oppenheimer did important research in theoretical astronomy ( especially as related to general relativity and nuclear theory ) , nuclear physics , spectroscopy , and quantum field theory , including its extension into quantum electrodynamics . The formal mathematics of relativistic quantum mechanics also attracted his attention , although he doubted its validity . His work predicted many later finds , which include the neutron , meson and neutron star . 
 Initially , his major interest was the theory of the continuous spectrum and his first published paper , in 1926 , concerned the quantum theory of molecular band spectra . He developed a method to carry out calculations of its transition probabilities . He calculated the photoelectric effect for hydrogen and X @-@ rays , obtaining the absorption coefficient at the K @-@ edge . His calculations accorded with observations of the X @-@ ray absorption of the sun , but not hydrogen . Years later it was realized that the sun was largely composed of hydrogen and that his calculations were indeed correct . 
 Oppenheimer also made important contributions to the theory of cosmic ray showers and started work that eventually led to descriptions of quantum tunneling . In 1931 he co @-@ wrote a paper on the " Relativistic Theory of the <unk> Effect " with his student Harvey Hall , in which , based on empirical evidence , he correctly disputed Dirac 's assertion that two of the energy levels of the hydrogen atom have the same energy . Subsequently , one of his doctoral students , Willis Lamb , determined that this was a consequence of what became known as the Lamb shift , for which Lamb was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1955 . 
 Oppenheimer worked with his first doctoral student , Melba Phillips , on calculations of artificial radioactivity under bombardment by deuterons . When Ernest Lawrence and Edwin McMillan bombarded nuclei with deuterons they found the results agreed closely with the predictions of George Gamow , but when higher energies and heavier nuclei were involved , the results did not conform to the theory . In 1935 , Oppenheimer and Phillips worked out a theory now known as the Oppenheimer – Phillips process to explain the results , a theory still in use today . 
 As early as 1930 , Oppenheimer wrote a paper essentially predicting the existence of the positron , after a paper by Paul Dirac proposed that electrons could have both a positive charge and negative energy . Dirac 's paper introduced an equation , known as the Dirac equation , which unified quantum mechanics , special relativity and the then @-@ new concept of electron spin , to explain the Zeeman effect . Oppenheimer , drawing on the body of experimental evidence , rejected the idea that the predicted positively charged electrons were protons . He argued that they would have to have the same mass as an electron , whereas experiments showed that protons were much heavier than electrons . Two years later , Carl David Anderson discovered the positron , for which he received the 1936 Nobel Prize in Physics . 
 In the late 1930s Oppenheimer became interested in astrophysics , probably through his friendship with Richard Tolman , resulting in a series of papers . In the first of these , a 1938 paper co @-@ written with Robert Serber entitled " On the Stability of Stellar Neutron Cores " , Oppenheimer explored the properties of white dwarfs . This was followed by a paper co @-@ written with one of his students , George Volkoff , " On Massive Neutron Cores " , in which they demonstrated that there was a limit , the so @-@ called Tolman – Oppenheimer – Volkoff limit , to the mass of stars beyond which they would not remain stable as neutron stars and would undergo gravitational collapse . Finally , in 1939 , Oppenheimer and another of his students , Hartland Snyder , produced a paper " On Continued Gravitational Attraction " , which predicted the existence of what are today known as black holes . After the Born – Oppenheimer approximation paper , these papers remain his most cited , and were key factors in the rejuvenation of astrophysical research in the United States in the 1950s , mainly by John A. Wheeler . 
 Oppenheimer 's papers were considered difficult to understand even by the standards of the abstract topics he was expert in . He was fond of using elegant , if extremely complex , mathematical techniques to demonstrate physical principles , though he was sometimes criticized for making mathematical mistakes , presumably out of haste . " His physics was good " , said his student Snyder , " but his arithmetic awful " . 
 Oppenheimer published only five scientific papers , one of which was in biophysics , after World War II , and none after 1950 . Murray Gell @-@ Mann , a later <unk> who , as a visiting scientist , worked with him at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1951 , offered this opinion : 
 He didn 't have <unk> , ' sitting flesh , ' when you sit on a chair . As far as I know , he never wrote a long paper or did a long calculation , anything of that kind . He didn 't have patience for that ; his own work consisted of little <unk> , but quite brilliant ones . But he inspired other people to do things , and his influence was fantastic . 
 Oppenheimer 's diverse interests sometimes interrupted his focus on projects . In 1933 he learned Sanskrit and met the Indologist Arthur W. Ryder at Berkeley . He read the Bhagavad Gita in the original Sanskrit , and later he cited it as one of the books that most shaped his philosophy of life . His close confidant and colleague , Nobel Prize winner Isidor Rabi , later gave his own interpretation : 
 Oppenheimer was <unk> in those fields , which lie outside the scientific tradition , such as his interest in religion , in the Hindu religion in particular , which resulted in a feeling of mystery of the universe that surrounded him like a fog . He saw physics clearly , looking toward what had already been done , but at the border he tended to feel there was much more of the mysterious and novel than there actually was … [ he turned ] away from the hard , crude methods of theoretical physics into a mystical realm of broad intuition . 
 In spite of this , observers such as Nobel Prize @-@ winning physicist Luis Alvarez have suggested that if he had lived long enough to see his predictions substantiated by experiment , Oppenheimer might have won a Nobel Prize for his work on gravitational collapse , concerning neutron stars and black holes . In retrospect , some physicists and historians consider this to be his most important contribution , though it was not taken up by other scientists in his own lifetime . The physicist and historian Abraham Pais once asked Oppenheimer what he considered to be his most important scientific contributions ; Oppenheimer cited his work on electrons and positrons , not his work on gravitational contraction . Oppenheimer was nominated for the Nobel Prize for physics three times , in 1945 , 1951 and 1967 , but never won . 
 = = Private and political life = = 
 During the 1920s , Oppenheimer remained aloof from worldly matters . He claimed that he did not read newspapers or listen to the radio , and had only learned of the Wall Street crash of 1929 some six months after it occurred while on a walk with Ernest Lawrence . He once remarked that he never cast a vote until the 1936 election . However , from 1934 on , he became increasingly concerned about politics and international affairs . In 1934 , he earmarked three percent of his salary — about $ 100 a year — for two years to support German physicists fleeing from Nazi Germany . During the 1934 West Coast Waterfront Strike , he and some of his students , including Melba Phillips and Bob Serber , attended a longshoremen 's rally . Oppenheimer repeatedly attempted to get Serber a position at Berkeley but was blocked by Birge , who felt that " one Jew in the department was enough " . 
 Oppenheimer 's mother died in 1931 , and he became closer to his father who , although still living in New York , became a frequent visitor in California . When his father died in 1937 leaving $ 392 @,@ 602 to be divided between Oppenheimer and his brother Frank , Oppenheimer immediately wrote out a will leaving his estate to the University of California for graduate scholarships . Like many young intellectuals in the 1930s , he was a supporter of social reforms that were later alleged to be communist ideas . He donated to many progressive efforts which were later branded as " left @-@ wing " during the McCarthy era . The majority of his allegedly radical work consisted of hosting fund raisers for the Republican cause in the Spanish Civil War and other anti @-@ fascist activity . He never openly joined the Communist Party , though he did pass money to liberal causes by way of acquaintances who were alleged to be Party members . In 1936 , Oppenheimer became involved with Jean Tatlock , the daughter of a Berkeley literature professor and a student at Stanford University School of Medicine . The two had similar political views ; she wrote for the Western Worker , a Communist Party newspaper . 
 Tatlock broke up with Oppenheimer in 1939 , after a tempestuous relationship . In August that year he met Katherine ( " Kitty " ) <unk> Harrison , a radical Berkeley student and former Communist Party member . Harrison had been married three times previously . Her first marriage lasted only a few months . Her second husband was Joe Dallet , an active member of the Communist party , who was killed in the Spanish Civil War . Kitty returned to the United States where she obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree in botany from the University of Pennsylvania . There she married Richard Harrison , a physician and medical researcher , in 1938 . In June 1939 Kitty and Harrison moved to Pasadena , California , where he became chief of radiology at a local hospital and she enrolled as a graduate student at the University of California , Los Angeles . Oppenheimer and Kitty created a minor scandal by sleeping together after one of Tolman 's parties . In the summer of 1940 she stayed with Oppenheimer at his ranch in New Mexico . She finally asked Harrison for a divorce when she found out she was pregnant . When he refused , she obtained an instant divorce in Reno , Nevada , and took Oppenheimer as her fourth husband on November 1 , 1940 . 
 Their first child Peter was born in May 1941 , and their second child , Katherine ( " Toni " ) , was born in Los Alamos , New Mexico , on December 7 , 1944 . During his marriage , Oppenheimer continued his affair with Jean Tatlock . Later their continued contact became an issue in his security clearance hearings because of Tatlock 's Communist associations . Many of Oppenheimer 's closest associates were active in the Communist Party in the 1930s or 1940s . They included his brother Frank , Frank 's wife Jackie , Kitty , Jean Tatlock , his landlady Mary Ellen Washburn , and several of his graduate students at Berkeley . 
 When he joined the Manhattan Project in 1942 , Oppenheimer wrote on his personal security questionnaire that he [ Oppenheimer ] had been " a member of just about every Communist Front organization on the West Coast " . Years later he claimed that he did not remember saying this , that it was not true , and that if he had said anything along those lines , it was " a half @-@ jocular overstatement " . He was a subscriber to the People 's World , a Communist Party organ , and he testified in 1954 , " I was associated with the Communist movement . " From 1937 to 1942 , Oppenheimer was a member at Berkeley of what he called a " discussion group " , which was later identified by fellow members , Haakon Chevalier and Gordon Griffiths , as a " closed " ( secret ) unit of the Communist Party for Berkeley faculty . 
 The Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) opened a file on Oppenheimer in March 1941 . It recorded that he attended a meeting in December 1940 at Chevalier 's home that was also attended by the Communist Party 's California state secretary William Schneiderman , and its treasurer Isaac <unk> . The FBI noted that Oppenheimer was on the Executive Committee of the American Civil Liberties Union , which it considered a Communist front organization . Shortly thereafter , the FBI added Oppenheimer to its <unk> Detention Index , for arrest in case of national emergency . Debates over Oppenheimer 's Party membership or lack thereof have turned on very fine points ; almost all historians agree he had strong left @-@ wing sympathies during this time and interacted with Party members , though there is considerable dispute over whether he was officially a member of the Party . At his 1954 security clearance hearings , he denied being a member of the Communist Party , but identified himself as a fellow traveler , which he defined as someone who agrees with many of the goals of Communism , but without being willing to blindly follow orders from any Communist party apparatus . 
 Throughout the development of the atomic bomb , Oppenheimer was under investigation by both the FBI and the Manhattan Project 's internal security arm for his past left @-@ wing associations . He was followed by Army security agents during a trip to California in June 1943 to visit his former girlfriend , Jean Tatlock , who was suffering from depression . Oppenheimer spent the night in her apartment . Tatlock committed suicide on January 4 , 1944 , which left Oppenheimer deeply grieved . In August 1943 , he volunteered to Manhattan Project security agents that George Eltenton , whom he did not know , had solicited three men at Los Alamos for nuclear secrets on behalf of the Soviet Union . When pressed on the issue in later interviews , Oppenheimer admitted that the only person who had approached him was his friend Haakon Chevalier , a Berkeley professor of French literature , who had mentioned the matter privately at a dinner at Oppenheimer 's house . Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , thought Oppenheimer was too important to the project to be ousted over this suspicious behavior . On July 20 , 1943 , he wrote to the Manhattan Engineer District : 
 In accordance with my verbal directions of July 15 , it is desired that clearance be issued to Julius Robert Oppenheimer without delay irrespective of the information which you have concerning Mr Oppenheimer . He is absolutely essential to the project . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 = = = Los Alamos = = = 
 On October 9 , 1941 , shortly before the United States entered World War II , President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved a crash program to develop an atomic bomb . In May 1942 , National Defense Research Committee Chairman James B. Conant , who had been one of Oppenheimer 's lecturers at Harvard , invited Oppenheimer to take over work on fast neutron calculations , a task that Oppenheimer threw himself into with full vigor . He was given the title " Coordinator of Rapid Rupture " , specifically referring to the propagation of a fast neutron chain reaction in an atomic bomb . One of his first acts was to host a summer school for bomb theory at his building in Berkeley . The mix of European physicists and his own students — a group including Robert Serber , Emil Konopinski , Felix Bloch , Hans Bethe and Edward Teller — busied themselves calculating what needed to be done , and in what order , to make the bomb . 
 In June 1942 , the US Army established the Manhattan Engineer District to handle its part in the atom bomb project , beginning the process of transferring responsibility from the Office of Scientific Research and Development to the military . In September , Groves was appointed director of what became known as the Manhattan Project . Groves selected Oppenheimer to head the project 's secret weapons laboratory , a choice which surprised many , as Oppenheimer had left @-@ wing political views , and no record as a leader of large projects . The fact that he did not have a Nobel Prize , and might not have the prestige to direct fellow scientists , did concern Groves . However , he was impressed by Oppenheimer 's singular grasp of the practical aspects of designing and constructing an atomic bomb , and by the breadth of his knowledge . As a military engineer , Groves knew that this would be vital in an interdisciplinary project that would involve not just physics , but chemistry , metallurgy , ordnance and engineering . Groves also detected in Oppenheimer something that many others did not , an " overweening ambition " that Groves reckoned would supply the drive necessary to push the project to a successful conclusion . Isidor Rabi considered the appointment " a real stroke of genius on the part of General Groves , who was not generally considered to be a genius " . 
 Oppenheimer and Groves decided that for security and cohesion they needed a centralized , secret research laboratory in a remote location . Scouting for a site in late 1942 , Oppenheimer was drawn to New Mexico , not far from his ranch . On November 16 , 1942 , Oppenheimer , Groves and others toured a prospective site . Oppenheimer feared that the high cliffs surrounding the site would make his people feel claustrophobic , while the engineers were concerned with the possibility of flooding . He then suggested and championed a site that he knew well : a flat mesa near Santa Fe , New Mexico , which was the site of a private boys ' school called the Los Alamos Ranch School . The engineers were concerned about the poor access road and the water supply , but otherwise felt that it was ideal . The Los Alamos Laboratory was built on the site of the school , taking over some of its buildings , while many others were erected in great haste . There Oppenheimer assembled a group of the top physicists of the time , which he referred to as the " luminaries " . 
 Initially Los Alamos was supposed to be a military laboratory , and Oppenheimer and other researchers were to be commissioned into the Army . He went so far as to order himself a lieutenant colonel 's uniform and take the Army physical test , which he failed . Army doctors considered him underweight at 128 pounds ( 58 kg ) , diagnosed his chronic cough as tuberculosis and were concerned about his chronic <unk> joint pain . The plan to commission scientists fell through when Robert Bacher and Isidor Rabi balked at the idea . Conant , Groves , and Oppenheimer devised a compromise whereby the laboratory was operated by the University of California under contract to the War Department . It soon turned out that Oppenheimer had hugely underestimated the magnitude of the project ; Los Alamos grew from a few hundred people in 1943 to over 6 @,@ 000 in 1945 . 
 Oppenheimer at first had difficulty with the organizational division of large groups , but rapidly learned the art of large @-@ scale administration after he took up permanent residence on the mesa . He was noted for his mastery of all scientific aspects of the project and for his efforts to control the inevitable cultural conflicts between scientists and the military . He was an iconic figure to his fellow scientists , as much a symbol of what they were working toward as a scientific director . Victor Weisskopf put it thus : 
 Oppenheimer directed these studies , theoretical and experimental , in the real sense of the words . Here his uncanny speed in grasping the main points of any subject was a decisive factor ; he could acquaint himself with the essential details of every part of the work . 
 He did not direct from the head office . He was intellectually and physically present at each decisive step . He was present in the laboratory or in the seminar rooms , when a new effect was measured , when a new idea was conceived . It was not that he contributed so many ideas or suggestions ; he did so sometimes , but his main influence came from something else . It was his continuous and intense presence , which produced a sense of direct participation in all of us ; it created that unique atmosphere of enthusiasm and challenge that pervaded the place throughout its time . 
 In 1943 development efforts were directed to a plutonium gun @-@ type fission weapon called " Thin Man " . Initial research on the properties of plutonium was done using cyclotron @-@ generated plutonium @-@ 239 , which was extremely pure but could only be created in tiny amounts . When Los Alamos received the first sample of plutonium from the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor in April 1944 a problem was discovered : reactor @-@ bred plutonium had a higher concentration of plutonium @-@ 240 , making it unsuitable for use in a gun @-@ type weapon . In July 1944 , Oppenheimer abandoned the gun design in favor of an implosion @-@ type weapon . Using chemical explosive lenses , a sub @-@ critical sphere of fissile material could be squeezed into a smaller and denser form . The metal needed to travel only very short distances , so the critical mass would be assembled in much less time . In August 1944 Oppenheimer implemented a sweeping reorganization of the Los Alamos laboratory to focus on implosion . He concentrated the development efforts on the gun @-@ type device , a simpler design that only had to work with uranium @-@ 235 , in a single group , and this device became Little Boy in February 1945 . After a mammoth research effort , the more complex design of the implosion device , known as the " Christy gadget " after Robert Christy , another student of Oppenheimer 's , was finalized in a meeting in Oppenheimer 's office on February 28 , 1945 . 
 In May 1945 an Interim Committee was created to advise and report on wartime and postwar policies regarding the use of nuclear energy . The Interim Committee in turn established a scientific panel consisting of Compton , Fermi , Lawrence and Oppenheimer to advise it on scientific issues . In its presentation to the Interim Committee the scientific panel offered its opinion not just on the likely physical effects of an atomic bomb , but on its likely military and political impact . This included opinions on such sensitive issues as whether or not the Soviet Union should be advised of the weapon in advance of its use against Japan . 
 = = = Trinity = = = 
 The joint work of the scientists at Los Alamos resulted in the first artificial nuclear explosion near Alamogordo on July 16 , 1945 , on a site that Oppenheimer codenamed " Trinity " in mid @-@ 1944 . He later said this name was from one of John Donne 's Holy Sonnets . According to the historian Gregg Herken , this naming could have been an allusion to Jean Tatlock , who had committed suicide a few months previously and had in the 1930s introduced Oppenheimer to Donne 's work . Oppenheimer later recalled that , while witnessing the explosion , he thought of a verse from the Hindu holy book , the Bhagavad Gita ( XI , 12 ) : 
 If the radiance of a thousand suns were to burst at once into the sky , that would be like the splendor of the mighty one ... 
 Years later he would explain that another verse had also entered his head at that time : namely , the famous verse : " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( XI , 32 ) , which he translated as " I am become Death , the destroyer of worlds . " 
 In 1965 , he was persuaded to quote again for a television broadcast : 
 We knew the world would not be the same . A few people laughed , a few people cried . Most people were silent . I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture , the Bhagavad Gita ; Vishnu is trying to persuade the Prince that he should do his duty and , to impress him , takes on his multi @-@ armed form and says , ' Now I am become Death , the destroyer of worlds . ' I suppose we all thought that , one way or another . 
 According to his brother , at the time Oppenheimer simply exclaimed , " It worked . " A contemporary account by Brigadier General Thomas Farrell , who was present in the control bunker at the site with Oppenheimer , summarized his reaction as follows : 
 Dr. Oppenheimer , on whom had rested a very heavy burden , grew tenser as the last seconds ticked off . He scarcely breathed . He held on to a post to steady himself . For the last few seconds , he stared directly ahead and then when the announcer shouted " Now ! " and there came this tremendous burst of light followed shortly thereafter by the deep growling roar of the explosion , his face relaxed into an expression of tremendous relief . 
 Physicist Isidor Rabi noticed Oppenheimer 's disconcerting triumphalism : " I 'll never forget his walk ; I 'll never forget the way he stepped out of the car ... his walk was like High Noon ... this kind of strut . He had done it . " At an assembly at Los Alamos on August 6 ( the evening of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima ) , Oppenheimer took to the stage and clasped his hands together " like a prize @-@ winning boxer " while the crowd cheered . He noted his regret the weapon had not been available in time to use against Nazi Germany . However , he and many of the project staff were very upset about the bombing of Nagasaki , as they did not feel the second bomb was necessary from a military point of view . He traveled to Washington on August 17 to hand @-@ deliver a letter to Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson expressing his revulsion and his wish to see nuclear weapons banned . In October 1945 Oppenheimer was granted an interview with President Harry S Truman . The meeting , however , went badly , after Oppenheimer remarked he felt he had " blood on my hands . " The remark infuriated Truman and put an end to the meeting . Truman later told his Undersecretary of State Dean Acheson " I don 't want to see that son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch in this office ever again . " 
 For his services as director of Los Alamos , Oppenheimer was awarded the Medal for Merit from President Harry S Truman in 1946 . 
 = = Postwar activities = = 
 After the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , the Manhattan Project became public knowledge ; and Oppenheimer became a national spokesman for science , emblematic of a new type of technocratic power . He became a household name and his face appeared on the covers of Life and Time . Nuclear physics became a powerful force as all governments of the world began to realize the strategic and political power that came with nuclear weapons . Like many scientists of his generation , he felt that security from atomic bombs would come only from a transnational organization such as the newly formed United Nations , which could institute a program to stifle a nuclear arms race . 
 = = = Institute for Advanced Study = = = 
 In November 1945 , Oppenheimer left Los Alamos to return to Caltech , but he soon found that his heart was no longer in teaching . In 1947 , he accepted an offer from Lewis Strauss to take up the directorship of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , New Jersey . This meant moving back east and leaving Ruth Tolman , the wife of his friend Richard Tolman , with whom he had begun an affair after leaving Los Alamos . The job came with a salary of $ 20 @,@ 000 per annum , plus rent @-@ free accommodation in the director 's house , a 17th @-@ century manor with a cook and groundskeeper , surrounded by 265 acres ( 107 ha ) of woodlands . 
 Oppenheimer brought together intellectuals at the height of their powers and from a variety of disciplines to solve the most pertinent questions of the age . He directed and encouraged the research of many well @-@ known scientists , including Freeman Dyson , and the duo of Chen Ning Yang and Tsung @-@ Dao Lee , who won a Nobel Prize for their discovery of parity non @-@ conservation . He also instituted temporary memberships for scholars from the humanities , such as T. S. Eliot and George F. Kennan . Some of these activities were resented by a few members of the mathematics faculty , who wanted the institute to stay a bastion of pure scientific research . Abraham Pais said that Oppenheimer himself thought that one of his failures at the institute was being unable to bring together scholars from the natural sciences and the humanities . 
 A series of conferences in New York from 1947 through 1949 saw physicists switch back from war work to theoretical issues . Under Oppenheimer 's direction , physicists tackled the greatest outstanding problem of the pre @-@ war years : infinite , divergent , and non @-@ sensical expressions in the quantum electrodynamics of elementary particles . Julian Schwinger , Richard Feynman and Shin <unk> Tomonaga tackled the problem of regularization , and developed techniques which became known as renormalization . Freeman Dyson was able to prove that their procedures gave similar results . The problem of meson absorption and Hideki Yukawa 's theory of mesons as the carrier particles of the strong nuclear force were also tackled . Probing questions from Oppenheimer prompted Robert Marshak 's innovative two @-@ meson hypothesis : that there were actually two types of mesons , pions and muons . This led to Cecil Frank Powell 's breakthrough and subsequent Nobel Prize for the discovery of the pion . 
 = = = Atomic Energy Commission = = = 
 As a member of the Board of Consultants to a committee appointed by Truman , Oppenheimer strongly influenced the Acheson – Lilienthal Report . In this report , the committee advocated creation of an international Atomic Development Authority , which would own all fissionable material and the means of its production , such as mines and laboratories , and atomic power plants where it could be used for peaceful energy production . Bernard Baruch was appointed to translate this report into a proposal to the United Nations , resulting in the Baruch Plan of 1946 . The Baruch Plan introduced many additional provisions regarding enforcement , in particular requiring inspection of the Soviet Union 's uranium resources . The Baruch Plan was seen as an attempt to maintain the United States ' nuclear monopoly and was rejected by the Soviets . With this , it became clear to Oppenheimer that an arms race was unavoidable , due to the mutual suspicion of the United States and the Soviet Union , which even Oppenheimer was starting to distrust . 
 After the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) came into being in 1947 as a civilian agency in control of nuclear research and weapons issues , Oppenheimer was appointed as the Chairman of its General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) . From this position he advised on a number of nuclear @-@ related issues , including project funding , laboratory construction and even international policy — though the GAC 's advice was not always heeded . As Chairman of the GAC , Oppenheimer lobbied vigorously for international arms control and funding for basic science , and attempted to influence policy away from a heated arms race . When the government questioned whether to pursue a crash program to develop an atomic weapon based on nuclear fusion — the hydrogen bomb — Oppenheimer initially recommended against it , though he had been in favor of developing such a weapon during the Manhattan Project . He was motivated partly by ethical concerns , feeling that such a weapon could only be used strategically against civilian targets , resulting in millions of deaths . He was also motivated by practical concerns , however , as at the time there was no workable design for a hydrogen bomb . Oppenheimer felt that resources would be better spent creating a large force of fission weapons . He and others were especially concerned about nuclear reactors being diverted from plutonium to tritium production . They were overridden by Truman , who announced a crash program after the Soviet Union tested their first atomic bomb in 1949 . Oppenheimer and other GAC opponents of the project , especially James Conant , felt personally shunned and considered retiring from the committee . They stayed on , though their views on the hydrogen bomb were well known . 
 In 1951 , however , Edward Teller and mathematician Stanislaw Ulam developed what became known as the Teller @-@ Ulam design for a hydrogen bomb . This new design seemed technically feasible and Oppenheimer changed his opinion about developing the weapon . As he later recalled : 
 The program we had in 1949 was a tortured thing that you could well argue did not make a great deal of technical sense . It was therefore possible to argue that you did not want it even if you could have it . The program in 1951 was technically so sweet that you could not argue about that . The issues became purely the military , the political and the humane problems of what you were going to do about it once you had it . 
 = = = Security hearing = = = 
 The FBI under J. Edgar Hoover had been following Oppenheimer since before the war , when he showed Communist sympathies as a professor at Berkeley and had been close to members of the Communist Party , including his wife and brother . He had been under close surveillance since the early 1940s , his home and office bugged , his phone tapped and his mail opened . The FBI furnished Oppenheimer 's political enemies with incriminating evidence about his Communist ties . These enemies included Strauss , an AEC commissioner who had long harbored resentment against Oppenheimer both for his activity in opposing the hydrogen bomb and for his humiliation of Strauss before Congress some years earlier ; regarding Strauss 's opposition to the export of radioactive isotopes to other nations , Oppenheimer had memorably categorized these as " less important than electronic devices but more important than , let us say , vitamins . " 
 On June 7 , 1949 , Oppenheimer testified before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee , where he admitted that he had associations with the Communist Party in the 1930s . He testified that some of his students , including David Bohm , Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz , Philip Morrison , Bernard Peters and Joseph Weinberg , had been Communists at the time they had worked with him at Berkeley . Frank Oppenheimer and his wife Jackie testified before the HUAC and admitted that they had been members of the Communist Party . Frank was subsequently fired from his University of Minnesota position . Unable to find work in physics for many years , he became instead a cattle rancher in Colorado . He later taught high school physics and was the founder of the San Francisco Exploratorium . 
 Oppenheimer had found himself in the middle of more than one controversy and power struggle in the years from 1949 to 1953 . Edward Teller , who had been so uninterested in work on the atomic bomb at Los Alamos during the war that Oppenheimer had given him time instead to work on his own project of the hydrogen bomb , had eventually left Los Alamos in 1951 to help found , in 1952 , a second laboratory at what would become the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory . There , he could be free of Los Alamos control to develop the hydrogen bomb . Long @-@ range thermonuclear " strategic " weapons delivered by jet bombers would necessarily be under control of the new United States Air Force ( USAF ) . Oppenheimer had for some years pushed for smaller " tactical " nuclear weapons which would be more useful in a limited theater against enemy troops and which would be under control of the Army . The two services fought for control of nuclear weapons , often allied with different political parties . The USAF , with Teller pushing its program , gained ascendance in the Republican @-@ controlled administration following the election of Dwight D. Eisenhower as president in 1952 . 
 Strauss and Senator Brien McMahon , author of the 1946 McMahon Act , pushed Eisenhower to revoke Oppenheimer 's security clearance . On December 21 , 1953 , Strauss told Oppenheimer that his security clearance had been suspended , pending resolution of a series of charges outlined in a letter , and discussed his resigning . Oppenheimer chose not to resign and requested a hearing instead . The charges were outlined in a letter from Kenneth D. Nichols , General Manager of the AEC . The hearing that followed in April – May 1954 , which was initially confidential and not made public , focused on Oppenheimer 's past Communist ties and his association during the Manhattan Project with suspected disloyal or Communist scientists . The US Department of Energy made public the full text of the transcript in October 2014 . 
 One of the key elements in this hearing was Oppenheimer 's earliest testimony about George Eltenton 's approach to various Los Alamos scientists , a story that Oppenheimer confessed he had fabricated to protect his friend Haakon Chevalier . Unknown to Oppenheimer , both versions were recorded during his interrogations of a decade before . He was surprised on the witness stand with transcripts of these , which he had not been given a chance to review . In fact , Oppenheimer had never told Chevalier that he had finally named him , and the testimony had cost Chevalier his job . Both Chevalier and Eltenton confirmed mentioning that they had a way to get information to the Soviets , Eltenton admitting he said this to Chevalier and Chevalier admitting he mentioned it to Oppenheimer , but both put the matter in terms of gossip and denied any thought or suggestion of treason or thoughts of espionage , either in planning or in deed . Neither was ever convicted of any crime . 
 Teller testified that he considered Oppenheimer loyal , but that : 
 In a great number of cases , I have seen Dr. Oppenheimer act — I understand that Dr. Oppenheimer acted — in a way which was for me was exceedingly hard to understand . I thoroughly disagreed with him in numerous issues and his actions frankly appeared to me confused and complicated . To this extent I feel that I would like to see the vital interests of this country in hands which I understand better , and therefore trust more . In this very limited sense I would like to express a feeling that I would feel personally more secure if public matters would rest in other hands . 
 This led to outrage by the scientific community and Teller 's virtual expulsion from academic science . Groves , threatened by the FBI as having been potentially part of a coverup about the Chevalier contact in 1943 , likewise testified against Oppenheimer . Many top scientists , as well as government and military figures , testified on Oppenheimer 's behalf . Inconsistencies in his testimony and his erratic behavior on the stand , at one point saying he had given a " cock and bull story " and that this was because he " was an idiot " , convinced some that he was unstable , unreliable and a possible security risk . Oppenheimer 's clearance was revoked one day before it was due to lapse anyway . Isidor Rabi 's comment was that Oppenheimer was merely a government consultant at the time anyway and that if the government " didn 't want to consult the guy , then don 't consult him . " 
 During his hearing , Oppenheimer testified willingly on the left @-@ wing behavior of many of his scientific colleagues . Had Oppenheimer 's clearance not been stripped then he might have been remembered as someone who had " named names " to save his own reputation . As it happened , Oppenheimer was seen by most of the scientific community as a martyr to McCarthyism , an eclectic liberal who was unjustly attacked by warmongering enemies , symbolic of the shift of scientific creativity from academia into the military . Wernher von Braun summed up his opinion about the matter with a quip to a Congressional committee : " In England , Oppenheimer would have been knighted . " 
 In a seminar at the Woodrow Wilson Institute on May 20 , 2009 , based on an extensive analysis of the Vassiliev notebooks taken from the KGB archives , John Earl Haynes , Harvey Klehr and Alexander Vassiliev confirmed that Oppenheimer never was involved in espionage for the Soviet Union . The KGB tried repeatedly to recruit him , but was never successful ; Oppenheimer did not betray the United States . In addition , he had several persons removed from the Manhattan Project who had sympathies to the Soviet Union . Haynes , Klehr and Vassiliev also state Oppenheimer " was , in fact , a concealed member of the CPUSA in the late 1930s " . According to biographer Ray Monk : " He was , in a very practical and real sense , a supporter of the Communist Party . Moreover , in terms of the time , effort and money spent on Party activities , he was a very committed supporter " . 
 = = Final years and death = = 
 Starting in 1954 , Oppenheimer spent several months of the year living on the island of Saint John in the U.S. Virgin Islands . In 1957 , he purchased a 2 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) tract of land on Gibney Beach , where he built a spartan home on the beach . He spent a considerable amount of time sailing with his daughter Toni and wife Kitty . 
 Increasingly concerned about the potential danger to humanity arising from scientific discoveries , Oppenheimer joined with Albert Einstein , Bertrand Russell , Joseph Rotblat and other eminent scientists and academics to establish what would eventually become the World Academy of Art and Science in 1960 . Significantly , after his public humiliation , he did not sign the major open protests against nuclear weapons of the 1950s , including the Russell – Einstein Manifesto of 1955 , nor , though invited , did he attend the first Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs in 1957 . 
 In his speeches and public writings , Oppenheimer continually stressed the difficulty of managing the power of knowledge in a world in which the freedom of science to exchange ideas was more and more hobbled by political concerns . Oppenheimer delivered the Reith Lectures on the BBC in 1953 , which were subsequently published as Science and the Common Understanding . In 1955 Oppenheimer published The Open Mind , a collection of eight lectures that he had given since 1946 on the subject of nuclear weapons and popular culture . Oppenheimer rejected the idea of nuclear gunboat diplomacy . " The purposes of this country in the field of foreign policy " , he wrote , " cannot in any real or enduring way be achieved by coercion . " In 1957 the philosophy and psychology departments at Harvard invited Oppenheimer to deliver the William James Lectures . An influential group of Harvard alumni led by Edwin Ginn that included Archibald Roosevelt protested against the decision . Some 1 @,@ 200 people packed into Sanders Theatre to hear Oppenheimer 's six lectures , entitled " The Hope of Order " . Oppenheimer delivered the Whidden Lectures at McMaster University in 1962 , and these were published in 1964 as The Flying Trapeze : Three Crises for Physicists . 
 Deprived of political power , Oppenheimer continued to lecture , write and work on physics . He toured Europe and Japan , giving talks about the history of science , the role of science in society , and the nature of the universe . In September 1957 , France made him an Officer of the Legion of Honor , and on May 3 , 1962 , he was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society in Britain . At the urging of many of Oppenheimer 's political friends who had ascended to power , President John F. Kennedy awarded Oppenheimer the Enrico Fermi Award in 1963 as a gesture of political rehabilitation . Edward Teller , the winner of the previous year 's award , had also recommended Oppenheimer receive it , in the hope that it would heal the rift between them . A little over a week after Kennedy 's assassination , his successor , President Lyndon Johnson , presented Oppenheimer with the award , " for contributions to theoretical physics as a teacher and originator of ideas , and for leadership of the Los Alamos Laboratory and the atomic energy program during critical years . " Oppenheimer told Johnson : " I think it is just possible , Mr. President , that it has taken some charity and some courage for you to make this award today . " The rehabilitation implied by the award was partly symbolic , as Oppenheimer still lacked a security clearance and could have no effect on official policy , but the award came with a $ 50 @,@ 000 tax @-@ free stipend , and its award outraged many prominent Republicans in Congress . The late President Kennedy 's widow Jacqueline , still living in the White House , made it a point to meet with Oppenheimer to tell him how much her husband had wanted him to have the medal . While still a senator in 1959 , Kennedy had been instrumental in voting to narrowly deny Oppenheimer 's enemy Lewis Strauss a coveted government position as Secretary of Commerce , effectively ending Strauss ' political career . This was partly due to lobbying by the scientific community on behalf of Oppenheimer . 
 Oppenheimer was diagnosed with throat cancer in late 1965 and , after inconclusive surgery , underwent unsuccessful radiation treatment and chemotherapy late in 1966 . He fell into a coma on February 15 , 1967 , and died at his home in Princeton , New Jersey , on February 18 , aged 62 . A memorial service was held at Alexander Hall at Princeton University a week later , attended by 600 of his scientific , political and military associates including Bethe , Groves , Kennan , Lilienthal , Rabi , Smyth and Wigner . His brother Frank and the rest of his family were also there , as was the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger , Jr . , the novelist John O 'Hara , and George Balanchine , the director of the New York City Ballet . Bethe , Kennan and Smyth gave brief eulogies . Oppenheimer was cremated and his ashes were placed in an urn . Kitty took his ashes to St. John and dropped the urn into the sea off the coast , within sight of the beach house . 
 When Kitty died of an intestinal infection complicated by pulmonary embolism in October 1972 , Oppenheimer 's ranch in New Mexico was inherited by their son Peter , and the beach property was inherited by their daughter Katherine " Toni " Oppenheimer Silber . Toni was refused security clearance for her chosen vocation as a United Nations translator after the FBI brought up the old charges against her father . In January 1977 , three months after the end of her second marriage , she committed suicide at age 32 . She left the property to " the people of St. John for a public park and recreation area . " The original house , built too close to the coast , succumbed to a hurricane , but today , the Virgin Islands Government maintains a Community Center in the area . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 When Oppenheimer was ejected from his position of political influence in 1954 , he symbolized for many the folly of scientists thinking they could control how others would use their research . He has also been seen as symbolizing the dilemmas involving the moral responsibility of the scientist in the nuclear world . The hearings were motivated both by politics , as Oppenheimer was seen as a representative of the previous administration , and by personal considerations stemming from his enmity with Lewis Strauss . The ostensible reason for the hearing and the issue that aligned Oppenheimer with the liberal intellectuals , Oppenheimer 's opposition to hydrogen bomb development , was based as much on technical grounds as on moral ones . Once the technical considerations were resolved , he supported Teller 's hydrogen bomb because he believed that the Soviet Union would inevitably construct one too . Rather than consistently oppose the " Red @-@ baiting " of the late 1940s and early 1950s , Oppenheimer testified against some of his former colleagues and students , both before and during his hearing . In one incident , his damning testimony against former student Bernard Peters was selectively leaked to the press . Historians have interpreted this as an attempt by Oppenheimer to please his colleagues in the government and perhaps to divert attention from his own previous left @-@ wing ties and those of his brother . In the end it became a liability when it became clear that if Oppenheimer had really doubted Peters ' loyalty , his recommending him for the Manhattan Project was reckless , or at least contradictory . 
 Popular depictions of Oppenheimer view his security struggles as a confrontation between right @-@ wing militarists ( symbolized by Teller ) and left @-@ wing intellectuals ( symbolized by Oppenheimer ) over the moral question of weapons of mass destruction . The question of the scientists ' responsibility toward humanity inspired Bertolt Brecht 's drama Galileo ( 1955 ) , left its imprint on Friedrich Dürrenmatt 's Die <unk> , and is the basis of the opera Doctor Atomic by John Adams ( 2005 ) , which was commissioned to portray Oppenheimer as a modern @-@ day Faust . <unk> Kipphardt 's play In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer , after appearing on West German television , had its theatrical release in Berlin and Munich in October 1964 . Oppenheimer 's objections resulted in an exchange of correspondence with Kipphardt , in which the playwright offered to make corrections but defended the play . It premiered in New York in June 1968 , with Joseph Wiseman in the Oppenheimer role . New York Times theater critic Clive Barnes called it an " angry play and a partisan play " that sided with Oppenheimer but portrayed the scientist as a " tragic fool and genius " . Oppenheimer had difficulty with this portrayal . After reading a transcript of Kipphardt 's play soon after it began to be performed , Oppenheimer threatened to sue the playwright , decrying " improvisations which were contrary to history and to the nature of the people involved . " Later Oppenheimer told an interviewer : 
 The whole damn thing [ his security hearing ] was a farce , and these people are trying to make a tragedy out of it . ... I had never said that I had regretted participating in a responsible way in the making of the bomb . I said that perhaps he [ Kipphardt ] had forgotten Guernica , Coventry , Hamburg , Dresden , Dachau , Warsaw , and Tokyo ; but I had not , and that if he found it so difficult to understand , he should write a play about something else . 
 The 1980 BBC TV serial Oppenheimer , starring Sam Waterston , won three BAFTA Television Awards . The Day After Trinity , a 1980 documentary about J. Robert Oppenheimer and the building of the atomic bomb , was nominated for an Academy Award and received a Peabody Award . Oppenheimer 's life has been explored in the play Oppenheimer by Tom Morton @-@ Smith . In addition to his use by authors of fiction , there are numerous biographies , including American Prometheus : The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer ( 2005 ) by Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin which won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography for 2006 . A centennial conference and exhibit were held in 2004 at Berkeley , with the proceedings of the conference published in 2005 as <unk> Oppenheimer : Centennial Studies and Reflections . His papers are in the Library of Congress . 
 As a scientist , Oppenheimer is remembered by his students and colleagues as being a brilliant researcher and engaging teacher , the founder of modern theoretical physics in the United States . Because his scientific attentions often changed rapidly , he never worked long enough on any one topic and carried it to fruition to merit the Nobel Prize , although his investigations contributing to the theory of black holes may have warranted the prize had he lived long enough to see them brought into fruition by later astrophysicists . An asteroid , <unk> Oppenheimer , was named in his honor , as was the lunar crater Oppenheimer . 
 As a military and public policy advisor , Oppenheimer was a technocratic leader in a shift in the interactions between science and the military and the emergence of " Big Science " . During World War II , scientists became involved in military research to an unprecedented degree . Because of the threat fascism posed to Western civilization , they volunteered in great numbers both for technological and organizational assistance to the Allied effort , resulting in such powerful tools as radar , the proximity fuse and operations research . As a cultured , intellectual , theoretical physicist who became a disciplined military organizer , Oppenheimer represented the shift away from the idea that scientists had their " head in the clouds " and that knowledge on such previously esoteric subjects as the composition of the atomic nucleus had no " real @-@ world " applications . 
 Two days before the Trinity test , Oppenheimer expressed his hopes and fears in a quotation from the Bhagavad Gita : 
 In battle , in the forest , at the precipice in the mountains , 
 On the dark great sea , in the midst of javelins and arrows , 
 In sleep , in confusion , in the depths of shame , 
 The good deeds a man has done before defend him . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Oppenheimer , J. Robert ( 1954 ) . Science and the Common Understanding . New York : Simon and Schuster . OCLC <unk> . 
 Oppenheimer , J. Robert ( 1955 ) . The Open Mind . New York : Simon and Schuster . OCLC <unk> . 
 Oppenheimer , J. Robert ( 1964 ) . The Flying Trapeze : Three Crises for Physicists . London : Oxford University Press . OCLC <unk> . 
 Oppenheimer , J. Robert ; Rabi , <unk> ( 1969 ) . Oppenheimer . New York : Scribner . OCLC <unk> . ( posthumous ) 
 Oppenheimer , J. Robert ; Smith , Alice Kimball ; Weiner , Charles ( 1980 ) . Robert Oppenheimer , Letters and Recollections . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Harvard University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . ( posthumous ) 
 Oppenheimer , J. Robert ; Metropolis , N. ; Rota , Gian @-@ Carlo ; Sharp , D. H. ( 1984 ) . Uncommon Sense . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Birkhäuser Boston . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . OCLC <unk> . ( posthumous ) 
 Oppenheimer , J. Robert ( 1989 ) . Atom and Void : Essays on Science and Community . Princeton , New Jersey : Princeton University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . OCLC <unk> . ( posthumous ) 
 = St Andrew 's ( stadium ) = 
 St Andrew 's is an association football stadium in the Bordesley district of Birmingham , England . It has been the home ground of Birmingham City Football Club for more than a century . 
 Constructed and opened in 1906 to replace the Muntz Street ground , which had become too small to meet the club 's needs , the original St Andrew 's could hold an estimated 75 @,@ 000 spectators , housed in one grandstand and a large uncovered terrace . The attendance record , variously recorded as 66 @,@ 844 or 67 @,@ 341 , was set at a 1939 FA Cup tie against Everton . During the Second World War , St Andrew 's suffered bomb damage and the grandstand , housing a temporary fire station , burned down in an accidental fire . In the 1950s , the club replaced the stand and installed floodlights , and later erected a second small stand and roofed over the open terraces , but there were few further changes . 
 The ground became dilapidated : a boy was killed when a wall collapsed during rioting in the 1980s . When new owners took the club out of administration in 1993 , they began a six @-@ year redevelopment programme during which the ground was converted to an all @-@ seater stadium to comply with the Taylor Report into safety at sports grounds , and all areas apart from the Main Stand were completely rebuilt . The seating capacity of the modern stadium is just over 30 @,@ 000 . It has function rooms suitable for business or social events and a club store selling Birmingham City merchandise . A 2004 proposal that the club should sell the ground and move into a multi @-@ purpose City of Birmingham Stadium remains speculative . In 2013 , the ground was listed as an Asset of Community Value under the Localism Act 2011 . 
 St Andrew 's has been the venue for England international football matches at all levels below the senior national team , and for semifinal matches in the FA Cup and finals of lesser competitions . It has played host to events in other sports , including rugby union and professional boxing , and more recently has staged music concerts . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Former grounds = = = 
 Small Heath Alliance – the original name of Birmingham City Football Club – played their first home games on waste ground off Arthur Street , in the Bordesley Green district of Birmingham , very near the site where St Andrew 's would be built . In 1876 , they made a temporary move to a fenced @-@ off field in Ladypool Road , Sparkbrook , with an estimated capacity of 3 @,@ 000 spectators ; because the field was enclosed , admission could be charged . Interest in the team grew , and a year later they moved again , this time to a rented field in Small Heath , situated on the eastern edge of Birmingham 's built @-@ up area , just north of the main road to Coventry . This ground , which became known as Muntz Street , had four sides of open terracing , a small covered wooden stand , and a changing @-@ room for the players . When first opened it could hold approximately 10 @,@ 000 spectators . Over the years the height of the terracing was raised , which increased the capacity to around 30 @,@ 000 , but this became insufficient to cope with the demand . The attendance at a match in 1905 against local rivals Aston Villa was officially recorded as 28 @,@ 000 spectators , but several thousand more climbed walls or forced turnstiles to gain entry . The landlords refused to sell the freehold of the ground , nor would they permit major extensions to be made . As the board of directors estimated that staying at Muntz Street was costing the club £ 2 @,@ 000 a year ( £ 194 @,@ 000 at today 's prices ) , they began the search for an alternative site . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Director Harry Morris identified a site for a new ground in Bordesley , some three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 km ) from Muntz Street towards the city centre . Covering an area of 7 @.@ 5 acres ( 3 ha ) , bounded by Cattell Road , Coventry Road , Tilton Road , Garrison Lane and the railway , and near St Andrew 's church , the site was where a brickworks had once operated . Though Morris described the land itself as " a wilderness of stagnant water and muddy slopes " , the Sporting Mail considered it " very favourably situated for obtaining easy communication with the city and many of the suburbs , and will be served by an excellent service of electric cars [ trams ] , while the provision of a railway station close at hand is also considered as within the bounds of possibility . " 
 The club took the land on a 21 @-@ year lease , and entrusted the role of surveyor and engineer to a local carpenter , Harry Pumfrey , who despite a lack of qualifications produced plans " which would have done credit to the most expensive professional architect " . Club director Thomas Turley , a builder , acted as clerk of works , and it is estimated the club saved more than £ 2 @,@ 000 in professional fees by keeping the work in @-@ house . Tradition has it that gypsies , evicted from the site before work could begin , laid a 100 @-@ year curse on the club ; although gypsies are known to have camped nearby , there is no contemporary evidence for their eviction by the club , and construction began in February 1906 . 
 <unk> springs , which kept the land flooded , had to be drained and blocked off with tons of rubble before soil could be laid on top . To create height for the terracing on the Coventry Road side of the ground , the club offered the site as a tip , local people paying a total of £ 800 ( £ 77 @,@ 600 today ) for dumping an estimated 100 @,@ 000 loads of rubbish . This embankment was known from the beginning as the Spion Kop , stood 110 terraces high at its highest point , and had a reported capacity of 48 @,@ 000 spectators , each paying 6d ( £ 2 @.@ 43 today ) . The Grandstand , on the Garrison Lane side of the ground , was 123 yards ( 112 m ) in length . It held 6 @,@ 000 seats divided among six sections , priced from 1s to 2s ( £ 4 @.@ 90 to £ 9 @.@ 70 today ) , and all accesses were lit by electricity . In front of the stand was space for 5 @,@ 000 to stand under cover . Beneath the stand were refreshment rooms , changing rooms , a training area with plunge bath , a billiard room donated by brewery magnate Sir John Holder , and the club 's boardroom and offices , which hitherto had been maintained in premises in Birmingham city centre . Behind the goal at the railway end of the ground was space for a further 4 @,@ 000 standing spectators , and access to the ground was gained via turnstiles on three sides of the ground . Total capacity was estimated at 75 @,@ 000 , and construction cost at £ 10 @,@ 000 ( £ 970 @,@ 000 today ) . The playing surface , at 115 by 75 yards ( 105 m × 69 m ) , was one of the largest in the country , had a four @-@ yard ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) grassed border , and was surrounded by a cinder running track . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 St Andrew 's was officially opened by Sir John Holder on 26 December 1906 , when Birmingham played Middlesbrough in a First Division fixture . There had been heavy snowfall overnight , and dozens of volunteers , including members of the club 's board , worked all morning to clear the pitch . The game finally kicked off an hour late , finishing goalless in front of 32 @,@ 000 spectators . The Birmingham Daily Post editorial next day suggested that " the fact that so many spectators attended under such adverse conditions augurs well for the step that the directors have taken " , and that the directors were " to be congratulated in having provided their supporters with a ground second to none in the country " . 
 The Football Association chose St Andrew 's to host the 1907 FA Cup semifinal between The Wednesday and Woolwich Arsenal ; Wednesday won 3 – 1 , and went on to win the tournament . This was the first FA Cup tie to be played at the ground , as Birmingham had lost their opening match away from home . Three more semifinals took place at St Andrew 's before the Second World War , in 1911 , 1924 and 1934 . The club bought the freehold of the ground in 1921 for a price believed to be less than £ 7 @,@ 000 ( £ 679 @,@ 000 today ) . In the 1930s , roofs were erected over the Kop and Railway End terraces , and in February 1939 , the ground attendance record , variously recorded as 66 @,@ 844 or 67 @,@ 341 , was set at the fifth @-@ round FA Cup tie against Everton . 
 = = = Wartime = = = 
 During the First World War , the club supported the war effort by allowing the ground to be used as a rifle range for military training . On the outbreak of the Second World War , all outdoor sport was banned by the Government until safety implications could be assessed . When football resumed a few weeks later , Birmingham 's Chief Constable ordered the ground 's closure because of its proximity to probable air @-@ raid targets such as the BSA munitions factories . The matter was first raised in Parliament in November 1939 , but the Home Secretary felt unable to intervene . By March 1940 , when St Andrew 's had for some time been the only football ground in England still closed , the Chief Constable bowed to public pressure , and a crowd of 13 @,@ 241 witnessed Birmingham 's first home game in more than six months . 
 In 1941 , St Andrew 's suffered 20 direct hits from Luftwaffe bombing , which destroyed the roof of the Kop , badly damaged the Railway End , and forced the team to play elsewhere . It was therefore a surprising choice of venue for a wartime international match between England and Wales ; on safety grounds , spectators were required to purchase tickets in advance , and numbers were limited to 25 @,@ 000 . Three months later , the Main Stand , which was being used as a temporary National Fire Service station , burned down , destroying the club 's records and equipment – " not so much as a lead pencil was saved from the wreckage " – when a fireman mistook a bucket of petrol for water when intending to damp down a brazier . The team returned to the ground in 1943 . 
 = = = Improvements = = = 
 The replacement Main Stand , built in the early 1950s , used a propped cantilever roof design , which meant fewer pillars to block spectators ' view of the pitch . Floodlights were installed , and officially switched on for a friendly match against Borussia Dortmund in October 1956 . By the early 1960s , a stand had been built at the Railway End to the same design as the Main Stand , a new roof erected over the Kop , and the Tilton Road end covered for the first time . A scoreboard and clock were installed at the City end of the ground in memory of Birmingham and England player Jeff Hall , who died of polio during the 1958 – 59 season . In the 1970s , the Asda chain proposed to share the cost of a new stand as part of a supermarket development on land behind the Kop made vacant by slum clearance ; in the face of opposition from commercial rivals , the proposal fell through . 
 = = = Modernisation = = = 
 The last home game of the 1984 – 85 promotion season , against Leeds United , was marred by rioting , culminating in the death of a boy when a wall collapsed on him ; this was on the same day as the Bradford City stadium fire , and the events at St Andrew 's were included in the remit of Mr Justice Popplewell 's inquiry into safety at sports grounds . In response to this and the later Taylor Report , the capacity of St Andrew 's was cut to 26 @,@ 000 , but it was accepted that the stadium had to be brought up to modern standards . Club chairman David Gold recalled his first visit in March 1993 : 
 It was a shock . I had a picture in my mind of what I was expecting , but it was in such a state of disrepair that it was hard to comprehend ... Only two @-@ thirds of the bulbs on the floodlights were working and the Football League had threatened action if we didn 't do something to improve the lights . It was raining . It was a dour game . It was dark . It was dull . There were people standing in the rain looking extremely uncomfortable and unhappy . This First Division club was penniless and near to extinction . There were corrugated @-@ iron fences round the ground and it looked as though it hadn 't seen a lick of paint since Birmingham reached the FA Cup Final in 1956 . 
 Though relegation to the Third Division meant the club was no longer bound by the Taylor Report 's 1994 deadline for conversion to all @-@ seater , new owner David Sullivan continued the £ 4 @.@ 5 million development as planned . After the last home game of the 1993 – 94 season , the Kop and Tilton Road terraces were demolished , helped by fans who took home a significant proportion as souvenirs , the land was cleared – the rubbish tip beneath the Kop which had earned the club £ 800 in 1906 ( £ 43 @,@ 300 at 1994 prices ) cost £ 250 @,@ 000 to decontaminate – and by the start of the new season , 7 @,@ 000 seats in the Tilton Road Stand were ready for use . On completion of the Kop Stand , the stadium was formally re @-@ opened in November 1994 by Baroness Trumpington , representing the Department of National Heritage , who unveiled a commemorative plaque and presented a cheque for £ 2 @.@ 5 million on behalf of the Football Trust ; the ceremony was followed by a friendly match against Aston Villa , attended by a crowd of 20 @,@ 000 . Planning permission for an all @-@ seater Railway Stand was granted in March 1995 , but work was delayed by a dispute over land owned by Railtrack and the stand opened only in 1999 . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The stadium has four stands . The Main Stand ( renamed the Garrison Lane Stand from 2010 to 2012 ) , a free @-@ standing structure on the north side of the playing area , was completed in 1954 and has seating for fewer than 5 @,@ 000 spectators . The upper tier contains the media area and an area of corporate seats as well as standard seating . The lower tier , known as the Paddocks , consists of a few rows of seats placed on the uncovered terraced area in front of the stand ; the view from this area can be obstructed by the central tunnel and the dugouts . A row of executive boxes was added at the back of the Paddocks in the 1970s . The family area is divided between the eastern end of the Main Stand and the Paddock beneath . The club planned £ 1 @.@ 3 million worth of restructuring and refurbishment work on the stand , which contained hospitality areas and offices , during the 2009 closed season , and seating was replaced in 2010 . The broadcasting gantry is situated in the roof of this stand . 
 To commemorate the 50th anniversary of Jeff Hall 's death , the club commissioned a memorial clock to replace the original which did not survive the 1990s renovations . Placed centrally above the Main Stand , it was unveiled in September 2008 by Hall 's teammates Alex Govan and Gil Merrick . However , adverse reaction to the clock 's size and position provoked the club into ordering a larger replacement to be incorporated in a proposed big screen . 
 The Railway Stand , on the west side of the stadium nearest to Birmingham city centre , is also free @-@ standing . It was opened in 1999 and holds some 8 @,@ 000 spectators in two tiers ; the upper tier , a small area known as the Olympic Gallery , overhangs the lower , at the back of which is a row of executive boxes . From the 2009 – 10 season , the Railway Stand was renamed the Gil Merrick Stand , in honour of the club 's appearance record @-@ holder and former manager . Visiting supporters are housed in the lower Railway Stand , segregated from home fans by plastic netting over the seats . 
 The Kop Stand and the Tilton Road Stand , opened in 1994 , form a continuous L @-@ shaped single @-@ tier stand , with seating capacity for nearly 17 @,@ 000 spectators , round the remaining half of the pitch . A walkway separates back and front sections . The Kop seating includes the directors ' box and a row of executive boxes , within the stand are a number of function rooms and hospitality areas , and there are electronic perimeter advertising boards in front . The stadium has floodlight pylons only on the north side ; the south side is lit by a row of lights along the front of the Kop roof . The Tilton Road Stand has 9 @,@ 000 seats , and is the only one without hospitality boxes . 
 The various function rooms and corporate boxes are available for hire for business or social events , and the stadium is licensed as a venue for civil weddings . There are wheelchair areas in all parts of the stadium , and commentary headsets for visually impaired spectators are available . 
 The pitch measures 100 by 66 metres ( 109 yd × 72 yd ) . It was relaid three times in 2007 . The first attempt , made because the surface had deteriorated to a dangerous condition , was unsuccessful because of freak rainfall which resulted in the postponement of the next match – the first time such an event had happened in senior English football . The work had to be repeated , and then done for a third time in the closed season . The postponement of an FA Cup @-@ tie in January 2009 highlighted the lack of under @-@ soil heating , which was installed in June . 
 = = Future = = 
 In 2004 a proposal was put forward to build a " sports village " comprising a new 55 @,@ 000 stadium for the club , to be known as the City of Birmingham Stadium , other sports and leisure facilities , and a super casino . The project would be jointly financed by Birmingham City Council , Birmingham City F.C. ( via the proceeds of the sale of St Andrew 's ) and the casino group Las Vegas Sands . The feasibility of the plan depended on the government issuing a licence for a super casino as permitted under the Gambling Act 2005 , and Birmingham being chosen as the venue , but this did not happen . The club have planning permission to redevelop the Main Stand , and a derelict building behind the stand has been demolished , but club and council have continued to seek alternative sources of funding for the City of Birmingham Stadium project . 
 In 2013 , the Birmingham City Supporters ' Trust 's application for listing St Andrew 's as an Asset of Community Value ( ACV ) under the Localism Act 2011 was approved by Birmingham City Council . The legislation defines an ACV as a building or other land whose main use " furthers the social wellbeing or social interests of the local community " and where it is realistic to believe it could do so in the future . It requires any proposed sale to be notified to the Council , and provides for a six @-@ month moratorium on that sale to allow the Trust and other community groups to submit their own bid . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Teams representing England have played international matches at St Andrew 's , though not at senior level . In 1957 , England B defeated Scotland B under floodlights in front of nearly 40 @,@ 000 spectators . England 's junior sides have played there on several occasions , at under @-@ 23 , under @-@ 21 – the 4 – 0 defeat to Spain in 2001 was the England under @-@ 21 team 's worst home defeat – and youth levels . Before competitive football resumed after the First World War , a Scottish Football League XI beat their English counterparts , including Birmingham players Frank Womack and Billy Morgan , 3 – 1 at St Andrew 's . 
 As of 2009 , four FA Cup semifinals have taken place at St Andrew 's , and the ground has hosted semifinal replays on five occasions , most recently in 1961 . It was the venue for the 1987 play @-@ off final replay , in which Charlton Athletic beat Leeds United to remain in the Football League First Division , and for the final of the FA Vase in 2004 and 2006 . 
 The ground has also been used for other sports . Small Heath Harriers athletic club , whose headquarters had been at the Muntz Street ground , trained at St Andrew 's until the 1920s . The 1960 South African touring rugby union team beat a Midland Counties XV by 16 points to 5 on a muddy St Andrew 's pitch in front of a 17 @,@ 000 crowd . In 1949 , Dick Turpin beat Albert Finch on points to retain his British and Empire middleweight boxing title ; Turpin 's brothers Jack and future world champion Randolph fought on the undercard . In 1965 , Henry Cooper defeated Johnny Prescott at St Andrew 's to retain his British and Empire heavyweight title ; the fight took place two days after originally scheduled , having been rained off at the last minute , which prompted debate as to the feasibility of outdoor boxing promotions in light of the uncertain British weather . 
 St Andrew 's was the location for the rally scene in Peter Watkins ' 1967 film Privilege . It has hosted a number of music concerts : performers and events include UB40 , supported by The Pogues , in 1989 , Duran Duran in 2005 , and the 2002 Party in the Park , featuring Westlife and Sugababes among others . 
 = = Records = = 
 The record attendance at St Andrew 's was set at the fifth @-@ round FA Cup tie against Everton on 11 February 1939 ; the actual figure is variously reported as 66 @,@ 844 or 67 @,@ 341 . The highest attendance recorded for a league match is 60 @,@ 250 , against Aston Villa in the First Division on 23 November 1935 . The highest average attendance over a league season , 38 @,@ 821 , was set during the 1948 – 49 First Division season , and the lowest , 6 @,@ 289 , was recorded in the Second Division in 1988 – 89 . Since the stadium was converted to all @-@ seater , the record attendance is 29 @,@ 588 , set against Arsenal in the Premier League on 22 November 2003 . 
 St Andrew 's was the venue for the first use of a penalty shootout to determine the winner of an FA Cup match . For five seasons , between 1970 and 1974 , the losing FA Cup semifinalists were obliged to play off for third and fourth place ; Birmingham City finished third in the 1971 – 72 FA Cup by beating Stoke City 4 – 3 on penalties following a goalless 90 minutes . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The nearest railway station to the stadium is Bordesley , on the Birmingham to Stratford Line between Moor Street and Small Heath stations , which has regular services only on match days . The stadium is a 20 @-@ minute walk from New Street station , which is served by direct trains from most parts of the country , and slightly less far from Moor Street , which is served by Chiltern Railways trains from London Marylebone . Digbeth Coach Station , served by National Express coaches , is a 15 @-@ minute walk away , and buses run from the city centre past the ground . There is very limited parking at the stadium itself , but a secure outdoor car park is available at Birmingham Wheels Park , less than 15 minutes walk away , and parking is permitted in the streets surrounding the ground . 
 = Badrinath Temple = 
 Badrinath or Badrinarayan Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to Vishnu which is situated in the town of Badrinath in Uttarakhand , India . The temple and town form one of the four Char Dham and Chota Char Dham pilgrimage sites . The temple is also one of the 108 Divya Desams dedicated to Vishnu , who is worshipped as Badrinath — holy shrines for Vaishnavites . It is open for six months every year ( between the end of April and the beginning of November ) , because of extreme weather conditions in the Himalayan region . The temple is located in Garhwal hill tracks in Chamoli district along the banks of Alaknanda River at an elevation of 3 @,@ 133 m ( 10 @,@ 279 ft ) above the mean sea level . It is one of the most visited pilgrimage centres of India , having recorded 1 @,@ 060 @,@ 000 visits . 
 The image of the presiding deity worshipped in the temple is a 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) tall , black stone statue of Vishnu in the form of Badrinarayan . The statue is considered by many Hindus to be one of eight <unk> <unk> kshetras , or self @-@ manifested statues of Vishnu . 
 Mata Murti Ka Mela , which commemorates the descent of river Ganges on mother earth , is the most prominent festival celebrated in the Badrinath Temple . Although Badrinath is located in North India , the head priest , or Rawal , is traditionally a Nambudiri Brahmin chosen from the South Indian state of Kerala . The temple was included in the Uttar Pradesh state government Act No. 30 / 1948 as Act no . 16 @,@ 1939 , which later came to be known as Shri <unk> and Shri Kedarnath Mandir Act . The committee nominated by the state government administers both the temples and has seventeen members on its board . 
 The temple is mentioned in ancient religious texts like Vishnu Purana and Skanda Purana . It is glorified in the Divya Prabandha , an early medieval Tamil canon of the Azhwar saints from the 6th – 9th centuries AD . 
 = = Location , architecture , and shrines = = 
 The temple is located in Garhwal hill tracks along the banks of the Alaknanda River in Chamoli district in Uttarakhand , a state in North India . The hill tracks are located 3 @,@ 133 m ( 10 @,@ 279 ft ) above the mean sea level . The Nar Parbat mountain is located opposite to the temple , while the Narayana Parbat is located behind the Neelakanta peak . 
 The temple has three structures : the Garbhagriha ( sanctum ) , the Darshan Mandap ( worship hall ) , and Sabha Mandap ( convention hall ) . The conical @-@ shaped roof of the sanctum , the garbhagriha , is approximately 15 m ( 49 ft ) tall with a small cupola on top , covered with a gold gilt roof . The facade is built of stone and has arched windows . A broad stairway leads up to the main entrance , a tall , arched gateway . Just inside is a mandap , a large , pillared hall that leads to the sanctum , or main shrine area . The walls and pillars of the hall are covered with intricate carvings . 
 The main shrine houses the 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) Shaligram ( black stone ) image of Badrinarayan , which is housed in a gold canopy under a Badri Tree . The image of Badrinarayan holds a Shankha ( conch ) and a Chakra ( wheel ) in two of its arms in a lifted posture and two arms are rested on its lap in a <unk> ( Padmasana ) posture . The sanctum also houses images of the god of wealth — Kubera , sage Narada , <unk> , Nar and Narayan . There are fifteen more images that are also worshipped around the temple . These include that of Lakshmi ( the consort of Vishnu ) , Garuda ( the vahana of Narayan ) , and Navadurga , the manifestation of Durga in nine different forms . The temple also has shrines of Lakshmi <unk> and for saints Adi Shankara ( AD 788 @-@ 820 ) , Vedanta <unk> and Ramanujacharya . All the idols of the temple are made of black stone . 
 The <unk> Kund , a group of hot sulphur springs just below the temple , are considered to be medicinal ; many pilgrims consider it a requirement to bathe in the springs before visiting the temple . The springs have a year @-@ round temperature of 55 ° C ( 131 ° F ) , while outside temperature is typically below 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) all year round . The two water ponds in the temple are called <unk> Kund and Surya Kund . 
 = = History = = 
 There is no historical record about the temple , but there is a mention of the presiding deity Badrinath in Vedic scriptures , indicating the presence of the temple during the Vedic period ( c . 1750 – 500 BC ) . As per some accounts , the temple was a Buddhist shrine till the 8th century and Adi Shankara converted it to a Hindu temple . The architecture of the temple resembling that of a Buddhist vihara ( temple ) and the brightly painted facade which is atypical of Buddhist temples leads to the argument . As per other accounts , it was originally established as a pilgrimage site by Adi Shankara in the ninth century . It is believed that Shankara resided in the place for six years from AD 814 to 820 . He resided six months in Badrinath and the rest of the year in Kedarnath . Hindu followers assert that he discovered the image of Badrinath in the Alaknanda River and enshrined it in a cave near the <unk> Kund hot springs . A traditional story asserts that Shankara expelled all the Buddhists in the region with the help of the Parmar ruler king Kanak Pal . The hereditary successors of the king governed the temple and endowed villages to meet its expenses . The income from a set of villages on the route to the temple was used to feed and accommodate pilgrims . The Parmar rulers held the title " <unk> Badrinath " , meaning speaking Badrinath . They had other titles , including Shri 108 <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 The throne of Badrinath was named after the presiding deity ; the king enjoyed ritual obeisance by the devotees before proceeding to the shrine . The practice was continued until the late 19th century . During the 16th century , the King of Garhwal moved the murti to the present temple . When the state of Garhwal was divided , the Badrinath temple came under British rule but the king of Garhwal continued as the chairman of the management committee . 
 The temple has undergone several major renovations due to its age and damage by an avalanche . In the 17th century , the temple was expanded by the Kings of Garhwal . After significant damage in the great 1803 Himalayan earthquake , it was largely rebuilt by the King of Jaipur . It was still under renovation as late as the 1870s but these were completed by the time of the First World War . At that time , the town was still small , consisting of only the 20 @-@ odd huts housing the temple 's staff , but the number of pilgrims was usually between seven and ten thousand . The Kumbh Meld festival held every twelve years raised the number of visitors to 50 @,@ 000 . The temple also enjoyed revenue from the rents owed to it by various villages bequeathed by various rajas . 
 During 2006 , the state government announced the area around Badrinath as a no construction zone to curb illegal encroachment . 
 = = Legend = = 
 According to Hindu legend , god Vishnu sat in meditation at this place , keeping away from <unk> , a place in the Himalayas which was corrupted by meat @-@ eating monks and unchaste people . During his meditation , Vishnu was unaware of cold weather . Lakshmi , his consort , protected him in the form of the Badri tree ( jujube or Indian date ) . Pleased by the devotion of Lakshmi , Vishnu named the place <unk> Ashram . According to Atkinson ( 1979 ) , the place used to be a jujube forest , which are not found there today . Vishnu in the form of Badrinath is depicted in the temple sitting in the padmasana posture . According to the legend , Vishnu was chastised by a sage , who saw Vishnu 's consort Lakshmi massaging his feet . Vishnu went to Badrinath to perform austerity , meditating for a long time in padmasana . 
 The Vishnu Purana narrates another version of the origins of Badrinath . According to the tradition , <unk> had two sons , Nar and Narayan — both of which are modern names of Himalayan mountains . They chose the place to spread their religion and each of them wed the spacious valleys in the Himalayas . Searching for an ideal place to set up a hermitage , they came across the other four <unk> of the Pancha Badri , namely <unk> Badri , Yog <unk> , Dhyan Badri and <unk> Badri . They finally found the hot and cold spring behind the Alaknanda River and named it Badri Vishal . 
 = = Literary mention = = 
 The temple finds mention in several ancient books like Bhagavata Purana , Skanda Purana and Mahabharata . According to the Bhagavata Purana , " [ t ] here in <unk> the Personality of Godhead ( Vishnu ) , in his incarnation as the sages Nar and Narayana , had been undergoing great penance since time immemorial for the welfare of all living entities " . The Skanda Purana states that " [ t ] here are several sacred shrines in heaven , on earth , and in hell ; but there is no shrine like Badrinath " . The area around Badrinath is also celebrated in Padma Purana as abounding in spiritual treasures . The Mahabharata revered the holy place as the one which can give salvation to devotees arriving close to if , while in other holy places they must perform religious ceremonies . The temple is revered in Nalayira Divya Prabandham , in 11 hymns in the 7th – 9th century Vaishnava canon by <unk> and in 13 hymns in Thirumangai Azhwar . It is one of the 108 Divyadesam dedicated to Vishnu , who is worshipped as Badrinath . 
 = = Pilgrimage = = 
 Devotees of all faiths and all schools of thought of Hinduism visit the Badrinath Temple . All the major monastic institutions like Kashi Math , <unk> Mutt ( Andhra mutt ) , Udupi <unk> and <unk> Sri Raghavendra Swamy Mutts have their branches and guest houses there . 
 The Badrinath temple is one of five related shrines called Panch Badri , which are dedicated to the worship of Vishnu . The five temples are Vishal Badri - Badrinath Temple in Badrinath , <unk> Badri located at <unk> , Bhavishya Badri located 17 km ( 10 @.@ 6 mi ) from Jyotirmath at <unk> , <unk> Badri located 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) from Jyotirmath in <unk> and Adi Badri located 17 km ( 10 @.@ 6 mi ) from <unk> . The temple is considered one of the holiest Hindu Char Dham ( four divine ) sites , comprising Rameswaram , Badrinath , Puri and Dwarka . Although the temple 's origins are not clearly known , the Advaita school of Hinduism established by Adi Shankara attributes the origin of Char Dham to the seer . The four monasteries are located across the four corners of India and their attendant temples are Badrinath Temple at Badrinath in the North , Jagannath Temple at Puri in the East , Dwarakadheesh Temple at Dwarka in the West and Sri Sharada Peetam Sringeri at Sringeri , Karnataka in the South . 
 Though ideologically the temples are divided between the sects of Hinduism , namely Saivism and Vaishnavism , the Char Dham pilgrimage is an all @-@ Hindu affair . There are four abodes in the Himalayas called Chota Char Dham ( Chota meaning small ) : Badrinath , Kedarnath , Gangotri and Yamunotri — all of which lie in the foothills of the Himalayas . The name Chota was added during the mid of 20th century to differentiate the original Char <unk> . As the number of pilgrims to these places has increased in modern times , it is called Himalayan Char Dham . 
 The journey across the four cardinal points in India is considered sacred by Hindus , who aspire to visit these temples once in their lifetimes . Traditionally , the pilgrimage starts at the eastern end from Puri , proceeding clockwise in a manner typically followed for circumambulation in Hindu temples . 
 = = Festivals and religious practices = = 
 The most prominent festival held at Badrinath Temple is Mata Murti Ka Mela , which commemorates the descent of the river Ganges on mother earth . The mother of Badrinath , who is believed to have divided the river into twelve channels for the welfare of earthly beings , is worshiped during the festival . The place where the river flowed became the holy land of Badrinath . 
 The Badri Kedar festival is celebrated during the month of June in both the temple and the Kedarnath temple . The festival lasts for eight days ; artists from all over the country perform during the function . 
 The major religious activities ( or pujas ) performed every morning are <unk> ( ablution ) , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> puja , while in the evening the pujas include geet <unk> and aarti . Recital in vedic scripts like <unk> and Sahasranama is practiced during all the rituals . After aarti , the decorations are removed from the image of Badrinath and sandalwood paste is applied to it . The paste from the image is given to the devotees the next day as prasad during the <unk> darshan . All the rituals are performed in front of the devotees , unlike those in some Hindu temples , where some practices are hidden from them . Sugar balls and dry leaves are the common prasad provided to the devotees . From May 2006 , the practise of offering <unk> Prasad , prepared locally and packed in local bamboo baskets , was started . 
 The temple is closed for winter on the auspicious day of Vijayadasami during October – November . On the day of closure , <unk> Jyothi , a lamp is lit filled with ghee to last for six months . Special pujas are performed on the day by the chief priest in the presence of pilgrims and officials of the temple . The image of Badrinath is notionally transferred during the period to the Narasimha temple at Jyotirmath , located 40 mi ( 64 km ) away from the temple . The temple is reopened around April on Vasant Panchami , another auspicious day on the Hindu calendar . Pilgrims gather on the first day of opening of the temple after the winter to witness the <unk> Jyothi . 
 The temple is one of the holy places where the Hindus offer oblations to ancestors with the help of the priests . Devotees visit the temple to worship in front of the image of Badrinath in the sanctum and have a hold dip in Alaknanda River . The general belief is that a dip in the tank purifies the soul . 
 = = Administration and visit = = 
 The Badrinath Temple was included in the Uttar Pradesh state government Act No. 30 / 1948 as Act no . 16 @,@ 1939 , which was later known as Shri <unk> and Shri Kedarnath Mandir Act . A committee nominated by the state government administers both the temples . The act was modified in 2002 to appoint additional committee members , including Government officials and a Vice chairman . There are seventeen members in the board ; three selected by the Uttaranchal Legislative Assembly , one member each by the Zilla <unk> of <unk> , Tehri , Chamoli and Uttarkashi , and ten members nominated by the state government . 
 As per the temple records , the priests of the temple were Shiva ascetics called Dandi <unk> , who belonged to Nambudiri community , a religious group common in modern Kerala . When the last of the ascetics died without an heir in 1776 AD , the king invited non @-@ ascetic <unk> from Kerala for priesthood , a practice that continues in modern times . Till 1939 , all the offerings made by the devotees to the temple went to the Rawal ( chief priest ) , but after 1939 , his jurisdiction was restricted to religious affairs . The administrative structure of the temple consists of a chief executive officer who executes the orders from the state government , a deputy chief executive officer , two <unk> , an executive officer , an account officer , a temple officer and a publicity officer to assist the chief executive officer . 
 Although Badrinath is located in North India , the head priest , or Rawal , is traditionally a Nambudiri Brahmin chosen from the South Indian state of Kerala . This tradition is believed to have been initiated by Adi Shankara , who was a South Indian philosopher . The Rawal ( chief priest ) is requested by the Government of Uttarakhand ( Uttar Pradesh government before the formation of Uttarakhand state ) to the Kerala Government . The candidate should possess a degree of Acharya in Sanskrit , be a bachelor , well @-@ versed in reciting mantras ( sacred texts ) and be from the Vaishnava sect of Hinduism . The erstwhile ruler of Garhwal , who is the tutelary head of Badrinath , approves the candidate sent by the Government of Kerala . A Tilak Ceremony is held to instate the Rawal and he is deputed from April to November , when the temple remains open . The Rawal is accorded high holiness status by Garhwal Rifles and the state governments of Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh . He is also held in high esteem by the Royals of Nepal . From April to November , he performs his duties as a temple priest . Thereafter , he either stays in <unk> or returns to his native village in Kerala . The duties of the Rawal starts at 4 a.m. every day with the <unk> . He should not cross the river until Vamana <unk> and must adhere to Brahmacharya . The Rawal is assisted by the Garhwali <unk> Pundits belonging to the Village Dimmer , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , a group of priests , Pandas <unk> , Bhandari , <unk> ( cook ) , devotional singer , clerk of <unk> , Jal <unk> ( water keeper ) and temple guards . Badrinath is one of the few temples in North India that follow the ancient Tantra @-@ <unk> of <unk> tradition more common in the south . 
 In 2012 , the temple administration introduced a token system for visitors to the temple . Tokens indicating the time of visit were provided from three stalls in the taxi stands . Each devotee to visit the presiding deity is allocated 10 – 20 seconds . Proof of identity is mandatory to enter the temple . The temple is reached from Rishikesh , located 298 km ( 185 mi ) away via Dev Prayag , Rudra Prayag , Karna Prayag , Nanda Prayag , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . From Kedarnath , visitors can follow the 243 km ( 151 mi ) -long Rudra Prayag route or the 230 km ( 140 mi ) -long <unk> and <unk> route . 
 = New Jersey Route 88 = 
 Route 88 is a state highway in the northern part of Ocean County , New Jersey , United States . It runs 10 @.@ 02 mi ( 16 @.@ 13 km ) from an intersection with U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) and County Route 547 ( CR 547 ) in Lakewood Township to an intersection with Route 35 in Point Pleasant . It is a two @-@ lane undivided road that passes through mostly residential and commercial areas . The route intersects CR 549 in Lakewood , Route 70 in Brick Township at the former Laurelton Circle , and CR 549 Spur in Point Pleasant . The road is mentioned in the lyrics of the 1973 song " Spirit in the Night " by Bruce Springsteen . 
 The route was built as a gravel county road in 1903 and became part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 , a route that was to run from Absecon to Rahway , in 1916 . US 9 was designated along this stretch of road in 1926 when the U.S. Highway System was created . A year later , in 1927 , this portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 became a part of Route 35 , a route that was to from Lakewood to South Amboy . By the 1940s , US 9 was moved off this road to follow its current alignment between Lakewood and South Amboy . In 1953 , Route 35 was realigned to follow a portion of Route 37 between Point Pleasant and Seaside Heights , and Route 88 was designated along the former alignment of Route 35 between Lakewood and Point Pleasant . The Laurelton Circle at Route 70 , built in 1937 , was replaced with the current intersection by the 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 88 begins at an intersection with US 9 and CR 547 in Lakewood Township , and heads eastward on Main Street , a two @-@ lane undivided road . The road heads through the downtown before heading into wooded residential areas , where it becomes Ocean Avenue at the Pearl Street intersection before coming to a junction with CR 20 . Past this intersection , the route heads through a mix of residences and businesses with some woodland . Route 88 intersects CR 623 , where it heads through a commercial district , crossing CR 549 . A short distance later , the route passes under the Garden State Parkway without an interchange before crossing the Metedeconk River into Brick Township . Here , the road heads through a mix of residential and commercial areas , intersecting CR 64 , CR 44 , CR 40 , and CR 16 . It turns south and intersects CR 40 before crossing Route 70 . 
 Past this intersection , Route 88 briefly splits into a one @-@ way pair . Here , the eastbound direction follows Princeton Avenue southeast before turning north onto Post Road , with CR 630 continuing along Princeton Avenue , while westbound Route 88 follows Princeton Post Road . Past the one @-@ way pair , the route continues northeast on Princeton Post Road , which passes by numerous businesses . Along this stretch of road Route 88 intersects several county routes , including CR 64 again , CR 42 , CR 10 , and CR 54 . The route heads into Point Pleasant , where it intersects CR 56 before crossing Beaver Dam Creek and becoming Sea Avenue . From here , the road crosses CR 632 before heading east and intersecting CR 549 Spur and CR 630 . After this intersection , Route 88 crosses the Point Pleasant Canal ( part of the Intracoastal Waterway ) on a lift bridge before heading east through residential areas with some businesses . Here , the road intersects CR 633 / CR 10 , CR 6 , and CR 604 . A short distance later , Route 88 ends at an intersection with Route 35 on the border of Point Pleasant and Point Pleasant Beach . 
 = = History = = 
 What is modern @-@ day Route 88 was first built as a hard gravel county road back in 1903 , the first such road in Ocean County . In 1916 , this road was designated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 , a state road that was to run from Absecon north to Rahway . With the creation of the U.S. Highway System in 1926 , US 9 was also designated along this route , running concurrent with Route 4 . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering a year later , Route 35 replaced this portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 as part of its route from Lakewood to South Amboy . By the 1940s , US 9 was moved off this portion of Route 35 to follow its current alignment along Route 4 between Lakewood and South Amboy . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 35 was realigned to follow what was a part of Route 37 between Point Pleasant and Seaside Heights , and Route 88 was designated along the former alignment of Route 35 between Lakewood and Point Pleasant . A traffic circle called the Laurelton Circle , built in 1937 , once existed at the intersection with Route 70 ; it was replaced with its current configuration by the 1990s . 
 Route 88 was referred to in the 1973 song " Spirit in the Night " by Bruce Springsteen on his debut album Greetings from Asbury Park , <unk> .. 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Ocean County . 
 = Huldrych Zwingli = 
 Huldrych Zwingli or Ulrich Zwingli ( 1 January 1484 – 11 October 1531 ) was a leader of the Reformation in Switzerland . Born during a time of emerging Swiss patriotism and increasing criticism of the Swiss mercenary system , he attended the University of Vienna and the University of Basel , a scholarly center of Renaissance humanism . He continued his studies while he served as a pastor in Glarus and later in Einsiedeln , where he was influenced by the writings of Erasmus . 
 In 1518 , Zwingli became the pastor of the Grossmünster in Zurich where he began to preach ideas on reforming the Catholic Church . In his first public controversy in 1522 , he attacked the custom of fasting during Lent . In his publications , he noted corruption in the ecclesiastical hierarchy , promoted clerical marriage , and attacked the use of images in places of worship . In 1525 , Zwingli introduced a new communion liturgy to replace the Mass . Zwingli also clashed with the Anabaptists , which resulted in their persecution . Historians have debated whether or not he turned Zurich into a theocracy . 
 The Reformation spread to other parts of the Swiss Confederation , but several cantons resisted , preferring to remain Catholic . Zwingli formed an alliance of Reformed cantons which divided the Confederation along religious lines . In 1529 , a war between the two sides was averted at the last moment . Meanwhile , Zwingli 's ideas came to the attention of Martin Luther and other reformers . They met at the Marburg Colloquy and although they agreed on many points of doctrine , they could not reach an accord on the doctrine of the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist . 
 In 1531 Zwingli 's alliance applied an unsuccessful food blockade on the Catholic cantons . The cantons responded with an attack at a moment when Zurich was ill prepared . Zwingli was killed in battle at the age of 47 . His legacy lives on in the confessions , liturgy , and church orders of the Reformed churches of today . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 The Swiss Confederation in Huldrych Zwingli 's time consisted of thirteen states ( cantons ) as well as affiliated states and common lordships . Unlike the current modern state of Switzerland , which operates under a federal government , the thirteen states were nearly independent , conducting their own domestic and foreign affairs . Each state formed its own alliances within and without the Confederation . This relative independence served as the basis for conflict during the time of the Reformation when the various states divided between different confessional camps . Military ambitions were given an additional impetus with the competition to acquire new territory and resources , as seen for example in the Old Zurich War . 
 The political environment in Europe during the 15th and 16th centuries was also volatile . For centuries the foreign policies of the Confederation were determined by its relationship with its powerful neighbour , France . Nominally , the Confederation was under the control of the Holy Roman Empire . However , through a succession of wars culminating in the Swabian War , the Confederation had become de facto independent . As the two continental powers and minor states such as the Duchy of Milan , Duchy of Savoy , and the Papal States competed and fought against each other , there were far @-@ reaching political , economic , and social consequences for the Confederation . It was during this time that the mercenary pension system became a subject of disagreement . The religious factions of Zwingli 's time debated vociferously regarding the merits of sending young Swiss men to fight in foreign wars mainly for the enrichment of the cantonal authorities . 
 These internal and external factors contributed to the rise of a Confederation national consciousness , in which the term fatherland ( patria ) began to take on meaning beyond an individual canton . At the same time , Renaissance humanism , with its universal values and emphasis on scholarship ( as exemplified by Erasmus , the " prince of humanism " ) , had taken root in the country . It was within this environment , defined by the confluence of Swiss patriotism and humanism , that Zwingli was born . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1484 – 1518 ) = = = 
 Huldrych Zwingli was born on 1 January 1484 in Wildhaus , in the Toggenburg valley of Switzerland , to a family of farmers , the third child of nine . His father , Ulrich , played a leading role in the administration of the community ( <unk> or chief local magistrate ) . Zwingli 's primary schooling was provided by his uncle , Bartholomew , a cleric in <unk> , where he probably met Katharina von Zimmern . At ten years old , Zwingli was sent to Basel to obtain his secondary education where he learned Latin under Magistrate Gregory <unk> . After three years in Basel , he stayed a short time in Bern with the humanist , Henry <unk> . The Dominicans in Bern tried to persuade Zwingli to join their order and it is possible that he was received as a novice . However , his father and uncle disapproved of such a course and he left Bern without completing his Latin studies . He enrolled in the University of Vienna in the winter semester of 1498 but was expelled , according to the university 's records . However , it is not certain that Zwingli was indeed expelled , and he re @-@ enrolled in the summer semester of 1500 ; his activities in 1499 are unknown . Zwingli continued his studies in Vienna until 1502 , after which he transferred to the University of Basel where he received the Master of Arts degree ( Magister ) in 1506 . 
 Zwingli was ordained in Constance , the seat of the local diocese , and he celebrated his first Mass in his hometown , Wildhaus , on 29 September 1506 . As a young priest he had studied little theology , but this was not considered unusual at the time . His first ecclesiastical post was the pastorate of the town of Glarus , where he stayed for ten years . It was in Glarus , whose soldiers were used as mercenaries in Europe , that Zwingli became involved in politics . The Swiss Confederation was embroiled in various campaigns with its neighbours : the French , the Habsburgs , and the Papal States . Zwingli placed himself solidly on the side of the Roman See . In return , Pope Julius II honoured Zwingli by providing him with an annual pension . He took the role of chaplain in several campaigns in Italy , including the Battle of Novara in 1513 . However , the decisive defeat of the Swiss in the Battle of Marignano caused a shift in mood in Glarus in favour of the French rather than the pope . Zwingli , the papal partisan , found himself in a difficult position and he decided to retreat to Einsiedeln in the canton of Schwyz . By this time , he had become convinced that mercenary service was immoral and that Swiss unity was indispensable for any future achievements . Some of his earliest extant writings , such as The Ox ( 1510 ) and The Labyrinth ( 1516 ) , attacked the mercenary system using allegory and satire . His countrymen were presented as virtuous people within a French , imperial , and papal triangle . Zwingli stayed in Einsiedeln for two years during which he withdrew completely from politics in favour of ecclesiastical activities and personal studies . 
 Zwingli 's time as the pastor of Glarus and Einsiedeln was characterized by inner growth and development . He perfected his Greek and he took up the study of Hebrew . His library contained over three hundred volumes from which he was able to draw upon classical , patristic , and scholastic works . He exchanged scholarly letters with a circle of Swiss humanists and began to study the writings of Erasmus . Zwingli took the opportunity to meet him while Erasmus was in Basel between August 1514 and May 1516 . Zwingli 's turn to relative pacifism and his focus on preaching can be traced to the influence of Erasmus . 
 In late 1518 , the post of the <unk> ( people 's priest ) of the Grossmünster at Zurich became vacant . The canons of the foundation that administered the Grossmünster recognised Zwingli 's reputation as a fine preacher and writer . His connection with humanists was a decisive factor as several canons were sympathetic to Erasmian reform . In addition , his opposition to the French and to mercenary service was welcomed by Zurich politicians . On 11 December 1518 , the canons elected Zwingli to become the stipendiary priest and on 27 December he moved permanently to Zurich . 
 = = = Zurich ministry begins ( 1519 – 1521 ) = = = 
 On 1 January 1519 , Zwingli gave his first sermon in Zurich . Deviating from the prevalent practice of basing a sermon on the Gospel lesson of a particular Sunday , Zwingli , using Erasmus ' New Testament as a guide , began to read through the Gospel of Matthew , giving his interpretation during the sermon , known as the method of <unk> continua . He continued to read and interpret the book on subsequent Sundays until he reached the end and then proceeded in the same manner with the Acts of the Apostles , the New Testament epistles , and finally the Old Testament . His motives for doing this are not clear , but in his sermons he used exhortation to achieve moral and ecclesiastical improvement which were goals comparable with Erasmian reform . Sometime after 1520 , Zwingli 's theological model began to evolve into an idiosyncratic form that was neither Erasmian nor Lutheran . Scholars do not agree on the process of how he developed his own unique model . One view is that Zwingli was trained as an Erasmian humanist and Luther played a decisive role in changing his theology . Another view is that Zwingli did not pay much attention to Luther 's theology and in fact he considered it as part of the humanist reform movement . A third view is that Zwingli was not a complete follower of Erasmus , but had diverged from him as early as 1516 and that he independently developed his theology . 
 Zwingli 's theological stance was gradually revealed through his sermons . He attacked moral corruption and in the process he named individuals who were the targets of his denunciations . Monks were accused of indolence and high living . In 1519 , Zwingli specifically rejected the veneration of saints and called for the need to distinguish between their true and fictional accounts . He cast doubts on hellfire , asserted that unbaptised children were not damned , and questioned the power of excommunication . His attack on the claim that tithing was a divine institution , however , had the greatest theological and social impact . This contradicted the immediate economic interests of the foundation . One of the elderly canons who had supported Zwingli 's election , Konrad Hofmann , complained about his sermons in a letter . Some canons supported Hofmann , but the opposition never grew very large . Zwingli insisted that he was not an innovator and that the sole basis of his teachings was Scripture . 
 Within the diocese of Constance , <unk> Sanson was offering a special indulgence for contributors to the building of St Peter 's in Rome . When Sanson arrived at the gates of Zurich at the end of January 1519 , parishioners prompted Zwingli with questions . He responded with displeasure that the people were not being properly informed about the conditions of the indulgence and were being induced to part with their money on false pretences . This was over a year after Martin Luther published his Ninety @-@ five theses ( 31 October 1517 ) . The council of Zurich refused Sanson entry into the city . As the authorities in Rome were anxious to contain the fire started by Luther , the Bishop of Constance denied any support of Sanson and he was recalled . 
 In August 1519 , Zurich was struck by an outbreak of the plague during which at least one in four persons died . All of those who could afford it left the city , but Zwingli remained and continued his pastoral duties . In September , he caught the disease and nearly died . He described his preparation for death in a poem , Zwingli 's Pestlied , consisting of three parts : the onset of the illness , the closeness to death , and the joy of recovery . The final verses of the first part read : 
 In the years following his recovery , Zwingli 's opponents remained in the minority . When a vacancy occurred among the canons of the Grossmünster , Zwingli was elected to fulfill that vacancy on 29 April 1521 . In becoming a canon , he became a full citizen of Zurich . He also retained his post as the people 's priest of the Grossmünster . 
 = = = First rifts ( 1522 – 1524 ) = = = 
 The first public controversy regarding Zwingli 's preaching broke out during the season of Lent in 1522 . On the first fasting Sunday , 9 March , Zwingli and about a dozen other participants consciously transgressed the fasting rule by cutting and distributing two smoked sausages ( the <unk> in Christoph <unk> 's workshop ) . Zwingli defended this act in a sermon which was published on 16 April , under the title Von <unk> und Freiheit der Speisen ( Regarding the Choice and Freedom of Foods ) . He noted that no general valid rule on food can be derived from the Bible and that to transgress such a rule is not a sin . The event , which came to be referred to as the Affair of the Sausages , is considered to be the start of the Reformation in Switzerland . Even before the publication of this treatise , the diocese of Constance reacted by sending a delegation to Zurich . The city council condemned the fasting violation , but assumed responsibility over ecclesiastical matters and requested the religious authorities clarify the issue . The bishop responded on 24 May by admonishing the Grossmünster and city council and repeating the traditional position . 
 Following this event , Zwingli and other humanist friends petitioned the bishop on 2 July to abolish the requirement of celibacy on the clergy . Two weeks later the petition was reprinted for the public in German as Eine <unk> <unk> und Ermahnung an die Eidgenossen ( A Friendly Petition and Admonition to the Confederates ) . The issue was not just an abstract problem for Zwingli , as he had secretly married a widow , Anna Reinhard , earlier in the year . Their cohabitation was well @-@ known and their public wedding took place on 2 April 1524 , three months before the birth of their first child . They would eventually have four children : Regula , William , Huldrych , and Anna . As the petition was addressed to the secular authorities , the bishop responded at the same level by notifying the Zurich government to maintain the ecclesiastical order . Other Swiss clergymen joined in Zwingli 's cause which encouraged him to make his first major statement of faith , <unk> <unk> ( The First and Last Word ) . He defended himself against charges of inciting unrest and heresy . He denied the ecclesiastical hierarchy any right to judge on matters of church order because of its corrupted state . 
 = = = Zurich disputations ( 1523 ) = = = 
 The events of 1522 brought no clarification on the issues . Not only did the unrest between Zurich and the bishop continue , tensions were growing among Zurich 's Confederation partners in the Swiss Diet . On 22 December , the Diet recommended that its members prohibit the new teachings , a strong indictment directed at Zurich . The city council felt obliged to take the initiative and find its own solution . 
 = = = = First Disputation = = = = 
 On 3 January 1523 , the Zurich city council invited the clergy of the city and outlying region to a meeting to allow the factions to present their opinions . The bishop was invited to attend or to send a representative . The council would render a decision on who would be allowed to continue to proclaim their views . This meeting , the first Zurich disputation , took place on 29 January 1523 . 
 The meeting attracted a large crowd of approximately six hundred participants . The bishop sent a delegation led by his vicar general , Johannes Fabri . Zwingli summarised his position in the <unk> ( Concluding Statements or the Sixty @-@ seven Articles ) . Fabri , who had not envisaged an academic disputation in the manner Zwingli had prepared for , was forbidden to discuss high theology before laymen , and simply insisted on the necessity of the ecclesiastical authority . The decision of the council was that Zwingli would be allowed to continue his preaching and that all other preachers should teach only in accordance with Scripture . 
 = = = = Second Disputation = = = = 
 In September 1523 , Leo Jud , Zwingli 's closest friend and colleague and pastor of St. Peterskirche , publicly called for the removal of statues of saints and other icons . This led to demonstrations and iconoclastic activities . The city council decided to work out the matter of images in a second disputation . The essence of the mass and its sacrificial character was also included as a subject of discussion . Supporters of the mass claimed that the eucharist was a true sacrifice , while Zwingli claimed that it was a commemorative meal . As in the first disputation , an invitation was sent out to the Zurich clergy and the bishop of Constance . This time , however , the lay people of Zurich , the dioceses of Chur and Basel , the University of Basel , and the twelve members of the Confederation were also invited . About nine hundred persons attended this meeting , but neither the bishop nor the Confederation sent representatives . The disputation started on 26 October 1523 and lasted two days . 
 Zwingli again took the lead in the disputation . His opponent was the aforementioned canon , Konrad Hofmann , who had initially supported Zwingli 's election . Also taking part was a group of young men demanding a much faster pace of reformation , who among other things pleaded for replacing infant baptism with adult baptism . This group was led by Conrad Grebel , one of the initiators of the Anabaptist movement . During the first three days of dispute , although the controversy of images and the mass were discussed , the arguments led to the question of whether the city council or the ecclesiastical government had the authority to decide on these issues . At this point , Konrad Schmid , a priest from Aargau and follower of Zwingli , made a pragmatic suggestion . As images were not yet considered to be valueless by everyone , he suggested that pastors preach on this subject under threat of punishment . He believed the opinions of the people would gradually change and the voluntary removal of images would follow . Hence , Schmid rejected the radicals and their iconoclasm , but supported Zwingli 's position . In November the council passed ordinances in support of Schmid 's motion . Zwingli wrote a booklet on the evangelical duties of a minister , <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( Short Christian Introduction ) , and the council sent it out to the clergy and the members of the Confederation . 
 = = = Reformation progresses in Zurich ( 1524 – 1525 ) = = = 
 In December 1523 , the council set a deadline of Pentecost in 1524 for a solution to the elimination of the mass and images . Zwingli gave a formal opinion in <unk> <unk> der <unk> und der Messe ( Proposal Concerning Images and the Mass ) . He did not urge an immediate , general abolition . The council decided on the orderly removal of images within Zurich , but rural congregations were granted the right to remove them based on majority vote . The decision on the mass was postponed . 
 Evidence of the effect of the Reformation was seen in early 1524 . Candlemas was not celebrated , processions of robed clergy ceased , worshippers did not go with palms or relics on Palm Sunday to the <unk> , and triptychs remained covered and closed after Lent . Opposition to the changes came from Konrad Hofmann and his followers , but the council decided in favour of keeping the government mandates . When Hofmann left the city , opposition from pastors hostile to the Reformation broke down . The bishop of Constance tried to intervene in defending the mass and the veneration of images . Zwingli wrote an official response for the council and the result was the severance of all ties between the city and the diocese . 
 Although the council had hesitated in abolishing the mass , the decrease in the exercise of traditional piety allowed pastors to be unofficially released from the requirement of celebrating mass . As individual pastors altered their practices as each saw fit , Zwingli was prompted to address this disorganised situation by designing a communion liturgy in the German language . This was published in Aktion oder <unk> des <unk> ( Act or Custom of the Supper ) . Shortly before Easter , Zwingli and his closest associates requested the council to cancel the mass and to introduce the new public order of worship . On Maundy Thursday , 13 April 1525 , Zwingli celebrated communion under his new liturgy . Wooden cups and plates were used to avoid any outward displays of formality . The congregation sat at set tables to emphasise the meal aspect of the sacrament . The sermon was the focal point of the service and there was no organ music or singing . The importance of the sermon in the worship service was underlined by Zwingli 's proposal to limit the celebration of communion to four times a year . 
 For some time Zwingli had accused mendicant orders of hypocrisy and demanded their abolition in order to support the truly poor . He suggested the monasteries be changed into hospitals and welfare institutions and incorporate their wealth into a welfare fund . This was done by reorganising the foundations of the Grossmünster and <unk> and <unk> off remaining nuns and monks . The council secularised the church properties and established new welfare programs for the poor . Zwingli requested permission to establish a Latin school , the <unk> ( Prophecy ) or Carolinum , at the Grossmünster . The council agreed and it was officially opened on 19 June 1525 with Zwingli and Jud as teachers . It served to retrain and re @-@ educate the clergy . The Zurich Bible translation , traditionally attributed to Zwingli and printed by Christoph <unk> , bears the mark of teamwork from the Prophecy school . Scholars have not yet attempted to clarify Zwingli 's share of the work based on external and stylistic evidence . 
 = = = Conflict with the Anabaptists ( 1525 – 1527 ) = = = 
 Shortly after the second Zurich disputation , many in the radical wing of the Reformation became convinced that Zwingli was making too many concessions to the Zurich council . They rejected the role of civil government and demanded the immediate establishment of a congregation of the faithful . Conrad Grebel , the leader of the radicals and the emerging Anabaptist movement , spoke disparagingly of Zwingli in private . On 15 August 1524 the council insisted on the obligation to baptise all newborn infants . Zwingli secretly conferred with Grebel 's group and late in 1524 , the council called for official discussions . When talks were broken off , Zwingli published Wer Ursache <unk> zu <unk> ( Whoever Causes Unrest ) clarifying the opposing points @-@ of @-@ view . On 17 January 1525 a public debate was held and the council decided in favour of Zwingli . Anyone refusing to have their children baptised was required to leave Zurich . The radicals ignored these measures and on 21 January , they met at the house of the mother of another radical leader , Felix Manz . Grebel and a third leader , George Blaurock , performed the first recorded Anabaptist adult baptisms . 
 On February 2 , the council repeated the requirement on the baptism of all babies and some who failed to comply were arrested and fined , Manz and Blaurock among them . Zwingli and Jud interviewed them and more debates were held before the Zurich council . Meanwhile , the new teachings continued to spread to other parts of the Confederation as well as a number of Swabian towns . On 6 – 8 November , the last debate on the subject of baptism took place in the Grossmünster . Grebel , Manz , and Blaurock defended their cause before Zwingli , Jud , and other reformers . There was no serious exchange of views as each side would not move from their positions and the debates degenerated into an uproar , each side shouting abuse at the other . 
 The Zurich council decided that no compromise was possible . On 7 March 1526 it released the notorious mandate that no one shall <unk> another under the penalty of death . Although Zwingli , technically , had nothing to do with the mandate , there is no indication that he disapproved . Felix Manz , who had sworn to leave Zurich and not to baptise any more , had deliberately returned and continued the practice . After he was arrested and tried , he was executed on 5 January 1527 by being drowned in the Limmat river . He was the first Anabaptist martyr ; three more were to follow , after which all others either fled or were expelled from Zurich . 
 = = = Reformation in the Confederation ( 1526 – 1528 ) = = = 
 On 8 April 1524 , five cantons , Lucerne , Uri , Schwyz , Unterwalden , and Zug , formed an alliance , die <unk> <unk> ( the Five States ) to defend themselves from Zwingli 's Reformation . They contacted the opponents of Martin Luther including John Eck , who had debated Luther in the Leipzig Disputation of 1519 . Eck offered to dispute Zwingli and he accepted . However , they could not agree on the selection of the judging authority , the location of the debate , and the use of the Swiss Diet as a court . Because of the disagreements , Zwingli decided to boycott the disputation . On 19 May 1526 , all the cantons sent delegates to Baden . Although Zurich 's representatives were present , they did not participate in the sessions . Eck led the Catholic party while the reformers were represented by Johannes Oecolampadius of Basel , a theologian from Württemberg who had carried on an extensive and friendly correspondence with Zwingli . While the debate proceeded , Zwingli was kept informed of the proceedings and printed pamphlets giving his opinions . It was of little use as the Diet decided against Zwingli . He was to be banned and his writings were no longer to be distributed . Of the thirteen Confederation members , Glarus , Solothurn , Fribourg , and Appenzell as well as the Five States voted against Zwingli . Bern , Basel , Schaffhausen , and Zurich supported him . 
 The Baden disputation exposed a deep rift in the Confederation on matters of religion . The Reformation was now emerging in other states . The city of St Gallen , an affiliated state to the Confederation , was led by a reformed mayor , Joachim <unk> , and the city abolished the mass in 1527 , just two years after Zurich . In Basel , although Zwingli had a close relationship with Oecolampadius , the government did not officially sanction any reformatory changes until 1 April 1529 when the mass was prohibited . Schaffhausen , which had closely followed Zurich 's example , formally adopted the Reformation in September 1529 . In the case of Bern , Berchtold Haller , the priest at St Vincent Münster , and Niklaus Manuel , the poet , painter , and politician , had campaigned for the reformed cause . But it was only after another disputation that Bern counted itself as a canton of the Reformation . Four hundred and fifty persons participated , including pastors from Bern and other cantons as well as theologians from outside the Confederation such as Martin Bucer and Wolfgang Capito from Strasbourg , Ambrosius <unk> from Constance , and Andreas <unk> from Nuremberg . Eck and Fabri refused to attend and the Catholic cantons did not send representatives . The meeting started on 6 January 1528 and lasted nearly three weeks . Zwingli assumed the main burden of defending the Reformation and he preached twice in the Münster . On 7 February 1528 the council decreed that the Reformation be established in Bern . 
 = = = First Kappel War ( 1529 ) = = = 
 Even before the Bern disputation , Zwingli was canvassing for an alliance of reformed cities . Once Bern officially accepted the Reformation , a new alliance , das Christliche Burgrecht ( the Christian Civic Union ) was created . The first meetings were held in Bern between representatives of Bern , Constance , and Zurich on 5 – 6 January 1528 . Other cities , including Basel , Biel , Mülhausen , Schaffhausen , and St Gallen , eventually joined the alliance . The Five ( Catholic ) States felt encircled and isolated , so they searched for outside allies . After two months of negotiations , the Five States formed die Christliche Vereinigung ( the Christian Alliance ) with Ferdinand of Austria on 22 April 1529 . 
 Soon after the Austrian treaty was signed , a reformed preacher , Jacob Kaiser , was captured in <unk> and executed in Schwyz . This triggered a strong reaction from Zwingli ; he drafted <unk> über den Krieg ( Advice About the War ) for the government . He outlined justifications for an attack on the Catholic states and other measures to be taken . Before Zurich could implement his plans , a delegation from Bern that included Niklaus Manuel arrived in Zurich . The delegation called on Zurich to settle the matter peacefully . Manuel added that an attack would expose Bern to further dangers as Catholic Valais and the Duchy of Savoy bordered its southern flank . He then noted , " You cannot really bring faith by means of spears and halberds . " Zurich , however , decided that it would act alone , knowing that Bern would be obliged to acquiesce . War was declared on 8 June 1529 . Zurich was able to raise an army of 30 @,@ 000 men . The Five States were abandoned by Austria and could raise only 9 @,@ 000 men . The two forces met near Kappel , but war was averted due to the intervention of Hans <unk> , a relative of Zwingli , who pleaded for an armistice . 
 Zwingli was obliged to state the terms of the armistice . He demanded the dissolution of the Christian Alliance ; unhindered preaching by reformers in the Catholic states ; prohibition of the pension system ; payment of war reparations ; and compensation to the children of Jacob Kaiser . Manuel was involved in the negotiations . Bern was not prepared to insist on the unhindered preaching or the prohibition of the pension system . Zurich and Bern could not agree and the Five ( Catholic ) States pledged only to dissolve their alliance with Austria . This was a bitter disappointment for Zwingli and it marked his decline in political influence . The first Land Peace of Kappel , der erste <unk> , ended the war on 24 June . 
 = = = Marburg Colloquy ( 1529 ) = = = 
 While Zwingli carried on the political work of the Swiss Reformation , he developed his theological views with his colleagues . The famous disagreement between Luther and Zwingli on the interpretation of the eucharist originated when Andreas Karlstadt , Luther 's former colleague from Wittenberg , published three pamphlets on the Lord 's Supper in which Karlstadt rejected the idea of a real presence in the elements . These pamphlets , published in Basel in 1524 , received the approval of Oecolampadius and Zwingli . Luther rejected Karlstadt 's arguments and considered Zwingli primarily to be a partisan of Karlstadt . Zwingli began to express his thoughts on the eucharist in several publications including de Eucharistia ( On the Eucharist ) . He attacked the idea of the real presence and argued that the word is in the words of the institution — " This is my body , this is my blood " — means signifies . Hence , the words are understood as a metaphor and Zwingli claimed that there was no real presence during the eucharist . In effect , the meal was symbolic of the Last Supper . 
 By spring 1527 , Luther reacted strongly to Zwingli 's views in the treatise Dass <unk> Worte Christi " Das ist mein Leib etc . " noch fest <unk> wider die <unk> ( That These Words of Christ " This is My Body etc . " Still Stand Firm Against the Fanatics ) . The controversy continued until 1528 when efforts to build bridges between the Lutheran and the Zwinglian views began . Martin Bucer tried to mediate while Philip of Hesse , who wanted to form a political coalition of all Protestant forces , invited the two parties to Marburg to discuss their differences . This event became known as the Marburg Colloquy . 
 Zwingli accepted Philip 's invitation fully believing that he would be able to convince Luther . By contrast , Luther did not expect anything to come out of the meeting and had to be urged by Philip to attend . Zwingli , accompanied by Oecolampadius , arrived on 28 September 1529 with Luther and Philipp Melanchthon arriving shortly thereafter . Other theologians also participated including Martin Bucer , Andreas Osiander , Johannes Brenz , and Justus Jonas . The debates were held from 1 – 3 October and the results were published in the fifteen Marburg Articles . The participants were able to agree on fourteen of the articles , but the fifteenth article established the differences in their views on the presence of Christ in the eucharist . Afterwards , each side was convinced that they were the victors , but in fact the controversy was not resolved and the final result was the formation of two different Protestant confessions . 
 = = = Politics , confessions , the Kappel Wars , and death ( 1529 – 1531 ) = = = 
 With the failure of the Marburg Colloquy and the split of the Confederation , Zwingli set his goal on an alliance with Philip of Hesse . He kept up a lively correspondence with Philip . Bern refused to participate , but after a long process , Zurich , Basel , and Strasbourg signed a mutual defence treaty with Philip in November 1530 . Zwingli also personally negotiated with France 's diplomatic representative , but the two sides were too far apart . France wanted to maintain good relations with the Five States . Approaches to Venice and Milan also failed . 
 As Zwingli was working on establishing these political alliances , Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , invited Protestants to the Augsburg Diet to present their views so that he could make a verdict on the issue of faith . The Lutherans presented the Augsburg Confession . Under the leadership of Martin Bucer , the cities of Strasbourg , Constance , Memmingen , and Lindau produced the Tetrapolitan Confession . This document attempted to take a middle position between the Lutherans and <unk> . It was too late for the Burgrecht cities to produce a confession of their own . Zwingli then produced his own private confession , Fidei ratio ( Account of Faith ) in which he explained his faith in twelve articles conforming to the articles of the Apostles ' Creed . The tone was strongly anti @-@ Catholic as well as anti @-@ Lutheran . The Lutherans did not react officially , but criticised it privately . Zwingli 's and Luther 's old opponent , Johann Eck , counter @-@ attacked with a publication , Refutation of the Articles Zwingli Submitted to the Emperor . 
 When Philip of Hesse formed the Schmalkaldic League at the end of 1530 , the four cities of the Tetrapolitan Confession joined on the basis of a Lutheran interpretation of that confession . Given the flexibility of the league 's entrance requirements , Zurich , Basel , and Bern also considered joining . However , Zwingli could not reconcile the Tetrapolitan Confession with his own beliefs and wrote a harsh refusal to Bucer and Capito . This offended Philip to the point where relations with the League were severed . The Burgrecht cities now had no external allies to help deal with internal Confederation religious conflicts . 
 The peace treaty of the First Kappel War did not define the right of unhindered preaching in the Catholic states . Zwingli interpreted this to mean that preaching should be permitted , but the Five States suppressed any attempts to reform . The Burgrecht cities considered different means of applying pressure to the Five States . Basel and Schaffhausen preferred quiet diplomacy while Zurich wanted armed conflict . Zwingli and Jud unequivocally advocated an attack on the Five States . Bern took a middle position which eventually prevailed . In May 1531 , Zurich reluctantly agreed to impose a food blockade . It failed to have any effect and in October , Bern decided to withdraw the blockade . Zurich urged its continuation and the Burgrecht cities began to quarrel among themselves . 
 On 9 October 1531 , in a surprise move , the Five States declared war on Zurich . Zurich 's mobilisation was slow due to internal squabbling and on 11 October , 3500 poorly deployed men encountered a Five States force nearly double their size near Kappel on 11 October . Many pastors , including Zwingli , were among the soldiers . The battle lasted less than one hour and Zwingli was among the 500 casualties in the Zurich army . 
 Zwingli had considered himself first and foremost a soldier of Christ ; second a defender of his country , the Confederation ; and third a leader of his city , Zurich , where he had lived for the previous twelve years . Ironically , he died at the age of 47 , not for Christ nor for the Confederation , but for Zurich . 
 Luther wrote , " It is well that Zwingli , Carlstadt and <unk> lie dead on the battlefield , for otherwise we could not have kept the Landgrave , Strasbourg and others of our neighbors . Oh , what a triumph this is , that they have perished . How well God knows his business . " A false report had added Carlstadt and <unk> to the fatalities . Erasmus wrote , " We are freed from great fear by the death of the two preachers , Zwingli and Oecolampadius , whose fate has wrought an incredible change in the mind of many . This is the wonderful hand of God on high . " Oecolampadius had died on 24 November . Erasmus also wrote , " If Bellona had favoured them , it would have been all over with us . " 
 = = Theology = = 
 According to Zwingli , the cornerstone of theology is the Bible . Zwingli appealed to scripture constantly in his writings . He placed its authority above other sources such as the ecumenical councils or the Church Fathers , although he did not hesitate to use other sources to support his arguments . The principles that guide Zwingli 's interpretations are derived from his rationalist humanist education and his Reformed understanding of the Bible . He rejected literalist interpretations of a passage , such as those of the Anabaptists , and used synecdoche and analogies , methods he describes in A Friendly Exegesis ( 1527 ) . Two analogies that he used quite effectively were between baptism and circumcision and between the eucharist and Passover . He also paid attention to the immediate context and attempted to understand the purpose behind it , comparing passages of scripture with each other . 
 Zwingli rejected the word sacrament in the popular usage of his time . For ordinary people , the word meant some kind of holy action of which there is inherent power to free the conscience from sin . For Zwingli , a sacrament was an initiatory ceremony or a pledge , pointing out that the word was derived from <unk> meaning an oath . ( However , the word is also translated " mystery . " ) In his early writings on baptism , he noted that baptism was an example of such a pledge . He challenged Catholics by accusing them of superstition when they ascribed the water of baptism a certain power to wash away sin . Later , in his conflict with the Anabaptists , he defended the practice of infant baptism , noting that there is no law forbidding the practice . He argued that baptism was a sign of a covenant with God , thereby replacing circumcision in the Old Testament . 
 Zwingli approached the eucharist in a similar manner to baptism . During the first Zurich disputation in 1523 , he denied that an actual sacrifice occurred during the mass , arguing that Christ made the sacrifice only once and for all eternity . Hence , the eucharist was " a memorial of the sacrifice " . Following this argument , he further developed his view , coming to the conclusion of the " signifies " interpretation for the words of the institution . He used various passages of scripture to argue against transubstantiation as well as Luther 's views , the key text being John 6 : 63 , " It is the Spirit who gives life , the flesh is of no avail " . Zwingli 's approach and interpretation of scripture to understand the meaning of the eucharist was one reason he could not reach a consensus with Luther . 
 The impact of Luther on Zwingli 's theological development has long been a source of interest and discussion among Zwinglian scholars . Zwingli himself asserted vigorously his independence of Luther . The most recent studies have lent credibility to this claim , although some scholars still claim his theology was dependent upon Luther 's . Zwingli appears to have read Luther 's books in search of confirmation from Luther for his own views . Zwingli did , however , admire Luther greatly for the stand he took against the pope . This , more than Luther 's theology , was a key influence on Zwingli 's convictions as a reformer . What Zwingli considered Luther 's courageous stance at the Leipzig Disputation had a decisive impact on Zwingli during his earliest years as a priest , and during this time Zwingli praised and promoted Luther 's writings to support his own similar ideas . Like Luther , Zwingli was also a student and admirer of Augustine . His later writings continued to show characteristic differences from Luther such as the inclusion of non @-@ Christians in heaven as described in An Exposition of the Faith . 
 = = Music = = 
 Zwingli enjoyed music and could play several instruments , including the violin , harp , flute , dulcimer and hunting horn . He would sometimes amuse the children of his congregation on his lute and was so well known for his playing that his enemies mocked him as " the evangelical lute @-@ player and fifer " . Three of Zwingli 's Lieder or hymns have been preserved : the Pestlied mentioned above , an adaptation of Psalm 65 ( c . 1525 ) , and the Kappeler Lied , which is believed to have been composed during the campaign of the first war of Kappel ( 1529 ) . These songs were not meant to be sung during worship services and are not identified as hymns of the Reformation , though they were published in some 16th @-@ century hymnals . 
 Zwingli criticised the practice of priestly chanting and monastic choirs . The criticism dates from 1523 when he attacked certain worship practices . His arguments are detailed in the Conclusions of 1525 , in which , Conclusions 44 , 45 and 46 are concerned with musical practices under the rubric of " prayer " . He associated music with images and vestments , all of which he felt diverted people 's attention from true spiritual worship . It is not known what he thought of the musical practices in early Lutheran churches . Zwingli , however , eliminated instrumental music from worship in the church , stating that God had not commanded it in worship . The organist of the People 's Church in Zurich is recorded as weeping upon seeing the great organ broken up . Although Zwingli did not express an opinion on congregational singing , he made no effort to encourage it . Nevertheless , scholars have found that Zwingli was supportive of a role for music in the church . Gottfried W. Locher writes , " The old assertion ' Zwingli was against church singing ' holds good no longer ... Zwingli 's polemic is concerned exclusively with the medieval Latin choral and priestly chanting and not with the hymns of evangelical congregations or choirs " . Locher goes on to say that " Zwingli freely allowed vernacular psalm or choral singing . In addition , he even seems to have striven for lively , antiphonal , unison recitative " . Locher then summarizes his comments on Zwingli 's view of church music as follows : " The chief thought in his conception of worship was always ' conscious attendance and understanding ' — ' devotion ' , yet with the lively participation of all concerned " . 
 The as of today <unk> ( literally : music <unk> ) , located in the choir of the <unk> church in Zürich was founded in 1971 , being a scientific music collection of European importance . It publishes the materials entrusted to it at irregular intervals as CD 's , the repertoire ranges of early 16th @-@ century spiritual <unk> of Huldrych Zwingli 's to the late 20th century , published under the label " Musik aus der <unk> Zürich " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Zwingli was a humanist and a scholar with many devoted friends and disciples . He communicated as easily with the ordinary people of his congregation as with rulers such as Philip of Hesse . His reputation as a stern , stolid reformer is counterbalanced by the fact that he had an excellent sense of humour and used satiric fables , spoofing , and puns in his writings . He was more conscious of social obligations than Luther and he genuinely believed that the masses would accept a government guided by God 's word . He tirelessly promoted assistance to the poor , whom he believed should be cared for by a truly Christian community . 
 In December 1531 , the Zurich council selected Heinrich Bullinger as his successor . He immediately removed any doubts about Zwingli 's orthodoxy and defended him as a prophet and a martyr . During Bullinger 's rule , the confessional divisions of the Confederation were stabilised . He rallied the reformed cities and cantons and helped them to recover from the defeat at Kappel . Zwingli had instituted fundamental reforms , while Bullinger consolidated and refined them . 
 Scholars have found it difficult to assess Zwingli 's impact on history , for several reasons . There is no consensus on the definition of " Zwinglianism " ; by any definition , Zwinglianism evolved under his successor , Heinrich Bullinger ; and research into Zwingli 's influence on Bullinger and John Calvin is still rudimentary . Bullinger adopted most of Zwingli 's points of doctrine . Like Zwingli , he summarised his theology several times , the best @-@ known being the Second Helvetic Confession of 1566 . Meanwhile , Calvin had taken over the Reformation in Geneva . Calvin differed with Zwingli on the eucharist and criticised him for regarding it as simply a metaphorical event . In 1549 , however , Bullinger and Calvin succeeded in overcoming the differences in doctrine and produced the Consensus <unk> ( Zurich Consensus ) . They declared that the eucharist was not just symbolic of the meal , but they also rejected the Lutheran position that the body and blood of Christ is in union with the elements . With this rapprochement , Calvin established his role in the Swiss Reformed Churches and eventually in the wider world . 
 Outside of Switzerland , no church counts Zwingli as its founder . Scholars speculate as to why Zwinglianism has not diffused more widely , even though Zwingli 's theology is considered the first expression of Reformed theology . Although his name is not widely recognised , Zwingli 's legacy lives on in the basic confessions of the Reformed churches of today . He is often called , after Martin Luther and John Calvin , the " Third Man of the Reformation " . 
 = = List of works = = 
 Zwingli 's collected works are expected to fill 21 volumes . A collection of selected works was published in 1995 by the <unk> in collaboration with the <unk> Verlag Zürich This four @-@ volume collection contains the following works : 
 Volume 1 : 1995 , 512 pages , ISBN 3 @-@ 290 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Pestlied ( 1519 / 20 ) " The Plague Song " 
 Die <unk> Wahl der Speisen ( 1522 ) " Choice and Liberty regarding Food " 
 Eine <unk> Ermahnung der <unk> ( 1522 ) " A Solemn Exhortation [ to the people of Schwyz ] " 
 Die <unk> und <unk> des <unk> Gottes ( 1522 ) " The Clarity and Certainty of the Word of God " 
 <unk> und <unk> <unk> ( 1523 ) " Divine and Human Righteousness " 
 Wie <unk> aus <unk> Haus zu <unk> sind ( 1523 ) " How to educate adolescents from a good home " 
 Der Hirt ( 1524 ) " The Shepherd " 
 Eine <unk> und <unk> Ermahnung der Eidgenossen ( 1524 ) " Zwingli 's Letter to the Federation " 
 Wer Ursache zum <unk> gibt ( 1524 ) " Those Who Give Cause for Tumult " 
 Volume 2 : 1995 , 556 pages , ISBN 3 @-@ 290 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 <unk> und <unk> der Thesen oder <unk> ( 1523 ) " Interpretation and justification of the theses or articles " 
 Volume 3 : 1995 , 519 pages , ISBN 3 @-@ 290 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 <unk> zur <unk> auf einen <unk> Krieg ( 1524 ) " Plan for a Campaign " 
 <unk> über die <unk> und die <unk> Religion ( 1525 ) " Commentary on True and False Religion " 
 Volume 4 : 1995 , 512 pages , ISBN 3 @-@ 290 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 <unk> auf die <unk> <unk> gegen die <unk> ( 1527 ) " A Refutation of Luther 's sermon against vain enthusiasm " 
 Die beiden Berner <unk> ( 1528 ) " The Berne sermons " 
 <unk> über den Glauben ( 1530 ) " An Exposition of the Faith " 
 Die <unk> ( 1530 ) " Providence " 
 <unk> des <unk> Glaubens ( 1531 ) " Explanation of the Christian faith " 
 The complete 21 @-@ volume edition is being undertaken by the <unk> in collaboration with the Institut für <unk> <unk> , and is projected to be organised as follows : 
 vols . I – VI Werke : Zwingli 's theological and political writings , essays , sermons etc . , in chronological order . This section was completed in 1991 . 
 vols . VII – XI Briefe : Letters 
 vol . XII <unk> : Zwingli 's glosses in the margin of books 
 vols XIII ff . <unk> Schriften : Zwingli 's exegetical notes on the Bible . 
 Vols . XIII and XIV have been published , vols . XV and XVI are under preparation . Vols . XVII to XXI are planned to cover the New Testament . 
 Older German / Latin editions available online include : 
 Huldreich <unk> <unk> Werke , vol . 1 , Corpus <unk> vol . 88 , ed . Emil <unk> . Berlin : <unk> , 1905 . 
 Analecta <unk> : <unk> und Abhandlungen zur Geschichte <unk> und seiner Zeit , vol . 1 , ed . Emil <unk> . Zürich : <unk> and <unk> , 1899 . 
 Huldreich Zwingli 's Werke , ed . Melchior Schuler and Johannes Schulthess , <unk> . : vol . I ; vol . II ; vol . III ; vol . IV ; vol . V ; vol . VI , 1 ; vol . VI , 2 ; vol . VII ; vol . VIII . 
 Der <unk> <unk> nach den <unk> der <unk> , ed . Paul <unk> . Tübingen : Mohr , 1918 . 
 Von Freiheit der Speisen , eine <unk> , 1522 , ed . Otto Walther . Halle : Niemeyer , 1900 . 
 See also the following English translations of selected works by Zwingli : 
 The Latin Works and the Correspondence of Huldreich Zwingli , Together with Selections from his German Works . 
 Vol . 1 , 1510 – 1522 , New York : G.P. Putnam and Sons , 1912 . 
 Vol . 2 , Philadelphia : Heidelberg Press , 1922 . 
 Vol . 3 , Philadelphia : Heidelberg Press , 1929 . 
 Selected Works of Huldreich Zwingli ( 1484 – 1531 ) . Philadelphia : University of Pennsylvania , 1901 . 
 The Christian Education of Youth . <unk> : Thompson Bros. , 1899 . 
 = Kapil Dev as Indian national cricket coach = 
 Kapil Dev was appointed the Indian national cricket coach in September 1999 following the appointment of Sachin Tendulkar as captain of the Indian team in August 1999 . As a player , Kapil Dev captained the team to their first Cricket World Cup victory in 1983 . When he retired in 1994 , he was the most capped Indian Test player , the holder of record for the highest number of Test wickets ( 434 ) and had earlier held the record for the highest number of wickets in ODIs as well . Due to his credentials as player and captain , he was appointed as the coach ahead of teammate Kris Srikkanth . The team saw success in his first series at home against New Zealand but saw whitewash in the subsequent test series against host tour of Australia and visitors South Africa , India 's first home series loss in 12 years . India 's 3 – 2 win in the subsequent ODI series under new captain Sourav Ganguly will forever be remembered for the claims of match @-@ fixing against South Africa 's captain <unk> Cronje . 
 As the match @-@ fixing scandal took <unk> , former player Manoj Prabhakar accused Kapil Dev of trying to bribe him in 1994 during a tournament in Sri Lanka . Under severe pressure from politicians and fans , Kapil Dev resigned as coach in September 2000 , after having spent less than one year as the team coach . The reports of CBI ( India 's premier investigating agency ) and K. Madhavan ( appointed by BCCI to investigate match @-@ fixing allegations ) in November 2000 exonerated Kapil Dev of any involvement in match @-@ fixing . India 's performance in the coaching stint of Kapil Dev was below @-@ par , winning just one Test match ( out of 8 played ) and 9 ODIs ( out of 25 played ) . 
 = = India 's performance = = 
 = = = New Zealand tour of India = = = 
 Kapil Dev was appointed coach of the Indian national cricket team in 1999 succeeding <unk> Gaekwad . His appointment coincided with the second term of captaincy for Tendulkar . Kapil 's first international competition as India 's coach started badly with the team bowled out for 83 all out against the visiting New Zealand team in Mohali . Due to an inspired bowling display by Javagal Srinath , the lead was restricted to 132 runs after New Zealand were dismissed for 215 . India 's batsmen bounced back in the second innings with a total of 505 with all the top five batsmen passing fifty and Rahul Dravid and Tendulkar scoring centuries . Anil Kumble 's ten @-@ wicket match haul at Kanpur enabled India to win the second Test match . The Third Test ended in a draw , with Tendulkar recording his first double @-@ century in Test Cricket . In the ensuing ODI Series , India won 3 – 2 and the highlight for Indian team was a world record ODI partnership of 331 runs between Dravid and Tendulkar in the 2nd match at Hyderabad . The series against New Zealand would be Kapil 's most successful series as national coach . 
 = = = Indian tour of Australia = = = 
 India followed the NZ tour with a trip to Australia . India lost the Test series 3 – 0 and the margin of defeat was heavy in each of these matches – 285 runs , 180 runs , innings and 141 runs . The highlight of the Test series came in the final Test when V. V. S. Laxman scored 167 at a run a ball in fading light at the Sydney Cricket Ground and came for much praise from the media . India 's ODI series performance matched the Test series in failure as India managed to win just one match against Pakistan and Kapil had to come out in defense of his team . 
 = = = South Africa tour of India = = = 
 India had not lost a home test series since 1987 ( against Pakistan ) and when South Africa toured India in February – March 2000 , that streak was ended as India lost the home series 2 – 0 . However events outside the field overshadowed the cricket : Before start of the series , Tendulkar announced his decision to relinquish the captaincy after the Test matches , Azharuddin and Mongia were recalled to the team , controversy arose over Azharuddin 's injury leading to his exclusion from the First Test . Ganguly was made the captain of the Indian team for the one @-@ day series . Talks in the media about no way but ' UP ' were not unfounded when India took a 2 – 0 lead in the ODI Series and finishing the series at 3 – 2 , after South Africa won the last two matches . It was learnt later that South Africa 's captain Cronje was involved in betting and there were attempts to buy @-@ off South African players by Cronje and bookmakers . At the end of the series , the media felt that Ganguly 's attitude and captaincy was heartening . In March 2000 , India participated in a triangular series with South Africa and Pakistan . India won only one of their four matches and missed the finals . 
 = = Match Fixing Allegation and Resignation = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 As the 1999 / 00 cricket season was winding down , the Delhi Police shocked the cricket world when they announced that Cronje was involved in a " Cricket Match @-@ fixing and Betting Racket " . The <unk> released terse statements denying the allegations triggering a diplomatic row . When Delhi Police began mounting evidence , Cronje admitted to accepting money for throwing away games in a phone call with <unk> 's chief Ali Bacher . Cronje was sacked and replaced by Shaun Pollock . 
 = = = Manoj Prabhakar 's allegations = = = 
 Former Indian player <unk> publicly claimed that Kapil wanted to throw away a match against Pakistan . Prabhakar 's allegations against an unknown team member was not new as he made these allegations to a magazine The Outlook in 1997 based on which BCCI instituted the Chandrachud Inquiry , a one man commission headed by retired Chief Justice of India <unk> Vishnu Chandrachud . Prabhakar did not reveal names or provide evidence of his charges ( match fixing and phone tapping allegation on then cricket manager Ajit <unk> ) . When the match fixing controversy resurfaced in 2000 , BCCI released the Chandrachud Report to the media . The reaction of the Indian public resulted in PILs and International Cricket Council and the BCCI were called to respond in the Delhi and Calcutta High Courts . In response to the crisis , the Indian government initiated a CBI inquiry on 28 April 2000 . Former BCCI President Inderjit Singh Bindra revealed on 4 May 2000 that Prabhakar told him that Kapil asked him to throw away the match . During the ensuing exchanges between various parties , Kapil Dev broke down in an interview on BBC 's Hard Talk with Karan Thapar . 
 = = = Kapil 's resignation = = = 
 Kapil initially did not resign or take a leave of absence , from his coaching responsibilities . As the weeks progressed and as public discontent mounting on inaction in the match @-@ fixing scandal and in no small measure the pressure from the then Union Sport Minister <unk> Singh <unk> , Kapil Dev resigned from his position of Indian Cricket Coach on 12 September 2000 vowing farewell to the game of cricket . 
 = = = Clearing of match @-@ fixing charges = = = 
 After extensive investigation and interviews , the CBI submitted its report to Union Sports Minister on 1 November 2000 . The report found that there was " no credible evidence " against Kapil . The BCCI 's anti @-@ corruption officer K Madhavan ( former Joint Director of CBI ) submitted his report on 28 November 2000 in which he elaborated on players who were found to have links with the match @-@ fixing syndicate . Madhavan concluded that Kapil did not attempt to bribe Prabhakar and none of the players corroborated with Prabhakar 's version of the events . 
 = = Legacy of Kapil 's coaching = = 
 Kapil 's term as Indian cricket team 's national coach was not considered a success due to poor on @-@ field performances . During Kapil 's reign as National Coach , India performed badly in away matches and managed just 3 victories in 15 games ( 20 % ) in ODI Tournaments . In Test cricket , India lost its first home series in 13 years and managed just 1 victory in 3 Test series . 
 = Guitar Hero World Tour = 
 Guitar Hero World Tour ( initially referred to as Guitar Hero IV or Guitar Hero IV : World Tour ) is a music rhythm game developed by Neversoft , published by Activision and distributed by RedOctane . It is the fourth main entry in the Guitar Hero series . The game was launched in North America in October 2008 for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Wii , and Xbox 360 consoles , and a month later for Europe and Australia . A version of World Tour for Microsoft Windows and Apple Macintosh was later released . 
 While the game continues to feature the use of a guitar @-@ shaped controller to simulate the playing of rock music , Guitar Hero World Tour is the first game in the Guitar Hero series to feature drum and microphone controllers for percussion and vocal parts , similar in manner to the competing Rock Band series of games . The game allows users to create new songs through the " Music Studio " mode , which can then be uploaded and shared through a service known as " GHTunes " . 
 World Tour received generally positive reviews with critics responding positively to the quality of the instrument controllers , the customization abilities , and improvements in the game 's difficulty compared with the previous Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Guitar Hero World Tour builds on the gameplay from previous Guitar Hero games , in which players attempt to simulate the playing of rock music using special guitar @-@ shaped controllers . World Tour expands beyond the core guitar @-@ based gameplay by introducing the ability to play drums and sing vocals , and supports the ability for up to four players to play together in a virtual band through these different instruments . Successfully hitting notes increases the player 's or band 's score , as well as increase the " Rock Meter " that represents the song 's performance . Missed notes are not scored and negatively affect the Rock Meter . If the Rock Meter drops too low , the song ends prematurely , with the virtual audience booing the band off stage . Completing a consecutive series of notes successfully will increase a scoring multiplier for that player up to 4x . This multiplier is doubled when the player activates star power . Similar to Rock Band , the band shares a common score , scoring multiplier and band performance meter while each player has their own performance metric ; the band also shares the same " Star Power " meter , though any player may activate it at any time . A player that performs poorly and reduces their performance meter to zero can still continue to play , but they drain the overall performance meter for the band , requiring the other players to make up for this . Successfully completing a song garners a three to five @-@ star rating based on the accumulated score , and rewards such as in @-@ game money that can be used to buy new guitars and outfits for characters . 
 The guitar interface remains relatively unchanged in World Tour . As with previous Guitar Hero titles , the guitar and bass player must hold down the correct fret button ( s ) on the controller while strumming in time with the notes as they scroll on @-@ screen . One addition to the guitar gameplay is the ability to play notes while holding a sustained note . Additionally , the bass guitar player is required to play notes representing an open E string , which is shown on @-@ screen as a solid line across their note track . To play these notes , the bass guitar player strums the controller without pressing any fret button keys . The drum interface is similar to the guitar 's interface , with each on @-@ screen note track equivalent to a colored drum head on the controller , with the bass drum indicated by a line across the note track . The drum player only needs to hit the correct drum pads simultaneously to the note gems to successfully play their track . There are also marked sections indicating drum fills wherein the player may play any notes they wish in a ' solo ' to gain points . The vocal track requires the player to match the pitch of the notes in a manner similar to Karaoke Revolution to be successful . Special sections of each players ' note track are marked with glowing notes , which , if completed successfully , builds up Star Power . Once enough Star Power is accumulated , it can be released via various means to double the band 's current score multiplier . For guitar and bass , this is done by lifting the guitar controller vertically or ( though not in bass ) by pressing a button on the guitar face ; for drums , by striking both cymbal pads on the controller at the same time ; for vocals , by tapping the microphone or making a similarly quick sound . Star Power 's use has been modified over previous Guitar Hero entries in that Star Power can now be accumulated even when Star Power is in use by successfully completing additional Star Power phrases , which extends the Star Power 's duration . 
 In addition to the standard four difficulty levels ( Easy , Medium , Hard , and Expert ) for each song and instrument , a new Beginner level has been added in World Tour . This difficulty is aimed for younger and unskilled players ; notes are generally simple straight lines in time with bass drum beats , and allowing any or no fret button to be held while the note is strummed ( for lead and bass guitar ) , any drum to be hit ( for drums ) , or any sound to be made ( for vocals ) . 
 = = = Game modes = = = 
 The primary single @-@ player game mode is Career mode , which can be played on either the lead guitar , bass guitar , drums , or vocals . Career mode has been slightly altered from previous Guitar Hero games . After creating a band , selecting or creating an avatar , and then selecting an instrument , the player is then presented with one of several gigs containing two to five songs each . Most gigs end with an encore song that is not revealed until the other songs are completed . Two of the lead guitar gigs feature " boss challenges " with Zakk Wylde and Ted Nugent ; these boss challenges , featuring original songs by Wylde and Nugent , are different from Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock 's boss battle , removing the focus on attack power @-@ ups and instead featuring a call @-@ and @-@ response mechanic similar to the existing Face @-@ Off mode . The gigs are arranged by difficulty based on the selected instrument . The player is awarded in @-@ game money for each song completed , and completing each gig can also award additional money for meeting certain criteria , such as never letting the Rock Meter drop below a certain level or playing the first several notes of a song perfectly . Completing a gig can also unlock one or more gigs with more difficult songs to complete . Additional awards , such as customization items , are also awarded for completing gigs . The player 's accumulated earnings across any of the single player Career Modes are tracked and used to rank the player 's overall performance level . 
 Band Career mode is similar to the solo Career mode , with the game songs presented as several gigs to be completed . A band must have at least two players to proceed . The second player may be either a local player or one over the network . Players may be at different levels of progression in the game , but still gain benefits for successfully completing songs when playing together . The in @-@ game interface features vocals along the top of the screen , and three tracks underneath , for bass , drums , and guitar ; only tracks for active players are shown . Full four @-@ player bands can compete with other bands online in a Battle of the Bands mode . 
 Both single players and bands can play a setlist of up to six songs in Quickplay mode , still earning in @-@ game money rewards for their performances . Existing competitive modes from the series , including the Battle Mode from Guitar Hero III , are also present in the game . 
 The Wii version of the game features a special " Mii Freestyle " mode that allows players to use their Miis as their characters as they improvise songs via the guitar and drum controllers or using the Wii Remote and Nunchuk . 
 = = = Characters and customization = = = 
 Players are able to use the Create @-@ a @-@ Rocker mode which is based on the Create @-@ a @-@ Skater mode in Neversoft 's Tony Hawk series and the advanced character creation scheme from the Tiger Woods PGA Tour series . Players can change their character 's poise , clothing , tattoos , makeup , and age . Selected characters from previous Guitar Hero games are available as templates for creating a rocker . Previous games featured Gibson Guitars , but as a result of a lawsuit with Gibson Guitars , branded guitars are not featured ; instead , the player can create a customized guitar from various components , such as bodies , <unk> , and <unk> . The player 's in @-@ game drum set and microphone can also be similarly customized . The 14 starting characters of the game can be customized too ; however , their customization is limited to clothing and accessories only . Activision had formed partnerships with several instrument equipment manufactures to be featured in the game , including Ampeg , Audio @-@ Technica , EMG Pickups , Ernie Ball , Evans Drumheads , Guitar Center , Krank Amplification , Mackie , Marshall , Orange County Drum & Percussion , Pork Pie Percussion , Regal Tip , Sabian , Vox and Zildjian . 
 In addition to the computer- and player @-@ controlled characters , avatars of notable musicians are featured in the game , either with motion capture or the licensing of their image for their character . Such playable artists include Hayley Williams , Jimi Hendrix , Ozzy Osbourne , Zakk Wylde , Billy Corgan , Sting , Ted Nugent , and Travis Barker . 
 New venues in the game include virtual recreations of real arenas , such as Ozzfest , Amoeba Music , Live Nation ’ s House of Blues , Sunset Strip and San Francisco ’ s AT & T Park . One venue showcases the trademark art style of Tool and was developed in collaboration with the band . World Tour is the first Activision game on the PlayStation 3 to support dynamic in @-@ game advertising provided by IGA Worldwide ; similar advertising for the Xbox 360 version is provided by Massive Incorporated . 
 = = = Instruments = = = 
 = = = = Guitar / Bass Guitar = = = = 
 RedOctane developed a new guitar controller for World Tour . The unit is approximately 25 % larger than previous controllers , making it closer to the size of a real guitar . The new controller includes a longer whammy bar and places the Star Power button directly below the strum bar , improving the access of these features . The strum bar itself was made quieter and longer . The neck of the guitar is detachable , similar to the Gibson Les Paul controller for Guitar Hero III , but the connector has been hardened to avoid connection issues experienced with the previous unit . The neck of the guitar features a touch @-@ sensitive pad just toward the body end from the normal five fret buttons . The player can use either the fret buttons or the touch pad to play regular notes . The pad also allows the player to play notes via tapping or via " tap strumming " similar to the slap bass method for bass guitar , and to alter the pitch of sustained notes . Guitar tracks feature notes connected by a semi @-@ transparent purple line , ( except for the Wii and PlayStation 2 version , in which semi @-@ transparent gems replace this purple line ) called " Slider Gems " ; the player can play these notes by sliding their fingers up and down the touch pad or by tapping the fret buttons without strumming . The touchpad can also be used for sustained and staccato notes in the music studio feature while recording guitar , and is used for finer control over loops when recording other instruments . 
 = = = = Drums = = = = 
 World Tour features a wireless six @-@ piece drum kit , with a bass drum pedal and five velocity @-@ sensitive drum pads , which Activision has stated provide the " most realistic drum experience ever in a video game " . Generally , the pads represent the snare drum ( red ) , the tom @-@ tom drum ( blue ) , the floor tom ( green ) , the hi @-@ hat cymbal ( yellow ) , and the crash cymbal ( orange ) , however , they can be used for other percussion instruments depending on the song . The bass drum is represented by a purple , horizontal line on the highway , which players must the drum pedal to hit . The drum kit was designed with help from John <unk> , the developer of MTV <unk> , and developed key patents used for most modern music games that are now owned by Activision . Special note gems on the drum track , representing accent notes , are " armored " , requiring the player to strike the corresponding drum head harder in order to break the armor and score more points . During song creation , the velocity sensitivity feature of the drum pad allows players to alter the sounds made by the drums . The drum set also has a MIDI input port in the back , allowing users to connect a compatible MIDI drum kit to play in the game . The Wii version of the drum controller includes a slot for the Wii Remote to fit into , enabling it to become wireless , much like the guitar controller introduced for the Wii version of Guitar Hero III . 
 = = = = Microphone = = = = 
 The official microphone used for vocals uses a USB connection . For other consoles , such as the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , a headset can also be used as an alternative , but has proven to be less reliable as it tends not to pick up the audio from the player . When playing vocals , a standard game controller , or Wii Remote on the Wii version , is necessary in order to navigate menus , select difficulties and pause . The microphone can also be used as a standard recording device when connected to a casual PC USB port . The computer recognizes the device as a Logitech Recording Device . 
 Logitech and Activision announced that the former company would produce " premium " instruments to be released later in 2008 . 
 = = = = Instrument compatibility = = = = 
 World Tour works with older Guitar Hero guitar controllers . Activision stated during their E3 2008 press conference that Xbox 360 users would be able to use the existing Rock Band instrument controllers as well as other third party controllers in Guitar Hero World Tour ; Rock Band instruments for the PlayStation 3 are not guaranteed to work in World Tour , though Sony is attempting to help make these units compatible . All Rock Band original Harmonix instruments for PlayStation 2 work with World Tour . According to issue 027 of the UK 's Official PlayStation Magazine , all Guitar Hero and Rock Band PS3 controllers are cross @-@ compatible with all games ( except for Guitar Hero : World Tour drums on Rock Band , however some require patching , which is done automatically when connected to the internet ) . Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 instruments also work on the PlayStation 2 versions of World Tour , as well as later Guitar Hero games . 
 Console makers have helped to ensure instrument compatibility between current and upcoming guitar and band games . Both Sony and Microsoft announced that instruments for World Tour , Rock Band 2 , and Konami 's Rock Revolution would work between all three games on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . The Wii version of the game only supports guitar controllers from previous Guitar Hero games , and " no compatibility with any other peripherals " . 
 World Tour adjusts the tracks in the game to account for the instrument controller being used . For example , sections of the lead guitar track that are designed to be played on the new World Tour controller 's touchpad can be played by tapping the frets on older controllers without strumming . When using Rock Band 's drum controller , which has one fewer percussion pad than the World Tour unit and lacks velocity sensitivity , two of the lanes on the " World Tour " drum board merge , reducing the note track to four drum pads and bass pedal , and no armored notes are presented . 
 = = Development = = 
 The fourth major entry to the Guitar Hero series , at the time named Guitar Hero IV , was officially announced upon the merger of Activision and Vivendi Games in December 2007 . " We couldn 't have done it without Red Octane 's support . " says the Guitar Hero Team . The game 's new name , Guitar Hero World Tour , was officially announced by Activision in May 2008 . 
 Activision and RedOctane had previously registered for trademarks on " Guitar Villain " , " Drum Villain " , " Keyboard Hero " , " Drum Hero " and " Band Hero " . Analysts speculated that future Guitar Hero would need to include additional instrument peripherals in order to compete against former Guitar Hero developer Harmonix 's Rock Band . Activision 's CEO Bobby Kotick and early previews of the game revealed that Guitar Hero IV would branch out into other instruments and vocals . 
 According to the Game Informer preview , the addition of drum functionality came from work initially done towards the Drum Hero title . This work was later folded into the Guitar Hero series after Neversoft was chosen as developer of the series . Neversoft 's Allen Flores stated that with the addition of the existing drum gameplay , the development of World Tour took under a year , starting development immediately after the release of Guitar Hero III . The drum instrument controller was designed to be more realistic , with input from Chad Smith ( of Red Hot Chili Peppers ) , Stewart Copeland ( of The Police ) and Travis Barker ( of Blink @-@ 182 ) , all of whom requested the elevated cymbal pads . The ability to open @-@ strum the guitar was a feature that was planned for Guitar Hero III but was removed before release , finding that it was too difficult on the guitar tracks . However , they built this feature in from the start of World Tour development for the bass guitar tracks . 
 Bright describes the development of the note track for a given song once it has been licensed for the game as a parallel effort , a process that they have found to be more efficient than their previous work on the Tony Hawk games . Once the song was mixed for use by the development team , a " tempo map " was created by one developer ; this map denotes the beats in the music which then can be used by the rest of the development team . Once the tempo map was complete , the song was then distributed to the various teams , such as the specific instrument teams or to the animators , to complete the song . Note @-@ for @-@ note tracking from the song was then performed , and in some cases , changes were made to account for sections that cannot be replicated on the game controllers ; the final track represented the note track for the Expert difficulty of the song . Note tracks were then reduced and adjusted to create the note tracks for the lower difficulties in the game . A difficulty assessment was made using the final note tracks to determine where the songs were to be placed in the soundtrack progression . The difficulty model is based on that from Guitar Hero : Aerosmith , which was adjusted from the Guitar Hero III model after the team received negative feedback from players regarding a " brick wall " in the difficulty progression in that game . 
 The song list for World Tour started as the list of songs that Neversoft wanted to include in Guitar Hero III , but had failed to get into the game or as downloadable content ; the list was eventually expanded to over 500 songs . The song list was then prioritized based on what the team thought would be best in the game , and then going after the music that would take the longest time to license , as was the case for the Jimi Hendrix songs . While songs were selected to make sure that guitar , bass , and drums all had great parts , they also opted for songs that would be strong for one single instrument as to make the game still appealing for those playing the single player modes . Some songs were also suggested through the licensing efforts by Activision for inclusion in the game . Flores stated that the inclusion of caricatures of recording artists in the game was either due to the team seeking that specific artist for the game , or the artist approaching the development team and requesting to be part of it . The band Tool , which hasn 't licensed its music since 1996 , allowed for the inclusion of three of its songs in World Tour as long they were involved with the artwork and tracking of the songs for the game , leading to the creation of the art @-@ like Tool venue . 
 Bright noted that they had support for " epic drum solos " , in which the band animation would focus on the drummer , but removed this feature from the game 's final release due to its complexity . They also had to remove the " Jam Over " mode planned for the game 's music creation section that would have allowed players to start with one of the game 's songs and play over it on their instruments ; this feature was removed in order to keep the final product polished and on @-@ time . 
 The custom song creation feature was inspired by the current " hacking environment " that has arisen from the first two Guitar Hero games , where players would create new tracks and share them with others . 
 Hands @-@ On Mobile has secured the worldwide rights to create a mobile phone version of the game to be released later in 2008 . A version of the game has been rated by the ESRB for Microsoft Windows computers , though Activision has not officially confirmed this version . 
 A PC version of Guitar Hero World Tour was confirmed by Intel on February 27 , 2009 and displayed at <unk> on March 3 – 8 , 2009 in Hannover , Germany . 
 = = = Bundling and promotion = = = 
 World Tour is available in several bundle packages , as well as the stand @-@ alone game . In addition to a game bundle that includes a wireless guitar for each platform , the game can be bought in one of two bundles that include the guitar , drums , and microphone controller . The second bundle , only available through RedOctane 's store , also includes a T @-@ shirt , keychain , and a recharging kit . Players in the United Kingdom who pre @-@ order the full band bundle also received a second guitar controller for bass players . The bass guitar is the Les Paul guitar , the same model as bundled with Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock . During the Christmas season of 2008 , Some retailers , such as Target , sold in @-@ store a dual guitar bundle which included two identical wireless Les Paul styled guitars from previous game versions and did not include the new guitar with the tapping area . 
 Activision created a series of television advertisements directed by Brett Ratner based on the famous scene from Risky Business where Tom Cruise dances to Bob Seger 's " Old Time Rock and Roll " in a shirt and underwear , each featuring a different set of celebrities lip synching to the lyrics while using the new instrument controllers . The first ad included athletes Kobe Bryant , Tony Hawk , Alex Rodriguez , and Michael Phelps . Another ad spot featured model Heidi Klum ; two versions of Klum 's ad exist , one a " director 's cut " where she is wearing less clothing . A subsequent commercial featuring model Marisa Miller was banned from airing as too racy . 
 A YouTube viral video entitled " Bike Hero " showed what appeared to be a teenager riding a bike along a route marked with symbols similar in appearance to the in @-@ game note tracks with LED lights on the handlebars blinking in time to the notes to the song " Prisoner of Society " by The Living End . The video was later determined to be the work of a viral marketing company Droga5 in cooperation with Activision to promote the Guitar Hero games . The viral advertisement was considered a success , with about 3 @.@ 5 million views since its release . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 All of the 86 songs in the game are master recordings , a first for the series . Project director Brian Bright claims that they have " a pretty even split between the ' 80s , ' 90s , and classic rock " with a " good amount of emerging bands " . Some of the songs from the disc are exportable to both Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero for a small fee , with music licensing rights limiting which songs can be exported . 
 = = = Custom songs = = = 
 Guitar Hero World Tour allows players to create their own songs through the " Music Studio " and share them with others through the Xbox Live , PlayStation Network , and Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection internet capabilities . The Studio is similar to Apple 's GarageBand software . The player can create the tracks for each song by playing it in real or slowed time , with the game quantizing offbeat notes to the nearest beat as set by the player , or tracks can be constructed one note at a time . The notes played by the user are the default " Expert " difficulty track , and the lower difficulty versions are generated by the game . 
 Players can create the tracks for lead , rhythm , and bass guitars and for drums , selecting from a number of different sounds and kits for each instrument . Distortion and other effects can be added to these tracks through Line 6 amplifiers in the " <unk> " mode . Players cannot record vocals directly , but can create a hum @-@ along vocal line in the Studio . PlayStation 3 users with MIDI @-@ compatible computers are also able to connect their computer to the console and use it for song composition ; a similar feature is sought for Xbox 360 owners . Eurogamer reported that a crew at Activision was able to successfully create a " perfectly respectable cover " version of the first verse of " Smells Like Teen Spirit " by Nirvana . 
 Custom songs can be uploaded to the " GH Tunes " service , allowing other players to rate songs and search and download songs by these ratings . A Showcase service provides some of the best user works alongside new songs from popular artists for players to download . Players can only upload five songs to the service at the start , but players that have highly rated songs gain the ability to upload more . Bright stated that uploaded songs would be actively monitored , and that covers of copyrighted songs would be removed from the service while also taking down any other requests made by copyright owners . The PlayStation 2 version of the game features custom song creation , but does not support the uploading service . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 In addition to custom songs , players of the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Wii versions are able to download new licensed songs for the game . This is the first game in the Guitar Hero series to support download functionality on the Wii . Wii users are able to store downloaded songs on either the Wii 's internal memory or on an SD Card in a " Rock Archive , " and then are able to add songs to playlists from this . When playing tracks stored on an SD Card , each song is automatically copied to a " content cache " on the Wii 's flash memory for play and then deleted after the song is finished . This requires about 200 free memory blocks on the Wii . 
 Neversoft and Activision expressed intentions to release downloadable content more frequently . Downloadable content is available through the in @-@ game store and includes full album downloads and more regular releases compared to Guitar Hero III . Most existing downloadable content for Guitar Hero III is not be playable in World Tour , due to the lack of having tracks for all four instruments for the latter game . However , with the release of Metallica 's Death Magnetic , the developers were able to prepare the tracks in Guitar Hero III to have the required portions needed for World Tour , and thus these tracks are forward @-@ compatible . Activision has also stated that they are considering a monthly subscription service to deliver downloadable content to users for future games . Most of the downloadable content ( 152 of 158 songs as of early August 2009 ) is exportable to both Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero , updated to include new features introduced in those games . However , Guitar Hero 5 downloadable content is not playable in World Tour . 
 = = Technical issues = = 
 Users encountered several technical issues with the instrument controllers upon release of the game . Most often cited was the drum controller failing to register drum hits by the player . Some users have also found that , despite the assurance of instrument compatibility , the PlayStation 3 World Tour drum kit does not work with Rock Band 2 , however the 1 @.@ 1 patch for Rock Band 2 on PS3 has fixed this issue . Users have also noted that the wireless guitar strum bar may fail after a few hours of playing . Activision has acknowledged that drum sets from earlier manufacturing processes may be prone to these errors , and have set up several support threads on their Guitar Hero forums to address the issue and assist users in equipment replacement . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guitar Hero World Tour has received generally positive reviews from critics , many making comparisons between it and the Rock Band series . 1UP noted that while World Tour is not as good a " party game " as Rock Band , the game still provides " great peripherals and fun @-@ to @-@ play music " and delivers what the player should expect . GameTrailers stated that " another viable challenger has stepped onto the stage . " IGN 's review was lukewarm , noting that " A number of things it tries to accomplish were already done better in Rock Band " , but stated that the game would be a good " stepping point " for the next iteration of the series . 
 While reviewers were satisfied with the single player modes of the game , the Band tour mode was considered weaker than Rock Band 's Tour mode . The interface for a full band , despite being similar to Rock Band , was found to be confusing , making it difficult to determine if a fellow bandmember was about to fail or identifying how much Star Power the band had accumulated . The Band tour was found to be little different from the single player modes , and lacked the additional incentives and challenges that Rock Band had . The note charts and the game 's difficulty curve were found to be significantly easier than the more punishing ones in Guitar Hero III . Critics did observe poor note charting , stating that some of the song charts " simply don 't match the music " and that " you 'll be asked to hit notes where there are none , or not hit notes that are there . " The soundtrack was generally praised for containing all master recordings . However , critics found that the setlist contains very few standout hits , and that the inclusion of a number of foreign @-@ language and difficult @-@ to @-@ recognize songs weakened the overall list . Reviews also commented on the number of songs that overlapped with Rock Band 2 's set list . 
 Reviews of the instrument peripherals for World Tour were mixed . The new touchpad on the guitar controller was found to be imprecise to make it difficult to use during difficult song sections and would sometimes fail to register taps or slides ; some of these issues were attributed to initial manufacturing problems . The drum kit has been praised for ease of set up , the drum pad layout , and the response of the drums , though the lack of a means to fix the location of bass drum pedal was seen as a drawback when compared to the Rock Band drum kit . 
 The music creation feature of the game , while seen as a useful addition to the game , was found to be difficult to use , suffered from on @-@ screen lag that could interfere with song creation , and the quality of the resulting songs were compared to ring tones for cell phones . The character customization in World Tour was generally seen as an improvement over the limitations of Rock Band . However , reviewers noted that the use of the real @-@ life celebrities against the cartoon @-@ like visuals , along with the emphasis on the band and not individual players , made their presence " anachronistic " . 
 The Wii version received additional praise from reviewers , mostly from the changes in the Wii operation to accommodate the game 's Music Store and online play features . The Mii Freestyle Mode was also found to be a good addition , allowing the game to be accessible for younger players . IGN noted that most of the credit for the Wii version is due to Vicarious Visions , as that " the only real aspects that hold the game back from being truly amazing overall are - oddly enough - the ones implemented by Neversoft 's core design " . It was awarded Best Music / Rhythm Game on the Wii by IGN in its 2008 video game awards . IGN also nominated it for several other Wii @-@ specific awards , including Best Family Game , Best Online Multiplayer Game , and Game of the Year . 
 World Tour sold more than 534 @,@ 000 units during its first week of release , less than half of the sales of Guitar Hero III during the same period , with the Wii version selling the most with 183 @,@ 000 units . During the month of November 2008 , 978 @,@ 000 units were sold , with 475 @,@ 000 being for the Wii platform . The Wii version was the fifth best @-@ selling game of December 2008 in the United States , selling in excess of 850 @,@ 000 copies . The PlayStation 2 version was the 17th best @-@ selling game and best @-@ selling PlayStation 2 game of the same month in that region . The Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions did not rank , but ranked the sixth and fifth best @-@ selling games respectively for their respective systems . World Tour sold 3 @.@ 4 million copies across all platforms in North America during 2008 . Full band bundles represented 41 % of all unit sales of World Tour through January 2009 , equating to 61 % of the game 's revenue , while 35 % of unit sales and 27 % of total revenues came from the guitar and game bundle . In a March 2011 list , the NPG Group placed World Tour as the 7th highest grossing game in the United States since 1995 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 IGN Best of 2008 : 
 Best Music / Rhythm Game ( Wii ) 
 Game Informer : Included in " The Top 50 Games of 2008 " . 
 Kids Choice Award ( 2009 ) Best Video Game . 
 = Louie Caporusso = 
 Louie Caporusso ( born June 21 , 1989 ) is a Canadian ice hockey player . He is currently playing for the <unk> Roosters of the DEL . Caporusso was drafted by the Ottawa Senators in the 3rd round ( 90th overall ) of the 2007 NHL Entry Draft . 
 Caporusso played from 2007 to 2011 with the University of Michigan Wolverines team . During the 2008 – 09 Michigan Wolverines men 's ice hockey season , he was named to the All @-@ Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) first team . He was also named first @-@ team AHCA / Reebok Division I Ice Hockey All @-@ American . He led the nation in goals scored for most of the 2008 – 09 NCAA Division I men 's ice hockey season . During the 2009 – 10 Michigan Wolverines men 's ice hockey season , he was named to the CCHA All @-@ tournament team as he led the team to the championship . Prior to his time at the University of Michigan , he excelled in junior hockey in Ontario , Canada , which earned him a position as a draftee by the Ottawa Senators of the National Hockey League before entering college . After finishing his senior season , Caporusso signed with the Senators on May 30 , 2011 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 During the 2004 – 05 season , he played in the Greater Toronto Hockey League ( GTHL ) for the Toronto Red Wings , recording 70 points including 41 goals in 56 games . The 70 @-@ point total made him the GTHL point leader for the season . 
 After his league leading performance , he was drafted by the Toronto St. Michael 's Majors of the Ontario Hockey League with the seventh selection of the tenth round , but instead of playing for them , he spent the following two seasons playing in the Ontario Junior Hockey League ( OPJHL ) for the St. Michael 's Buzzers . During the 2005 – 06 season , he led the OPJHL in scoring with 73 points in 48 games and led the team to the OPJHL championship . Caporusso scored 50 points in 37 games during the 2006 – 07 season , but the team lost in the finals . Following the season , he was drafted with the 90th selection overall in the third round by the Ottawa Senators in the June 22 , 2007 NHL Entry Draft . 
 As a junior player , he earned a variety of all @-@ star selections . He participated in the 2006 Canadian Junior Hockey League Top Prospects Game , earning Team East MVP honors . In addition , he was selected for the 2007 Ontario Hockey Association Top Prospect Team and the 2007 OPJHL All @-@ Star team . He was also a silver medalist for Team Canada East at the 2006 World Junior A Challenge where he was selected to tournament 's all @-@ star team . 
 = = = College = = = 
 Caporusso , is described as a left @-@ handed shooting forward by some sources , and he is described as either a left wing or a center by others . However , the Ann Arbor Press described him as a center . The Ottawa Senators have him listed as a centre . 
 As a freshman at Michigan , he scored 21 points , including 12 goals , in 33 games . That season he missed eight games due to a leg injury . As a sophomore during the 2008 – 09 season , Caporusso was one of ten finalists for the Hobey Baker Award . During the season , he scored 49 points in 41 games . He was also named to the All @-@ Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) first @-@ team and AHCA / Reebok Division I Ice Hockey All @-@ American first @-@ team along with team mate Aaron <unk> . In addition , he was selected to the CCHA All @-@ Conference tournament team . One of the highlights of the season occurred when he scored the first three goals of the game in the first period ( the first two within 24 seconds of each other ) for the natural hat trick against Michigan Tech on December 27 , 2008 . During the first half of the season , he led the nation in goals scored . He played a different scoring role during the final nine regular season games , as the team went 8 – 1 and he scored two goals and posted 14 assists . Caporusso was named the team MVP at the end of the season . 
 In Caporusso 's junior season , he posted 21 goals and 22 assists . Michigan began the season ranked number five in the nation , but Caporusso only scored one goal in his first ten games and had no <unk> games until well into February . Michigan entered the CCHA playoffs with a 19 – 17 – 1 record and was on the verge of breaking the team 's nineteen consecutive year streak of qualifying for the NCAA Men 's Ice Hockey Championship . However , the team won six consecutive games in the conference championship tournament to earn the automatic invitation . Caporusso scored both goals in the final 2 – 1 victory of the tournament and was named to the All @-@ Tournament team . He also scored in the second period of the first game of the tournament to give Michigan a 2 – 0 lead . However , Michigan lost in the quarterfinal round in double overtime to the CCHA regular season champion Miami Redhawks . 
 As a senior , he served as captain of the team . The 2010 – 11 Michigan Wolverines men 's ice hockey team was the 2001 – 11 CCHA regular season champion . Subsequently , the team finished as runner @-@ up in the 2011 NCAA Division I Men 's Ice Hockey Tournament . Caporusso finished second on the team in scoring for the third consecutive season . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 Caporusso signed a two @-@ year entry @-@ level contract with the Senators on May 30 , 2011 . After attending Ottawa 's NHL training camp , He was expected to join the Binghamton Senators to begin his professional career . On October 14 , 2011 , Caporusso was reassigned to the Elmira Jackals of the ECHL . After scoring 5 points in his first 5 games with Elmira , he was promoted to the Binghamton Senators of the American Hockey League on November 4 . After recording zero points in six games with Binghamton , he was reassigned to Elmira on November 17 . On November 26 , Caporusso was recalled by Binghamton for one game before being returned to Elmira on November 28 . Caporusso spent 4 months with the Jackals ( missing 6 weeks due to a concussion ) , scoring 16 goals and 16 assists in 29 games , before being called back up to the Senators on March 15 . 
 At the conclusion of his contract Caporusso 's rights were relinquished by the Senators . On August 15 , 2013 , he signed as a free agent to a one @-@ year contract with reigning champions the Reading Royals of the ECHL . 
 After parts of two seasons in the Deutsche Eishockey Liga with Augsburger Panther , Caporusso joined fellow German club , <unk> Roosters on a one @-@ year contract on June 12 , 2015 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Born in Toronto , Ontario , Caporusso is from Woodbridge , Ontario . At the University of Michigan , Caporusso was enrolled in the School of Kinesiology and performed public service by visiting the U @-@ M Mott Children ’ s Hospital . Caporusso is a 2007 graduate of the St. Michael 's College School in Toronto . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 All statistics taken from NHL.com 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 = Dave Shannon = 
 David John ( Dave ) Shannon , DSO & Bar , DFC & Bar ( 27 May 1922 – 8 April 1993 ) was an Australian bomber pilot of World War II , best known for his part in the " Dambusters " raid on the night of 16 / 17 May 1943 . Born in South Australia , he joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in 1941 and learned to fly under the Empire Air Training Scheme . After further training in the United Kingdom he was posted to No. 106 Squadron RAF , operating Avro Lancaster heavy bombers , and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) in January 1943 . In March he was selected by No. 106 Squadron 's commanding officer , Wing Commander Guy Gibson , to join the newly formed No. 617 Squadron for Operation Chastise , the attack on the dams of the Ruhr valley . Awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) following the raid , Shannon continued to fly with No. 617 Squadron until October 1944 , during which time he earned bars to his DSO and DFC . He was then assigned to transport duties , first with No. 511 Squadron and then , in March 1945 , with No. 246 Squadron . Ranked squadron leader , Shannon was demobilised after the war and remained in England , becoming an executive with Shell . He died in South London in 1993 , aged seventy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Shannon was born on 27 May 1922 at Unley Park , South Australia . His father , Howard Huntley Shannon , served as a South Australian state parliamentarian from 1933 to 1968 . Shannon was working for an insurance company when he joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) Reserve in Adelaide on 5 July 1940 , aged eighteen . On 4 January 1941 he transferred to the RAAF as an air cadet under the Empire Air Training Scheme . He received his instruction in Western Australia at No. 5 Initial Training School in Pearce , No. 9 Elementary Flying Training School in Cunderdin , and No. 4 Service Flying Training School in Geraldton . Following graduation as a pilot officer in September , he was posted to the United Kingdom . 
 = = Active service = = 
 Promoted to flying officer in March 1942 , Shannon underwent conversion to Armstrong Whitworth Whitley bombers at No. 19 Operational Training Unit in Kinloss , Scotland . He was then posted to No. 106 Squadron RAF , operating Avro Lancasters , and flew the first of his thirty @-@ six sorties with the unit in June . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross on 12 January 1943 for " attacks on industrial targets in enemy territory " . In March he was selected by No. 106 Squadron 's former commanding officer , Wing Commander Guy Gibson , to join the newly formed No. 617 Squadron for Operation Chastise , the " Dambusters " raid on the dams of the Ruhr valley . Shannon was one of four Australian pilots in the squadron — the others being " Micky " Martin , Robert Barlow , and Les Knight — and , at twenty , the youngest captain from among all the crews . He cultivated a moustache in an attempt to add maturity to his baby face . 
 On the night of Operation Chastise , 16 / 17 May 1943 , Shannon was among a group of Lancasters led by Gibson in assaults on the Möhne and Eder Dams . After five of the aircraft had dropped their bouncing bombs on the Möhne , Shannon was preparing to make his attack on the dam when it gave way , so he carried on to the Eder with Gibson and three other Lancasters , captained by " Dinghy " Young , Henry Maudsley , and Les Knight . Detailed for the first bombing run at the Eder , Shannon took several attempts to familiarise himself with the area and line up his aircraft , so in the meantime Gibson ordered Maudsley to make his attack . Shannon went in next , delivering his bomb on target . Knight then dropped his bomb , and the dam broke . Shannon landed back at RAF Scampton feeling " terribly elated " . His bomb was believed to have caused a crack in the dam 's wall , while Knight 's completed the breach . Speaking later of the severe losses suffered by the squadron — eight out of nineteen planes — Shannon contended , " I suppose we had become hardened to loss – we could shrug it off . We had to , otherwise we could never have flown again . " He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his part in the mission , one of a number of decorations awarded to the aircrew of No. 617 Squadron for the dams raid and promulgated in the London Gazette under the citation : 
 On the night of 16th May , 1943 , a force of Lancaster bombers was detailed to attack the <unk> , Eder and <unk> dams in Germany . The operation was one of great difficulty and hazard , demanding a high degree of skill and courage and close co @-@ operation between the crews of the aircraft engaged . Nevertheless , a telling blow was struck at the enemy by the successful breaching of the <unk> and Eder dams . This outstanding success reflects the greatest credit on the efforts of the following personnel who participated in the operation in various capacities as members of aircraft crew . 
 Soon afterward Shannon married a WAAF , Section Officer Ann Fowler , whom he met at Scampton before the raid . He remained with No. 617 Squadron while its role as a special @-@ duties unit operating against high @-@ value targets was expanded , participating in attacks on canals and V @-@ weapon sites with 12 @,@ 000 lb ( 5 @,@ 400 kg ) Tallboy bombs . Shannon was promoted to flight lieutenant on 23 September 1943 and awarded a bar to his DFC on 12 November for a " low level attack in adverse weather against heavy opposition " . He again participated in raids against V @-@ weapon sites in January 1944 . The following month , No. 617 Squadron undertook its first sortie under the leadership of Wing Commander Leonard Cheshire . At this point the unit began flying low @-@ level target @-@ marking missions using de Havilland Mosquito light bombers in addition to Lancasters . Shannon converted to the Mosquito and started flying it operationally in April . He returned to the Lancaster on 5 June to drop " Window " as a part of the Allies ' diversions ahead of the D @-@ Day landings the following day , prior to again flying Mosquitos against V @-@ weapon sites and in support of the Normandy invasion forces . Though " outwardly nerveless " , according to military historian Patrick Bishop , Shannon was not immune to dread feelings . As they prepared to depart on one of their night missions , Cheshire commented on the beautiful sunset , to which Shannon replied , " I don 't give a fuck about that , I want to see the sunrise " . Having been raised to acting squadron leader , he was awarded a bar to his DSO on 26 September 1944 for " courage of high order on numerous sorties " . The full citation in the London Gazette read : 
 Since the award of a bar to the Distinguished Flying Cross , Squadron Leader Shannon has completed many sorties which he has executed with outstanding resolution and success . He has at all times displayed courage and fortitude of a high order and his appreciation of the responsibilities entrusted to him have set a fine example to all . 
 In October 1944 , after a total of sixty @-@ nine sorties , Shannon was taken off bomber operations and transferred to transport duties , initially with No. 511 Squadron , which flew long @-@ range missions with Avro Yorks . His promotion to squadron leader became substantive on 1 January 1945 . Three months later he was assigned to No. 246 Squadron , which operated Yorks and Consolidated Liberators . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Shannon was discharged from the RAAF as a squadron leader on 15 December 1945 . He remained in England and became an executive with Shell and later Cunard . Shannon no longer flew after the war , but did like to drive fast cars . He also served as chairman of the No. 617 Squadron Association , helping to raise funds for the Dambusters memorial at Woodhall Spa near RAF Scampton . On 8 April 1993 , shortly before a planned fiftieth anniversary reunion of surviving Dambusters , he died at his home in Sydenham , South London , aged seventy . He was survived by his second wife <unk> and his daughter by Ann . On 17 May 2008 , the sixty @-@ fifth anniversary of the Dambusters raid , a memorial to Shannon and two other South Australians who took part in the mission , bomb aimers Fred Spafford and Bob Hay , was unveiled in Adelaide in the presence of the airmen 's families . In July 2009 Shannon 's daughter Nikki made his medals , uniform , and logbook available to the Australian War Memorial in Canberra , for long @-@ term display . 
 = Tales of Graces = 
 Tales of Graces ( Japanese : テイルズ オブ グレイセス , Hepburn : Teiruzu Obu <unk> ) is a Japanese role @-@ playing game released for the Wii on December 10 , 2009 in Japan . The game is a core product of the Tales series and was developed by Namco Tales Studio . The game was ported to the PlayStation 3 under the title Tales of Graces f ( テイルズ オブ グレイセス <unk> , Teiruzu Obu <unk> <unk> ) and was released on December 2 , 2010 in Japan . The PlayStation 3 version was localized for North America on March 13 , 2012 and Europe on August 31 , 2012 . 
 The game takes place in a world known as Ephinea and follows Asbel Lhant . During his childhood , Asbel befriends an amnesiac girl and witnesses her death . Seven years later , he is reunited with the girl who retains her amnesia . The plot 's central theme is Mamoru <unk> o Shiru RPG ( <unk> ? , lit . " RPG to Know the Strength to Protect " ) . 
 Tales of Graces and Tales of Graces f both received positive reception in Japan . The Wii version sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies while the PS3 version sold 200 @,@ 000 copies during their week of release . The game was adapted into four manga collections , a novel series , and eight drama CDs . The English localization of Tales of Graces f received praise for the gameplay with mixed reviews for its presentation . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Tales of Graces consists primarily of two major areas : the field map and a battle screen . The field map is a realistically scaled 3D environment traversed by foot . On the field maps , various skits between the characters can be viewed . They involve animated character portraits , subtitles , and full voice acting . Skits concern anything from character development to side details . The battle screen is a 3D representation of an area , in which the player commands the characters in battles against CPU @-@ controlled enemies . 
 During battle sequences , the game uses the Style Shift Linear Motion Battle System . Four characters are chosen to battle and characters not controlled by a player are controlled by artificial intelligence with instructions set by the players beforehand . The " Chain Capacity " ( CC ) denotes the number of skills and actions a character can perform . Usage brings the CC down and is recharged over time . During battle , the player and enemy has an " Eleth Gauge " . When the Eleth Gauge is filled , the user or the enemy receive unlimited CC and become resistant to stunning . Each character has two skill systems : " Assault Artes " which are pre @-@ determined combos and " Burst Artes " which can be mapped to specific inputs . Skill and attribute development are dependent on " Titles " and their levels . Titles are earned through story progression and completion of miscellaneous criteria during battle . Each Title has five levels which are advanced by completing battles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game takes place in a fictional world called Ephinea . Ephinea is divided into three countries : Windor , Stratha , and Fendel . Asbel Lhant , Hubert Lhant , and Cheria Barnes are children from Lhant , a village of Windor . One day , the three befriend an amnesiac girl from outside their village who they name Sophie . That same day , Lhant is visited by Richard , the prince of Windor , who befriends the four of them . Richard returns to Barona , Windor 's capital city , and invites them to sneak into his castle via a secret passage . There , the four are mortally wounded by an unknown monster but are saved when Sophie sacrifices herself . Asbel regains consciousness in Lhant and is told about Sophie 's death and Hubert 's political adoption into the Oswell family to secure Asbel 's future as the Lord of Lhant . <unk> over Sophie 's death and the political events at home , Asbel runs away from home and enrolls in the Barona knight academy . 
 Seven years later , Asbel learns from Cheria that his father died defending Lhant from an invasion by Fendel . The two return to Lhant and are saved from Fendel 's army by Sophie and later Hubert with the Stratha military . Hubert reveals Stratha has been ordered by Windor to secure Lhant and assumes the position of Lord after banishing Asbel from the village . Hearing rumors of Richard 's death , the party investigate and find him in the castle 's secret passage . Richard explains his father was killed by his uncle , Cedric , who then assumed the throne . The three travel to meet a trusted Duke and are joined by Pascal , a prodigy from an engineering tribe known as the <unk> . With the Duke 's army , the party overthrows Cedric and Richard regains the throne . Richard orders an invasion of Lhant to rid it of Stratha 's control forcing the party to betray him . Acknowledging Hubert 's efforts as Lord of Lhant , Asbel and the party , joined by Malik Caesar , travel to Stratha to negotiate with the government to formally instate Hubert as Lord . The government agrees on the pretense that Pascal fixes Stratha 's valkines , a large crystal which supplies a life sustaining energy known as eleth ; Pascal succeeds but Richard appears and absorbs the valkines ' eleth , and flees . The party learn Windor 's valkines has also been absorbed and plan to intercept Richard at the final valkines in Fendel . Hubert joins the party as they travel to Fendel but fail to stop Richard . Deducing the Lastalia , the planet 's core , is Richard 's target , the party find Richard there ; Richard mortally injures Sophie before sealing the entrance to the Lastalia . 
 The party is unable to heal Sophie with magic or medicine so Pascal suggests the party travel to Fodra , a nearby planet , where Sophie originates from to find a cure . After finding a space shuttle left by Pascal 's ancestors , the party travel to Fodra where they meet Emeraude , the last remaining human on the desolated planet . Using advanced machinery , Sophie is healed and regains her memories revealing she is a biological humanoid engineered to defeat Lambda , the monster that attacked them in their childhood and is currently possessing Richard . Emeraude helps the party bypass the barrier on the Lastalia where they confront and defeat Richard . Emeraude betrays the party and attempts to absorb Lambda 's power but dies in the process . Lambda begins to fuse with the Lastalia causing the party to see his memories and learn about his suffering caused by humanity . The party defeats the materialized Lambda ; Since Lambda can not be killed by normal means , Sophie intends to sacrifice herself to kill him . Instead , Asbel absorbs and convinces Lambda to let him show humanity 's worth . Lambda agrees before falling into a deep sleep . 
 In the after @-@ story Lineage and Legacies , the monster population have become an epidemic forcing Asbel and his friends to reunite and investigate the cause . <unk> that the eleth from Fodra is influencing the monsters , the party travel there and discover Fodra 's core has reactivated . They learn the core is sentient and wants revenge on the humans for Fodra 's environmental decay . The party defeats Fodra 's soldiers , the Little Queens , and have the reawakened Lambda absorb Fodra 's consciousness . In doing so , Lambda returns to his deep sleep in order to dissuade Fodra 's hatred . The party separates and returns to their daily life concluding with Asbel proposing to Cheria . In the distant future , Sophie shares the party 's adventure to Asbel 's and Cheria 's great great grandson . 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Asbel Lhant ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) 
 Asbel is the eldest son and successor to Aston Lhant , the Lord of the village Lhant . After Sophie 's death and Hubert 's adoption into the Oswell family , Asbel leaves for Barona where he trains to be a knight in order to atone for his failure to protect Sophie . After the events of Tales of Graces , he assumes the position as Lord . In Lineage and Legacies , he marries Cheria and adopts Sophie into the Lhant family . He is voiced by Yuki Kaida as a child and Takahiro Sakurai as an adult . In the English dub , Kate Higgins voices him as a child and Bryce Papenbrook as an adult . Since his debut , Asbel has ranked third in the Tales character popularity polls . 
 Asbel is a playable character in Tales of the World : Radiant Mythology 3 , Tales of the Heroes : Twin Brave and is a character class in Tales of Phantasia : <unk> Dungeon X. He also makes a cameo in .hack / / Link 's pre @-@ order DVD . The game 's producer , Hideo Baba , wanted Asbel 's story to portray the need to conform to social guidelines and expectations as one grows up . Through Asbel 's conflict on succeeding his father 's Lordship or following his dreams as a Knight , Baba wanted the players to understand the importance in protecting what is important to them and to follow through with their own path and dreams . 
 Sophie ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Sophie is an amnesiac girl Asbel , Hubert , Cheria , and Richard befriend . She is seemingly killed after protecting them from Lambda . She reappears seven years later when Asbel and Cheria were in danger . Sophie is revealed to be <unk> Heis , a humanoid made of tiny particles acting in concert with each other . Her death seven years ago is explained as Sophie breaking up into particles residing inside Asbel , Hubert , and Cheria to heal their wounds and is the reason the three possess mystical powers . During the events of Lineage and Legacies , Sophie expresses her fears of life after the death of her friends due to her immortality . To lessen her fears , Asbel formally adopts her into the Lhant family . After fusing with a Little Queen , Sophie ages to an adult and is able to express a greater variety of emotions . She is voiced by Kana Hanazawa and dubbed by Cassandra Morris . Since her debut , Sophie has ranked on the Tales character popularity polls . Sophie is a playable character in Tales of the World : Radiant Mythology 3 . 
 Hubert Oswell ( <unk> ･ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) 
 Hubert is Asbel 's younger brother . He is fostered into the Oswell family to secure Asbel 's succession to Lord . Hubert resents Asbel for deserting Lhant , perceiving the act as spiting his sacrifice , and his parents for abandoning him . He overcomes his anger when he reunites with his family seven years later . Due to his capabilities , he is appointed the lieutenant of the <unk> military . He is voiced by Mikako Takahashi as a child and Takahiro Mizushima as an adult . In the English dub , he is voiced by Steve Staley . Hubert ranked on the fifth Tales character popularity poll and fell from the rankings afterwards . He makes a cameo in Tales of Hearts R dressed as the Sony mascot Kuro . 
 Cheria Barnes ( <unk> ･ <unk> , Sheria <unk> ) 
 Cheria is the granddaughter of Lhant 's family butler . She was sickly as a child but is healed due to Sophie 's powers . She harbors a crush on Asbel but treats him coldly after he leaves Lhant . She later reveals her sorrow in having Asbel abandon her and reconciles with him . She also becomes Asbel 's wife . She is voiced by Shiho <unk> and dubbed by Laura Bailey . Since her debut , Cheria has ranked on the Tales character popularity polls . Game Informer listed Cheria as one of the best characters in the Tales series . Cheria is a playable character in Tales of the World : Radiant Mythology 3 and Tales of the Heroes : Twin Brave . 
 Richard ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Richard is the prince of Windor who befriends Asbel and Sophie after his visit to Lhant . Before meeting Asbel , Richard has a strong distrust in others due to others using his status for their own gain and his uncle Cedric 's attempts to murder him . When Cedric poisoned and left him to die in the underground passage , Lambda saves his life by fusing with him . Seven years later , Lambda 's influence causes Richard to become violent and urges him to destroy humanity by fusing with the Lastalia . After separating from Lambda , Richard is determined to atone for his crimes which causes his popularity to soar in all three countries . He is voiced by Yuko Sanpei as a child and Daisuke Namikawa as an adult . In the English dub , he is voiced by Wendee Lee as a child and David Vincent as an adult . Since his debut , Richard has ranked on the Tales character popularity polls . 
 Malik Caesar ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) 
 Malik is Asbel 's instructor at the knight academy . His maturity and gentlemanly demeanor makes him popular with women . In the past , he was a revolutionist of Fendel who wanted more for the lower class . After the events of the game , Malik becomes Fendel 's ambassador . He is voiced by Hiroki <unk> and dubbed by Jamieson Price . Malik ranked on the fifth Tales character popularity poll and fell from the rankings since then . He makes a cameo in .hack / / Link 's pre @-@ order DVD . 
 Pascal ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Pascal is an <unk> prodigy , a tribe of engineers . She has a hyperactive personality and is fascinated in mysterious technology and in Sophie 's origins . She is voiced by Kana Ueda and dubbed by Kate Higgins . Since her debut , Pascal has ranked on the Tales character popularity polls . She makes a cameo in Tales of Hearts R dressed as the Sony mascot Toro Inoue . 
 Lambda ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Lambda is an advanced lifeform created on Fodra . His mistreatment by humans fueled his hatred towards them . During the party 's childhood , he resides inside Richard after he was injured by Sophie and as a result , saved Richard 's life . Seven years later , Lambda is reawakened when Richard receives a fatal wound . Lambda empowers Richard and manipulates him to achieve his goals of destroying humanity . After he is defeated by the party , Lambda is absorbed by Asbel who convinces him to give humans a chance . In Lineage and Legacies , he absorbs Fodra 's consciousness to dissuade her hatred as Asbel did for him . He is voiced by Shigeru Nakahara and dubbed by Keith Silverstein . 
 Fodra ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Fodra is a sentient desolated planet . A thousand years ago , Fodra started annihilating humanity with its personal army , the Little Queen , to preserve its environment . Fodra 's scientists were able to shut down Fodra 's core and relocate the surviving humans to Ephinea . In Lineage and Legacies , Fodra is reactivated and resumes its genocide . It is confronted by the party , forcing it to merge the remaining Little Queens to form Fodra Queen which is defeated by the party . Fodra 's consciousness is then absorbed by Lambda who intends to dissuade its hatred . As the last Little Queen nears death , Sophie accepts her request to merge and watch over Fodra . Little Queen is voiced by Yoshino Nanjō and Fodra Queen by Mika Doi . Little Queen was dubbed by Lauren Landa and Fodra Queen by Jessica Straus . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 On July 7 , 2008 , Namco Bandai Games announced the next core product of the Tales series is developed for the Wii . A trailer for the game was shown in October 2008 during the Nintendo Autumn 2008 Conference . During Jump Festa 2009 , the game was given the code name Tales of 10 ( テイルズ オブ 10 , Teiruzu Obu 10 ) and is revealed to have been in development for the past two years . In the first week of April 's Weekly Shōnen Jump , the game 's name was revealed to be Tales of Graces ; the name was trademarked by Namco Bandai Games a month prior . That same week , the developers were revealed to the same developers from Tales of Destiny . In the same month , the game 's theme was revealed to be Mamoru <unk> wo Shiru RPG ( <unk> ? , lit . " RPG to Know the Strength to Protect " ) . During the September Tokyo Game Show , the game 's theme song was revealed to be <unk> ( White Wishes ) by BoA . The game was released on December 10 , 2009 and was also available as a bundle with a new Wii system . The game included <unk> Merchant ! ( <unk> ! ? , lit . " Turtle Merchant ! " ) , a minigame for the Nintendo DS . <unk> Merchant ! was released for the Nintendo DSi on December 2 , 2009 . To promote the game , Namco Bandai Games and House Foods collaborated on packaged <unk> curry . In March 2010 , Namco Bandai Games began to recall Tales of Graces due to software bugs . Namco allowed customers to exchange their game with an updated version until July 2011 . 
 The PlayStation 3 port , Tales of Graces f , was first revealed in July 28 , 2010 's Weekly Shonen Jump and officially announced by Namco on August 2 , 2010 . The producer , Hideo Baba , explained the port was decided in February 2010 due to fan demand . The port adds an " Accelerate Mode " to the gameplay and an after @-@ story entitled Lineage & Legacies . <unk> received a DVD which contains a video of the game 's protagonists meeting with characters from Tales of Destiny 2 . A demo was released on October 7 , 2010 and the game was released on December 2 , 2010 . A limited edition of the game included a letter set . Namco and House Foods restarted the packaged <unk> curry to promote the game . Tales of Graces f was later re @-@ released with a 15th anniversary cover art edition on August 4 , 2011 and with PlayStation 3 The Best label in August 2 , 2012 . 
 A North American localization was hinted on Namco Bandai Games ' Facebook page by a puzzle on January 24 , 2011 . When solved , the puzzle reveals a URL to a distorted image which was restored on February 2 , 2011 and reveals Tales of Graces f 's localization for North America . On May 11 , 2011 , Namco officially announced the North American , EMEA and Asia @-@ Pacific localization of Tales of Graces f . The text was translated by 8 @-@ 4 while Cup of Tea Productions produced the dubbing . The North American localization was released on March 13 , 2012 . The EMEA and Asia @-@ Pacific localization released on August 31 , 2012 along with a day one special edition . The game was made available on the North American and European PlayStation Network in March 2013 . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 Tales of Graces offers costumes for the playable characters as downloadable content . Pre @-@ orderers received codes which give Asbel , Sophie , and Cheria costumes from Tales of Vesperia . Costumes based on The Idolmaster Dearly Stars for Sophie , Cheria , and Pascal were released on December 16 , 2009 . On December 23 , 2009 a Hatsune Miku costume for Sophie and a suit set for Asbel , Hubert , and Malik were released . Between January and March 2010 , a set of unique costumes designed by Mutsumi Inomata were released for each character . In addition to the costumes , challenge battles were also added as downloadable content . 
 Tales of Graces f received similar content as its Wii predecessor . Pre @-@ orderers received a code which gives Asbel , Sophie , and Richard costumes from Tales of Destiny 2 . On the release date , Code <unk> costumes , a Toro costume for Pascal , and Sophie 's Hatsune Miku costume were made available to download . On December 9 , 2010 , the Idolmaster set , suit set , school uniform set , and a <unk> costume for Asbel were released . The unique costumes designed by Inomata were released on December 22 , 2010 . In January 2011 , various costumes were released to make the characters resemble other characters from the Tales series . 
 In North America , all Tales of Graces f 's DLC , excluding cameo costumes from other franchises , was localized and released between March 13 , 2012 and April 10 , 2012 . Europe received the same DLC which were released between August 29 , 2012 and September 26 , 2012 . For the Tales of Destiny 2 preorder costumes , North American preorders from GameStop received a code for them ; in Europe , the code was included with the day one special edition . 
 = = Media adaptions = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Tales of Graces spawned four manga adaptations after its release : Three anthology collections , and a traditional manga series . The first anthology collection , Tales of Graces Comic Anthology consists of three volumes by Ichijinsha . The second anthology collection , Tales of Graces f Comic Anthology , consists of a single volume by Ichijinsha and was released on March 25 , 2011 . The third anthology collection is Tales of Graces f Sub Travels was serialized in ASCII Media Works 's Viva Tales of Magazine Volume 8 , 2011 to Volume 10 , 2012 issues . The individual chapters were then collected and released in a single volume on November 27 , 2012 under the Dengeki Comics imprint . A traditional manga series titled Tales of Graces f is written and authored by <unk> Aya . It began serialization in Viva Tales of Magazine beginning in its Volume 2 , 2011 issue and is currently ongoing . ASCII Media Works collected the chapters and released the first volume on October 27 , 2011 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Tales of Graces spun off a novel series titled " Tales of Graces f : <unk> no Hana " ( テイルズ オブ グレイセス <unk> <unk> ? , lit . Tales of Graces f : Flower 's Promise ) . The first volume is subtitled Jō ( 上 ? , lit . Above ) and the second Ka ( 下 ? , lit . Below ) . They were released by Enterbrain on February and May 2011 . Tales of Graces f Official Scenario Book by Namco Bandai Games was released by Yamashita Books in June 4 , 2012 . It details the game 's plot and fictional world . Tales of Graces has received six strategy guides in total : three for the Wii and three for the PS3 . Shueisha , Namco Bandai Games , and Enterbrain were the publishers . 
 = = = Audio CDs = = = 
 Ten drama CDs , produced by Frontier Works , and an original soundtrack by Avex Group were created based on the game . Drama CD : Tales of Graces 1 to 4 are side stories that take place during the game 's plot . They were released between May 26 , 2010 and August 25 , 2010 . Anthology Drama CD : Tales of Graces f 2010 Winter , Anthology Drama CD : Tales of Graces f 2011 Summer , Anthology Drama CD : Tales of Graces f 2012 Winter , Anthology Drama CD : Tales of Graces f 2012 Summer , Anthology Drama CD : Tales of Graces f 2013 Winter , and Anthology Drama CD : Tales of Graces f 2013 Summer are side stories after the events of the Tales of Graces . Tales of Graces Original Soundtrack was released on February 10 , 2010 and contains four discs . It ranked 128th on Oricon 's charts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Tales of Graces sold 113 @,@ 000 copies on its initial launch date , and sales reached 216 @,@ 000 within its first year . The game was re @-@ released under the Nintendo Selects label on March 24 , 2011 . Famitsu praised the depth of the gameplay but criticized the loading time . The game was listed on Famitsu 's " Greatest Games of All @-@ Time " in 2010 . Tales of Graces f sold over 200 @,@ 000 copies in Japan during its first week and reached over 300 @,@ 000 a year later . Tales of Graces f was later re @-@ released under PlayStation 3 The Best label in August 2 , 2012 . Famitsu repeated their praise of the gameplay and lauded the graphical upgrades . A survey by ASCII Media Works 's Dengeki Online in 2011 revealed Tales of Graces is ranked seventh on games readers would want to be adapted into an anime . 
 For the English localization of Tales of Graces f , critics praised the gameplay while the presentation received mixed reviews . IGN described the battle system as " a beautiful ebb and flow to each confrontation " while GameSpot considered it to be the most technical and robust system of the Tales series . Electronic Gaming Monthly and Joystiq praised the depth with the latter calling it " an actual challenge instead of mindless button @-@ pressing " . Meanwhile , Game Informer considered the combat to be simple but fun . Critics have also commented on the game 's alchemy system , with IGN calling it " an approachable pursuit " and Joystiq describing it as " unwieldy " due to the amount of collectibles . IGN , Game Informer , GamesRadar , and Game Trailers all criticized the backtracking needed in the game . GameInformer , GameSpot , and Game Trailers commented on the small world , with Game Trailers panning the linear pathways and " invisible walls " which prevent exploration along with the " cut and paste " dungeons . 
 The plot , graphics , and audio have received mixed reviews . The plot and characters have been called cliché by Game Informer , GameSpot , and GamesRadar . Game Informer called the childhood prologue monotonous but commented on the improving story after the time skip . GameSpot agreed , calling the prologue the " weakest part of the story on its own " but " crucial point of reference " which adds depth and eventually breaks away from the cliché . GamesRadar shared the same opinion as GameSpot and praised Richard 's transformation into a villain . As for the graphics , IGN considered them outdated while Joystiq described it as washed @-@ out with jerky movements . For the audio , IGN , Game Informer , and GamesRadar , considered the music underwhelming and the voice acting acceptable . IGN describes the voice acting " works " but some parts suffer from weak script . Game Informer compared the voices to a well @-@ produced anime and GamesRadar considered them fitting for the characters . Meanwhile , Game Trailers criticized the presentation completely , citing the plot as predictable , the characters unengaging , the <unk> flat , animations stiff , <unk> off , forgettable music , and the voice acting as dry . 
 = Disruptive coloration = 
 Disruptive coloration ( also known as disruptive camouflage or disruptive patterning ) is a form of camouflage that works by breaking up the outlines of an animal , soldier or military vehicle with a strongly contrasting pattern . It is often combined with other methods of crypsis including background colour matching and countershading . It appears paradoxical as a way of not being seen , since disruption of outlines depends on high contrast , so the patches of colour are themselves conspicuous . 
 The importance of high @-@ contrast patterns for successful disruption was predicted in general terms by the artist Abbott Thayer in 1909 and explicitly by the zoologist Hugh Cott in 1940 . Later experimental research has started to confirm these predictions . Disruptive patterns work best when all their components match the background . 
 While background matching works best for a single background , disruptive coloration is a more effective strategy when an animal or a military vehicle may have a variety of backgrounds . 
 Conversely , poisonous or distasteful animals that advertise their presence with warning coloration ( aposematism ) use patterns that emphasize rather than disrupt their outlines . For example , skunks , salamanders and monarch butterflies all have high @-@ contrast patterns that display their outlines . 
 = = Early research = = 
 The artist Abbott Handerson Thayer in his 1909 book Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom argued that animals were concealed by a combination of countershading and " ruptive " marks , which together " obliterated " their self @-@ shadowing and their shape . Thayer explained that : 
 Markings ... of whatever sort , tend to obliterate , — to cancel , by their separate and conflicting pattern , the visibility of the details and boundaries of form .... If the bird 's or butterfly 's costume consists of sharply contrasted bold patterns of light and dark , in about equal proportions , its contour will be " broken up " against both light and dark — light failing to show against light , dark against dark . Such is apparently the basal and predominant use of almost all the bolder patterns in animals ' costumes . 
 Hugh Cott 's 1940 book Adaptive Coloration in Animals introduced ideas such as " maximum disruptive contrast " . This uses streaks of boldly contrasting colour , which paradoxically make animals or military vehicles less visible by breaking up their outlines . Cott explains that in ideal conditions , background colour matching together with countershading would " suffice to render an animal absolutely invisible against a plain background " , but at once adds that conditions are hardly ever ideal , as they are constantly changing , as is the light . Therefore , Cott argues , camouflage has to break up the perceived continuous surfaces of an object and its outlines . In Cott 's own words , " for effective concealment , it is essential that the tell @-@ tale appearance of form should be destroyed . " Cott draws an analogy with a pickpocket who carefully distracts your attention , arguing that : 
 The function of a disruptive pattern is to prevent , or to delay as long as possible , the first recognition of an object by sight ... irregular patches of contrasted colours and tones ... tend to catch the eye of the observer and to draw his attention away from the shape which bears them . 
 Further , Cott criticises unscientific attempts at camouflage , early in the Second World War , for not understanding the principles involved : 
 Various recent attempts to camouflage tanks , armoured cars and the roofs of buildings with paint reveal an almost complete failure by those responsible to grasp the essential factor in the disguise of surface continuity and of contour . Such work must be carried out with courage and confidence , for at close range objects properly treated will appear glaringly conspicuous . But they are not painted for deception at close range , but at ranges at which ... bombing raids are likely ... And at these distances differences of tint ... blend and thus nullify the effect and render the work practically useless . 
 The pioneering work of Thayer and Cott is endorsed in the 2006 review of disruptive coloration by Martin Stevens and colleagues , which notes that they proposed a " different form of camouflage " from the traditional " strategy of background matching " proposed by authors such as Alfred Russel Wallace ( Darwinism , 1889 ) , Edward Bagnall Poulton ( The Colours of Animals , 1890 ) and Frank Evers Beddard ( Animal Coloration , 1895 ) ; Stevens observes that background matching on its own would always fail because of " discontinuities between the boundary of the animal and the background " . 
 = = In animals = = 
 Disruptive patterns use strongly contrasting markings such as spots or stripes to break up the outlines of an animal or military vehicle . Some predators , like the leopard , and some potential prey like the Egyptian nightjar , use disruptive patterns . Disruptive patterns are defined by A. Barbosa and colleagues as " characterized by high @-@ contrast light and dark patches , in a <unk> configuration , that also provide camouflage by disrupting the recognizable shape or orientation of the animal " , as in the cuttlefish . 
 The strategy appears paradoxical and counter @-@ intuitive as a method of camouflage , since disrupting outlines depends on using patches of colour which contrast strongly with each other , so the patches are themselves conspicuous . While background matching works best for a single background , disruptive coloration is a more effective strategy when an animal or a military vehicle may have a variety of backgrounds . 
 Martin Stevens and colleagues in 2006 made what they believed was the first experimental test that " disruptive coloration is effective even when some colour patches do not match the background and have a high contrast with both the background and adjacent pattern elements ( disruptive contrast ) " . They used " moth @-@ like targets " , some matching the lightness of the background oak tree bark , other mismatching it , each with a dead mealworm . If the mealworm was removed it was assumed a bird predator had taken it : this could be distinguished from visits by other predators . They found that disruptive coloration provided the best protection from bird predators when the pattern was matched to background luminance , but even when elements in a pattern did not match , disruptive patterns were still better at reducing predation than either non @-@ disruptive patterns or plain ( <unk> ) control targets . 
 Disruptive patterns can also conceal specific features . Animals such as fish , birds , frogs and snakes can readily be detected by their eyes , which are necessarily round and dark . Many species conceal the eye with a stripe that runs through the eye , sometimes contrasting with a stripe above the eye , making it seem just part of a dark area of background . Cott called this a " coincident disruptive pattern " . 
 = = = The opposite case : aposematism = = = 
 Many poisonous or distasteful animals that advertise their presence with warning coloration ( aposematism ) use patterns that emphasize rather than disrupt their outlines . For example , skunks , salamanders and monarch butterflies all have high contrast patterns that display their outlines . These advertising patterns exploit the opposite principle to disruptive coloration , for what is in effect the exactly opposite effect : to make the animal as conspicuous as possible . 
 = = = A disputed case : the giraffe = = = 
 The presence of bold markings does not in itself prove that an animal relies on camouflage . According to Mitchell , adult giraffes are " inescapably conspicuous " , making the conclusion that their patterns are for camouflage appear counterintuitive : but when standing among trees and bushes , their camouflage is effective at even a few metres ' distance . 
 Further , young giraffes are much more vulnerable to predation than adults : between 60 % and 75 % of calves die within a year . Mothers hide their calves , which spend much of the time lying down in cover . Since the presence of a mother does not affect survival , Mitchell suggests that young giraffes must be extremely well camouflaged . This is supported by the fact that coat markings are strongly inherited . Conversely , far from hiding , adult giraffes move about to gain the best view of an approaching predator , relying on their size and ability to defend themselves even from lions . 
 = = = Other ways of hiding outlines = = = 
 The outlines of an animal 's body can be made hard to see by other methods , such as by using a highly irregular outline . For example , the Comma butterfly , <unk> c @-@ album , is highly cryptic when its wings are closed , with cryptic colours , disruptive pattern , and irregular outer margins to the wings . 
 = = Military usage = = 
 Disruptive coloration is common in military usage , for military vehicles , for firing positions and other installations , and for individual soldiers , where uniforms , equipment such as helmets , and face paint may be used to break up outlines and features . Disruptive coloration , however , does not always achieve crypsis on its own , as an animal or a military target may be given away by other factors including shape , shine , and shadow . 
 Many military camouflage patterns since the 1940s have been disruptively coloured , and with the issue of US Woodland pattern to United States armed forces from 1981 , disruptive pattern became a dominant feature of military uniforms . From 1969 , Disruptive Pattern Material ( DPM ) began to replace plain material for uniforms in the British Armed Forces and was later used by many other armies . 
 = = = Challenges = = = 
