 Actress Anna Torv called the episode 's hotel scene her favorite of the show so far , explaining " I loved shooting that because it was the first time that Olivia really inched her way into that dynamic of Peter and Walter . She ’ s been kind of on the outside , and wrangling them constantly , but this gave me a glimpse into realizing everything is a little bit entwined , and building more of that emotional conflict between them . I really loved shooting that . " 
 The final scene of the episode ended with a tape of a young Olivia in a fire @-@ damaged room , leading to rumors her character was a fire starter . Torv however discounted this soon after , explaining " I think it 's more than that ... I think what they got given or what they got taught is much bigger than just starting fire " . Jeff Pinkner agreed and elaborated further , " We saw the consequence . We saw that she started a fire at the end of the last episode , but I think it 's a mistake to assume that that 's her power . I think the truth is , it 's probably a consequence of her ability " . This particular scene , as well as the episode 's reference to experiments Walter performed on children , comprise the main plot of the season three episode " Subject 13 " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The episode was watched by more than 9 @.@ 89 million viewers in the United States , with a 5 @.@ 9 / 9 rating among all households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Noel Murray from A.V. Club graded the episode with an A- ; he praised the " fine job " of director / writer Akiva Goldsman , and thought the climax was " extraordinarily well @-@ shot and performed " . IGN 's Ramsey Isler rated the episode 9 @.@ 2 / 10 , writing that it " is a classic example of a story you have to be patient with . This was an episode with a compelling , shocking start that kept us hooked well enough to deal with some slow points in the rest of the first half @-@ hour . But we were rewarded for our patience with one heck of a climax and epilogue . This was well @-@ executed TV " . Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times thought that while the first half wasn 't very exciting , the second half had " plenty to keep up interest " as more was revealed about Olivia and Walter 's backgrounds . 
 Rhee Dee of Pinkraygun.com liked the scenes depicting Olivia and Broyles ' relationship , as well as the revelations behind the experimentation on a young Olivia , and thought the Fox promos made the episode look much lamer than it actually <unk> io9 's Annalee Newitz loved the " great , creepy " opening scene , the arc concerning Walter 's past experimentation on children , and the " well @-@ played , funny and strange " scene when " Olivia " goes to the strip club . Though a bit disappointed with the " conspiracy " story , <unk> 's Sarah Stegall nevertheless called the episode " well @-@ crafted , " enjoyed the Peter @-@ Olivia moments , praised Torv 's performance , and said Akiva Goldsman " gave us an episode built like a slow fuse : tightly wound , coiling out of sight , and finishing big . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Director @-@ writer Akiva Goldsman submitted the episode for consideration in the Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series category at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards , but did not receive a nomination . 
 = Ontario Highway 74 = 
 King 's Highway 74 , commonly referred to as Highway 74 , was a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that travelled north from Highway 3 at New Sarum to <unk> County Road 29 ( Hamilton Road ) on the outskirts of London . The 22 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 9 mi ) was assumed by the province in September 1937 . Aside from paving and the construction of an interchange with Highway 401 , it remained generally unchanged for the next six decades until it was decommissioned in 1997 and transferred to Elgin County and Middlesex County . The road has since been redesignated as Elgin County Road 74 and <unk> County Road 74 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 74 began at an intersection with Highway 3 in the community of New Sarum , midway between the city of St. Thomas to the west , and the town of Aylmer to the east . It crossed the St. Thomas and Eastern Railway just north of Highway 3 before curving to cross the West Catfish Creek , which it meandered alongside into Mapleton . Immediately north of that community , the route curved to the north and was straight for the remainder of its route . The highway continued , entering the village of Belmont , where it intersected a Canadian Pacific Railway line . North of there it crossed the boundary between Elgin County to the south and Middlesex County to the north . North of the county line , Highway 74 continued into the community of Derwent . Shortly thereafter , it crossed and interchanged with Highway 401 at Exit 195 . The highway ended just north of Highway 401 in <unk> at an intersection with Middlesex County Road 29 ( Hamilton Road ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 74 was established in mid @-@ 1937 when the New Sarum to Dorchester Road was designated by the Department of Highways ( DHO ) , the predecessor to the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) . The section within Elgin County was assumed by the DHO on August 25 , 1937 , while the section within Middlesex County was assumed one week later on September 1 . Originally an unpaved gravel road , the route was paved between Belmont and its northern terminus by 1938 . The remainder of the route was paved in 1952 . Otherwise , the route remained generally unchanged for six decades until March 31 , 1997 , when it was decommissioned in its entirety and transferred to Elgin County and Middlesex County . It has since been known as Elgin County Road 74 and Middlesex County Road 74 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 74 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Earthling ( Fringe ) = 
 " Earthling " is the sixth episode of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe 's second season . The episode followed the Fringe team 's investigation into random people mysteriously disintegrating into ash , a case which Agent Broyles had become deeply obsessed with in the past . 
 It was co @-@ written by J.H. Wyman and Jeff Vlaming , while Jon Cassar served as the director . The episode first aired on November 5 , 2009 in the United States on the Fox network . An estimated 4 @.@ 86 million viewers tuned in , contributing to a new ratings low for the series . The episode received generally mixed reviews , though multiple reviewers highlighted the episode 's special effects . The VFX production team received a nomination at the 8th Annual Visual Effects Society Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A Boston man ( Joe Towne ) is attacked by a shadowy , ghost @-@ like figure ; his wife ( Michelle Harrison ) returns home to find he disintegrates into ash upon being touched . After learning all of the victims had recently visited a hospital before dying , Agent Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) explains the case is similar to one he had trouble with in the past , in which his obsessive behavior effectively ended his marriage to his wife Diane . The suspect , an Eastern European man , had contacted him four years ago sounding distraught and asked him to figure out a special formula , which Broyles was unable to solve . Walter ( John Noble ) and Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) study the victim 's remains at their lab and begin studying the formula given to Broyles . 
 Several more people are attacked and reduced to ash . A search of Eastern European employees leads them to Russian night nurse Tomas ( Ravil Isyanov ) , but he is gone when they search his apartment . Despite being ordered to end the investigation and that the suspect is wanted by the Russian government and the CIA , Broyles tells Olivia ( Anna Torv ) to continue the case . Walter posits the entity needs radiation , and chooses its victims based on their exposure levels . They learn that Tomas stole his comatose brother , a former cosmonaut , and has been moving him around to both protect him and contain the entity . Fearing capture , Tomas removes his brother from the hospital ; Walter speculates that the cosmonaut brought the entity back with him upon returning from space . Walter is finally able to solve the formula , and Broyles sadly tells Tomas over the phone that his brother and the entity cannot be separated . However , during their conversation , the entity escapes his brother 's body and kills Tomas . The Fringe team is able to trace the call , and Broyles shoots the host ( Tomas ' brother ) in the head to stop the entity from attacking another victim . 
 At the end of the episode , a mysterious CIA agent ( J. R. Bourne ) approaches Broyles and tells him to not report the case . He reveals the cosmonaut resurrected itself , and it is implied to have been sent into space , " wherever it came from " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 The episode was co @-@ written by executive producer J.H. Wyman and supervising producer Jeff Vlaming , while 24 veteran , Jon Cassar , directed the hour . On August 14 , 2009 , he posted " rough drawn " storyboards of the episode on Twitter . The episode remains Cassar 's first and only directional credit for the series to date . 
 The episode was filmed in mid @-@ September 2009 in Vancouver . Due to the Russian lettering on many of the episode props , director Cassar joked during shooting , " Can we get a translator and find out what this writing means , specifically ? Maybe it says ' Do not open until Christmas ' or ' Watch The Simpsons on Sunday night , ' knowing Fox . " To create the episode 's auditory effects , sound editor Bruce Tanis explained his production steps in an interview with Designing Sound , " ' Earthling ' was a really good episode for strange sounds . It starts out with the appearance of a smoke monster that kills its victims by enveloping them and leaving behind an exact life @-@ like looking corpse only the body is made of ash which crumbles horribly when touched . The smoke creature moved rapidly as opposed to gently drifting so I had some movement to play off of in creating a sound for him . I came up with some stuttering , fluttery whooshes that kind of vibrated which made him more dangerous than if he sounded like a puff of steam moving along the hall . The smoke monster requires a host body to live in when he 's not vibrating around killing people . The only way to recall the smoke monster to the host body , or to keep him there in the first place , is by severe electrical shock . " 
 Visual effects supervisor Jay Worth found inspiration for the ash storyline from holding his grandmother @-@ in @-@ law 's hands while at her funeral . He noted during production , " The Ash Man definitely had its own set of challenges , because we wanted to utilize a lot of real elements , and because we didn 't have the time to do all the simulation and particle work needed to make it look real . The thing that sold The Ash Man more than anything was the aftermath shot : This half @-@ disintegrated body with a pile of ash for the head on the ground . It ended up being a layering , compositing , tweaking challenge beyond belief . I got to shoot the elements myself and had more control over them . " 
 Another VFX supervisor from Zoic Studios , Andrew Orloff , believed the episode 's special effects were possibly the most difficult of the season . He wrote , " Originally , it was supposed to be a practical effect but they couldn 't get it to fall in a natural way , so what we had to do was shoot the practical elements in pieces and we put them all together and timed all those plates and ended up rebuilding a significant part of it and tying it all together in CG . So we took a <unk> of the guy 's body , and on top of all the practical elements we used as a base , we had a matte painting , a reveal matte painting of the cracks that ran through the body , 3D particles of large chunks of ash falling out , 3D particles of small ash bits floating down , residual dust flying off of it and , at one point , his head falls off and crashes to the ground as ash . So we had to do a full @-@ CG head and tumble it down the body . That was pretty complicated and entailed lots of R & D : there was 2D work in After Effects , tracking , <unk> , we did a lot of CG lighting for the body parts in Maya / mental ray and all of the particles were a combination of Maya software , and rendered in Maya / mental ray . " 
 = = = Casting and audio = = = 
 Guest actor Gerard Plunkett made the first of two appearances as Senator James Van Horn ( the second would be a season three episode ) . Other guest stars included Ravil Isyanov , J. R. Bourne , Joe Towne , Michelle Harrison , and Yaroslav <unk> . Karen Holness made her first guest appearance of the series playing Broyles ' ex @-@ wife Diane . 
 In addition to its original score , " Earthling " featured musical content from several outside artists . These songs included " Freezing " by American singer MoZella , " Straighten Up and Fly Right " by American musician Nat King Cole , and " Una <unk> <unk> " by American tenor Mario Lanza . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The episode was first broadcast on November 5 , 2009 after a two @-@ week hiatus . " Earthling " was watched by an estimated 4 @.@ 86 million viewers in the United States . It earned a 3 @.@ 0 / 5 household rating and a 1 @.@ 7 / 4 ratings share for adults aged 18 – 49 . With a 23 percent ratings decline from the previous episode and a 40 percent decline from the first season , this was a new series low for Fringe , which some media outlets attributed to the unexpected early end of the 2009 World Series . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 MTV columnist Josh Wigler was disappointed with the presumed alien storyline and believed it to be a " weak episode " . Despite liking actor Lance Reddick , Wigler was displeased with his character 's increased screentime , believing Broyles works better as an " enigmatic figure " . Wigler did however praise the villain 's " murderous method of choice " , writing " Those who 've read my Fringe reviews know that I 'm not big on the mystery @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week element , but I have to give this episode some credit for at least making it look good . " IGN 's Ramsey Isler rated the episode 8 @.@ 0 / 10 , noting the " great work " done with the CGI and props while at the same time acknowledging the opening was not " particularly exciting " . Isler praised Reddick 's performance , but continued " besides the Broyles characterization , this episode kind of fell flat . The plot unfolds slowly , and the first sixty percent of this episode is kind of a <unk> . The only things that really spice up the story are Walter 's antics ( which are very amusing , as usual ) . The monster of the week , an alien stowing away in a Russian cosmonaut 's body , isn 't all that scary or even malevolent ( it 's just trying to stay alive by feeding on radiation ) . " 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Noel Murray graded " Earthling " with a B. Unlike Isler , the A.V. Club reviewer loved the opening , calling it " one of Fringe 's most effective freak @-@ meets " . Murray continued that he believed the episode to be " an efficient action / adventure / horror hour , heavy on suspenseful moments and neat effects , light on character development and progress on the master @-@ plot . When all is said and done and Fringe eventually ends its run , I 'm betting that a newcomer will be able to skip ' Earthling ' without putting a dent in their overall understanding of the show . But that doesn 't mean it wasn 't still cool to see people get reduced to dust right in front of our eyes . Jane Boursaw from AOL TV responded negatively to the episode , wishing it had not been yet another " stand @-@ alone creature feature " . While praising the special effects , Boursaw expressed disinterest in learning more about Broyles and compared the Fringe case to something already done in The X @-@ Files . She concluded , " Take the creepy alien factor out of it , and this could have been any other police procedural " . UGO Networks reviewer Alex Zalben also noted similarities to The X @-@ Files , writing that " the reason [ the episode ] is weird for Fringe is that , <unk> evidence aside , they ’ ve been very careful to avoid the overarching alien mythology X @-@ Files is famous for . Oops . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The crew responsible for the episode 's visual effects , VFX supervisors Jay Worth , Robert <unk> , and Andrew <unk> , and Visual Effects Artist Eric Hance , succeeded in gaining a nomination for their work . " Earthling " was nominated in the " Visual effects in a broadcast series " category at the 8th Annual Visual Effects Society Awards , but lost to the fourth season finale of the science fiction series Battlestar Galactica . 
 = Cranial nerves = 
 Cranial nerves are the nerves that emerge directly from the brain ( including the brainstem ) , in contrast to spinal nerves ( which emerge from segments of the spinal cord ) . Cranial nerves relay information between the brain and parts of the body , primarily to and from regions of the head and neck . 
 Spinal nerves emerge sequentially from the spinal cord with the spinal nerve closest to the head ( C1 ) emerging in the space above the first cervical vertebra . The cranial nerves , however , emerge from the central nervous system above this level . Each cranial nerve is paired and is present on both sides . Depending on definition in humans there are twelve or thirteen cranial nerves pairs , which are assigned Roman numerals I – XII , sometimes also including cranial nerve zero . The numbering of the cranial nerves is based on the order in which they emerge from the brain , front to back ( brainstem ) . 
 The terminal nerves , olfactory nerves ( I ) and optic nerves ( II ) emerge from the cerebrum or forebrain , and the remaining ten pairs arise from the brainstem , which is the lower part of the brain . 
 The cranial nerves are considered components of the peripheral nervous system ( PNS ) , although on a structural level the olfactory , optic and terminal nerves are more accurately considered part of the central nervous system ( CNS ) . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 Most typically , humans are considered to have twelve pairs of cranial nerves ( I – XII ) . They are : the olfactory nerve ( I ) , the optic nerve ( II ) , oculomotor nerve ( III ) , trochlear nerve ( IV ) , trigeminal nerve ( V ) , abducens nerve ( VI ) , facial nerve ( VII ) , vestibulocochlear nerve ( VIII ) , glossopharyngeal nerve ( IX ) , vagus nerve ( X ) , accessory nerve ( XI ) , and hypoglossal nerve ( XII ) . ( There may be a thirteenth cranial nerve , the terminal nerve ( nerve O or N ) , which is very small and may or may not be functional in humans ) 
 = = = Terminology = = = 
 Cranial nerves are generally named according to their structure or function . For example , the olfactory nerve ( I ) supplies smell , and the facial nerve ( VII ) supplies motor innervation to the face . Because Latin was the lingua franca ( common language ) of the study of Anatomy when the nerves were first documented , recorded , and discussed , many nerves maintain Latin or Greek names , including the trochlear nerve ( IV ) , named according to its structure , as it supplies a muscle that attaches to a pulley ( Greek : trochlea ) . The trigeminal nerve ( V ) is named in accordance with its three components ( Latin : tri @-@ <unk> meaning triplets ) , and the vagus nerve ( X ) is named for its wandering course ( Latin : vagus ) . 
 Cranial nerves are numbered based on their rostral @-@ caudal ( front @-@ back ) position , when viewing the brain . If the brain is carefully removed from the skull the nerves are typically visible in their numeric order . 
 Cranial nerves have paths within and outside of the skull . The paths within the skull are called " intracranial " and the paths outside the skull are called " extracranial " . There are many holes in the skull called " foramina " by which the nerves can exit the skull . All cranial nerves are paired , which means that they occur on both the right and left sides of the body . The muscle , skin , or additional function supplied by a nerve on the same side of the body as the side it originates from , is referred to an ipsilateral function . If the function is on the opposite side to the origin of the nerve , this is known as a contralateral function . 
 = = = Intracranial course = = = 
 = = = = Nuclei = = = = 
 The cell bodies of many of the neurons of most of the cranial nerves are contained in one or more nuclei in the brainstem . These nuclei are important relative to cranial nerve dysfunction because damage to these nuclei such as from a stroke or trauma can mimic damage to one or more branches of a cranial nerve . In terms of specific cranial nerve nuclei , the midbrain of the brainstem has the nuclei of the oculomotor nerve ( III ) and trochlear nerve ( IV ) ; the pons has the nuclei of the trigeminal nerve ( V ) , abducens nerve ( VI ) , facial nerve ( VII ) and vestibulocochlear nerve ( VIII ) ; and the medulla has the nuclei of the glossopharyngeal nerve ( IX ) , vagus nerve ( X ) , accessory nerve ( XI ) and hypoglossal nerve ( XII ) . The fibers of these cranial nerves exit the brainstem from these nuclei . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Some of the cranial nerves have sensory or parasympathetic ganglia ( collections of cell bodies ) of neurons , which are located outside of the brain ( but can be inside or outside of the skull ) . 
 The sensory ganglia are directly correspondent to dorsal root ganglia of spinal nerves and are known as cranial sensory ganglia . Sensory ganglia exist for nerves with sensory function : V , VII , VIII , IX , X. There are also parasympathetic ganglia , which are part of the autonomic nervous system for cranial nerves III , VII , IX and X. 
 The trigeminal ganglia of the trigeminal nerve ( V ) occupies a space in the dura mater called Trigeminal cave . This ganglion contains the cell bodies of the sensory fibers of the three branches of the trigeminal nerve . 
 The geniculate ganglion of the facial nerve ( VII ) is found just after the nerve enters the facial canal ; it contains the cell bodies of the sensory fibers of the facial nerve . 
 Superior and inferior ganglia of the glossopharyngeal nerve ( IX ) , are located just after the nerve passes through the jugular foramen and contain the cell bodies of the sensory fibers of this nerve . 
 inferior ganglion of vagus nerve ( <unk> ganglion ) is located below the jugular foramen and contains the cell bodies of the sensory fibers of the vagus nerve ( X ) . 
 = = = = Exiting the skull and <unk> Course = = = = 
 After emerging from the brain , the cranial nerves travel within the skull , and some must leave this bony compartment in order to reach their destinations . Often the nerves pass through holes in the skull , called foramina , as they travel to their destinations . Other nerves pass through bony canals , longer pathways enclosed by bone . These foramina and canals may contain more than one cranial nerve , and may also contain blood vessels . 
 The olfactory nerve ( I ) , actually composed of many small separate nerve fibers , passes through perforations in the <unk> plate part of the <unk> bone . These fibers terminate in the upper part of the nasal cavity and function to convey impulses containing information about odors to the brain . 
 The optic nerve ( II ) passes through the optic foramen in the sphenoid bone as it travels to the eye . It conveys visual information to the brain . 
 The oculomotor nerve ( III ) , trochlear nerve ( IV ) , abducens nerve ( VI ) and the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve ( V1 ) travel through the cavernous sinus into the superior orbital fissure , passing out of the skull into the orbit . These nerves control the small muscles that move the eye and also provide sensory innervation to the eye and orbit . 
 The maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve ( V2 ) passes through foramen rotundum in the sphenoid bone to supply the skin of the middle of the face . 
 The mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve ( V3 ) passes through foramen ovale of the sphenoid bone to supply the lower face with sensory innervation . This nerve also sends branches to almost all of the muscles that control chewing . 
 The facial nerve ( VII ) and vestibulocochlear nerve ( VIII ) both enter the internal auditory canal in the temporal bone . The facial nerve then reaches the side of the face by using the stylomastoid foramen , also in the temporal bone . Its fibers then spread out to reach and control all of the muscles of facial expression . The vestibulocochlear nerve reaches the organs that control balance and hearing in the temporal bone , and therefore does not reach the external surface of the skull . 
 The glossopharyngeal ( IX ) , vagus ( X ) and accessory nerve ( XI ) all leave the skull via the jugular foramen to enter the neck . The glossopharyngeal nerve provides innervation to the upper throat and the back of the tongue , the vagus provides innervation to the muscles in the voicebox , and continues downward to supply parasympathetic innervation to the chest and abdomen . The accessory nerve controls two muscles in the neck and shoulder . 
 The hypoglossal nerve ( XII ) exits the skull using the hypoglossal canal in the occipital bone and reaches the tongue to control almost all of the muscles involved in movements of this organ . 
 = = Function = = 
 The cranial nerves provide motor and sensory innervation mainly to the structures within the head and neck . The sensory innervation includes both " general " sensation such as temperature and touch , and " special " innervation such as taste , vision , smell , balance and hearing 
 The vagus nerve ( X ) provides sensory and autonomic ( <unk> ) motor innervation to structures in the neck and also to most of the organs in the chest and abdomen . 
 = = = Smell ( I ) = = = 
 The olfactory nerve ( I ) conveys the sense of smell . 
 Damage to the olfactory nerve ( I ) can cause an inability to smell ( anosmia ) , a distortion in the sense of smell ( <unk> ) , or a distortion or lack of taste . If there is suspicion of a change in the sense of smell , each nostril is tested with substances of known odors such as coffee or soap . Intensely smelling substances , for example ammonia , may lead to the activation of pain receptors ( <unk> ) of the trigeminal nerve that are located in the nasal cavity and this can confound olfactory testing . 
 = = = Vision ( II ) = = = 
 The optic nerve ( II ) transmits visual information . 
 Damage to the optic nerve ( II ) affects specific aspects of vision that depend on the location of the lesion . A person may not be able to see objects on their left or right sides ( homonymous hemianopsia ) , or may have difficulty seeing objects on their outer visual fields ( <unk> hemianopsia ) if the optic chiasm is involved . Vision may be tested by examining the visual field , or by examining the retina with an ophthalmoscope , using a process known as <unk> . Visual field testing may be used to pin @-@ point structural lesions in the optic nerve , or further along the visual pathways . 
 = = = Eye movement ( III , IV , VI ) = = = 
 The oculomotor nerve ( III ) , trochlear nerve ( IV ) and abducens nerve ( VI ) coordinate eye movement . 
 Damage to nerves III , IV , or VI may affect the movement of the eyeball ( globe ) . Both or one eye may be affected ; in either case double vision ( diplopia ) will likely occur because the movements of the eyes are no longer synchronized . Nerves III , IV and VI are tested by observing how the eye follows an object in different directions . This object may be a finger or a pin , and may be moved at different directions to test for pursuit velocity . If the eyes do not work together , the most likely cause is damage to a specific cranial nerve or its nuclei . 
 Damage to the oculomotor nerve ( III ) can cause double vision ( diplopia ) and inability to coordinate the movements of both eyes ( strabismus ) , also eyelid drooping ( ptosis ) and pupil dilation ( mydriasis ) . Lesions may also lead to inability to open the eye due to paralysis of the levator <unk> muscle . Individuals suffering from a lesion to the oculomotor nerve may compensate by tilting their heads to alleviate symptoms due to paralysis of one or more of the eye muscles it controls . 
 Damage to the trochlear nerve ( IV ) can also cause diplopia with the eye <unk> and elevated . The result will be an eye which can not move downwards properly ( especially downwards when in an inward position ) . This is due to impairment in the superior oblique muscle , which is innervated by the trochlear nerve . 
 Damage to the abducens nerve ( VI ) can also result in diplopia . This is due to impairment in the lateral rectus muscle , which is innervated by the abducens nerve . 
 = = = Trigeminal Nerve ( V ) = = = 
 The trigeminal nerve ( V ) is composed of three distinct parts : The <unk> ( V1 ) , the Maxillary ( V2 ) , and the <unk> ( V3 ) nerves . Combined , these nerves provide sensation to the skin of the face and also controls the muscles of mastication ( chewing ) . Conditions affecting the trigeminal nerve ( V ) include trigeminal neuralgia , cluster headache , and trigeminal zoster . Trigeminal neuralgia occurs later in life , from middle age onwards , most often after age 60 , and is a condition typically associated with very strong pain distributed over the area innervated by the maxillary or mandibular nerve divisions of the trigeminal nerve ( V2 and V3 ) . 
 = = = Facial expression ( VII ) = = = 
 Lesions of the facial nerve ( VII ) may manifest as facial palsy . This is where a person is unable to move the muscles on one or both sides of their face . A very common and generally temporarily facial palsy is known as Bell 's palsy . Bell 's Palsy is the result of an idiopathic ( unknown ) , unilateral lower motor neuron lesion of the facial nerve and is characterized by an inability to move the ipsilateral muscles of facial expression , including elevation of the eyebrow and furrowing of the forehead . Patients with Bell 's palsy often have a drooping mouth on the affected side and often have trouble chewing because the buccinator muscle is affected . 
 = = = Hearing and balance ( VIII ) = = = 
 The vestibulocochlear nerve ( VIII ) splits into the vestibular and cochlear nerve . The vestibular part is responsible for innervating the vestibules and semicircular canal of the inner ear ; this structure transmits information about balance , and is an important component of the <unk> reflex , which keeps the head stable and allows the eyes to track moving objects . The cochlear nerve transmits information from the cochlea , allowing sound to be heard . 
 When damaged , the vestibular nerve may give rise to the sensation of spinning and dizziness . Function of the vestibular nerve may be tested by putting cold and warm water in the ears and watching eye movements caloric stimulation . Damage to the vestibulocochlear nerve can also present as repetitive and involuntary eye movements ( nystagmus ) , particularly when looking in a horizontal plane . Damage to the cochlear nerve will cause partial or complete deafness in the affected ear . 
 = = = Oral sensation , taste , and salivation ( IX ) = = = 
 The glossopharyngeal nerve ( IX ) <unk> the <unk> muscle and provides sensory innervation to the oropharynx and back of the tongue . The glossopharyngeal nerve also provides parasympathetic innervation to the parotid gland . Unilateral absence of a gag reflex suggests a lesion of the glossopharyngeal nerve ( IX ) , and perhaps the vagus nerve ( X ) . 
 = = = <unk> nerve ( X ) = = = 
 Loss of function of the vagus nerve ( X ) will lead to a loss of parasympathetic innervation to a very large number of structures . Major effects of damage to the vagus nerve may include a rise in blood pressure and heart rate . Isolated dysfunction of only the vagus nerve is rare , but can be diagnosed by a hoarse voice , due to dysfunction of one of its branches , the recurrent laryngeal nerve . 
 Damage to this nerve may result in difficulties swallowing . 
 = = = Shoulder elevation and head @-@ turning ( XI ) = = = 
 Damage to the accessory nerve ( XI ) will lead to ipsilateral weakness in the <unk> muscle . This can be tested by asking the subject to raise their shoulders or shrug , upon which the shoulder blade ( scapula ) will protrude into a winged position . Additionally , if the nerve is damaged , weakness or an inability to elevate the scapula may be present because the levator scapulae muscle is now solely able to provide this function . Depending on the location of the lesion there may also be weakness present in the <unk> muscle , which acts to turn the head so that the face points to the opposite side . 
 = = = Tongue movement ( XII ) = = = 
 The hypoglossal nerve ( XII ) is unique in that it is innervated from both the motor cortex of both hemispheres of the brain . Damage to the nerve at lower motor neuron level may lead to fasciculations or atrophy of the muscles of the tongue . The fasciculations of the tongue are sometimes said to look like a " bag of worms " . Upper motor neuron damage will not lead to atrophy or fasciculations , but only weakness of the innervated muscles . 
 When the nerve is damaged , it will lead to weakness of tongue movement on one side . When damaged and extended , the tongue will move towards the weaker or damaged side , as shown in the image . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 = = = Examination = = = 
 Physicians , neurologists , and other medical professionals may conduct a cranial nerve examination as part of a neurological examination to examine the functionality of the cranial nerves . This is a highly formalized series of tests that assess the status of each nerve . A cranial nerve exam begins with observation of the patient because some cranial nerve lesions may affect the symmetry of the eyes or face . The visual fields are tested for nerve lesions or nystagmus via an analysis of specific eye movements . The sensation of the face is tested , and patients are asked to perform different facial movements , such as puffing out of the cheeks . Hearing is checked by voice and tuning forks . The position of the patient 's uvula is examined because asymmetry in the position could indicate a lesion of the glossopharyngeal nerve . After the ability of the patient to use their shoulder to assess the accessory nerve ( XI ) , and the patient 's tongue function is assessed by observing various tongue movements . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 = = = = Compression = = = = 
 Nerves may be compressed because of increased <unk> pressure , a mass effect of an intracerebral haemorrhage , or tumour that presses against the nerves and interferes with the transmission of impulses along the nerve . A loss of functionality of a single cranial nerve may sometimes be the first symptom of an intracranial or skull base cancer . 
 An increase in intracranial pressure may lead to impairment of the optic nerves ( II ) due to compression of the surrounding veins and capillaries , causing swelling of the eyeball ( papilloedema ) . A cancer , such as an optic glioma , may also impact the optic nerve ( II ) . A pituitary tumour may compress the optic tracts or the optic chiasm of the optic nerve ( II ) , leading to visual field loss . A pituitary tumour may also extend into the cavernous sinus , compressing the <unk> nerve ( III ) , trochlear nerve ( IV ) and abducens nerve ( VI ) , leading to double @-@ vision and strabismus . These nerves may also be affected by herniation of the temporal lobes of the brain through the falx cerebri . 
 The cause of trigeminal neuralgia , in which one side of the face is exquisitely painful , is thought to be compression of the nerve by an artery as the nerve emerges from the brain stem . An acoustic neuroma , particularly at the junction between the pons and medulla , may compress the facial nerve ( VII ) and vestibulocochlear nerve ( VIII ) , leading to hearing and sensory loss on the affected side . 
 = = = = Stroke = = = = 
 <unk> of blood vessels that supply the nerves or their nuclei , an ischemic stroke , may cause specific signs and symptoms that can localise where the occlusion occurred . A clot in a blood vessel draining the cavernous sinus ( cavernous sinus thrombosis ) affects the oculomotor ( III ) , trochlear ( IV ) , <unk> branch of the trigeminal nerve ( V1 ) and the abducens nerve ( VI ) . 
 = = = = Inflammation = = = = 
 Inflammation resulting from infection may impair the function of any of the cranial nerves . Inflammation of the facial nerve ( VII ) may result in Bell 's palsy . 
 Multiple sclerosis , an inflammatory process that may produce a loss of the myelin sheathes which surround the cranial nerves , may cause a variety of shifting symptoms affecting multiple cranial nerves . 
 = = = = Other = = = = 
 Trauma to the skull , disease of bone such as Paget 's disease , and injury to nerves during neurosurgery ( such as tumor removal ) are other possible causes of cranial nerve damage . 
 = = History = = 
 Galen ( AD 129 @-@ 210 ) named seven pairs of cranial nerves . Much later , in 1664 , Sir Thomas Willis suggested that there were actually 10 pairs of nerves . Finally , in 1778 , <unk> described the 12 pairs of nerves that are generally accepted today . However , because many of the nerves emerge from the brain stem as rootlets , there is continual debate as to how many nerves there actually are , and how they should be grouped . There is reason to consider both the olfactory ( I ) and Optic ( II ) nerves to be brain tracts , rather than cranial nerves . Further , the very small terminal nerve ( nerve N or O ) exists in humans but may not be functional . In other animals , it appears to be important to sexual receptivity based on perceptions of <unk> 
 = = Other animals = = 
 Cranial nerves are also present in other vertebrates . Other amniotes ( non @-@ amphibian tetrapods ) have cranial nerves similar to those of humans . In <unk> ( fishes and amphibians ) , the accessory nerve ( XI ) and hypoglossal nerve ( XII ) do not exist , with the accessory nerve ( XI ) being an integral part of the vagus nerve ( X ) ; the hypoglossal nerve ( XII ) is represented by a variable number of spinal nerves emerging from vertebral segments fused into the occiput . These two nerves only became discrete nerves in the ancestors of amniotes ( non @-@ amphibian tetrapods ) . 
 = Doris Stevens = 
 Doris Stevens ( October 26 , 1888 – March 22 , 1963 ) was an American suffragist , woman 's legal rights advocate and author . She was the first female member of the American Institute of International Law and first chairman of the Inter @-@ American Commission of Women . 
 Born in 1888 in Omaha , Nebraska , Stevens became involved in the fight for suffrage while a college student at Oberlin College . After graduating with a degree in sociology in 1911 , she taught briefly before becoming a paid regional organizer for the National American Woman Suffrage Association 's Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage ( CUWS ) . When the CUWS broke from the parent organization in 1914 , Stevens became the national strategist . She was in charge of coordinating the women 's congress , held at the Panama Pacific Exposition in 1915 . When the CUWS became the National Woman 's Party ( NWP ) in 1916 , Stevens organized party delegates for each of the 435 Congressional Districts in an effort to attain national women 's enfranchisement and defeat candidates who were opposed to women 's rights . Between 1917 and 1919 , Stevens was a prominent participant in the Silent Sentinels vigil at Woodrow Wilson 's White House to urge the passage of a constitutional amendment for women 's voting rights and was arrested several times for her involvement . After the 19th Amendment secured women 's right to vote , she wrote a book , titled Jailed for Freedom ( 1920 ) , which recounted the sentinel 's ordeals . 
 Once the right to vote was secured , Stevens turned her attention to women 's legal status . She supported passage of the Equal Rights Amendment and worked with Alice Paul from 1927 – 1933 on a volume of work comparing varying impact on law for women and men . The goal in compiling the data was to obtain an international law protecting women 's right of citizenship . The research was completed with the help of feminists in 90 countries and evaluated laws controlling women 's nationality from every country . Gaining approval for the work from the League of Nations in 1927 , Stevens presented the proposal Pan American Union in 1928 , convincing the governing body to create the Inter @-@ American Commission of Women ( CIM ) . In 1931 , she joined the American Institute of International Law , becoming its first female member . In 1933 , her work resulted in the first treaty to secure international rights for women . The Convention on the Nationality of Women established that women retained their citizenship after marriage and Convention on Nationality provided that neither marriage nor divorce could affect the nationality of the members of a family , extending citizenship protection to children . 
 <unk> from the CIM in 1938 , and the NWP in 1947 over policy disputes , Stevens became vice president of the Lucy Stone League in 1951 , of which she had been a member since the 1920s . She fought the roll @-@ back of policies removing the gains women had made to enter the work force during World War II and worked to establish feminism as an academic field of study . She continued fighting for feminist causes until her death in 1963 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dora Caroline Stevens was born on October 26 , 1888 in Omaha , Nebraska to Caroline D. ( née Koopman ) and Henry <unk> Stevens . Her father was a pastor of the Dutch Reformed Church for forty years and her mother was a first generation immigrant from Holland . One of four children , Stevens grew up in Omaha and graduated in 1905 from Omaha High School . She went on to further her education graduating from Oberlin College in 1911 with a degree in sociology , though she had originally pursued music . While in college , she was known for her romances and for being a spirited suffragette . Her unruly behavior and disdain for feminine propriety were cultivated during her college years . After graduation , Stevens worked as a music teacher and social worker in Ohio , <unk> and Montana before moving to Washington , D.C. , where she became a regional organizer with the National American Woman Suffrage Association ( NAWSA ) . 
 = = Suffrage = = 
 In 1913 , Stevens arrived in Washington to take part in the June picketing of the Senate . She did not plan to stay , but Alice Paul convinced her to do so . She was hired by the NAWSA , and was assigned to the newly formed Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage ( CUWS ) , which had been created by Alice Paul and Mary Ritter Beard . At that time , the Congressional Union was a subdivision of the NAWSA , though it operated independently . Stevens was hired to serve as executive secretary in Washington , D. C. , as well as serve as regional organizer and was assigned the eastern district . Paul had divided the nation into quadrants of twelve states each and assigned Stevens to the eastern area , Mabel Vernon to the middle west , Anne Martin to the far west , and Maud Younger to the south . The regional organizers were tasked with educating groups about the suffrage bills that were in Congress and garnering support from each state for ratifying national suffrage . Rather than follow the previous strategy of achieving enfranchisement on a state @-@ by @-@ state basis , the Congressional Union Strategy was full federal approval . This issue , caused a rift in the suffrage movement at the 1913 Convention , causing Paul and her supporters to break ties with the NAWSA and become an independent organization . 
 With the fissure , the Congressional Union began a reorganization to push for campaigns against Democratic candidates because they had not supported suffrage while they were in control of the legislature . Paul established an all @-@ woman advisory council of suffrage workers and prominent women which included Bertha Fowler , Charlotte Perkins Gilman , Helen Keller , Belle Case La Follette , May Wright Sewall and educators such as Emma Gillett , Maria Montessori , and Clara Louise Thompson , a Latin Professor at Rockford College , among others , to lend credibility to the new organization . Stevens became the national organizer , charged with organizing women in states in which they were able to vote to use their ballots and oppose any candidate not in favor of full enfranchisement of women . One of the first places Stevens traveled to was Colorado , where CUWS was successful in attaining commitment from one congressman to support the women 's cause . Returning from that success in January 1915 , she went to New York and Newport , Rhode Island to campaign before heading west . She campaigned in Kansas , hoping to secure delegates for a convention planned in San Francisco for September . 
 Arriving in California in June , Stevens accompanied a group of women led by Charlotte Anita Whitney to meet with House Appropriations Committee members who were meeting at the Palace Hotel , in San Francisco . The women had been assured that they would be able to present their issues , but the chair , Representative John J. Fitzgerald of New York , refused to allow it . Undaunted , Whitney and Stevens continued their planning efforts for the Panama Pacific Exposition CUWS Congress in San Francisco . In San Francisco at the CUWS headquarters in 1915 , Stevens discussed the strategy of employing a " million @-@ vote smile " , positing that smiling was a useful tool in the fight to win over men 's support . " Smile on men and they will give you a vote . Look severe and they won 't , " she stated . However , when Alice Paul arrived two weeks before the event , she canceled choral events , a parade and a mass meeting that had been planned for the Scottish Rite Hall . Stevens had been involved in supervising each of these events , though local women planned and orchestrated them . Paul did keep the luncheon and a ball to be held at the California building of the exposition . After the September Congress , Stevens had planned to remain in San Francisco and run the exposition booth of CUWS , but she was forced to return to Washington because the eastern delegate Margaret Whittemore had left due to her marriage . Stevens immediately began planning for a convention to be held in Washington in December . 
 At the beginning of 1916 , Stevens announced the policy that the CUWS had organized in twenty @-@ two states and planned on recruiting delegates for each of the 435 House Districts . The delegates were required to form committees to press Congressional Members to favor suffrage and make them aware that their constituents were in favor of women attaining the vote . Another strategy Stevens began implementing early in 1916 required CUWS members to go to other states in which women were allowed to vote , establish residence and register to vote . In this way , they could vote in state and national elections in the hope of filling the legislature with legislators who favored suffrage . Stevens registered to vote in Kansas that year . On 5 June 1916 , the CUWS became the National Woman 's Party ( NWP ) , having a single platform to acquire a constitutional amendment for national women 's suffrage . After attending the NWP convention in Chicago in June , Stevens headed to a convention in Colorado . By October , Stevens was organizing and managing the NWP election campaign in California . 
 = = Arrest = = 
 Due to the United States ' entry into World War I , some suffragists stopped their activism in 1917 because it might be seen as " unpatriotic ; " Stevens , instead , insisted that it was " arrogant of Wilson to fight for democracy abroad when women were not included in democracy at home . " In January after a delegation of NWP members had a disappointing meeting with President Woodrow Wilson , it was decided that they would protest at the White House every day , standing as Silent Sentinels until Wilson recognized the importance of their cause . The women maintained their post for over a year disregarding weather conditions and the threat of arrest . Though she performed other organizational tasks , such as organizing the North Carolina branch of the NWP in March , Stevens participated as a sentinel . She and fifteen other women were arrested for picketing at the White House on Bastille Day , in July 1917 , charged with obstructing the sidewalk , and served three days of their 60 @-@ day sentence at <unk> Workhouse before receiving a pardon from President Wilson . The women were placed within the prison population , given no toothbrushes , combs or toiletries and were surprised that they were required to share a water dipper with the rest of the prisoners . 
 Stevens met her first husband , Dudley Field Malone , when he represented her for her protest in front of the White House . He had been serving as an Assistant Secretary of State in the Wilson cabinet , but was converted to the suffragist cause and resigned his post . He appeared with Stevens at fundraising events and helped raise thousands of dollars for their cause , which was gaining momentum , as President Wilson finally endorsed enfranchisement . Between 1918 and 1919 , Stevens continued alternating speaking engagements and picketing . She was arrested again , along with Elsie Hill , Alice Paul and three " Jane Doe " suffragists at the NWP demonstration of the Metropolitan Opera House in New York in March 1919 . On 4 September 1920 , the fight was won when Secretary of State Bainbridge Colby proclaimed the necessary 36 states had ratified the 19th Amendment with Tennessee 's ratification . Stevens published the quintessential insider account of the imprisonment of NWP activists , Jailed for Freedom , in 1920 . 
 Over the years , Stevens held several important NWP leadership positions , including Legislative Chairman and membership on the executive committee . In 1920 , Alva Belmont was elected president of he NWP and Stevens served as Belmont ’ s personal assistant , even writing Belmont 's autobiography . Belmont and Steven 's relationship was contentious , but the younger Stevens accepted years of control by Belmont over many of her personal actions . Traveling to Europe with Belmont for work of the NWP , Belmont insisted that Steven 's fiance could not join them and when he did , Belmont removed to France without Stevens . 
 On 5 December 1921 in Peekskill , New York , Stevens and Malone were secretly married by a hardware store owner who was a Justice of the Peace and immediately sailed for their two @-@ month honeymoon in Paris . Stevens announced she would not take Malone 's name and would remain " Doris Stevens " . From the middle of the 1920s , Stevens lived primarily in Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson , New York , where she became friends with leading members of the Greenwich Village radical scene and bohemians , including Louise Bryant , Max and Crystal Eastman , Edna St. Vincent Millay , John Reed and others . Stevens divorced Malone in 1929 after a string of infidelities on both sides and failed attempts at reconciliation . 
 = = Equality activism = = 
 The focus of the NWP shifted to equality under the law , including equal employment opportunities , jury service , nationality for married women and any other provision which legally prohibited women from having full legal equality . In 1923 , the Equal Rights Amendment was introduced by Daniel Read Anthony , Jr. and the women pushed for its passage , lobbying for support from both political parties . Stevens served as vice chairman of NWP ’ s New York branch , spearheading the NWP Women for Congress campaign in 1924 . Unable to run herself due to her having established a legal residence in France , Stevens worked toward the goal of securing the election of 100 women to Congress in states where female candidates were among contenders for office . The campaign had negligible results and the women shifted back to equality measures . Beginning in 1926 , one of the proposals Stevens focused on for the next several years was the " Wages for Wives " marriage contract . Campaigning vigorously for its adoption , the " Wages for Wives " proposal called for a flexible contract which split marital assets 50 @-@ 50 rather than treating married couples as a single entity and called for women to be paid a wage for domestic services and raising children as a protection for children 's continuous support . 
 From the end of the War , a growing belief among women 's organizations was the notion that all women faced similar problems as subordinates to men and that combining their interests might lead to gains . At the International Council of Women ( ICW ) conference held in Washington in 1925 , the sentiment was expressed by Lady Aberdeen , welcoming all women to the " sisterhood , of whatever creed , party , section or class they may belong " . In 1927 , Stevens and Alice Paul undertook a massive study of how laws affected women 's nationality ; studying for example , if they lost their nationality by marrying or even became stateless . Stevens met with feminists throughout Europe and held public meetings to gather data , including Dr. Luisa Baralt of Havana , Dr. Ellen Gleditsch of Oslo , Chrystal Macmillan and Sybil Thomas , Viscountess Rhondda of the UK , the <unk> del Ter of Spain , Maria <unk> of France and Hélène <unk> of Romania , as well as various officers of the International Federation of University Women and others . Paul reviewed the laws of each country . Together , they compiled a monumental report , which indexed all laws controlling women 's nationality from every country in its native language and then translated each law on an accompanying page . Tables were provided for easy comparison and a synopsis of the laws was given . The report was initially prepared for a meeting that was to take place at the League of Nations in 1930 to discuss codification of international laws . Stevens felt that nationality of women should be included in that discussion and spearheaded the research , believing " feminism should strive for equal rights for women , and that women should be considered first and foremost as human beings . " In September 1927 , she attended a preliminary meeting of the League of Nations in Geneva and obtained their unanimous support of her proposal . She continued meeting with women and gathering data until January 1928 , when she attended the Pan @-@ American Conference in Havana . Stevens convinced the governing body of the Pan American Union to create the Inter @-@ American Commission of Women ( Spanish : Comisión Interamericana de Mujeres ) ( CIM ) on 4 April 1928 . 
 The initial Inter @-@ American Commission of Women ( CIM ) was made up of seven women delegates who were charged with finalizing the report for the next Pan @-@ American Conference ( 1933 ) to review civil and political equality for women . Stevens served as chair of the CIM from its creation in 1928 until her ouster in 1938 . By August , Stevens was back in Paris working on the report . She and other suffragists picketed the French president , Gaston Doumergue , in 1928 in an attempt to get the world peace delegates to support an equal rights treaty . They were dismissively described by a journalist who did cover the event as " militant suffragettes , " and a Paris paper called the protest " an amusing incident . " Though arrested , they were released upon providing proof of their identities . 
 In 1929 , Stevens returned to the United States and began to study law , taking classes at the American University and Columbia University in international law and foreign policy . In 1930 , she returned to Havana in February for the first meeting of the CIM women which included Flora de Oliveira Lima ( Brazil ) , <unk> Parada ( Chile ) , Lydia Fernández ( Costa Rica ) , Elena <unk> de González ( Cuba ) , Gloria Moya de Jiménez ( Dominican Republic ) , Irene de <unk> ( Guatemala ) , Margarita Robles de Mendoza ( Mexico ) , Juanita Molina de <unk> ( Nicaragua ) , Clara González ( Panama ) , Teresa <unk> de Prevost ( Peru ) . From Cuba , she went to the The Hague for the first World Conference on the Codification of International Law held on 13 March . Presenting her data on what had been accomplished in the Americas , Stevens asked that the international community enact laws to protect women 's citizenship . She returned to the United States and her studies . Though she didn 't graduate , in 1931 she became the first woman member of American Institute of International Law . That same year , she , Belmont and Paul attended the League of Nations meeting in September to present their nationality findings . 
 = = Seventh Pan @-@ American Conference = = 
 Stevens was very active in working with Latina feminists through the CIM . At the Seventh Pan @-@ American Conference , held in 1933 in Montevideo , Uruguay , the women presented their analysis of the legal status of women in each of the 21 member countries . The first report ever to study in detail the civil and political rights of women , it had been prepared solely by women . They proposed a Treaty on the Equality of Rights for Women , and it was rejected by the conference , though it was signed by Cuba , Ecuador , Paraguay , and Uruguay . Three of those states had already granted suffrage to women , and none of the four ratified the Treaty after the conference . However , the women had presented the first international resolution to recommend suffrage for women . Next , Stevens presented their materials which showed the disparity between rights of men and women . For example , in 16 countries of the Americas women could not vote at all , in two countries they could vote with restrictions , and in three countries they had equal enfranchisement . In 19 of the American countries , women did not have equal custody over their children , including in seven US states , and only two countries allowed joint authority for women of their own children . None of the Latin American countries allowed women to serve on juries , and 27 US states prohibited women from participating in juries . Divorce grounds in 14 countries and 28 states were disparate for men and women , and a woman could not administer her own separate property in 13 countries and two US states . 
 After reviewing the data , the conference approved the first international agreement ever adopted on women 's rights . The Convention on the Nationality of Women made it clear that should a woman marry a man of a different nationality , her citizenship could be retained . The text stated , " There shall be no distinction based on sex as regards to nationality " . The conference also passed the Convention on Nationality , which established that neither marriage nor divorce could affect the nationality of the members of a family , extending citizenship protection to children as well . The Roosevelt administration , hoping to get rid of Stevens , then argued that the women 's task was completed and the CIM should be abandoned . Not wanting to bow to US pressure , the Conference did not vote to continue the CIM , but instead voted as a unit , with the exception of Argentina , to block the US proposal . 
 = = Later career = = 
 It would take FDR another five years , with the help of the League of Women Voters to replace Stevens . Making the argument that Stevens was appointed by the Conference of the Pan @-@ American States and not as a U.S. delegate , FDR agreed to give permanent status to the CIM , if each state was allowed to appoint their own delegates . Securing approval , he then immediately replaced Stevens with Mary Nelson Winslow . Stevens did not go quietly and the clash continued throughout 1939 with Eleanor Roosevelt backing Winslow and suffragists backing Stevens . Eleanor 's objection to Stevens was multi @-@ faced , in that she did not think that the Equal Rights Amendment would protect women and on a personal level , she believed Stevens behaved in an unladylike manner . 
 In 1940 , Stevens was elected to serve on the National Council of the National Woman 's Party . The following year , when Alice Paul returned from a two @-@ year trip to Switzerland to establish the World Woman ’ s Party ( <unk> ) , difficulties arose . Paul experienced both challenges to the direction she was taking the NWP and had personality conflicts with members , including Stevens . When Alva Belmont died in 1933 , the bequest she had promised Stevens for years of personal service was instead directed to the NWP . Stevens sued the estate , eventually receiving US $ 12 @,@ 000 , but she believed that Paul had sabotaged her relationship with Belmont . After Paul 's resignation in 1945 , Stevens did not support Paul 's hand @-@ selected replacement , Anita Pollitzer and led an unsuccessful attempt to challenge her leadership . Pollitzer was seen as a figurehead for Paul and an internal dispute arose over the NWP ’ s emphasis on the <unk> and international rights rather than domestic organizing . During these tensions , a dissenting faction of NWP members tried to take over party headquarters and elect their own slate of officers , but Pollitzer ’ s claim to leadership was supported by a ruling of a federal district judge . 
 Stevens parted ways with the NWP in 1947 and turned instead to activity in the Lucy Stone League , a women ’ s rights organization based on Lucy Stone 's retention of her maiden name after marriage . After World War II ended , the organization was revived in 1950 because the rights women had seen surge during the war were reverting to their pre @-@ war state . Stevens was one of the <unk> along with Freda <unk> , Frances Perkins and others . Stevens had long been a proponent of a woman retaining her own name and did not take her husband 's name in either of her marriages . She had remarried to Jonathan Mitchell on August 31 , 1935 in Portland , Maine . Mitchell was a reporter for the The New Republic during the Roosevelt years and later for the National Review , and was an anti @-@ communist . He took part in the McCarthy hearings and Stevens , after her marriage to him , moved politically to the right , from her previously socialist leanings . 
 From 1951 to 1963 , Stevens served as vice @-@ president of the Lucy Stone League , though she struggled with maintaining militancy . Stevens was not anti @-@ male , rather pro @-@ female . She did not follow a belief that for women to succeed , men had to be omitted ; rather , she believed that collaboration with men was essential . In her last years , Stevens supported the establishment of feminist studies as a legitimate field of academic inquiry in American universities and tried to establish a Lucy Stone Chair of Feminism at Radcliffe College . 
 Stevens died on March 22 , 1963 in New York City , two weeks after having a stroke . Princeton University has an endowed chair in women 's studies created by the Doris Stevens Foundation in 1986 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1986 , Princeton University established an endowed chair through the Doris Stevens Foundation in women ’ s studies . In 2004 the HBO film Iron Jawed Angels was made about the early days of the suffrage movement . Doris Stevens was portrayed by Laura Fraser . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Stevens , Doris ( 1919 ) . The militant campaign . Washington , D.C. : The National Woman 's Party . OCLC <unk> . 
 Stevens , Doris ( 1920 ) . Jailed for Freedom . New York , New York : Boni and Liveright . OCLC <unk> . 
 Stevens , Doris ( 1928 ) . L <unk> des droits pour les femmes par Convention Internationale : Discours <unk> à la session <unk> non @-@ officielle de la <unk> <unk> Pan @-@ Américaine . Pan @-@ American Conference publication ( in French ) . Washington , D.C. : The National Woman 's Party . OCLC <unk> . 
 Stevens , Doris ( 1933 ) . Tribute to Alva Belmont : late president of the National Woman 's Party . Washington , D.C. : Inter American Commission of Women , Pan American Union . OCLC <unk> . 
 Stevens , Doris ( 1934 ) . History of equal rights treaty signed at the VII International Conference of American States by Uruguay , Paraguay , Ecuador and Cuba . Washington , D.C. : Inter American Commission of Women , Pan American Union . OCLC <unk> . 
 Stevens , Doris ( 1936 ) . A comparison of the political and civil rights of men and women in the United States : statement interpreting the laws of the United States ... and presented for action by the 7th International Conference of American States . Washington , D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office . OCLC <unk> . 
 Stevens , Doris ( 1936 ) . En prison pour la <unk> ! Comment nous avons <unk> le vote des femmes aux États @-@ <unk> ( in French ) . Paris , France : A. <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Stevens , Doris ( 1940 ) . Paintings & drawings of Jeannette Scott . Mount Vernon , New York : Privately printed for James Brown Scott . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Christmas Carol ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Christmas Carol " is the sixth episode of the fifth season of American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Vince Gilligan , John Shiban and Frank Spotnitz and directed by Peter Markle . The episode explores the series ' overarching mythology . The episode premiered in the United States on December 7 , 1997 on the Fox network , earning a Nielsen household rating of 12 @.@ 8 and being watched by 20 @.@ 91 million people in its initial broadcast . It received moderately positive reviews from television critics , with many complimenting Gillian Anderson 's performance . 
 The show centers on FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Scully , on Christmas vacation with her family , receives a mysterious phone call that leads her to a case involving a little girl that she believes to be the daughter of her dead sister , Melissa . 
 " Christmas Carol " is the first of a two @-@ part story that concludes with episode seven , " Emily " . The episode was inspired by the 1951 British film Scrooge , starring Alastair Sim . The young actress who originally played Emily was terrified of the hospital setting in the episode 's sequel " Emily " , and as a result the producers had to recast the role and reshoot all footage featuring her including her scene featured in this episode . Gillian Anderson 's younger sister , Zoe , was chosen to play Scully in a flashback sequence . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and her mother visit her brother Bill and his pregnant wife Tara around Christmas time . Scully answers the phone , and the person on the other line , who sounds just like her dead sister Melissa , tells her that someone needs her help . Scully traces the call to a nearby home in San Diego where a group of cops are investigating the suicide of a woman , Roberta Sim . The lead detective , Kresge , tells Scully that it was impossible for Roberta to have dialed , as she died before the telephone call was made . That night after dinner Scully reveals to her mother that due to her abduction and cancer she is unable to bear children . Scully flashes back to when as a child , she hid her pet rabbit from her brother in a lunchbox , only for it to suffocate and die . Scully receives another telephone call from the same person on her cell phone , which was once again made from the Sim home . Roberta 's husband , Marshall , is meeting with two dark @-@ suited men inside his house and has no desire to listen to and help Scully figure out what is going on . 
 Scully visits Kresge , wanting to look further into Roberta Sim 's suicide , despite the fact that the police think it is a simple suicide . Scully finds a striking resemblance between the Sims ' daughter , Emily , and her sister Melissa from when she was that age . Scully flashes back to a funeral she attended when she was a little girl but imagines Marshall Sim holding her hand . Scully insists on performing an autopsy on Roberta , thinking that she was murdered . Scully finds a needle puncture in Roberta 's foot , causing her to believe that she was anesthetized and her suicide was staged . The police search the Sim 's house and find a used hypodermic needle , which Marshall claims was used for injecting the anemic Emily with treatment . Scully spots the dark @-@ suited men watching from a nearby car . Scully receives DNA data on Melissa , and matching it up to Emily 's finds them nearly identical , causing her to believe that Emily is Melissa 's daughter . Scully believes that Melissa gave birth to her while on the west coast and gave her up for adoption without ever telling the rest of the family . Scully flashes back to when she and Melissa were teenagers and were given cross necklaces from their mother for Christmas . 
 Kresge comes to see Scully , telling her that the Sims received several large payments from a pharmaceutical company , Prangen Industries . The two visit Dr. Calderon , who tells them that Emily was part of clinical trials and that Roberta was paid the money to keep her from pulling Emily from the program . Marshall Sim is arrested for the murder of his wife . Scully visits Emily and gives her the cross necklace . Marshall confesses soon after , but is found dead in his cell shortly after being visited by the two dark @-@ suited men . Bill shows Scully a photo of Melissa , who is clearly not pregnant , shortly before Emily was born , which he thinks proves that she isn 't Emily 's mother . Scully meets with someone from an adoptive agency , wanting to adopt Emily . The woman is very hesitant considering Scully 's job and the fact that Emily is a special needs child . Scully flashes back to talking with Melissa around Christmas time shortly before she joined the FBI . On Christmas morning Scully receives the results of a DNA test from the FBI proving that Melissa is not Emily 's mother — she is . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 During the second week of October 1997 , David Duchovny was scheduled to be away from Vancouver for promotional purposes for the movie Playing God . As a result , the producers delayed shooting of the episode " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " and developed a Scully @-@ centric episode to take its place in the queue . With the episode scheduled to air during December , Vince Gilligan , John Shiban , and Frank Spotnitz decided to craft a Christmas episode and put Dana Scully into a situation similar to that of Scrooge in the 1951 film Scrooge , starring Alastair Sim . After failing to write an episode paralleling that story , the writers decided instead to feature Scully being visited by earlier versions of herself , resulting in the flashback sequences appearing in the episode . They also decided to have her be taken on an emotional journey by her descendant . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The young actress who originally played Emily was terrified of the hospital setting in the episode 's sequel " Emily " , and as a result the producers had to recast the role and reshoot all footage featuring her including her scene featured in this episode . The show 's casters replaced her with Lauren Diewold , who had previously appeared on an episode of Millennium . Due to the show 's shooting schedule , the producers were unable to use Gillian Anderson to reshoot the necessary scenes in " Christmas Carol " , resulting in Anderson 's double being used instead , with the footage pieced together in the editing room . 
 Props specialist Ken Hawryliw claimed the biggest challenge in producing the episode was finding Christmas paper from the 1980s for the flashback sequences . Casting director Corrine Mays had difficulty finding an actress to play Dana Scully 's 1976 self before executive producer Robert Goodwin came up with the idea of using Gillian Anderson 's fourteen @-@ year @-@ old sister Zoë for the role . Gillian Anderson , while liking the finalized episode , believed that she never was able to capture the complex relationship between herself and Emily , stating : " I felt in the end that I was a little low energy , a little too melancholy . It was hard to find the right attitude for Scully in dealing with a child that 's apparently hers ; to find the right flavor of relationship to her and this disease she 's going through , all mixed up with the aspect of the paranormal . " Anderson also admitted that another issue she had was that " she had no history with this child " so she was unable to " play the kind of attachment I would feel if my own daughter , Piper , were going through the same thing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Christmas Carol " premiered on the Fox network on December 7 , 1997 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 8 , with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 12 @.@ 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 20 @.@ 91 million viewers . 
 The episode received moderately positive reviews from television critics . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club gave the episode an A and called it " generally a terrific episode " . Handlen wrote that he was " delighted to get another Scully @-@ centric episode [ especially ] one that doesn 't end up with her looking pale and deathly in a hospital bed . " Despite his approval of the script , he slightly criticized the series for writing Scully @-@ centric episodes based solely on the idea that " something is being done to her " as opposed to against or with her . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode an 8 out of 10 , and wrote " Overall , this episode was an interesting and uncommon in @-@ depth look at Scully 's psychology . The writers rarely had such an opportunity , and along with Gillian Anderson , they run with the opportunity . The religious metaphor is a bit thick throughout , but this is actually a bit more subtle than would become the norm . Making the child sick works for the mythology , but in a lot of ways , it seems like a plot contrivance . " 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two wrote that the script was " really sharp " and features " natural dialogue " that disguises the stumbles in the character study . Shearman and Pearson also praised Anderson 's performance , calling it " terrific " and noted that her acting " hint [ ed ] years before it happens to the relationship Anderson will enjoy with Robert Patrick " , the actor who would go on to portray agent John Doggett . Matt <unk> and Chris Knowles , in their book The Complete X @-@ Files called the episode " a showcase for Gillian Anderson 's startling acting chops . " 
 Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique , on the other hand , gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . She described the episode as " one [ where ] disbelief isn 't suspended so much as hung by the neck until dead " . She heavily derided the episode 's " overnight DNA tests " , " helpful couriers that deliver the results at Christmas " , and the fact that Scully fills out an adoption paper and is visited by a Social Service agent on Christmas Eve . 
 = 2010 East – West Shrine Game = 
 The 2010 East – West Shrine Game was the 85th staging of the all @-@ star college football exhibition game featuring NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision players . The game featured over 100 players from the 2009 college football season , and prospects for the 2010 Draft of the professional National Football League ( NFL ) , as well as for the United Football League 's inaugural draft . In the week prior to the game , scouts from all 32 NFL teams attended . The proceeds from the East @-@ West Shrine Game benefit Shriners Hospitals for Children . 
 Marty Schottenheimer and Romeo Crennel served as the two teams ' coaches for the game . The East team won by a 13 – 10 margin on the strength of a touchdown with just six seconds remaining . According to some reliable sources , Wisconsin defensive end O 'Brien Schofield and Northwestern quarterback Mike Kafka of the east team were defensive and offensive MVPs , respectively . However , other sources point to East Carolina cornerback Van Eskridge also of the east team was selected as defensive MVP . 
 Although no players from this game were chosen in the first round of the NFL Draft and only 7 were chosen on the second day of the draft ( rounds 2 & 3 ) , a total of 34 participants were selected during the draft 's seven rounds . This includes four selections by the Pittsburgh Steelers and three each by the Philadelphia Eagles and Green Bay Packers . Three Utah Utes football players and five offensive tackles from this game were selected in the draft . 
 = = Game notes = = 
 The West team was coached by Schottenheimer and the East by Crennel . The game was played on January 23 , 2010 at 3 : 00 p.m. local time at Citrus Bowl in Orlando , Florida . It was the first time the game was played at the Citrus Bowl . In fact , it was the first time the game was played in the state of Florida . The game had been hosted in California since 1925 until 2006 when it was moved to Texas . The game was broadcast on ESPN2 . The combined score of 23 was the lowest since the 14 – 6 1992 East @-@ West Shrine Game . The total attendance of 8 @,@ 345 was the lowest in the history of the self @-@ described longest running college all @-@ star game . During the week before the game was played , the players interacted with general managers and scouts between practices . 
 In the first half , the East posted two interceptions . Schofield , who also had three tackles , made an interception of a pass by BYU quarterback Max Hall . Subsequently , Eskridge also intercepted a pass by Kansas quarterback Todd Reesing . The only first half scoring came on field goals . Joshua Shene of Ole Miss posted field goals of 44 and 40 yards for the East . Texas placekicker Hunter Lawrence had a 47 @-@ yarder for the West . Shene 's field goals both came in the final two minutes and fifteen seconds of the first half . 
 The West took a 10 – 6 lead with 6 : 59 left in the game when Hall connected with UCLA fullback Ryan Moya for an 8 @-@ yard touchdown pass . A key play on the drive was a 41 @-@ yard pass from Hall to Eastern Washington tight end Nathan Overbay as he was cutting across the middle of a wide @-@ open field . BYU 's Dennis <unk> then caught a 17 yard reception . 
 Kafka threw the game @-@ winning touchdown to Penn State tight end Andrew Quarless with six seconds left , resulting in the 13 – 10 victory over the West . The touchdown capped an 11 @-@ play 55 @-@ yard game @-@ winning drive . The play before the touchdown , Kafka had scrambled out of the grasp of a swarm of defenders for a 9 @-@ yard gain . During the drive Freddie Barnes of Bowling Green caught three consecutive passes of 12 , 7 , and 10 yards . The final play was set up after Kafka eluded a sack during a 2nd down and 10 yards situation on the West 11 yardline which led to a timeout with 12 seconds left before Kafka connected with Quarless in the back of the end zone . 
 Kafka was 18 of 27 for 150 yards and Michigan State 's Blair White made 7 receptions for 93 yards for the East . Hall was 7 of 12 for 119 yards , a touchdown , and an interception and <unk> recorded 4 receptions for 72 yards for the West . The game saw no one accumulate more than 28 total rushing yards from scrimmage and no run was longer than 16 yards . In addition to the aforementioned players , the defensive standouts for the East on Saturday were Virginia Tech 's Kam Chancellor ( 7 tackles ) , USF 's Kion Wilson ( 6 tackles , forced fumble ) and Ole Miss ' Greg Hardy , Jr . ( 5 tackles , sack ) . The West were led by seven tackles from Kansas ' Darrell Stuckey and six tackles and three pass breakups from Texas Tech 's Jamar Wall . 
 According to the release from Shriners International Headquarters and several other sources , Schofield and Kafka of the east team were defensive and offensive MVPs , respectively . However , according to the Associated Press press release that was published by ESPN , Sports Illustrated and several other sources , Eskridge was selected as defensive MVP . 
 = = = Scoring summary = = = 
 = = = Statistical leaders = = = 
 = = Coaching staff = = 
 = = = West Team = = = 
 = = = East Team = = = 
 = = Rosters = = 
 = = = East team = = = 
 = = = West team = = = 
 = = 2010 NFL Draft = = 
 Below is a list of the 34 players from this game that were drafted in the 2010 NFL Draft . The Pittsburgh Steelers drafted four players that they scouted at this game and both the Philadelphia Eagles and the Green Bay Packers scouted three . The Arizona Cardinals , Buffalo Bills , Houston Texans , Tennessee Titans and Baltimore Ravens each selected two . Five offensive tackles , four defensive tackles , defensive ends , tight ends and wide receivers were drafted from this game . Three players from the Utah Utes as well as two each from the UCLA Bruins and Kansas Jayhawks were selected . Although 34 players were selected during the seven round draft , none were selected in the first round , while ten were chosen in the fifth and an additional 7 were chosen in the final seventh round . 
 The east team 's Matt <unk> had already been drafted with the fifth pick of the third round in the 2009 CFL Draft by the BC Lions . Jordan Sisco was selected with the first pick in the second round ( 8th overall ) of the 2010 CFL Draft by the Saskatchewan Roughriders . 
 = Markus Näslund = 
 Markus Sten Näslund ( born July 30 , 1973 ) is a Swedish retired ice hockey player and former general manager for Modo Hockey of the Swedish Hockey League ( SHL , formerly named Elitserien ) . He played in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Pittsburgh Penguins , Vancouver Canucks and New York Rangers , as well as in the Elitserien with Modo Hockey . Nicknamed " <unk> " by Canucks fans and " Macke " or " <unk> " in his native Sweden , he was known for his offensive skills , particularly his wrist shot and stickhandling . 
 After playing junior hockey within the Modo organization , Näslund turned professional with the club 's Elitserien team in 1990 – 91 . Selected in the first round , 16th overall by the Penguins in the 1991 NHL Entry Draft , he joined the NHL in 1993 – 94 . After his tenure with Pittsburgh , Näslund was traded to the Vancouver Canucks in 1996 , where he spent 12 years , including a team record 8 as captain . He received the Cyclone Taylor Trophy as the Canucks ' most valuable player five times and the Cyrus H. McLean Trophy as the leading point @-@ scorer for seven consecutive seasons — both club records — en route to becoming the franchise leader in goals and points . In 2008 , Näslund signed with the Rangers , where he spent one season before announcing his retirement from the NHL . In 15 NHL seasons , Näslund was thrice First Team All @-@ Star , chosen in 2002 , 2003 and 2004 , and a Lester B. Pearson Award recipient ( now known as the Ted Lindsay award ) , winning in 2003 . He was the runner @-@ up for the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2003 . Midway through the 2009 – 10 season , he returned to play for Modo before retiring a second time . In December 2010 , he became the third Canucks player to have his jersey retired , joining Stan Smyl and Trevor Linden . 
 Internationally , Näslund has competed with the Swedish national team in two European Junior Championships , two World Junior Championships , four World Championships , two World Cups and one Winter Olympics . He holds the World Junior record for most goals scored in a single tournament , scoring 13 in 1993 , while also winning back @-@ to @-@ back silver medals at the competition . In World Championship play , he won a silver medal in 1993 and two bronze medals in 1999 and 2002 . On April 21 , 2014 , Naslund was inducted into the Swedish Hockey Hall Of Fame . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Näslund was born to Sture and Ulla Näslund on 30 July 1973 in Örnsköldsvik , Sweden . The city has produced numerous NHL players , including childhood friend and future Modo Hockey teammate Peter Forsberg , as well as Victor Hedman and future Canucks teammates Henrik and Daniel Sedin . 
 Growing up idolizing Swedish NHL and Elitserien star Håkan Loob , he played most of his organized hockey at an outdoor rink in his neighbourhood during his youth . At age 14 , Näslund competed with the regional all @-@ star team from Ångermanland , helping the squad win a national under @-@ 16 championship at TV @-@ pucken in 1988 . He received the Sven <unk> Award as the tournament 's best forward . 
 Born within 10 days of each other , Näslund and Forsberg became well @-@ acquainted while playing on separate youth teams . They went on to join the Ångermanland team together , before competing on the same side at the junior and senior levels for Modo Hockey and the Swedish national team . They attended high school together and had summer jobs at the age of 18 with the same electrical company that employed both Näslund 's mother and Forsberg 's father , Kent . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Modo Hockey = = = 
 At age 15 , Näslund played a season with <unk> SK in Sweden 's third @-@ tier men 's league . Appearing in 14 games , he scored 7 goals and 13 points . The following season , in 1989 – 90 , Näslund joined the Modo Hockey organization , playing in Sweden 's highest @-@ level junior league , the J20 SuperElit , where he and Peter Forsberg skated together on one of the most productive lines in the league . The pair helped Modo to win back @-@ to @-@ back junior championships . After a season of junior , in 1990 – 91 Näslund joined Modo 's professional team in the Elitserien , Sweden 's premiere league . The Modo equipment manager designated him with the jersey number 19 , which Näslund thereafter opted to wear with the Swedish national teams he played on . He recorded 10 goals and 19 points in his rookie season , a record points total for a 17 @-@ year @-@ old in the league , until Robert Nilsson scored 21 in 2002 – 03 . 
 In the off @-@ season , Näslund was drafted 16th overall in the 1991 NHL Entry Draft by the Pittsburgh Penguins . The team 's general manager , Craig Patrick , hailed Näslund and Forsberg as the draft 's top two prospects behind first @-@ overall selection Eric Lindros . He compared Näslund to the Los Angeles Kings ' Swedish forward Tomas Sandström , although he did not consider him as aggressive a player , and further claimed that he was a more natural goal @-@ scorer than Penguins forward Jaromír Jágr , who had just completed his rookie year with the club . 
 Näslund remained in Sweden with Modo for two more years , recording a team @-@ leading 39 points in 1991 – 92 . He matched that points total the following season before helping Modo to the quarterfinals of the Elitserien playoffs . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Penguins = = = 
 Following the 1992 – 93 season , his contract with Modo expired on 30 April 1993 , and he had not yet come to terms with the Penguins . According to the collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) between the NHL and NHL Players Association ( NHLPA ) , he was entitled to free agency within the league , beginning on 1 July . However , a conflicting agreement between the league and Swedish ice hockey officials required that he sign an NHL contract on or before 30 June in order to leave Sweden . With the deadline approaching , Näslund filed a federal lawsuit against the NHL claiming that their agreement with Swedish officials could not override his rights as a player under the CBA . The case went to a federal judge in Newark , New Jersey , who ruled in favour of Näslund on 29 June . League president and lawyer Gil Stein released an affidavit stating the NHL @-@ Swedish agreement did not apply to Näslund , as he was not under contract with any Swedish team . 
 Näslund became a Group 4 restricted free agent on 1 July . He did not receive any offers from other teams due to an apparent promise from the Penguins organization to exercise their right to match . After two months of free agency , Näslund and the Penguins agreed to a deal on 9 September 1993 , worth approximately US $ 1 @.@ 8 million over three years , including a $ 750 @,@ 000 signing bonus . 
 Näslund subsequently joined the Penguins for the 1993 – 94 season . Due to teammate Bryan Trottier already wearing his Modo jersey number , 19 , he chose number 29 instead . He appeared in his first NHL game on 5 October 1993 against the Philadelphia Flyers . Five days later , he registered his first NHL point , an assist , during a game against the Quebec Nordiques . His first NHL goal came the following month on 9 November 1993 in a 3 – 3 tie against the St. Louis Blues . The goal came in the first period on the powerplay against goaltender Curtis Joseph , assisted by Doug Brown and Marty McSorley . Upon entering the NHL , Näslund struggled and was admittedly frustrated with himself . As a result , he was demoted to the Penguins ' International Hockey League ( IHL ) affiliate , the Cleveland Lumberjacks , on several occasions . He finished his rookie campaign with four goals and seven assists in 71 games . Although the Penguins qualified for the 1994 playoffs , Näslund did not participate in post @-@ season play , being made a healthy scratch ( non @-@ dressing player ) , and watched as Washington eliminated Pittsburgh in the first round . 
 The following season , shortened due to the 1994 – 95 labour dispute , he continued to split playing time between the NHL and IHL . In 14 games with Pittsburgh , he scored two goals and four points , while recording seven points in seven games with Cleveland . He did not appear in the NHL playoffs for a second straight season , despite the Penguins qualifying . Instead , he was assigned to Cleveland for their playoff season , in which he recorded four points in four games . Frustrated by his ongoing demotions to the IHL , at one point during the season he requested to be traded from Pittsburgh . 
 Näslund impressed in his third training camp with the Penguins , held prior to the 1995 – 96 season . He was labelled in the media as " Mr. September " , referring to his ability to show promise before struggling once the season began . Due to the departures of All @-@ Star left @-@ wingers Kevin Stevens and Luc Robitaille from the Penguins , Näslund had an opportunity for a more prominent role with the club in 1995 – 96 . He played on the second offensive unit with winger Jaromír Jágr and centre Ron Francis during training camp before being moved up to the first line with Mario Lemieux . He showed an immediate improvement , starting the season with 36 points in 29 games . He recorded his first NHL career hat @-@ trick on 28 November 1995 in a 7 – 2 win over the Ottawa Senators . However , his production slowed later in the season ; he was scratched on several occasions and was demoted to the third and fourth lines by February . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 = = = = 1996 – 2000 : Trade to Vancouver and captaincy = = = = 
 In the final year of his contract with Pittsburgh , he was the subject of trade rumours . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette listed the Edmonton Oilers as the most likely candidate to deal for Näslund . However , on 20 March 1996 , he was dealt to the Vancouver Canucks in exchange for forward Alek Stojanov . The deal would be regarded as one of the most lopsided trades in NHL history once Näslund displayed his full offensive capabilities later in his career . Stojanov , who had been drafted eight spots ahead of Näslund in the 1991 Draft , went on to play 45 games , scoring two goals and four assists for the Penguins over the next two seasons . He became a career minor @-@ leaguer and retired by age 29 , while Näslund would eventually play 884 games with the Canucks in 12 seasons . 
 Näslund made his debut with the team two days following the trade against the Dallas Stars . As his desired jersey number 19 was already being worn on the team by Tim Hunter , the Canucks gave him number 22 . Going pointless in his first nine games with his new club , Näslund recorded a hat @-@ trick in the last game of the regular season , a 5 – 0 win over the Calgary Flames on 13 April 1996 . The victory qualified the Canucks for the 1996 playoffs . He finished the regular season with a combined 22 goals and 55 points over 76 games between Pittsburgh and Vancouver . Näslund competed in his first NHL playoffs as the Canucks faced the Colorado Avalanche in the first round . He scored his first career NHL playoff goal in the final game of the series , opening the scoring against goaltender Patrick Roy on the powerplay . Colorado won 3 – 2 to eliminate Vancouver in six games . Näslund added two assists over the course of the series for three points total . 
 In the off @-@ season , he was re @-@ signed by the Canucks on 8 August 1996 . Näslund switched his jersey number back to 19 from his time with Modo , as Hunter left the team . In his first full campaign with the Canucks , he recorded 21 goals and 41 points over 78 games . The Canucks failed to qualify for the playoffs that season ; they would not return to the post @-@ season until 2001 . At the start of the 1997 – 98 season , Canucks head coach Mike Keenan scratched a healthy Näslund , prompting him to request a trade once again . He finished the year with 14 goals and 34 points over 76 games . 
 The following campaign , Näslund emerged as an offensive leader with the Canucks . Injuries to forwards Alexander Mogilny and Todd Bertuzzi , as well as the absence of Pavel Bure , resulted in Näslund earning more ice time . He scored his third NHL career hat @-@ trick on 5 December 1998 during a 4 – 1 win against the Dallas Stars . At mid @-@ season , he was named to his first NHL All @-@ Star Game , held in January 1999 . He went on to record a team @-@ leading 36 goals and 66 points , resulting in him being awarded the Cyclone Taylor Trophy as the Canucks ' most valuable player — his first of five during his tenure with Vancouver — as well as his first of two of the team 's annual Most Exciting Player Awards ( he received his second two years later ) . In the off @-@ season , he was re @-@ signed by the Canucks to a three @-@ year , $ 7 @.@ 2 million contract . 
 During the Canucks ' 2000 – 01 training camp in Sweden , Näslund was named team captain on 15 September 2000 . He replaced Mark Messier , who had returned as a free agent to the New York Rangers , and became the first European @-@ born captain in Canucks ' history . Näslund has cited Messier as his greatest playing influence , having played alongside him the previous three seasons . In his first year as team captain , Näslund continued to improve offensively and was named to his second NHL All @-@ Star Game , held in February 2001 . With 10 games remaining in the season , he suffered a broken leg on 16 March 2001 during a contest against the Buffalo Sabres . Chasing a loose puck in the third period , he was hit by Sabres defencemen Jay McKee and Rhett Warrener simultaneously , falling awkwardly on his right leg . Näslund was sidelined for the remainder of the season , as he required surgery to repair broken tibia and fibula bones . His 41 goals at the time of the injury were tied for third in the league , while his 75 points ranked in 11th place . As a result , he received his first of three career Viking Awards , given to the best Swedish player in the NHL . Without Näslund in the lineup , the Canucks finished the season with the eighth and final seed in the Western Conference , but were swept in the first round by the Colorado Avalanche in four games . 
 The Canucks ' return to the playoffs marked a turning point in the team 's success . After undergoing a rebuilding period in the late @-@ 90s under leading point @-@ scorers Messier , Bure and Mogilny , Näslund formed a new core that included Bertuzzi , Brendan Morrison , Ed Jovanovski and Mattias Öhlund . He recalls " grow [ ing ] up together in the early 2000s " with this group of players as his " fondest memory " in the NHL . 
 = = = = 2001 – 2005 West Coast Express = = = = 
 Set to enter the final year of his contract , Näslund re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a three @-@ year extension on 28 June 2001 . He spent the off @-@ season rehabilitating his leg , which was held together with a titanium rod and screws following surgery , at his private gym in his hometown of Örnsköldsvik . He returned from his injury in 2001 – 02 and improved to 40 goals and 90 points , which ranked second in the league behind Jarome Iginla . The 2001 – 02 campaign marked the beginning of what was widely considered the most effective line combination in the league for several seasons . Näslund and Bertuzzi had already formed a duo as wingers on the Canucks ' top line for more than two seasons when head coach Marc Crawford replaced centre Andrew Cassels with Brendan Morrison during a game on 9 January 2002 . The trio were dubbed the " West Coast Express " , named after Vancouver 's commuter rail service of the same name . 
 The formation of Näslund 's new line coincided with an eight @-@ goal , 21 @-@ point effort over 14 games in January 2002 , earning him NHL Player of the Month honours . He was later chosen to represent the World Team at the 2002 NHL All @-@ Star Game in Los Angeles and scored the game @-@ winning goal in an 8 – 5 victory over the North American team . The Canucks finished the season with the eighth seed in the Western Conference for the second straight year , resulting in a first @-@ round playoff match @-@ up with the Detroit Red Wings . It was Näslund 's first appearance in the post @-@ season since his initial year with the Canucks in 1996 . He was limited to a goal and an assist as Vancouver was eliminated by Detroit in six games . In the off @-@ season , Näslund received NHL First Team All @-@ Star honours as the league 's top left @-@ winger . He also finished fifth in Hart Memorial Trophy balloting . 
 In 2002 – 03 , with the West Coast Express line intact for a full season , Näslund finished with a career @-@ high of 48 goals and 104 points , finishing second in the league in both categories . Furthermore , he led the league with 54 powerplay points and 12 game @-@ winning goals . Näslund 's linemates also produced career seasons as Bertuzzi recorded 97 points , which ranked fifth in league scoring , while Morrison tallied 71 . Together , the trio accounted for 45 % of the Canucks ' 264 goals . 
 Early in the season , Näslund scored his eighth career NHL hat @-@ trick , scoring three goals in a seven @-@ minute span during the second period of a 5 – 2 win over the San Jose Sharks on 21 October 2002 . On 14 December , he scored a career @-@ high four goals in a 6 – 3 win over the Edmonton Oilers , tying a Canucks record for most goals in a single game . Named to his third consecutive All @-@ Star Game , held in February 2003 , Näslund scored a goal in the first shootout in All @-@ Star Game history to help the Western Conference defeat the Eastern Conference 6 – 5 . He was joined on the All @-@ Star squad by three other Canucks – Bertuzzi , Ed Jovanovski and head coach Marc Crawford . Crawford paired Näslund on a line with Peter Forsberg , marking the first time in nearly 10 years the two had played together . Later that month , Näslund registered another career @-@ high game with a six @-@ point night ( one goal , five assists ) in an 8 – 0 victory over the Atlanta Thrashers on 14 February 2003 . The win extended the Canucks ' franchise record unbeaten streak to 14 games . On 27 March , he recorded an assist in a 5 – 1 win against the Phoenix Coyotes for his 100th point of the season , becoming the third Canuck to reach the plateau after Pavel Bure and Alexander Mogilny . 
 On the last day of the 2002 – 03 regular season , the Canucks lost the Northwest Division title to the Colorado Avalanche through a defeat against the Los Angeles Kings . Näslund had also begun the night as the league 's leading point – and goal @-@ scorer , but was surpassed by Avalanche forwards Peter Forsberg and Milan Hejduk , respectively . After the game , Näslund apologized to the home fans at General Motors Place , saying the team " choked . " Qualifying for the 2003 playoffs , Vancouver won its first @-@ round matchup against the St. Louis Blues in seven games after trailing the series three games to one . Näslund scored a goal in the deciding game to help the Canucks advance . Against the Minnesota Wild in the next round , the Canucks were eliminated by relinquishing a three @-@ to @-@ one series lead of their own . Näslund finished the playoffs with a career @-@ high 14 points in 14 games . 
 In the off @-@ season , Näslund received the Lester B. Pearson Award ( since renamed the Ted Lindsay Award ) , given to the league 's best player as voted by the NHLPA . By beating out fellow award nominees Forsberg and Boston Bruins centre Joe Thornton , he became the first Swedish @-@ born recipient of the award , as well as the first Canucks player . He was presented the trophy during a ceremony at the Hockey Hall of Fame . Näslund was also a finalist for the Hart Memorial Trophy , awarded to the league 's most valuable player as voted by the Professional Hockey Writers ' Association . He finished as first runner @-@ up to Forsberg , receiving five first @-@ place ballots out of 62 compared to Forsberg 's 38 . Second runner @-@ up Martin Brodeur of the New Jersey Devils had 14 first @-@ place ballots , but less voting points overall than Näslund . Despite losing the Hart , he was chosen by The Hockey News as the league 's most valuable player that year . Näslund also received both the Viking Award and First Team All @-@ Star honours for the second time . 
 The following season , Näslund led the Canucks in scoring for the sixth @-@ straight year . His 84 points ranked fourth in the league , while his 35 goals was seventh . His even @-@ strength points topped the league at 58 . It marked , however , the beginning of a consistent decline in offensive production for the remainder of his NHL career . He was briefly sidelined in early December 2003 due to a groin injury , but returned to score his second career four @-@ goal game , scoring all the Canucks ' goals in a 4 – 3 overtime win against the Pittsburgh Penguins , on 9 December 2003 . At mid @-@ season , he was selected as team captain for the Western Conference at the 2004 NHL All @-@ Star Game in Minnesota . 
 On 16 February 2004 , during a game against the Colorado Avalanche , Näslund received a body @-@ check to the head from opposing forward Steve Moore . <unk> to retrieve a loose puck , he was hit by Moore with his elbow and shoulder . The league 's leading scorer at the time , he sustained a minor concussion , requiring 13 stitches on his forehead and nose , and was sidelined for three games . He also suffered a hyper @-@ extended elbow when he fell to the ice , which he played with through the remainder of the regular season and playoffs . Moore 's hit went unpenalized and several Canucks players vowed to exact revenge when the Canucks and Avalanche were set to play each other again on 8 March . Late in the third period of that subsequent game , Todd Bertuzzi skated behind Moore around the ice , punched him in the head and pushed him to the ice . Moore suffered career @-@ ending injuries and Bertuzzi was suspended indefinitely by the league . A close friend of Bertuzzi 's , Näslund was deeply affected by the incident , as subsequent lawsuits and public scrutiny negatively impacted Bertuzzi 's career . Several years later , Näslund stated , " It still bothers me what Todd has had to go through ... There 's no question he was standing up for me ... it all went too far . " 
 Despite the absence of Bertuzzi for the remainder of the season , Näslund led the Canucks to the Northwest Division title they had lost the previous season . Bertuzzi was replaced on the top line by Matt Cooke . The Canucks ' division title placed them third in the Western Conference standings , matching them against the sixth @-@ placed Calgary Flames in the opening round of the 2004 playoffs . In the seventh and deciding game of the series between the two teams , the Canucks faced a one @-@ goal deficit in the final minute of regulation time . With the Canucks having pulled their goaltender for an extra attacker , Näslund <unk> the length of the ice past two defenders , before shooting the puck on goal . Calgary goaltender Miikka Kiprusoff saved the shot before Cooke scored on the rebound with six seconds left in the game . Despite the effort , Calgary subsequently eliminated Vancouver a minute @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half into the subsequent overtime period on a powerplay goal . Näslund finished the playoffs with nine points in seven games . 
 At the end of the campaign , he received his second consecutive and third career Viking Award and First Team All @-@ Star mention . In the three seasons from 2001 – 02 to 2003 – 04 , Näslund scored the most goals ( 123 ) and points ( 278 ) of any NHL player . 
 During the NHL labour conflict , he returned to play for Modo Hockey of the Elitserien in 2004 – 05 . Näslund announced his return in mid @-@ January in order to meet the 31 January player @-@ transfer deadline for European clubs , joining Canucks teammates Daniel and Henrik Sedin , as well as former Modo teammate Peter Forsberg on the squad . He was originally expected to sign with Modo before the season started in September , but he returned to Vancouver after spending the summer in Sweden . Vancouver radio @-@ station Team 1040 cited high tax premiums explaining the decision , while Näslund later reasoned that he preferred to be readily available for the NHL , just in case the league and NHLPA could come to an agreement and the season was salvaged . 
 He played his first game for Modo in nearly 12 years on 20 January 2005 , receiving a standing ovation from the home crowd . Näslund went on to appear in 13 games , scoring 17 points . Modo finished in sixth place during the regular season before being eliminated in the first round of the playoffs by Färjestads BK . 
 = = = = Post @-@ lockout = = = = 
 As NHL play was set to resume for the 2005 – 06 season , Näslund became an unrestricted free agent . On the open market for several days , he re @-@ signed with the Canucks for three more years on 3 August 2005 , at $ 6 million per season . Vancouver newspaper The Province reported that two other teams had offered deals that matched the contract he signed , but Näslund ultimately chose to remain with the Canucks because he felt the club had a better chance of winning the Stanley Cup . At the time , Näslund said he hoped to retire as a Canuck . 
 For a franchise @-@ record seventh consecutive season , he led the Canucks in scoring , with 32 goals and 79 points . Despite new NHL rules set in place after the lockout that sought to allow skilled players such as Näslund and his linemates to thrive , all three members of the Canucks ' top line saw decreased offensive production in 2005 – 06 . Furthermore , the Canucks failed to make the playoffs for the first time in four seasons , finishing at ninth place in the Western Conference , despite early @-@ season projections to be Stanley Cup contenders . Consequently , significant changes to the Canucks ' personnel were made in the off @-@ season . Of particular significance to Näslund , longtime linemate Bertuzzi was traded to the Florida Panthers in exchange for goaltender Roberto Luongo , while Alain Vigneault replaced Marc Crawford with a more defensive @-@ minded coaching approach . Crawford later recalled the 2005 – 06 season as a turning point in Näslund 's role as the offensive leader on the team , noting that Henrik and Daniel Sedin had surpassed him and Bertuzzi in that respect as the campaign progressed . 
 Facing significant changes in the 2006 – 07 season , Näslund 's points total continued to decrease . He began the season by scoring his 300th goal as a Canuck during the team 's home @-@ opener against the San Jose Sharks on 14 October 2006 . The goal tied Canucks teammate Trevor Linden for the franchise lead in all @-@ time goals . He soon surpassed Linden with his 301st goal against the Edmonton Oilers on 17 October . Near the midway point of the season , however , Näslund went through a 17 @-@ game stretch without a goal . He completed the season with 60 points , his lowest output since 1997 – 98 . Teammate Daniel Sedin had 84 points , marking the first time in eight seasons that Näslund did not lead the team in scoring . In the 2007 post @-@ season , Näslund contributed five points before the team was eliminated by the Anaheim Ducks in the Conference Semifinals . 
 In 2007 – 08 , Näslund set several more career marks . On 21 November 2007 , Näslund tied the Canucks ' franchise record of 10 hat @-@ tricks with a three @-@ goal game against the Minnesota Wild , a 4 – 2 win for Vancouver . It was his first hat @-@ trick since December 2003 and 11th in his career overall . Several games later , on 5 December , Näslund became the Canucks ' franchise leading point @-@ scorer , assisting on defenceman Mattias Öhlund 's goal and passing Linden with 725 points . The following month , on 17 January 2008 , Näslund played his 1,000th career game against the Detroit Red Wings , scoring a goal in a 3 – 2 shootout loss . Playing parts of the season on a line with Daniel and Henrik Sedin , he recorded 25 goals and 55 points . 
 As Näslund 's free agency approached on 1 July 2008 , Näslund made it clear that the style of play and the player personnel of a team would be important factors in determining which team he would sign with after his contract with the Canucks expired . He was admittedly frustrated with Vigneault 's defensive coaching style . Furthermore , since Bertuzzi 's departure in the summer of 2006 , Vigneault placed Näslund on inconsistent line combinations , often with career minor @-@ leaguers . While he did not rule out the possibility of returning to Vancouver , he sold his Vancouver home and described his return as questionable . 
 = = = New York Rangers = = = 
 Näslund signed a two @-@ year , $ 8 million contract , including a $ 1 million signing bonus , with the New York Rangers on 3 July 2008 . Upon signing , he revealed New York was his preferred destination heading into free agency . He left Vancouver as the franchise 's all @-@ time leader in goals and points with 346 and 756 , respectively . His departure also ended his eight @-@ year tenure as team captain , matching Stan Smyl 's captaincy as the longest in franchise history . General manager Mike Gillis , who formerly acted as Näslund 's agent , released a statement on behalf of the Canucks organization , commending him as " one of the greatest athletes to ever represent the Canucks both on and off of the ice " . 
 As the Rangers held their training camp for the 2008 – 09 season overseas in Europe , they competed in a one @-@ game challenge against Russian squad Metallurg Magnitogorsk on 1 October 2008 in Bern , Switzerland . The Rangers won the game 4 – 3 , capturing the inaugural Victoria Cup . On 3 October , Näslund was named an alternate captain for the Rangers . The next day , he scored his first goal as a Ranger during the season @-@ opener in Prague , Czech Republic , a 2 – 1 win against the Tampa Bay Lightning . In his only season with the Rangers , Näslund led the team in scoring with 24 goals and was fourth in points with 46 . He added three points in the playoffs , as the Rangers were eliminated in the first round by the Washington Capitals . 
 Following the Rangers ' defeat , he announced his retirement from the NHL on 4 May 2009 , at the age of 35 . Näslund had informed Rangers general manager Glen Sather , head coach John Tortorella , and his teammates of his intention to retire prior to the team 's playoff elimination . By announcing his retirement early in the off @-@ season , Näslund forfeited a $ 2 million buyout from the Rangers , which would have counted against the team 's salary cap for the following season had he waited until he was formally bought out . Näslund retired from the NHL second among all @-@ time Swedish players with 395 goals ( behind Mats Sundin 's 564 ; he retired the same year ) . His 869 points ranked fifth , while his 1 @,@ 117 games played ranked fourth . 
 = = = Return to Modo and retirement = = = 
 Näslund returned to Sweden with his family in the summer of 2009 . During this time , Peter Forsberg was attempting a return to the NHL for the 2009 – 10 season , playing with Modo and the Swedish national team for conditioning purposes . Among the NHL teams interested were the Vancouver Canucks . Näslund had previously tried recruiting Forsberg to play for the Canucks prior to the 2007 – 08 season , when Forsberg was an unrestricted free agent , without any luck . Weighing in on Forsberg 's possible NHL return , Näslund speculated that Forsberg would remain in Sweden to continue playing for Modo . Several days later , Canucks general manager Mike Gillis confirmed Näslund 's speculation , asserting that Forsberg intended on finishing the season with Modo . 
 The following day , on 17 November 2009 , Näslund announced he was coming out of retirement to join Forsberg with Modo for the remainder of the 2009 – 10 Elitserien season . He explained that while he did not miss playing , both he and Forsberg desired to help their former club out of financial troubles and a last @-@ place standing in the league , facing potential relegation . The announcement crashed the Modo web server as a result of the heavy volume of people visiting the site . As a board member of the club , Näslund said he and Forsberg would play without salary . 
 Näslund played in his first game back with Modo on 28 November , 11 days after the announcement , registering an assist on the first goal of the game by Forsberg . Modo won the game 4 – 1 over <unk> BK . The following match , on 1 December , he registered two assists , setting up the game @-@ tying goal with two seconds remaining in regulation by team captain Per <unk> and the overtime @-@ winner by Forsberg . He scored his first goal since his return on 8 December in a 4 – 1 win over HV71 . On 27 February , he notched a hat @-@ trick against Färjestads BK in a 10 – 3 win . Playing in 29 of Modo 's 55 games , Näslund scored at a point @-@ per @-@ game pace with 10 goals and 19 assists . Ranked last in the league prior to Näslund 's return , Modo went on to earn 58 points in the remaining 36 games of the season , but finished one point out of a playoff spot . Näslund confirmed his second retirement following the campaign . 
 At the start of the 2010 – 11 NHL season , the NHL and NHLPA honoured Näslund with a tribute and ceremonial puck drop prior to a game held in Stockholm , Sweden , between the San Jose Sharks and Columbus Blue Jackets . Several months later , the Canucks retired his number 19 jersey prior to a home game against the Tampa Bay Lightning on 11 December 2010 . Attending the on @-@ ice ceremony were his wife , three children , parents and sister , as well as former Canucks teammates , coaches and executives . The night included a video tribute highlighting his hockey career , speeches from team personalities and gift presentations from the organization . In honour of Näslund and his wife 's past philanthropy in the Vancouver community , the team also announced the establishment of a sports equipment centre for underprivileged children . Prior to the jersey raising , Näslund thanked those involved in his career . Reflecting on his career , he commented , " Young hockey players from northern Sweden never dream of a night like this ... To go from sitting up in the press box as a healthy scratch to be standing here in front of you is quite amazing . " By having his jersey retired , he became the third player in team history to receive the honour , after Stan Smyl and Trevor Linden . 
 = = International play = = 
 Näslund made his first international appearance for Sweden at the 1989 Four Nations Tournament in the Soviet Union . The following year , he competed in the 1990 European Junior Championships , an under @-@ 18 tournament . He went pointless in six games , but helped Sweden to a gold medal finish . He improved the following year with a tournament @-@ leading 14 goals . His 16 points ranked second overall to teammate Peter Forsberg . Sweden failed to defend their gold medal . 
 Näslund continued to play in junior tournaments over the next two years , competing in the 1992 and 1993 World Junior Championships , where Sweden won back @-@ to @-@ back silver medals . During his first tournament appearance in Germany , he recorded 10 points , ranking third among all players , including a tournament @-@ leading eight goals ( tied with four others ) . Sweden finished second in the tournament 's round @-@ robin format to the Commonwealth of Independent States with a record of five wins , one loss and one tie . 
 The following year , Sweden hosted the World Junior tournament in Gävle . Näslund set a competition record for most goals scored in a single year with 13 , while playing on a line with Forsberg and Niklas Sundström . His 24 points were second in the tournament behind Forsberg 's 31 . Although Sweden and Canada finished with identical records of six wins and one loss , Canada was awarded the gold medal by virtue of their 3 – 2 win against Sweden during round @-@ robin play . Näslund was named along with Forsberg to the Tournament All @-@ Star Team . 
 Näslund made his senior international debut later that year at the 1993 World Championships in Munich and Dortmund , Germany , where he earned another silver medal with Sweden . He contributed a goal and an assist over eight games . Three years later , he was added to Sweden 's roster for the 1996 World Championships in Vienna , Austria , after the Canucks were eliminated in the NHL playoffs . He was pointless while competing in one game , as Sweden failed to medal . Several months later , Näslund competed in the inaugural 1996 World Cup , but was again limited to one game . Sweden reached the semifinal , where they were eliminated by Canada . Competing in his third World Championships in 1999 , Näslund helped Sweden to a bronze medal with a 10 @-@ point effort in 10 games . 
 In 2002 , Näslund made his first and only appearance in the Winter Olympics at the 2002 Games in Salt Lake City . He scored his first and only two Olympic goals during a 7 – 1 win against Germany . After going undefeated in the round @-@ robin and heralded as medal favourites , Sweden was defeated by Belarus 4 – 3 in the quarterfinal . The loss was widely considered one of the most surprising results in Olympic history , while Näslund described the defeat in a post @-@ game interview as " devastating ... for us and our country . " He finished the tournament with two goals and an assist over four games , ranking fourth on the team in scoring . 
 Several months later , he participated in his final World Championships in 2002 , a tournament Sweden hosted in the cities of Gothenburg , Karlstad and Jönköping . He was added to the roster prior to the quarterfinal , following the Canucks ' first @-@ round elimination in the NHL playoffs . Sweden was defeated by Slovakia 3 – 2 in the semifinal . They went on to win their consolation match against Finland 5 – 3 to capture the bronze medal . It was Näslund 's second bronze medal in as many tournament appearances ; he scored three points in three games . 
 Prior to the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , Näslund participated in his final international competition at the 2004 World Cup , where he failed to score a goal in four games played . Although he was named to Team Sweden for the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , Näslund chose not to play due to a groin injury . Sweden went on to win the gold medal , defeating Finland in the final . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Näslund was known as a highly skilled offensive player with good skating and puck @-@ handling abilities . The most prominent aspect of his game was his wrist shot , which was known to be one of the most accurate in the league and accounted for a large portion of his goals . He also earned many of his points on the powerplay . Regarding his skill level and creativity , his first Canucks head coach , Marc Crawford , heralded him as one of " a handful of players in this game who can take a play where there 's nothing ... and turn it into a scoring chance " . 
 Näslund 's prime coincided with the contributing performances of his linemates Bertuzzi and Morrison . His finesse and goal @-@ scoring abilities were complemented by Morrison 's playmaking and Bertuzzi 's strength and aggression as a power forward . They were known for playing a fast and entertaining style . As a result , head coach Marc Crawford implemented a highly offensive coaching strategy . 
 As captain of the Canucks for eight years , Näslund was a self @-@ professed " leader by example " with his work ethic and play on the ice . He was often criticized by the media and fans in his final few seasons with the Canucks for not being sufficiently vocal or emotional as the team 's captain . Former teammates in Vancouver have described him as a quiet leader that spoke when needed nonetheless . They have also commended him for his integrity , professionalism and the caring manner in which he treated everyone in the organization . In particular , fellow Swedes Daniel and Henrik Sedin have singled him out as a player that mentored them early in their NHL career . New York Rangers general manager Glen Sather reiterated the guiding influence Näslund had on young players coming into the league . 
 These criticisms began especially in light of his decreasing offensive production following the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout . The decline was often attributed in the media to him becoming more defensively responsible under new Canucks coach Alain Vigneault . Bertuzzi 's absence following the 2005 – 06 season was also seen as a negative factor for Näslund individually . It was further proposed that the physical effects of his concussion , as a result of Steve Moore 's hit against him in 2004 , as well as the emotional toll of Bertuzzi 's subsequent retaliation against Moore strained his playing efficiency . 
 = = Management career = = 
 Midway through the 2010 – 11 Elitserien season on 17 December 2010 , Näslund was named the general manager of the Modo organization , overseeing all the organization 's sports clubs . In his first season with the organization , the hockey club finished last in the Elitserien , six points out of a playoff spot . Facing relegation to the second @-@ tier HockeyAllsvenskan , Modo finished second in the 2011 <unk> , retaining their Elitserien status for the 2011 – 12 season . 
 In the off @-@ season , Näslund was joined by Peter Forsberg on Modo 's management team . Forsberg was announced as Modo 's assistant manager in April 2011 . 
 = = Off the ice = = 
 = = = Personal = = = 
 Näslund and his wife Lotta have three children : Rebecca , Isabella , and Alex . During his NHL career , they spent their summers in Sweden . Like Swedes Nicklas Lidström and his childhood idol , Håkan Loob , Näslund had expressed a desire to raise his children in his homeland Sweden . He made headlines when he first publicly contemplated an early retirement from the NHL to serve those purposes during the 2002 – 03 season . However , he also considered Vancouver his home and cherished his time spent in the city as a member of the Canucks . 
 Upon being signed by the Rangers , Näslund and his family moved to Tarrytown , New York . Following his retirement from the NHL in 2009 , they returned to Sweden , where Näslund began coaching his son 's minor @-@ league hockey team before he became the general manager of Modo . He participated in the construction of a new house in Örnsköldsvik that his family moved into . 
 It has been reported that Naslund is a devout Christian when he has actually not been a part of the Christian Church for many years . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 In 2002 , Näslund and Forsberg founded <unk> , an organization that raises money for sick and disabled children in their home region of <unk> . A team of Swedish all @-@ stars are annually assembled to host exhibition charity games against varying challengers . 
 In Vancouver , Näslund ran a program called " <unk> 's Suite 19 " that gave underprivileged children the opportunity to watch Canucks games from a private suite in GM Place . Game attendees were chosen through local children 's charities . The program was later taken over by Canucks goaltender Roberto Luongo and renamed " Lui 's Crease Club " after Näslund 's departure from Vancouver . Along with other Canucks players , Näslund made regular visits to Canuck Place , a children 's hospice that provides specialized care for children with life @-@ threatening illnesses ; BC Children 's Hospital ; and was a contributor to the Canucks For Kids Fund . He also appeared in a public service announcement with BC Children 's Hospital , educating provincial viewers on mental health issues . 
 Following his NHL retirement , he joined the anniversary tour of the NHLPA 's Goals and Dreams program , a charity that donates hockey equipment to underprivileged children . Näslund began the tour in Örnsköldsvik before joining former Canucks teammates Jyrki Lumme and Pavel Bure for stops in Helsinki and Moscow , respectively . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 At the peak of his career , Näslund signed multiple endorsement deals , most notably with Nike Bauer and Electronic Arts ( EA ) . In 2004 , EA Sports selected Näslund to appear on the cover of NHL 2005 , EA 's yearly hockey video game . He is also on the European cover of NHL 2000 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International statistics = = = 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = Sweden = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks team awards = = = 
 = = Records = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 World Junior Championships ' record ; most goals , single tournament : 13 ( 1993 ) 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 All @-@ time hat @-@ tricks : 10 ( tied with Tony Tanti ) 
 All @-@ time powerplay goals : 114 
 Longest tenured captain : 8 years ( 2000 – 08 ) 
 Single @-@ season points by a left wing : 104 ( 2002 – 03 ) 
 Single @-@ season goals by a left wing : 48 ( 2002 – 03 ) 
 Single @-@ game goals : 4 ( twice ; 14 December 2002 vs. Edmonton Oilers ; 9 December 2003 vs. Pittsburgh Penguins ; tied with 10 others ) 
 = Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good = 
 Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good is the first long @-@ form video by American singer Jennifer Lopez . It was released in the United States on DVD and VHS on November 7 , 2000 by SMV Enterprises , the home media division of Sony 's music and entertainment label . With a running time of 60 minutes , the video provides a documentary @-@ style look at the launch of Lopez 's music career , through a mixture of interviews , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage , music videos and live performances . The interview segments were conducted by Lopez 's sister Lynda , who interviews not only Lopez , but also their mother , Benny Medina and Marc Anthony . 
 Beginning her career in musical theater , Lopez re @-@ entered the music scene upon her portrayal of the title role in the Selena biopic of the same name ( 1997 ) . The role inspired her to launch a career in music ; critics deemed it risky , noting that if she was unsuccessful in doing so , it would be an embarrassment and could damage her career . During the production of her debut album , On the 6 ( 1999 ) , Lopez was aware that she received her recording contract on the premise of having an already established name in the entertainment industry ; her goal for the album was to prove she had musical talent . The success of her debut single " If You Had My Love " and On the 6 came as a surprise to critics ; their release made the " popular actor even more popular " , with both the music industry and the public becoming intrigued by " this woman who seemed to have so many different talents " . 
 Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good received generally favorable reviews from critics , although it was noted that it would be of no interest to those who were not fans of Lopez . It was additionally praised for showing the singer 's transition from her acting career to a music career . The interview segments of the video were deemed to be " slick and promotional " . In the United States , Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good was certified as a Gold Video Longform by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 50 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Background = = 
 From a young age , Lopez 's Puerto Rican parents stressed the importance of work ethic and being able to speak English . They encouraged their three daughters to put on performances at home , singing and dancing in front of each other and their friends so that they would stay " out of trouble " . While attending her final year of high school , Lopez learned about a film casting that was seeking several teenage girls for small roles . She auditioned and was cast in My Little Girl ( 1986 ) , an low @-@ budget film co @-@ written and directed by Connie <unk> . After she finished filming her role in the film , Lopez knew that she wanted to become a " famous movie star " . She told her parents this , but they <unk> that it was a " really stupid " idea and that " no Latinos did that " . Their disagreements led Lopez to move out of their family home and into an apartment in Manhattan . During this period , Lopez performed in regional productions of several musicals , before being hired for the chorus in a musical that toured Europe for five months . She was unhappy with the role , as she was the only member of the chorus not to have a solo . From there , she got a job on the show Synchronicity in Japan , where she acted as a dancer , singer and a choreographer . Lopez then gained her first regular high @-@ profile job as a Fly Girl dancer on the television comedy program In Living Color . She moved to Los Angeles with then @-@ boyfriend David Cruz to film the series and remained a regular cast member until 1993 when she decided to pursue a full @-@ time acting career . 
 After a series of co @-@ starring film roles , Lopez received her big break came in 1996 , when she was cast to play the title role in Selena , a biopic of the late American singer @-@ songwriter Selena . In the film , Selena 's real voice is used for the musical sequences in Selena , but Lopez would nonetheless sing the lyrics during the scenes instead of lip syncing . When asked in an interview if Selena inspired her to launch a music career , Lopez stated : " I really , really became inspired , because I started my career in musical theater on stage . So doing the movie just reminded me of how much I missed singing , dancing , and the like ... " After filming Selena , Lopez was " really feeling [ her ] Latin roots " and cut a demo in Spanish . Lopez 's manager then sent the song , entitled " Vivir Sin Ti " , to Sony Music Entertainment 's Work Group , who showed an interest in signing Lopez . Tommy Mottola , the head of the label suggested to her that she sing in English instead . She complied and began recording her debut studio album On the 6 . During production of the album , Lopez was aware of the fact that she received her recording contract on the premise of her looks and having an already established name in the entertainment industry , and wanted to prove that she had musical talent . Prior to the debut of her music , critics wondered why she would take the risk of launching a music career . It was noted that : " If the album was a flop , not only would it embarrass Lopez , but it might even damage her career . " 
 Lopez 's debut single , " If You Had My Love " , was released in May 1999 . The song reached the top spot on the Billboard Hot 100 on the issue dated June 12 , 1999 , dethroning Ricky Martin 's " Livin ' La Vida Loca " as the number @-@ one song in the country . The song stayed atop the Billboard Hot 100 for a period of a month and remained in the top ten until September 1999 . " If You Had My Love " was also a success internationally ; topping the charts in countries including New Zealand , Australia , and Canada . The song also peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart and reached the top ten of seven other countries . " No Me Ames " , a duet with American recording artist Marc Anthony was released as a B @-@ side to " If You Had My Love " and as the album 's second single . The song was promoted by Sony Discos , who released a salsa and a ballad version of the song on their respective radio formats . The success of " If You Had My Love " and On the 6 came as a surprise to critics ; their release made the " popular actor even more popular " . Both the music industry and the public became intrigued by " this woman who seemed to have so many different talents " . Following the release of " If You Had My Love " and " No Me Ames " , three additional singles were released from the album . By the end of 1999 , Lopez had successfully converted herself from a film star to a pop star . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good opens with an intertitle that features a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes look at Lopez during the artwork shoot for On the 6 , artist 's proof of said photoshoot and brief clips of the music videos to the album 's five singles . In the second chapter , " Why Risk a Music Career ? " , Lopez is interviewed by her sister Lynda Lopez , who oversees each interview segment , about the risks of starting a music career after having an already thriving movie career . Critics believed that she was only launching a music career with an intent to expand her brand , while Lopez felt as if it was simply the " next natural step " in her career . Lopez 's manager Benny Medina further discusses this , labeling her as the " ultimate " triple threat – " the actor , singer and dancer " . Lopez then confers , in the chapter " Press Tours / Promotions " , about the extensive promotional schedule she was on to promote the album . She examines the differences in promoting an album and a film , stating that promoting an album is more " personal " as it is something that is " closer to your heart " and something she " really believes in " . According to Lopez , by the end of the promotional tour for the album she " lost " her voice from the amount of interviews she had . Following this , Lopez 's performance of the Darkchild remix of " If You Had My Love " at the 1999 VH1 Fashion Awards is shown . 
 In the fifth chapter , " Beginning of the Year " , Lopez discusses her hectic schedule at the beginning of 1999 ; balancing film events and choosing the album 's first single and shooting its music video . Lopez then goes into detail about the concept behind the music video for " If You Had My Love " . Lopez 's sister Lynda makes a formal introduction to the music video , as having a " special place " in her heart , and it is shown . Lopez then explains how her duet with Marc Anthony on " No Me Ames " came about and the concept of the video . Video footage is shown , as Lopez discusses her first ever live performance , with " No Me Ames " , in April 1999 at Madison Square Garden alongside Anthony . Following this , the official music video to " No Me Ames " is shown . In the eleventh chapter of Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good , appropriately entitled " First Number One Single " , Lopez reveals the moment she found out that " If You Had My Love " went number one in the United States . She went on to discuss the events that occurred during the release week of On the 6 in " Record Release Week " . Lopez then reveals how she came to record " Let 's Get Loud " and her performance of the song at the 1999 FIFA Women 's World Cup is shown . 
 In " Jennifer 's Energy " , Medina discusses Lopez 's ability to work at late hours of the night . Her 1999 Billboard Music Awards performance of the Hex Hector remix of " Waiting for Tonight " is then shown . Lopez then speaks of filming the music video for " Waiting for Tonight " and behind the scenes footage on set of the video is shown . She also explains how the Hex Hector remix of the song came about and the alternative music video that was created for it . A megamix video of the original and Hex Hector remix follows . The twentieth chapter , " Jennifer 's Mom " , is an interview with Lopez 's mother , discussing what was like to see Lopez on television for the first time . Lopez then discusses her surprise to the amount of fans she had and their dedication in " Fan Support " . In " Working on Record " , the twenty @-@ second chapter of Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good , Lopez discusses the process of writing and recording the album . Lopez 's sister Lynda interviews her choreographer Tina Landon on what it is like to work with her , before her 1999 Blockbuster Awards performance of " If You Had My Love " is shown . Footage is then shown of Lopez " goofing around " during a photoshoot , before the music video to her song " Baila " is debuted . In " Film Energy vs. Music Energy " Lopez compares the difference between the fans of her movies and of her music . In the final interview footage of Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good , Lopez explains the concept behind the music video of " Feelin ' So Good " and why Big Pun and Fat Joe were chosen to be featured on the song . The music video is then shown and is faded out into the end credits . 
 = = Release = = 
 Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good was released on DVD and VHS formats in the United States on November 7 , 2000 by SMV Enterprises , the home media division of Sony Corporation 's music and entertainment label Sony Music Entertainment . It was released in Canada the following week by CBS Video on DVD and VHS . In the United Kingdom , the video received a DVD release on January 30 , 2001 and a VHS release on April 30 , 2001 by SMV Enterprises . Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good was released on DVD in Japan on June 20 , 2001 by Sony Music Records , and on DVD and VHS in France on April 8 , 2002 by Sony BMG . The Region 1 cover features a black and white photo of Lopez during the photoshoot of On the 6 , while the Region 2 edition features a golden hue image also taken during the same photoshoot . Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good and Let 's Get Loud were released as a two disc DVD set in France on October 20 , 2003 . Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good was re @-@ released on DVD in Japan on November 21 , 2007 . Cory Rooney and Lopez acted as album executive producers of the DVD , while Lopez acted as a video executive producer , alongside Medina . Jeffrey <unk> acted as a video associate producer . 
 Digitally remastered with Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 Surround Sound , the DVD edition of Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good contains interactive menus and chapter access to songs . It contains song lyrics and a biography of Lopez in English and Spanish , as well as an exclusive photo gallery . Additionally , the video contains the music videos to Lopez 's songs : " If You Had My Love " , " Waiting for Tonight " , " No Me Ames " , " Feelin ' So Good " and " Baila " . It contains four live televised performances by Lopez in 1999 . First is her Blockbuster Movie Awards performance of " If You Had My Love " , followed by her VH1 Fashion Awards performance of the Darkchild remix of the same song . Then , her performance at the Billboard Music Awards of the Hex Hector remix of " Waiting for Tonight " and lastly her Woman 's World Cup Finale performance of " Let 's Get Loud " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good received generally favorable reviews from critics . Perry Seibert of Allmusic awarded the DVD three out of five stars , commenting that fans of Lopez will " greatly enjoy this disc " , but it carries little interest to the average DVD consumer . Aaron Beierle of DVD Talk stated that : " It 's interesting to watch this disc after watching Lopez in The Cell . I think it 's been impressive to watch her mature as an actress ; although much has been made of her supposedly demanding attitude , I think she 's talented as not only a singer / dancer but as a dramatic actress – I 'm sure a comedic role is right around the corner " . The reviewer additionally stated that the most interesting segment of the release was the " Waiting for Tonight " music video . He concluded by stating that : " Although I 'm not really a big fan of her music , I do appreciate it and found it enjoyable and entertaining to listen to throughout . " Beierle compared Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good to the video releases of Mariah Carey . The interview footage in @-@ between the performance segments has been described as " very slick and promotional " . It was also noted that in the interview footage Lopez " comes through energetically " and without " much star @-@ ego " . In the United States , Jennifer Lopez : Feelin ' So Good was certified as a Gold Video Longform by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 50 @,@ 000 units . 
 = Adderall = 
 Adderall is a combination drug containing salts of the two enantiomers of amphetamine , a central nervous system ( CNS ) stimulant of the phenethylamine class . Adderall is used in the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) and narcolepsy . It is also used as an athletic performance enhancer and cognitive enhancer , and recreationally as an aphrodisiac and euphoriant . By salt content , the active ingredients of Adderall are 25 % levoamphetamine salts ( the <unk> or ' left @-@ handed ' enantiomer ) and 75 % dextroamphetamine salts ( the <unk> or ' right @-@ handed ' enantiomer ) . 
 Adderall is generally well @-@ tolerated and effective in treating the symptoms of ADHD and narcolepsy . At therapeutic doses , Adderall causes emotional and cognitive effects such as euphoria , change in desire for sex , increased wakefulness , and improved cognitive control . At these doses , it induces physical effects such as decreased reaction time , fatigue resistance , and increased muscle strength . In contrast , much larger doses of Adderall can impair cognitive control , cause rapid muscle breakdown , or induce a psychosis ( e.g. , delusions and paranoia ) . The side effects of Adderall vary widely among individuals , but most commonly include insomnia , dry mouth , and loss of appetite . The risk of developing an addiction is insignificant when Adderall is used as prescribed at fairly low daily doses , such as those used for treating ADHD ; however , the routine use of Adderall in larger daily doses poses a significant risk of addiction due to the pronounced reinforcing effects that are present at higher doses . Recreational doses of Adderall are generally much larger than prescribed therapeutic doses , and carry a far greater risk of serious adverse effects . 
 The two amphetamine enantiomers that compose Adderall ( i.e. , levoamphetamine and dextroamphetamine ) alleviate the symptoms of ADHD and narcolepsy by increasing the activity of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and dopamine in the brain , which results from their interactions with trace amine associated receptor 1 ( TAAR1 ) and vesicular monoamine transporter 2 ( VMAT2 ) in neurons . Dextroamphetamine is a more potent CNS stimulant than levoamphetamine , but levoamphetamine has slightly stronger cardiovascular and peripheral effects and a longer elimination half @-@ life ( i.e. , it remains in the body longer ) than dextroamphetamine . The levoamphetamine component of Adderall has been reported to improve the treatment response in some individuals relative to dextroamphetamine alone . Adderall 's active ingredient , amphetamine , shares many chemical and pharmacological properties with the human trace amines , particularly phenethylamine and N @-@ methylphenethylamine , the latter of which is a positional isomer of amphetamine . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Medical = = = 
 Adderall is used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) and narcolepsy ( a sleep disorder ) . Long @-@ term amphetamine exposure at sufficiently high doses in some animal species is known to produce abnormal dopamine system development or nerve damage , but , in humans with ADHD , pharmaceutical amphetamines appear to improve brain development and nerve growth . Reviews of magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) studies suggest that long @-@ term treatment with amphetamine decreases abnormalities in brain structure and function found in subjects with ADHD , and improves function in several parts of the brain , such as the right caudate nucleus of the basal ganglia . 
 Reviews of clinical stimulant research have established the safety and effectiveness of long @-@ term amphetamine use for ADHD . Controlled trials spanning two years have demonstrated treatment effectiveness and safety . One review highlighted a nine @-@ month randomized controlled trial in children with ADHD that found an average increase of 4 @.@ 5 IQ points , continued increases in attention , and continued decreases in disruptive behaviors and hyperactivity . 
 Current models of ADHD suggest that it is associated with functional impairments in some of the brain 's neurotransmitter systems ; these functional impairments involve impaired dopamine neurotransmission in the mesocorticolimbic projection and norepinephrine neurotransmission in the locus coeruleus and prefrontal cortex . <unk> like methylphenidate and amphetamine are effective in treating ADHD because they increase neurotransmitter activity in these systems . Approximately 80 % of those who use these stimulants see improvements in ADHD symptoms . Children with ADHD who use stimulant medications generally have better relationships with peers and family members , perform better in school , are less distractible and impulsive , and have longer attention spans . The Cochrane Collaboration 's reviews on the treatment of ADHD in children , adolescents , and adults with pharmaceutical amphetamines stated that while these drugs improve short @-@ term symptoms , they have higher discontinuation rates than non @-@ stimulant medications due to their adverse side effects . A Cochrane Collaboration review on the treatment of ADHD in children with tic disorders such as Tourette syndrome indicated that stimulants in general do not make tics worse , but high doses of dextroamphetamine could exacerbate tics in some individuals . 
 Adderall is available as immediate release tablets or extended @-@ release capsules . The extended release capsule is generally used in the morning . The extended release formulation available under the brand Adderall XR is designed to provide a therapeutic effect and plasma concentrations identical to taking two doses 4 hours apart . 
 = = = Enhancing performance = = = 
 In 2015 , a systematic review and a meta @-@ analysis of high quality clinical trials found that , when used at low ( therapeutic ) doses , amphetamine produces modest , unambiguous improvements in cognition , including working memory , episodic memory , inhibitory control and some aspects of attention , in normal healthy adults ; the cognition @-@ enhancing effects of amphetamine are known to occur through its indirect activation of both dopamine receptor D1 and adrenoceptor α2 in the prefrontal cortex . A systematic review from 2014 noted that low doses of amphetamine also improve memory consolidation , in turn leading to improved recall of information . Therapeutic doses of amphetamine also enhance cortical network efficiency , an effect which mediates improvements in working memory in all individuals . Amphetamine and other ADHD stimulants also improve task saliency ( motivation to perform a task ) and increase arousal ( wakefulness ) , in turn promoting goal @-@ directed behavior . Stimulants such as amphetamine can improve performance on difficult and boring tasks and are used by some students as a study and test @-@ taking aid . Based upon studies of self @-@ reported illicit stimulant use , 5 – 35 % of college students use diverted ADHD stimulants , which are primarily used for performance enhancement rather than as recreational drugs . However , high amphetamine doses that are above the therapeutic range can interfere with working memory and other aspects of cognitive control . 
 Amphetamine is used by some athletes for its psychological and athletic performance @-@ enhancing effects , such as increased endurance and alertness ; however , non @-@ medical amphetamine use is prohibited at sporting events that are regulated by collegiate , national , and international anti @-@ doping agencies . In healthy people at oral therapeutic doses , amphetamine has been shown to increase muscle strength , acceleration , athletic performance in anaerobic conditions , and endurance ( i.e. , it delays the onset of fatigue ) , while improving reaction time . Amphetamine improves endurance and reaction time primarily through reuptake inhibition and effluxion of dopamine in the central nervous system . Amphetamine and other dopaminergic drugs also increase power output at fixed levels of perceived exertion by overriding a " safety switch " that allows the core temperature limit to increase in order to access a reserve capacity that is normally off @-@ limits . At therapeutic doses , the adverse effects of amphetamine do not impede athletic performance ; however , at much higher doses , amphetamine can induce effects that severely impair performance , such as rapid muscle breakdown and elevated body temperature . 
 Adderall has been banned in the National Football League ( NFL ) , Major League Baseball ( MLB ) , National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , and the National Collegiate Athletics Association ( NCAA ) . In leagues such as the NFL , there is a very rigorous process required to obtain an exemption to this rule even when the athlete has been medically prescribed the drug by their physician . 
 = = = Recreational = = = 
 Adderall is considered to have a high potential for misuse as a recreational drug . Adderall tablets can be crushed and snorted , or dissolved in water and injected . Injection into the bloodstream can be dangerous because insoluble fillers within the tablets can block small blood vessels . 
 = = Contraindications = = 
 According to the International Programme on Chemical Safety ( IPCS ) and United States Food and Drug Administration ( USFDA ) , amphetamine is contraindicated in people with a history of drug abuse , heart disease , severe agitation , or severe anxiety . It is also contraindicated in people currently experiencing arteriosclerosis ( hardening of the arteries ) , glaucoma ( increased eye pressure ) , hyperthyroidism ( excessive production of thyroid hormone ) , or moderate to severe hypertension . People who have experienced allergic reactions to other stimulants in the past or who are taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors ( MAOIs ) are advised not to take amphetamine , although safe concurrent use of amphetamine and monoamine oxidase inhibitors has been documented . These agencies also state that anyone with anorexia nervosa , bipolar disorder , depression , hypertension , liver or kidney problems , mania , psychosis , Raynaud 's phenomenon , seizures , thyroid problems , tics , or Tourette syndrome should monitor their symptoms while taking amphetamine . Evidence from human studies indicates that therapeutic amphetamine use does not cause developmental abnormalities in the fetus or newborns ( i.e. , it is not a human teratogen ) , but amphetamine abuse does pose risks to the fetus . Amphetamine has also been shown to pass into breast milk , so the IPCS and USFDA advise mothers to avoid breastfeeding when using it . Due to the potential for reversible growth impairments , the USFDA advises monitoring the height and weight of children and adolescents prescribed an amphetamine pharmaceutical . 
 = = Side effects = = 
 The side effects of Adderall are many and varied , but the amount of substance consumed is the primary factor in determining the likelihood and severity of side effects . Adderall is currently approved for long @-@ term therapeutic use by the USFDA . Recreational use of Adderall generally involves far larger doses and is therefore significantly more dangerous , involving a much greater risk of serious side effects . 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 At normal therapeutic doses , the physical side effects of amphetamine vary widely by age and from person to person . Cardiovascular side effects can include hypertension or hypotension from a <unk> response , Raynaud 's phenomenon ( reduced blood flow to extremities ) , and tachycardia ( increased heart rate ) . Sexual side effects in males may include erectile dysfunction , frequent erections , or prolonged erections . Abdominal side effects may include abdominal pain , appetite loss , nausea , and weight loss . Other potential side effects include blurred vision , dry mouth , excessive grinding of the teeth , nosebleed , profuse sweating , rhinitis <unk> ( drug @-@ induced nasal congestion ) , reduced seizure threshold , and tics ( a type of movement disorder ) . Dangerous physical side effects are rare at typical pharmaceutical doses . 
 Amphetamine stimulates the medullary respiratory centers , producing faster and deeper breaths . In a normal person at therapeutic doses , this effect is usually not noticeable , but when respiration is already compromised , it may be evident . Amphetamine also induces contraction in the urinary bladder sphincter , the muscle which controls urination , which can result in difficulty urinating . This effect can be useful in treating bed wetting and loss of bladder control . The effects of amphetamine on the gastrointestinal tract are unpredictable . If intestinal activity is high , amphetamine may reduce gastrointestinal motility ( the rate at which content moves through the digestive system ) ; however , amphetamine may increase motility when the smooth muscle of the tract is relaxed . Amphetamine also has a slight analgesic effect and can enhance the pain relieving effects of opioids . 
 USFDA @-@ commissioned studies from 2011 indicate that in children , young adults , and adults there is no association between serious adverse cardiovascular events ( sudden death , heart attack , and stroke ) and the medical use of amphetamine or other ADHD stimulants . 
 = = = Psychological = = = 
 Common psychological effects of therapeutic doses can include increased alertness , apprehension , concentration , decreased sense of fatigue , mood swings ( elated mood followed by mildly depressed mood ) , increased initiative , insomnia or wakefulness , self @-@ confidence , and sociability . Less common side effects include anxiety , change in libido , grandiosity , irritability , repetitive or obsessive behaviors , and restlessness ; these effects depend on the user 's personality and current mental state . Amphetamine psychosis ( e.g. , delusions and paranoia ) can occur in heavy users . Although very rare , this psychosis can also occur at therapeutic doses during long @-@ term therapy . According to the USFDA , " there is no systematic evidence " that stimulants produce aggressive behavior or hostility . 
 Amphetamine has also been shown to produce a conditioned place preference in humans taking therapeutic doses , meaning that individuals acquire a preference for spending time in places where they have previously used amphetamine . 
 = = Overdose = = 
 An amphetamine overdose can lead to many different symptoms , but is rarely fatal with appropriate care . The severity of overdose symptoms increases with dosage and decreases with drug tolerance to amphetamine . Tolerant individuals have been known to take as much as 5 grams of amphetamine in a day , which is roughly 100 times the maximum daily therapeutic dose . Symptoms of a moderate and extremely large overdose are listed below ; fatal amphetamine poisoning usually also involves convulsions and coma . In 2013 , overdose on amphetamine , methamphetamine , and other compounds implicated in an " amphetamine use disorder " resulted in an estimated 3 @,@ 788 deaths worldwide ( 3 @,@ 425 – 4 @,@ 145 deaths , 95 % confidence ) . 
 Pathological overactivation of the mesolimbic pathway , a dopamine pathway that connects the ventral tegmental area to the nucleus accumbens , plays a central role in amphetamine addiction . Individuals who frequently overdose on amphetamine during recreational use have a high risk of developing an amphetamine addiction , since repeated overdoses gradually increase the level of <unk> ΔFosB , a " molecular switch " and " master control protein " for addiction . Once nucleus accumbens ΔFosB is sufficiently overexpressed , it begins to increase the severity of addictive behavior ( i.e. , compulsive drug @-@ seeking ) with further increases in its expression . While there are currently no effective drugs for treating amphetamine addiction , regularly engaging in sustained aerobic exercise appears to reduce the risk of developing such an addiction . Sustained aerobic exercise on a regular basis also appears to be an effective treatment for amphetamine addiction ; exercise therapy improves clinical treatment outcomes and may be used as a combination therapy with cognitive behavioral therapy , which is currently the best clinical treatment available . 
 = = = Addiction = = = 
 Addiction is a serious risk with heavy recreational amphetamine use but is unlikely to arise from typical long @-@ term medical use at therapeutic doses . Drug tolerance develops rapidly in amphetamine abuse ( i.e. , a recreational amphetamine overdose ) , so periods of extended use require increasingly larger doses of the drug in order to achieve the same effect . 
 = = = = Biomolecular mechanisms = = = = 
 Current models of addiction from chronic drug use involve alterations in gene expression in certain parts of the brain , particularly the nucleus accumbens . The most important transcription factors that produce these alterations are ΔFosB , cAMP response element binding protein ( CREB ) , and nuclear factor kappa B ( NF @-@ κB ) . ΔFosB plays a crucial role in the development of drug addictions , since its overexpression in D1 @-@ type medium spiny neurons in the nucleus accumbens is necessary and sufficient for most of the behavioral and neural adaptations that arise from addiction . Once ΔFosB is sufficiently overexpressed , it induces an addictive state that becomes increasingly more severe with further increases in ΔFosB expression . It has been implicated in addictions to alcohol , cannabinoids , cocaine , methylphenidate , nicotine , opioids , phencyclidine , propofol , and substituted amphetamines , among others . 
 ΔJunD , a transcription factor , and G9a , a histone methyltransferase enzyme , both directly oppose the induction of ΔFosB in the nucleus accumbens ( i.e. , they oppose increases in its expression ) . Sufficiently overexpressing ΔJunD in the nucleus accumbens with viral vectors can completely block many of the neural and behavioral alterations seen in chronic drug abuse ( i.e. , the alterations mediated by ΔFosB ) . ΔFosB also plays an important role in regulating behavioral responses to natural rewards , such as palatable food , sex , and exercise . Since both natural rewards and addictive drugs induce expression of ΔFosB ( i.e. , they cause the brain to produce more of it ) , chronic acquisition of these rewards can result in a similar pathological state of addiction . Consequently , ΔFosB is the most significant factor involved in both amphetamine addiction and amphetamine @-@ induced sex addictions , which are compulsive sexual behaviors that result from excessive sexual activity and amphetamine use . These sex addictions are associated with a dopamine dysregulation syndrome which occurs in some patients taking dopaminergic drugs . 
 The effects of amphetamine on gene regulation are both <unk> and route @-@ dependent . Most of the research on gene regulation and addiction is based upon animal studies with intravenous amphetamine administration at very high doses . The few studies that have used equivalent ( weight @-@ adjusted ) human therapeutic doses and oral administration show that these changes , if they occur , are relatively minor . This suggests that medical use of amphetamine does not significantly affect gene regulation . 
 = = = = Pharmacological treatments = = = = 
 As of May 2014 , there is no effective pharmacotherapy for amphetamine addiction . Reviews from 2015 and 2016 indicated that TAAR1 @-@ selective agonists have significant therapeutic potential as a treatment for psychostimulant addictions ; however , as of February 2016 , the only compounds which are known to function as TAAR1 @-@ selective agonists are experimental drugs . Amphetamine addiction is largely mediated through increased activation of dopamine receptors and co @-@ localized NMDA receptors in the nucleus accumbens ; magnesium ions inhibit NMDA receptors by blocking the receptor calcium channel . One review suggested that , based upon animal testing , pathological ( addiction @-@ inducing ) psychostimulant use significantly reduces the level of intracellular magnesium throughout the brain . Supplemental magnesium treatment has been shown to reduce amphetamine self @-@ administration ( i.e. , doses given to oneself ) in humans , but it is not an effective monotherapy for amphetamine addiction . 
 = = = = Behavioral treatments = = = = 
 Cognitive behavioral therapy is currently the most effective clinical treatment for psychostimulant addictions . Additionally , research on the neurobiological effects of physical exercise suggests that daily aerobic exercise , especially endurance exercise ( e.g. , marathon running ) , prevents the development of drug addiction and is an effective adjunct therapy ( i.e. , a supplemental treatment ) for amphetamine addiction . Exercise leads to better treatment outcomes when used as an adjunct treatment , particularly for psychostimulant addictions . In particular , aerobic exercise decreases psychostimulant self @-@ administration , reduces the reinstatement ( i.e. , relapse ) of drug @-@ seeking , and induces increased dopamine receptor D2 ( DRD2 ) density in the striatum . This is the opposite of pathological stimulant use , which induces decreased striatal DRD2 density . One review noted that exercise may also prevent the development of a drug addiction by altering ΔFosB or c @-@ Fos <unk> in the striatum or other parts of the reward system . 
 = = = Dependence and withdrawal = = = 
 According to another Cochrane Collaboration review on withdrawal in individuals who compulsively use amphetamine and methamphetamine , " when chronic heavy users abruptly discontinue amphetamine use , many report a time @-@ limited withdrawal syndrome that occurs within 24 hours of their last dose . " This review noted that withdrawal symptoms in chronic , high @-@ dose users are frequent , occurring in up to 87 @.@ 6 % of cases , and persist for three to four weeks with a marked " crash " phase occurring during the first week . Amphetamine withdrawal symptoms can include anxiety , drug craving , depressed mood , fatigue , increased appetite , increased movement or decreased movement , lack of motivation , sleeplessness or sleepiness , and lucid dreams . The review indicated that withdrawal symptoms are associated with the degree of dependence , suggesting that therapeutic use would result in far milder discontinuation symptoms . Manufacturer prescribing information does not indicate the presence of withdrawal symptoms following discontinuation of amphetamine use after an extended period at therapeutic doses . 
 = = = Toxicity and psychosis = = = 
 In rodents and primates , sufficiently high doses of amphetamine cause dopaminergic neurotoxicity , or damage to dopamine neurons , which is characterized by reduced transporter and receptor function . There is no evidence that amphetamine is directly neurotoxic in humans . However , large doses of amphetamine may cause indirect neurotoxicity as a result of increased oxidative stress from reactive oxygen species and autoxidation of dopamine . 
 A severe amphetamine overdose can result in a stimulant psychosis that may involve a variety of symptoms , such as paranoia and delusions . A Cochrane Collaboration review on treatment for amphetamine , dextroamphetamine , and methamphetamine psychosis states that about 5 – 15 % of users fail to recover completely . According to the same review , there is at least one trial that shows antipsychotic medications effectively resolve the symptoms of acute amphetamine psychosis . Psychosis very rarely arises from therapeutic use . 
 = = Interactions = = 
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors ( MAOIs ) taken with Adderall may result in a hypertensive crisis if taken within two weeks after last use of an MAOI type drug . 
 Inhibitors of enzymes that directly metabolize amphetamine ( particularly <unk> and CYP2D6 ) will prolong the elimination of amphetamine . 
 Stimulants and antidepressants ( sedatives and depressants ) may increase ( decrease ) the drug effects of Adderall , and vice versa . 
 Dietary pH affects the absorption and elimination half @-@ life of Adderall ; an alkaline diet increases the rate of absorption and decreases the rate of excretion , while acidic diets decrease absorption and increase excretion rates . 
 Proton @-@ pump inhibitors ( <unk> ) modify the pharmacokinetics of Adderall XR . Co @-@ administration requires monitoring for changes in clinical effect . 
 = = Pharmacology = = 
 = = = Mechanism of action = = = 
 Amphetamine , the active ingredient of Adderall , works primarily by increasing the activity of the neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine in the brain . It also triggers the release of several other hormones ( e.g. , epinephrine ) and neurotransmitters ( e.g. , serotonin and histamine ) as well as the synthesis of certain <unk> ( e.g. , cocaine and amphetamine regulated transcript [ CART ] peptides ) , . Both active ingredients of Adderall , dextroamphetamine and levoamphetamine , bind to the same biological targets , but their binding affinities ( that is , potency ) differ somewhat . Dextroamphetamine and levoamphetamine are both potent full agonists ( activating compounds ) of trace amine @-@ associated receptor 1 ( TAAR1 ) and interact with vesicular monoamine transporter 2 ( VMAT2 ) , with dextroamphetamine being the more potent agonist of TAAR1 . Consequently , dextroamphetamine produces more CNS stimulation than levoamphetamine ; however , levoamphetamine has slightly greater cardiovascular and peripheral effects . <unk> provides Adderall with a quicker onset and longer @-@ lasting effects than dextroamphetamine alone . It has been reported that certain children have a better clinical response to levoamphetamine . 
 In the absence of amphetamine , VMAT2 will normally move monoamines ( e.g. , dopamine , histamine , serotonin , norepinephrine , etc . ) from the intracellular fluid of a monoamine neuron into its synaptic vesicles , which are essentially chemical storage units inside a neuron . When amphetamine enters a neuron and interacts with VMAT2 , the transporter reverses its direction of transport , thereby releasing stored monoamines inside synaptic vesicles back into the neuron 's intracellular fluid . Meanwhile , when amphetamine activates TAAR1 , the receptor causes the neuron 's cell membrane @-@ bound monoamine transporters ( i.e. , the dopamine transporter , norepinephrine transporter , or serotonin transporter ) to either stop transporting molecules altogether ( via internalization ) or even transport them in reverse ; in other words , the reversed membrane transporter will push dopamine , norepinephrine , and serotonin out of the neuron 's intracellular fluid and into the synaptic cleft . In summary , by interacting with both VMAT2 and TAAR1 , amphetamine releases neurotransmitters from synaptic vesicles ( the effect from VMAT2 ) into the intracellular fluid where they subsequently exit the neuron through the membrane @-@ bound , reversed monoamine transporters ( the effect from TAAR1 ) . 
 = = = Pharmacokinetics = = = 
 The oral bioavailability of amphetamine varies with gastrointestinal pH ; it is well absorbed from the gut , and bioavailability is typically over 75 % for dextroamphetamine . Amphetamine is a weak base with a pKa of 9 – 10 ; consequently , when the pH is basic , more of the drug is in its lipid soluble free base form , and more is absorbed through the lipid @-@ rich cell membranes of the gut epithelium . Conversely , an acidic pH means the drug is predominantly in a water @-@ soluble cationic ( salt ) form , and less is absorbed . Approximately 15 – 40 % of amphetamine circulating in the bloodstream is bound to plasma proteins . 
 The half @-@ life of amphetamine enantiomers differ and vary with urine pH . At normal urine pH , the half @-@ lives of dextroamphetamine and levoamphetamine are 9 – 11 hours and 11 – 14 hours , respectively . An acidic diet will reduce the enantiomer half @-@ lives to 8 – 11 hours ; an alkaline diet will increase the range to 16 – 31 hours . The immediate @-@ release and extended release variants of salts of both isomers reach peak plasma concentrations at 3 hours and 7 hours post @-@ dose respectively . Amphetamine is eliminated via the kidneys , with 30 – 40 % of the drug being excreted unchanged at normal urinary pH . When the urinary pH is basic , amphetamine is in its free base form , so less is excreted . When urine pH is abnormal , the urinary recovery of amphetamine may range from a low of 1 % to a high of 75 % , depending mostly upon whether urine is too basic or acidic , respectively . Amphetamine is usually eliminated within two days of the last oral dose . Apparent half @-@ life and duration of effect increase with repeated use and accumulation of the drug . 
 CYP2D6 , dopamine β @-@ hydroxylase , flavin @-@ containing monooxygenase 3 , butyrate @-@ CoA ligase , and glycine N @-@ acyltransferase are the enzymes known to metabolize amphetamine or its metabolites in humans . Amphetamine has a variety of excreted metabolic products , including 4 @-@ hydroxyamphetamine , 4 @-@ hydroxynorephedrine , 4 @-@ hydroxyphenylacetone , benzoic acid , hippuric acid , norephedrine , and phenylacetone . Among these metabolites , the active sympathomimetics are 4 ‑ hydroxyamphetamine , 4 ‑ hydroxynorephedrine , and norephedrine . The main metabolic pathways involve aromatic para @-@ hydroxylation , aliphatic alpha- and beta @-@ hydroxylation , N @-@ oxidation , N @-@ dealkylation , and deamination . The known pathways and detectable metabolites in humans include the following : 
 = = = Related endogenous compounds = = = 
 Amphetamine has a very similar structure and function to the endogenous trace amines , which are naturally occurring neurotransmitter molecules produced in the human body and brain . Among this group , the most closely related compounds are phenethylamine , the parent compound of amphetamine , and N @-@ methylphenethylamine , an isomer of amphetamine ( i.e. , it has an identical molecular formula ) . In humans , phenethylamine is produced directly from L @-@ phenylalanine by the aromatic amino acid decarboxylase ( <unk> ) enzyme , which converts L @-@ DOPA into dopamine as well . In turn , N ‑ methylphenethylamine is metabolized from phenethylamine by phenylethanolamine N @-@ methyltransferase , the same enzyme that metabolizes norepinephrine into epinephrine . Like amphetamine , both phenethylamine and N ‑ methylphenethylamine regulate monoamine neurotransmission via TAAR1 ; unlike amphetamine , both of these substances are broken down by monoamine oxidase B , and therefore have a shorter half @-@ life than amphetamine . 
 = = History , society , and culture = = 
 Richwood Pharmaceuticals , which later merged with Shire plc , introduced the current Adderall brand in 1996 as an instant @-@ release tablet . In 2006 , Shire agreed to sell rights to the Adderall name for this instant @-@ release medication to <unk> Pharmaceuticals . <unk> Pharmaceuticals was acquired by Teva Pharmaceuticals in 2008 during their acquisition of Barr Pharmaceuticals , including Barr 's <unk> division . 
 The first generic version of Adderall IR was introduced to market in 2002 . Later on , Barr and Shire reached a settlement agreement permitting Barr to offer a generic form of the drug beginning in April 2009 . 
 = = = Commercial formulation = = = 
 Chemically , Adderall is a mixture of several amphetamine salts ; specifically , it is composed of equal parts ( by mass ) of amphetamine aspartate monohydrate , amphetamine sulfate , dextroamphetamine sulfate , and dextroamphetamine <unk> . This drug mixture has slightly stronger CNS effects than racemic amphetamine due to the higher proportion of dextroamphetamine . Adderall is produced as both an immediate release ( IR ) and extended release ( XR ) formulation . As of December 2013 , ten different companies have produced generic Adderall IR at one point , while Teva Pharmaceutical Industries , <unk> , and Barr Pharmaceuticals currently manufacture generic Adderall XR . Shire plc , the company that held the original patent for Adderall and Adderall XR , still manufactures brand name Adderall XR , but not Adderall IR . 
 = = = Comparison to other formulations = = = 
 Adderall is one of several formulations of pharmaceutical amphetamine , including singular or mixed enantiomers and as an enantiomer prodrug . The table below compares these medications ( based on US approved forms ) : 
 = = = Past formulations = = = 
 <unk> , a pharmaceutical company , reformulated another drug , branded as Obetrol , and continued to sell this new formulation under the same brand name . This new unapproved formulation was later rebranded and sold as Adderall by Richwood after it acquired <unk> resulting in FDA warning in 1994 . Richwood submitted this formulation as NDA 11 @-@ 522 and Adderall gained FDA approval for the treatment of attention @-@ deficit / hyperactivity disorder on 13 February 1996 . 
 = = = Legal status = = = 
 In Canada , amphetamines are in Schedule I of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act , and can only be obtained by prescription . 
 In Japan , the use , production , and import of any medicine containing amphetamine are prohibited . 
 In South Korea , amphetamines are prohibited . 
 In Thailand , <unk> are classified as Type 1 Narcotics . 
 In the United Kingdom , amphetamines are regarded as Class B drugs . The maximum penalty for unauthorized possession is five years in prison and an unlimited fine . The maximum penalty for illegal supply is 14 years in prison and an unlimited fine . 
 In the United States , amphetamine is a Schedule II prescription drug , classified as a CNS stimulant . 
 Internationally ( United Nations ) , amphetamine is in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances . 
 = = Reference notes = = 
 = Star Trek : Secret of Vulcan Fury = 
 Star Trek : Secret of Vulcan Fury is a cancelled action @-@ adventure game , in development by Interplay Entertainment from 1997 until its cancellation in 1999 . Based on the Star Trek : The Original Series licence , the game would have followed Captain James T. Kirk and the crew of the USS Enterprise through a series of adventures regarding the Vulcan and Romulan races . Secret of Vulcan Fury was to have been the latest in a series of games produced by Interplay based on the licence . It would have featured a control method similar to those seen in LucasArts games of that period , and nearly seven hours of full motion video capture using clay models . 
 The storyline was written by former Star Trek writer D.C. Fontana , while the script was created by John Meredyth Lucas . A promotional cereal competition was run in conjunction with Quaker Oats , the first for the licence in the United States . Despite this promotion , the game was cancelled with estimates placing it at only 5 % completion . The cast of The Original Series had already recorded their voices . Lead engineer Thom Robertson later explained the studio had underestimated the cost of the game and the difficulties in filming the clay models . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The game was to be set in the 23rd century and across four independent stories which would have revolved around ancient secrets in the history of the Vulcan and Romulan races . The episodes allow the player to assume the roles of Captain James T. Kirk , Mr. Spock , Dr. Leonard McCoy , Lt. Hikaru Sulu , Ensign Pavel Chekov , and Engineer Montgomery " Scotty " Scott . The first episode was to involve the murder of a Romulan ambassador who was seeking to reunite the races , placing the player in control of Dr. McCoy initially . 
 The character that the player controlled would change as they progressed through the game . The creators sought to have the player control Spock during one of the Vulcan 's mind melds . The ending of the game would have seen the player control Kirk , Spock and Chekov in an attempt to stop the titular superweapon . The interface for the game revolved around a menu which appears after the mouse button is held down while the cursor is hovering over an object . This was to prevent the need for controls to be shown on screen at all times , in a manner similar to LucasArts games of that period . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was announced by Interplay Entertainment on June 19 , 1997 and was initially scheduled to be released on CD @-@ ROM for Windows 95 in November 1997 . Interplay had previously produced a number of Star Trek games , including Star Trek : 25th Anniversary , Star Trek : Starfleet Academy and Star Trek : Judgment Rites . The game was developed by <unk> Dreams , an in @-@ house division of Interplay . 
 The storyline was written D. C. Fontana , who was a writer on both Star Trek : The Original Series and season one of Star Trek : The Next Generation , and the script was directed by John Meredyth Lucas who had previously written and directed episodes of The Original Series . Fontana and Lucas had previously collaborated on the episodes " The Enterprise Incident " and " The Ultimate Computer " . In writing the storyline , Fontana wrote dialogue for more puzzle branches than were planned by the developers . The entire main cast of The Original Series recorded their voices for the project . Brian Murray , who was hired to storyboard the game , suggested spinning the camera around the Enterprise crew as they used the transporter to merge their original location into their destination . 
 The game was expensive to create , and used motion capture techniques of clay models for the on @-@ screen 3 @-@ D animation . The game used the same graphics engine both for normal gameplay and for cutscenes . The quality of the footage was described as similar to the cutscenes in Blade Runner ( 1997 ) , but Tribal Dreams intended to remove the " robotlike stare " of the characters as seen in that game . Quaker Oats signed a promotional deal to feature the game on cereal boxes in a promotion beginning in April 1998 , which featured both a competition to win a visit to the one of the series sets and a $ 10 rebate for either Secret of Vulcan Fury or Starfleet Academy . It was the first Star Trek cereal promotion in the United States . 
 Secret of Vulcan Fury was cancelled in February 1999 , following the continued departure of staff and because of financial problems at Interplay . During the production , three separate producers and the lead artist quit . At the time the project was shut down , it was estimated that less than 5 % of the game had been completed . Lead engineer Thom Robertson later explained that the company had massively underestimated the cost of production , having expected to produce nearly seven hours of full motion video for 5 % of the budget of a computer generated film such as Toy Story . They also had problems with the filming of the stop motion , as one three @-@ day shoot was ruined when the director had red dots painted across the green screen in the hope that it would help with camera tracking . Further issues arose with the shoot as they had used a painted screen , which faded during the shoot causing problems in merging the video . Additional artists were then taken from other projects in order to mitigate those issues . The graphics designed for a Vulcan character were later used by artist Scott <unk> as a basis for the Klingon captain Klunk for the video game Star Trek : New Worlds . 
 = The Supremes = 
 The Supremes were an American female singing group and the premier act of Motown Records during the 1960s . Founded as the Primettes in Detroit , Michigan , in 1959 , the Supremes were the most commercially successful of Motown 's acts and are , to date , America 's most successful vocal group with 12 number one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 . Most of these hits were written and produced by Motown 's main songwriting and production team , Holland – Dozier – Holland . At their peak in the mid @-@ 1960s , the Supremes rivaled the Beatles in worldwide popularity , and it is said that their success made it possible for future African American R & B and soul musicians to find mainstream success . 
 Founding members Florence Ballard , Mary Wilson , Diana Ross , and Betty McGlown , all from the Brewster @-@ Douglass public housing project in Detroit , formed the Primettes as the sister act to the Primes ( with Paul Williams and Eddie Kendricks , who went on to form the Temptations ) . Barbara Martin replaced McGlown in 1960 , and the group signed with Motown the following year as the Supremes . Martin left the act in early 1962 , and Ross , Ballard , and Wilson carried on as a trio . 
 During the mid @-@ 1960s , the Supremes achieved mainstream success with Ross as lead singer . In 1967 , Motown president Berry Gordy renamed the group Diana Ross & the Supremes , and replaced Ballard with Cindy Birdsong . Ross left to pursue a solo career in 1970 and was replaced by Jean Terrell , at which point the group 's name reverted to the Supremes . After 1972 , the lineup changed more frequently ; Lynda Laurence , Scherrie Payne , and Susaye Greene all became members of the group during the mid @-@ 1970s . The Supremes disbanded in 1977 after 18 years . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1958 , Florence Ballard — a junior high school student living in the Brewster @-@ Douglass Housing Projects in Detroit — met Paul Williams and Eddie Kendricks , two members of a Detroit male singing group known as the Primes . Since Ballard sang , as did Paul Williams ' girlfriend Betty McGlown , the Primes 's manager Milton Jenkins decided to create a sister group to the Primes called the Primettes . Ballard recruited her best friend Mary Wilson , who in turn recruited classmate Diane Ross . Mentored and funded by Jenkins , the Primettes began by performing hit songs by artists such as Ray Charles and the Drifters at sock hops , social clubs and talent shows around the Detroit area . Receiving additional guidance from group friend and established performer Jesse Greer , the quartet quickly earned a local fan following . The girls crafted an age @-@ appropriate style that was inspired by the collegiate dress of popular doo @-@ wop group Frankie Lymon & the Teenagers ; and , for the most part , Ballard , Ross and Wilson performed equal leads on songs . Within a few months , guitarist Marvin <unk> was added to the Primettes ' lineup — a move that helped distinguish the group from Detroit 's many other aspiring acts by allowing the girls to sing live instead of lip @-@ synching . 
 After winning a prestigious local talent contest , the Primettes ' sights were set on making a record . In hopes of getting the group signed to the local upstart Motown label , in 1960 Ross asked an old neighbor , Miracles lead singer Smokey Robinson , to help the group land an audition for Motown executive Berry Gordy , who had already proven himself a capable songwriter . Robinson liked " the girls " ( as they were then known around Motown ) and agreed to help , but he liked their guitarist even more ; with the Primettes ' permission he hired <unk> , who became the guitarist for the Miracles . Robinson arranged for the Primettes to audition a cappella for Gordy — but Gordy , feeling the girls too young and inexperienced to be recording artists , encouraged them to return when they had graduated from high school . Undaunted , later that year the Primettes recorded a single for Lu Pine Records , a label created just for them , titled " Tears of Sorrow " , which was backed with " Pretty Baby " . The single failed to find an audience , however . Shortly thereafter , McGlown became engaged and left the group . Local girl Barbara Martin was McGlown 's prompt replacement . 
 Determined to leave an impression on Gordy and join the stable of rising Motown stars , the Primettes frequented his Hitsville , U.S.A. recording studio every day after school . Eventually , they convinced Gordy to allow them to contribute hand claps and background vocals for the songs of other Motown artists including Marvin Gaye and Mary Wells . In January 1961 , Gordy finally relented and agreed to sign the girls to his label – but under the condition that they change the name of their group . The Primes had by this time combined with Otis Williams & the <unk> and would soon sign to Motown as the Temptations . Gordy gave Ballard a list of names to choose from that included suggestions such as " the <unk> " , " the Sweet Ps " , " the <unk> " , " the <unk> " and " the <unk> " . Ballard chose " the Supremes " , a name that Ross initially disliked as she felt it too masculine . Nevertheless , on January 15 the group signed with Motown as the Supremes . In the spring of 1962 , Martin left the group to start a family . Thus , the newly named Supremes continued as a trio . 
 Between 1961 and 1963 , the Supremes released six singles , none of which charted in the Top 40 positions of the Billboard Hot 100 . <unk> referred to as the " no @-@ hit Supremes " around Motown 's Hitsville U.S.A. offices , the group attempted to compensate for their lack of hits by taking on any work available at the studio , including providing hand claps and singing backup for Motown artists such as Marvin Gaye and the Temptations . During these years , all three members took turns singing lead : Wilson favored soft ballads ; Ballard favored soulful , hard @-@ driving songs ; and Ross favored mainstream pop songs . Most of their early material was written and produced by Berry Gordy or Smokey Robinson . In December 1963 , the single " When the Lovelight Starts Shining Through His Eyes " peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 " Lovelight " was the first of many Supremes songs written by the Motown songwriting and production team known as Holland – Dozier – Holland . In late 1963 , Berry Gordy chose Diane Ross — who began going by " Diana " in 1965 — as the official lead singer of the group . Ballard and Wilson were periodically given solos on Supremes albums , and Ballard continued to sing her solo number , " People " , in concert for the next two years . 
 In the spring of 1964 , the Supremes recorded the single " Where Did Our Love Go " . The song was originally intended by Holland @-@ Dozier @-@ Holland for the Marvelettes , who rejected it . Although the Supremes disliked the song , the producers coerced them into recording it . In August 1964 , while the Supremes toured as part of Dick Clark 's Caravan of Stars , " Where Did Our Love Go " reached number one on the US pop charts , much to the surprise and delight of the group . It was also their first song to appear on the UK pop charts , where it reached number three . 
 " Where Did Our Love Go " was followed by four consecutive US number @-@ one hits : " Baby Love " ( which was also a number @-@ one hit in the UK ) , " Come See About Me " , " Stop ! In the Name of Love " and " Back in My Arms Again " . " Baby Love " was nominated for the 1965 Grammy Award for Best R & B Song . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The Supremes deliberately embraced a more glamorous image than previous black performers . Much of this was accomplished at the behest of Motown chief Berry Gordy and Maxine Powell , who ran Motown 's in @-@ house finishing school and Artist Development department . Unlike many of her contemporaries , Ross sang in a thin , calm voice , and her vocal styling was matched by having all three women embellish their femininity instead of imitate the qualities of male groups . Eschewing plain appearances and basic dance routines , the Supremes appeared onstage in detailed make @-@ up and high @-@ fashion gowns and wigs , and performed graceful choreography created by Motown choreographer <unk> Atkins . Powell told the group to " be prepared to perform before kings and queens . " Gordy wanted the Supremes , like all of his performers , to be equally appealing to black and white audiences , and he sought to erase the image of black performers as being unrefined or lacking class . 
 Public magazines such as Time and The Detroit News commented on the Supremes ' polished presentation . Time called the Supremes the " pride of [ the ] Detroit [ sound ] " and described them as " three thrushes who have a touch of gospel and sweet lyrics like ' I 'm standing at the crossroads of love ' . " Arnold S. Hirsch of The Detroit News said about the Supremes : " they don 't scream or wail incoherently . An adult can understand nine out of every 10 words they sing . And , most astounding , melody can be clearly detected in every song . " In addition , unlike most American vocal groups , the group members became easily identifiable by their fans , thanks partially to the cover of their album , More Hits by the Supremes , which each member was pictured separately on the front , with her signature above it . 
 By 1965 , the Supremes were international stars . They toured the world , becoming almost as popular abroad as they were in the US . Almost immediately after their initial number @-@ one hits , they recorded songs for motion picture soundtracks , appeared in the 1965 film Beach Ball , and endorsed dozens of products , at one point having their own brand of bread . By the end of 1966 , their number @-@ one hits included " I Hear a Symphony " , " You Can 't Hurry Love " and " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " . That year the group also released The Supremes A ' Go @-@ Go , which became the first album by an all @-@ female group to reach number one on the US Billboard 200 , knocking the Beatles ' Revolver out of the top spot . Because the Supremes were popular with white audiences as well as with black ones , Gordy had the group cater to its middle American audience with performances at renowned supper clubs such as the Copacabana in New York . Broadway and pop standards were incorporated into their repertoire alongside their own hit songs . As a result , the Supremes became one of the first black musical acts to achieve complete and sustained crossover success . Black rock and roll musicians of the 1950s had seen many of their original hit tunes covered by white musicians , with these covers usually achieving more fame and sales success than the originals . The Supremes ' success , however , counteracted this trend . Featuring three group members who were marketed for their individual personalities ( a move unprecedented at the time ) and Diana Ross 's pop @-@ friendly voice , the Supremes broke down racial barriers with rock and roll songs underpinned by R & B stylings . The group became extremely popular both domestically and abroad , becoming one of the first black musical acts to appear regularly on television programs such as Hullabaloo , The Hollywood Palace , The Della Reese Show , and , most notably , The Ed Sullivan Show , on which they made 17 appearances . The Supremes ' cross @-@ cultural success effectively paved the way for the mainstream success of contemporaneous label mates such as the Temptations , the Four Tops and the Jackson 5 . 
 = = = Name and personnel changes = = = 
 Personnel problems within the group and within Motown Records ' stable of performers led to tension among the members of the Supremes . Many of the other Motown performers felt that Berry Gordy was lavishing too much attention upon the group and upon Ross , in particular . In early 1967 , the name of the act was officially changed briefly to " the Supremes with Diana Ross " before changing again to " Diana Ross & the Supremes " by mid @-@ summer . The Miracles had become " Smokey Robinson & the Miracles " two years prior . The fall of 1967 saw Martha & the Vandellas become " Martha Reeves & the Vandellas " . Having learned that Ross would receive top billing , David Ruffin lobbied , unsuccessfully , to have the Temptations renamed as " David Ruffin & the Temptations " , although Gordy maintained that the name changes were done so that Motown could demand more money for live bookings ( because they would be providing two acts — a lead singer and a group — instead of just one ) . 
 The Supremes ' name change fueled already present rumors of a solo career for Ross and contributed to the professional and personal dismantling of the group . In fact , Gordy intended to replace Ross with Barbara Randolph as early as the fall of 1966 , but changed his mind and instead kept Ross in the group for several more years . Gordy 's caution may have been sparked by an incident in early 1966 as the group prepared to make their second appearance at the Copacabana . Angered by Ballard 's erratic behavior , Gordy intended to replace her with Marlene Barrow , a member of the Motown in @-@ house singing group the Andantes . However , when club management heard of this change , they threatened to cancel the group 's appearance if Ballard was replaced , as they saw Ballard 's banter with her group mates as a major part of their act 's success . 
 As Ross became the focal point of the Supremes , Ballard felt pushed aside in the group . Depression ensued , and Ballard began to drink excessively , gaining weight until she could no longer comfortably wear many of her stage outfits . The friendship , and later the working relationship , between Ross and Ballard became strained . During this turbulent period , Ballard relied heavily upon the advice of group mate Mary Wilson , with whom she had maintained a close friendship . Wilson , while outwardly demure and neutral in hopes of keeping the group stable , privately advised Ballard that Ross and Gordy were eager to oust Ballard . Although the Supremes scored two number @-@ one hits during the first quarter of 1967 , " Love Is Here and Now You 're Gone " and " The Happening " , the group as a unit began to disintegrate . 
 By 1967 , Ballard would not show up for recording dates , or would arrive at shows too inebriated to perform . For some early 1967 shows , she was replaced by Marlene Barrow . Looking for a more permanent replacement , Gordy once again thought of Barbara Randolph , possibly believing that Randolph could be groomed as lead singer for the group once it was decided to take Ross solo . However , Ross did not receive Randolph well . In April 1967 , Gordy then contacted Cindy Birdsong , a member of Patti LaBelle & the Blue Belles who superficially resembled Ballard , with plans to bring her in as Ballard 's replacement . He made his plans clear to Ballard and her group mates at a mid @-@ April meeting , and Birdsong was brought in to begin rehearsals . Gordy did not fire Ballard outright at that time , asking Ballard instead to quit on her own . 
 Birdsong first appeared with the Supremes in Ballard 's place at a benefit concert at the Hollywood Bowl on April 29 , 1967 . Following the performance , Gordy quickly learned that Birdsong was still contractually committed to the Blue Belles when that group 's lawyers filed an injunction against him . In May , Ballard returned for what she believed was a probationary period , although in reality it was a stopgap measure until Gordy was able to buy out Birdsong 's contract . During May and June , knowing that she was one step away from being dismissed , Ballard made an attempt to toe the line , slimming down and showing up to commitments on time and sober . Despite this , Birdsong was secretly traveling with the Supremes , studying their routines . 
 On June 29 , 1967 the group returned to the Flamingo Hotel in Las Vegas billed as " the Supremes with Diana Ross " , the first time in which Ross was billed separately from the group . One month later , Gordy renamed the group " Diana Ross & the Supremes , " putting Ross 's name ahead of the group . 
 The first two days of the Flamingo engagement went by smoothly . On July 1 , when reporting for makeup and wardrobe before their first show of the evening , Ballard discovered an extra set of gowns and costumes that had been brought along for Cindy Birdsong . Angered , Ballard performed the first concert of the night inebriated , leading to an embarrassing on @-@ stage incident in which her stomach was revealed when she purposely thrust it forward during a dance routine . Enraged , Gordy ordered her back to Detroit and permanently dismissed her from the group . Birdsong officially assumed her place during the second July 1 show . 
 Ballard 's release from Motown was made final on February 22 , 1968 , when she received a one @-@ time payment of US $ 139 @,@ 804 @.@ 94 in royalties and earnings . She attempted a solo career with ABC Records , and was forced to formally reject a solo contract offered by Motown as part of her settlement . Ballard 's two 1968 singles failed to chart and her solo album was shelved . In 1971 , Ballard sued Motown for $ 8 @.@ 7 million , claiming that Gordy and Diana Ross had conspired to force her out of the group ; the judge ruled in favor of Motown . Ballard eventually sank into poverty and died abruptly on February 22 , 1976 from coronary thrombosis at the age of 32 . At the time of her death , she had begun to make financial and personal strides and was planning to reinvigorate her solo career . 
 = = = Ross ' departure = = = 
 Holland @-@ Dozier @-@ Holland left Motown in early 1968 after a dispute with the label over royalties and profit sharing . The quality of Motown 's output ( and Diana Ross & the Supremes ' records in particular ) began to falter as a result . From " Reflections " in 1967 to " The Weight " in 1969 , only six out of the eleven released singles reached the Top 20 , and only one of those , 1968 's " Love Child " , made it to number one . Due to the tension within the group and stringent touring schedules , neither Mary Wilson nor Cindy Birdsong appear on many of these singles ; they were replaced on these recordings by session singers such as the Andantes . The changes within the group and their decreasing sales were signs of changes within the music industry . The gospel @-@ based soul of female performers such as Aretha Franklin had eclipsed the Supremes ' pop @-@ based sound , which had by now evolved to include more middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road material . In a cultural climate now influenced more than ever by countercultural movements such as the Black Panther Party , the Supremes found themselves attacked for not being " black enough " , and lost ground in the black music market . 
 In mid @-@ 1968 , Motown initiated a number of high @-@ profile collaborations for the Supremes with their old colleagues , the Temptations . Besides the fact that both groups had come up together , the pairings made financial sense : the Supremes had a mostly white fanbase , while the Temptations a mostly black fanbase . By 1969 , the label began plans for a Diana Ross solo career . A number of candidates — most notably Syreeta Wright — were considered to replace Ross . After seeing 24 @-@ year @-@ old Jean Terrell perform with her brother Ernie in Florida , Berry Gordy decided on Ross ' replacement . Terrell was signed to Motown and began recording the first post @-@ Ross Supremes songs with Wilson and Birdsong during the day , while Wilson and Birdsong toured with Ross at night . At the same time , Ross began to make her first solo recordings . In November 1969 , Ross ' solo career was publicly announced . 
 " Someday We 'll Be Together " was recorded with the intent of releasing it as the first solo single for Diana Ross . Desiring a final Supremes number @-@ one record , Gordy instead had the song released as a Diana Ross & the Supremes single , despite the fact that neither Wilson nor Birdsong sang on the record . " Someday We 'll Be Together " hit number one on the American pop charts , becoming not only the Supremes ' 12th and final number @-@ one hit , but also the final number @-@ one hit of the 1960s . This single also would mark the Supremes ' final television appearance together with Ross , performing on The Ed Sullivan Show on December 21 , 1969 . The Supremes without Ross made their final appearance altogether on Ed Sullivan on February 15 , 1970 . 
 = = = The Supremes in the 1970s = = = 
 Diana Ross & the Supremes gave their final performance on January 14 , 1970 at the Frontier Hotel in Las Vegas . At the final performance , the replacement for Diana Ross , Jean Terrell , was introduced . According to Mary Wilson , after this performance , Berry Gordy wanted to replace Terrell with Syreeta Wright . Wilson refused , leading to Gordy stating that he was washing his hands of the group thereafter . This claim is also made by Mark Ribowsky . After the Frontier Hotel performance , Ross officially began her career as a solo performer . Mary Wilson and Cindy Birdsong continued working with Jean Terrell on the first post @-@ Ross Supremes album , Right On . 
 The Terrell @-@ led Supremes — now rebranded as " the Supremes ; " known unofficially at first as " the New Supremes " , and in later years informally called " The ' 70s Supremes " — scored hits including " Up the Ladder to the Roof " ( US number 10 , UK number 6 ) , " Stoned Love " ( US number 7 , UK number 3 ) and " Nathan Jones " ( US number 16 , UK number 5 ) , all of which were produced by Frank Wilson . These three singles were also R & B Top Ten hits , with " Stoned Love " becoming their last No.1 R & B hit in December 1970 . Songwriting / production team Nickolas Ashford & Valerie Simpson produced another Top 20 hit for the group , a Supremes / Four Tops duet version of Ike & Tina Turner 's " River Deep – Mountain High " . 
 In 1972 , the Supremes had their last Top 20 hit single release , " Floy Joy " , written and produced by Smokey Robinson , followed by the final US Top 40 hit for the Jean Terrell @-@ led version of the group , " <unk> Sunshine " ( US number 37 , UK number 10 ) . " <unk> Sunshine " later became the group 's final top 10 single in the UK . On both " Floy Joy " and " Sunshine " Terrell shared lead with Mary Wilson . Motown , by then moving from Detroit to Los Angeles to break into motion pictures , put only limited effort into promoting the Supremes ' new material , and their popularity and sales began to wane . Cindy Birdsong left the group in April 1972 , after recording the Floy Joy album , to start a family ; her replacement was Lynda Laurence , a former member of Stevie Wonder 's backup group , Third Generation ( a predecessor to <unk> ) . Jimmy Webb was hired to produce the group 's next LP , The Supremes Produced and Arranged by Jimmy Webb , but the album and its only single " I Guess I 'll Miss the Man " failed to make an impact on the Billboard pop chart , with the single charting at number 85 . 
 In early 1973 , Laurence prevailed upon her old mentor Stevie Wonder to write and produce a hit for the Supremes , but the resulting " Bad Weather " peaked at number 87 on the US pop charts and number 37 in the UK . Laurence can be heard briefly , shouting several times at the end of the song ( the only recording on which Laurence is heard ) . Laurence left to start a family ; her replacement : a returning Cindy Birdsong . 
 Dismayed by this poor @-@ performing record and the lack of promotional support from Motown , Jean Terrell left the group and was replaced by Scherrie Payne , the sister of Invictus Records recording artist Freda Payne . 
 Between the 1973 departures of Laurence and Terrell and the first Supremes single with Scherrie Payne , " He 's My Man " , a disco single on which Payne and Wilson shared lead vocal , Motown was slow in producing contracts for Payne and the returning Birdsong . Before the release of the album in 1975 , the Supremes remained a popular live act , and continued touring overseas , particularly in the UK and Japan . The group 's new recordings were not as successful as their earlier releases , although " He 's My Man " from the album The Supremes was a popular disco hit in 1975 . In 1976 , Birdsong , dissatisfied with the management of the Supremes ( handled at the time by Mary Wilson 's then @-@ husband Pedro Ferrer ) , left again and was replaced by Susaye Greene , another former member of <unk> . 
 This final version of the Supremes released two albums , both of which reunited the Supremes with Holland @-@ Dozier @-@ Holland : High Energy , which includes Birdsong on all of the tracks , and Mary , Scherrie & Susaye . During that year , the Supremes released " I 'm Gonna Let My Heart Do the Walking " , their final Top 40 hit on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 On June 12 , 1977 , the Supremes performed their farewell concert at the Drury Lane Theater in London and disbanded . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Works inspired by the Supremes = = = 
 Several fictional works have been published that are based in part on the career of the group . The 1976 film Sparkle features the story of a Supremes @-@ like singing trio called " Sister & the Sisters " from Harlem , New York . The film 's score was composed by Curtis Mayfield , and the soundtrack album by Aretha Franklin was a commercial success . A remake of Sparkle was in development in the early 2000s with R & B singer Aaliyah as the lead , but the project was shelved when Aaliyah died in 2001 . A remake of Sparkle eventually was released to film theaters in August 2012 . The remake starred Jordin Sparks and Whitney Houston , in her final film role before her death . On December 21 , 1981 , the Tony Award @-@ winning musical Dreamgirls opened at the Imperial Theatre on Broadway and ran for 1 @,@ 522 performances . The musical , loosely based on the history of the Supremes , follows the story of the Dreams , an all @-@ female singing trio from Chicago who become music superstars . Several of the characters in the play are analogues of real @-@ life Supremes / Motown counterparts , with the story focusing upon the Florence Ballard doppelgänger Effie White . While influenced by the Supremes ' and Motown 's music , the songs in the play are a broader mix of R & B / soul and Broadway music . Mary Wilson loved the musical , but Diana Ross was reportedly angered by it and refused to see it . 
 A film adaptation of Dreamgirls was released by DreamWorks and Paramount Pictures in December 2006 . The film contains more overt references to Motown and the Supremes than does the play that inspired it : for example , in the film , many of the Dreams ' album covers are identical in design to Supremes album covers , and the Dreams themselves hail from Detroit – not Chicago , as do their Broadway counterparts . 
 = = = Awards and followers = = = 
 The Supremes were twice nominated for a Grammy Award — for Best Rhythm & Blues Recording ( " Baby Love " , 1965 ) and Best Contemporary Rock & Roll Group Vocal Performance ( " Stop ! In the Name of Love " , 1966 ) — but never won an award in competition . Three of their songs have been named to the Grammy Hall of Fame : " Where Did Our Love Go " and " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " ( both 1999 ) and " Stop ! In the Name of Love " ( 2001 ) . 
 The group 's songs " Stop ! In the Name of Love " and " You Can 't Hurry Love " are among the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll . The Ross @-@ Wilson @-@ Ballard lineup was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 , received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1994 , and entered into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 1998 . In 2004 , Rolling Stone placed the group at number 97 on their list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " . The Supremes are notable for the influences they have had on the black girl groups who have succeeded them in popular music , such as The Three Degrees , The Emotions , The Pointer Sisters , En Vogue , TLC , Destiny 's Child and Cleopatra . 
 = = = Reunions = = = 
 Fan interest made the idea of a Supremes reunion tour a very profitable one during the 1980s . In 1982 , around the time that Motown reunited all of the Temptations , it was rumored that Motown would reunite the Supremes . The 1974 line @-@ up of the Supremes ( Wilson , Birdsong and Payne ) was considered for this reunion , which was to include new recordings and a tour . Under advisement from Berry Gordy , Wilson declined to reunite , and the idea was scrapped . Ross briefly reunited with Wilson and Birdsong to perform " Someday We 'll Be Together " on the Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever television special , taped on March 25 , 1983 , and broadcast on NBC on May 16 , 1983 . 
 In 2000 , plans were made for Ross to join Wilson and Birdsong for a planned " Diana Ross & the Supremes : Return to Love " reunion tour . However , Wilson passed on the idea , because while the promoters offered Ross $ 15 million to perform , Wilson was offered $ 4 million and Birdsong less than $ 1 million . Ross herself offered to double the amounts both Wilson and Birdsong had originally been offered , but while Birdsong accepted , Wilson remained adamant , and as a result the deal fell through with both former Supremes . Eventually , the " Return to Love " tour went on as scheduled , but with Payne and Laurence joining Ross , although none of the three had ever been in the group at the same time and neither Payne nor Laurence had sung on any of the original hit recordings that they were now singing live . Susaye Greene was also considered for this tour , but refused to audition for it . The music critics cried foul and many fans were disappointed by both this and the shows ' high ticket prices . Though the tour did well in larger markets including near capacity at the opening night in Philadelphia and a sellout at Madison Square Garden in New York , it under performed in smaller / medium markets . The tour was canceled after playing only half of the dates on itinerary . 
 = = = Post @-@ Supremes groups = = = 
 In 1986 , Jean Terrell , Scherrie Payne and Lynda Laurence began to perform as " The <unk> " : Former Ladies of the Supremes . When Terrell quit in 1992 , <unk> Tucker , Laurence ’ s sister , stepped in for a short time , but was replaced by <unk> Poole in 1996 . More recently in September 2009 , Poole was replaced by Joyce Vincent , formerly of Tony Orlando and Dawn . The group , now called Former Supremes Scherrie Payne and Lynda Laurence with Joyce Vincent , are working on a new recording . 
 <unk> Ragland performed with Mary Wilson from 1978 though the mid @-@ 1980s . In 1989 she formed her own group called " the Sounds of the Supremes " . She has claimed numerous times that she was a member of the Supremes because of her performances with Wilson , but she was never signed by Motown and performed with Wilson only after the Supremes disbanded in 1977 and is not considered as a member of the Supremes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Supremes ( aka the Primettes and Diana Ross & the Supremes ) 
 Florence Ballard ( 1959 – 67 ) 
 Mary Wilson ( 1959 – 77 ) 
 Diana Ross ( 1959 – 70 ) 
 Betty McGlown ( 1959 – 60 ) 
 Barbara Martin ( 1960 – 62 ) 
 Cindy Birdsong ( 1967 – 72 , 1973 – 76 ) 
 Jean Terrell ( 1970 – 73 ) 
 Lynda Laurence ( 1972 – 73 ) 
 Scherrie Payne ( 1973 – 77 ) 
 Susaye Greene ( 1976 – 77 ) 
 = = Lineups = = 
 = M19 Multiple Gun Motor Carriage = 
 The M19 Multiple Gun Motor Carriage ( MGMC ) was a World War II United States Army self @-@ propelled anti @-@ aircraft weapon on the M24 light tank chassis . It was equipped with two Bofors 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) guns . It was produced by Cadillac near the end of 1944 . 
 The M19 was developed from the T65 which was based on the M5 light tank chassis . The original design was improved upon and designated the T65E1 . It was accepted into service in May 1944 as the M19 MGMC , equipping several U.S. Army anti @-@ aircraft units during World War II . The M19A1 was an improved variant with an auxiliary engine and spare barrels for the 40 mm Bofors guns . 
 During World War II , the M19 and M19A1 saw action in the European Theater of Operations as an assault gun , since the Allies had air supremacy over the skies of Europe . The M19 and M19A1 were also used during the Korean War in the same role . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The M19 MGMC had similar specifications to the M24 Chaffee . It was 17 @.@ 9 ft ( 5 @.@ 46 m ) long , 9 @.@ 33 ft ( 2 @.@ 845 m ) wide , and 9 @.@ 83 ft ( 2 @.@ 997 m ) high . It had a weight of 38 @,@ 499 lb ( 17 @,@ 463 kg ) , and was powered with a 220 hp ( 160 kW ) Twin Cadillac Model 42 , V @-@ 8 engine installation . It could achieve a speed of 35 mph ( 56 @.@ 3 km / h ) , and had a range of 150 mi ( 241 km ) . The vehicle was operated with a crew of six . 
 = = Development = = 
 The M19 evolved from the 40 mm Gun Motor Carriage T65 project , which was based on an Armored Force requirement for a light anti @-@ aircraft vehicle based on the M5 light tank chassis . Although trials were successful and a production of 1 @,@ 000 <unk> had been requested , the project was stopped by the Ordnance Department since the M5A1 light tank chassis was being phased out of production . 
 Since the T65 project was fading away , the Armored Force still needed a light anti @-@ aircraft vehicle , so they made a new project ( called T65E1 ) based on the new <unk> chassis ( a prototype of the M24 Chaffee ) . The T65E1 had the same overall layout as the T65 GMC – gun turret at rear with the engines in the middle of the chassis – with a few minor tweaks ( including an angular gun shield instead of a straight one ) . 
 = = = M19 and M19A1 = = = 
 The T65E1 was accepted into service as the M19 Gun Motor Carriage in May 1944 with an order for 904 production models , which was sent to Cadillac . Production did not start until August of that year , and only 285 were produced by the end of the war . The M19A1 had an auxiliary engine and generator to operate the 40 mm guns when the main engine was shut down , and fixtures for carrying two spare gun barrels . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The full order was not completed as the requirements for anti @-@ aircraft weapons had changed and chassis were diverted to produce more of the Chaffee light tank . 
 The M19 MGMC served in Europe in World War II with the U.S. Army . By the time the M19 arrived , the Luftwaffe had been driven from the skies by Allied air power , so the M19 found use as an assault gun , which was a role it performed very well . It was never delivered to other countries for Lend @-@ Lease or the Military Aid Program . It also served in the Korean War , for the same purpose as it was used in World War II . It was used in the defense against the North Korean forces in the Pusan Perimeter fighting and later fighting in Korea . The 40 mm guns were especially effective against Chinese mass infantry charges in North Korea . 
 When it was decided to phase out the M24 Chaffee and other vehicles on the same chassis , the M19 turrets were re @-@ mounted on a M41 Light Tank chassis to produce the M42 Duster . 
 = = Comparable vehicles = = 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 40M <unk> 
 Crusader Mk . III Anti @-@ Aircraft Tank Mk . I 
 ZSU @-@ 37 
 = African crake = 
 The African crake ( Crex egregia ) is a bird in the rail family that breeds in most of sub @-@ Saharan Africa away from the arid south and southwest . It is seasonally common in most of its range other than the rainforests and areas that have low annual rainfall . This crake is a partial migrant , moving away from the equator as soon as the rains provide sufficient grass cover to allow it to breed elsewhere . There have been a few records of vagrant birds reaching Atlantic islands . This species nests in a wide variety of grassland types , and agricultural land with tall crops may also be used . 
 A smallish crake , the African crake has brown @-@ streaked blackish upperparts , bluish @-@ grey underparts and black @-@ and @-@ white barring on the flanks and belly . It has a stubby red bill , red eyes , and a white line from the bill to above the eye . It is smaller than its closest relative , the corn crake ; that species is also lighter @-@ plumaged , and has an eye stripe . The African crake has a range of calls , the most characteristic being a series of rapid grating <unk> notes . It is active during the day , and is territorial on both the breeding and non @-@ breeding grounds ; the male has a threat display , and may fight at territory boundaries . The nest is a shallow cup of grass leaves built in a depression under a grass tussock or small bush . The 3 – 11 eggs start hatching after about 14 days , and the black , downy precocial chicks fledge after four to five weeks . The African crake feeds on a wide range of invertebrates , along with some small frogs and fish , and plant material , especially grass seeds . It may itself be eaten by large birds of prey ; snakes ; or mammals , including humans , and can host parasites . Although it may be displaced temporarily by the burning of grassland , or permanently by agriculture , wetland drainage or urbanisation , its large range and population mean that it is not considered to be threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The rails are a bird family comprising nearly 150 species . Although the origins of the group are lost in antiquity , the largest number of species and the most primitive forms are found in the Old World , suggesting that this family originated there . The taxonomy of the small crakes is complicated , but the closest relative of the African crake is the corn crake , C. crex , which breeds in Europe and Asia , but winters in Africa . The African crake was first described as <unk> egregia by Wilhelm Peters in 1854 from a specimen collected in Mozambique , but the genus name failed to become established . For some time it was placed as the sole member of the genus Crecopsis but subsequently moved to Crex , created for this species by German naturalist and ornithologist Johann Matthäus Bechstein in 1803 . Richard Bowdler Sharpe considered that the African bird differed sufficiently from the corn crake to have its own genus Crecopsis , and later authors sometimes placed it in Porzana , based on a resemblance to the ash @-@ throated crake , P. albicollis . Structural differences rule out Porzana , and the placement in Crex is now the most common and best @-@ supported treatment . Phylogeny and morphology confirm that the Porzana crakes are the closest relatives of the Crex genus . The genus name is onomatopoeic , referring to the repetitive grating call of the corn crake , and the species name egregia derives from Latin <unk> , " outstanding , prominent " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The African crake is a smallish crake , 20 – 23 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 9 @.@ 1 in ) long with a 40 – 42 cm ( 16 – 17 in ) wingspan . The male has blackish upperparts streaked with olive @-@ brown , apart from the nape and hindneck which are plain pale brown ; there is a white streak from the base of the bill to above the eye . The sides of the head , foreneck , throat and breast are bluish @-@ grey , the flight feathers are dark brown , and the flanks and sides of the belly are barred black and white . The eye is red , the bill is reddish , and the legs and feet are light brown or grey . The sexes are similar in appearance , although the female is slightly smaller and duller than the male , with a less contrasting head pattern . Immature birds have darker and duller upperparts than the adult , a dark bill , grey eye , and less barring on the underparts . There are no subspecific or other geographical variations in plumage . This crake has a complete moult after breeding , mainly prior to migration . Although this species occurs in fairly open habitats , it lacks the pure white undertail used for signalling in open water or gregarious species like the coots and moorhens . 
 The African crake is smaller than the corn crake , which also has darker upperparts , a plain grey face and different underparts barring pattern . In flight , the African species has shorter , blunter wings with a less prominent white leading edge , and deeper wingbeats than its relative . Other sympatric crakes are smaller with white markings on the upperparts , different underparts patterns and a shorter bill . The African rail has dark brown upperparts , a long red bill and red legs and feet . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Like other rails , this species has a wide range of vocalisations . The male 's territorial and advertising call is a series of rapid grating <unk> notes repeated two or three times a second for several minutes . It is given most often in the breeding season , usually early or late in the day , but sometimes continues after dark or starts before dawn . The male stands upright with his neck extended when advertising , but will also call when chasing intruders on the ground or in flight . Both sexes give a sharp , loud kip call as an alarm or during territorial interactions , adapting a similar pose as for the advertising call . Once breeding starts , the birds become much quieter , but territorial birds commence the kip call again during the non @-@ breeding season , especially when there is a high density of African crakes in the area . A wheezy <unk> is associated with threat displays and copulation ; imitation of this call by a human can bring a rail to within 10 m ( 33 ft ) . Newly hatched chicks make a soft <unk> call , and older chicks cheep . 
 The rasping advertising call is readily distinguished from the hwitt @-@ hwitt @-@ hwitt of spotted crake , the monotonous clockwork tak @-@ tak @-@ tak @-@ tak @-@ tak of striped crake , or the quick @-@ quick of Baillon 's crake . The corn crake is silent in Africa . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The African crake occurs throughout sub @-@ Saharan Africa from Senegal east to Kenya , and south to KwaZulu @-@ Natal , South Africa , except in arid areas of south and southwest Africa where the annual summer rainfall is less than 300 mm ( 12 in ) . It is widespread and locally common in most of its range , apart from the rainforests and the drier regions . Nearly all the South Africa population of about 8 @,@ 000 birds occur in KwaZulu @-@ Natal and the former Transvaal Province , and much good habitat is protected in the Kruger National Park and <unk> Wetland Park . This crake is only a vagrant to southern Mauritania , southwest Niger , Lesotho , South Africa 's northern and eastern Cape Province and North West Province , and southern Botswana . Further afield , it is rare on Bioko Island ( Equatorial Guinea ) , and there have been two records each for Sao Tome and Tenerife , the Canary Islands birds being the first records for the Western <unk> . Holocene remains from North Africa suggest that the species may have been more widespread when the climate was wetter in what is now the Sahara . 
 This crake is a partial migrant , but although it is less skulking than many of its relatives , its movements are complex and poorly studied ; the distribution map is therefore largely hypothetical . It is mainly a wet @-@ season breeder , and many birds move away from the equator as soon as the rains provide sufficient grass cover to allow them to breed elsewhere . Southward movement is mainly from November to April , the return north beginning when burning or drought reduces the grass cover again . This species is present throughout the year in some West African countries , and in equatorial regions , but even in those areas numbers vary seasonally due to local movements ; north @-@ south migration has been noted within countries including Nigeria , Senegal , The Gambia , Ivory Coast and Cameroon . Migration takes place at night and involves small groups of up to eight birds ; It may be one or two months after the rains begin before the grass is sufficiently high for breeding birds to arrive . Even in southern Africa , some birds may stay after breeding if enough usable habitat remains . 
 The habitat is predominantly grassland , ranging from wetland edges and seasonal floodlands to savanna , lightly wooded dry grassland , and grassy forest clearings . The crake also frequents maize , rice and cotton crops , derelict farmland and sugarcane plantations close to water . A wide range of grass species are used , with a preferred height of 0 @.@ 3 – 1 m ( 0 @.@ 98 – 3 @.@ 28 ft ) tall but vegetation is acceptable up to 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) tall . It normally prefers moister and shorter grassland habitats than does the corn crake , and its breeding territories often contain or are close to thickets or termite mounds . It occurs from sea level to 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) but is rare in the higher altitude grasslands . Its grassland habitat is frequently burned in the dry season , forcing the birds to move elsewhere . In an East African study , the average area occupied by one bird was 2 @.@ 6 hectares ( 6 @.@ 4 acres ) when breeding , and 1 @.@ 97 to 2 @.@ 73 ha ( 4 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 7 acres ) at other times . The highest densities occur in lush or moist grassland such as the Okavango Delta . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The African crake is active during the day , especially at dusk , during light rain , or after heavier rain . It is less skulking and easier to flush from cover than other crakes , and is often seen at the edges of roads and tracks . An observer in a vehicle can approach to within 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) . When a bird is flushed it normally flies less than 50 m ( 160 ft ) , but new arrivals may occasionally fly twice as far . A flushed crake will frequently land in a wet area or behind a thicket , and crouch on landing . In short grass , it can escape from a dog using its speed and manoeuvrability , running with the body held almost horizontal . It may roost in a depression near grass tussock and it will bathe in puddles . 
 The African crake is territorial on both the breeding and non @-@ breeding grounds ; the male threat display involves the bird standing upright and spreading the feathers of the flanks and belly like a fan to show the barred underparts . He may march towards the intruder , or walk side by side with another displaying male . The female may accompany the male , but with feathers less widely fanned . Fighting at territorial boundaries involves the male birds jumping at each other and pecking . Paired females will attack other females in the territory , especially if the male has shown an interest in them . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Breeding behavior commences with a courtship chase with the female running in a crouch , pursued by the male , who adopts a more upright stance and has his neck outstretched . The female may stop and lower her head and tail to allow copulation ; this takes just a few seconds , but may be repeated several times in an hour . The nest is a shallow cup of grass leaves , sometimes with a loose canopy , built in a depression and hidden under a grass tussock or small bush ; it may be on dry ground or slightly raised above standing water , or occasionally floating . The nest is about 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) across with the internal cup 2 – 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 – 1 @.@ 97 in ) deep , and 11 – 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) wide . The clutch size is from 3 to 11 pink @-@ coloured eggs ; the first is often laid when the nest is little more than a pad of grass , and a further egg is laid on each subsequent day . Both sexes incubate , and the eggs start hatching after about 14 days ; all hatch with 48 hours despite the extended laying period . The black , downy precocial chicks soon leave the nest but are fed and protected by the parents . Fledging occurs after four to five weeks , and the young can fly before they are fully grown . It is not known whether a second brood is raised . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The African crake feeds on invertebrates including earthworms , gastropods , molluscs and the adults and larvae of insects , especially termites , ants , beetles and grasshoppers . Vertebrate prey such as small frogs or fish may also be taken . Plant material is eaten , especially grass seeds , but also green shoots , leaves and other seeds . The crake searches for food both within vegetation and in the open , picking insects and seeds from the ground , turning over leaf litter , or digging with its bill in soft or very dry ground . It will chase faster moving prey , reach up to take food from plants , and wade to pluck food items from the water . Crop plants such as rice , maize and peas may sometimes be eaten , but this bird is not an agricultural pest species . It forages singly , in pairs or in family groups , sometimes in association with other grassland birds such as great snipes , blue quails and corn crakes . Chicks are fed mainly on animal food . As with other rails , grit is swallowed to help break up food in the stomach . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 Predators include the leopard , serval , cats , the black @-@ headed heron , dark chanting goshawk , African hawk @-@ eagle and Wahlberg 's eagle . In South Africa , newly hatched chicks were taken by a <unk> . If surprised , an African crake will leap vertically into the air before running away , a tactic believed to help it to evade snakes or terrestrial mammals . 
 Parasites of this species include ticks of the family <unk> , and a feather mite , <unk> elongatus , of the subspecies M. e. curtus . The nominate form of the mite occurs thousands of kilometres away in New Caledonia . 
 = = Status = = 
 The African crake has a huge breeding range estimated at 11 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 km2 ( 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 mi2 ) . Its population is unknown , but it is common in most of its range , and its numbers appear to be stable . It is therefore classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . Overgrazing , agriculture and the loss of wetland and moist grassland have reduced the availability of suitable habitat in many areas , such as some parts of the southern KwaZulu @-@ Natal coast which have been urbanised or planted with sugarcane . In other areas , grassland may have increased locally in recent years as woodland is cleared . This crake is considered to be good eating , and is killed for food in some regions . Despite these adverse factors , it appears to be under no real threat . 
 Although most rails in the Old World are covered by the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) , the African crake is not listed even in Kenya , where it is considered " near @-@ threatened " . Like its relative , the corn crake , it is too terrestrial to be classed as a wetland species . 
 = Jos LeDuc = 
 Michel Pigeon ( August 31 , 1944 – May 1 , 1999 ) was a Canadian professional wrestler better known by his ring name , Jos LeDuc . 
 Wrestling with a lumberjack gimmick , he debuted in Stampede Wrestling with his kayfabe brother , Paul LeDuc . The pair later won several titles in Montreal , where they feuded with the Rougeau wrestling family , and Florida , where they held the NWA Florida Tag Team Championship . After an injury ended Paul 's career , LeDuc competed as a singles wrestler and involved in a heated feud with Dusty Rhodes . LeDuc then moved to Tennessee , where he had a rivalry with Jerry Lawler over the NWA Mid @-@ America Southern Tag Team Championship , notably legitimately breaking Lawler 's leg when he threw him over the top rope onto the announcer 's desk . 
 LeDuc spent many years traveling between Florida and Tennessee , and he won belts in both locations as a singles wrestler and as a tag team competitor . He also spent time on wrestling tours of Japan and New Zealand . One of LeDuc 's biggest storylines was with manager Oliver Humperdink , whom LeDuc had accused of stealing his money . This led to a feud , during which LeDuc won the NWA Television Championship from one of Humperdink 's wrestlers . LeDuc continued to split his time between singles and tag team wrestling , and he resumed his feud with Lawler in Tennessee . In his later career , LeDuc competed in Puerto Rico and had a brief stint in the World Wrestling Federation . Altogether , LeDuc held 32 championships — 15 singles belts and 17 tag team titles . He died of a lung infection on May 1 , 1999 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Canada ( 1968 – 1973 ) = = = 
 Prior to entering professional wrestling , Pigeon gained combat sport experience by studying judo . He worked for the Quebec Provincial Police until the mid @-@ 1960s , when he decided to become a wrestler . His friend Paul LeDuc had competed as a professional wrestler in Mexico and wanted a tag team partner . He convinced Pigeon to train as a wrestler , and Pigeon trained under Stu Hart in Calgary , Alberta . 
 Along with Paul , Pigeon began wrestling in Hart 's Stampede Wrestling in 1968 under the ring name Jos LeDuc , Paul 's tag team partner and kayfabe brother . The LeDucs ' gimmick was inspired by " Yukon " Eric <unk> , a professional wrestler who had died three years earlier . They portrayed stereotypical Canadian lumberjacks and wore flannel shirts to the ring . They received a push from the promoters and won the Stampede International Tag Team Championship in 1969 , but they lost the belts later that year . 
 After moving to the Montreal area , the LeDucs debuted in the International Wrestling Association with a scripted attack on local wrestler Johnny Rougeau . This led to a feud between the LeDucs and the Rougeaus ( Johnny and his real @-@ life brother Jacques ) . Jos LeDuc was booked to win the Montreal version of the International Heavyweight Championship by defeating Johnny Rougeau in 1971 . The bookers also decided to give him a run with the International Tag Team Championship that year , which LeDuc won while teaming with Tony Baillargeon . While in Montreal , the LeDucs also competed for Grand Prix Wrestling and were booked in a feud with the Vachon brothers ( Mad Dog and Butcher ) as well as Killer Kowalski . The LeDucs had two reigns as the Grand Prix Wrestling Tag Team Championship in 1972 and 1973 . 
 = = = Southern United States ( 1973 – 1980 ) = = = 
 LeDuc 's next stop was in Championship Wrestling from Florida ( CWF ) , where he resumed teaming with Paul LeDuc . Wrestling under the name The Canadian Lumberjacks , they were soon pushed to win the NWA Florida Tag Team Championship in December 1973 by defeating Dusty Rhodes and Dick Slater . They defended the belts for two months before dropping them to Slater and his new partner Stan Vachon , a kayfabe brother of the <unk> from Montreal . This was the final time the LeDuc 's held a title together , as Paul LeDuc sustained a legitimate injury that forced Jos to wrestle without him . Jos LeDuc also wrestled as a singles competitor in Florida . He was booked to win the NWA Florida Southern Heavyweight Championship by defeating Rhodes in late 1973 . He dropped the title to Rhodes in January 1974 , however . LeDuc and Rhodes were placed in a heated feud at this time , and they frequently faced each other in Death matches . 
 LeDuc made his AWA television debut on August 2 , 1975 defeating Angel Rivera . LeDuc was given wins over Buddy Wolff and Boris <unk> ( Nicolai Volkoff ) before forming the team with Larry Hennig . Leduc and Hennig first teamed on September 12 , 1975 in Denver , Colorado losing to Jimmy and Johnny Valiant . Leduc and Hennig feuded with the Valiant Brothers for several months before entering a feud with Baron Von <unk> and Mad Dog Vachon . Jos and Larry also received a few title shots against AWA tag champs Blackjack Lanza and Bobby <unk> in August 1976 . Probably his most memorable accomplishment while working for the promotion was a bus @-@ pulling stunt filmed in Minneapolis that was also used in promo videos while appearing in the Memphis and Atlanta territories , among others . LeDuc departed the AWA in September 1976 . 
 Wrestling in Tennessee in 1977 , LeDuc teamed with Bob Armstrong to win the NWA Southeast Tag Team Championship in September . They were put over Bob Orton , Jr. and Mr. Knoxville for the belts but lost them in a rematch . While in Tennessee , LeDuc gained notoriety from a worked feud with Jerry Lawler . Wrestling as a heel , he faced Jerry Lawler , who was a favorite in the state , in many matches throughout the year . LeDuc was placed with a new partner , Jean Louie , to win the NWA Mid @-@ America Southern Tag Team Championship in May . They faced Lawler and Jimmy Valiant on May 22 to defend the belts , but the match was declared a no contest and the title was vacated . Lawler and Valiant won the belts in a rematch the following week , but LeDuc and Louie regained them the following month . In September , LeDuc and Louie dropped the belts once again , this time to Lawler and the Mongolian Stomper . 
 LeDuc returned to Florida in 1978 and was given a title reign as the NWA Florida Heavyweight Championship after defeating Mr. Uganda on December 18 . He held the belt for two weeks before dropping it to his old kayfabe rival Dick Slater . He was soon a champion again , however , as he and Thor the Viking were booked to win the NWA Florida United States Tag Team Championship in early 1979 . They dropped the belts to Killer Karl Kox and Jimmy Garvin , but LeDuc soon regained the title by teaming with Pak Song . LeDuc and Song vacated the title shortly after winning it , but LeDuc teamed with yet another partner , Don Muraco , to win the belts back later that year . 
 During this stint in Florida , LeDuc made a scripted turn from face to heel . Garvin claimed that LeDuc was aligned with heel manager Sonny King , but LeDuc denied the claim . Garvin then showed video footage to prove that LeDuc had secret dealings with King . LeDuc responded by attacking Garvin in front of the crowd , solidifying a heel turn for LeDuc . In a storyline several months later , LeDuc and King Curtis <unk> attacked Buddy Rogers , a veteran then working as a face . The injuries Rogers received were said to be so severe that he was forced to retire , although , in reality , Rogers had simply moved to another wrestling promotion . 
 Later that year , LeDuc wrestled in Japan during a brief tour . He was successful during several matches on the tour , but his wrestling style was noticeably different from the traditional Japanese style . In the Japanese media , he was referred to as " maniacal " and " demented " . 
 LeDuc had more success in Southeast Championship Wrestling after returning to the Tennessee area . He was pushed to win his first NWA Southeast Heavyweight Championship in a victory over Killer Karl Kox in March 1980 before losing the belt back to Kox in a rematch . In October , he regained the Southeastern Tag Team Championship while teaming with Robert Fuller . They lost the belts to Super Pro and Ron Bass , but LeDuc teamed with Armstrong again to regain the belts . 
 = = = New Zealand ( 1981 ) = = = 
 LeDuc travelled to New Zealand to wrestle in 1981 . While there , he was booked in two title reigns . On April 23 , he won the NWA New Zealand British Commonwealth Championship by defeating Steve Rickard . He dropped the belt to Mark Lewin one week later but regained it in a rematch on July 9 . His second and final reign came to an end when he lost the belt to Rickard in mid @-@ August . 
 = = = Return to the Southern United States ( 1981 – 1984 ) = = = 
 Later that year , LeDuc returned to Southeastern Championship Wrestling and was given two more tag team title reigns while teaming with Fuller . Ultimately , however , the team split up and vacated the title . LeDuc was then booked in singles competition , winning the Southeastern Heavyweight Championship twice more with victories over Jacques Rougeau , Jr. and Terry Gordy . He was also put over Terry Gordy to win the NWA Alabama Heavyweight Championship in May 1982 , but LeDuc dropped the title that summer to Austin Idol . 
 In the early 1980s , LeDuc wrestled in Mid @-@ Atlantic Championship Wrestling , where the bookers had him join Oliver Humperdink 's " House of Humperdink " stable . Under Humperdink 's management , LeDuc was booked to win the NWA Television Championship by defeating Jimmy Valiant in 1982 . The title reign did not last long , however , as the belt was soon taken away because of an angle that saw LeDuc cheat in a title defense against Johnny Weaver . Eventually , the storyline had LeDuc claim that Humperdink had stolen his money , and LeDuc left the stable . This led to a worked feud between LeDuc and the members of Humperdink 's stable , although the main rivalry that was portrayed was between LeDuc and Dick Slater . As part of the feud , LeDuc and Slater faced each other on April 30 , 1983 in a Lumberjack match . At this time , LeDuc received a push and won the match and Slater 's NWA Television Championship . 
 LeDuc then returned to Florida , where he was kept mainly in the singles division . In October 1983 , he was put over Scott McGhee to win the NWA Florida Heavyweight Championship for a second time . He dropped the belt to Barry Windham the following month . In a rematch with Windham the following night , LeDuc won the belt once again . His final reign as Florida Heavyweight Champion was short @-@ lived , however , as the bookers had him drop the belt in a rematch with Windham the next night . 
 Another short stint in Southeastern Championship Wrestling followed , with LeDuc being given two more reigns with the Southeastern Heavyweight title . He was put over his former partner Bob Armstrong for the belt in August 1983 and began a feud with Robert Fuller , another former partner . During the course of this feud , the belt changed hands twice . Fuller was booked to win the belt from LeDuc , but LeDuc won a subsequent match to win the title for his sixth and final reign . LeDuc held the belt until vacating the title when he left the promotion . 
 On March 12 , 1984 , LeDuc teamed with former kayfabe rival Jerry Lawler to win the AWA Southern Tag Team Championship from Elijah Akeem and Kareem Muhammad . In a six @-@ man match the following week , LeDuc teamed with Lawler and Jimmy Hart , who was their manager but wrestled on occasion . During the match , LeDuc revealed that his reconciliation with Lawler was a setup , as LeDuc and Hart turned on Lawler by walking away to leave Lawler by himself . As a result , the tag team title was vacated and the feud was rekindled . 
 = = = Puerto Rico ( 1986 ) = = = 
 While wrestling in Puerto Rico , LeDuc was booked in his final championship reign . He defeated Hercules Ayala on January 6 , 1986 to win the World Wrestling Council 's North American Heavyweight Championship . He held the belt for just over two months before dropping it to Al Perez on March 7 . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation ( 1988 ) = = = 
 LeDuc made his first appearance for the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) on March 19 , 1988 when he defeated Brady Boone in a dark match at a WWF Superstars taping . He made his first house show appearance on April 22 , defeating Jose Luis Rivera in White Plains , NY on April 22 . On May 9 at a show in Ontario , LeDuc added Frenchy Martin as his manager . On July 4 ( in a match taped on June 21st in Glens Falls , NY , LeDuc made his first television appearance as " The Headbanger Butcher " on WWF PrimeTime Wrestling . He lost to Brian Costello via disqualification after he refused to cease headbutting his preliminary opponent . On July 16 in Landover , MD he sustained his first pinfall loss when he was defeated by Sam Houston . His final WWF match came a day later when he again lost to Houston in Hershey , PA although he did have a match versus Tito Santana which was broadcast on July 25th on Prime Time Wrestling but was likely recorded much earlier . He suffered a pinball loss in that encounter with Santana . 
 = = = Later career ( 1989 – 1995 ) = = = 
 The following year , LeDuc returned to Japan for another brief wrestling tour . He wrestled primarily in tag teams with Masanobu Kurisu . They were booked to lose each of these matches , however . LeDuc 's only victory in Japan came when he was put over Tarzan Goto in a singles match . 
 Following his stint in Japan , LeDuc retired from wrestling . On June 10 , 1995 , he wrestled one final event , teaming with Phil Hickerson to face Lawler and Valiant at the United States Wrestling Association 's " Memphis Memories II " event . The match built upon the storyline feud between LeDuc and Lawler , and Lawler won the match for his team by pinning LeDuc . 
 In November 1995 , he was scheduled to wrestle for Smoky Mountain Wrestling , teaming with Buddy Landel in a series of matches against The Punisher and Tommy Rich , but due to LeDuc retiring , The Bullet took his place teaming with Landel . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 LeDuc 's first wife died in a car accident in 1981 . He remarried and was married at the time of his death in 1999 . He had three children : two daughters , Nadine and Michele , and a son , Robert . 
 LeDuc appeared in the 1989 movie No Holds Barred , which starred fellow professional wrestler Hulk Hogan . 
 LeDuc had many problems with diabetes toward the end of his life . While visiting his son in Atlanta , Georgia , LeDuc slipped in the shower . As a result of the injuries , he developed an infection that ultimately led to his death . He died of a lung infection on May 1 , 1999 in Atlanta . After his death , the revelation that he and Paul LeDuc were not related caused a minor scandal on talk shows in Quebec . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 One @-@ armed backbreaker 
 Signature moves 
 Bearhug 
 Nicknames 
 " The Canadian Freight Train " 
 Managers 
 Paul <unk> 
 Jimmy Hart 
 Oliver Humperdink 
 Sonny King 
 Frenchy Martin 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Championship Wrestling from Florida 
 NWA Florida Heavyweight Championship ( 3 times ) 
 NWA Florida Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Paul LeDuc 
 NWA Southern Heavyweight Championship ( Florida version ) ( 1 time ) 
 NWA United States Tag Team Championship ( Florida version ) ( 3 times ) – with Thor the Viking ( 1 ) , Pak Song ( 1 ) , and Don Muraco 
 Grand Prix Wrestling ( Montreal ) 
 Grand Prix Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Paul LeDuc 
 International Wrestling Association ( Montreal ) 
 IWA International Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IWA International Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Tony Baillargeon 
 Mid @-@ Atlantic Championship Wrestling 
 NWA Television Championship ( 2 times ) 
 NWA Mid @-@ America – Continental Wrestling Association 
 AWA Southern Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 AWA Southern Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Jerry Lawler 
 NWA Southern Tag Team Championship ( Mid @-@ America version ) ( 1 time ) – with Jean Louie 
 NWA New Zealand 
 NWA British Commonwealth Heavyweight Championship ( New Zealand version ) ( 2 times ) 
 Southeastern Championship Wrestling 
 NWA Alabama Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Southeastern Heavyweight Championship ( Northern Division ) ( 6 times ) 
 NWA Southeastern Tag Team Championship ( 5 times ) – with Bob Armstrong ( 2 ) and Robert Fuller ( 3 ) 
 Stampede Wrestling 
 NWA International Tag Team Championship ( Calgary version ) ( 1 time ) – with Paul LeDuc 
 United States Wrestling Association 
 Memphis Wrestling Hall of Fame ( Class of 1995 ) 
 World Wrestling Council 
 WWC North American Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Action of 6 November 1794 = 
 The Action of 6 November 1794 ( Known in French as the Combat du 16 Brumaire an III ) was a naval engagement during the French Revolutionary Wars . Two British ships of the line , HMS Alexander and HMS Canada were intercepted while returning to Britain through the Celtic Sea by a large French squadron . The French squadron had sailed from Brest in search of an inward bound British convoy in October , but instead encountered the two British ships returning from escorting an outward @-@ bound convoy . There had been no warning of the French approach as the British force assigned to watch Brest was absent at Plymouth due to the policy of operating a distant blockade . 
 The British ships separated and attempted to escape , but the French commander Contre @-@ amiral Joseph @-@ Marie Nielly simply split his forces in response , and although Canada was eventually able to outrun pursuit , Alexander was slower and was caught by several French ships in succession . The first two opponents were driven off , but the third succeeded in coming alongside and , in a fierce and close fought duel , compelled Captain Richard Rodney Bligh to surrender his ship in the face of overwhelming odds . The battle was a rare French victory , lying between the significant British victories at the Glorious First of June and the Battle of Groix , in the Royal Navy campaign against the French fleet at Brest . 
 = = Background = = 
 In February 1793 , following years of rising tension , the French Republic that had emerged from the French Revolution declared war on the Kingdom of Great Britain . For the Royal Navy one of the most immediate concerns was to contain the French Atlantic Fleet based in the massively fortified harbour at Brest in Brittany . This port was ideally positioned to disrupt the merchant shipping convoys that passed through the Celtic Sea and the Bay of Biscay en route to Britain from all over the world , and it was therefore imperative that the French fleet was not permitted to put to sea without being challenged . For the French , Brest was a vital port for the receipt of grain supplies from the Americas and so French fleets regularly sailed on missions to escort these convoys into the harbour and to disrupt British convoys entering the English Channel . 
 In May 1794 , a large French fleet put to sea to ensure the safety of an American grain convoy and was intercepted far out in the Atlantic at the Glorious First of June by the British Channel Fleet , the most powerful of the Royal Navy 's fleets and the force assigned to restrict French movements from Brest . The French suffered a serious defeat , losing seven ships , but managed to retire in good order and saved the grain convoy . Later in June 1794 the British Fleet again put to sea , but was caught in a storm and many ships were badly damaged . Its commander Lord Howe retired with his fleet to the anchorage in Torbay and thus there was no British fleet at sea in late October when a powerful French squadron sailed from Brest with the intention of attacking a large merchant convoy sailing from Lisbon to Britain . The force , under the command of Contre @-@ amiral Joseph @-@ Marie Nielly , consisted of the 74 @-@ gun ships of the line Marat , Tigre , Droits de l 'Homme , Pelletier and Jean @-@ Bart with the frigates Charente , Fraternité , Gentille and the corvette Papillon . 
 In addition to the Lisbon convoy , a number of other vulnerable British targets were in the region , including a second convoy from the Mediterranean Sea under Rear @-@ Admiral Philip Cosby en route to Britain and the first @-@ rate HMS Victory , which was sailing independently with Lord Hood on board . Nielly had information concerning these movements , and was cruising in a pattern that was intended to cover the Western approaches to the English Channel . The French force cruised in the Celtic Sea for several days , until on 6 November at 02 : 30 two unidentified ships were spotted on the northeastern horizon . These vessels were the British 74 @-@ gun ships of the line HMS Alexander under Captain Richard Rodney Bligh and HMS Canada under Captain Charles Powell Hamilton , returning northeastwards to rejoin the Channel Fleet after escorting a Lisbon and Mediterranean bound convoy to a safe latitude . 
 = = Chase = = 
 On sighting the French force , the British captains first sought to establish the identity of the strange ships , shortening sail and tacking to port so that they could close with the squadron . At 04 : 00 they were about 0 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 0 @.@ 93 km ; 0 @.@ 58 mi ) away , ordering their crews to set more sail , ready to attempt to escape should the squadron be revealed to be French . At 05 : 00 , lookouts on the British ships discovered that the squadron , which had favourable wind , was approaching fast and this convinced Bligh and Hamilton that the unidentified ships were hostile . Bligh ordered Hamilton to separate in the hope that he could escape without the slower Alexander , Hamilton adjusting his course to a more northerly direction . Nielly had deliberately sought to disguise his squadron 's nationality in an effort to lure the British close enough that he could catch and overwhelm them , the trap springing successfully as three ships of the line pursued Alexander while two ships of the line , including Nielly 's flagship , and two frigates followed Canada . To continue the deception , Nielly ordered his ships to raise the Union Flag at 07 : 30 , to which the British ships replied at 08 : 15 by raising their own , having shifted their direction of flight to the eastwards to make better use of the available wind . 
 The raising of the British flags on Alexander and Canada was a clear indicator to Nielly that the British were aware of his identity , and he instead ordered his squadron to hoist the French tricolour , finally abandoning the ruse that his ships were British . During the preceding three hours , the division of the French squadron in pursuit of Alexander had steadily closed the gap between the ships , Alexander responding by firing stern @-@ chasers at the pursuers . The French ships responded by firing their bow @-@ chasers at the British vessel . At 09 : 00 Canada too came in range , Nielly ordering his flagship Marat to fire on the Hamilton 's ship , the shot flying over the vessel and harmlessly into the sea . Hamilton responded with fire from his own stern @-@ chasers and Bligh issued signals for Alexander and Canada to form a line , Canada in the lead , so that the British vessels might mutually support one another . 
 Nielly recognised Bligh 's intentions as soon as Canada began to move however , and interposed his division so that they blocked Hamilton 's manoeuvre , both ships of the division now firing on Hamilton 's ship . Bligh was thus isolated , Alexander falling further behind Canada . At 11 : 00 , the French ship Jean @-@ Bart was able to draw close enough to Alexander to discharge its main broadside at the British vessel , the two ships engaging in a fierce duel for 30 minutes , both suffering damage . At 11 : 30 Jean @-@ Bart sheered away from the engagement , assisted by a French frigate , and its place was taken by the next French ship in line , Tigre . Tigre could not pull directly alongside Bligh 's ship , but was still able to attack the British ship with heavy fire , receiving a battering in turn that shot away the French ship 's main and mizen topmasts and inflicted severe damage to its rigging . 
 Tigre too turned away at about 12 : 00 and was again replaced by the third ship in the French line , Marat , which pulled alongside and battered the already damaged Alexander for an hour , taking damage in its turn . At 13 : 00 , with his rigging and sails tattered , his masts shot through , hull shattered and several fires raging on board , Bligh surrendered Alexander in the face of overwhelming French odds as Nielly 's division pulled within range and began to fire on his ship . Hamilton in Canada had been able to pull ahead of Nielly and escape , most of the French shot flying over the British ship : so ineffectual had been the attack on Canada that Hamilton reported no damage or casualties at all . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Consolidating his battered prize , Nielly ordered his squadron to return to Brest without waiting for the British convoys that had been his intended targets : unknown to the French , both the Lisbon and Mediterranean convoys were less than 180 nautical miles ( 330 km ; 210 mi ) away from the action . Alexander was in a sinking condition , and it was only with difficulty that the ship was brought back to port afloat . The captured crew were distributed among the French squadron and as a result Bligh was unable to make a full casualty list . He later estimated losses of approximately 40 men killed or wounded aboard Alexander , although French accounts give 28 killed and 30 wounded . British histories reported French casualties in the engagement as the enormous figure of 450 men killed and wounded , although as French historian Charles <unk> noted in 1868 , this is an absurdly inflated total : <unk> gave French losses as 10 wounded , all on Marat . Bligh was returned to Brest in the custody of Captain Jean François Renaudin , who had commanded the ship Vengeur du Peuple at the Glorious First of June until his ship was sunk . Bligh , who had , unknown to him , been promoted to rear @-@ admiral whilst at sea , later commended Renaudin for his conduct while Bligh was a prisoner and wrote to the Admiralty that he had been treated with " great Kindness and Humanity " . However , historian Edward Pelham Brenton reported in 1825 that at Brest : 
 " the populace insulted the prisoners as they marched to their place of confinement : officers and men shared the same lot ; they were denied the commonest rations of provisions , and reduced to starvation . A wretched dog that crept into the cells was killed , and his head alone sold for a dollar , to satisfy the cravings of nature : a prisoner , in a state of delirium , threw himself in the well within the prison walls , and his dead body , after lying some time , was taken out , but no other water was allowed to the people to drink . " 
 Bligh was exchanged shortly after the action and returned to Britain . On 27 May 1795 he sat before a court @-@ martial , standard practice when a Royal Navy ship was lost in action , and was honourably acquitted of blame in the loss of Alexander . In France , the National Convention commended Nielly on his victory and the captured ship was repaired and taken into the French Navy , joining the Atlantic Fleet . It was however a poor sailor and in June 1795 was with the French fleet that participated in Cornwallis 's Retreat and the Battle of Groix : at the latter action Alexandre was overrun by the British fleet and recaptured , rejoining the Royal Navy . The historical assessment of the capture of Alexander has been summed up by the historian Robert Gardiner , who wrote in 1996 that " The capture of a British 74 was a rare event during these wars – only five were lost . . . However , the one sided nature of the conflict was not apparent in 1794 and what has been called the Royal Navy 's ' habit of victory ' was not yet established . " 
