 = Gloria Steinem = 
 Gloria Marie Steinem ( born March 25 , 1934 ) is an American feminist , journalist , and social and political activist , who became nationally recognized as a leader and a spokeswoman for the feminist movement in the late 1960s and early 1970s . 
 Steinem was a columnist for New York magazine , and a founder of Ms. magazine . In 1969 , Steinem published an article , " After Black Power , Women 's Liberation , " which brought her to national fame as a feminist leader . 
 In 2005 , Steinem , Jane Fonda , and Robin Morgan co @-@ founded the Women 's Media Center , an organization that works " to make women visible and powerful in the media . " 
 Steinem currently travels internationally as an organizer and lecturer , and is a media spokeswoman on issues of equality . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Steinem was born on March 25 , 1934 in Toledo , Ohio , the daughter of Ruth ( née <unk> ) and Leo Steinem . Her mother was a Presbyterian of mostly German ( including Prussian ) , and some Scottish , descent . Her father was Jewish , the son of immigrants from Württemberg , Germany and <unk> , Poland . Her paternal grandmother , Pauline Perlmutter Steinem , was chairwoman of the educational committee of the National Woman Suffrage Association , a delegate to the 1908 International Council of Women , and the first woman to be elected to the Toledo Board of Education , as well as a leader in the movement for vocational education . Pauline also rescued many members of her family from the Holocaust . 
 The <unk> lived and traveled about in the trailer from which Leo carried out his trade as a traveling antiques dealer . Before Steinem was born , her mother Ruth , then aged 34 , had a " nervous breakdown " that left her an invalid , trapped in delusional fantasies that occasionally turned violent . She changed " from an energetic , fun @-@ loving , book @-@ loving " woman into " someone who was afraid to be alone , who could not hang on to reality long enough to hold a job , and who could rarely concentrate enough to read a book . " Ruth spent long periods in and out of sanatoriums for the mentally ill . Steinem was ten years old when her parents finally separated in 1944 . Her father went to California to find work , while she and her mother continued to live together in Toledo . 
 While her parents divorced as a result of her mother 's illness , Steinem did not attribute it to a result of chauvinism on the father 's part , and she claims to have " understood and never blamed him for the breakup . " Nevertheless , the impact of these events had a formative effect on her personality : while her father , a traveling salesman , had never provided much financial stability to the family , his exit aggravated their situation . Steinem concluded that her mother 's inability to hold on to a job was evidence of general hostility towards working women . She also concluded that the general apathy of doctors towards her mother emerged from a similar anti @-@ woman animus . Years later , Steinem described her mother 's experiences as having been pivotal to her understanding of social injustices . These perspectives convinced Steinem that women lacked social and political equality . 
 Steinem attended Waite High School in Toledo and Western High School in Washington , D.C. , graduating from the latter . She then attended Smith College , an institution with which she continues to remain engaged , and from which she graduated as a member of Phi Beta Kappa . In the late 1950s , Steinem spent two years in India as a Chester Bowles Asian Fellow . After returning to the U.S. , she served as director of the Independent Research Service , an organization funded in secret by a donor that turned out to be the CIA . She worked to send non @-@ Communist American students to the 1959 World Youth Festival . In 1960 , she was hired by Warren Publishing as the first employee of Help ! magazine . 
 = = Journalism career = = 
 Esquire magazine features editor Clay Felker gave freelance writer Steinem what she later called her first " serious assignment " , regarding contraception ; he didn 't like her first draft and had her re @-@ write the article . Her resulting 1962 article about the way in which women are forced to choose between a career and marriage preceded Betty Friedan 's book The Feminine Mystique by one year . 
 In 1963 , while working on an article for Huntington Hartford 's Show magazine , Steinem was employed as a Playboy Bunny at the New York Playboy Club . The article , published in 1963 as " A Bunny 's Tale " , featured a photo of Steinem in Bunny uniform and detailed how women were treated at those clubs . Steinem has maintained that she is proud of the work she did publicizing the exploitative working conditions of the bunnies and especially the sexual demands made of them , which skirted the edge of the law . However , for a brief period after the article was published , Steinem was unable to land other assignments ; in her words , this was " because I had now become a Bunny – and it didn 't matter why . " Steinem eventually landed a job at Felker 's newly founded New York magazine in 1968 . 
 In the interim , she conducted a 1964 interview with John Lennon for Cosmopolitan magazine . In 1965 , she wrote for NBC @-@ TV 's weekly satirical revue , That Was The Week That Was ( <unk> ) , contributing a regular segment entitled " Surrealism in Everyday Life " . 
 In 1969 , she covered an abortion speak @-@ out for New York Magazine , which was held in a church basement in Greenwich , New York . Steinem had had an abortion herself in London at the age of 22 . She felt what she called a " big click " at the speak @-@ out , and later said she didn 't " begin my life as an active feminist " until that day . As she recalled , " It [ abortion ] is supposed to make us a bad person . But I must say , I never felt that . I used to sit and try and figure out how old the child would be , trying to make myself feel guilty . But I never could ! I think the person who said : ' Honey , if men could get pregnant , abortion would be a sacrament ' was right . Speaking for myself , I knew it was the first time I had taken responsibility for my own life . I wasn 't going to let things happen to me . I was going to direct my life , and therefore it felt positive . But still , I didn 't tell anyone . Because I knew that out there it wasn 't [ positive ] . " She also said , " In later years , if I 'm remembered at all it will be for inventing a phrase like ' reproductive freedom ' ... as a phrase it includes the freedom to have children or not to . So it makes it possible for us to make a coalition . " 
 In 1972 , she co @-@ founded the feminist @-@ themed magazine Ms. with Dorothy Pitman Hughes ; it began as a special edition of New York , and Clay Felker funded the first issue . Its 300 @,@ 000 test copies sold out nationwide in eight days . Within weeks , Ms. had received 26 @,@ 000 subscription orders and over 20 @,@ 000 reader letters . The magazine was sold to the Feminist Majority Foundation in 2001 ; Steinem remains on the masthead as one of six founding editors and serves on the advisory board . 
 Also in 1972 , Steinem became the first woman to speak at the National Press Club . 
 In 1978 , Steinem wrote a semi @-@ satirical essay for Cosmopolitan titled " If Men Could <unk> " in which she imagined a world where men menstruate instead of women . She concludes in the essay that in such a world , menstruation would become a badge of honor with men comparing their relative sufferings , rather than the source of shame that it had been for women . 
 = = Activism = = 
 In 1959 , Steinem led a group of activists in Cambridge , Massachusetts , to organize the Independent Service for Information on the Vienna festival , to advocate for American participation in the World Youth Festival , a Soviet @-@ sponsored youth event . 
 In 1968 , Steinem signed the " War Tax Protest " pledge , vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War . 
 In 1969 , she published an article , " After Black Power , Women 's Liberation " which brought her to national fame as a feminist leader . As such she campaigned for the Equal Rights Amendment , testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee in its favor in 1970 . That same year she published her essay on a utopia of gender equality , " What It Would Be Like If Women Win " , in Time magazine . 
 On July 10 , 1971 , Steinem was one of over three hundred women who founded the National Women 's Political Caucus ( <unk> ) , including such notables as Bella Abzug , Betty Friedan , Shirley Chisholm , and Myrlie Evers @-@ Williams . As a co @-@ convener of the Caucus , she delivered the speech " Address to the Women of America " , stating in part : 
 This is no simple reform . It really is a revolution . Sex and race because they are easy and visible differences have been the primary ways of organizing human beings into superior and inferior groups and into the cheap labor on which this system still depends . We are talking about a society in which there will be no roles other than those chosen or those earned . We are really talking about humanism . 
 In 1972 , she ran as a delegate for Shirley Chisholm in New York , but lost . 
 In March 1973 , she addressed the first national conference of Stewardesses for Women 's Rights , which she continued to support throughout its existence . Stewardesses for Women 's Rights folded in the spring of 1976 . 
 Steinem , who grew up reading Wonder Woman comics , was also a key player in the restoration of Wonder Woman 's powers and traditional costume , which were restored in issue # 204 ( January – February 1973 ) . Steinem , offended that the most famous female superhero had been depowered , had placed Wonder Woman ( in costume ) on the cover of the first issue of Ms. ( 1972 ) – Warner Communications , DC Comics ' owner , was an investor – which also contained an appreciative essay about the character . 
 In 1976 , the first women @-@ only Passover seder was held in Esther M. <unk> 's New York City apartment and led by <unk> , with 13 women attending , including Steinem . 
 In 1984 Steinem was arrested along with a number of members of Congress and civil rights activists for disorderly conduct outside the South African embassy while protesting against the South African apartheid system . 
 At the outset of the Gulf War in 1991 , Steinem , along with prominent feminists Robin Morgan and Kate Millett , publicly opposed an incursion into the Middle East and asserted that ostensible goal of " defending democracy " was a pretense . 
 During the Clarence Thomas sexual harassment scandal in 1991 , Steinem voiced strong support for Anita Hill and suggested that one day Hill herself would sit on the Supreme Court . 
 In 1992 , Steinem co @-@ founded Choice USA , a non @-@ profit organization that mobilizes and provides ongoing support to a younger generation that lobbies for reproductive choice . 
 In 1993 Steinem co @-@ produced and narrated an Emmy Award winning TV documentary for HBO about child abuse , called , " Multiple Personalities : The Search for Deadly Memories . " Also in 1993 , she and <unk> Heller co @-@ produced an original TV movie for Lifetime , " Better Off Dead , " which examined the parallel forces that both oppose abortion and support the death penalty . 
 She contributed the piece " The Media and the Movement : A User 's Guide " to the 2003 anthology Sisterhood Is Forever : The Women 's Anthology for a New Millennium , edited by Robin Morgan . 
 On June 1 , 2013 Steinem performed on stage at the " Chime For Change : The Sound Of Change Live " Concert at Twickenham Stadium in London , England . Later in 2014 , UN Women began its commemoration of the 20th anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women , and as part of that campaign Steinem ( and others ) spoke at the Apollo Theater in New York City . Chime For Change funded by Gucci , focusing on using innovative approaches to raise funds and awareness especially regarding girls and women . 
 Steinem has stated , " I think the fact that I 've become a symbol for the women 's movement is somewhat accidental . A woman member of Congress , for example , might be identified as a member of Congress ; it doesn 't mean she 's any less of a feminist but she 's identified by her nearest male analog . Well , I don 't have a male analog so the press has to identify me with the movement . I suppose I could be referred to as a journalist , but because Ms. is part of a movement and not just a typical magazine , I 'm more likely to be identified with the movement . There 's no other slot to put me in . " 
 Contrary to popular belief , Steinem did not coin the feminist slogan " A woman needs a man like a fish needs a bicycle . " Although she helped popularize it , the phrase is actually attributable to Irina Dunn . When Time magazine published an article attributing the saying to Steinem , Steinem wrote a letter saying the phrase had been coined by Dunn . 
 Another phrase sometimes wrongly attributed to Steinem is , " If men could get pregnant , abortion would be a sacrament . " Steinem herself attributed it to " an old Irish woman taxi driver in Boston , " who she said she and Florynce Kennedy met . 
 As for 2015 , she joined the thirty leading international women peacemakers and became an honorary co @-@ chairwoman of 2015 Women 's Walk For Peace In Korea with Mairead Maguire . The group 's main goal is to advocate disarmament and seek Korea 's reunification . It will be holding international peace symposiums both in Pyongyang and Seoul in which women from both North Korea and South Korea can share experiences and ideas of mobilizing women to stop the Korean crisis . The group 's specific hope is to walk cross the 2 @-@ mile wide Korean Demilitarized Zone that separates North Korea and South Korea which is meant to be a symbolic action taken for peace in the Korean peninsular suffering for 70 years after its division at the end of World War II . It is especially believed that the role of women in this act would help and support the reunification of family members divided by the split prolonged for 70 years . 
 = = Involvement in political campaigns = = 
 Steinem 's involvement in presidential campaigns stretches back to her support of Adlai Stevenson in the 1952 presidential campaign . 
 = = = 1968 election = = = 
 A proponent of civil rights and fierce critic of the Vietnam War , Steinem was initially drawn to Senator Eugene McCarthy because of his " admirable record " on those issues , but in meeting him and hearing him speak , she found him " cautious , uninspired , and dry . " As the campaign progressed , Steinem became baffled at " personally vicious " attacks that McCarthy leveled against his primary opponent Robert Kennedy , even as " his real opponent , Hubert Humphrey , went free . " 
 On a late @-@ night radio show , Steinem garnered attention for declaring , " George McGovern is the real Eugene McCarthy . " In 1968 , Steinem was chosen to pitch the arguments to McGovern as to why he should enter the presidential race that year ; he agreed , and Steinem " consecutively or simultaneously served as pamphlet writer , advance " man " , fund raiser , lobbyist of delegates , errand runner , and press secretary . " 
 McGovern lost the nomination at the 1968 Democratic National Convention , and Steinem later wrote of her astonishment at Hubert Humphrey 's " refusal even to suggest to Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley that he control the rampaging police and the bloodshed in the streets . " 
 = = = 1972 election = = = 
 Steinem was reluctant to re @-@ join the McGovern campaign , as although she had brought in McGovern 's single largest campaign contributor in 1968 , she " still had been treated like a frivolous pariah by much of McGovern 's campaign staff . " In April 1972 , Steinem remarked that he " still doesn 't understand the Women 's Movement " . 
 McGovern ultimately excised the abortion issue from the party 's platform , and recent publications show McGovern was deeply conflicted on the issue . Steinem later wrote this description of the events : 
 The consensus of the meeting of women delegates held by the caucus had been to fight for the minority plank on reproductive freedom ; indeed our vote had supported the plank nine to one . So fight we did , with three women delegates speaking eloquently in its favor as a constitutional right . One male Right @-@ to @-@ Life zealot spoke against , and Shirley MacLaine also was an opposition speaker , on the grounds that this was a fundamental right but didn 't belong in the platform . We made a good showing . Clearly we would have won if McGovern 's forces had left their delegates <unk> and thus able to vote their consciences . 
 However , Germaine Greer flatly contradicted Steinem 's account , reporting , " Jacqui Ceballos called from the crowd to demand abortion rights on the Democratic platform , but Bella [ Abzug ] and Gloria stared <unk> out into the room , " thus killing the abortion rights platform , " and asking " Why had Bella and Gloria not helped Jacqui to nail him on abortion ? What reticence , what <unk> had afflicted them ? " Steinem later recalled that the 1972 Convention was the only time Greer and Steinem ever met . 
 The cover of Harper 's that month read , " <unk> , they did not want to get tough with their man , and so , <unk> , they got screwed . " 
 = = = 2004 election = = = 
 In the run @-@ up to the 2004 election , Steinem voiced fierce criticism of the Bush administration , asserting , " There has never been an administration that has been more hostile to women 's equality , to reproductive freedom as a fundamental human right , and has acted on that hostility , " adding , " If he is elected in 2004 , abortion will be criminalized in this country . " At a Planned Parenthood event in Boston , Steinem declared Bush " a danger to health and safety , " citing his antagonism to the Clean Water Act , reproductive freedom , sex education , and AIDS relief . 
 = = = 2008 election = = = 
 Steinem was an active participant in the 2008 presidential campaign , and praised both the Democratic front @-@ runners , commenting , 
 Both Senators Clinton and Obama are civil rights advocates , feminists , environmentalists , and critics of the war in Iraq ... Both have resisted pandering to the right , something that sets them apart from any Republican candidate , including John McCain . Both have Washington and foreign policy experience ; George W. Bush did not when he first ran for president . 
 Nevertheless , Steinem endorsed Senator Hillary Clinton , citing her broader experience , and saying that the nation was in such bad shape it might require two terms of Clinton and two of Obama to fix it . 
 She also made headlines for a New York Times op @-@ ed in which she cited gender and not race as " probably the most restricting force in American life " . She elaborated , " Black men were given the vote a half @-@ century before women of any race were allowed to mark a ballot , and generally have ascended to positions of power , from the military to the boardroom , before any women . " This was attacked , however , from critics saying that white women were given the vote unabridged in 1920 , whereas many blacks , female or male , could not vote until the Voting Rights Act of 1965 , and some were lynched for trying , and that many white women advanced in the business and political worlds before black women and men . 
 Steinem again drew attention for , according to the New York Observer , seeming " to denigrate the importance of John McCain 's time as a prisoner of war in Vietnam " ; Steinem 's broader argument " was that the media and the political world are too admiring of militarism in all its guises . " 
 Following McCain 's selection of Sarah Palin as his running mate , Steinem penned an op @-@ ed in which she labeled Palin an " unqualified woman " who " opposes everything most other women want and need , " described her nomination speech as " divisive and deceptive " , called for a more inclusive Republican Party , and concluded that Palin resembled " Phyllis Schlafly , only younger . " 
 = = = 2016 election = = = 
 In an HBO interview with Bill Maher , Steinem , when asked to explain the broad support for Bernie Sanders among young Democratic women , responded , " When you ’ re young , you ’ re thinking , ' Where are the boys ? The boys are with Bernie . ' " Her comments triggered widespread criticism , and Steinem later issued an apology and said her comments had been " misinterpreted " . 
 = = CIA ties = = 
 In May 1975 , <unk> , a radical feminist group , published a report on the Vienna Youth Festival that Steinem and others had put together for the Independent Research Service . Though she acknowledged having worked for the CIA @-@ financed foundation in the late 1950s and early 1960s in interviews given to the New York Times and Washington Post in 1967 in the wake of the Ramparts magazine CIA exposures ( nearly two years before Steinem attended her first <unk> or feminist meeting ) , Steinem in 1975 denied any continuing involvement . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Steinem was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1986 and trigeminal neuralgia in 1994 . 
 On September 3 , 2000 , at age 66 , Steinem married David Bale , father of actor Christian Bale . The wedding was performed at the home of her friend Wilma <unk> , the first female Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation . Steinem and Bale were married for only three years before he died of brain lymphoma on December 30 , 2003 , at age 62 . 
 Previously , she had had a four @-@ year relationship with the publisher Mortimer Zuckerman . 
 Commenting on aging , Steinem says that as she approached 60 she felt like she entered a new phase in life that was free of the " demands of gender " that she faced from adolescence onward . 
 = = Feminist positions = = 
 Although most frequently considered a liberal feminist , Steinem has repeatedly characterized herself as a radical feminist . More importantly , she has repudiated categorization within feminism as " <unk> to specific problems , " saying : " I 've turned up in every category . So it makes it harder for me to take the divisions with great seriousness . " Nevertheless , on concrete issues , Steinem has staked several firm positions . 
 = = = Female genital mutilation and male circumcision = = = 
 In 1979 , Steinem wrote the article on female genital mutilation that brought it into the American public 's consciousness ; the article , " The International Crime of Female Genital Mutilation , " was published in the March 1979 issue of Ms .. The article reported on the " 75 million women suffering with the results of genital mutilation . " According to Steinem , " The real reasons for genital mutilation can only be understood in the context of the patriarchy : men must control women 's bodies as the means of production , and thus repress the independent power of women 's sexuality . " Steinem 's article contains the basic arguments that would later be developed by philosopher Martha Nussbaum . 
 On male circumcision , she commented , " These patriarchal controls limit men 's sexuality too ... That 's why men are asked symbolically to submit the sexual part of themselves and their sons to patriarchal authority , which seems to be the origin of male circumcision , a practice that , even as advocates admit , is medically unnecessary 90 % of the time . Speaking for myself , I stand with many brothers in eliminating that practice too . " 
 = = = Feminist theory = = = 
 Steinem has frequently voiced her disapproval of the obscurantism and abstractions some claim to be prevalent in feminist academic theorizing . She said , " Nobody cares about feminist academic writing . That 's careerism . These poor women in academia have to talk this silly language that nobody can understand in order to be accepted ... But I recognize the fact that we have this ridiculous system of tenure , that the whole thrust of academia is one that values education , in my opinion , in inverse ratio to its usefulness — and what you write in inverse relationship to its understandability . " Steinem later singled out deconstructionists like Judith Butler for criticism , saying , " I always wanted to put a sign up on the road to Yale saying , ' Beware : Deconstruction Ahead ' . Academics are forced to write in language no one can understand so that they get tenure . They have to say ' discourse ' , not ' talk ' . Knowledge that is not accessible is not helpful . It becomes <unk> . " 
 = = = Pornography = = = 
 Steinem has criticized pornography , which she distinguishes from erotica , writing : " Erotica is as different from pornography as love is from rape , as dignity is from humiliation , as partnership is from slavery , as pleasure is from pain . " Steinem 's argument hinges on the distinction between reciprocity versus domination , as she writes , " <unk> or subtle , pornography involves no equal power or mutuality . In fact , much of the tension and drama comes from the clear idea that one person is dominating the other . " 
 On the issue of same @-@ sex pornography , Steinem asserts , " Whatever the gender of the participants , all pornography including male @-@ male gay pornography is an imitation of the male @-@ female , conqueror @-@ victim paradigm , and almost all of it actually portrays or implies enslaved women and master . " Steinem has also cited " snuff films " as a serious threat to women . 
 = = = Same @-@ sex marriage = = = 
 In an essay published in Time magazine on August 31 , 1970 , " What Would It Be Like If Women Win , " Steinem wrote about same @-@ sex marriage in the context of the " Utopian " future she envisioned , writing : 
 What will exist is a variety of alternative life @-@ styles . Since the population explosion dictates that childbearing be kept to a minimum , parents @-@ and @-@ children will be only one of many " families " : couples , age groups , working groups , mixed communes , blood @-@ related clans , class groups , creative groups . Single women will have the right to stay single without ridicule , without the attitudes now betrayed by " spinster " and " bachelor . " Lesbians or homosexuals will no longer be denied legally binding marriages , complete with mutual @-@ support agreements and inheritance rights . Paradoxically , the number of homosexuals may get smaller . With fewer over @-@ possessive mothers and fewer fathers who hold up an impossibly cruel or perfectionist idea of manhood , boys will be less likely to be denied or reject their identity as males . 
 Although Steinem did not mention or advocate same @-@ sex marriage in any published works or interviews for more than three decades , she again expressed support for same @-@ sex marriage in the early 2000s , stating in 2004 that " [ t ] he idea that sexuality is only okay if it ends in reproduction oppresses women — whose health depends on separating sexuality from reproduction — as well as gay men and lesbians . " Steinem is also a signatory of the 2008 manifesto , " Beyond Same @-@ Sex Marriage : A New Strategic Vision For All Our Families and Relationships " , which advocates extending legal rights and privileges to a wide range of relationships , households , and families . 
 = = = Transgender rights = = = 
 In 1977 , Steinem expressed disapproval that the heavily publicized sex reassignment surgery of tennis player Renée Richards had been characterized as " a frightening instance of what feminism could lead to " or as " living proof that feminism isn 't necessary . " Steinem wrote , " At a minimum , it was a diversion from the widespread problems of sexual inequality . " She also wrote that , while she supported the right of individuals to identify as they choose , she claimed that , in many cases , transsexuals " surgically mutilate their own bodies " in order to conform to a gender role that is inexorably tied to physical body parts . She concluded that " feminists are right to feel uncomfortable about the need for and uses of transsexualism . " The article concluded with what became one of Steinem 's most famous quotes : " If the shoe doesn 't fit , must we change the foot ? " Although clearly meant in the context of transsexuality , the quote is frequently mistaken as a general statement about feminism . 
 On October 2 , 2013 , Steinem clarified her remarks on transsexualism in an op @-@ ed for The Advocate , writing that critics failed to consider that her 1977 essay was " written in the context of global protests against routine surgical assaults , called female genital mutilation by some survivors . " Steinem later in the piece expressed unequivocal support for transgender people , saying that transgender people " including those who have transitioned , are living out real , authentic lives . Those lives should be celebrated , not questioned . " She also apologized for any pain her words might have caused . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California 's Bill of Rights Award 
 American Humanist Association 's 2012 Humanist of the Year ( 2012 ) 
 Biography magazine 's 25 most influential women in America ( Steinem was listed as one of them ) 
 Clarion award 
 DVF Lifetime Leadership Award ( 2014 ) 
 Emmy Citation for excellence in television writing 
 Esquire magazine 's 75 greatest women of all time ( Steinem was listed as one of them ) ( 2010 ) 
 Equality Now 's international human rights award , given jointly to her and Efua <unk> ( 2000 ) 
 Front Page award 
 Glamour magazine 's " The 75 Most Important Women of the Past 75 Years " ( Steinem was listed as one of them ) ( 2014 ) 
 Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund 's Liberty Award 
 Library Lion award ( 2015 ) 
 The Ms. Foundation for Women 's Gloria Awards , given annually since 1988 , are named after Steinem . 
 National Gay Rights Advocates Award 
 National Magazine awards 
 National Women 's Hall of Fame inductee ( 1993 ) 
 New York Women 's Foundation 's Century Award ( 2014 ) 
 Parenting magazine 's Lifetime Achievement Award ( 1995 ) 
 Penney @-@ Missouri Journalism Award 
 Presidential Medal of Freedom ( 2013 ) 
 Rutgers University announced the Gloria Steinem Endowed Chair in September 2014 . The Chair will fund teaching and research for someone ( not necessarily a woman ) who exemplifies Steinem 's values of equal representation in the media . This person will teach at least one undergraduate course per semester . 
 Sara Curry Humanitarian Award ( 2007 ) 
 Simmons College 's Doctorate of Human Justice 
 Society of Professional Journalists ' Lifetime Achievement in Journalism Award 
 <unk> trading card set ( card number 32 featured Steinem 's name and picture ) ( 1979 ) 
 United Nations ' Ceres Medal 
 United Nations ' Society of Writers Award 
 University of Missouri School of Journalism Award for Distinguished Service in Journalism 
 Women 's Sports Journalism Award 
 2015 Richard C. Holbrooke Distinguished Achievement Award of the Dayton Literary Peace Prize 
 = = In media = = 
 In 1995 , Education of a Woman : The Life of Gloria Steinem , by Carolyn Heilbrun , was published . 
 In 1997 , Gloria Steinem : Her Passions , Politics , and Mystique , by Sydney <unk> Stern , was published . 
 In the musical Legally Blonde , which premiered in 2007 , Steinem is mentioned in the scene where Elle Woods wears a flashy Bunny costume to a party , and must pretend to be dressed as Gloria Steinem " researching her feminist manifesto ' I Was A Playboy Bunny ' . " 
 In 2011 , Gloria : In Her Own Words , a documentary , first aired . 
 In 2013 , Female Force : Gloria Steinem , a comic book by Melissa Seymour , was published . 
 Also in 2013 , Steinem was featured in the documentary <unk> : Women Who Make America about the feminist movement . 
 In 2014 , Who Is Gloria Steinem ? , by Sarah <unk> , was published . 
 Also in 2014 , Steinem appeared in Season 1 , Episode 8 of the television show The Sixties . 
 Also in 2014 , Steinem appeared in Season 6 , Episode 3 of the television show The Good Wife . 
 In 2016 , Steinem was featured in the catalog of clothing retailer Lands ' End . After an outcry from anti @-@ abortion customers , the company removed Steinem from their website , stating on their Facebook page : " It was never our intention to raise a divisive political or religious issue , so when some of our customers saw the recent promotion that way , we heard them . We sincerely apologize for any offense . " The company then faced further criticism online , this time both from customers who were still unhappy that Steinem had been featured in the first place , and customers who were unhappy that Steinem had been removed . 
 In Jennifer Lopez 's 2016 music video for her song " Ain 't Your Mama " , Steinem can be heard saying part of her " Address to the Women of America " speech , specifically , " This is no simple reform . It really is a revolution . " 
 Also in 2016 , the television series Woman premiered , featuring Steinem as producer and host ; it is a documentary series concerning sexist injustice and violence worldwide . 
 The Gloria Steinem Papers are held in the Sophia Smith Collection at Smith College , under collection number MS 237 . 
 = = Works = = 
 The Thousand Indias ( 1957 ) 
 The Beach Book ( 1963 ) , New York : Viking Press . OCLC <unk> 
 Outrageous Acts and Everyday Rebellions ( 1983 ) , New York : Holt , Rinehart , and Winston . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 03 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Marilyn : Norma Jean ( 1986 ) , with George Barris , New York : Holt . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Revolution from Within ( 1992 ) , Boston : Little , Brown . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 316 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Moving beyond Words ( 1993 ) , New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Doing Sixty & Seventy ( 2006 ) , San Francisco : Elders Academy Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @-@ 4 
 My Life on the Road ( 2015 ) , New York : Random House . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 679 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 = Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England = 
 The medieval cathedrals of England , which date from between approximately 1040 and 1540 , are a group of twenty @-@ six buildings that constitute a major aspect of the country ’ s artistic heritage and are among the most significant material symbols of Christianity . Though diversified in style , they are united by a common function . As cathedrals , each of these buildings serves as central church for an administrative region ( or diocese ) and houses the throne of a bishop ( cathedra , from the Greek ) . Each cathedral also serves as a regional centre and a focus of regional pride and affection . 
 Only sixteen of these buildings had been cathedrals at the time of the Reformation : eight that were served by secular canons , and eight that were monastic . A further five cathedrals are former abbey churches which were reconstituted with secular canons as cathedrals of new dioceses by Henry VIII following the dissolution of the monasteries and which comprise , together with the former monastic cathedrals , the " Cathedrals of the New Foundation " . Two further pre @-@ Reformation monastic churches , which had survived as ordinary parish churches for 350 years , became cathedrals in the 19th and 20th centuries , as did the three medieval collegiate churches that retained their foundations for choral worship . 
 While there are characteristics of each building that are distinctly English , these cathedrals are marked by their architectural diversity , both from one to another and also within each individual building . This is much more the case than in the medieval cathedrals of Northern France , for example , where the cathedrals and large abbeys form a relatively homogenous group and the architectural development can easily be traced from building to building . 
 One of the points of interest of the English cathedrals is the way in which much of the history of medieval architecture can be demonstrated within a single building , which typically has important parts constructed in several different centuries with no attempt whatever to make the later work match or follow through on an earlier plan . For this reason a comprehensive architectural chronology must jump backwards and forwards from one building to another . Only at one building , Salisbury Cathedral , is stylistic unity demonstrated . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 Christianity was carried to England by the Romans and spread throughout Britain , until the 5th century , when it waned through the departure of the Romans and the invasion by Saxons . In 597 Pope Gregory sent Augustine as a missionary from Rome to Canterbury where a church was established and run initially by secular canons , then Benedictine monks from the late Saxon period until 1540 . The present cathedral church at Canterbury is the seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury , Primate of All England . 
 As begun by Alfred the Great in 871 and consolidated under William the Conqueror in 1066 , England became a politically unified entity at an earlier date than other European countries . One of the effects was that the units of government , both of church and state , were comparatively large . England was divided into the See of Canterbury and the See of York under two archbishops . During the Medieval period there were no more than 17 bishops , far fewer than the numbers in France and Italy . 
 Benedictine monasticism , present in England from the 6th century , was greatly extended after the Norman Invasion in 1066 . There were also a number of Cistercian abbeys , but these were often in remote areas and not destined to become cathedrals . The Romanesque architecture of Normandy replaced that of Saxon England , the buildings being generally larger and more spacious , the general arrangement of monastic buildings following those of the great Abbey of Cluny . The Romanesque style , of which the English form is often known as Norman architecture , developed local characteristics . 
 At the Norman conquest , most English cathedrals were already richly endowed , and as major centres of Norman power they were then able to acquire further lands formerly held by dispossessed English landowners . Furthermore , the development of tithe as a compulsory tax on agricultural production resulted in greatly increased incomes for incumbent clergy . Although all cathedrals gathered donations from worshippers and pilgrims ; in practice major building campaigns were largely , or entirely , funded from the accumulated wealth of the bishop and the chapter clergy . The availability of finance largely determined the speed of construction for major projects . When money was readily available , cathedral works could proceed with great speed . At Winchester , during the Norman period , an entire cathedral of unprecedented size was built from scratch in less than 20 years . 
 An important aspect in the practice of medieval Christianity was the veneration of saints , and the associated pilgrimages to places where particular saint 's relics were interred and their tradition honoured . The possession of the relics of a popular saint was a source of funds to the individual church as the faithful made donations and benefices in the hope that they might receive spiritual aid , a blessing or a healing from the presence of the physical remains of the holy person . Among those churches to benefit in particular were St. Alban 's Abbey , which contained the relics of England 's first Christian martyr , Ripon with the shrine of it founder St. Wilfrid ; Durham , which was built to house the body of Saints Cuthbert of Lindisfarne ; and Aidan , Ely with the shrine of St. Ethelreda , Westminster Abbey with the magnificent shrine of its founder St. Edward the Confessor and at Chichester , the remains of St. Richard . 
 All these saints brought pilgrims to their churches , but among them the most renowned was Thomas Becket , the late Archbishop of Canterbury , assassinated by henchmen of King Henry II in 1170 . As a place of pilgrimage Canterbury was , in the 13th century , second only to Santiago de Compostela . 
 In the 1170s Gothic architecture was introduced from France at Canterbury and Westminster Abbey . Over the next 400 years it developed in England , sometimes in parallel with and influenced by Continental forms , but generally with great local diversity and originality . 
 In the 16th century the Reformation brought about changes in the governance of the cathedrals as discussed below . Some existent buildings became cathedrals at this time . Several of the buildings were structurally damaged or left incomplete because of the Dissolution of the Monasteries , 1537 – 40 . Many of the large abbey churches , particularly those outside the towns , were robbed , burnt out and abandoned . The late 16th and early 17th centuries saw repairs to the fabric of many cathedrals and some new building and stained glass as well as many new fittings . 
 During the period of the Commonwealth , 1649 – 60 , wholesale iconoclasm was wrought on all the pictorial elements of Christian buildings . Most of England ’ s medieval stained glass was smashed . The majority of England ’ s medieval statues were smashed or defaced leaving only a few isolated examples intact . Medieval paintings almost disappeared . Vestments embroidered in the famous style known as Opus Anglicanum were burnt . Those medieval Communion vessels that had escaped the Dissolution were melted down so that only about 50 items of pre @-@ Reformation church plate remain . 
 The Restoration of the Monarchy in 1660 also brought about some restoration of churches and cathedrals such as that at Lichfield by Sir William Wilson , and their enrichment with new fittings , new church plate and many elaborate memorials . The loss of the ancient St. Paul ’ s Cathedral in the Great Fire of London in 1666 meant that an entirely new cathedral , the present St Paul ’ s , was built on its site to a design in the Baroque style by Sir Christopher Wren . 
 In general , from the time of the Reformation onwards , apart from necessary repairs so that buildings might remain in use , and the internal adornments of successive generations who wished to be commemorated , there was little building work and only piecemeal restoration . This situation lasted for about 250 years with the fabric of many major cathedrals suffering from neglect . The severity of the problem was demonstrated by the spectacular collapse of the spire of Chichester Cathedral , which suddenly telescoped in on itself in 1861 . 
 By this date medieval architecture was back in fashion . A growing awareness of the value of England ’ s medieval heritage had begun in the late 18th century , leading to some work on a number of the cathedrals by the architect James Wyatt . The consciousness accelerated until in the 1840s two academic groups , the Oxford Society and the Cambridge Camden Society both pronounced that the only suitable style in which to design a church was Gothic . The critic John Ruskin was an ardent advocate of all things medieval and popularised these ideas . The architect Augustus Welby Pugin , who designed mainly for the growing Roman Catholic Church , set himself to recreate not only the structural appearance of medieval churches , but also the richly decorated and colourful interiors that had been almost entirely lost , existing only as a painted screen here and there , a few tiled floors such as those at Winchester and Canterbury and the intricate painted wooden ceiling of Peterborough Cathedral . 
 The Victorian era saw the restoration of all of England ’ s cathedrals and remaining major abbey churches . Some buildings left incomplete were completed at this time and the greater part of existent church furniture , fittings and stained glass dates from this period . The architects included George Gilbert Scott , John Loughborough Pearson , George Frederick Bodley , Arthur Blomfield and George Edmund Street . 
 = = = Scope = = = 
 The 26 cathedrals described in this article are those of Bristol , Canterbury , Carlisle , Chester , Chichester , Durham , Ely , Exeter , Gloucester , Hereford , Lichfield , Lincoln , Manchester Norwich , Oxford , Peterborough , Ripon , Rochester , St. Alban 's , Salisbury , Southwark , Southwell , Wells , Winchester , Worcester and York with reference also to Westminster Abbey and the ancient cathedral of London generally known as Old St. Paul ’ s . 
 All the medieval buildings that are now cathedrals of England were Roman Catholic in origin , as they predate the Reformation . All these buildings now serve the Church of England as a result of the change to the official religion of the country , which occurred in 1534 during the reign of Henry VIII . 
 The cathedrals fall into three distinct groups , depending on their earlier organisational structure . Firstly , there are those that , during the Medieval period as now , were governed by a body of secular clergy or chapter , presided over by a dean . These cathedrals are Chichester , Exeter , Hereford , Lichfield , Lincoln , London , Salisbury , Wells , and York , all of which built specifically to serve as cathedral churches . 
 Secondly , there was a group of monastic cathedrals in which the bishop was titular abbot . These cathedrals are Canterbury , Carlisle , Durham , Ely , Norwich , Rochester , Winchester and Worcester . These monasteries were Benedictine except in the case of Carlisle , which was Augustinian . Six of these churches were built from the start as cathedrals . Carlisle and Ely are purely monastic churches , which then became the seat of a bishop during the course of construction . At the Dissolution of the Monasteries under Henry VIII , all the previously monastic cathedrals became governed by secular canons like the first group . 
 The third group are those churches established as new cathedrals since the Reformation . They include five great medieval abbey churches established as new cathedrals under Henry VIII : Bristol , Chester , Gloucester , Oxford , and Peterborough . Five further large churches later became cathedrals : St Albans and Southwark , which were of monastic foundation , and Manchester , Ripon , and Southwell , which were collegiate churches ( and all of which consequently combine the functions of cathedral and parish church ) . Westminster Abbey was a Benedictine monastery that became a cathedral after the Dissolution of the Monasteries , but only for ten years . 
 Four other churches are associated with this tradition : St John the Baptist 's Church , Chester , Old St. Paul 's Cathedral , London , Bath Abbey and the destroyed Benedictine Abbey of Coventry . The collegiate church of St John in Chester was raised to cathedral status in 1075 , but became a co @-@ cathedral in 1102 , when the see was removed to Coventry . The current building was probably begun around the time of the see 's removal . St. Paul ’ s , a cathedral with a secular chapter , was destroyed in the Great Fire of London in 1666 and was replaced by the present cathedral in the Baroque style designed by Christopher Wren . Bath Abbey was co @-@ cathedral of the Diocese of Bath and Wells , along with Wells Cathedral . Although a large church , architecturally it does not fit the cathedral tradition , but has much in common with King ’ s College Chapel , Cambridge and St. George ’ s Chapel , Windsor . The abbey church at Coventry , was co @-@ cathedral with Lichfield and St John Chester in the Diocese of Lichfield , but was destroyed at the Dissolution . The large parish church of St. Michael ’ s , Coventry , became Coventry Cathedral in 1918 . It was bombed during World War II , leaving intact only its spire , regarded as one of the finest in England . The new Coventry Cathedral designed by Sir Basil Spence was consecrated in 1962 and adjoins the shell of the ancient church . 
 = = = Liturgical and organisational = = = 
 Cathedrals are places where the Christian rituals particular to a bishop , especially ordination and enthronement , can be performed , and are structured and furnished for these purposes . Each cathedral contains the seat of the local bishop , often literally a large throne . The bishop 's throne is located towards the eastern end of the cathedral , near the high altar , which is main focus of worship . On the altar is served the Eucharist , a symbolic meal of bread and wine in memory of Jesus ’ last supper with his disciples . In the early Medieval period , the altar always contained , or was associated with , the relics of a saint . Sometimes the relics were held in a separate shrine , near the high altar . In this part of the church are often located the tombs of former bishops , typically arranged either side of the major shrine , so the worshipping congregation symbolically comprised the whole body of clergy of the diocese , both living and dead , in communion with their patron saint . Seats are provided for the other significant clergy of the cathedral : the dean who is the foremost priest at the cathedral , the precentor , sacristan , archdeacon and canons . 
 Each of these priests , either as secular clergy , or as previously , members of a religious order , is obligated to say the “ Holy Office ” every day . To this end , cathedrals normally have a number of small chapels used for private devotion or for small groups . In England there is a strong tradition that each chapel should face the east . For this reason the transepts of English cathedrals are longer than those in most other countries , and there is often a second transept , as at Salisbury . This arrangement permits a greater number of eastward @-@ facing chapels . That part of the main interior which is furthest to the east and reserved for the prayers of the clergy is the presbytery . 
 English cathedrals maintain a traditional form of church service , of which canticles , the set psalm of the day , responses , and an anthem are sung by a choir traditionally composed of about thirty men and boys . ( Many cathedrals now also have a girls choir , and a lay choir ) . Because of this tradition , that part of the building that contains the stalls , usually to the east of the central tower but sometimes extending under it , is called the choir or quire . The choir is sometimes divided from the nave of the cathedral by a wide medieval screen constructed of stone and in some instances carrying a large pipe organ . This screen traditionally separated the quire from the nave and the clergy from the laity , who were expected to worship at parish churches , rather than at the cathedral . The nave of the cathedral , in medieval times , was used primarily for processions . At its western end it contains the font for the ritual washing service of Baptism , at which a person , most often an infant , is symbolically accepted into the church . The font is usually made of stone and is usually the oldest fitting in the cathedral , many of them being Norman . 
 Since the Reformation , the nave is that part of the building which is usually open to and most used by the congregation and general public . There is also , usually in the nave , a raised pulpit from which the dean or other clergy can expound the scriptures . In the late 20th century it became customary in some cathedrals for an hourly prayer to be said , for the benefit of visitors , and this is often presented from the nave pulpit . In a large cathedral , particularly in those where the building is divided by a screen as at Canterbury , an altar may be set at the eastern end of the nave so that services might be held there for large congregations . At each place where services are held there is a lectern on which rests a Bible . 
 = = General characteristics of English cathedrals = = 
 Note : all the dimensions are those given by John Harvey unless otherwise cited . The periods and style names are those used by Banister Fletcher and others , based on Rickman and Sharpe . 
 = = = Plan and section = = = 
 Like the majority of medieval cathedrals , those of England are cruciform . While most are of the Latin Cross shape with a single transept , several including Salisbury , Lincoln , Wells and Canterbury have two transepts , which is a distinctly English characteristic . The transepts , unlike those of many French cathedrals , always project strongly . The cathedral , whether of monastic or secular foundation , often has several clearly defined subsidiary buildings , in particular the chapter house and cloister . 
 With two exceptions , the naves and eastern arms of the cathedrals have single lower aisles on either side with a clerestory that illuminates the central space . At Bristol the aisles are at the same height as the medieval choir like some German cathedrals , and at Chichester there are two aisles on either side of the nave like some French cathedrals . At a number of the cathedrals where the transepts are large they also have aisles , either on the eastern side as at Peterborough , Durham , Lincoln and Salisbury or both , as at Winchester , Wells , Ely and York . 
 = = = Length = = = 
 The nave and sometimes the eastern arm are often of great length by comparison with the medieval cathedrals of other countries , seven of the twenty @-@ five English cathedrals , Canterbury , Durham , Ely , Lincoln , St Albans , Winchester and York , exceeding 150 metres ( being between 509 and 554 feet , 155 – 169 metres ) , only equalled by the cathedrals of Milan and Florence . Another 9 of the cathedrals , Norwich , Peterborough , Salisbury , Worcester , Gloucester , Wells , Exeter , Chichester and Lichfield , are between 120 – 150 metres long ( being between 397 – 481 feet , 121 @-@ 146 @.@ 5 metres ) . By comparison , the largest cathedrals of Northern France , Notre Dame de Paris , Amiens , Rouen , Reims and Chartres , are all about 135 – 140 metres in length , as is Cologne in Germany . The longest cathedrals of Spain , including Seville , which has the largest floor area of any medieval church , are about 120 metres . Five English cathedrals : Chester , Hereford , Rochester , Southwell , and Ripon are 90 – 115 metres ( 318 – 371 feet , 97 – 113 metres ) . The last four cathedrals all , for various reasons , either have no medieval nave or only a few remaining bays . At Bristol and Southwark the naves were built in the Victorian era , leaving Carlisle and Oxford , with naves of only two and four bays respectively , as the smallest of England ’ s ancient cathedrals at 73 metres ( 239 feet ) and 57 metres ( 187 feet . ) 
 = = = Height = = = 
 By contrast with their tendency towards extreme length , the vaults of English cathedrals are low compared with many of those found in other countries . The highest medieval stone vault in England is at Westminster Abbey at 102 feet ( 31 m ) , that at York Minster being of the same height but despite its appearance , not actually of stone , but wood . The majority of English cathedrals have vaults ranging in height from 20 – 26 metres ( 65 – 86 feet ) . These contrast with cathedrals such as Beauvais , Amiens and Cologne with internal heights of over 42 metres ( 140 ft ) . 
 = = = Towers = = = 
 An important feature of English cathedrals , uncommon elsewhere except in Normandy , is the large and often elaborate square central tower over the crossing . The larger of these towers range from 55 metres ( 182 ft ) at Wells to 82 @.@ 5 metres ( 271 ft ) at Lincoln . The central tower may exist as a single feature as at Salisbury , Gloucester , Worcester , Norwich and Chichester or in combination with paired towers at the west front as at York , Lincoln , Canterbury , Durham and Wells . Among the cathedrals that have three towers , the central tower is usually much the tallest . At Southwell the two western towers are capped by pyramidal spires sheathed in lead . 
 Tall Gothic central spires remain at Salisbury and Norwich , that at Chichester having been rebuilt in the 19th century after its collapse . The spire of Salisbury at 404 feet ( 123 m ) is the tallest in Britain . It is also the tallest 14th @-@ century spire , the tallest ashlar masonry spire ( as against the openwork spires of Germany and France ) , and tallest spire in the world that remains from the Medieval period that has not been entirely rebuilt . However , it was greatly surpassed in height by the spires of Lincoln and Old St. Paul ’ s . At Lincoln , between the early 14th century and 1548 , the central tower was surmounted by the tallest spire in the world at about 170 metres ( 557 ft ) but this fell in a storm . Lichfield Cathedral , uniquely in England , has three medieval masonry spires . 
 Although single western towers are common in English parish churches , only one medieval cathedral , Ely , retains a centrally placed western tower , and in that case , it was framed by two lower lateral towers , one of which has since fallen down . Ely , alone among England ’ s cathedrals , has a central feature over the crossing that somewhat resembles the polygonal vaulted lantern towers of Spain . This elaborate lantern @-@ like structure known as “ The Octagon ” spans both the nave and aisles , and is thus said to have inspired Christopher Wren ’ s design for the dome of St. Paul ’ s Cathedral . Its upper parts are supported by hidden wooden hammer @-@ beams , an architectural device unique to English Gothic . 
 = = = Facades = = = 
 The facades of English cathedrals show a considerable diversity , rather than a consistent progression , as is the case in Northern France and other cathedrals influenced by the French Gothic style . In many cases , regardless of the architectural form , the English façade was treated as a decorative screen with many niches occupied by statues . A great number of these were toppled or defaced during the 17th century , however a “ Gallery of Kings ” remains high on the façade of Lincoln , and many of the original weather @-@ worn figures remain at Exeter . 
 Most English cathedral facades fall into two basic types , with several variations . 
 The most typical cathedrals are those that have large paired towers at their western end , as at Canterbury , Durham , Southwell , Wells , Ripon and York . 
 Between the towers is either a single large traceried window , as at York and Canterbury , or an arrangement of untraceried lancets , as at Ripon and Wells , rather than the rose windows typical of French facades . There are usually three doors but unlike those of French cathedrals , they are rarely highly elaborate and far more emphasis is placed on the central door than those to either side . The entrance in most common use is sometimes located in a porch at one side of the nave . Where there are not two large towers at the west front , there are generally two pinnacled turrets that frame the façade or the central nave much in the nature of very large buttresses . This arrangement may be seen at Salisbury , Winchester and Rochester . 
 At Lincoln a vast Gothic screen with similar buttress @-@ like terminals was built across the front of the cathedral , incorporating the Norman portals , but hiding the Norman towers . The towers were then greatly heightened to be visible above the screen . 
 A Gothic screen was also added to the Norman nave at Peterborough , but this is an architectural oddity with no precedent or successor . The screen is composed of three enormous open arches , the two outer ones being much wider than that which frames the central door . The overwhelming composition is somewhat spoilt by the later porch and the fact that two towers of very different height pop up from behind the screen . Despite this , it is regarded as one of the supreme masterpieces of Gothic , revealing the enormous diversity and imagination of English medieval architects . 
 = = = Eastern end = = = 
 The eastern ends of English cathedrals show a greater diversity than those of any other country . Those built in the Norman era had high apsidal ends surrounded by a lower ambulatory , as is typical of Northern France . This arrangement still exists at Norwich and in part at Peterborough and also , with variation , in the Early English Gothic east end at Canterbury , but in every other case has been modified . 
 The typical arrangement for an English Gothic east end is square , and may be an unbroken cliff @-@ like design as at York , Lincoln , Ripon , Ely and Carlisle or may have a projecting Lady Chapel of which there is a great diversity as at Salisbury , Lichfield , Hereford , Exeter and Chichester . 
 The ends of Norwich and Canterbury also have projecting chapels , that at Norwich being a Gothic addition to the Norman east end , while that at Canterbury , known as the Corona , being designed as part of the Early English plan , specifically to enshrine the relic of the crown of Thomas Becket ’ s skull , sliced off at the time of his assassination . The east ends of a number of other cathedrals , such as Durham , Peterborough and Gloucester , have been modified in various ways and do not fit any particular model . 
 = = = External appearance = = = 
 As English cathedrals are often surrounded by an expanse of green lawn , the plan is usually clearly visible at ground level , which is not the case with the many European cathedrals that are closely surrounded by town or monastic buildings . The general impression is that the English cathedral sprawls across its site with many projecting limbs . These horizontal projections are visibly balanced by the strong verticals of the massive towers , which may be one , two or three in number . Many of the cathedrals , particularly those like Winchester , St. Albans and Peterborough where the towers are not particularly high , give an impression of tremendous length and have been described as resembling “ aircraft carriers ” . 
 While all the cathedrals are impressive , some , because of their location , are highly significant landmarks and landscape elements . Among these is Chichester , which can be seen for many miles across a landscape of open fields and is the only one of England ’ s cathedrals that is visible from the sea . The grey spire of Norwich rises serenely from its surrounding city , to be a focus of the Norwich School of landscape painters . Ely , on a small hill , dominates the rural countryside and its appearance in times of flood causes it to be known as The Ship of the Fens . The three spires of Lichfield are known as The Ladies of the Vale . The “ exquisite tower ” of Worcester is seen best across the River Severn . Lincoln with its vast façade and three towers , the tallest being over 80 metres ( 270 ft ) , rises majestically from a steep hill above the town . Salisbury Cathedral with its “ faultless spire ” constitutes one of the iconic views of England , made famous by the landscape painter John Constable . In the north of England , Durham makes a “ spectacular ” view as it sits dramatically on its steep rocky peninsula above the River Wear , “ half Church of God , half castle ‘ <unk> the Scots ” . 
 = = = Internal appearance = = = 
 = = = = Horizontal emphasis = = = = 
 Because the architecture of English cathedrals is so diverse and inventive , the internal appearances differ a great deal . However , in general , English cathedral interiors tend to give an impression of length . This is in part because many of the buildings are actually very long , but also because more than in the medieval architecture of any other country , the horizontal direction is given as much visual emphasis as the vertical . This is particularly the case at Wells where , unlike most Gothic buildings , there are no vertical shafts that continue from the arcade to the vault and there is a very strong emphasis on the triforium gallery with its seemingly endless and undifferentiated row of narrow arches . Salisbury has a similar lack of verticals while the course below the triforium and the undecorated capitals of Purbeck stone create strong visual horizontals . In the cases of Winchester , Norwich and Exeter the horizontal effect is created by the emphasis on the ridge rib of the elaborate vaults . 
 = = = = Complex vaulting = = = = 
 The complexity of the vault is another significant feature of English cathedrals . The vaults range from the simple quadripartite vault in the French manner at Chichester through increasingly elaborate forms including the multi @-@ ribbed ( “ tierceron ” ) vault at Exeter , the similar vault with inter @-@ connecting ( “ lierne ” ) ribs at Norwich , the still more elaborate variation at Winchester , the array of unique lierne vaults at Bristol , the net @-@ like stellar vaulting of the choirs at Gloucester and York , the fan vaulting of the retro @-@ choir at Peterborough , and the pendant vaulting of the choir at Oxford , where elaborate long stone bosses are suspended from the ceiling like lanterns . Many of the more elaborate forms are unique to England , with stellar vaulting also occurring in Spain and Germany . 
 = = Architectural styles = = 
 = = = Saxon = = = 
 While in most cases a Norman church entirely replaced a Saxon one , at Ripon the cathedral uniquely retains its early Saxon crypt , while a similar crypt also survives below the former cathedral of Hexham . At Winchester the excavated foundations of the 10th @-@ century cathedral – when built , the largest church in northern Europe – are marked on grass of the cathedral close . At Worcester , a new cathedral was built in the Norman style from 1084 , but the crypt contains re @-@ used stonework and columns from its two Saxon predecessor churches . Elsewhere , the abbey church of Sherborne preserves much masonry from the former Saxon cathedral , in the west front , transepts and crossing , so that the nave and crossing of present late medieval abbey retains the proportions of the previous Saxon structure . 
 = = = Norman = = = 
 The comprehensive reconstruction of the Saxon cathedral churches of England by the Normans represented the single largest ecclesiastical building programme of medieval Europe and when built , these were the biggest structures to have been erected in Christian Europe since the end of the Roman Empire . All the medieval cathedrals of England , with the exception of Salisbury , Lichfield and Wells have evidence of Norman architecture . Peterborough , Durham and Norwich remain for the greater part Norman buildings , while at many others there are substantial parts of the building in the Norman style , such as the naves of Ely , Gloucester and Southwell , and the transepts at Winchester . The Norman architecture is distinguished by its round @-@ headed arches , and bold tiers of arcades on piers , which originally supported flat wooden roofs of which two survive , at Peterborough and Ely . Columns , where used , are massive , as in the nave at Gloucester , and are alternated with piers at Durham . <unk> were cut with geometric designs and arcading was a major decorative form , particularly externally . Little figurative sculpture has survived , notably the " barbaric " ornament around the west doors at Lincoln , the bestial capitals of the crypt at Canterbury and the tympanum of the west door at Rochester . 
 = = = Lancet Gothic = = = 
 Many of the cathedrals have major parts in the late @-@ 12th @-@ to @-@ early @-@ 13th @-@ century style known as Lancet Gothic or Early English Gothic , and defined by its simple , untraceried lancet @-@ like openings . Salisbury Cathedral is the major example of this style , which is also seen at Wells and Worcester , at the eastern arms of Canterbury , Hereford and Southwark , and at the transepts of York . Also of this period is the spectacular façade of Peterborough , and the less grand but harmonious façade of Ripon . 
 = = = Decorated Gothic = = = 
 The Decorated Gothic style , with traceried windows , is further subdivided dependent upon whether the tracery is Geometric or Curvilinear . Many cathedrals have important parts in the Geometric style of the mid 13th to early 14th centuries , including much of Lincoln , Lichfield , the choir of Ely and the chapter houses of Salisbury and Southwell . By the late 13th century the style of tracery evolved to include a greater number of narrow shapes that adapted easily to Gothic openings in combination with circular shapes as can be seen in the windows of the chapter house of York , the Octagon of Ely and the west window of Exeter . 
 Further development included the repetition of Curvilinear or flame @-@ like forms that occur in a great number of windows of around 1320 , notably in the retro @-@ choir at Wells and the nave of Exeter Cathedral . This type of tracery is often seen in combination with vaulting ribs of extreme projection and very rich moulding , as is seen in the chapter house at Wells , and the vault at Exeter , which stretches , uninterrupted by a central tower , for 91 metres ( 300 ft ) and is the longest medieval vault in the world . 
 The last stage of Curvilinear or Flowing Decorated Gothic , is expressed in tracery of very varied and highly complex forms . Many of the largest and most famous windows of England date from 1320 – 30 and are in this style . They include the south transept rose window known as the “ Bishop ’ s Eye ” at Lincoln , the “ Heart of Yorkshire ” window in the west end of York and the famous nine @-@ light east window of Carlisle . 
 There are many smaller architectural works within cathedrals which have the curvilinear tracery . These include the arcading in the Lady Chapel at Ely , which also has the widest vault in England , the pulpitum screen at Lincoln and richly decorated doorways at Ely and Rochester . Characteristic of this period of Gothic is elaborate lierne vaulting in which the main ribs are connected by intermediate ribs which do not spring from the wall and so are not major structural members . The vaults of Bristol are the most famous examples of this style , which can also be seen at York . 
 = = = Perpendicular Gothic = = = 
 In the 1330s , when the architects of Europe were embracing the Flamboyant style , English architecture moved away from the Flowing Decorated in an entirely different and much more sober direction with the reconstruction , in highly modular form , of the choir of the Norman abbey , now cathedral , at Gloucester . The Perpendicular style , which relies on a network of intersecting mullions and transoms rather than on a diversity of richly carved forms for effect , gives an overall impression of great unity , in which the structure of the vast windows of both clerestory and east end are integrated with the arcades below and the vault above . The style proved very adaptable and continued with variations in the naves of Canterbury and Winchester , and in the choir of York . 
 During the 15th century , many of England ’ s finest towers were either built or extended in the Perpendicular style including those of the cathedrals of Gloucester , Worcester , Wells , York , Durham and Canterbury , and the spires of Chichester and Norwich . 
 The design of church interiors went through a final stage that lasted into the 16th century . This was the development of fan vaulting , first used in about 1370 in the cloisters at Gloucester , then in the retrochoir at Peterborough in the early 15th century . In a still more elaborate form with stone pendants it was used to roof the Norman choir at Oxford and in the great funerary chapel of Henry VII at Westminster Abbey , at a time when Italy had embraced the Renaissance . 
 = = Architectural diversity = = 
 The plan of Salisbury Cathedral is that most often reproduced in architectural histories for the purpose of comparing English Gothic architecture with that of France , Italy and other countries . It has many features that , on paper at least , are typical . The plan of Worcester Cathedral , for example , closely resembles that of Salisbury . Both have two transepts , a large central tower , a large porch to the north side of the nave , a cloister to the south , off which opens a polygonal chapter house . Internally , there are also strong visual similarities in the simple lancet windows of the east end and the contrasting profusion of Purbeck marble shafts . But the histories of the two buildings are very different . Salisbury Cathedral took 160 years to complete , from its foundations in 1220 to the top of its massive spire in 1380 . Worcester took 420 years from its Norman crypt of 1084 to its chapel in memory of Prince Arthur in 1504 . The history of Worcester is much more representative of the history of most of England ’ s medieval cathedrals than is that of Salisbury . 
 = = = The building of Salisbury Cathedral = = = 
 An earlier cathedral was located , between 1075 and 1228 , on the hill top near the ancient fort at Old Sarum . In the early 13th century it was decided to move the location of the cathedral to the plain . The new building was designed in the Lancet Gothic style ( otherwise known as Early English Gothic ) by Elias of Dereham and Nicholas of Ely and begun in 1220 , starting at the eastern end , and rising westward until by 1258 it was complete , except for the façade and central tower . The façade , huge cloister and polygonal chapter house were then constructed by Richard Mason and were completed by about 1280 , the later work employing Geometric Decorated tracery in the openings of windows and arcades . It was about fifty years before the major undertaking of the tower and spire was commenced , the architect being Richard Farleigh and the details being rather more intricate and elaborate than the earlier work . The entire cathedral was complete by 1380 , and the only subsequent inclusion of note has been the reinforcement of the arches of the tower when one of the piers developed a bend . This three @-@ part building program spanning 160 years with a fifty @-@ year gap in the middle is the shortest and least diverse and makes Salisbury by far the most homogenous of all the cathedrals . 
 = = = The building of Worcester Cathedral = = = 
 Worcester Cathedral , unlike Salisbury , has important parts of the building dating from every century from the 11th to the 16th . The earliest part of the building at Worcester is the multi @-@ columned Norman crypt with cushion capitals remaining from the original monastic church begun by St Wulfstan in 1084 . Also from the Norman period is the circular chapter house of 1120 , made octagonal on the outside when the walls were reinforced in the 14th century . The nave was built and rebuilt piecemeal and in different styles by several different architects over a period of 200 years , some bays being a unique and decorative transition between Norman and Gothic . It dates from 1170 to 1374 . The east end was rebuilt over the Norman crypt by Alexander Mason between 1224 and 1269 , coinciding with , and in a very similar Early English style to the greater part of Salisbury . From 1360 John <unk> finished off the nave , built its vault , the west front , the north porch and the eastern range of the cloister . He also strengthened the Norman chapter house , added buttresses and changed its vault . His masterpiece is the central tower of 1374 , originally supporting a timber , lead @-@ covered spire , now gone . Between 1404 and 1432 an unknown architect added the north and south ranges to the cloister , which was eventually closed by the western range by John Chapman , 1435 – 38 . The last important addition is the Prince Arthur ’ s Chantry Chapel to the right of the south choir aisle , 1502 – 04 . 
 = = Famous features of the cathedrals = = 
 Note : all the dates are those given by John Harvey . 
 = = = Bristol Cathedral = = = 
 Begun in 1140 and completed in 1888 , Bristol Cathedral ’ s fame lies in the unique 14th @-@ century lierne vaults of the choir and choir aisles , which are of three different designs and , according to Nikolaus Pevsner , “ ... from a point of view of spatial imagination are superior to anything else in England . ” 
 = = = Canterbury Cathedral = = = 
 Founded as a cathedral in 597 , the earliest parts are from 1070 , completed 1505 , except the north west tower of 1834 . Canterbury is one of the biggest cathedrals in England , and seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury . It is famous for the Norman crypt with sculptured capitals , the east end of 1175 – 84 by William of Sens , the 12th- and 13th @-@ century stained glass , the “ supremely beautiful ” Perpendicular nave of 1379 – 1405 by Henry Yevele , the fan vault of the tower of 1505 by John Wastell , the tomb of the Black Prince and the site of the murder of St. Thomas Becket . 
 = = = Carlisle Cathedral = = = 
 Founded in 1092 and completed in the early 15th century , Carlisle Cathedral is one of England ’ s smallest cathedrals since the demolition of its nave by the Scottish Presbyterian Army in 1649 . Its most significant feature is its nine @-@ light Flowing Decorated east window of 1322 , still containing medieval glass in its upper sections , forming a “ glorious termination to the choir ” and regarded by many as having the finest tracery in England . 
 = = = Chester Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1093 and 1537 , Chester Cathedral includes a set of medieval choir stalls dating from 1380 , with exquisite figurative carving . An unusual feature is the very large south transept . The Early English Lady Chapel is a harmonious composition in Lancet Gothic . It retains substantial monastic buildings including a large refectory . 
 = = = Chichester Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1088 and the early 15th century , the unusual features of Chichester Cathedral are a Transitional retro choir , a pair of early Norman relief carvings and its freestanding belfry of the 15th century . The spire , rebuilt after its collapse in 1860 , can be seen from the English Channel . 
 = = = Durham Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1093 and 1490 , Durham Cathedral , with the exception of the upper parts of its towers , the eastern extension known as the Chapel of Nine Altars , and the large west window of 1341 , is entirely Norman and is regarded by Alec Clifton @-@ Taylor as " the incomparable masterpiece of Romanesque architecture " . The interior is “ overwhelmingly impressive ” . The western Lady Chapel known as the Galilee Chapel is a unique Norman building different in style to the cathedral itself . The view of the cathedral from the south west is particularly famous because of its “ incomparable setting ” on a steep promontory above the River Wear . The Venerable C.J. <unk> wrote “ It stands today vast and impressive in its massive strength , and yet so well proportioned that there is nothing about it which seems ponderous . ” 
 = = = Ely Cathedral = = = 
 With the present building dating between 1090 and 1536 , Ely Cathedral has a significant Norman nave and Decorated Gothic choir , but its most important features are its unique western tower of 1174 and central octagon of 1322 , which Clifton @-@ Taylor describes as “ one of the wonders of English cathedral architecture ” . It also has a unique , very large , free @-@ standing Lady Chapel with a very wide vault and intricately carved stone arcades around the sedilia . 
 = = = Exeter Cathedral = = = 
 Dating from 1112 to 1519 , Exeter Cathedral is the major example of a cathedral built mainly in the later Decorated Gothic style of the 14th century . It has an impressive vault , the longest medieval vault in the world , which runs between two Norman towers placed , uniquely among the cathedrals , over the transepts . Exeter has many sculptural details , including the figures of its west front . 
 = = = Gloucester Cathedral = = = 
 Dating from 1098 to 1493 , Gloucester Cathedral has a Norman nave with massive masonry piers , and a fine 15th @-@ century Perpendicular tower , but its main feature is the eastern end , reconstructed in the 14th century as an early example of Perpendicular Gothic and with the largest medieval window in the world , the area of a tennis court . The cloisters have the earliest example of fan @-@ vaulting . 
 = = = Hereford Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1079 and 1530 , with a 19th @-@ century west front , Hereford Cathedral has a Norman nave and large central tower . Other important features being the unusual style of the north transept and the north porch , also of the 13th century , but greatly extended in the 16th . Its Early English Lady Chapel is considered “ one of the most beautiful of the thirteenth century ” . 
 = = = Lichfield Cathedral = = = 
 Although dating from 1195 to about 1400 , Lichfield Cathedral has an interior which presents a harmonious appearance , much of which is due to its having undergone extensive restoration and refurnishing in the 19th century . The nave is very fine and the Lady Chapel is apsidal with very tall windows , giving a rather French impression . Lichfield is the only one of the cathedrals to have retained three spires . 
 = = = Lincoln Cathedral = = = 
 Dating from 1074 to 1548 , Lincoln Cathedral is one of the largest of England ’ s cathedrals and it has been claimed by John Ruskin that , architecturally , it is worth any two of the others put together . Edward Freeman described it as “ one of the loveliest of human works . ” It retains portions of the three massive arches of the Norman west front and much heavily restored sculpture around the central portal . The central tower is the tallest in England and is visible for many miles as it rises in spectacular fashion from a high hill . The decagonal Chapter House with its huge flying buttresses is the first polygonal chapter house in England . Of the interior , the finest part is considered to be the late @-@ 13th @-@ century “ Angel Choir ” with “ gorgeous layers of tracery ” and enriched with carved angels . The transepts have two rose windows , the “ Dean ’ s Eye ” on the north dating from c . 1200 and retaining its original glass , while the Flowing Decorated “ Bishop ’ s Eye ” on the south is filled with salvaged medieval fragments . 
 = = = Manchester Cathedral = = = 
 Manchester Cathedral began as a parish church and was re @-@ founded as a religious college in 1422 , much of its structure being designed by John Wastell ( 1485 to 1506 ) . It is very different in style from the earlier great churches , sometimes being listed with the 13 Anglican ' parish @-@ church cathedrals ' . Double aisles give it the widest nave of any English cathedral ( 115 feet ) ; and it also has the richest set of late medieval choir stalls and misericords in the country . 
 = = = Norwich Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1096 and 1536 , Norwich Cathedral has a Norman form , retaining the greater part of its original stone structure , which was then vaulted between 1416 and 1472 in a spectacular manner with hundreds of ornately carved , painted , and gilded bosses . It also has the finest Norman tower in England , surmounted by a 15th @-@ century spire , and a large cloister with many more bosses . 
 = = = Oxford Cathedral = = = 
 Dating from 1158 to the early 16th century , Oxford Cathedral was always a small cathedral and was made smaller by the destruction of much of the nave in the 16th century . The stone spire , from 1230 , is one of the oldest in England and contributes to Oxford ’ s tradition as “ the city of dreaming spires ” . Its most unusual feature is the late @-@ 15th @-@ century pendant vault over the Norman chancel . 
 = = = Peterborough Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1117 and 1508 , Peterborough Cathedral is remarkable as the least altered of the Norman cathedrals with only its famous Early English west front , with its later porch and the Perpendicular rebuilding of the eastern ambulatory by John Wastell being in different styles . J.L. Cartwright wrote of the west front that it is “ as magnificent an entrance to a sacred building as could well be imagined . ” The long wooden roof of the nave is original and has retained its painting from 1220 . 
 = = = Ripon Cathedral = = = 
 Dating from the 7th century to 1522 , Ripon Cathedral preserves the crypt of the original church built by Saint Wilfred . The west front is an unaltered and harmonious composition in Early English Gothic . The choir has retained richly carved 14th @-@ century stalls , famous for the many lively figures among the carvings . 
 = = = Rochester Cathedral = = = 
 Dating from 1177 to 1512 , Rochester Cathedral has a Norman nave and crypt , and Early English choir . Its most remarkable feature is the rare , exuberantly carved Norman portal , which has , unfortunately , suffered much damage . 
 = = = St Albans Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1077 and 1521 , St Albans Cathedral is unique among the cathedrals in that much of it , including the large Norman tower , is built of bricks salvaged from the Roman town of Verulamium . Both internally and externally , the tower is the most significant feature . St Albans also retains some medieval wall paintings , as well as a painted wooden roof of the late 13th century . 
 = = = Salisbury Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1220 and 1380 with additional structural reinforcement in the next century , Salisbury Cathedral epitomises the ideal English Cathedral , even though its stylistic unity makes it far from typical . Its fame lies in its harmonious proportions , particularly from the exterior where the massing of the various horizontal parts in contrast to the vertical of the spire make it one of the most famous architectural compositions of the Medieval period . Canon Smethurst wrote “ It symbolises the peaceful loveliness of the English countryside … , the eternal truths of the Christian faith expressed in stone … ” 
 = = = Southwark Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1220 and 1420 , Southwark Cathedral had its nave demolished and rebuilt in the late 19th century by Arthur Blomfield . It has a fine Early English tower and choir which retains an elaborate 16th @-@ century reredos , fitted with statues replacing those destroyed in the 17th century . 
 = = = Southwell Minster = = = 
 Built between 1208 and 1520 , Southwell Minster has its Norman façade intact , except for the insertion of a large window in the Perpendicular Style to give light to the Norman nave . The particular fame of Southwell is its late @-@ 13th @-@ century chapter house , which contains the most famous medieval floral carvings in England , described by Nikolaus Pevsner as “ throbbing with life ” . 
 = = = Wells Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1175 and 1490 , Wells Cathedral has been described as “ the most poetic of the English Cathedrals ” . Much of the structure is in the Early English style and is greatly enriched by the deeply sculptural nature of the mouldings and the vitality of the carved capitals in a foliate style known as “ stiff leaf ” . The eastern end has retained much original glass , which is rare in England . The exterior has the finest Early English façade and a large central tower . 
 = = = Winchester Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1079 and 1532 , Winchester Cathedral has had an unusual architectural history . The exterior , apart from the modified windows , gives the impression of a massive Norman building and indeed , it is the longest medieval church in the world . However , the west front is now Perpendicular , with its huge window filled with fragments of medieval glass . Inside , only the crypt and the transepts have retained their Norman appearance . The spectacular Perpendicular nave with its tall arcade arches and strong vertical emphasis has been literally carved out of the original Norman interior . The Very Rev. Sykes wrote of it “ Well might the visitor who enters … by the west door gasp with amazement . ” Winchester is also famous for its carved wooden fittings of many different periods . 
 = = = Worcester Cathedral = = = 
 Built between 1084 and 1504 , Worcester Cathedral represents every medieval style from Norman to Perpendicular . It is famous for its Norman crypt , and for its circular chapter house , which became the model from which derives the series of uniquely British polygonal chapter houses . Also notable are a series of unusual Transitional Gothic bays , fine woodwork and the central tower , which , though not large , is nevertheless of particularly fine proportions . 
 = = = York Minster = = = 
 Built between 1154 and 1500 , York Minster is one of the biggest Gothic churches in the world . The deceptively simple plan with square eastern and western ends and a single transept dividing the building into equal parts belies the architectural richness of this building . The remains of the Norman crypt indicate that the older building must have been as massive and ornamental in its architecture as Durham . The Early English transepts are both famous , that of the south having a complex arrangements of lancets and a rose window making up an entrance façade . On the north side are lancet windows called the “ Five Sisters ” each only 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) wide , but 57 feet ( 17 m ) tall . The interior of York is very spacious . The West front with its paired towers is a harmonious arrangement of the late Decorated period and the large central window has fine Flowing Decorated tracery called the " Heart of Yorkshire " , while the large eastern window is Perpendicular in style . A rare feature of York Minster is that these important windows have all retained their medieval glass , from c . 1270 , 1335 and 1405 , respectively . 
 = = Architects = = 
 The researches of John Harvey have uncovered the names of many English medieval architects , and by tracing stylistic characteristics , it has sometimes proved possible to track their careers from one building to another . Leading architects were highly paid - especially those employed in the King 's works - and they can often be identified from regular payments in cathedral accounts . 
 No architectural drawings survive for any English cathedral earlier than 1525 ( although an engineer 's design for a proposed new water supply at Canterbury cathedral priory exists in a 12th @-@ century plan ) . Architectural details , such as window tracery designs , were not executed as scale drawings , but were incised full @-@ size onto a large flat gypsum tracing @-@ floor , examples of which survive at York and Wells . 
 Medieval construction was seasonal , work on site being undertaken only in the spring and summer , when the light was good and the weather more reliable . Each autumn , all exposed surfaces were covered and lagged against frost damage . The architects worked over winter in the tracing house ( that of York has both a fireplace and a privy ) to prepare designs for the next season 's campaign . They translated the designs into sets of planed oak cross @-@ sectional templates , which were given to the stone @-@ cutters . Construction of cathedrals and major churches almost invariably started at the eastern arm , and then proceeded westwards , with towers erected last . 
 Robert the Mason , c 1100 , St Albans abbey , William of Sens , d 1184 , Canterbury choir , William the Englishman d 1214 , Canterbury choir , Elias of Dereham d 1246 , Salisbury , Michael of Canterbury d 1321 , Canterbury , Henry Wy c 1324 , St Albans nave , William Ramsey ( architect ) d 1349 , Norwich , Ely , Old St Paul 's chapter house , Lichfield <unk> , William Hurley d 1354 , Ely lantern , Richard of Farleigh d 1364 , Salisbury tower and spire , <unk> of Walsingham d 1364 , Ely <unk> <unk> d 1374 , Worcester nave , tower , west front , Henry Yevele d 1400 , Canterbury nave , Durham Neville <unk> Wynford d 1405 , Winchester nave , Thomas <unk> d 1438 , Canterbury SW tower , William Smyth d 1490 , Wells vaults , William Orchard ( architect ) d 1504 , Oxford vaults , John Wastell d 1515 , Canterbury tower , Peterborough retrochoir , Manchester , 
 = HD 217107 = 
 HD 217107 ( 6 G. <unk> ) is a yellow subgiant star approximately 65 light @-@ years away from Earth in the constellation of Pisces ( the Fish ) . Its mass is very similar to the Sun 's , although it is considerably older . Two planets have been discovered orbiting the star : one is extremely close and completes an orbit every seven days , while the other is much more distant , taking eight years to complete an orbit . 
 = = Distance , age , and mass = = 
 HD 217107 is fairly close to the Sun : the Hipparcos astrometric satellite measured its parallax as 50 @.@ 71 <unk> , which corresponds to a distance of 65 light years . Its apparent magnitude is 6 @.@ 17 , making it just barely visible to the naked eye under favourable conditions . 
 Spectroscopic observations show that its spectral type is G7 or G8 , which means its temperature is about 5 @,@ 000 K. Its mass is thought to be roughly the same as the Sun 's , although its estimated age of 7 @.@ 7 billion years is rather older than the Sun 's 4 @.@ 6 billion years , and it is thought to be beginning to evolve away from the main sequence , having consumed almost all the hydrogen in its core in nuclear fusion reactions . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 A study of the radial velocity of HD 217107 carried out in 1998 revealed that its motion along the line of sight varied over a 7 @.@ 1 @-@ day cycle . The period and amplitude of this variation indicated that it was caused by a planetary companion in orbit around the star , with a minimum mass slightly greater than that of Jupiter . The companion planet was designated HD 217107 b . 
 While most planets with orbital periods of less than 10 days have almost circular orbits , HD 217107 b has a somewhat eccentric orbit , and its discoverers hypothesized that this could be due to the gravitational influence of a second planet in the system at a distance of several astronomical units ( AU ) . Confirmation of the existence of a second planet followed in 2005 , when long term observations of the star 's radial velocity variations revealed a variation on a period of about eight years , caused by a planet with a mass at least twice that of Jupiter in a very eccentric orbit with a semimajor axis of about 4 @.@ 3 AU . The second planet was designated HD 217107 c . 
 = The Myst Reader = 
 The Myst Reader is a collection of three novels based on the Myst series of adventure games . The collection was published in September 2004 and combines three works previously published separately : The Book of Atrus ( 1995 ) , The Book of Ti 'ana ( 1996 ) , and The Book of D 'ni ( 1997 ) . The novels were each written by British science @-@ fiction writer David Wingrove with assistance from Myst 's creators , Rand and Robyn Miller . 
 Each novel centers on the family of Atrus , a scientist and explorer who has the ability to write special books which serve as links to other worlds , known as Ages . This ability , known as the Art , was practiced extensively by an ancient civilization known as the D 'ni , who were only mentioned briefly in the original Myst game . The plot of each book reveals more of the Myst back @-@ story and the workings of the D 'ni . 
 Upon release , reception of the novels have been mixed . Many reviewers expressed surprise that a novel based on a videogame worked ; others found the prose dull and uninteresting , or that the book could not stand on its own without the game . The individual books sold well , with The Book of Atrus making USA Today 's Best @-@ Selling Books list . Two more novels are planned ; a sample of the first , The Book of Marrim , was packaged with an edition of Myst V : End of Ages . The plots to the novels have also been adapted by fans into a planned film based on The Book of Ti 'ana , with the blessing of Cyan Worlds . 
 = = Background = = 
 Myst co @-@ creators and brothers Rand and Robyn Miller often created fictional worlds and stories as young children . Their vision was refined by the works of fantasy and science fiction writers such as J. R. R. Tolkien , Robert A. Heinlein , and Isaac Asimov ; Star Wars offered them a glimpse at an exciting , fully realized fictional world . Younger brother Robyn began working on a children 's novel called <unk> ; though he never completed the work , elements from the story influenced aspects of Myst 's story . 
 The video game Myst tells the story of a special book which serves as a link to a world known as Myst . Myst is the home of an explorer named Atrus , who lives on the island with his wife Catherine and two sons , Sirrus and Achenar . An unnamed protagonist drops into Myst and finds the island strangely deserted . As the player explores Myst , they discover Sirrus and Achenar trapped inside two books . Both swear that their parents are dead due to the machinations of the other brother , and instruct the player to repair their books so they can be freed . In truth , Atrus and Catherine are merely imprisoned , and both Sirrus and Achenar are guilty of growing power @-@ hungry and destroying Atrus ' books . The player frees Atrus , leading to the events of the sequel Riven . 
 The Millers began the game 's development by sketching out puzzles and each individual world the player would explore in the game . As the brothers were conceptualizing the various worlds , they also wrote down pieces of the story . At some point in the development of these bits of story , Robyn explained in an interview , " We started realizing this story is actually something we thought the public would enjoy , so we started pressing to make [ the novel ] happen . " Buoyed by strong sales of the video game , publisher Hyperion signed a three @-@ novel , US $ 1 million deal with the brothers . 
 The Miller brothers wrote the entire first novel , but were unsatisfied with the result ; the Millers pointed out that writing a character for a novel is much harder than writing the characters of a game . Hyperion recruited author David Wingrove to assist with the project ; the Millers ended up giving Wingrove a detailed draft , and the author rewrote the entire book . The book 's design was made to fit the themes of the game ; the novels are made to look like journals found in Myst , with embossed covers and pages darkened as though with time and use . 
 To promote the release of The Book of Atrus , the Millers embarked on an eleven @-@ city book tour . The publicity stemming from the book and game surprised the Millers , who remained unaccustomed to their new @-@ found fame . " The excitement is in talking to people who 've walked through our world , " Rand Miller said in an interview . " But we 're not used to signing books - we 're a bit out of our element . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Book of Atrus = = = 
 The Book of Atrus serves as a prequel to the events of the eponymous first game in the Myst series , and introduces both new characters and old characters seen in the games . The book 's protagonist is Atrus . He is raised by his grandmother Anna after his mother dies and his father abandons him . Eventually , Atrus ' father Gehn returns from his explorations of the ruins of the D 'ni empire and enlists Atrus to come follow him back to the fallen city . Gehn teaches Atrus the Art , a skill the D 'ni used to create special books which allow transport between worlds known as Ages . Atrus is awed by the Art at first , but he is horrified when he witnesses Gehn 's manipulation and dismissive attitude to the inhabitants of the Ages . He also comes to understand Gehn 's selfish , cold cruelty and his own power @-@ hungry nature ; Gehn believes that he creates the Ages he writes , instead of creating links to preexisting universes . Gehn destroys Atrus ' first Age , Inception , because it does not follow Gehn 's style of writing . After attempting to escape his father , Gehn traps Atrus in a locked chamber in D 'ni , with the only escape Gehn 's own Age of Riven . On Riven Atrus falls in love with a villager named Catherine . 
 Catherine and Atrus hatch a plan to trap Gehn on Riven . Gehn is stranded when Atrus and Catherine destroy all linking books on Riven , escaping by using a book Ti 'ana wrote for them , leading to the Age of Myst . Atrus drops the Myst linking book into a massive disturbance on Riven known as the Star Fissure ; the book falls through the fissure to be picked up by the Stranger in Myst . The closing words of the book are the opening narrative from the video game . 
 = = = Book of Ti 'ana = = = 
 The Book of Ti 'ana takes place earlier than The Book of Atrus . The first part of the book focuses on life of Atrus ' grandfather Aitrus with his parents <unk> and <unk> , Aitrus ' meeting with Ti 'ana , and the birth of their son Gehn . The book also explains the destruction of the D 'ni civilization . Two D 'ni , Veovis and A 'Gaeris , plot to destroy their civilization , which they believe has been corrupted . Veovis and A 'Gaeris create a plague which wipes out many of the D 'ni and follows them through the Ages . Veovis is murdered by A 'Gaeris for refusing to write an Age where the two of them would have been worshipped as gods , and Aitrus sacrifices himself in order to lure A 'Gaeris to an unstable Age , killing them both . 
 = = = Book of D 'ni = = = 
 In The Book of D 'ni , Atrus opens the crumbled exit of the room in K 'veer , where he had been imprisoned by Gehn , and gains access to the rest of D 'ni . Atrus and his team set out to find linking books and search for D 'ni survivors . Eventually , Atrus and the rest of the D 'ni plan on rebuilding the civilization , but this plan is put to a halt when a book leading to a great lost Age called Terahnee is found . Terahnee is a sister Age to D 'ni and is populated by descendants of the same ancestors as the D 'ni . 
 At first sight , Terahnee seems like a Utopia . Everyone lives in sumptuous palaces , and nobody goes hungry ; in reality , the society is run by slave labor . After writing new Ages , the Terahnee people capture the inhabitants to use as slaves , considering themselves gods over their Ages . The Terahnee people are taught not to ' see ' the slaves ; only the servants interact with the lower orders . The Terahnee are suddenly stricken by a plague the D 'ni brought with them ; Atrus and his companions help the Age 's slaves recover and create a new society before returning to D 'ni and sealing up the path to Terahnee . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reception to the Myst novels has been mixed . Sybil Steinberg of Publishers Weekly reviewed The Book of Atrus and stated that Wingrove 's achievement of a " rollicking adventure tale " was improbable , given that previous game @-@ to @-@ book attempts had failed horribly . Booklist also gave the book a positive review , stating that the plot was predictable but the book served its purpose " to either introduce readers to the game , or supply players with back stories " . A reviewer for New Scientist called the story " a good , light read for the holiday season . " 
 Other reviewers felt that the novel could not stand on its own , and relied on the games to maintain relevancy . Albert Kim of Entertainment Weekly also gave the novel a mediocre score , saying the main issue that doomed The Book of Atrus was that it removed the mystery from Myst . " Much of the game 's charm is derived from its eeriness , a haunting aura that is lost in the text , " Kim wrote . Fantasy and Science Fiction stated that the prose was not up to the task of bringing the characters to life . Steinberg later stated that with the books " bereft of the game 's dazzling graphics and its hypnotic interactive dimension " , the second and third novels <unk> along with boring prose . 
 Despite the mixed reviews , the Myst novels sold well . The Book of Atrus reached a top spot of 176 on USA Today 's Best @-@ Selling Books list . More than 450 @,@ 000 copies of Book of Atrus and Book of Ti 'ana have been sold . A fourth and fifth Myst novel were planned . The first , entitled Myst : The Book of Marrim , was announced in 2004 ; a preview of the novel was packaged in the Myst V : End of Ages special edition . A group of independent filmmakers adapted The Book of Ti 'ana into a screenplay , with the blessing of the Millers . 
 = Shuttle – Mir Program = 
 The Shuttle – Mir Program was a collaborative space program between Russia and the United States , which involved American Space Shuttles visiting the Russian space station Mir , Russian cosmonauts flying on the shuttle , and an American astronaut flying aboard a Soyuz spacecraft to engage in long @-@ duration expeditions aboard Mir . 
 The project , sometimes called " Phase One " , was intended to allow the United States to learn from Russian experience with long @-@ duration spaceflight and to foster a spirit of cooperation between the two nations and their space agencies , the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) and the Russian Federal Space Agency ( Roskosmos ) . The project helped to prepare the way for further cooperative space ventures ; specifically , " Phase Two " of the joint project , the construction of the International Space Station ( ISS ) . The program was announced in 1993 , the first mission started in 1994 and the project continued until its scheduled completion in 1998 . Eleven Space Shuttle missions , a joint Soyuz flight and almost 1000 cumulative days in space for American astronauts occurred over the course of seven long @-@ duration expeditions . 
 During the four @-@ year program , many firsts in spaceflight were achieved by the two nations , including the first American astronaut to launch aboard a Soyuz spacecraft , the largest spacecraft ever to have been assembled at that time in history , and the first American spacewalk using a Russian Orlan spacesuit . 
 The program was marred by various concerns , notably the safety of Mir following a fire and a collision , financial issues with the cash @-@ strapped Russian Space Program and worries from astronauts about the attitudes of the program administrators . Nevertheless , a large amount of science , expertise in space station construction and knowledge in working in a cooperative space venture was gained from the combined operations , allowing the construction of the ISS to proceed much more smoothly than would have otherwise been the case . 
 = = Background = = 
 The origins of the Shuttle – Mir Program can be traced back to the Apollo – Soyuz Test Project , that resulted in an joint US / Soviet mission during the détente period of the Cold War and the docking between an US Apollo spacecraft and an Soviet Soyuz spacecraft in 1975 . This was followed by the talks between NASA and Intercosmos in the 1970s about a " Shuttle @-@ Salyut " program to fly Space Shuttle missions to a Salyut space station , with later talks in the 1980s even considering flights of the future Soviet shuttles from the Buran programme to a future US space station – this " Shuttle @-@ Salyut " program never materialized however during the existence of the Soviet Intercosmos program . 
 This changed after the Dissolution of the Soviet Union : the end of Cold War and Space Race resulted in funding for the US modular space station ( originally named Freedom ) , which was planned since the early 1980s , being slashed . Similar budgetary difficulties were being faced by other nations with space station projects , prompting American government officials to start negotiations with partners in Europe , Russia , Japan , and Canada in the early 1990s to begin a collaborative , multi @-@ national , space station project . In the Russian Federation , as the successor to much of the Soviet Union and its space program , the deteriorating economic situation in the post @-@ Soviet economic chaos lead to growing financial problems of the now Russian space station program . The construction of the Mir @-@ 2 space station as an replacement for the aging Mir became illusionary , though only after its base block , DOS @-@ 8 , had been built . These developments resulted in bringing the former adversaries together with the Shuttle – Mir Program , which would pave the way to the International Space Station , a joint project with several international partners . 
 In June 1992 , American President George H. W. Bush and Russian president Boris Yeltsin agreed to co @-@ operate on space exploration by signing the Agreement between the United States of America and the Russian Federation Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes . This agreement called for setting up a short , joint space project , during which one American astronaut would board the Russian space station Mir and two Russian cosmonauts would board a Space Shuttle . 
 In September 1993 , American Vice @-@ President Al Gore , Jr . , and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin announced plans for a new space station , which eventually became the International Space Station . They also agreed , in preparation for this new project , that the United States would be heavily involved in the Mir project in the years ahead , under the code name " Phase One " ( the construction of the ISS being " Phase Two " ) . 
 The first Space Shuttle flight to Mir was an rendezvous mission without docking on STS @-@ 63 . This was followed during the course of the project by a total of 9 Shuttle @-@ Mir docking missions , from STS @-@ 71 to STS @-@ 91 . The Shuttle rotated crews and delivered supplies , and one mission , STS @-@ 74 , carried a docking module and a pair of solar arrays to Mir . Various scientific experiments were also conducted , both on shuttle flights and long @-@ term aboard the station . The project also saw the launch of two new modules , Spektr and Priroda , to Mir , which were used by American astronauts as living quarters and laboratories to conduct the majority of their science aboard the station . These missions allowed NASA and the Russian Federal Space Agency to learn a great deal about how best to work with international partners in space and how to minimize the risks associated with assembling a large space station in orbit , as would have to be done with the ISS . 
 The project also served as a political ruse on the part of the American government , providing a diplomatic channel for NASA to take part in the funding of the cripplingly under @-@ funded Russian space program . This in turn allowed the newly fledged Russian government to keep Mir operating , in addition to the Russian space program as a whole , ensuring the Russian government remained ( and remains ) friendly towards the United States . 
 = = = Increments = = = 
 In addition to the flights of the Shuttle to Mir , Phase One also featured seven " Increments " aboard the station , long @-@ duration flights aboard Mir by American astronauts . The seven astronauts who took part in the Increments , Norman Thagard , Shannon Lucid , John Blaha , Jerry Linenger , Michael Foale , David Wolf and Andrew Thomas , were each flown in turn to Star City , Russia , to undergo training in various aspects of the operation of Mir and the Soyuz spacecraft used for transport to and from the Station . The astronauts also received practice in carrying out spacewalks outside Mir and lessons in the Russian language , which would be used throughout their missions to talk with the other cosmonauts aboard the station and Mission Control in Russia , the TsUP . 
 During their expeditions aboard Mir , the astronauts carried out various experiments , including growth of crops and crystals , and took hundreds of photographs of the Earth spinning serenely beneath them . They also assisted in the maintenance and repair of the aging station , following various incidents with fires , collisions , power losses , uncontrolled spins and toxic leaks . In all , the American astronauts would spend almost a thousand days aboard Mir , allowing NASA to learn a great deal about long @-@ duration spaceflight , particularly in the areas of astronaut psychology and how best to arrange experiment schedules for crews aboard space stations . 
 = = = Mir = = = 
 Mir was constructed between 1986 and 1996 and was the world 's first modular space station . It was the first consistently inhabited long @-@ term research station in space , and previously held the record for longest continuous human presence in space , at eight days short of ten years . Mir 's purpose was to provide a large and habitable scientific laboratory in space , and , through a number of collaborations , including Intercosmos and Shuttle @-@ Mir , was made internationally accessible to cosmonauts and astronauts of many different countries . The station existed until March 23 , 2001 , at which point it was deliberately deorbited , and broke apart during atmospheric re @-@ entry . 
 Mir was based upon the Salyut series of space stations previously launched by the Soviet Union ( seven Salyut space stations had been launched since 1971 ) , and was mainly serviced by Russian @-@ manned Soyuz spacecraft and Progress cargo ships . The Buran space shuttle was anticipated to visit Mir , but its program was canceled after its first unmanned spaceflight . Visiting US Space Shuttles used an Androgynous Peripheral Attach System docking collar originally designed for Buran , mounted on a bracket originally designed for use with the American Space Station Freedom . 
 With the Space Shuttle docked to Mir , the temporary enlargements of living and working areas amounted to a complex that was the world 's largest spacecraft at that time , with a combined mass of 250 metric tons ( 250 long tons ; 280 short tons ) . 
 = = = Space Shuttle = = = 
 NASA 's Space Shuttle , officially called the Space Transportation System ( STS ) , is the United States government 's most recent manned launch vehicle . A total of five usable orbiters were built , of which three were in use until the program 's retirement in 2011 . The winged shuttle Orbiter is launched vertically , usually carrying five to seven astronauts ( although eight have been carried and eleven could be accommodated in an emergency ) along with up to 50 @,@ 000 pounds ( 23 @,@ 000 kg ) of payload into low earth orbit . When its mission is complete , it fires its manoeuvring thrusters to drop out of orbit and re @-@ enters the Earth 's atmosphere . During the descent and landing , the shuttle Orbiter acts as a glider and makes a completely unpowered landing . 
 The Shuttle is the first orbital spacecraft designed for partial reusability . It carries large payloads to various orbits , and , during the Shuttle – Mir and ISS programs , provides crew rotation and carries various supplies , modules and pieces of equipment to the stations . Each Shuttle was designed for a projected lifespan of 100 launches or 10 years ' operational life . 
 In total 9 docking missions were flown to Mir , from 1995 to 1997 during " Phase One " : Space Shuttle Atlantis docked 7 times to Mir , with Discovery and Endeavour each flying one docking mission to Mir . As Space Shuttle Columbia was the oldest and heaviest of the fleet , it was not suited for efficient operations at Mir 's ( and later the ISS 's ) 51 @.@ 6 @-@ degree inclination – Columbia was therefore not retrofitted with the necessary external airlock and Orbital Docking System , and never flew to a space station . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = New cooperation begins ( 1994 ) = = = 
 Phase One of the Shuttle – Mir Program began on February 3 , 1994 , with the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on its 18th mission , STS @-@ 60 . The eight @-@ day mission was the first shuttle flight of that year , the first flight of a Russian Cosmonaut , Sergei Krikalev , aboard the American shuttle , and marked the start of increased cooperation in space for the two nations , 37 years after the Space Race began . Part of an international agreement on human space flight , the mission was the second flight of the Spacehab pressurized module and marked the hundredth " Getaway Special " payload to fly in space . The primary payload for the mission was the Wake Shield Facility ( or WSF ) , a device designed to generate new semiconductor films for advanced electronics . The WSF was flown at the end of Discovery 's robotic arm over the course of the flight . During the mission , the astronauts aboard Discovery also carried out various experiments aboard the Spacehab module in the Orbiter 's payload bay , and took part in a live bi @-@ directional audio and downlink video hookup between themselves and the three Cosmonauts on board Mir , Valeri Polyakov , Viktor Afanasyev and Yury <unk> ( flying Mir expeditions LD @-@ 4 and EO @-@ 15 ) . 
 = = = America arrives at Mir ( 1995 ) = = = 
 1995 began with the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on February 3 . Discovery 's mission , STS @-@ 63 , was the second Space Shuttle flight in the program and the first flight of the shuttle with a female pilot , Eileen Collins . Referred to as the " near @-@ Mir " mission , the eight @-@ day flight saw the first rendezvous of a Space Shuttle with Mir , as Russian Cosmonaut Vladimir Titov and the rest of Discovery 's crew approached within 37 feet ( 11 m ) of Mir . Following the rendezvous , Collins performed a <unk> of the station . The mission , a dress rehearsal for the first docked mission in the program , STS @-@ 71 , also carried out testing of various techniques and pieces of equipment that would be used during the docking missions that followed . 
 Five weeks after Discovery 's flight , the March 14 launch of Soyuz TM @-@ 21 carried expedition EO @-@ 18 to Mir . The crew consisted of Cosmonauts Vladimir Dezhurov and Gennady Strekalov and NASA Astronaut Norman Thagard , who became the first American to fly into space aboard the Soyuz spacecraft . During the course of their 115 @-@ day expedition , the Spektr science module ( which served as living and working space for American astronauts ) was launched aboard a Proton rocket and docked to Mir . Spektr carried more than 1 @,@ 500 pounds ( 680 kg ) of research equipment from America and other nations . The expedition 's crew returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis following the first Shuttle – Mir docking during mission STS @-@ 71 . 
 The primary objectives of STS @-@ 71 , launched on June 27 , called for the Space Shuttle Atlantis to rendezvous and perform the first docking between an American Space Shuttle and the station . On June 29 , Atlantis successfully docked with Mir , becoming the first US spacecraft to dock with a Russian spacecraft since the Apollo @-@ Soyuz Test Project in 1975 . Atlantis delivered Cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyev and Nikolai Budarin , who would form the expedition EO @-@ 19 crew , and retrieved Astronaut Norman Thagard and Cosmonauts Vladimir Dezhurov and Gennady Strekalov of the expedition EO @-@ 18 crew . Atlantis also carried out on @-@ orbit joint US @-@ Russian life sciences investigations aboard a Spacelab module and performed a logistical resupply of the station . 
 The final Shuttle flight of 1995 , STS @-@ 74 , began with the November 12 launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis , and delivered the Russian @-@ built Docking Module to Mir , along with a new pair of solar arrays and other hardware upgrades for the station . The Docking Module was designed to provide more clearance for Shuttles in order to prevent any collisions with Mir 's solar arrays during docking , a problem which had been overcome during STS @-@ 71 by relocating the station 's Kristall module to a different location on the station . The module , attached to Kristall 's docking port , prevented the need for this procedure on further missions . During the course of the flight , nearly 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) of water were transferred to Mir and experiment samples including blood , urine and saliva were moved to Atlantis for return to Earth . 
 = = = Priroda ( 1996 ) = = = 
 Continuous US presence aboard Mir started in 1996 with the March 22 launch of Atlantis on mission STS @-@ 76 , when the Second Increment astronaut Shannon Lucid was transferred to the station . STS @-@ 76 was the third docking mission to Mir , which also demonstrated logistics capabilities through deployment of a Spacehab module , and placed experiment packages aboard Mir 's docking module , which marked the first spacewalk which occurred around docked vehicles . The spacewalks , carried out from Atlantis 's crew cabin , provided valuable experience for astronauts in order to prepare for later assembly missions to the International Space Station . 
 Lucid became the first American woman to live on station , and , following a six @-@ week extension to her Increment due to issues with Shuttle Solid Rocket Boosters , her 188 @-@ day mission set the US single spaceflight record . During Lucid 's time aboard Mir , the Priroda module , with about 2 @,@ 200 pounds ( 1 @,@ 000 kg ) of US science hardware , was docked to Mir . Lucid made use of both Priroda and Spektr to carry out 28 different science experiments and as living quarters . 
 Her stay aboard Mir ended with the flight of Atlantis on STS @-@ 79 , which launched on September 16 . STS @-@ 79 was the first Shuttle mission to carry a double Spacehab module . More than 4 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 800 kg ) of supplies were transferred to Mir , including water generated by Atlantis 's fuel cells , and experiments that included investigations into superconductors , cartilage development , and other biology studies . About 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) of experiment samples and equipment were also transferred back from Mir to Atlantis , making the total transfer the most extensive yet . 
 This , the fourth docking , also saw John Blaha transferring onto Mir to take his place as resident Increment astronaut . His stay on the station improved operations in several areas , including transfer procedures for a docked space shuttle , " hand @-@ over " procedures for long duration American crew members and " Ham " amateur radio communications . 
 Two spacewalks were carried out during his time aboard . Their aim was to remove electrical power connectors from a 12 @-@ year @-@ old solar power array on the base block and reconnect the cables to the more efficient new solar power arrays . In all , Blaha spent four months with the Mir @-@ 22 Cosmonaut crew conducting material science , fluid science , and life science research , before returning to Earth the next year aboard Atlantis on STS @-@ 81 . 
 = = = Fire and collision ( 1997 ) = = = 
 In 1997 STS @-@ 81 replaced Increment astronaut John Blaha with Jerry Linenger , after Blaha 's 118 @-@ day stay aboard Mir . During this fifth shuttle docking , the crew of Atlantis moved supplies to the station and returned to Earth the first plants to complete a life cycle in space ; a crop of wheat planted by Shannon Lucid . During five days of mated operations , the crews transferred nearly 6 @,@ 000 pounds ( 2 @,@ 700 kg ) of logistics to Mir , and transferred 2 @,@ 400 pounds ( 1 @,@ 100 kg ) of materials back to Atlantis ( the most materials transferred between the two spacecraft to that date ) . 
 The STS @-@ 81 crew also tested the Shuttle Treadmill Vibration Isolation and Stabilization System ( <unk> ) , designed for use in the Zvezda module of the International Space Station . The shuttle 's small vernier jet thrusters were fired during the mated operations to gather engineering data for " <unk> " the ISS . After undocking , Atlantis performed a fly @-@ around of Mir , leaving Linenger aboard the station . 
 During his Increment , Linenger became the first American to conduct a spacewalk from a foreign space station and the first to test the Russian @-@ built Orlan @-@ M spacesuit alongside Russian cosmonaut Vasili Tsibliyev . All three crewmembers of expedition EO @-@ 23 performed a " fly @-@ around " in the Soyuz spacecraft , first undocking from one docking port of the station , then manually flying to and <unk> the capsule at a different location . This made Linenger the first American to <unk> from a space station aboard two different spacecraft ( Space Shuttle and Soyuz ) . 
 Linenger and his Russian crewmates Vasili Tsibliyev and Aleksandr <unk> faced several difficulties during the mission . These included the most severe fire aboard an orbiting spacecraft ( caused by a backup oxygen @-@ generating device ) , failures of various on board systems , a near collision with a Progress resupply cargo ship during a long @-@ distance manual docking system test and a total loss of station electrical power . The power failure also caused a loss of attitude control , which led to an uncontrolled " tumble " through space . 
 The next NASA astronaut to stay on Mir was Michael Foale . Foale and Russian mission specialist Elena <unk> boarded Mir from Atlantis on mission STS @-@ 84 . The STS @-@ 84 crew transferred 249 items between the two spacecraft , along with water , experiment samples , supplies and hardware . One of the first items transferred to Mir was an Elektron oxygen @-@ generating unit . Atlantis was stopped three times while backing away during the undocking sequence on May 21 . The aim was to collect data from a European sensor device designed for future rendezvous of ESA 's Automated Transfer Vehicle ( ATV ) with the International Space Station . 
 Foale 's Increment proceeded fairly normally until June 25 , when a resupply ship collided with solar arrays on the Spektr module during the second test of the Progress manual docking system , TORU . The module 's outer shell was hit and holed , which caused the station to lose pressure . This was the first on @-@ orbit depressurization in the history of spaceflight . The crew quickly cut cables leading to the module and closed Spektr 's hatch in order to prevent the need to abandon the station in their Soyuz lifeboat . Their efforts stabilized the station 's air pressure , whilst the pressure in Spektr , containing many of Foale 's experiments and personal effects , dropped to a vacuum . Fortunately , food , water and other vital supplies were stored in other modules , and salvage and replanning effort by Foale and the science community minimized the loss of research data and capability . 
 In an effort to restore some of the power and systems lost following the isolation of Spektr and to attempt to locate the leak , Mir 's new commander Anatoly Solovyev and flight engineer Pavel Vinogradov carried out a salvage operation later in the mission . They entered the empty module during a so @-@ called " IVA " spacewalk , inspecting the condition of hardware and running cables through a special hatch from Spektr 's systems to the rest of the station . Following these first investigations , Foale and Solovyev conducted a 6 @-@ hour EVA on the surface of Spektr to inspect the damaged module . 
 After these incidents , the US Congress and NASA considered whether to abandon the program out of concern for astronauts ' safety but NASA administrator Daniel Goldin decided to continue the program . The next flight to Mir , STS @-@ 86 , brought Increment astronaut David Wolf to the station . 
 STS @-@ 86 performed the seventh Shuttle – Mir docking , the last of 1997 . During Atlantis 's stay crew members Titov and Parazynski conducted the first joint US – Russian extravehicular activity during a Shuttle mission , and the first in which a Russian wore a US spacesuit . During the five @-@ hour spacewalk , the pair affixed a 121 @-@ pound ( 55 kg ) Solar Array Cap to the Docking Module , for a future attempt by crew members to seal off the leak in Spektr 's hull . The mission returned Foale to Earth , along with samples , hardware , and an old Elektron oxygen generator , and dropped Wolf off on the Station ready for his 128 @-@ day Increment . Wolf had originally been scheduled to be the final Mir astronaut , but was chosen to go on the Increment instead of astronaut Wendy Lawrence . Lawrence was deemed ineligible for flight because of a change in Russian requirements after the Progress supply vehicle collision . The new rules required that all Mir crew members should be trained and ready for spacewalks , but a Russian spacesuit could not be prepared for Lawrence in time for launch . 
 = = = Phase One closes down ( 1998 ) = = = 
 The final year of Phase One began with the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS @-@ 89 . The mission delivered Cosmonaut Salizhan Sharipov to Mir and replaced David Wolf with Andy Thomas , following Wolf 's 119 day Increment . 
 During his Increment , the last of the program , Thomas worked on 27 science investigations into areas of advanced technology , Earth sciences , human life sciences , microgravity research , and ISS risk mitigation . His stay on Mir , considered the smoothest of the entire Phase One program , featured weekly " Letters from the Outpost " from Thomas and passed two milestones for length of spaceflight — 815 consecutive days in space by American astronauts since the launch of Shannon Lucid on the STS @-@ 76 mission in March 1996 , and 907 days of Mir occupancy by American astronauts dating back to Norman Thagard 's trip to Mir in March 1995 . 
 Thomas returned to Earth on the final Shuttle – Mir mission , STS @-@ 91 . The mission closed out Phase One , with the EO @-@ 25 and STS @-@ 91 crews transferring water to Mir and exchanging almost 4 @,@ 700 pounds ( 2 @,@ 100 kg ) of cargo experiments and supplies between the two spacecraft . Long @-@ term American experiments that had been on board Mir were also moved into Discovery . Hatches were closed for undocking at 9 : 07 a.m. Eastern Daylight Time ( EDT ) on June 8 and the spacecraft separated at 12 : 01 p.m. EDT that day . 
 = = = Phases Two and Three : ISS ( 1998 – 2024 ) = = = 
 With the landing of Discovery on June 12 , 1998 , the Phase One program concluded . Techniques and equipment developed during the program assisted the development of Phase Two : initial assembly of the International Space Station ( ISS ) . The arrival of the Destiny Laboratory Module in 2001 marked the end of Phase Two and the start of Phase Three , the final outfitting of the station , completed in 2012 . In 2015 , a reconfiguration of the American segment was completed to allow its docking ports to accommodate NASA @-@ sponsored commercial crew vehicles , that are expected to start visiting the ISS in 2017 . 
 As of June 2015 , the ISS has a pressurized volume of 915 cubic metres ( 32 @,@ 300 cu ft ) , and its pressurized modules total 51 metres ( 167 ft ) in length , plus a large truss structure that spans 109 metres ( 358 ft ) , making it the largest spacecraft ever assembled . The completed station consists of five laboratories and is able to support six crew members . With over 332 cubic metres ( 11 @,@ 700 cu ft ) of habitable volume and a mass of 400 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 880 @,@ 000 lb ) the completed station is almost twice the size of the combined Shuttle – Mir spacecraft . 
 Phases Two and Three are intended to continue both international cooperation in space and zero @-@ gravity scientific research , particularly regarding long @-@ duration spaceflight . By spring 2015 , Roscosmos , NASA , and the Canadian Space Agency ( CSA ) have agreed to extend the ISS 's mission from 2020 to 2024 . The results of this research will provide considerable information for long @-@ duration expeditions to the Moon and flights to Mars . 
 Following the intentional deorbiting of Mir on 23 March 2001 , the ISS became the only space station in orbit around Earth . It retained that distinction until the launch of Chinese Tiangong @-@ 1 space laboratory on 29 September 2011 . Mir 's legacy lives on in the station , bringing together five space agencies in the cause of exploration and allowing those space agencies to prepare for their next leap into space , to the Moon , Mars and beyond . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 = = = Safety and scientific return = = = 
 Criticism of the program was primarily concerned with the safety of the aging Mir , particularly following the fire aboard the station and collision with the Progress supply vessel in 1997 . 
 The fire , caused by the malfunction of a backup solid @-@ fuel oxygen generator ( SFOG ) , burned for , according to various sources , between 90 seconds and 14 minutes , and produced large amounts of toxic smoke that filled the station for around 45 minutes . This forced the crew to don respirators , but some of the respirator masks initially worn were broken . Fire extinguishers mounted on the walls of the modules were immovable . The fire occurred during a crew rotation , and as such there were six men aboard the station rather than the usual three . Access to one of the docked Soyuz lifeboats was blocked , which would have prevented escape by half of the crew . A similar incident had occurred on an earlier Mir expedition , although in that case the SFOG burned for only a few seconds . 
 The near @-@ miss and collision incidents presented further safety issues . Both were caused by failure of the same piece of equipment , the TORU manual docking system , which was undergoing tests at the time . The tests were called in order to gauge the performance of long @-@ distance docking in order to enable the cash @-@ strapped Russians to remove the expensive Kurs automatic docking system from the Progress ships . 
 The accidents also added to the increasingly vocal criticism of the aging station 's reliability . Astronaut Blaine Hammond claimed that his safety concerns about Mir were ignored by NASA officials , and that records of safety meetings " disappeared from a locked vault " . Mir was originally designed to fly for five years but eventually flew for three times that length of time . During Phase One and afterward , the station was showing her age — constant computer crashes , loss of power , uncontrolled tumbles through space and leaking pipes were an ever @-@ present concern for crews . Various breakdowns of Mir 's Elektron oxygen @-@ generating system were also a concern . These breakdowns led crews to become increasingly reliant on the SFOG systems that caused the fire in 1997 . SFOG systems continue to be a problem aboard the ISS . 
 Another issue of controversy was the scale of its actual scientific return , particularly following the loss of the Spektr science module . Astronauts , managers and various members of the press all complained that the benefits of the program were outweighed by the risks associated with it , especially considering the fact that most of the US science experiments had been contained within the holed module . As such , a large amount of American research was inaccessible , reducing the science that could be performed . The safety issues caused NASA to reconsider the future of the program at various times . The agency eventually decided to continue and came under fire from various areas of the press regarding that decision . 
 = = = Attitudes = = = 
 Attitudes of the Russian space program and NASA towards Phase One were also of concern to the astronauts involved . Because of Russia 's financial issues , many workers at the TsUP felt that the mission hardware and continuation of Mir was more important than the lives of the cosmonauts aboard the station . As such the program was run very differently compared to American programs : cosmonauts had their days being planned for them to the minute , actions ( such as docking ) which would be performed manually by shuttle pilots were all carried out automatically , and cosmonauts had their pay docked if they made any errors during their flights . Americans learned aboard Skylab and earlier space missions that this level of control was not productive and had since made mission plans more flexible . The Russians , however , would not budge , and many felt that significant work time was lost because of this . 
 Following the two accidents in 1997 , astronaut Jerry Linenger felt that the Russian authorities attempted a cover @-@ up to downplay the significance of the incidents , fearing that the Americans would back out of the partnership . A large part of this " cover @-@ up " was the seeming impression that the American astronauts were not in fact " partners " aboard the station , but were instead " guests " . NASA staff did not find out for several hours about the fire and collision and found themselves kept out of decision @-@ making processes . NASA became more involved when Russian mission controllers intended to place blame for the accident entirely on Vasily Tsibliyev . It was only after the application of significant pressure from NASA that this stance was changed . 
 At various times during the program , NASA managers and personnel found themselves limited in terms of resources and manpower , particularly as Phase Two geared up , and had a hard time getting anywhere with NASA administration . One particular area of contention was with crew assignments to missions . Many astronauts allege that the method of selection prevented the most skilled people from performing roles they were best @-@ suited for . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 Since the breakup of the Soviet Union a few years earlier , the Russian economy had been slowly collapsing and the budget for space exploration was reduced by around 80 % . Before and after Phase One , a great deal of Russia 's space finances came from flights of astronauts from Europe and other countries , with one Japanese TV station paying $ 9 @.@ 5 million to have one of their reporters , Toyohiro Akiyama , flown aboard Mir . By the start of Phase One , cosmonauts regularly found their missions extended to save money on launchers , the six @-@ yearly flights of the Progress had been reduced to three , and there was a distinct possibility of Mir being sold for around $ 500 million . 
 Critics argued that the $ 325 million contract NASA had with Russia was the only thing keeping the Russian space program alive , and only the Space Shuttle was keeping Mir aloft . NASA also had to pay hefty fees for training manuals and equipment used by astronauts training at Star City . Problems came to a head when ABC 's Nightline revealed that there was a distinct possibility of embezzlement of American finances by the Russian authorities in order to build a suite of new cosmonaut houses in Moscow , or else that the building projects were being funded by the Russian Mafia . NASA administrator Goldin was invited onto Nightline to defend the homes but he refused to comment . NASA 's office for external affairs was quoted as saying that " What Russia does with its own money is their business . " 
 = Tropical Storm Omeka = 
 Tropical Storm Omeka was the latest forming Eastern Pacific named storm since reliable records began in the 1960s . The storm was part of the 2010 Pacific typhoon and hurricane season . On December 18 , 2010 , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) began monitoring a subtropical cyclone near the International Dateline for possible tropical cyclogenesis . Over the following two days , the system tracked southwestward , entering the Western Pacific basin . It then began to transition into a tropical cyclone . Shortly before crossing the dateline on December 20 , the CPHC assessed the system to have become a tropical storm . The storm was assigned the name Omeka several hours later as it moved into the CPHC 's area of responsibility – which is from 140 ° W to the International Dateline . Upon doing so , Omeka attained its peak intensity with winds of 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Later on December 20 , wind shear in the region increased , causing the system to weaken . By December 21 , the center of Omeka was devoid of convection and dissipated on the next day . Omeka brushed Lisianski Island with no damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Omeka were from an extratropical cyclone in the western Pacific Ocean . The storm tracked southeastward near the International Dateline , and by December 18 it transitioned into a kona storm and soon into a subtropical cyclone . A large , sprawling system , little development was initially expected to take place as the storm moved towards the southwest . As the low moved over warmer waters , the cyclone was able to maintain an area of deep convection near its center . According to the CPHC , the system was nearly fully tropical early on December 19 as it moved west of the dateline . However , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) considered the low to be fully subtropical as a cold @-@ core was present over the center of circulation . At this time , the storm had an eye @-@ like feature , and attained its peak strength with winds of 60 miles per hour ( 100 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 997 millibars ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Later on December 19 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression as the low turned towards the southeast . Early on December 20 , the JMA issued their final advisory on the depression as it moved east of the dateline and reentered the CPHC 's area of responsibility . 
 Already classifying it as a tropical storm , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) issued their first advisory on the system at 0900 UTC on December 20 , at which time it was situated roughly 505 miles ( 815 km ) south of Midway Island . Upon issuing this advisory , they designated the system as Tropical Storm Omeka , the first named storm of the Central Pacific season . The storm generally tracked towards the northeast , in response to a mid @-@ level low to the west , throughout the remainder of its existence . Traversing an area of decreased sea surface temperatures and increasing wind shear , Omeka quickly weakened to a minimal tropical storm later on December 20 , with winds of 40 miles per hour ( 65 km / h ) . Intermittent bursts of convection allowed the system to maintain gale @-@ force winds through December 21 ; however , persistent shear finally took its toll later that morning . Between 0700 and 0800 UTC , Omeka brushed Lisianski Island . Around 0900 UTC , the CPHC issued their final advisory on Omeka , as it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone roughly 280 miles ( 450 km ) east @-@ southeast of Midway Island , near Lisianski Island . The extratropical cyclone dissipated on December 23 . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 On December 21 , the center of Omeka brushed Lisianski Island , with winds of 40 miles per hour ( 65 km / h ) . However , no tropical storm watches or warnings were issued since the CPHC anticipated weakening prior to the storm passing the island . Crossing the International Dateline into the northeast Pacific on December 20 , being the first tropical cyclone to do so since Tropical Storm Wene in 2000 , Omeka existed in the northeast Pacific later than any other storm since the 1960s , when reliable records begin in the basin . However , according to the CPHC 's database , there are two possible tropical cyclones in 1903 and 1904 which developed on December 23 . Omeka was the first December storm in the Central Pacific since Tropical Storm Paka in 1997 . Throughout 2010 , the entire Pacific Ocean experienced record @-@ low tropical cyclone activity due to a strong La Niña . Since Omeka was the first storm in the Central Pacific during the year , it marked the latest start to a season since reliable records began , excluding seasons with no storms . In addition , even though it did not become a named storm , Tropical Depression Nine @-@ C of the 2015 Pacific hurricane season marked the latest forming tropical cyclone on record as it spanned two calendars and dissipated on January 1 , 2016 . 
 = USS Florida ( BB @-@ 30 ) = 
 USS Florida ( BB @-@ 30 ) was the lead ship of the Florida class of dreadnought battleships of the United States Navy . She had one sister ship , Utah . Florida was laid down at the New York Navy Yard in March 1909 , launched in May 1910 , and commissioned into the US Navy in September 1911 . She was armed with a main battery of ten 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns and was very similar in design to the preceding Delaware @-@ class battleships . 
 Florida was one of the first ships to arrive during the United States occupation of Veracruz in early 1914 , and part of her crew joined the landing party that occupied the city . She was assigned to United States Battleship Division 9 after the American entrance into World War I in April 1917 ; the division was sent to Europe to reinforce the British Grand Fleet . During the war , Florida and the rest of her unit , reassigned as the 6th Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet , conducted patrols in the North Sea and escorted convoys to Norway . She saw no action with the German High Seas Fleet , however . 
 Florida returned to normal peacetime duties in 1919 . She was heavily modernized in 1924 – 1926 , including a complete overhaul of her propulsion system . She remained in service until 1930 , when the London Naval Treaty was signed . Under the terms of the treaty , Florida and Utah were removed from active service . Therefore , Florida was decommissioned in 1931 and scrapped the next year in Philadelphia . 
 = = Design = = 
 Florida was 521 ft 6 in ( 158 @.@ 95 m ) long overall and had a beam of 88 ft 3 in ( 26 @.@ 90 m ) and a draft of 28 ft 6 in ( 8 @.@ 69 m ) . She displaced 21 @,@ 825 long tons ( 22 @,@ 175 t ) as designed and up to 23 @,@ 033 long tons ( 23 @,@ 403 t ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by four @-@ shaft Parsons steam turbines rated at 28 @,@ 000 shp ( 20 @,@ 880 kW ) and twelve coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers , generating a top speed of 20 @.@ 75 kn ( 38 @.@ 43 km / h ; 23 @.@ 88 mph ) . The ship had a cruising range of 5 @,@ 776 nmi ( 6 @,@ 650 mi ; 10 @,@ 700 km ) at a speed of 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 1 @,@ 001 officers and men . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of ten 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) / 45 caliber Mark 5 guns in five twin Mark 8 gun turrets on the centerline , two of which were placed in a superfiring pair forward . The other three turrets were placed aft of the superstructure . The secondary battery consisted of sixteen 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 51 caliber guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull . As was standard for capital ships of the period , she carried a pair of 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . The main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick , while the armored deck was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The gun turrets had 12 in ( 305 mm ) thick faces and the conning tower had 11 @.@ 5 in ( 292 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Florida was laid down at the New York Navy Yard on 9 March 1909 . She was launched on 12 May 1910 , and commissioned into the US Navy on 15 September 1911 . She spent the next several months on training cruises in the Caribbean and off Maine , after which she moved to Hampton Roads to join the Atlantic Fleet . She arrived on 29 March 1912 , and was made the flagship of the 1st Battleship Division ( BatDiv ) . For the next two years , she participated in the normal routine of peacetime exercises with her division and squadron and with the entire Atlantic Fleet . She also conducted extensive gunnery training and took midshipmen from the US Naval Academy on midshipman training cruises . 
 In early 1914 during the Mexican Revolution , the United States intervened in the fighting and occupied Veracruz . Florida and her sister Utah were the first capital ships to arrive in Veracruz , on 16 February . These two ships and Prairie landed a total contingent of over a thousand Marines and bluejackets to begin the occupation of the city on 21 April . Over the next three days , the Marines battled Mexican defenders in the city and suffered ninety @-@ four casualties ( 19 dead ) , while killing hundreds of Mexicans in return . Fourteen men from Florida 's crew won the Medal of Honor for their actions during the battle . In July , Florida departed Mexican waters to return to normal fleet operations , and in October , she was reassigned to the 2nd Battleship Division . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 On 6 April 1917 , the United States declared war on Germany over its unrestricted submarine warfare campaign . Florida participated in wartime readiness exercises in 1917 , before steaming across the Atlantic with Battleship Division 9 . The division , which consisted of Florida , New York , Wyoming , and Delaware , left the United States on 25 November . The division was sent to European waters to reinforce the British Grand Fleet in the North Sea . After arriving in Scapa Flow , Battleship Division 9 became the 6th Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet . 
 Starting in late 1917 , the Germans had begun to use surface raiders to attack the British convoys to Scandinavia ; this forced the British to send squadrons from the Grand Fleet to escort the convoys . On 6 February 1918 , the 6th Battle Squadron and eight British destroyers escorted a convoy of merchant ships to Norway . While on the operation , Florida 's lookouts reported spotting a U @-@ boat , though the commander of Wyoming later argued that this and others issued by the rest of the squadron were false reports . The squadron was back in Scapa Flow on 10 February ; Delaware escorted two more such convoys in March and April . During the March convoy , Florida , Wyoming , Texas , and four destroyers became separated from the convoy in heavy fog , and only relocated it the following morning when the fog had lifted . The squadron returned to Scapa Flow on 13 March . 
 On 22 – 24 April , the German High Seas Fleet sortied to intercept one of the convoys in the hope of cutting off and destroying the escorting battleship squadron . Florida and the rest of the Grand Fleet left Scapa Flow on 24 April in an attempt to intercept the Germans , but the High Seas Fleet had already broken off the operation and was on its way back to port . On 30 June , the 6th Squadron was cruising in the North Sea in support of a mine @-@ laying operation ; while on patrol , Florida and several other ships fired on what they incorrectly believed to be U @-@ boat wakes . By early November , the Spanish Flu pandemic had spread to the Grand Fleet ; Florida was the only ship of the American contingent not to be quarantined for the virus . On 20 November , Florida and the rest of the Grand Fleet rendezvoused with the High Seas Fleet , which was then interned in Scapa Flow , following the Armistice with Germany that ended the war . Shortly thereafter , Florida was replaced with the newly commissioned Nevada . 
 Florida then joined the passenger ship SS George Washington on 12 December , which was carrying President Woodrow Wilson on his way to France to participate in the peace negotiations . The ships arrived in Brest , France on 13 December , after which Florida returned to the United States . She was present during the Victory Naval Review in the North River in New York City at the end of December . 
 = = = Inter @-@ War Period = = = 
 Florida returned to normal peacetime duties in January 1919 , when she arrived in Norfolk on the 4th . She steamed to the Azores to take weather observations for Navy seaplanes that were to make the first aerial crossing the Atlantic . In August 1920 , Florida was present during the 300th anniversary of the Pilgrims ' landing at Provincetown , Massachusetts . In December 1920 , she made a good @-@ will cruise to South America with US Secretary of State Bainbridge Colby aboard and over the next three years conducted amphibious operation training with the Marine Corps in the Caribbean . Florida also participated in the normal routine of exercises and midshipman cruises . During this period , she was made the flagship of the Commander , Control Force , US Fleet . 
 In early 1924 , Florida took part in the Fleet Problem III maneuvers , where she and her sister Utah acted as stand @-@ ins for the new Colorado @-@ class battleships . In June 1924 , Florida was taken out of service for a modernization at the Boston Navy Yard , which lasted from 1 April 1925 to 1 November 1926 . During the reconstruction , her deck armor was strengthened and anti @-@ torpedo blisters were installed to increase her resistance to underwater damage . Her secondary battery was rearranged to improve its efficiency , and four of her 5 @-@ inch guns , which were mounted in sponsons , were removed . She was also reboilered with four White @-@ Forster oil @-@ fired models that had been removed from the battleships and battlecruisers scrapped as a result of the Washington Naval Treaty . Her Parsons turbines were replaced with new Curtis geared turbines and her two funnels were trunked into one stack . The rear lattice mast was replaced with a pole mast , which was moved further aft . Her two submerged torpedo tubes were also removed . 
 Florida remained in service for a few years in her modernized form , and participated in joint Army @-@ Navy coast defense exercises in June 1928 . Under the terms of the London Naval Treaty of 1930 , which reduced the battle fleets of the signatory countries , she was to be disposed of , along with her sister Utah and either Arkansas or Wyoming ( Wyoming would be the second affected vessel , demilitarized in May 1931 for use as a training ship ) . She was accordingly decommissioned on 16 February 1931 at the Philadelphia Naval Yard , and was broken up in Philadelphia later that year . The one @-@ ton ship 's bell was saved and transported to the University of Florida in Gainesville , where it was first installed in a clock atop a classroom building . The clock was removed in the early 1950s and the bell was put in storage . In 1960 , it was installed atop the stands in the north end zone at Florida Field , where it was traditionally rung by either cheerleaders or fans at the conclusion of a victory by the Florida Gator football team . As the stadium underwent successive expansions and renovations , the bell was moved to a location under the north end zone concourse and then was removed from the stadium in 1992 . It has been restored and is now housed in the lobby of the Museum of Florida History . 
 = Petropavlovsk @-@ class battleship = 
 The Petropavlovsk class , sometimes referred to as the Poltava class , was a class of three pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Russian Navy during the 1890s . They were transferred to the Pacific Squadron upon completion and based at Port Arthur before the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 . All three ships participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on the second day of the war . Petropavlovsk sank two months after the war began after striking one or more mines laid by the Japanese . The remaining two ships participated in the Battle of the Yellow Sea in August 1904 and were sunk or scuttled during the final stages of the Siege of Port Arthur . 
 Poltava was salvaged after the Japanese captured Port Arthur and incorporated into the Imperial Japanese Navy . The ship , renamed Tango in Japanese service , participated in the Battle of Tsingtao in late 1914 , during World War I. She was sold back to the Russians in 1916 and renamed Chesma as her original name was in use by another battleship . The ship became the flagship of the Russian Arctic Flotilla in 1917 and her crew supported the Bolsheviks later that year . She was seized by the British in early 1918 when they intervened in the Russian Civil War , abandoned by them when they withdrew and scrapped by the Soviets in 1924 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Design work for the Petropavlovsk class began as an enlarged and improved version of the battleship Imperator Nikolai I , but with her main armament of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns mounted in barbettes . Based on experience with Imperator Aleksandr II in which the casemate @-@ mounted secondary armament could often not be worked in rough weather , the Naval Technical Committee adopted the layout of the American Indiana @-@ class battleships with the secondary armament of 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns mounted in turrets on the upper deck . Use of the lighter barbette mounting allowed for a flush @-@ deck hull which gave the ship high freeboard . The class was designed with a displacement of 10 @,@ 960 long tons ( 11 @,@ 136 t ) , a full @-@ length waterline armor belt , and the upper hull featured a modest amount of tumblehome . It was approved in January 1891 . 
 The design was intended to have a maximum speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) using forced draft , but model testing of the hull showed that it could only reach 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . Rather than delay construction by redesigning the hull to reach the desired speed , the navy accepted the slower speed . Development of the quick @-@ firing gun meant that an upper belt of armor was necessary and the weight required was gained by shortening the waterline armor belt , which left the ships ' ends protected only by the sloping armor deck . Other changes included the replacement of the barbettes with turrets of the same type as used in the battleship Sissoi Veliky and the substitution of 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) quick @-@ firing guns for the original eight @-@ inch guns . This saved enough weight that four additional six @-@ inch guns could be added . 
 The Petropavlovsk @-@ class ships were 376 feet ( 114 @.@ 6 m ) long overall , had a beam of 70 feet ( 21 m ) and a draft of 28 feet 3 inches ( 8 @.@ 6 m ) . Designed to displace 10 @,@ 960 long tons ( 11 @,@ 140 t ) , they were 400 – 800 long tons ( 410 – 810 t ) overweight and actually displaced 11 @,@ 354 – 11 @,@ 842 long tons ( 11 @,@ 536 – 12 @,@ 032 t ) . The ships were the first flush @-@ decked battleships built for the Navy . They had a partial double bottom and the hull was divided by 10 watertight transverse bulkheads ; a centerline bulkhead divided the machinery spaces . The upper part of the hull between the main and upper decks curved inwards ( tumblehome ) , although the tumblehome on these ships was much less pronounced than that found on French battleships of the time , which began curving inwards at the waterline . They had a designed metacentric height of 5 @.@ 43 feet ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) and were good seagoing ships . Their crew consisted of 26 – 27 officers and 605 – 25 enlisted men ; Petropavlovsk had a crew of 750 when serving as a flagship . 
 The ships were powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller , using steam generated by 14 cylindrical boilers at a working pressure of 8 @.@ 8 atm ( 892 kPa ; 129 psi ) . Unlike her sisters , Sevastopol had 16 boilers . The engines were rated at 10 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 900 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 16 knots . The machinery for Poltava and Petropavlovsk was ordered from British companies and slightly exceeded their specifications ; the ships reached maximum speed of 16 @.@ 29 and 16 @.@ 38 knots ( 30 @.@ 17 and 30 @.@ 34 km / h ; 18 @.@ 75 and 18 @.@ 85 mph ) from 11 @,@ 213 and 11 @,@ 255 indicated horsepower ( 8 @,@ 362 and 8 @,@ 393 kW ) , respectively , during their sea trials . Sevastopol , using domestically built machinery , only reached a speed of 15 @.@ 3 knots ( 28 @.@ 3 km / h ; 17 @.@ 6 mph ) from 9 @,@ 368 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 986 kW ) , despite the extra boilers , but the Naval Ministry chose not to exercise the penalty provisions of the contract for failing to attain the design speed because it had specified the machinery to be used . They carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 050 long tons ( 1 @,@ 070 t ) of coal which allowed them to steam for 3 @,@ 750 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 940 km ; 4 @,@ 320 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament consisted of two pairs of 40 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch guns mounted in French @-@ style center @-@ pivot twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft . They used hydraulic power for loading and traversing , but the ammunition hoists were electrically powered . They were designed to fire one shell every 90 seconds , but the rate of fire in service proved to be one round every three minutes . The structure of the turrets proved to be too weak to withstand extra @-@ strength charges and had to be reinforced . These guns had a maximum elevation of 15 ° and could traverse 270 ° . 58 rounds per gun were carried . They fired a 731 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 331 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 598 ft / s ( 792 m / s ) to a range of 12 @,@ 010 yards ( 10 @,@ 980 m ) at an elevation of 10 ° . 
 The secondary armament of the ships consisted of a dozen 45 @-@ caliber Canet Model 1892 six @-@ inch quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns , eight mounted in four twin @-@ gun turrets on the upper deck and four pedestal @-@ mounted guns in embrasures on the sides of the hull , one deck below and between the turrets . The turrets were traversed by and the ammunition hoists were worked by electric motors , but the guns were elevated manually . They had an 135 ° arc of fire and the guns could elevate to a maximum of + 15 ° and depress to − 5 ° . The rate of fire of the turret @-@ mounted guns was generally only about half that ( 2 – 3 rounds per minute ) of the pedestal @-@ mounted guns . The motors and mechanism of the ammunition hoists were problematic and sometimes reduced the rate of fire down of one round per minute . The guns in the hull could traverse 100 ° and each six @-@ inch gun was provided with 200 rounds . They fired shells that weighed 91 @.@ 27 lb ( 41 @.@ 40 kg ) with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ( 790 m / s ) . They had a maximum range of 12 @,@ 600 yards ( 11 @,@ 500 m ) when fired at an elevation of + 20 ° . 
 A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included twelve 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns in hull embrasures and on the superstructure . They fired a 3 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 476 ft / s ( 450 m / s ) at a rate of 20 rounds per minute to a range of 2 @,@ 020 yards ( 1 @,@ 850 m ) . Twenty smaller 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss guns were positioned in hull embrasures , on the superstructure and in the fighting tops . They fired a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 50 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 450 ft / s ( 440 m / s ) . They had a rate of fire of 20 rounds per minute and a maximum range of 3 @,@ 038 yards ( 2 @,@ 778 m ) . 
 The Petropavlovsk @-@ class ships carried four 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes , all above water , mounted on the broadside and two broadside 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) underwater tubes . The forward 15 @-@ inch tubes were near the forward main gun turret and were unprotected by any armor ; aft , the 15 @-@ inch tubes were protected by the upper armor belt . The underwater tubes were protected underneath the armor deck , forward of the forward 12 @-@ inch magazine . The 15 @-@ inch Type L torpedo carried a 141 @-@ pound ( 64 kg ) warhead of TNT . It had two speed settings which gave it a maximum range of 980 yards ( 900 m ) at 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) or 660 yards ( 600 m ) at 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . No data is available for the 18 @-@ inch torpedo . The ship also carried 50 mines to be laid to protect her anchorage in remote areas . 
 The ships were fitted with Liuzhol stadiametric rangefinders that used the angle between two vertical points on an enemy ship , usually the waterline and the crow 's nest , to estimate the range . The gunnery officer consulted his references to get the range and calculated the proper elevation and deflection required to hit the target . He transmitted his commands via a Geisler electro @-@ mechanical fire @-@ control transmission system to each gun or turret . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The Russian armor plate industry had not yet mastered the process for forming thick steel plates so the armor for these ships was ordered from companies in Germany and the United States . Even they could not produce enough of the latest types of armor plate in the quantities required for all three ships . Petropavlovsk had ordinary nickel steel , while Sevastopol used Harvey armor and Poltava used the latest Krupp armor . The thicknesses of the armor plates varied in an attempt to equalize their effectiveness . In Petropavlovsk , the maximum thickness of the waterline armor belt over the machinery spaces was 16 inches ( 406 mm ) which reduced to 12 inches ( 305 mm ) abreast the magazines . The belt tapered to a thickness of 8 inches ( 203 mm ) at its bottom edge . The belt armor in the other two ships was 14 @.@ 5 inches ( 368 mm ) over the machinery spaces and thinned to 10 inches ( 254 mm ) over the magazines . Their belt tapered to a thickness of 7 @.@ 25 inches ( 184 mm ) at its lower edge . The belt covered 240 feet ( 73 @.@ 2 m ) of the ship 's length and was 7 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) high , of which the upper 36 inches ( 914 @.@ 4 mm ) was intended to be above the waterline . The belt terminated in a transverse bulkhead 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick forward and eight inches thick aft , leaving the ends of the ships unprotected . Above the waterline belt was an upper strake of 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) armor that ran between the turret bases , seven and a half feet high . The ends of the upper belt were closed off by five @-@ inch angled transverse bulkheads that connected the ends of the upper belt to the turret support tubes . 
 The armor of the main gun turrets and their supporting tubes was ten inches thick ( Krupp armor in Poltava , nickel steel in the other two ) with roofs 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick . The turrets of the secondary armament had five @-@ inch sides with 1 inch ( 25 mm ) roofs . The six @-@ inch guns in the hull embrasures were unprotected . The sides of the conning tower were nine inches thick while the armor deck in the central citadel was two inches thick . Outside the area covered by the belt armor , the flat portion of the deck was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick , while the sloped portion was 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Careers = = 
 Petropavlovsk was the first of the three ships to enter service ; she departed Kronstadt on 17 October 1899 and reached Port Arthur on 10 May 1900 . She became flagship of the Pacific Squadron commander , Vice Admiral Nikolai I. <unk> , upon her arrival . The ship supported international efforts to suppress the Boxer Rebellion in mid @-@ 1900 . Poltava and Sevastopol departed for Port Arthur on 15 October 1900 and arrived on 12 and 13 April 1901 respectively . Petropavlovsk was the flagship of Vice Admiral Oskar <unk> Stark at the beginning of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in February 1904 . 
 During the Battle of Port Arthur on the second day of the war , Poltava was hit twice in the aft hull , Petropavlovsk was hit three times in the bow and Sevastopol was hit once . Between them , the three ships lost two men killed and seven wounded and none of them suffered any significant damage . Tsar Nicholas II relieved Stark and he was replaced by Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov who assumed command on 7 March . On 31 March , Petropavlovsk and Poltava sortied to support Russian cruisers and destroyers engaging their Japanese counterparts , but they headed back to Port Arthur to join the rest of the Pacific Squadron when the main Japanese battlefleet appeared . They ran into a newly laid minefield en route and Petropavlovsk struck at least one of the mines . Observers saw three explosions , one of which appeared to be that of her magazines , and the ship sank in less than two minutes . Casualties included Admiral Makarov and his guest , Russian battle artist Vasily Vereshchagin , 26 officers and 652 enlisted men . Only seven officers and 73 crewmen were rescued . 
 The new commander , Vice Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft , made an attempt to lead the Pacific Squadron to Vladivostok on 23 June , but abandoned the sortie when the squadron was discovered and pursued by the Japanese . While returning to Port Arthur , Sevastopol struck a mine and the ship took on an estimated 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 000 t ) of water ; despite the flooding she was able to keep up with the fleet and reached port successfully . While under repair , which lasted until 9 July , a fire broke out aboard the ship and killed two crewmen and injured an additional 28 . All of the 47- and 37 @-@ millimeter guns in the lower hull embrasures were removed from Poltava and Sevastopol during this time ; some were remounted on the superstructure , but others were used to reinforce the land defenses of Port Arthur . 
 Vitgeft made another attempt to break through the Japanese blockade on 10 August in accordance to a direct order from the Tsar . The squadron was spotted relatively quickly and the Japanese main fleet intercepted the Russians in the early afternoon . During the Battle of the Yellow Sea , Poltava and Sevastopol were the last battleships in the Russian column and Poltava , which was slowed by engine problems , became the primary target of the Japanese battleships and armored cruisers when Vitgeft maneuvered the squadron past the Japanese and forced them into a stern chase . Shortly before sunset , a lucky hit killed Vitgeft and threw the squadron into confusion . The squadron second @-@ in @-@ command , Rear Admiral Prince Pavel Ukhtomsky , eventually gained control of the squadron and led most of them back to Port Arthur . Poltava had been hit by 12 – 14 shells , eight or 12 inches in caliber , and suffered 12 killed and 43 wounded ; Sevastopol was only hit by several shells that killed one crewman and wounded 62 men . 
 On 23 August , Sevastopol sortied to bombard Japanese troops and struck a mine near her forward magazines while returning to port . She was badly damaged and took on a lot of water . The ship was towed back into Port Arthur and her repairs lasted until 6 November . In the meantime , the new squadron commander , Rear Admiral Robert N. Viren , decided to use the men and guns of the Pacific Squadron to reinforce the defenses of Port Arthur and even more guns were stripped from the squadron 's ships ; by September Poltava had dismounted three 6 @-@ inch , four 47- and twenty @-@ six 37 @-@ millimeter guns . Sevastopol lost one 47- and twenty @-@ six 37 @-@ millimeter guns as well . Both ships were lightly damaged by 28 @-@ centimeter ( 11 in ) shells in October when the Imperial Japanese Army 's siege guns began firing blindly into the harbor . The capture of Hill 203 , which overlooked the harbor , on 5 December allowed them to fire directly at the Russian ships and Poltava was sunk in shallow water that same day by a shell that started a fire in a magazine that eventually exploded . By 7 December all of the Russian battleships except Sevastopol had been sunk and the ship 's captain , Nikolai Essen , anchored her under the guns of the remaining coast defense guns outside the harbor . He rigged torpedo nets and laid a minefield around his ship that thwarted repeated attacks until 16 December when one torpedo struck the ship in the stern during a blinding snowstorm . Badly damaged , Sevastopol was towed to deep water about two weeks later , when Port Arthur surrendered on 2 January 1905 , and scuttled . 
 Poltava was subsequently raised , repaired and reclassified as a first @-@ class coastal defense ship in the Imperial Japanese Navy . Renamed Tango ( <unk> ) , she served as a gunnery training ship and the ship participated in the Siege of Tsingtao at the beginning of World War I. She was sold to Russia in March 1916 and arrived in Vladivostok on 2 April 1916 . Renamed Chesma ( Чесма ) , the ship arrived in Port Said , Egypt on 19 September and later supported efforts to intimidate the Greek Government into support Allied operations in Macedonia . She arrived at Alexandrovsk on 16 January 1917 after a brief refit in Birkenhead and became flagship of the Arctic Flotilla . Her crew joined the Bolsheviks in October 1917 and Chesma was captured by the British in Murmansk in March 1918 during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . The ship was already in bad shape and the British immobilized her when they departed Russia in October 1919 . She was stricken on 3 July 1924 and subsequently scrapped . 
 = 1977 European Cup Final = 
 The 1977 European Cup Final was an association football match between Liverpool of England and Borussia Mönchengladbach of Germany on 25 May 1977 at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome , Italy ( the venue was decided in Bern by the UEFA Executive Committee on 17 September 1976 ) . The showpiece event was the final match of the 1976 – 77 season of Europe 's premier cup competition , the European Cup . Both teams were appearing in their first European Cup final , although the two sides had previously met in the 1973 UEFA Cup Final , which Liverpool won 3 – 2 on aggregate over two legs . 
 Each club needed to progress through four rounds to reach the final . Matches were contested over two legs , with a match at each team 's home ground . Liverpool 's victories varied from close affairs to comfortable victories . They beat the previous season 's runners @-@ up Saint @-@ Étienne by a single goal over two legs , while they defeated FC Zürich 6 – 1 on aggregate in the semi @-@ final . Borussia Mönchengladbach matches were mainly all close affairs . All but one of their ties were won by the one goal . 
 Watched by a crowd of 57 @,@ 000 , Liverpool took an early lead through Terry McDermott , but Allan Simonsen equalised for Mönchengladbach early in the second half . Liverpool regained the lead midway through the second half with a goal from Tommy Smith , and Phil Neal ensured Liverpool won the match 3 – 1 to secure their first European Cup . The victory was a year after they had won the UEFA Cup , which meant that Bob Paisley became the first manager to win the UEFA Cup and European Cup in successive seasons . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool were the reigning UEFA Cup champions , they had beaten Belgian team Club Brugge 4 – 3 on aggregate to win the 1975 – 76 UEFA Cup . Liverpool entered the competition as English champions having won the 1975 – 76 Football League First Division . They were drawn against the Northern Irish champions Crusaders in the first round . The first leg was a home tie at Anfield , which Liverpool won 2 – 0 courtesy of a Phil Neal penalty and a John Toshack goal . The second leg away at Seaview , was won 5 – 0 by Liverpool . Four of the goals were scored within nine minutes of the end of the match , to make the scoreline seem more one @-@ sided than the match actually was . Liverpool won the tie 7 – 0 and were drawn against Turkish champions Trabzonspor in the second round . The first leg was played in Turkey at Hüseyin Avni Aker Stadium . Liverpool 's plan was to try to avoid defeat , however that plan failed when <unk> were awarded a penalty midway through the second half . Trabzonspor converted the subsequent penalty and won the match 1 – 0 . Liverpool recovered in the second leg at Anfield . Three goals early in the first half meant they won the match 3 – 0 to win the tie 3 – 1 on aggregate and progress to the quarter @-@ finals . 
 Liverpool 's opponents in the quarter @-@ finals were the previous year 's beaten finalists Saint @-@ Étienne of France . The first leg was at the Stade Geoffroy @-@ Guichard . As in the previous round Liverpool lost the away leg 1 – 0 . The return leg at Anfield is considered one of Liverpool 's most memorable European matches . Liverpool scored in the second minute of the match through Kevin Keegan to level the tie . Early in the second half Saint @-@ Étienne equalised through Dominique <unk> . The goal meant that the tie was 2 – 1 in the French team 's favour and due to the away goals rule , Liverpool needed to score two goals to progress to the semi @-@ finals . Liverpool scored again midway through the second half to make the 2 – 2 on aggregate . With 18 minutes remaining David Fairclough replaced John Toshack . After 12 minutes on the pitch , the " supersub " had struck ... again . Liverpool went on to win the match 3 – 1 and the tie 3 – 2 to progress to semi @-@ finals . Liverpool 's opponents in the semi @-@ finals were Swiss champions FC Zürich . The first leg at the <unk> was won 3 – 1 by Liverpool , after they had initially gone a goal behind . Liverpool won the second leg at Anfield 3 – 0 to win the tie 6 – 1 on aggregate and ensure their participation in the final . 
 = = = Borussia Mönchengladbach = = = 
 Borussia gained entry to the competition as a result of winning the 1975 – 76 Fußball @-@ Bundesliga . Their opposition in the first round were Austrian champions Austria Vienna . The away leg at the Franz <unk> Stadium ended in a 1 – 0 defeat for Borussia . The return leg at the Bökelbergstadion saw Borussia win 3 – 0 courtesy of goals from Uli Stielike , Rainer Bonhof and Jupp Heynckes . A 3 – 1 aggregate victory meant that Borussia would face Italian champions Torino in the second round . Borussia won the first leg away from home at the Stadio Olimpico di Torino 2 – 1 . The second leg finished 0 – 0 , which was enough for Borussia to progress to the quarter @-@ finals courtesy of a 2 – 1 aggregate victory . 
 Borussia 's <unk> in the quarter @-@ finals was Belgian champions Club Brugge . The first leg at the Bökelbergstadion saw Borussia concede two goals in the first half . However , they scored two goals in the second half courtesy of Christian Kulik and Allan Simonsen to secure a 2 – 2 draw . Despite this , Club Brugge had the advantage due to them having two away goals . Borussia knew that they had to score in the second leg at the Jan Breydel Stadium to have any chance of progressing to the semi @-@ finals . The first half was goalless , and with six minutes of the second half remaining Wilfried Hannes scored the goal Borussia needed . The match finished 1 – 0 and a 3 – 2 aggregate victory meant they progressed to the semi @-@ finals . Their opposition were Soviet champions Dynamo Kyiv . The first leg at the Central Stadium was won 1 – 0 by Dynamo . Borussia again needed to score to stay in the competition . Midway through the second half , Rainer Bonhof scored to make the tie 1 – 1 on aggregate . With eight minutes remaining and tie heading for extra time , Hans @-@ Jürgen <unk> scored to give Borussia a two @-@ goal lead . The score remained the same and Borussia progressed to their first European Cup final with a 2 – 1 aggregate victory . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The 1977 final was the first time Liverpool and Borussia Mönchengladbach had reached the showpiece match . The clubs had faced each other before in the final of a European competition ; the 1973 UEFA Cup Final . A match which Liverpool won 3 – 2 on aggregate . Despite this being both clubs first European Cup final they had both won European competitions . In addition to their UEFA Cup victory over Borussia , Liverpool had won the previous season 's UEFA Cup , beating Club Brugge 4 – 3 on aggregate . Borussia were successful in the 1974 – 75 UEFA Cup ; they beat FC Twente of the Netherlands 5 – 1 on aggregate . 
 Liverpool entered the match as English champions ; they had won the 1976 – 77 Football League for a record tenth time by a single point from Manchester City and Ipswich Town . Liverpool had also progressed to the final of the 1976 – 77 FA Cup against Manchester United . Liverpool had the opportunity to win an unprecedented Treble of League , FA Cup and European Cup . However , it was not to be as Liverpool lost the FA Cup final 2 – 1 . Borussia entered the match as German champions ; they had won the 1976 – 77 Fußball @-@ Bundesliga by a single point from Schalke and Eintracht Braunschweig . Borussia were aiming to become the second German to win the European Cup after Bayern Munich had won the three previous finals . 
 The first chance of the match was for Borussia ; Rainer Bonhof saw his shot come back off the post . In the 24th minute , Borussia player Herbert Wimmer suffered an injury and had to be replaced by Christian Kulik . Three minutes later Ian Callaghan won the ball in midfield and passed to Steve Heighway on the right wing . Heighway cut inside from a wing and passed into space for Terry McDermott who scored the opening goal of the match . Borussia began to exert more of an influence on the game after Liverpool 's goal , however they were unable to equalise before the end of the first half . 
 Seven minutes after the restart Borussia had equalised . A stray Jimmy Case pass was picked up by Allan Simonsen , who advanced towards goal and scored to level the match at 1 – 1 . Moments later , Liverpool thought they had won a penalty when Kevin Keegan seemed to have been brought down by Berti Vogts , however the referee waved play on . Five minutes after their goal , Simonsen crossed the ball from the wing , it was met by Uli Stielike whose shot was saved by Liverpool goalkeeper Ray Clemence . Two minutes later Liverpool regained the lead . They won a corner on the left side of the pitch , Heighway delivered the ball into the penalty area , which was met at the near post by Tommy Smith to give Liverpool a 2 – 1 lead in what was his 600th appearance for the club . Soon afterwards Bonhof appeared to have brought Heighway down in the penalty area , but the referee again waved play on . However , in the 82nd minute Liverpool were awarded a penalty when Vogts brought Kevin Keegan down . Phil Neal scored the subsequent penalty to give Liverpool a 3 – 1 lead . No further goals were scored and Liverpool won the match to win their first European Cup . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = Divine ( performer ) = 
 Harris Glenn Milstead , better known by his stage name Divine ( October 19 , 1945 – March 7 , 1988 ) , was an American actor , singer and drag queen . Closely associated with the independent filmmaker John Waters , Divine was a character actor , usually performing female roles in cinematic and theatrical appearances , and adopted a female drag persona for his music career . 
 Born in Baltimore , Maryland to a conservative middle @-@ class family , Milstead developed an early interest in drag while working as a women 's hairdresser . By the mid @-@ 1960s he had embraced the city 's countercultural scene and befriended Waters , who gave him the name " Divine " and the tagline of " the most beautiful woman in the world , almost . " Along with his friend David Lochary , Divine joined Waters ' acting troupe , the Dreamlanders , and adopted female roles for their experimental short films Roman Candles ( 1966 ) , Eat Your Makeup ( 1968 ) , and The Diane Linkletter Story ( 1969 ) . Again in drag , he took a lead role in both of Waters ' early full @-@ length movies , Mondo Trasho ( 1969 ) and Multiple Maniacs ( 1970 ) , the latter of which began to attract press attention for the group . Divine next starred in Waters ' Pink Flamingos ( 1972 ) , which proved a hit on the U.S. midnight movie circuit , became a cult classic , and established Divine 's fame within the American counterculture . 
 After starring as the lead role in Waters ' next picture , Female Trouble ( 1974 ) , Divine moved on to theater , appearing in several avant @-@ garde performances alongside San Francisco drag collective , The Cockettes . He followed this with a performance in Tom Eyen 's play Women Behind Bars and its sequel , The Neon Woman . Continuing his cinematic work , he starred in two more of Waters ' films , Polyester ( 1981 ) and Hairspray ( 1988 ) , the latter of which represented his breakthrough into mainstream cinema . Independent of Waters , he also appeared in a number of other films , such as Lust in the Dust ( 1985 ) and Trouble in Mind ( 1985 ) , seeking to diversify his repertoire by playing male roles . In 1981 , Divine embarked on a career in the disco industry by producing a number of Hi @-@ NRG tracks , most of which were written by Bobby Orlando . He achieved global chart success with hits like " You Think You 're a Man " , " I 'm So Beautiful " , and " Walk Like a Man " , all of which were performed in drag . Having struggled with obesity throughout his life , he died from <unk> . 
 Described by People magazine as the " Drag Queen of the Century " , Divine has remained a cult figure , particularly within the LGBT community , and has provided the inspiration for fictional characters , artworks and songs . Various books and documentary films devoted to his life have also been produced , including Divine Trash ( 1998 ) and I Am Divine ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Youth : 1945 – 65 = = = 
 Harris Glenn Milstead was born on October 19 , 1945 , at the Women 's Hospital in Baltimore , Maryland . His father , Harris Bernard Milstead ( May 1 , 1917 – March 4 , 1993 ) , after whom he was named , had been one of seven children born in Towson , Maryland to a plumber who worked for the Baltimore City Water Department . Divine 's mother , Frances Milstead ( née Vukovich ; April 12 , 1920 – March 24 , 2009 ) , was one of fifteen children born to an impoverished Serb immigrant couple who had grown up near Zagreb ( in today 's Croatia ) before moving to the United States in 1891 . When she was 16 , Frances moved to Baltimore where she worked at a diner in Towson , here meeting Harris , who was a regular customer . Entering into a relationship , they were married in 1938 before both gaining employment working at the Black and Decker factory in Towson . Due to his problems with muscular dystrophy , Harris was not required to fight for the U.S. armed forces in the Second World War , and instead Harris and Frances worked throughout the war in what they saw as " good jobs " . Attempting to conceive a child , Frances suffered two miscarriages in 1940 and 1943 . 
 By the time of Divine 's birth in 1945 , the <unk> were relatively wealthy and socially conservative , adhering to the Baptist denomination of Christianity . Later describing his upbringing , Divine would recollect : " I was an only child in , I guess , your upper middle @-@ class American family . I was probably your American spoiled brat . " His parents lavished almost anything that he wanted upon him , including food , and he became overweight , a condition he lived with for the rest of his life . Divine preferred to use his middle name , Glenn , to distinguish himself from his father , and was referred to as such by his parents and friends . 
 At age 12 , Divine and his parents moved to <unk> , a Baltimore suburb , where he attended Towson High School , graduating in 1963 . Bullied because of his weight and perceived effeminacy , he later reminisced that he " wasn 't rough and tough " but instead " loved painting and I always loved flowers and things . " Due to this horticultural interest , at 15 he took a part @-@ time job at a local florist 's shop . Several years later , he went on a diet that enabled him to drop in weight from 180 to 145 pounds ( 82 to 66 kg ) , giving him a new sense of confidence . When he was 17 , his parents sent him to a psychiatrist , where he first realized his sexual attraction to men as well as women , something then taboo in conventional American society . He helped out at his parents ' day care business , for instance dressing up as Santa Claus to entertain the children at Christmas time . In 1963 , he began attending the Marinella Beauty School , where he learned hair styling and , after completing his studies , gained employment at a couple of local salons , specializing in the creation of beehives and other upswept hairstyles . Milstead eventually gave up his job and for a while was financially supported by his parents , who catered to his expensive taste in clothes and cars . They reluctantly paid the many bills that he ran up financing lavish parties where he would dress up in drag as his favourite celebrity , actress Elizabeth Taylor . 
 = = = John Waters and Divine 's first films : 1966 – 68 = = = 
 Milstead built up a large collection of friends , among them David Lochary , who became an actor and costar in several of Divine 's later films . In the mid @-@ 1960s , Milstead befriended John Waters through their mutual friend Carol <unk> ; Waters and Milstead were the same age and from the same neighborhood , and both embraced Baltimore 's countercultural and underground elements . Along with friends like Waters and Lochary , Milstead began hanging out at a beatnik bar in downtown Baltimore named <unk> 's , where they associated with hippies and smoked marijuana , bonding into what Waters described as " a family of sorts " . Waters gave his friends new nicknames , and it was he who first called Milstead " Divine " . Waters later remarked that he had borrowed the name from a character in Jean Genet 's novel Our Lady of the Flowers ( 1943 ) , a controversial book about homosexuals living on the margins of Parisian society , which Waters – himself a homosexual – was reading at the time . Waters also introduced Divine as " the most beautiful woman in the world , almost " , a description widely repeated in ensuing years . 
 Waters was an aspiring filmmaker , intent on making " the trashiest motion pictures in cinema history " . Many of his friends , a group which came to be known as " the Dreamlanders " ( and who included Divine , Lochary , Mary Vivian Pearce and Mink Stole ) , appeared in some of his low @-@ budget productions , filmed on Sunday afternoons . Following the production of his first short film , Hag in a Black Leather Jacket ( 1964 ) , Waters began production of a second work , Roman Candles ( 1966 ) . This film was influenced by the pop artist Andy Warhol 's Chelsea Girls ( 1966 ) , and consisted of three 8 @-@ millimeter movies played simultaneously side by side . Roman Candles was the first film to star Divine , in this instance in drag as a smoking nun . It featured the Dreamlanders modeling shoplifted clothes and performing various unrelated activities . Being both a short film and of an avant @-@ garde nature , Roman Candles never received widespread distribution , instead holding its premier at the annual Mt . Vernon Flower Mart in Baltimore , which had become popular with " elderly dames , young faggots and hustlers , and of course a whole bunch of hippies " . Waters went on to screen it at several local venues alongside Kenneth Anger 's short film Eaux d <unk> ( 1953 ) . 
 Waters followed Roman Candles with a third short film , Eat Your Makeup ( 1968 ) , in which Divine once more wore drag , this time to portray a fictionalized version of Jackie Kennedy , the widow of recently assassinated U.S. President John F. Kennedy . In the film , she turns to kidnapping models and forcing them to eat their own makeup . Divine kept his involvement with Waters and these early underground films a secret from his conservative parents , believing that they would not understand them or the reason for his involvement in such controversial and bad @-@ taste films ; they would not find out about them for many years . Divine 's parents had bought him his own beauty shop in Towson , hoping that the financial responsibility would help him to settle down in life and stop spending so extravagantly . While agreeing to work there , he refused to be involved in owning and managing the establishment , leaving that to his mother . Not long after , in the summer of 1968 , he moved out of his parental home , renting his own apartment . 
 = = = The Diane Linkletter Story , Mondo Trasho and Multiple Maniacs : 1969 – 70 = = = 
 Divine appeared in Waters 's next short film , The Diane Linkletter Story ( 1969 ) , which was initially designed to be a test for a new sound camera . A black comedy that carried on in Waters 's tradition of making " bad taste " films to shock conventional American society , The Diane Linkletter Story was based upon the true story of Diane Linkletter , the daughter of media personality Art Linkletter , who had committed suicide earlier that year . Her death had led to a flurry of media interest and speculation , with various sources erroneously claiming that she had done so under the influence of the psychedelic LSD . Waters 's dramatized version starred Divine in the leading role as the teenager who rebels against her conservative parents after they try to break up her relationship with hippie boyfriend Jim , before consuming a large quantity of LSD and committing suicide . Although screened at the first Baltimore Film Festival , the film was not publicly released at the time , largely for legal reasons . 
 Soon after the production of The Diane Linkletter Story , Waters began filming a full @-@ length motion picture , Mondo Trasho , starring Divine as one of the main characters , an unnamed blonde woman who drives around town and runs over a hitchhiker . In one scene , an actor was required to walk along a street naked , which was a crime in the state of Maryland at the time , leading to the arrest of Waters and most of the actors associated with the film ; Divine escaped , having speedily driven away from the police when they arrived to carry out the arrests . In their review of the film , the Los Angeles Free Press exclaimed that " The 300 @-@ pound ( 140 kg ) sex @-@ symbol Divine is undoubtedly some sort of discovery . " 
 In 1970 , Divine abandoned work as a hairdresser , opening up a vintage clothing store in Provincetown , Massachusetts using his parents ' money . Opening in 1970 as " Divine Trash " , the store sold items that Divine had purchased in thrift stores , flea markets and garage sales , although it had to move from its original location after he had failed to obtain a license from the local authorities . Realizing that this venture was not financially viable , Divine sold off his stock at very low prices . In the hope of raising some extra money , he sold the furniture of his rented , furnished apartment , leading the landlady to put out a warrant for his arrest . He evaded the local police by traveling to San Francisco , California , a city which had a large gay subculture that attracted Divine , who was then embracing his homosexuality . 
 In 1970 , Divine played the role of Lady Divine , the operator of an exhibit known as The Cavalcade of Perversion who turns to murdering visitors in Waters 's film Multiple Maniacs . The film contained several controversial scenes , notably one which involved Lady Divine masturbating using a rosary while sitting inside a church . In another , Lady Divine kills her boyfriend and proceeds to eat his heart ; in actuality , Divine bit into a cow 's heart which had gone rotten from being left out on the set all day . At the end of the film , Lady Divine is raped by a giant lobster named <unk> , an act that drives her into madness ; she subsequently goes on a killing spree in Fell 's Point before being shot down by the National Guard . Due to its controversial nature , Waters feared that the film would be banned and confiscated by the Maryland Censor Board , so avoided their jurisdiction by only screening it at non @-@ commercial venues , namely rented church premises . Multiple Maniacs was the first of Waters 's films to receive widespread attention , as did Divine ; <unk> remarked that " Divine is incredible ! Could start a whole new trend in films . " 
 = = Rise to fame = = 
 = = = Pink Flamingos : 1971 – 72 = = = 
 Following his San Francisco sojourn , Divine returned to Baltimore and participated in Waters 's next film Pink Flamingos . Designed by Waters to be " an exercise in poor taste , " the film featured Divine as Babs Johnson , a woman who claims to be " the filthiest person alive " and who is forced to prove her right to the title from challengers , Connie ( Mink Stole ) and Raymond Marble ( David Lochary ) . In one scene , the Marbles send Babs a turd in a box as a birthday present , and in order to enact this scene , Divine defecated into the box the night before . Filmed in a hippie commune in Phoenix , Maryland , the cast members spent much of the time smoking cigarettes and marijuana and taking amphetamines , although all of the scenes had been heavily rehearsed beforehand . The final scene in the film proved particularly infamous , involving Babs eating fresh dog feces ; Divine later told a reporter , " I followed that dog around for three hours just zooming in on its asshole , " waiting for it to empty its bowels so that they could film the scene . The scene became one of the most notable moments of Divine 's acting career , and he later complained of people thinking that " I run around doing it all the time . I 've received boxes of dog shit – plastic dog shit . I have gone to parties where people just sit around and talk about dog shit because they think it 's what I want to talk about . " In reality , he remarked , he was not a coprophile but only ate excrement that one time because it was in the script . 
 The film premiered in late 1972 at the third Annual Baltimore Film Festival , held on the campus of the University of Baltimore , where it sold out tickets for three successive screenings ; the film aroused particular interest among underground cinema fans following the success of Multiple Maniacs , which had begun to be screened in New York City , Philadelphia , and San Francisco . Being picked up by the small independent company New Line Cinema , Pink Flamingos was distributed to Ben Barenholtz , the owner of the Elgin Theater in New York City . At the Elgin Theater , Barenholtz had been promoting the midnight movie scene , primarily by screening Alejandro Jodorowsky 's acid western film El Topo ( 1970 ) . Barenholtz felt that being of an avant @-@ garde nature , Pink Flamingos would fit in well with this crowd , screening it at midnight on Friday and Saturday nights . The film soon gained a cult following at the Elgin Theatre . Barenholtz characterized its early fans as primarily being " downtown gay people , more of the hipper set , " but after a while he noted that this group broadened , with the film becoming popular with " working @-@ class kids from New Jersey who would become a little rowdy " . Many of these cult cinema fans learned all of the film 's lines , reciting them at the screenings , a phenomenon which became associated with another popular midnight movie of the era , The Rocky Horror Picture Show ( 1975 ) . 
 While keeping his involvement with Waters 's underground filmmaking a secret from his parents , Divine continued relying on them financially , charging them for expensive parties that he held and writing bad checks . After charging them for a major repair to his car in 1972 , his parents confiscated it from him and told him that they would not continue to financially support him in such a manner . In retaliation , he came by their house the following day , collected his two pet dogs and then disappeared , not seeing or speaking with them for the next nine years . Instead , he sent them over fifty postcards from across the world , informing them that he was fine , but on none did he leave a return address . Frances and Harris Milstead retired soon after and moved to Florida at the advice of Harris 's doctor , who prescribed the southern state 's warmer weather as being beneficial for Harris 's muscular dystrophy . 
 = = = Theater work and Female Trouble : 1973 – 78 = = = 
 When the filming of Pink Flamingos finished , Divine returned to San Francisco , where he and Mink Stole starred in a number of small @-@ budget plays at the Palace Theater as part of drag troupe The Cockettes , including Divine and Her <unk> Studs , Divine Saves the World , Vice Palace , Journey to the Center of Uranus and The Heartbreak of Psoriasis . It was here that he first met androgynous performer Sylvester . Divine purchased a house in Santa Monica , which he furnished to his expensive tastes . On visits to Washington D.C. during the early 1970s , Divine and Waters attended the city 's balls that were frequented by LGBT African @-@ Americans . Here , Waters encouraged Divine 's drag persona to become more outrageous , exposing her overweight stomach and carrying weapons . He later commented that he wanted Divine to become " the Godzilla of drag queens " , a direct confrontation with the majority of Euro @-@ American drag queens who wanted to be Miss America . In his private life , Divine became the godfather of Brook Yeaton , the son of his friends Chuck Yeaton and Pat Moran ; Brook and Divine remained very close until Divine 's death . 
 In 1974 , Divine returned to Baltimore to film Waters 's next motion picture , Female Trouble , in which he played the lead role . Divine 's character , teenage delinquent Dawn Davenport , embraces the idea that crime is art and is eventually executed in the electric chair for her violent behavior . Waters claimed that the character of Dawn had been partly based on the mutual friend who had introduced him to Divine , Carol <unk> , while the costumes and make @-@ up were once more designed by Van Smith to create the desired " trashy , slutty look . " In the film , Divine did his own stunts , including the trampoline scene , for which he had to undertake a number of trampolining lessons . Divine also played his first on @-@ screen male role in the film , Earl Peterson , and Waters included a scene during which these two characters had sexual intercourse as a joke on the fact that both characters were played by the same actor . Female Trouble proved to be Divine 's favorite of his films , because it both allowed him to develop his character and to finally play a male role , something he had always felt important because he feared being typecast as a female impersonator . Divine was also responsible for singing the theme tune for Female Trouble , although it was never released as a single . Divine remained proud of the film , although it received a mixed critical reception . 
 In 1977 , Divine co @-@ starred in the revue Restless Underwear , alongside Canadian rock band Rough Trade , which played at Massey Hall in Toronto . In 1980 , the revue appeared at the Beacon Theater on Manhattan 's Upper West Side . Bernard Jay , Divine 's manager , said that it was a " gigantic disaster , " as Divine did not have as large a part in the revue as audience members expected . 
 Divine was unable to appear in Waters 's next feature , Desperate Living ( 1977 ) , despite the fact that the role of Mole McHenry had been written for him . This was because he had returned to working in the theater , this time taking the role of the scheming prison matron Pauline in Tom Eyen 's comedy Women Behind Bars . Performed in New York City 's Truck and Warehouse Theater , the play proved popular and was later taken to London 's Whitehall Theater next to Trafalgar Square . Containing a new cast , it proved less successful than it had in New York . It was in this city that Divine met a group of people whom he would come to know as his " London family " : fashion designer Zandra Rhodes , photographer Robyn <unk> , sculptor Andrew Logan and the latter 's partner , Michael Davis . While in London in 1978 , Divine attended as the guest of honour at the seventh annual Alternative Miss World pageant , a mock event founded by Logan in 1972 in which drag queens – including men , women and children – competed for the prize . The event was filmed by director Richard Gayer , whose subsequent film , entitled Alternative Miss World , premiered at the Odeon in London 's Leicester Square as well as featuring at the Cannes Film Festival , both events which were attended by Divine . 
 Impressed with Divine 's performance in Women Behind Bars , playwright Tom Eyen decided to write a new play that would feature him in a starring role . The result was The Neon Woman , a story set in 1962 featuring Divine as Flash Storm , the female owner of a Baltimore strip club . It played at the Hurrah ! club in New York City before moving on to the Alcazar Theatre in San Francisco . Divine would remain very proud of the work , seeing it as evidence that his acting skills were coming to wider recognition , and his performances were attended by such celebrities as Eartha Kitt , Elton John and Liza Minnelli . It was during the New York leg of the play 's tour that Divine befriended Jay Bennett ; they subsequently began renting an apartment together on 58th Street . In the city , Divine assembled a group of friends that came to be known as his " New York family " : designer Larry <unk> , makeup artist Conrad Santiago , Vincent <unk> and dresser Frankie Piazza . While there , he frequented the famous club Studio 54 , having a love of partying and club culture . 
 = = = Early disco work and Polyester : 1979 – 83 = = = 
 Divine eventually decided to abandon his agent , Robert <unk> , and replace him with his English friend Bernard Jay . Jay suggested that with his love of clubs , Divine could obtain work performing in them ; as a result , Divine first appeared in 1979 at a gay club in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , where his unscripted act included shouting " fuck you " repeatedly at the audience and then getting into a fight with another drag queen , a gimmick that proved popular with the club 's clientele . Subsequently , he saw the commercial potential of including disco songs in with his act and , with Tom Eyen and composer Henry Krieger , created " Born to be Cheap " in 1981 . In 1981 Divine appeared in John Waters 's next film , Polyester , starring as Francine <unk> . Unlike earlier roles , <unk> was not a strong female but a meek and victimized woman who falls in love with her dream lover , Todd Tomorrow , played by Tab Hunter . In real life , tabloid publications claimed a romantic connection between them , an assertion both denied . The film was released in " <unk> , " accompanied by " scratch ' n ' sniff " cards for the audience to smell at key points in the film . Soon after Polyester , Divine auditioned for a male role in Ridley Scott 's upcoming science @-@ fiction film Blade Runner . Even though Scott thought Divine unsuitable for the part , he claimed to be enthusiastic about Divine 's work and was very interested in including him in another of his films , but ultimately this never came about . 
 That same year , Divine decided to get back in contact with his estranged parents . His mother had learned of his cinematic and disco career after reading an article about the films of John Waters in Life magazine , and had gone to see Female Trouble at the cinema , but had not felt emotionally able to get back in contact with her son until 1981 . She got a friend to hand Divine a note at one of his concerts , leading Divine to telephone her , and the family was subsequently reunited . The relationship was mended , and Divine bought them lavish gifts and informed them of how wealthy he was . In fact , according to his manager Bernard Jay , he was already heavily in debt due to his extravagant spending . In 1982 , he then joined forces with young American composer Bobby Orlando , who wrote a number of Hi @-@ NRG singles for Divine , including " Native Love ( Step By Step ) , " " Shoot Your Shot " , and " Love Reaction " . To help publicize these singles , which proved to be successful in many discos across the world , Divine went on television shows like Good Morning America , as well as on a series of tours in which he combined his musical performances with comedic stunts and routines that often played up to his characters ' stereotype of being " trashy " and outrageous . Throughout the rest of the 1980s , Divine took his musical performances on tour across the world , attaining a particularly large following in Europe . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Later disco work , Lust in the Dust and Hairspray : 1984 – 88 = = = 
 Divine 's career as a disco singer continued and his records had sold well , but he and his management felt that they were not receiving their share of the profits . They went to court against Orlando and his company , O @-@ Records , and successfully nullified their contract . After signing with Barry <unk> 's company , <unk> Music Limited , Divine released several new disco records , including " You Think You 're A Man " and " I 'm So Beautiful " , which were both co @-@ produced by Pete Waterman of the then @-@ up @-@ and @-@ coming UK production team of Stock Aitken Waterman . In the United Kingdom , Divine sang his hit " You Think You 're A Man " – a song which he had dedicated to his parents – on BBC television show Top of the Pops . He gained a devout follower , Briton Mitch Whitehead , a man who would declare himself to be Divine 's " number 1 fan " , tattooing himself with images of his idol and eventually aiding Bernard Jay in setting up for Divine 's show onstage . In London , Divine also befriended drag comedy act Paul O 'Grady , with Jay helping O 'Grady obtain his first bookings in the U.S. 
 The next Divine film , Lust in the Dust ( 1985 ) , reunited him with Tab Hunter and was Divine 's first film not directed by John Waters . Set in the Wild West during the nineteenth century , the movie was a sex comedy that starred Divine as Rosie Velez , a promiscuous woman who works as a singer in saloons and competes for the love of Abel Wood ( Tab Hunter ) against another woman . A parody of the 1946 western Duel in the Sun , the film was a moderate critical success , with Divine receiving praise from a number of reviewers . Divine followed this production with a very different role , that of gay male gangster Hilly Blue in Trouble in Mind ( 1985 ) . The script was written with Divine in mind . Although not a major character in the film , Divine had been eager to play the part because he wished to perform in more male roles and leave behind the stereotype of simply being a female impersonator . Reviews of the film were mixed , as were the evaluations of Divine 's performance . 
 After finishing his work on Trouble in Mind , Divine again became involved with a John Waters project , the film Hairspray ( 1988 ) . Set in Baltimore during the 1960s , Hairspray revolved around self @-@ proclaimed " pleasantly plump " teenager Tracy Turnblad as she pursues stardom as a dancer on a local television show and rallies against racial segregation . As he had in Waters 's earlier film Female Trouble , Divine took on two roles in the film , one of which was male and the other female . The first of these , Edna Turnblad , was Tracy 's loving mother ; Divine would later note that with this character he could not be accurately described as a drag queen , proclaiming " What drag queen would allow herself to look like this ? I look like half the women from Baltimore . " His second character in the film was that of the racist television station owner Arvin <unk> . In one interview , Divine admitted that he had hoped to play both the role of mother and daughter in Hairspray , but that the producers had been " a bit leery " and chose Ricki Lake for the latter role instead . Divine went on to state his opinion on Lake , jokingly telling the interviewer that " She is nineteen and delightful . I hate her . " In reality they had become good friends while working together on set . Reviews of the film were predominantly positive , with Divine in particular being singled out for praise ; several commentators expressed their opinion that the film marked Divine 's breakthrough into mainstream cinema . He subsequently took his mother to the film 's premier in the Miami Film Festival before she once more accompanied him to the Baltimore premier , this time also with several of his other relatives . After the screening , a party was held at the Baltimore Museum of Art , where Frances Milstead granted an impromptu interview to the English film critic Jonathan Ross , a friend and fan of Divine 's . 
 Divine 's final film role was in the low @-@ budget comedy horror Out of the Dark , produced with the same crew as Lust in the Dust . Appearing in only one scene within the film , he played the character of Detective Langella , a foulmouthed policeman investigating the murders of a killer clown . Out of the Dark would be released the year after Divine 's death . Divine was also originally cast as an airplane passenger in the film Freddy 's Dead : The Final Nightmare , but died before the film was in production . Divine had become a well @-@ known celebrity throughout the 1980s , appearing on American television chat shows such as Late Night with David Letterman , Thicke of the Night , and The Merv Griffin Show to promote both his music and his film appearances . Divine @-@ themed merchandise was produced , including greeting cards and The Simply Divine Cut @-@ Out Doll Book . Portraits of Divine were painted by several famous artists , including David Hockney and Andy Warhol , both of whom were known for their works which dealt with popular culture . 
 = = = Death : 1988 = = = 
 On March 7 , 1988 , three weeks after Hairspray was released nationwide , Divine was staying at the Regency Plaza Suites Hotel in Los Angeles . He was scheduled to film a guest appearance the following day as Uncle Otto on the Fox network 's television series Married ... with Children in the second season wrap @-@ up episode . After spending all day at Sunset Gower Studios for rehearsals , Divine returned to his hotel that evening , where he dined with friends at the hotel restaurant before returning to his room . Shortly before midnight , he died in his sleep , at age 42 , of an enlarged heart . His corpse was discovered by Bernard Jay the following morning , who then sat with the body for the next six hours , alongside three of Divine 's other friends . They contacted Thomas Noguchi , the Chief Coroner for the County of Los Angeles , who arranged for removal of the body ; Divine 's friends were able to prevent the press from taking any photographs of the body as it was being carried out of the hotel . 
 Divine 's body was flown back to Maryland and taken to Ruck 's Funeral Home in Towson , where a coffin was obtained for him . The funeral took place at Prospect Hill Cemetery , where a crowd of hundreds had assembled to pay their respects . The ceremony was conducted by the Reverend Higgenbotham , who had baptized Divine into the Christian faith many years before . John Waters gave a speech and was one of the pallbearers who then carried the coffin to its final resting place , next to the grave of Divine 's grandmother . Many flowers were left at the grave , including a wreath sent by actress Whoopi Goldberg , which bore the remark " See what happens when you get good reviews . " Following the funeral , a tribute was held at the Baltimore Governor 's Mansion . In the ensuing weeks , the Internal Revenue Service confiscated many of Divine 's possessions and auctioned them off , as restitution for unpaid taxes . 
 = = Drag persona and performance = = 
 After developing a name for himself as a female impersonator known for " trashy " behavior in his early John Waters films , Divine capitalized on this image by appearing at his musical performances in his drag persona . In this role , he was described by his manager Bernard Jay , as displaying " Trash . Filth . Obscenity . In bucket @-@ loads " . Divine described his stage performances as " just good , dirty fun , and if you find it offensive , honey , don 't join in . " As a part of his performance , he constantly swore at the audience , often using his signature line of " fuck you very much " , and at times got audience members to come onstage , where he would fondle their buttocks , groins , and breasts . Divine and his stage act proved particularly popular among gay audiences , and he appeared at some of the world 's biggest gay clubs , such as Central London 's Heaven . According to Divine 's manager Bernard Jay , this was not because Divine himself was gay , but because the gay community " openly and proudly identified with the determination of the female character Divine " . 
 Divine became increasingly known for outlandish stunts onstage , each time trying to outdo what he had done before . At one performance in London 's Hippodrome coinciding with American Independence Day , Divine rose up from the floor on a hydraulic lift , draped in the American flag , and declared : " I 'm here representing Freedom , Liberty , Family Values , and the fucking American Way of Life . " When he performed at the London Gay Pride parade , he sang on the roof of a hired pleasure boat that floated down the Thames past Jubilee Gardens . At a performance Divine gave at the Hippodrome in the last year of his life , he appeared onstage riding an infant elephant which had been hired for the occasion . Divine was nevertheless not happy with being known primarily for his drag act , and told an interviewer that " my favorite part of drag is getting out of it . Drag is my work clothes . I only put it on when someone pays me to " , a view he echoed to his friends . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 During his childhood and adolescence , Divine was called " Glenn " by his friends and family ; as an adult , he used the stage name " Divine " as his personal name , telling one interviewer that both " Divine " and " Glenn Milstead " were " both just names . Glenn is the name I was brought up with , Divine is the name I 've been using for the past 23 years . I guess it 's always Glenn and it 's always Divine . Do you mean the character Divine or the person Divine ? You see , it gets very complicated . There 's the Divine you 're talking to now and there 's the character Divine , which is just something I do to make a living . She doesn 't really exist at all . " At one point he had the name " Divine " officially recognized , as it appeared on his passport , and in keeping with his personal use of the name , his close friends nicknamed him " <unk> " . 
 Divine considered himself to be male , and was not transgender or transsexual . He was gay , and during the 1980s had an extended relationship with a married man named Lee , who accompanied him almost everywhere that he went . They later separated , and Divine went on to have a brief affair with gay porn star Leo Ford , which was widely reported upon by the gay press . According to his manager Bernard Jay , Divine regularly engaged in sexual activities with young men that he would meet while on tour , sometimes becoming infatuated with them ; in one case , he met a young man in Israel whom he wanted to bring back to the United States , but was prevented from doing so by Jay . This image of promiscuity was disputed by his friend Anne <unk> , who claimed that Divine never exhibited such behavior when on tour . Divine initially avoided informing the media about his sexuality , even when questioned by interviewers , and would sometimes hint that he was bisexual , but in the latter part of the 1980s changed this attitude and began being open about his homosexuality . Nonetheless , he avoided discussing gay rights , partially at the advice of his manager , realizing that it would have had a negative effect on his career . 
 Divine 's mother , Frances Milstead , remarked that while Divine " was blessed with many talents and abilities , he could be very moody and demanding . " She noted that while he was " incredibly kind and generous " , he always wanted to get things done the way that he wanted , and would " tune you out if you displeased him . " She noted that in most interviews , he came across as " a very shy and private person " . Divine 's Dutch friends gave him two bulldogs in the early 1980s , on which he doted , naming them Beatrix and Claus after Queen Beatrix and her husband Prince Claus of the Netherlands . On numerous occasions he would have his photograph taken with them and sometimes use these images for record covers and posters . Divine suffered from problems with obesity from childhood , caused by his love of food , and in later life his hunger was increased by his daily use of marijuana , an addiction that he publicly admitted to . According to Bernard Jay , in Divine 's final years , when his disco career was coming to an end and he was struggling to find acting jobs , he felt suicidal and threatened to kill himself on several occasions . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 The New York Times said of Milstead 's 1980s films : " Those who could get past the unremitting weirdness of Divine 's performance discovered that the actor / actress had genuine talent , including a natural sense of comic timing and an uncanny gift for slapstick . " In a letter to the newspaper , Paul <unk> described him as " one of the few truly radical and essential artists of the century ... [ who ] was an audacious symbol of man 's quest for liberty and freedom . " People magazine described him as " the Goddess of Gross , the Punk Elephant , the Big Bad Mama of the Midnight Movies ... [ and ] a Miss Piggy for the blissfully depraved . " Following his death , fans of Divine visited Prospect Hill Cemetery to pay their respects . In what has become a tradition , fans have been known to leave makeup , food , and graffiti on his grave in memoriam ; Waters claims that some fans have sexual intercourse on his grave , which he believes Divine would love . 
 Divine has left an influence on a number of musicians . During the mid @-@ 1980s , the androgynous performer Sylvester decorated the powder room of his San Francisco home with Divine memorabilia . Anohni of the band Antony and the Johnsons wrote a song about Divine which was included in the group 's self @-@ titled debut album , released in 1998 . The song , titled " Divine , " was an ode to the actor , who was one of Anohni 's lifelong heroes . Her admiration is expressed in the lines : " He was my self @-@ determined guru " and " I turn to think of you / Who walked the way with so much pain / Who holds the mirror up to fools . " In 2008 , Irish electronic singer Róisín Murphy paid homage to Divine in the music video for her song " Movie Star " by reenacting the attack by <unk> from Multiple Maniacs . 
 Divine was an inspiration for Ursula the Sea Witch , the villain in the 1989 Disney animated film The Little Mermaid . Due to Divine 's portrayal of Edna Turnblad in the original comedy @-@ film version of Hairspray , later musical adaptations of Hairspray have commonly placed male actors in the role of Edna , including Harvey Fierstein and others in the 2002 Broadway musical , and John Travolta in the 2007 musical film . A 12 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) tall statue in the likeness of Divine by Andrew Logan can be seen on permanent display at The American Visionary Art Museum in Divine 's hometown of Baltimore . I Am Divine , a feature documentary on the life of Divine , was premiered at the 2013 South by Southwest film festival , and had its Baltimore premiere within Maryland Film Festival . It is produced and directed by Jeffrey Schwarz of the Los Angeles @-@ based production company <unk> Pictures . In August 2015 , a play based on the final day of Divine 's life , Divine / Intervention , was performed at the New York Fringe Festival . 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 Divine 's manager and friend Bernard Jay wrote a book titled Not Simply Divine ! , published in 1992 by Virgin Books . Admitting that he was " immensely proud " of Divine and the cause which he " strived for " , Jay noted in the book 's introduction that he wrote the work because he felt that Divine deserved a " memorial " that would act as a " record for posterity " . He insisted that Not Simply Divine ! was " not the bitter revenge of an unappreciated manager , eager now to get his share of his praise " , but that equally it was not " a gushing homage " designed to paint Divine as " both saintly and legendary . " He expressed his hope that the book shines light on the " shades of grey " between the man and his female persona , portraying a " warts and all " picture . The book was criticized by Divine 's mother , Frances Milstead , who accused Jay of writing a " mean @-@ spirited " work that provided an incorrect image of her son . Not Simply Divine ! was also criticised by Divine 's friend Greg Gorman , who remarked that , " there was so much hostility and so much <unk> in the way Divine was portrayed in the book , that it was just 180 degrees from who he was . " 
 Frances Milstead subsequently cowrote her own book about Divine , entitled My Son Divine , with Kevin Heffernan and Steve Yeager , which was published by Alyson Books in 2001 . His mother 's continued relationship with the gay community was later documented in a film Frances : A Mother Divine ( 2010 ) , directed by Tim Dunn and Michael O 'Quinn . Postcards From Divine , a book composed of over 50 postcards Divine sent to his parents while traveling the world between 1977 and 1987 , was released by the Divine estate on November 5 , 2011 . Postcards From Divine also includes quotes and stories from his friends and colleagues , including Waters , Mink Stole , Mary Vivian Pearce , Channing <unk> , Susan Lowe , Jean Hill , Tab Hunter , Lainie Kazan , Alan J. Wendl , Ruth Brown , Deborah Harry , Jerry Stiller , Ricki Lake , Silvio Gigante and others . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = CD reissues = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Wildlife ( La Dispute album ) = 
 Wildlife is the second studio album by American post @-@ hardcore band La Dispute , released October 4 , 2011 , on independent label No Sleep Records . Recording sessions for the album took place primarily at <unk> in New York in April 2011 . The band members took control of all of the production duties alongside the album 's recording engineers , Andrew Everding and Joseph Pedulla . Wildlife was their last release on No Sleep Records before forming their own record label , Better Living . 
 Noted by music writers for its varied elements , Wildlife incorporates musical components from La Dispute 's previous releases , particularly Somewhere at the Bottom of the River Between Vega and Altair and Here , Hear III . , and genres such as screamo , progressive rock and post @-@ rock . The album features lyrical themes that – while making several references to the band 's home town of Grand Rapids – focus on personal loss , anger , and despair and , in the vision of the band , is a collection of unpublished " short stories " from a hypothetical author , complete with the author ’ s notes and sectioned thematically by the use of four monologues . 
 The album debuted at number 135 on the US Billboard 200 chart , selling 3 @,@ 140 copies in its first week . It spent one week on the chart and charted only in the United States . Prior to its release , Wildlife was promoted with two singles , " Harder Harmonies " and " The Most Beautiful Bitter Fruit " . The album was well received by critics , who mainly praised its conceptual lyrics and more melodic approach to the band 's style . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 The writing of the album did not start until a year after La Dispute 's debut album , Somewhere at the Bottom of the River Between Vega and Altair , was released . Part of the reason for the delay was the band 's continuous touring and promotion of the debut across the United States and Canada , with rare tour and festival appearances in Europe and Australia . When commenting on the delay between the band 's album releases , singer Jordan Dreyer said he and the rest of the band members require " an absurdly long gestation period with these types of things and then we have to really sit down and be as meticulous as we all want to be " . The band decided to use lyrical elements that they had intended to use in the first album but that were not included because they did not seem fully developed at the time . While writing La Dispute , the band had very specific goals ; they projected the album to have 14 tracks and knew exactly what they wanted from each song . 
 La Dispute wrote and recorded Wildlife in pieces to accommodate their intense tour schedule . The album was recorded at two different studios with recording engineers Andrew Everding and Joe Pedulla . They started with the instrumentation of six tracks at <unk> Studios in Chicago ; this recording process took place over two weeks . The songwriting featured on the album is distinct from La Dispute 's previous releases . Dreyer wrote the stories or the concepts behind each song , and then the band adapted these stories into lyrics and created music to revolve around them . In an interview , Dreyer was asked how the songwriting differs ; he said that the lyrics were written before the music was composed . He was quoted as saying : " This time around , we switched the process up entirely . Previous to Wildlife , we 'd always start music first and add vocals later based on the way the song felt . This time around , because we had a more concrete concept going into it , and because we wanted to work even more as a single unit [ ... ] " Dreyer and the rest of La Dispute had expressed interest in writing a conceptual record , but with ambiguity so it would not limit the listener 's experience . " Oftentimes , I think records with a linear narrative narrow the ways in which a person can enjoy it , and not everyone wants to sit down and listen to something front to back . " When they returned from their touring in Australia in February 2011 they " dropped off the face of the earth " for two months , during which their writing sessions lasted twelve to fourteen hours a day . 
 La Dispute recorded the remainder of the album in a month in <unk> in New York City in April 2011 . Dreyer wanted to give the album the most organic feel possible by using no artificial reverb or studio techniques that would give the album a synthesized quality . Joe Pedulla stated that he wanted to give the album a more raw and authentic sound : " We were just trying to capture what it would be like for an audience member sitting and listening to a guitar in a room . " He also credited Dreyer 's vocal range : " Jordan Dreyer has this crazy dynamic range – a <unk> swing from how loud and quiet he gets . So there are some vocal parts with no resonance at all , where he 's speaking / singing softly , the room is not echoing , and he sounds close and in @-@ your @-@ face . Then the dynamic swing happens , and we would see how big it can get . " When recording vocals , Dreyer makes very long takes , trying to emulate the sound of his voice in live performances . The album 's recording features what the band considers " auxiliary instrumentation " , including trumpet and rhodes piano , and even improvised instruments that <unk> 's brother created out of scrap metal . 
 = = Title and packaging = = 
 The title Wildlife is not derived from lyrics from the album , but from themes that connect the songs . Dreyer regards wildlife as " an all @-@ encompassing word to sum everything up " , and he has said that " we all witness tragedy and change . It 's the summation of our existence . " On the inside of the album cover the words " To – for everything " are written as a dedication with a word being crossed out . It has been speculated by some that the word is the name ' Helen ' . Drummer Brad Vander Lugt when asked about the dedication replied " That ’ s Jordan ’ s story to tell , and not mine . [ ... ] It does have significance to a story he is telling . You will probably hear a little bit more about that in future work , Jordan has been known to continue stories or themes onto future albums . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music on Wildlife , akin to the band 's first album , incorporates elements of post @-@ hardcore , screamo , progressive rock and post @-@ rock , described as having " bluesy quirks and experimental touches " by Alex Reeves of The 1st Five . Compared with the first album , Wildlife has melodic tendencies and a more synchronized approach to musicianship and vocals , with fewer unusual time signatures and more emphasis on chord progressions . There is less hardcore punk @-@ style screaming , but as in the band 's earlier work , the vocal style alternates between singing and speaking . The song structures are often unconventional . Wildlife utilizes instrumental passages to complement the lyrics ; Reeves described it by saying that " the music expertly builds tension , creating a sense of visceral emotion and releasing this tension in a well @-@ timed burst " . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Dreyer had always stated that the band 's second album would feature " a lot of storytelling " , " a lot of groove " , and " a more of an organic feel " than their debut album . When describing the sound of the album the band wrote that they believe it is " musically more heavy and more soft , more fast and more slow , more complicated and more straight @-@ forward , and I know my band mates would agree , so there isn 't really a thing this record sounds like , at least not that we can hear . " With writer Vladimir Nabokov 's works Pale Fire and Lolita being considered as the " biggest external influence " on Wildlife , the album features dark lyrical themes that focus on personal loss and the anger and despair felt from watching one 's hometown decay , as well as dealing with personal loss , whether it is faith , a friend , or a family member . 
 In the vision of the band the album is a collection of unpublished " short stories " from a hypothetical author , complete with the author 's notes , and sectioned thematically by the use of four monologues . The stories are told in parallel to the author 's own ambiguous loss and struggle , and the lyrics are a combination of Dreyer 's fictional stories and his interactions in life , including true stories from La Dispute 's home town , Grand Rapids . The four monologues in question project the loss and the struggle of the artist with the introduction ' a Departure ' , and the three interludes , ' a Letter ' , ' a Poem ' and ' a Broken Jar ' . The first two monologues of Wildlife were used to " capture a general feeling " . ' a Poem ' and ' a Broken Jar ' are noted for using spoken word and alternative folk @-@ influenced melodies to spark melodramatic feelings . 
 <unk> . Paul Missionary Baptist Church Blues ' focuses on the decaying value of a real life abandoned church in Grand Rapids and how that was a striking contrast to the popularity of other churches . ' Edit Your Hometown ' , has been described as " treading the boundary between melodrama and actual drama " by Ben Patashnik of ' Rock Sound ' . ' The Most Beautiful Bitter Fruit ' deals with the hypothetical author 's sexuality , by exploring and questioning his inability to participate in casual sex . ' King Park ' , a seven @-@ minute ballad , focuses on inner @-@ city gang culture and follows the perspective of an individual who is engrossed by a drive @-@ by shooting ; and also follows how the drive by shooter , plagued by guilt , commits suicide . Dreyer described the true story behind the song : " A year or two ago , down the street from where Brad and I work , a kid was shot . It 's an area that 's been riddled with gang violence , which has been really sad to witness . " ' Edward Benz , 27 Times ' is the story of a father dealing with the pain of being brutally attacked by his schizophrenic son , while " I See Everything " describes parents losing their seven @-@ year @-@ old son to cancer . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Throughout their European tour in August 2011 , La Dispute performed a new song titled " Edit Your Hometown " . Once the tour was finished , La Dispute wrote a blog post titled " Arrivals " that announced the track listing , the album art , and the first single , titled " Harder Harmonies . " It became available to stream on August 23 , 2011 , in conjunction with the album 's announcement . On September 9 the seventh track , " The Most Beautiful Bitter Fruit " was released online to stream . On September 23 , La Dispute uploaded the entire album to stream on their official website and Facebook page . The album was released internationally on October 4 , 2011 . On October 26 , 2011 , Wildlife was released in Germany with German alternative magazine Visions . They promoted the initial release of the album by supporting Thrice 's headline tour across the United States in October and November 2011 . 
 For one day on December 25 , 2011 , La Dispute made all of their discography , including Wildlife , free to download with an opportunity to donate money to <unk> , a Michigan @-@ based , non @-@ profit organization dedicated to supporting students ages 6 to 18 with creative writing and to helping teachers to inspire their students to write . Donations on that day totaled $ 1 @,@ 600 . 
 Throughout 2012 La Dispute went on a series of headline tours that acted as promotion for Wildlife , with tour legs in Europe , Australia and North America . La Dispute 's European tour took place over January and early February with support from Former Thieves . Their Australian tour started four days after their European tour , and instead of having a permanent support band , they had a different line @-@ up every night , composed of local bands . The North American leg of the tour started in late March , lasting into June and had support from Balance and <unk> , Sainthood Reps , and All Get Out . At their shows in the United States in April , the band collaborated with <unk> once again to release 150 limited @-@ edition packets at their shows . These packets included their CD " Conversations " , which <unk> the lyrical themes in Wildlife in depth , along with rare photos , a poster , postcards and other items . In June 2012 , the band made several festival appearances in Europe including Download Festival , Greenfield Festival , Hurricane Festival and Southside Festival , during a short European tour with Hot Water Music . La Dispute planned to do a third European tour with Title Fight and Make Do and Mend in September and October 2012 . 
 As La Dispute have promoted their music on headline tours they have tried to create a play different songs and create a different experience for each live show . They have also used songs after a certain period of time : an example is ' King Park ' , which although was initially considered too emotionally draining for live performances , the band eventually started to play the song live . The band played ' St Paul Missionary Baptist Church Blues ' from Wildlife at its first performance in September 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The album received favorable reviews from critics . Alex Reeves of the The 1st Five gave a positive review of Wildlife favoring its lyrical depth and intimacy , comparing the album 's lyrics to " reading the tear @-@ stained diary of a good friend " . <unk> Cherrie , writing for Allmusic , gave the album a positive three and a half stars out of five and credited the album for its maturity and progression from the band from their debut , saying : " Wildlife is the best of both worlds , serving up the energy and power fans have come to expect from La Dispute , but showing a maturity beyond the band ’ s years . " Joshua Khan on Blare Magazine gave the album a 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 star rating , describing the album 's four monologues as " tormented progressive rock outbursts " and describes the instrumentation as bringing character to the vocals and lyrics . 
 Daniel Roe , writing for <unk> , acknowledged the album 's large stylistic shift from " blistering hardcore punk inspired " musicianship towards simpler chord progressions . Channing Freeman of Sputnikmusic gave an appreciative review of the album while praising its lyrical improvements over the predecessor , describing the album overall as " a wake @-@ up call for post @-@ hardcore bands . " 
 Negative opinions about the album stemmed from its lyrical content . Some critics have said that the serious nature of the lyrics are hard to digest . Others said Dreyer 's lyrics and vocals still overshadow the instrumentation . Alex Andrews of Thrash Hits gave the album a four out of six rating , saying : " The flipside of Dreyer 's imposing presence is that it can be all too easy to let the rest of the band fade into the background . It 's a shame , because for the most part , there are some interesting things happening " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 La Dispute 's record label No Sleep produced 5 @,@ 000 copies for Wildlife 's first pressing , adamant that they would all sell . In the United States the album debuted on the Billboard 200 at number 135 , selling 3 @,@ 140 copies of the album in the first week . Of those copies , 1 @,@ 192 were 7 " vinyl . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In the year of Wildlife 's release it featured in some end @-@ of @-@ year lists , including those by Rock Sound and Kill Your Stereo . Rock Sound placed the album at 19 out of their top 50 , stating " some bands ask for you attention , on Wildlife La Dispute demand it . " The album was also on Kill Your Stereo 's " Staff International top 10 " list , being placed at 7 out of 10 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jordan Dreyer , Brad Vander Lugt , Chad <unk> , Kevin Whittemore and Adam Vass . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 La Dispute 
 Jordan Dreyer — lead vocals , lyrics , percussions 
 Chad <unk> — guitar , synthesizer , percussions , backing vocals , glockenspiel , trumpet 
 Adam Vass — bass , backing vocals , guitar , baritone guitar 
 Kevin Whittemore — guitar 
 Brad Vander Lugt — drums , percussions , keyboards , claps , bells , tambourine , shaker , triangle , chimes , <unk> , box stomps , foot stomps , metal grate , chains , piano 
 Additional liner notes 
 Adam Vass — Album artwork and layout : 
 Andrew Everding , Joseph Pedulla , and La Dispute — Production 
 Joseph Pedulla and Andrew Everding — engineers 
 Keith Parry — Assistant engineer 
 Joseph Pedulla — Mix engineer 
 Ricardo Gutierrez — Mastering engineer 
 = Doug Bentley = 
 Douglas Wagner " Doug " Bentley ( September 3 , 1916 – November 24 , 1972 ) was a Canadian ice hockey left winger who played 13 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Chicago Black Hawks and New York Rangers as part of a senior and professional career that spanned nearly three decades . He was named to four NHL All @-@ Star Teams in his career and was the scoring leader in points and goals in 1942 – 43 and again in goals in 1943 – 44 . 
 Bentley was one of six hockey playing brothers and at one point played with four of his brothers with the Drumheller Miners of the Alberta Senior Hockey League . He made NHL history when he played on the league 's first all @-@ brother line with Max and Reg in 1943 . Injuries forced him out of the NHL in 1951 , but he returned in 1953 – 54 to play one last season for the Rangers with Max . He spent several seasons as a player @-@ coach for the Saskatoon Quakers , leading the team to the Pacific Coast Hockey League championship in 1952 . Bentley was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1964 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bentley was born March 1 , 1916 , in Delisle , Saskatchewan . He was the fifth of six boys and one of thirteen children . His father Bill was a native of Yorkshire , England , who emigrated to the United States as a child and became a speed skating champion in North Dakota before settling in Delisle . He became mayor and helped build the town 's covered skating rink . All of the Bentley children were athletes , and all six brothers played hockey . 
 Bill Bentley believed that all six boys could have played in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , though responsibilities on the family farm resulted in the eldest four boys spending the majority of their careers playing senior hockey on the Canadian Prairies . Doug was a small , slender player , weighing only 145 lbs at the peak of his career , but he was an exceptionally fast skater and his father taught him to use his speed to avoid larger opponents . He learned his trade with his brothers as they constantly played street hockey in the summers and on the ice in the winters . Bentley 's father flooded a sheet of ice that was the length of a regulation NHL hockey rink but much narrower , forcing the boys to develop the ability to maintain control of the puck while making fast , hard turns to reach the net . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Senior hockey = = = 
 Bentley 's early career was spent with several senior teams throughout Saskatchewan . He first played in his hometown of Delisle for the Tigers hockey team in 1932 – 33 before playing a year in Saskatoon , then another in Regina before settling in Moose Jaw for three seasons beginning in 1935 – 36 . He led the South @-@ Saskatchewan Senior Hockey League in scoring in 1936 – 37 with 37 points and added another 14 in the playoffs , also leading the league . In 1937 , Bentley , along with future Hall of Famer Elmer Lach attended the Toronto Maple Leafs training camp ; both were rejected as too small for the National Hockey League . According to Lach , Conn Smythe , manager of the Leafs , saw Bentley and Lach and said “ They were sending me big guys from the West , but instead they ’ ve sent me peanuts . ” He moved to Alberta with brother Reg , and joined elder brothers Max , Wyatt and Roy with the Drumheller Miners of the Alberta Senior Hockey League ( <unk> ) for the 1938 – 39 season . When not playing hockey , Doug helped run a gas station that the family purchased in Drumheller . 
 = = = Chicago Black Hawks = = = 
 The Chicago Black Hawks signed Bentley to a contract in the fall of 1939 . He had previously been placed on the protected list of the Montreal Canadiens , meaning they were the only NHL team eligible to sign him to a contract . They subsequently dealt his NHL rights to the Boston Bruins for Vic Myles . When he and brother Max went to Boston for a tryout camp , Bruins ' owner Art Ross declared them " among the worst amateurs to come to my camp " . However , by the time Chicago signed him , Bentley had established himself as one of the top forwards on the prairies . 
 Bentley appeared in 39 games in his rookie campaign with Chicago , scoring 12 goals and 19 points . His brother Max joined him early in the 1941 – 42 season , and the pair were placed on a line together . After two years of development with the Black Hawks , Bentley emerged as the NHL 's scoring leader in 1942 – 43 with 73 points , a total that tied Cooney Weiland 's NHL record for points in a season . He was the first Black Hawks player to finish as the scoring leader , and finished second in voting for the Hart Trophy as most valuable player . 
 World War II had decimated the rosters of all NHL teams , and with the Black Hawks searching for players , Max and Doug convinced the team to sign their brother Reg . The trio made history on January 1 , 1943 , when they became the first all @-@ brother line the NHL had seen . Two nights later , Max and Doug assisted on Reg 's first , and only , NHL goal . It is the only time in league history that a trio of family members recorded the goal and assists on a scoring play . While Max and Doug were established NHL stars , Reg played only 11 games in his NHL career . 
 In 1943 – 44 , Bentley again led the NHL in goal scoring with 38 , and was named a First Team All @-@ Star at left wing for the second consecutive season . His career was briefly halted in 1944 when , after playing an exhibition game with Chicago in Canada prior to the 1944 – 45 season , Canadian officials refused to allow him to return to the United States . He was given permission by military authorities to return to his family farm for the duration of the war , and signed on to play with the Laura Beavers of the Saskatchewan Intermediate Hockey League . The Beavers went on to win the western Canadian intermediate championship , defeating a team from Canmore , Alberta , to capture the title . 
 Following the war , Bentley returned to the Black Hawks where he was reunited with his brother Max . The brothers and Bill Mosienko formed a line in which each player was small and exceptionally fast ; they were dubbed the " Pony Line " and emerged as one of the top scoring lines in the league . Max led the NHL in scoring with 61 points , while Doug scored 40 points in just 36 games for Chicago . He improved to 55 points in 1946 – 47 and was named a First Team All @-@ Star for the third time . He played in the first All @-@ Star Game on October 13 , 1947 , for the NHL All @-@ Stars , who defeated the Toronto Maple Leafs , 4 – 3 . 
 The Black Hawks , who never iced a strong lineup while Bentley played , made a significant trade early in the 1947 – 48 season . They sent Max Bentley and a prospect to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for five players . The trade shocked Doug . He thought about retiring following the deal but felt he could give Chicago at least one more good season . He gave them several good seasons , finished the following three seasons with 57 , 66 and 52 points respectively , was named to the Second All @-@ Star Team in 1949 , and appeared in four more All @-@ Star Games in 1948 , 1949 , 1950 and 1951 . Chicago 's Herald American newspaper named him the city 's top hockey player of the half @-@ century in 1950 . 
 = = = Saskatoon and New York = = = 
 Injuries , including a pulled groin muscle , plagued Bentley in 1950 – 51 and limited him to 44 games . He played only eight games of the 1951 – 52 NHL season before the Black Hawks allowed him to return to Saskatchewan . He was loaned to the Saskatoon Quakers where he took on the role of player @-@ coach for the Pacific Coast Hockey League ( <unk> ) team . Bentley appeared in 35 regular season games for the Quakers then scored 12 points in 13 games to lead the Quakers to the President 's Cup championship . 
 Bentley remained with Saskatoon in 1952 – 53 , appearing in all 70 league games for the Quakers . Following the season , the New York Rangers lured Bentley back to the NHL , acquiring his brother Max , then purchasing his rights from Chicago . In his first game with the Rangers , he scored a goal and three assists . He played 20 games with the Rangers , scoring 12 points , but returned to Saskatoon to coach the team in their playoffs once the Rangers ' season ended . Bentley continued as Saskatoon 's player @-@ coach until 1955 . 
 In the midst of the 1955 – 56 season , Bentley surprised his team by announcing his resignation as a coach . He initially agreed to continue as a player , but when the team announced as his replacement a player who was formerly subordinate to him as coach , Bentley felt it best to leave to avoid embarrassing his successor . The 39 @-@ year @-@ old Bentley immediately received offers from other Western Hockey League ( WHL ) teams , including the New Westminster Royals . He chose to finish the season with the Brandon Regals . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Bentley did not play during the 1956 – 57 season , as he and Max chose instead to operate a new Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League team in Saskatoon . He first served as the team 's manager , and after briefly playing with the WHL 's Saskatoon / St. Paul Regals in 1957 – 58 , became the head coach of the junior team . He remained in the position until 1961 when he left to become chief scout with the WHL 's Los Angeles Blades for the 1961 – 62 season . 
 He was named an assistant coach midway through the year and even played when injuries forced players out of the lineup . Bentley moved on to become the player @-@ coach of the Long Beach Gulls of the California Hockey League in 1962 – 63 , opposing his brother Max who coached the Burbank Stars . He returned to his Saskatchewan home in 1964 to coach the senior Saskatoon Quakers for one season . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame that same year . He then moved to the Eastern Hockey League 's Knoxville Knights in 1966 – 67 , and finally the Edmonton Nuggets of the Western Canada Senior Hockey League in 1967 – 68 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Throughout the 1950s , Bentley and his brothers played baseball for both their home town of Delisle and the Saskatoon Gems of the Saskatchewan and later Western Canada senior leagues . He played as an outfielder . 
 Bentley and his wife Betty had three daughters and one son . Their son , Doug Jr . , was also a hockey player . Much of Doug Sr. ' s time away from the rink was spent at the family farm near Delisle . The family operated a large farm , raising cattle and growing wheat . Bentley battled cancer in his later life , first requiring surgery in Edmonton in 1969 . A second operation followed in 1970 , but he died of the disease on November 24 , 1972 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Dinesh Karthik = 
 Krishna Kumar Dinesh Karthik ( pronunciation ) ( born 1 June 1985 ) is an Indian wicketkeeper @-@ batsman who made his debut for the Indian cricket team in 2004 and has been a regular member of the team for varying periods since then , including a stint in 2007 as a specialist opening batsman and non @-@ wicket @-@ keeper . Karthik was a batsman in his junior career , but turned to wicket @-@ keeping in order to improve his future prospects . 
 Rising through the junior ranks , Karthik made his first @-@ class debut in late @-@ 2002 for Tamil Nadu as a 17 @-@ year @-@ old , and was dropped in his first season despite his healthy run @-@ scoring because of his problematic glovework . He fought his way back into the team and after playing for India at the 2004 Under @-@ 19 World Cup , made his ODI and Test cricket debut in late @-@ 2004 . 
 Karthik was the regular wicket @-@ keeper in Tests , making rare appearances in ODIs . During this period , Karthik struggled and averaged less than 20 with the bat , and he was replaced as Test wicketkeeper by Mahendra Singh Dhoni , who had been prolific and destructive with the bat in ODIs , in late @-@ 2005 . After donning the mantle of an opener for Tamil Nadu and raising himself to the standard of a specialist batsman at domestic level , he was recalled to the national squad as a batsman in late @-@ 2006 after injuries and form slumps hit other batsmen , playing occasional matches in both forms of cricket on the tour to South Africa , and scoring a half @-@ century in a Test as an opener . Following India 's elimination from the first round of the 2007 Cricket World Cup , the selectors made multiple changes , and Karthik became a non @-@ wicket @-@ keeping opening batsman in the Test team and regularly played ODIs , batting in the middle order . 
 He made his maiden Test century against Bangladesh and then was India 's leading scorer in the Test tour of England , helping India to win their first series in England in 21 years . However , Karthik suffered a form slump in late @-@ 2007 and was dropped from the Test team , and since then has only made sporadic international appearances , although he continues to score heavily in domestic cricket . These have come in occasional appearances as a specialist batsman when other players were rested or injured , or as a wicket @-@ keeper when Dhoni was sidelined . 
 = = Early life = = 
 He was born to a Telugu Naidu ( Kapu ) Family , Karthik began playing cricket at the age of 10 , after a two @-@ year stint living in Kuwait , where his father Krishna Kumar worked . He studied in Indian Public <unk> was taught by his father , a first @-@ division cricketer from Chennai . Disappointed that his own career was hindered when he was forced by his family to put his education first , Karthik 's father did not want his son to suffer the same way , and trained him hard from an early age . Karthik honed his reflexes at this young age by having his father throw hard leather balls at him at high speed . Initially he played in the youth teams for Tamil Nadu as a batsman who was learning to keep wicket , and was regarded by Robin Singh as having very high levels of fitness . 
 Karthik steadily ascended the youth ranks . He made his debut for Tamil Nadu Under @-@ 14s in early @-@ 1999 , and after scoring 78 and 26 in his two interstate matches , was promoted to the Under @-@ 16 team in November , still less than 14 and half years old . After spending the entire 1999 – 2000 season in the Under @-@ 16s , he was promoted to the Under @-@ 19 team at the start of the 2000 – 01 season , aged 15 years and 3 months , despite scoring only 52 runs at 10 @.@ 40 at Under @-@ 16 level and still being eligible for that age group . The selectors ’ decision did not result in increased productivity from Karthik ; he scored 133 runs at 22 @.@ 16 in seven innings with a top @-@ score of 39 , and was demoted back to the Under @-@ 16s in November , and responded immediately with 124 in his first innings against Karnataka . He added two further fifties in the season , including a 99 against Kerala . Karthik ended with 367 runs at 52 @.@ 42 for the season . 
 Karthik regained his position in the Under @-@ 19 team at the start of the following season , which he opened with 150 against Goa . After scoring 314 runs at 46 @.@ 42 in eight matches , he was promoted to the Under @-@ 22 team and made 78 runs at 39 @.@ 00 in five matches . Karthik was rewarded with selection for South Zone , which represents the country ’ s south , in the Under @-@ 19 zonal competition . He was not a success with the bat , scoring 0 , 1 and 2 in his 3 innings . In April 2002 , Karthik was selected to play against the touring Australian Cricket Academy , and scored 125 in the second of two matches . 
 At the start of the rest of the 2002 – 03 season , Karthik began to make an imposing case for senior selection . In his opening match of the season for the Tamil Nadu Under @-@ 19s , he scored 227 in his team ’ s 392 / 7 against Goa , and after making a duck in the first innings against Hyderabad , he hit 126 not out in the second innings . He then registered his third century in four innings , cracking 235 against Andhra Pradesh . His form tapered off and he only made 111 runs in his next six innings , but was nevertheless called up to the senior team to make his first @-@ class debut . 
 = = First @-@ class beginnings = = 
 Karthik made his debut at the first @-@ class level in late @-@ 2002 against Baroda , playing as a wicket @-@ keeper and batting at No. 8 , where he scored 37 . He batted throughout the round @-@ robin phase in five matches , scoring 179 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 80 with a top score of 88 * against Uttar Pradesh in his second match . This innings helped Tamil Nadu to avoid an outright defeat , hanging on for a draw with one wicket in hand . However his form tapered off after this match and he failed to pass 20 again during the season . He took 11 catches , but due to his repeated wicket @-@ keeping errors , he was dropped for the final matches . 
 After being dropped from the senior state team , Karthik was overlooked for the selection in the zonal Duleep Trophy , and played in the Under @-@ 19s for South Zone . He had a more productive time in his second zonal season , scoring 180 runs at 60 @.@ 00 with three half @-@ centuries . He was rewarded with selection in the national Under @-@ 19 team , and played in three youth one day internationals ( ODIs ) against Nepal . He made only 51 runs at 17 @.@ 00 without taking a catch , but India won all their matches with ease . 
 Karthik attended a wicket @-@ keeping camp in the off @-@ season under the guidance of former Indian glove @-@ man and chairman of selectors Kiran More , which he credited for improving his technique . After playing for a period in the Chennai League , he returned to the Under @-@ 22 team at the start of the season , before being selected for India Emerging Players to play their youthful counterparts from Sri Lanka and Pakistan in late @-@ September . He made 50 runs at 16 @.@ 66 and took nine catches in three limited overs matches , and then made 35 , 7 and 77 for the national Under @-@ 19s in some ODIs against the other Asian countries . 
 After these performances , Karthik was recalled to the Ranji Trophy team at the start of the 2003 – 04 season . This time , he accumulated 438 runs with an average of 43 @.@ 80 , with two centuries , and took twenty catches . After opening the batting for much of the round @-@ robin phase , and struggling with only 159 runs at 19 @.@ 87 in four matches , Karthik then played in the zonal Under @-@ 19 one @-@ dayers , managing only 28 runs in four innings . Karthik returned to the middle @-@ order for the semi @-@ final against Railways , scoring his maiden first @-@ class century of 122 to help his team take a first innings lead . He followed this with 48 in the second innings , to help Tamil Nadu progress to the final on the basis of the first innings after Railways held on for a draw still more than 300 runs short of their target . He followed this with an unbeaten 109 in the final against Mumbai . His innings was the mainstay of Tamil Nadu ’ s 294 , but Mumbai made 613 to take a first innings lead . Tamil Nadu made 4 / 393 in the second innings with Karthik not batting , but the first innings lead in the drawn match gave Mumbai the title . Karthik ended with three catches in the innings . However these performances were insufficient to gain regional representation , and he was overlooked for South Zone 's matches in the Duleep Trophy . 
 Karthik was selected in the India squad for the 2004 U @-@ 19 World Cup in Bangladesh , where he scored 70 runs from 39 balls against Sri Lanka . This helped set up a 56 @-@ run win and propelled India into the semi @-@ final , where they were knocked out by Pakistan . Karthik made only seven as India were skittled for 169 . He ended the tournament with 163 runs at 32 @.@ 60 . 
 He then scored two half centuries on an India A tour to Zimbabwe , making 96 and 52 against Zimbabwe Select XI . 
 = = Early international career = = 
 Karthik was selected for his first Indian squad in August 2004 for the ODI team , after the selectors decided to cease using Rahul Dravid as a makeshift wicket @-@ keeper and also due to the poor form of alternative wicket @-@ keeper Parthiv Patel . He played in only one match against England at Lord 's , where he got out after scoring one run . Despite dropping England captain Michael Vaughan from the bowling of Anil Kumble , he eventually stumped Vaughan down the <unk> and took another catch . He played another match in the 2004 ICC Champions Trophy against Kenya , taking three catches as India persisted with Dravid 's wicket @-@ keeping for the majority of the English tour . Karthik was not required to bat as India only lost four wickets in their innings . He was subsequently replaced in the ODI team by Mahendra Singh Dhoni , who took over the gloves from Dravid on a full @-@ time basis ; Karthik did not play another ODI until April 2006 . 
 Karthik his Test debut in the 4th Test between Australia and India in Mumbai , when Parthiv Patel was dropped following a poor run of form with the gloves . He only managed 14 in two innings and two catches , but was praised for his wicket @-@ keeping on a pitch with variable bounce and spin in which 40 wickets fell in two days ’ playing time . Karthik tasted victory immediately as India scraped home by 13 runs . Karthik was retained for India ’ s next engagement , a two @-@ Test home series against South Africa . In a high @-@ scoring draw in which both teams passed 450 in the first innings , Karthik managed only a solitary run in the First Test in Kanpur . In the Second Test in Calcutta , he scored 46 to help extend India ’ s first innings lead to 106 runs , as the hosts completed an eight @-@ wicket win . 
 Karthik had a chance to score heavily in India ’ s two @-@ Test tour of Bangladesh in December 2004 . Against a team that had never won a Test , India encountered little difficulty in sweeping the series , winning both matches by an innings . They passed 500 in both matches , but Karthik was unable to join the high @-@ scoring , managing only 25 and 11 . 
 Karthik returned to domestic cricket at the conclusion of the Tests while his colleagues played in the ODIs , and played in two Ranji Trophy matches for Tamil Nadu , scoring only 100 runs at 25 @.@ 00 in four innings . In January 2005 , a series of one @-@ day domestic tournaments were held , and Karthik had a chance to press his claims for selection in that format , having never played more than three List A matches in a sequence . In five matches for Tamil Nadu , he only had three innings , but scored 72 and 80 in two of them . He was then called into South Zone ’ s senior team for the first time , to play in the zonal one @-@ day competition . He scored 106 runs at 26 @.@ 50 in four outings for the southerners . In the Challenger Trophy , Karthik played for India A against India B and India Seniors , and made little impact , scoring 17 and 3 . He then played for South Zone in the first @-@ class Duleep Trophy , but continued to have modest returns with the bat , scoring 101 runs at 25 @.@ 25 in two outings , although he was run out in one innings after making a start and reaching 59 . 
 Despite these lean performances , Karthik was retained for the three @-@ Test series at home to Pakistan in March . In a high @-@ scoring draw in the First Test in Mohali , Karthik made only six as India amassed 516 . Karthik then put on his best Test batting performance to this point , at Eden Gardens , Kolkata against Pakistan . India batted first and Karthik made a start and reached 28 , before being run out . India made 407 and Pakistan almost broke even , replying with 393 . In the second innings , Karthik scored , combining with Rahul Dravid in a 166 @-@ run partnership to set up a target of 422 . This proved too much for the tourists on the deteriorating pitch and India won the match by 196 runs . In the next match , he made only 10 and 9 as India collapsed and lost ten wickets on the final day of an otherwise high @-@ scoring match — 1280 runs had been scored for only 22 wickets in the first three innings . 
 Karthik was not selected for the ODIs against Pakistan and returned to action in one @-@ dayers for Tamil Nadu in the meantime , but managed only 59 runs at 19 @.@ 66 in three matches . In contrast , Dhoni scored 148 in an ODI against Pakistan and kept his position as the ODI gloveman safe . Despite Dhoni ’ s heavy run @-@ scoring in the ODIs , the selectors continued to persist with Karthik for the Tests in the face of his low scoring at both domestic and international level in the preceding 12 months . Karthik started the tour of Zimbabwe with 40 in a warm @-@ up match against the Zimbabwe Board XI . The hosts , depleted due to political purges conducted by their government , were no match for India and lost by an innings and ten wickets respectively . India scored heavily against their weakened opponents , amassing 554 and 366 in their completed innings , but Karthik failed on both occasions , twice making a single . 
 Karthik returned to India and made 26 and 11 in the Challenger Trophy for India A , which was not enough for him to force his way into India ’ s squad for the home ODIs against Sri Lanka and South Africa . In the meantime , he played in the Duleep Trophy and had the chance to make his case for Test retention . However , he scored only 106 runs at 26 @.@ 50 in two matches and South Zone lost both of these and were eliminated , and Karthik spent the next month on the sidelines . 
 When the team for the three Tests at home to Sri Lanka was announced , Karthik was dropped in place of Dhoni . In ten Tests since his debut , Karthik had managed only 245 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 84 with only one half @-@ century and one other score beyond 25 . In contrast , Dhoni 's had been a prolific run @-@ scorer in ODIs , and had won the man of the series award against Sri Lanka and scored 183 not out in one match . 
 Karthik continued to play for Tamil Nadu in the Ranji Trophy , but only scored 30 in his first four innings of the season . This dropped him down the pecking order as Patel was favoured as the reserve wicket @-@ keeper on the 2006 tour to Pakistan . Immediately after the announcement , Karthik scored 134 against Mumbai in a losing effort , but was unable to back up with any scores beyond 50 in his five remaining innings in the competition . 
 Karthik then had mixed results in the domestic one @-@ day competitions . He scored only one half @-@ century in six matches for Tamil Nadu , a 79 , and one further fifty in three matches for South Zone , ending with a total of 209 runs at 23 @.@ 22 . 
 Test Centuries 
 = = International recall as a batsman = = 
 In April 2006 , Karthik 's career was revived when he was recalled to the ODI team by selectors to give Dhoni a rest in the final ODI against England in Indore . He was not required to bat as India cruised to a seven @-@ wicket victory . 
 He was then reinstated as the reserve wicketkeeper for the tour to the West <unk> after a campaign for India A during April in which he scored 134 runs at 33 @.@ 50 , including a man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match 75 runs against UAE on a tour to the gulf country . However , Karthik had little to do on his Caribbean sojourn , playing in only one non @-@ first @-@ class tour match ahead of the Tests . 
 At the start of the 2006 – 07 season , Karthik scored 11 and 85 for India Red in the Challenger Trophy . He then played in two Duleep Trophy matches for South Zone , scoring 95 in the latter against Sri Lanka A. 
 Karthik was given more opportunities at international level in late @-@ 2006 during the ODI tour of South Africa , after Yuvraj Singh was sidelined with a knee injury , and Karthik was given a spot purely as a batsman following the poor form of Suresh Raina and Mohammad Kaif . Karthik had opened the batting for Tamil Nadu in the previous season in the Ranji Trophy , as well as for South Zone in the Duleep Trophy . Playing in three of the ODIs , Karthik himself struggled , with 42 runs at an average of 14 @.@ 00 , and a top score of 17 as South Africa took a 5 – 0 whitewash . With India 's batsmen struggling , Raina and Kaif were dropped altogether from the Test squad , as Karthik was selected as a back @-@ up wicket @-@ keeper and middle order batsmen in the Test team for the first time in a year . He then scored an unbeaten 31 to steer India to a six @-@ wicket win in the Twenty20 International against South Africa with one ball to spare . After Dhoni suffered from a finger injury , Karthik replaced him for the Third Test at Newlands against South Africa , playing in his first Test in over a year . With regular opener Virender Sehwag suffering from a loss of form , Karthik opened the innings with Wasim Jaffer , allowing Sehwag to bat in the middle order . He used his domestic experience to score 63 in the first innings , combining in a century opening stand , helping India to 414 , enough for a first innings lead of 41 . In the second innings , he scored an unbeaten 38 , as the team suffered a batting collapse and were all out for 169 , allowing the hosts to take the series 2 – 1 by five wickets . In addition to his batting , his wicket @-@ keeping was praised and brought former South African fast bowler Allan Donald to predict further success in the future . 
 Karthik then featured in the four @-@ match ODI series against West Indies , and after not batting in the victory in the first match , he top @-@ scored with 63 as a specialist batsman when India recovered from 35 / 3 to post 189 on a slow wicket at the <unk> Stadium in Cuttack . India went on to win by 20 runs , giving Karthik his first man of the match award . He was rewarded with continued selection for the subsequent series against Sri Lanka and the 2007 Cricket World Cup . However , Karthik faltered in the series against Sri Lanka , managing only 31 , 4 not out and 1 , leaving his position in jeopardy . In two warm @-@ up matches in the West Indies before the start of the World Cup , Karthik scored 3 and 38 not out against The Netherlands and the West Indies . 
 Karthik did not play a match at the World Cup , and following India 's unexpected exit from the first round , a group of players was dropped from the squad , including Sehwag . As a result , Karthik was selected as a specialist opener for the tour of Bangladesh , scoring 56 and 22 in the drawn First Test in Chittagong before scoring his maiden Test century in the Second Test in Dhaka , compiling 129 runs and featuring in a century opening stand as India took an innings victory . He completed his tour with 58 * and six in the ODI series , playing in the middle order as India won both matches . 
 Prior to their tour of England , India played a series of ODIs in Ireland , against the hosts and South Africa . Karthik played in four matches , scoring 15 runs at 51 @.@ 00 and keeping wicket in two of the matches . 
 Karthik established himself as a regular opener in the mid @-@ 2007 Test series in England . After scoring 76 and 51 in the two tour matches ahead of the Tests , he recorded a half century in each of the three Tests , regularly helping India to make solid starts . In the First Test at Lord ’ s , Karthik made 60 in the second innings before India fell to 9 / 282 in pursuit of 380 when rain ended the match early . In the Second Test at Trent Bridge , Karthik scored 77 , helping to lay a top @-@ order platform for India ’ s first innings of 481 , which gave them a 283 @-@ run lead . He then scored 22 as they reached their target of 73 to take a winning series lead . In the Third Test at The Oval , Karthik scored 91 as India batted first and helped to lay the foundation for their total of 664 and a first @-@ innings lead . This was enough to secure a 319 @-@ run first innings lead , and although India were unable to finish England off , it was enough to secure a 1 – 0 series win . With a total of 263 runs at 43 @.@ 83 , he was the highest scorer in the series for India , as the tourists won their first series in England for 21 years . He started the ODI series with an unbeaten 44 in the first ODI as India capitulated to 184 all out and a 104 @-@ run defeat , but thereafter had four consecutive innings where he failed to score more than four runs , and he was dropped for the final two matches . 
 Karthik was selected for the inaugural World Twenty20 in South Africa in September 2007 , and played in India 's earlier matches , scoring 11 , 17 , and a duck , before being dropped from the semi @-@ final and final in favour of Rohit Sharma . India went on to win after starting the tournament as outsiders . Karthik kept his place in the Indian squad for the home ODI series against Australia but was on the outer after his decline in form in England , and played in only the final match in Mumbai , making a duck as India scraped home by two wickets . 
 After struggling in recent months in the limited overs format , Karthik bounced back during the Challenger Trophy at the start of the Indian domestic season . Playing for India Blue , he made a duck in the first match , but then made 65 against India Green and an unbeaten 116 in the final to guide his team through a successful run @-@ chase against India Red . He then rounded off his preparation for the next Test series with consecutive fifties for Tamil Nadu in the Ranji Trophy . 
 Karthik had a lean Test series against Pakistan at home in late @-@ 2008 . In the first two Tests , he managed only 39 in two innings , passing single figures only once . In the Third Test in Bangalore , Sachin Tendulkar was injured , and his replacement Yuvraj scored 170 . Karthik , batting down the order with Gautam Gambhir taking his opening position , scored 24 and 52 in a high @-@ scoring draw and kept wickets because of Dhoni 's absence with injury . In the first innings , Karthik was behind the stumps as India set a world record for the most extras conceded in a Test innings . The 35 byes that were leaked were the second highest amount in Test history . India won the First Test and the other matches were drawn . 
 Karthik was retained for the Test tour of Australia as an opener , while Gambhir was ruled out after suffering an injury . However , he did not play in the first two Tests , because Dravid was elevated into his opening position so that both Tendulkar and Yuvraj could bat in the middle order . When Dravid and Yuvraj both struggled in their new positions , Dravid was moved back to his No. 3 position and Yuvraj dropped for the Third Test of the series , but instead , it was Sehwag — who had earned a late call @-@ up as the reserve opener after Gambhir succumbed to injury — and not Karthik who was recalled . During the Test leg of the tour , Karthik played in only one non @-@ first @-@ class match against an Australian Capital Territory Invitation XI , scoring 25 and 97 . Karthik was selected for the limited overs component of the Australian tour , but did not play in any of the ten ODIs . This meant that in almost three months on tour , Karthik only played in a two @-@ day match and a Twenty20 match against Australia , in which he scored eight runs . 
 = = Back on the fringes = = 
 Upon his return to India , Karthik played in six one @-@ dayers for Tamil Nadu and South Zone , reaching 40 twice in six innings . Karthik played in the 2008 Indian Premier League as the wicket @-@ keeper for the Delhi Daredevils , scoring 145 runs at 24 @.@ 16 with a strike rate of 135 @.@ 51 . His highest score was an unbeaten 56 to steer Delhi to a five @-@ wicket win in a group match over the Mumbai Indians . In a match against the Deccan Chargers , team @-@ mate Amit Mishra took a hat @-@ trick , and when the new batsman came in , he charged out of his ground and missed , only for Karthik to miss the opportunity for the stumping and double hat @-@ trick . 
 He was recalled to the Test team as a wicket @-@ keeper for the July 2008 tour of Sri Lanka after Dhoni chose to take a break from cricket , citing the need to rest . Karthik played in the first two Tests , but struggled with the bat in the middle @-@ order , scoring 36 runs at 9 @.@ 00 , falling all four times to the spinners Muttiah Muralitharan and <unk> Mendis . He also dropped frequent catches and he was replaced for the Third Test by Patel . 
 Following the loss of his place in the Indian team , Karthik returned home and played for India A in a series of one @-@ dayers against their counterparts from Australia and New Zealand , and then for India Blue in the Challenger Trophy . He had an unsuccessful campaign , accumulating only 70 runs at 11 @.@ 66 . 
 He then had a strong domestic first @-@ class season in 2008 – 09 . After starting the Ranji Trophy campaign with two single @-@ figure scores , he scored 213 , featuring in a 213 @-@ run partnership with Subramaniam Badrinath as Tamil Nadu defeated Uttar Pradesh by an innings . Karthik then scored 123 and 113 in consecutive matches against Baroda and Railways before ending his Ranji <unk> campaign with 72 against Uttar Pradesh in the return match . He then continued his strong run against Central Zone in the Duleep Trophy , scoring 153 and 103 in one match . Karthik ended with 1026 runs at 64 @.@ 12 for the season , including five centuries and two fifties . 
 He then scored an unbeaten 117 against Kerala in the one @-@ day tournament and was selected for the tour of New Zealand as the reserve wicket @-@ keeper . After watching the entire T20 and ODI series from the sidelines , he played in the Second Test after Dhoni was injured , but he was criticised for dropping multiple catches as the hosts amassed 9 / 619 and made only six in his only innings . 
 In the 2009 Indian Premier League held in South Africa , Karthik played in each of Delhi 's 15 matches , scoring 288 runs at 36 @.@ 00 , passing 40 on three occasions and making 17 dismissals . Delhi topped the pool stage of the tournament , but Karthik made only nine in the semi @-@ final as Delhi were defeated by six wickets by the Deccan Chargers . 
 He got a chance again in India 's four match tour of West Indies where he replaced opener Sehwag , who was out with a shoulder injury . He scored 67 , 4 and 47 as an opener which could help him claim a berth for the future , as India took the series 2 – 1 . 
 With Sehwag still injured , he was retained for a short triangular ODI tournament in Sri Lanka in September . He scored 4 and 16 in India 's two round robin matches and was dropped for the final , in which India triumphed over the hosts . Karthik was retained for the 2009 ICC Champions Trophy in South Africa , but after his performances in Sri Lanka , was omitted for the first two matches . He was given an opportunity in India 's final pool match against the West Indies and scored 34 in a seven @-@ wicket win , but it was not enough to prevent India 's first round exit . 
 Sehwag and Yuvraj recovered in time for the home ODI series against Australia , so Karthik returned to domestic duty at the start of the 2009 – 10 season . He played in Delhi 's four matches in the 2009 Twenty20 Champions League , scoring 92 runs at 23 @.@ 00 , including a top @-@ score of 61 against Sri Lanka 's <unk> . Delhi were knocked out in the Super 8 stage . Karthik played in six Ranji Trophy matches for Tamil Nadu as captain , and he had an uneven run of scoring with the bat . He scored 152 against Orissa and 117 against Punjab , and added a further two scores of at least 70 , but managed only 16 runs in his four other innings . Karthik ended the season with 443 runs at 55 @.@ 37 . He also resorted to bowling himself twice , when matches were proceeding towards a draw , with no success ; he delivered 14 overs and conceded 97 runs in all . However , Karthik was not to lead Tamil Nadu into the knockout stages of the competition . 
 In December 2009 , Karthik was recalled to the ODI team during the Sri Lankan tour of India after Dhoni was banned after the second match for two matches because of slow over rates . Karthik kept wickets in the next two matches , scoring 32 and 19 and remaining unbeaten in both instances , helping to guide India to the target in successful <unk> . He retained his place as a middle @-@ order batsman in the fifth and final match when Dhoni returned after Tendulkar was rested and Yuvraj injured , but the match was ended prematurely due to an unsafe pitch . 
 Karthik retained his place for the ODI tri @-@ series in Bangladesh against the hosts and Sri Lanka after Tendulkar was rested for the tournament . Karthik played as an opener along Gambhir in the last two of the round @-@ robin matches after Sehwag was rested . Karthik made 48 and 34 in quick time as India won both matches but was dropped for the final , which was lost . 
