 In 2015 , four years since his last EP , Tobin released Dark Jovian ( EP ) , which contains tracks made after " binge @-@ watching space exploration films . " 
 = Astraea ( album ) = 
 Astraea is the third studio album by British mathcore band Rolo Tomassi . It was released on 5 November 2012 in the United Kingdom through Destination Moon , the band 's own record label . In interviews , the band described the composition of the album as being much more accessible and direct than their previous albums , while retaining the technical and experimental elements of their typical sound . The album was produced by Jason Sanderson , the producer of Rolo Tomassi 's first album <unk> . This is the band 's first release with Chris Cayford and Nathan Fairweather in their line @-@ up after the departure of Joseph Thorpe and Joe Nicholson . 
 The album was recorded in various locations across Nottingham , United Kingdom including James Spence 's house and The Bodega club night venue . This was because the band 's producer , Sanderson had come into contractual issues with the land owner of his recording studio . The album was critically acclaimed , praised for both its increased accessibility , sonic development and the increased use of Eva Spence 's singing . However , the album performed poorly commercially , failing to chart or make significant sales in upon its release . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rolo Tomassi only completed one short tour of the United Kingdom in 2011 . They spent all the year preparing for their new album and the creation of Destination Moon , the band 's own record label . They released a compilation CD , Eternal Youth , in mid @-@ 2011 to compile selected works from their numerous split EPs , demos and out @-@ of @-@ print extended plays . When asked about leaving Hassle to form their own record label , the band stated " We were questioning what we were doing for our label that we couldn 't do ourselves . We 've always been very proactive with the running of our band and we 've never given away much freedom . " The band announced in early February 2012 that both Joseph Thorpe and Joe Nicholson had left the band . This was because Joe Nicholson wanted to read chemistry at university , while Thorpe 's reasons were related to personal differences . The band replaced both with Chris Cayford , who is the current frontman and former guitarist of No Coast , and Nathan Fairweather , who plays in <unk> , making this the first release with the new line @-@ up . 
 The title of the album has been cited as having several origins . Some have suggested it gets its name from the Greek goddess of justice Astraea . Another possibility is <unk> , ( Autonomous Systems Technology Related Airborne Evaluation & Assessment ) an acronym for the development of British unmanned aerial vehicle . The album 's title acted as a reference to the Spence siblings ' admiration for greek mythology and a desire to pick an title that made the album " sound big and like this proper body of work " . James Spence described Astraea and the band 's previous album Cosmology as being " really grand titles " . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Writing for the album started as early as July 2011 . James Spence also had stated that in that period the band have at least two songs written with the lyrics being self @-@ reflective , a common theme for the band 's music . Around this time as well , Rolo Tomassi expressed interest in working with Anthony Gonzalez or Kurt Ballou respectively of M83 and Converge as producers for the third album . However at the time insufficient progress had been made for them to search for producers . James Spence had said that with this record he wished to experiment with shoegaze , " dreamy keyboard [ s ] " and utilising more melodic passages . Spence has also commented that " quite progressive synth @-@ based music " such as M83 and the horror film soundtracks Goblin have produced acted as influences . 
 Because all the members were working their band schedule round their jobs they had to practice in basic recording rooms and write and record their own ideas . From this the members listened to each other 's ideas and gave their interpretations and evaluations . <unk> player James felt the band produced their best work with this method as they were constantly assessing themselves . 
 In the writing of previous albums by Rolo Tomassi a majority of the music was written by James and Eva Spence wrote most of the lyrics . For Astraea , the band treated it as a collaboration between all five members ; however James and Cayford were the " main brains " . In January 2012 , in an interview with Kerrang ! , Eva Spence confirmed that the band are self @-@ producing their third full @-@ length with <unk> producer Jason Sanderson . The choice of returning to Sanderson was because he has been a close friend of the band members for a long time . Regarding the sound of the album , she stated that it will be " more direct and heavier " , but also noted that the band " will never shy away from being experimental " . However , James Spence went on record saying that during the actual production of the album the band did not consider themselves as part of the overall production ; rather just having a say in every aspect of the album progress . In April 2012 , the NME did a studio update with on the album with James Spence stating that the band 's writing was " 70 % complete " . He credited how the new members Chris and Nathan " breathed new life " into the band 's writing as the original three members had become " too set in their ways " . The band members have commented that this has made the writing a lot more fun as the band no longer writes a song then learns it . As the band wrote Astraea they decided to contrast with their typical style more with the clean and ethereal parts , which led to an increase of Eva 's singing . 
 They started recording Astraea in June at James Spence 's house in Nottingham . They were forced into this situation as Sanderson 's recording studio was taken from him through a contractual issue on the building with the landlord . The recording process was different from previous albums as there was a lot of production and pre @-@ production involved . Sanderson would come to the practice sessions of the bands and make suggestions to the songs and then they would go to record it . The album took three months to record because of band member 's personal commitments , this to James Spence had a positive effect as the members took their time with the music , believing the album was more “ produced ” than previous efforts . James believed Rolo Tomassi had much more of an opportunity to experiment in the studio and try things they had never tried before . However , James had commented that the recording of the album in his house revealed to be a stressful decision . An example of this was were his <unk> where all the recording equipment <unk> flooded due to heavy rainfall . Although nothing got damaged , stagnant water remained and they had to move the guitar cab to his bedroom . They recorded the drums upstairs at The Bodega in Nottingham then Rolo Tomassi then went to James and Eva Spence 's parents house record the vocals , keyboard and pianos . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Much like the band 's previous work Astraea is considered primarily as mathcore . This is displayed in the theoretical complexity of their music , such as odd time signatures like 9 / 13 , polyrhythmic drumming and use of dynamics , akin to bands such as Converge , Radiohead and Sigur Rós . Their sound is seen as a " stylistic schism " between " Dillinger Escape Plan @-@ esque tech @-@ metalcore , grandstanding prog rock and modish synthesised pop " and fusing aesthetics from shoegaze , space rock , ambient , black metal , hardcore punk , jazz , pop , progressive rock and techno . The band is noted for their two vocalists who utilise both screaming and singing vocals , and the album is described as featuring more ' clean vocals ' than previous albums . The band 's vocal diversity is said to : " immediately creates a rich and textured sonic world " . Eva has been seen as pushing her vocals " further than ever before , displaying extremity , contrasted with <unk> beauty " , with her singing voice being compared to the dream pop stylings of Grimes and Cocteau Twins . When Eva Spence has been asked about the album 's musical approach , is much more ' hard @-@ hitting ' and ' more direct ' than previous albums . She was quoted saying that the album is much more accessible than their previous albums : " You can get your teeth into it much quicker , people who didn 't have patience before with our music before will be into this record . It 's still technical , but we 're using the <unk> bits more sparingly . " 
 The album opens out with ' Howl ' , a grinding , but graceful opener . The song starts with an opening two minutes of intense and spacious drone synthesisers . The following two minutes of the song break into " unrelenting and brutal " mathcore with Eva Spence making her vocal debut with her " gleefully guttural vocal register " . The song is used as an example of how the band is using more complex , but ' more rewarding ' song structures in their music . ‘ Ex Luna Scientia ’ , the opening single for the album is seen as a more expansive and more melodic song in comparison to their previous work , placing emphasis on Eva Spence ’ s singing rather than her trademark ' guttural ' style . Rock Sound reviewer Oliver Robertson used the song as an example for the sonic development of the album as it is " more focused on making each element stand out now , rather than creating simply a cacophony of noise . " The introduction to ' <unk> ' is seen as being " completely caked in reverb " and ends with a stoner riff . The " sparse piano chords " that open both ' <unk> ' and ' Prelude II ' , among the atmospheric breaks that are featured on other tracks on the album defy the aggression featured on the rest of Astraea . Songs like ' The Scales of Balance ' , ' Remancer ' and ' Gloam ' are seen as having a <unk> style to the Rolo Tomassi 's previous work . ' Gloam ' , specifically the last half of the song , showcases a " battle between melodic keyboard [ s ] and screamed vocals with a real sense of urgency and threat . " ' Remancer ' specifically has been considered as almost like Mastodon . The album closes with ' <unk> ' , a song which Metal Hammer reviewer Merlin <unk> cites as showing Radiohead and Sigur Rós influences . 
 Lyrically , Eva Spence credited on how the Astraea was a lot more positive than their previous material due to having time off between tours and being able to relax in the writing process . " I feel happier than I have done in the past few years . I 'm seeing things in a positive light and I hope the lyrics will be more uplifting " In an interview with James Spence about the early writing process and how the lyrics have an essence of self @-@ reflection as a common theme in the band 's work , " it 's not something people normally look at or focus on ; self @-@ reflection as a theme , but if you ignore what 's happening to you and how it 's making you think about things then I don 't think that 's good . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 In early February 2012 , Rolo Tomassi announced the release of a new single : ' Old Mystics ' . ' Old Mystics ' and its B @-@ side ' <unk> ' was written by synthesiser play James Spence in the earliest stages of the Astraea 's writing , in late 2011 . The single was uploaded to the band 's Facebook profile to stream for free . They released the single on 26 March . The band announced a few days after releasing " Old Mystics " for streaming that it will most likely not appear on the new album and will just be a stand @-@ alone single as they felt the two songs did not fit onto Astraea . Rolo Tomassi completed their first tour of the year as the main support for Architects on a 14 @-@ date UK tour in April . They used this tour to promote their new single ' Old Mystics ' as well as debut other unrecorded new material from the album , such as songs ' Howl ' and ' Remancer ' . Rolo Tomassi 's presence on the tour was met with positive reception ; however , reviewers believed the band 's music was too aggressive and chaotic for fans of Architects . Tim Sewell when writing for The Courier Online said that : " it was apparent that much of the crowd ( mostly Architects fans ) were left a little confused by singer / <unk> Eva Spence , who flung herself about in front of them screaming . " 
 The album 's release date was delayed several times . Kerrang ! magazine initially announced that Astraea was expected to be released in May . But by April the album was then declared as being released in October . On 16 August 2012 , the band issued both the track listing for the album its title , Astraea and unveiled its British release date as 5 November . Before the Astraea 's release , they completed an October tour of Britain with support from <unk> and Goodtime Boys and then went on to support the album in Europe in November 2012 which , as a tour was 24 shows in 26 days . One music video and one single spawned out of the release of Astraea . The single was ' Ex Luna Scientia ' which was released in September 2012 . The music video was for ' Howl ' and was released in early March 2013 . 
 The aims of Astraea , in James Spence 's mind , was to help reach parts of the world they 've been unable to tour , like North America and South @-@ east Asia as well as desiring to tour and support the album all of 2013 . The band learned their studio output was not as easy to re @-@ create live as it was with previous albums . An example was with the song ' Gloam ' as the pedal changes were too rapid for live performances . 
 The band completed a small British tour in January 2013 , but in May that year Rolo Tomassi completed another short British tour with Bastions , the band was noted for only costing five pound a ticket for all venues . They picked Bastions as they were aware of them because of their mutual relationship with Holy Roar Records and how their bassist played in Crocus , a band which has played with Rolo Tomassi in the past . Rolo Tomassi 's decision of making the shows of the tour only cost five pound was questioned by interviewer Samantha Booth when writing for The National Student , James replied saying it was for the sake of encouraging people to come see them and because of the high prices of concert tickets . The band has hinted that their touring schedule would go " further afield " than Europe . In September Rolo Tomassi performed on three out of the four dates of the Japanese touring festival Reverberation Festival . In September and October , starting just three days after their Japanese performances Rolo Tomassi completed 13 date tour of Australia with Australian bands Totally Unicorn and <unk> . It is the first time the band has been in the country since 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The album received critical acclaim from popular critics . BBC issued a very much favourable review of the album as writer Noel Gardner praised Rolo Tomassi as remaining a " remarkably singular band " three albums into their career . Drowned In Sound writer Pieter Macmillan commented positively on their use of vocals on the album saying " having male and female vocals and the ability to switch from singing to screaming and back again immediately creates a rich and textured sonic world if it ’ s done well , as it certainly is here . " 
 The Fly magazine gave the album a four out of five star rating summarising the album as " blissed @-@ out ecstasy " . New Musical Express writer Barry Nicolson gave the album an 8 out of 10 and drew parallels between the album titles name , being derived from the Greek goddess of justice by concluding his review with " If there is any justice in the world , here ’ s an album richly deserving of some . " Metal Hammer reviewers praised the album for its increase in ' clean vocals ' and less disjointed song writing but still being heavy . 
 John Doran of online magazine The Quietus gave the album a glowing review expecting it to appear in his <unk> of year lists , describing it in summary as a triumph : " Rolo Tomassi are miles ahead of the game not just because they are constantly trying to break new ground but also because they have entered a nuclear arms race of progressiveness with their own back catalogue . " Oliver Robertson when writing for Rock Sound magazine gave the album a 7 out of 10 and started his review by praising the band saying " deviating little from the blueprint while making some of the finest mathcore albums of the past few years " . Considering the album as a sign of Rolo Tomassi maturing as a band . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The album earned numerous best @-@ of lists in 2012 . Appearing on Rock Sounds top 50 at 47 , The Quietus at number 62 out of 75 , Kerrang ! scored the album at 35 out of 101 and <unk> at number 22 out of 25 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Rolo Tomassi 
 Eva Spence – lead vocals 
 James Spence – synthesizer , vocals 
 Edward Dutton – drums 
 Chris Cayford – lead guitar 
 Nathan Fairweather – bass guitar 
 Additional personnel 
 Jason Sanderson – production 
 = Theatre Europe = 
 Theatre Europe is a turn @-@ based strategy video game developed and published by Personal Software Services . It was first released in the United Kingdom for the Commodore 64 , ZX Spectrum , Amstrad CPC and Atari 8 @-@ bit home computers in 1985 . It was later released in France by ERE Informatique in 1986 , and was released in the United States by <unk> later that year . It was also ported to the <unk> Einstein home computer in 1989 , exclusively in the United Kingdom . It is the fifth instalment of the Strategic Wargames series . 
 The game is set during a fictional war in Europe between NATO and the Warsaw Pact , in which both sides use nuclear and chemical weapons against each other . The main objective of the game is to fight conventional battles in continental Europe , whilst trying to avoid a worldwide nuclear holocaust . Throughout the game , various capital cities and their civilian populations will be destroyed by nuclear weapons ; the game will only end once either side is forced to surrender or if the entire population of Europe perishes . In order to request a nuclear strike , the player was required to call a dedicated telephone number , which led to an automated message announcing the authorisation code . 
 During development , the developers obtained extensive information and statistics of military strength from the Ministry of Defence and the Soviet embassy in London . Theatre Europe gained national controversy upon release , receiving criticism from both the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament ( CND ) and The Sun newspaper . Some high street retail chains refused to sell the game upon release . Despite the controversy , the game received critical acclaim from reviewers . Praise was directed at its accuracy , playability and value for money . It won the " Best Strategy Game " award at the 1985 Golden Joystick Awards and was nominated for the " Game of the Year " title . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a turn @-@ based strategy and revolves around a fictional conflict between the powers of NATO and allies of the Warsaw Pact . The player has the choice of choosing either NATO or the Warsaw Pact ( collectively referred to as Soviet forces ) , or a " demo " computer versus computer option , where the game plays itself . The game takes place over a period of 30 in @-@ game days , in which one day is equal to one " round " . There are three types of difficulty ; level one , in which unless provoked , the enemy will not use nuclear weapons , whilst levels two and three will enable the enemy to use nuclear and chemical attacks to prevent the player from winning the game . 
 The main feature of the game is focused on a map of Europe and western Russia , which displays accurate terrain such as mountain ranges , major cities , borders and all military forces belonging to each side . The game also features an arcade sequence which involves shooting down enemy units in order to secure combat bonuses ; this gameplay mode , however , can be ignored by changing the game 's settings . If the arcade sequences are turned on , the player will be notified to choose a battle on the map . Depending on the area chosen , an illustration of a battle commencing in countryside or a city is presented with various forms of military equipment including aeroplanes , helicopters and tanks . The player must shoot down and destroy enemy units using their cursor , in similar style to Missile Command . The outcome of the arcade sequence will affect the game ; performing poorly will result in severe losses throughout that round . 
 After combat has been resolved , the player must move and assemble their forces in continental Europe , which is known as the movement phase . Two special units are exclusively available to the Warsaw Pact : " the 1st Airborne Army which can be flown directly behind enemy lines , and the 1st Amphibious Army which can move over the sea to a tactical attack point " . Units are moved by cursor , and only one may be moved at a time . Once all units have been moved within a round , the attack phase will begin . Any amount of friendly units may attack an opposing army ; however , once a unit has been dispatched for battle it cannot be stopped until the current attack phase concludes . During the attacking phase , a separate screen displaying combat information , such as enemy numbers and casualties , is displayed . If the screen detailing the attacking phase has been turned off in the settings , the battle will instead be decided on warrants of air superiority and armaments . 
 After battle sequences , the player will have the opportunity to rebuild their units by allocating a quantity of armament supplies , such as air support , which can be issued to any friendly unit on the map . After rebuilding ground units , the game will move onto an " air phase " , which consists of commanding aircraft such as aeroplanes , bombers and a limited number of reserve air units . Several options for allocating air forces include : counter air strikes , reconnaissance on enemy movement , interdiction , assault breakers , and deep strikes . Counter air strikes involve attacks on enemy air bases , whereas interdiction involves aircraft being sent behind enemy lines in order to attack supply and movement networks . If interdiction aircraft are discovered in enemy territory , there will be a chance that the side will respond with a retaliatory nuclear strike . The remaining three aircraft options are to attack a single unit , strike enemy territory , and attack railways in order to disable enemy reinforcements , respectively . 
 The game allows the player to request chemical and nuclear tactical strikes against the enemy . A chemical attack is automatically targeted at an enemy capital city , and will conclude with a readout announcing the outcome of the attack , such as civilian casualties . In order to launch a strategic nuclear attack , the player is given 30 seconds to call a dedicated 1 @-@ 800 telephone number and obtain a special authorisation code from the automated <unk> message . Once the authorisation code has been received , the player will be given three separate options on how to proceed . Standby mode will postpone the nuclear launch , whereas a strategic launch will involve one nuclear warhead targeting a city . The third option , known as " Fire @-@ Plan " , will issue a full @-@ scale nuclear strike across Europe and may result in a nuclear holocaust , which will end the game . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , West Midlands , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in 1981 . The company were known for creating games that revolved around historic battles and conflicts , such as Battle of Britain , Bismarck and Falklands ' 82 . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique , and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . In 1986 , Cockayne took a decision to alter their products for release on 16 @-@ bit consoles , as he found that smaller 8 @-@ bit consoles such as the ZX Spectrum lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted as " pulling out " from the Spectrum market by video game journalist Phillipa Irving . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid @-@ 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties ; Cockayne admitted in a retrospective interview that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed by the company due to strains of debt . 
 In an interview with Your Computer magazine , Richard Cockayne stated that Theatre Europe received heavy criticism from the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament ( CND ) and The Sun newspaper , respectively . The CND accused the developers of " bad taste " , despite Cockayne claiming that the organisation never " looked into the product " . During development of the game , Cockayne and Mays obtained figures and statistics of various military strength from the Ministry of Defence and the Soviet embassy in London . Cockayne asserted that the statistics the developers gained were realistically plausible , stating that he would let the " horrifying results speak for themselves " during the game . Game designer Alan Steel stated that during testing , he was " alarmed " to discover when the computer played itself , the Warsaw Pact always won a conventional war overwhelmingly , forcing NATO to either surrender or begin a nuclear war . Steel adjusted the game to give NATO a chance to win . Theatre Europe was first released in the United Kingdom for the Commodore 64 , ZX Spectrum , Amstrad CPC and Atari 8 @-@ bit home computers in 1985 . It was then re @-@ released in France and the United States for those consoles in 1986 . Due to lobbying from the CND , high street outlets such as Boots and John Menzies refused to sell the game in their stores , with the former finding it " morally offensive " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received critical acclaim upon release . Gwyn Hughes of Your Sinclair defended the accuracy and morality of the game , stating that it was not in " bad taste " and that the game was a " well researched program " , which he thought would give the player an insight into the nature of modern war . Philippa Irving of Crash similarly stated that Theatre Europe offered more than a usual " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill " war game and heralded its simplistic nature , adding that novice gamers would " get in to it with ease " . John Gilbert of Sinclair User added scepticism over the developer 's intention of making something " so serious " as opposed to their other titles , however he praised the game as a " brilliant , if chilling " simulation . A reviewer writing for ZX Computing similarly stated that the game was " superbly chilling " and " extremely " well @-@ presented . A reviewer of Computer and Video Games criticised the inferior graphics on the ZX Spectrum , stating that they were " a bit flawed " in comparison to the Commodore 64 version . 
 Mark Reed of Computer Gamer noted that the game attracted media attention , despite the objective of the game discouraging the use of nuclear weapons . Reed praised the presentation and gameplay , also stating that the use of a joystick and keyboard is " excellent " . A reviewer of Zzap ! 64 heralded the presentation and value for money , stating that it is overall " very special indeed " . The reviewer also gave praise to the sound , suggesting that the game featured " one of the best pieces of micro music ever " . Peter Connor of Advanced Computer Entertainment said that Theatre Europe was a " gift " , in regards to its value of money and level of playability . The game won the " Best Strategy Game " award at the 1985 Golden Joystick Awards and was also nominated for the " Game of the Year " title . 
 = Oswald Watt = 
 Walter Oswald Watt , OBE ( 11 February 1878 – 21 May 1921 ) was an Australian aviator and businessman . The son of a Scottish @-@ Australian merchant and politician , he was born in England and moved to Sydney when he was one year old , returning to Britain at the age of eleven for education at Bristol and Cambridge . In 1900 he went back to Australia and enlisted in the Militia , before acquiring cattle stations in New South Wales and Queensland . He was also a partner in the family shipping firm . 
 The first Australian to qualify for a Royal Aero Club flying certificate , in 1911 , Watt joined the French Foreign Legion as a pilot on the outbreak of World War I. He transferred to the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) in 1916 , quickly progressing from flight commander with No. 1 Squadron in Egypt to commanding officer of No. 2 Squadron on the Western Front . By February 1918 , he had been promoted to lieutenant colonel and taken command of the AFC 's 1st Training Wing in England . 
 A recipient of France 's Legion of Honour and Croix de Guerre , and twice mentioned in despatches during the war , Watt was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 1919 . He left the military to pursue business interests in Australia , and was lauded for his generosity to other returned airmen . In 1921 , at the age of forty @-@ three , he died by accidental drowning at <unk> Beach , New South Wales , . He is commemorated by the Oswald Watt Gold Medal for outstanding achievement in Australian aviation , and the Oswald Watt Fund at the University of Sydney . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born on 11 February 1878 in Bournemouth , England , Oswald Watt was the youngest son of John Brown Watt , a Scot who had migrated to New South Wales in 1842 and became a successful merchant and politician , frequently representing his state on overseas missions . Oswald 's Australian @-@ born mother , Mary Jane , died when he was one and shortly afterwards the family relocated to Sydney . Oswald was sent back to England at the age of eleven to complete his schooling at Clifton College , Bristol , before going on to study at Trinity College , Cambridge , where he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1899 . Returning to Sydney in 1900 , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the New South Wales Scottish Rifles , a Militia unit , and in 1902 was appointed an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Governor of New South Wales . On 27 September that year , he married Muriel Williams at St. John 's Anglican Church in Toorak , Victoria ; the couple had one son . 
 Watt 's family was wealthy , and he was able to establish himself as a grazier by purchasing several cattle stations in New South Wales and Queensland . Travelling abroad again , he obtained his Master of Arts degree from Cambridge in 1904 . In October the following year he was promoted to captain in the Scottish Rifles . On a subsequent trip to England he took flying lessons at the Bristol aviation school on Salisbury Plain , where his fellow students included Eric Harrison . Watt attained his Royal Aero Club certificate , no . 112 , on 1 August 1911 , becoming the first Australian citizen so qualified . Upon his return to Australia later that year , he publicly declared that the time was " rapidly approaching when an aero corps [ would ] have to be inaugurated " as part of the country 's " military defence scheme " . 
 In March 1912 , Watt recommended a location in Canberra near the Royal Military College , Duntroon , as a base for the Army 's proposed Central Flying School . Owing to its altitude and nearby mountainous terrain , the site was rejected by the school 's nominated commanding officer , Lieutenant Henry Petre . Petre eventually chose 297 hectares at Point Cook , Victoria , an area suitable for seaplanes as well as land @-@ based aircraft , to become the " birthplace of Australian military aviation " . Watt also advocated manufacturing foreign @-@ designed aircraft under licence in Australia , but this would not be pursued until after World War I. In 1913 he was divorced on the grounds of " misconduct " with actress Ivy Schilling , and lost custody of his son in the judgment . He then went to Egypt , where he purchased and practised flying a Blériot XI monoplane ; while there he met leading French aviators Louis Blériot and Roland Garros . 
 = = World War I = = 
 In May 1914 , the francophile Watt left Egypt with his aeroplane and took up employment at the Blériot factory and airfield in Buc , outside Paris . Fired by the widely held conviction that Britain would stay out of a European conflict , Watt offered his services and his plane to the French government on 2 August , the day France declared war on Germany . This gesture was welcomed and he joined the Aviation Militaire section of the Foreign Legion as a pilot . Though he was ranked an ordinary soldier , his colleagues in Bleriot Squadron No. 30 referred to him as " Capitaine " in deference to his previous status in the Australian Militia . Posted to Maurice Farman Squadron No. 44 in April 1915 , he earned the Legion of Honour badge after he and his observer crash @-@ landed in no man 's land and succeeded in making their way back to French lines with valuable intelligence under intense fire from German positions . Soon afterwards , Watt was awarded the Croix de Guerre — with palm leaves personally presented by General Joffre — and promoted to the provisional rank of captain . As a foreigner , however , he was not eligible to command a French unit . Watt always proclaimed his antipodean connection while serving France , painting a kangaroo on the nose of his plane , which he named Advance Australia . Considered a no @-@ nonsense type , he once introduced himself to a British pilot with the words " I am an Australian and I haven 't got any manners " . 
 The French recognised that Watt 's talents were not being fully utilised due to his ineligibility to lead a squadron , and recommended that he transfer to the Australian Flying Corps . Watt did so on 1 March 1916 , with the rank of captain . Posted to Egypt in May , he was made commander of B Flight , No. 1 Squadron , and took charge of the unit 's first contingent of Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2s the following month . No. 1 Squadron was engaged mainly in aerial reconnaissance and army co @-@ operation duties , but the two @-@ seat B.E.2 proved inferior to German Fokkers and <unk> in speed , time @-@ to @-@ climb , and manoeuvrability . In September 1916 , Watt was promoted to major and given command of No. 2 Squadron , which was formed in Kantara . He was mentioned in despatches by General Archibald Murray , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force , on 13 October ; the commendation was promulgated in the London Gazette on 1 December . No. 2 Squadron 's personnel was composed largely of former Lighthorsemen , as well as thirteen mechanics from the Australian Flying Corps ' first combat formation , the Mesopotamian Half Flight , led by Flight Sergeant George Mackinolty . Watt personally trained the force in England commencing in January 1917 , before deploying it to the Western Front that September . He was " a born leader of men " , according to one officer , while another recalled that " In the things that mattered , his men knew he stood for absolute obedience . They also knew that when discipline could be safely relaxed he would be quick to grant them some relief from the strain . " 
 In the vicinity of Saint @-@ Quentin on 2 October , No. 2 Squadron became the first AFC unit in Europe to see aerial combat when one of its patrols engaged some German two @-@ seaters , which managed to escape . Because the Airco DH.5s in the squadron were handicapped as fighters by engine problems and low speed , the squadron was employed mainly in ground support duties . During the Battle of Cambrai that commenced on 20 November 1917 , Watt led his pilots on daring low @-@ level bombing and strafing attacks against enemy fortifications and lines of communication . Their loss rate reached 30 % , but morale remained high . After visiting the squadron , the Royal Flying Corps ' Major General Hugh Trenchard described its airmen as " really magnificent " while Charles Bean , war correspondent and future editor of the Official History of Australia in the War of 1914 – 1918 , commented on their " remarkably high level of conduct and general tone " . Six of Watt 's officers were awarded the Military Cross for gallantry during the battle , prompting General Sir William Birdwood to send him a personal message of congratulation on 16 December , declaring : " ... This is indeed a magnificent record for your squadron , and one of which I am sure everyone of you must rightly be extremely proud ; I doubt if it has been beaten anywhere ... " By this time , No. 2 Squadron had begun converting to Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s , though it could achieve little in the winter months due to inclement weather . Watt himself , now almost forty , was beginning to show the strain of frontline command . Bean found him looking " very worn " and noticed him shivering even while seated in front of the mess hall fire . 
 In February 1918 , Watt was promoted to lieutenant colonel and given command of the AFC 's 1st Training Wing ( Nos. 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 Squadrons ) headquartered at Tetbury in Gloucestershire , England ; the wing 's role was to train replacement pilots for the four operational AFC squadrons in Palestine and France . Watt proposed moving the wing to France , but it remained in England . He was mentioned in despatches by Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig on 7 April , and the commendation was gazetted on 28 May . Shortly after the end of hostilities in November 1918 , novelist William John Locke visited 1st Training Wing and found that " there was not one [ of Watt 's men ] who ... did not confide to me his pride in serving under a leader so distinguished " . A pilot later opined that as well as having " courage , determination , and an immense capacity for work " , Watt possessed " the greatest factor in leadership , a genius for endearing himself ( without conscious effort ) to all who served under him " . 
 = = Post @-@ war career and legacy = = 
 Watt was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire on 1 January 1919 , in recognition of his war service . He returned to Australia on 6 May with the rest of 1st Training Wing 's personnel , aboard the troopship Kaisar @-@ i @-@ Hind , on which he was the ranking officer . Leaving the AFC soon afterwards , he was elected president of the New South Wales section of the Australian Aero Club . He also served as senior delegate on a committee of veteran military pilots examining applications for appointment to a proposed independent Australian air service . Watt was esteemed as a man who did not forget old comrades , providing former AFC members with financial aid and helping them re @-@ establish themselves in civilian life . He maintained an interest in commercial flying but refused an offer to take up the position of controller of civil aviation in 1920 owing to his business interests , which included partnership in the family shipping firm of Gilchrist , Watt & Sanderson Ltd , and directorships of mining , rubber , and art corporations . He also turned down invitations to stand for parliament , and to join the fledgling Royal Australian Air Force . 
 Oswald Watt drowned at <unk> Beach , near Newport , New South Wales , on 21 May 1921 . Cuts and bruising on his body indicated that he had slipped on rocks , struck his head , and rolled unconscious into relatively shallow water . Survived by his 15 @-@ year @-@ old son , he was accorded a military funeral two days later at St Jude 's Church , Randwick . Members of the AFC , Royal Air Force , and Australian Aero Club formed a guard of honour at the service , one of the largest in the suburb 's history , which also included representatives of the Royal Australian Navy and Australian Army . Among the tributes was a floral wreath from an anonymous group of French admirers , and another that was dropped by parachute from a low @-@ flying plane . On 31 May , Watt 's body was cremated and his ashes interred in the family vault at St Jude 's . 
 In his will , Watt left two bequests to the Australian Aero Club , one of which was used to establish the Oswald Watt Gold Medal for outstanding achievement in Australian aviation . Winners of the award have included Charles Kingsford Smith , Bert Hinkler , Henry <unk> , Ivor McIntyre , Jon Johanson and Andy Thomas . He also bequeathed a sum to the Royal Military College , Duntroon , to award annually a set of binoculars for the best cadet essay on military aviation or aeronautics . The award was founded as the Oswald Watt Prize later in 1921 . Most of the residue of Watt 's estate went to the University of Sydney . Considered one of the university 's great benefactors , he was commemorated by the Oswald Watt Fund . In May 1923 , the Oswald Watt Wing of the <unk> Home for Orphans , Wahroonga , was opened by the Governor @-@ General of Australia . Watt was acknowledged as both a source and a reviewer by F.M. Cutlack in the latter 's volume on the Australian Flying Corps that was first published in 1923 as part of the Official History of Australia in the War of 1914 – 1918 . During World War I , Oswald Watt had been the only AFC officer to command a wing apart from Lieutenant Colonel Richard Williams , who was later to become known as the " Father of the RAAF " . In 2001 , military historian Alan Stephens noted that " had fate drawn him to a post @-@ war career in the Air Force instead of to business and an untimely death , ' Toby ' Watt might have challenged Richard Williams as the RAAF 's dominant figure in its formative years " . 
 = Drosera regia = 
 Drosera regia , commonly known as the king sundew , is a carnivorous plant in the sundew genus Drosera that is endemic to a single valley in South Africa . The genus name Drosera comes from the Greek word <unk> , meaning " dew @-@ covered " . The specific epithet regia is derived from the Latin for " royal " , a reference to the " striking appearance " of the species . Individual leaves can reach 70 cm ( 28 in ) in length . It has many unusual relict characteristics not found in most other Drosera species , including woody rhizomes , operculate pollen , and the lack of circinate vernation in scape growth . All of these factors , combined with molecular data from phylogenetic analysis , contribute to the evidence that D. regia possesses some of the most ancient characteristics within the genus . Some of these are shared with the related Venus flytrap ( Dionaea muscipula ) , which suggests a close evolutionary relationship . 
 The tentacle @-@ covered leaves can capture large prey , such as beetles , moths , and butterflies . The tentacles of all Drosera species are specialised stalked glands on the leaf 's upper surface that produce a sticky mucilage . The leaves are considered active flypaper traps that respond to captured prey by bending to surround it . In its native fynbos habitat , the plants compete for space with native marsh grasses and low evergreen shrubs . Of the two known populations of D. regia , the higher altitude site appears to be overgrown and is essentially extirpated . The lower altitude site is estimated to have about 50 mature plants , making it the most endangered Drosera species , since it is threatened with extinction in the wild . It is often cultivated by carnivorous plant enthusiasts , and a single cultivar has been registered . 
 = = Description = = 
 Drosera regia plants are fairly large herbs that produce horizontal woody rhizomes and a crown of large , linear leaves up to 70 cm ( 28 in ) long and 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide . The leaves possess stalked glands ( tentacles ) on the upper surface of the lamina along nearly the entire length of the leaf . The leaves lack petioles and stipules , emerging by circinate vernation ( <unk> ) and tapering to a filiform point . The tentacles and the leaf itself are capable of responding to prey by bending toward insects trapped in the sticky mucilage produced by the glands . Leaves are even capable of folding over themselves several times . Each leaf can possess thousands of tentacles , which can aid in the retention of larger prey when combined with the leaf wrapping tightly around captured insects . In its native habitat , D. regia has been known to capture large beetles , moths and butterflies . Plants go dormant during the colder season and form a dormant bud , consisting of a tight cluster of short , immature leaves . Plants begin to break dormancy in mid @-@ July with a typical growing season lasting from October to April , though this is variable and plants can continue growing year @-@ round without dormancy . Individual leaves die back but remain attached to the short stem , clothing the bottom portion of the plant in the blackened dead leaves of former years . 
 The woody rhizomes produced by the plant are one of the unusual characteristics that it shares only with D. arcturi in the genus ; the absence of woody rhizomes in all other Drosera is often cited as an indication of the presumed ancient lineage of D. regia and D. arcturi . Drosera regia also produces relatively few thick , fleshy roots , which possess root hairs along the terminal 15 cm ( 6 in ) . Asexual reproduction of mature plants usually occurs after flowering with new plants arising from the rhizome and roots . After a fire , undamaged roots will often re @-@ sprout new plants . 
 Drosera regia flowers in January and February , producing scapes up to 40 cm ( 16 in ) long . The scapes emerge vertically , lacking the circinate vernation of its leaves and all other scapes of the genus Drosera , with the exception of D. arcturi . The scapes consist of two primary branches and bear 5 to 20 ( sometimes 30 ) <unk> pink flowers with 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) long petals . <unk> are small , bearing some reduced tentacles . Each flower has three unbranched , spreading styles emerging from the top of the ovary and extending beyond the five erect stamens ( 15 mm long ) , which surround the ovary . This arrangement minimizes the chance of self @-@ fertilisation . Studies have shown that the operculate pollen shed in <unk> ( fused groups of four pollen grains ) , characteristics that are similar in the related Dionaea muscipula ( the Venus flytrap ) and Aldrovanda vesiculosa , is incompatible with clones , failing to produce seed when plants are self @-@ fertilised . Seeds are brown to black , linear and ornamented with fine network @-@ like markings , and 2 mm long and 0 @.@ 5 mm in diameter . Seed is shed by the end of March . 
 The unusual characteristics that set it apart from other species in the genus include the woody rhizome , undivided styles , and the operculate pollen . Drosera regia shares other features with the robust Tasmanian form of D. arcturi , including the lack of stipules and petioles and the non @-@ circinate growth of the scape . 
 It has a diploid chromosome number of 2n 
 = 34 , which is unusual for the genus Drosera and closer to the diploid chromosome number of the Venus flytrap ( Dionaea muscipula ) , another member of the Droseraceae . Variable chromosome counts for Dionaea from multiple studies include 2n = 
 30 , 32 , and 33 . Of the Drosera species with known chromosome counts , most are a multiple of x 
 = 10 . Based on an extensive review of karyotype studies , the botanist Fernando Rivadavia suggested that the base chromosome number for the genus could be 2n = 
 20 , a number that many Drosera species share including the widespread D. rotundifolia . Exceptions to this base number include the Australian , New Zealand and Southeast Asian Drosera , which have chromosome numbers ranging from 2n = 6 to 64 . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Drosera regia is endemic to South Africa and has only ever been found at two sites at altitudes of 500 and 900 m ( 1 @,@ 600 and 3 @,@ 000 ft ) in the <unk> Range near Wellington , Western Cape in South Africa . Despite extensive exploration , D. regia has not been found at any similar location in neighbouring valleys . Small morphological variations such as broader leaves have been recorded from these two small populations , which are restricted to an area of just a few hundred square meters . Drosera regia is found in a natural fynbos vegetation amongst dense marshy grasses . The fynbos habitat is similar to a low or medium shrubland or heathland , dominated by low evergreen shrubs . 
 The lower altitude site where D. regia is found is characterised by permanently damp soils consisting mostly of a gravel bench formed from a creek bed . The plants grow in a peaty quartzite sand , often with a gravel cover . Rhizomes of mature plants grow above ground and among associated grasses and sedges when gravel is absent and below ground when there is a gravel cover present . Associated vegetation included species of <unk> and members of the families Cyperaceae , Iridaceae , and <unk> . The habitat of D. regia depends on periodic fire sweeping through and keeping the larger plants from choking out D. regia . Frost occurs infrequently in the valley . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 In a 2009 report of a 2006 trip , botanist Andreas Fleischmann noted that the higher altitude site is overgrown with plants of the family <unk> and he could not locate any remaining D. regia . The lower altitude site was in a similar state , but he recorded approximately 50 mature plants , making this one of the most critically endangered Drosera species . While D. regia has not been evaluated under the current International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) standards for a rating on the Red List of Threatened Species , the International Carnivorous Plant Society recognised D. regia on their list of imperiled carnivorous plant species . Drosera regia was also listed as " rare " on an early IUCN report in 1997 , but these earlier IUCN assessments were often poorly documented and are thus not relied upon today . Several other authors have identified how rare D. regia is in the wild , even calling it " threatened with extinction " . 
 = = Taxonomy and botanical history = = 
 Drosera regia was originally described by South African botanist Edith Layard Stephens in 1926 . The binomial name Drosera regia is derived from the Greek word <unk> , meaning " dew @-@ covered " and the specific epithet regia comes from the Latin for " royal " , a reference to what Stephens described as its " striking appearance " . The genus is collectively referred to as the sundews , while Drosera regia is commonly referred to as the king sundew . Stephens was informed about this new species by Mr. J. Rennie , who had found several plants growing by a stream in the upper end of " <unk> <unk> " on Easter in 1923 . Additional specimens were located directly above this site on a plateau between South Ridge Peak and Observation Point . A second population was located in 1926 about 6 @.@ 5 km ( 4 mi ) away below the <unk> Peak near the headwaters of the Witte River . 
 Stephens placed D. regia in section <unk> <unk> . , which at that time included D. arcturi , D. <unk> , and D. uniflora , though she noted that the many @-@ flowered inflorescence was unusual for this group . In 1970 , the South African botanist Anna Amelia Obermeyer suggested that D. regia did not fit into any of the taxonomic groups established by Ludwig Diels in his 1906 monograph on the family . Obermeyer noted the unusual characteristics that set D. regia apart from any other Drosera species : the operculate pollen , circinate leaf vernation , undivided styles , and woody rhizomes . In 1994 , Rüdiger Seine and Wilhelm Barthlott proposed classifying D. regia as the sole species in a new subgenus , Drosera subg . Regiae , to " give adequate recognition to the isolated position of D. regia within the genus . " This taxonomic position was affirmed by Jan <unk> in his dichotomous key and taxonomic revisions published in 1996 . Also in 1996 two Czech researchers , <unk> <unk> and Zdeňka <unk> , proposed changes to the taxonomy of the genus by splitting D. regia off into its own , monotypic genus , <unk> . <unk> and <unk> cited the many morphological differences between D. regia and every other member of the genus Drosera in support of their decision to make this taxonomic split . They reaffirmed their taxonomic opinions in a 1999 article that also split the tuberous Drosera , members of the subgenus <unk> , to Johann Georg Christian Lehmann 's resurrected genus <unk> . These taxonomic revisions , however , have not gained any support , being rejected or largely ignored by recent publications on the genus . 
 = = = Evolutionary relationships = = = 
 Phylogenetic analysis of morphological characteristics and gene sequences has supported the basal position within the genus long suspected of D. regia , often regarded as the most ancient of all extant Drosera species . Its distinct morphology and unique relict characteristics , ones it likely shared with the common ancestor of all Drosera such as the operculate pollen , led early researchers to suggest its ancient position in the genus . The first cladistic analysis based on rbcL and morphological data confirmed these ideas and suggested that D. regia formed a clade sister to all other Drosera surveyed , with Dionaea muscipula forming a sister clade to all Drosera . Further analysis in 2002 based on the nuclear 18S rDNA , plastid DNA ( rbcL , matK , <unk> ) , and morphological data confirmed these relationships , supporting the basal position of D. regia in the genus and its close relationship with Dionaea and Aldrovanda . New analysis in 2003 revealed a close relationship between D. regia and D. arcturi , both of which clustered basally with respect to all other Drosera , suggesting a link between D. regia and all other Drosera through its relationship with D. arcturi . 
 Evidence for the evolution of " snap @-@ traps " of Dionaea and Aldrovanda from a flypaper trap like D. regia has also emerged and been argued for based on molecular data . The molecular and physiological data implies that the Venus flytrap ( Dionaea ) and Aldrovanda snap @-@ traps evolved from the flypaper traps of a common ancestor with the Drosera ; the living evidence of a link between Drosera and Dionaea is D. regia and its remnant characteristics . In this evolutionary model , pre @-@ adaptations to evolution into snap @-@ traps were identified in several species of Drosera , such as rapid leaf and tentacle movement . The model proposes that plant carnivory by snap @-@ trap evolved from the flypaper traps of Drosera , driven by increasing prey size . Larger prey can easily escape the sticky mucilage of flypaper traps ; the evolution of snap @-@ traps would largely prevent escape and kleptoparasitism ( theft of prey captured by the plant before it can derive any benefit from it ) . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Drosera regia cultivation was first attempted prior to the formal description of the species in 1926 . The author , Edith Layard Stephens , reported the successful cultivation of D. regia , noting that such success required " a moist and comparatively cool atmosphere " , similar to that of its native environment . 
 Drosera regia is often described as being a difficult species to cultivate , though modern reports on its cultivation have indicated which conditions have led to success for some . For optimal growth , D. regia appears to require good soil drainage and sufficient light levels , and prefers cooler temperatures . Cool nights and warm days have been reported to induce vigorous growth . Asexual propagation is frequently achieved through small root cuttings instead of leaf cuttings , which tend to rot before roots can form . Seed germination occurs as early as 10 days to 3 or 4 weeks with fresh seed , faster than many other Drosera species . Germination is <unk> ( non @-@ glandular cotyledons exposed , free from seed coverings ) , with the first true leaves being alternate in arrangement . 
 In 2004 , William Joseph Clemens registered the only cultivar of this species , D. regia ' Big Easy ' . It is reputed to be more robust than other clones of the species and is also more compact with maximum leaf lengths of 23 cm ( 9 in ) . Under his culture conditions , ' Big Easy ' has also never flowered or gone dormant . Clemens originally obtained his D. regia from a vendor at the International Carnivorous Plant Society conference held in 2000 . After sufficient investigation , he registered the new cultivar in a 2004 issue of the Carnivorous Plant Newsletter , the quarterly publication of the International Carnivorous Plant Society . 
 = Meteorological history of Hurricane Dennis = 
 The meteorological history of Hurricane Dennis spanned twenty @-@ two days , beginning with its inception as a tropical wave over Africa on June 26 , 2005 , and terminating with its dissipation on July 18 over the Great Lakes of North America . The incipient wave that became Dennis emerged over the Atlantic Ocean on June 29 and moved briskly to the west . Dry air initially inhibited development , though once this abated the wave was able to consolidate into a tropical depression on July 4 . The depression soon crossed Grenada before entering the Caribbean Sea whereupon increasingly favorable environmental factors , such as low wind shear and high sea surface temperatures , fueled intensification . Turning west @-@ northwest , the system achieved tropical storm status on July 5 and hurricane status the following day . 
 Formation of a well @-@ defined eye and central dense overcast signaled Dennis 's intensification into a major hurricane . The powerful storm soon struck Granma Province , Cuba , as a Category 4 early on July 8 ; violent winds battered the province and caused extensive damage . Paralleling the western coast of Cuba , Dennis attained its peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) later that day before making a second landfall in the country , this time in Matanzas Province . Interaction with the mountains of Cuba caused significant weakening ; however , once Dennis emerged over the Gulf of Mexico on July 9 , it was able to quickly reorganize . The hurricane reached Category 4 strength for a third time on July 10 as it approached Florida , weakening somewhat before striking the state . Dramatic weakening ensued once the cyclone moved ashore . Dennis lingered as a tropical depression and remnant low for roughly a week , traversing the Mississippi River Valley and Ohio River Valley before finally dissipating over Ontario on July 18 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 On June 26 , 2005 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring a tropical wave well @-@ inland over Africa . The feature was tracked via radiosonde observations from various nations for two days before being analyzed as a surface feature on June 28 over western Senegal . Accompanied by scattered convection — shower and thunderstorm activity — the westward moving system featured some cyclonic flow ; it emerged over the Atlantic Ocean early on June 29 . Conflicting observations from Dakar , Senegal , made tracking the wave difficult , with surface observations revealing a clear shift in wind direction and upper @-@ level soundings showing no change . Regardless of the exact position of the system , accompanying convection soon diminished and the system became ill @-@ defined . By June 30 , the system grew significantly and multiple low @-@ level circulations developed within the broader cyclonic envelope . Weather models at the time depicted a low probability of tropical cyclogenesis in the subsequent days . Gradual development ensued over the following days , though the broad circulation initially remained largely devoid of convection due to dry air associated with the Saharan Air Layer . 
 Two distinct low @-@ level centers became apparent on July 2 as the overall system progressed west . Surface observations from the Windward Islands and Guyana depicted a broad circulation ; however , satellite animations failed to show a defined center , inhibiting its classification as a tropical cyclone . The westernmost of the two centers moved across the Windward Islands early on July 4 and lost organization soon thereafter . Banding features developed with the eastern circulation throughout the day , consolidating around a 1012 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 89 inHg ) low . Later on July 4 , upper @-@ level outflow — an anticyclonic feature that provides thermal ventilation for tropical cyclones and allows for further development — became increasingly prominent . With continued organization , the NHC classified the system as Tropical Depression Four at 18 : 00 UTC at which time it was situated 65 mi ( 105 km ) east of St. George 's , Grenada . 
 = = Intensification and Cuban landfalls = = 
 Embedded within deep east @-@ southeasterly flow and along the periphery of a subtropical ridge , the depression moved rapidly along a west @-@ northwest course ; it soon made landfall over Grenada at 21 : 00 UTC on July 4 with maximum sustained winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Upon entering the Caribbean Sea , deep convection flared over the system . Environmental conditions ahead of the depression favored intensification into a hurricane , with little to no wind shear — analyzed to be roughly 25 mph ( 35 km / h ) below average — and high sea surface temperatures around 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) present along its path . Based on satellite intensity estimates obtained through the Dvorak technique , the depression is assessed to have become a tropical storm by 12 : 00 UTC on July 5 . Accordingly , the NHC assigned it the name Dennis at this time . This marked the earliest formation of a season 's fourth named storm on record ; however , this was later surpassed by Tropical Storm Debby of 2012 which was named on June 23 . 
 Throughout July 6 , convection steadily consolidated as the system acquired a more northerly component to its track . Hurricane Hunters investigating Dennis found steadily falling barometric pressures , indicative of intensification . Around 22 : 00 UTC , observation from the aircraft indicated that Dennis achieved hurricane @-@ strength ; a central pressure of 985 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 09 inHg ) and flight @-@ level winds of 91 mph ( 146 km / h ) were measured . A central dense overcast soon blossomed over the hurricane 's center while microwave satellite imagery depicted a closed , well @-@ defined mid @-@ level eye . At this point , the only factor inhibiting development was interaction with the mountains of Hispaniola and Jamaica . Dennis developed unusually prominent outflow , especially along its western side , for its location and time of year due in part to an unseasonably weak trough over the mid @-@ Atlantic . 
 Rapid intensification ensued throughout July 7 , as Dennis turned more northwest and tracked through the Jamaica Channel . A well @-@ defined , 10 mi ( 16 km ) eye formed within the hurricane 's central dense overcast that evening . Dennis achieved major hurricane status by 18 : 00 UTC and Category 4 status by 00 : 00 UTC on July 8 as it approached southern Cuba . An abbreviated eyewall replacement cycle likely took place during this period as the eye expanded to 18 to 23 mi ( 29 to 37 km ) in diameter . Reconnaissance flying in the storm reported flight @-@ level winds of 154 mph ( 248 km / h ) , and based on this Dennis is estimated to have reached its initial peak with surface winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) . Around 02 : 45 UTC , Dennis briefly moved over Granma Province , Cuba , with its center crossing the coast near Punta del Inglés ( close to Cabo Cruz ) . Violent and destructive winds battered the province . A weather station in Cabo Cruz reported sustained winds of 133 mph ( 214 km / h ) and a gust to 148 mph ( 238 km / h ) before being destroyed . 
 Interaction with land caused slight weakening ; however , Dennis soon emerged over the Gulf of Guacanayabo and the region 's shallow , warm waters fueled an abrupt reorganization . The hurricane traveled along the western spine of the Jardines de la Reina archipelago , subjecting the islands to Category 3 and 4 strength winds . Paralleling the coast of Cuba , Dennis attained its peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) around 12 : 00 UTC on July 8 . Hurricane Hunters observed flight @-@ level winds of 173 mph ( 278 km / h ) and a pressure of 938 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 70 inHg ) around this time . The former value indicated surface winds around Category 5 strength while the latter yielded slightly lower winds , via a pressure @-@ wind relationship method . The aforementioned peak strength was chosen accordingly as a compromise between the conflicting data . Another eyewall replacement cycle took place soon after this peak and slight weakening ensued . Around 18 : 45 UTC , Dennis made its second landfall in Cuba near Punta Mangles Altos in Matanzas Province with winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) ; a gust of 149 mph ( 240 km / h ) was reported in Cienfuegos . Despite moving over land , weakening was initially slow due to the hurricane 's proximity to water . Nearly six hours after moving ashore , Unión de Reyes was subjected to sustained winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) and gusts up to 123 mph ( 198 km / h ) . 
 = = Gulf of Mexico and dissipation = = 
 Maintaining its northwesterly course , Dennis emerged over the Gulf of Mexico just north of Havana around 05 : 00 UTC on July 9 . Prolonged interaction with the mountains of Cuba severely disrupted the hurricane 's core , though it managed to retain a ragged 14 mi ( 23 km ) wide eye . By the time Dennis emerged over water , its maximum winds fell to 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and its pressure rose to 973 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 74 inHg ) . Situated along the western periphery of a ridge , a gradual turn to the north @-@ northwest ensued . A cool eddy temporarily halted notable reorganization ; however , once Dennis cleared this eddy it was able to strengthen . Starting at 18 : 00 UTC , the hurricane underwent rapid intensification " at a rate that bordered on insane " , as described by forecaster Jack Beven . In the subsequent 18 hours , its central pressure fell by 32 mbar ( hPa ; 0 @.@ 95 inHg ) , including a drop of 11 mbar ( hPa ; 0 @.@ 32 inHg ) in 1 hour and 35 minutes . Hot towers extending to 10 mi ( 16 km ) were observed during the strengthening . The intensification culminated with Dennis attaining winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) at 06 : 00 UTC on July 10 and reaching its lowest pressure of 930 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 47 inHg ) at 12 : 00 UTC . This ranked Dennis as the strongest pre @-@ August hurricane in the Atlantic basin ; however , this was eclipsed just six days later by Hurricane Emily which was the first July Category 5 on record . At this time , the hurricane was situated roughly 180 mi ( 290 km ) southwest of Tallahassee , Florida . Although Dennis featured a large circulation with tropical storm @-@ force winds extending up to 230 mi ( 370 km ) from its center , its core was compact and hurricane @-@ force winds only stretched 40 mi ( 65 km ) outward . 
 During the latter part of July 10 , Dennis traversed an area with lower ocean heat content . Coupled with entrainment of mid- to upper @-@ level dry air , notable weakening took place as the hurricane approached the Florida Panhandle . Around 19 : 30 UTC , Dennis made its third and last landfall as a major hurricane over Santa Rosa Island , between Navarre Beach and Gulf Breeze , with estimated winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a pressure of 946 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 94 inHg ) . A Florida Coastal Management Program tower in Navarre observed sustained winds of 99 mph ( 159 km / h ) and a gust to 121 mph ( 195 km / h ) . Dramatic weakening ensued once the hurricane moved onshore , with winds falling below tropical storm @-@ force in just 12 hours . Upon weakening to a depression on July 11 , handling of operational advisories was transferred from the NHC to the Weather Prediction Center ( formerly the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center ) . 
 The lingering depression continued north @-@ northwest through the Mississippi River Valley and gradually slowed . Weakening steering currents caused Dennis to slow and turn northeast as it traversed the Ohio River Valley on July 12 – 13 . Dennis 's circulation became elongated and the system degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant low by 12 : 00 UTC on July 13 as it moved across Illinois . Thereafter , the cyclone executed a prolonged clockwise loop over the state before accelerating northeast on July 16 . During this period , a band of heavy precipitation set up over the southern Appalachian Mountains ; record rain fell across northern Georgia , with localized totals exceeding 10 in ( 250 mm ) . The remnants later crossed the Great Lakes before being absorbed into a larger extratropical cyclone over Ontario on July 18 . 
 = Foguang Temple = 
 Foguang Temple ( Chinese : <unk> ) is a Buddhist temple located five kilometres from <unk> , Wutai County , Shanxi Province of China . The major hall of the temple is the Great East Hall , built in 857 AD , during the Tang Dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) . According to architectural records , it is the third earliest preserved timber structure in China . It was rediscovered by the 20th @-@ century architectural historian Liang Sicheng ( 1901 – 1972 ) in 1937 , while an older hall at Nanchan Temple was discovered by the same team a year later . The temple also contains another significant hall dating from 1137 called the Manjusri Hall . In addition , the second oldest existing pagoda in China ( after the <unk> Pagoda ) , dating from the 6th century , is located in the temple grounds . Today the temple is part of a UNESCO World Heritage site and is undergoing restoration . 
 = = History = = 
 The temple was established in the fifth century during the Northern Wei dynasty . From the years of 785 to 820 , the temple underwent an active building period when a three level , 32 m tall pavilion was built . In 845 , Emperor <unk> banned Buddhism in China . As part of the persecution , Foguang temple was burned to the ground , with only the Zushi pagoda surviving from the temple 's early history . Twelve years later in 857 the temple was rebuilt , with the Great East Hall being built on the former site of a three storey pavilion . A woman named Ning <unk> provided most of the funds needed to construct the hall , and its construction was led by a monk named <unk> . In the 10th century , a depiction of Foguang Temple was painted in cave 61 of the Mogao Grottoes . However , it is likely the painters had never seen the temple , because the main hall in the painting is a two @-@ storied white building with a green @-@ glaze roof , very different from the red and white of the Great East Hall . This painting indicates that Foguang Temple was an important stop for Buddhist pilgrims . In 1137 of the Jin dynasty , the Manjusri Hall was constructed on the temple 's north side , along with another hall dedicated to Samantabhadra , which was burnt down in the Qing Dynasty ( 1644 @-@ 1912 ) . 
 In 1930 , the Society for Research in Chinese Architecture began a search in China for ancient buildings . In the seventh year of the society 's search in 1937 , an architectural team led by Liang Sicheng discovered that Foguang Temple was a relic of the Tang Dynasty . Liang was able to date the building after his wife found an inscription on one of the rafters . The date 's accuracy was confirmed by Liang 's study of the building which matched with known information about Tang buildings . 
 = = Layout = = 
 Unlike most other Chinese temples which are oriented in a south @-@ north position , the Foguang temple is oriented in an east @-@ west position due to there being mountains located on the east , north and south . Having mountains behind a building is believed to improve its Feng Shui . The temple consists of two main halls . The northern hall is called The Hall of Manjusri and was constructed in 1147 during the Jin dynasty . The largest hall , the Great East Hall was constructed in 857 during the Tang Dynasty . Another large hall , known as the Samantabhadra Hall , once existed on the south side of the monastery but is no longer extant . 
 = = = Great East Hall = = = 
 Dating from 857 of the Tang Dynasty , the Great East Hall ( <unk> ) is the third oldest dated wooden building in China after the main hall of the Nanchan Temple dated to 782 , and the main hall of the Five Dragons Temple , dated to 831 . The hall is located on the far east side of the temple , atop a large stone platform . It is a single storey structure measuring seven bays by four or 34 by 17 @.@ 7 metres ( 110 by 58 ft ) , and is supported by inner and outer sets of columns . On top of each column is a complicated set of brackets containing seven different bracket types that are one @-@ third as high as the column itself . Supporting the roof of the hall , each of the bracket sets are connected by crescent shaped crossbeams , which create an inner ring above the inner set of columns and an outer ring above the outer columns . The hall has a lattice ceiling that conceals much of the roof frame from view . The hipped @-@ roof and the extremely complex bracket sets are testament to the Great East Hall 's importance as a structure during the Tang Dynasty . According to the 11th @-@ century architectural treatise , Yingzao Fashi , the Great East Hall closely corresponds to a seventh rank building in a system of eight ranks . The high rank of the Great East Hall indicates that even in the Tang Dynasty it was an important building , and no other buildings from the period with such a high rank survive . 
 Inside the hall are thirty @-@ six sculptures , as well as murals on each wall that date from the Tang Dynasty and later periods . Unfortunately the statues lost much artistic value when they were repainted in the 1930s . The centre of the hall has a platform with three large statues of Sakyamuni , Amitabha and Maitreya sitting on lotus shaped seats . Each of the three statues is flanked by four assistants on the side and two <unk> in front . Next to the platform , there are statues of Manjusri riding a lion as well as Samantabhadra on an elephant . Two heavenly kings stand on either side of the dais . A statue representing the hall 's benefactor , Ning <unk> and one of the monk who helped build the hall <unk> , are present in the back of the hall . There is one large mural in the hall that shows events that took place in the Jataka , which chronicles Buddha 's past life . Smaller murals in the temple show Manjusri and Samantabhadra gathering donors to help support the upkeep of the temple . 
 = = = Hall of Manjusri = = = 
 On the north side of the temple courtyard is the Manjusri Hall ( <unk> ) . It was constructed in 1137 during the Jin dynasty and is roughly the same size as the East Hall , also measuring seven bays by four . It is located on an 83 cm ( 2 @.@ 7 ft ) high platform , has three front doors and one central back door , and features a single @-@ eave hip gable roof . The interior of the hall has only four support pillars . In order to support the large roof , diagonal beams are used . On each of the four walls are murals of <unk> painted in 1429 during the Ming dynasty . 
 = = = Zushi Pagoda = = = 
 The Zushi Pagoda ( <unk> ) , is a small funerary pagoda located to the south of the Great East Hall . While it is unclear as to the exact date of its construction , it was either built during the Northern Wei Dynasty ( 386 @-@ 534 ) or Northern Qi Dynasty ( 550 @-@ 577 ) and possibly contains the tomb of the founder of the Foguang Temple . It is a white , hexagonal shaped 6 metres ( 20 ft ) tall pagoda . The first storey of the pagoda has a hexagonal chamber , while the second storey is purely decorative . The pagoda is decorated with lotus petals and the steeple supports a precious bottle in the shape of a flower . 
 = = = Funerary pillars = = = 
 The temple grounds contain two Tang Dynasty funerary pillars . The oldest one , which 3 @.@ 24 meters ( 10 @.@ 6 ft ) tall and hexagonal , was built in 857 to record the East Hall 's construction . 
 = = The present = = 
 Beginning in 2005 , Global Heritage Fund ( <unk> ) , in partnership with Tsinghua University ( Beijing ) , has been working to conserve the cultural heritage of Foguang Temple 's Great East Hall . The hall has not had any restoration work done since the 17th century , and suffers from water damage and rotting beams . Despite the temple undergoing restoration , it is still open to the public . On June 26 , 2009 , the temple was inscribed as part of the Mount Wutai UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 = French battleship Voltaire = 
 Voltaire was one of the six Danton class semi @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the French Navy in the late 1900s . Shortly after World War I began , the ship participated in the Battle of Antivari in the Adriatic Sea and helped to sink an Austro @-@ Hungarian protected cruiser . She spent most of the rest of the war blockading the Straits of Otranto and the Dardanelles to prevent German , Austro @-@ Hungarian and Turkish warships from breaking out into the Mediterranean . Voltaire was hit by two torpedoes fired by a German submarine in October 1918 , but was not seriously damaged . After the war , she was modernized in 1923 – 25 and subsequently became a training ship . She was condemned in 1935 and later sold for scrap . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Although the Danton @-@ class battleships were a significant improvement from the preceding Liberté class , they were outclassed by the advent of the dreadnought well before they were completed . They were not well liked by the navy , although their numerous rapid @-@ firing guns were of some use in the Mediterranean . 
 Voltaire was 146 @.@ 6 meters ( 481 ft 0 in ) long overall and had a beam of 25 @.@ 8 meters ( 84 ft 8 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 9 @.@ 2 meters ( 30 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 19 @,@ 736 metric tons ( 19 @,@ 424 long tons ) at deep load and had a crew of 681 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered by four Parsons steam turbines using steam generated by twenty @-@ six Belleville boilers . The turbines were rated at 22 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 16 @,@ 800 kW ) and provided a top speed of around 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Voltaire , however , reached a top speed of 20 @.@ 7 knots ( 38 @.@ 3 km / h ; 23 @.@ 8 mph ) during her sea trials . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 027 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 995 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 3 @,@ 370 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 240 km ; 3 @,@ 880 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Voltaire 's main battery consisted of four 305mm / 45 Modèle 1906 guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of twelve 240mm / 50 Modèle 1902 guns in twin turrets , three on each side of the ship . A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included sixteen 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) L / 65 guns and ten 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns . The ship was also armed with two submerged 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship 's waterline armor belt was 270 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The conning tower also had 300 mm thick sides . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 During the war 75 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed on the roofs of the ship 's two forward 240 mm gun turrets . During 1918 , the mainmast was shortened to allow the ship to fly a captive kite balloon and the elevation of the 240 mm guns was increased which extended their range to 18 @,@ 000 meters ( 20 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 Construction of Voltaire was begun on 26 December 1906 by Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée in La Seyne @-@ sur @-@ Mer and the ship was laid down on 20 July 1907 . She was launched on 16 January 1909 and was completed on 5 August 1911 . The ship was assigned to the Second Division of the 1st Squadron ( escadre ) of the Mediterranean Fleet when she was commissioned . The ship participated in combined fleet maneuvers between Provence and Tunisia in May – June 1913 and the subsequent naval review conducted by the President of France , Raymond Poincaré on 7 June 1913 . Afterwards , Voltaire joined her squadron in its tour of the Eastern Mediterranean in October – December 1913 and participated in the grand fleet exercise in the Mediterranean in May 1914 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 In early August 1914 , the ship cruised the Strait of Sicily in an attempt to prevent the German battlecruiser Goeben and the light cruiser Breslau from breaking out to the West . On 16 August 1914 the combined Anglo @-@ French Fleet under Admiral Auguste Boué de Lapeyrère , including Voltaire , made a sweep of the Adriatic Sea . The Allied ships encountered the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruiser SMS Zenta , escorted by the destroyer SMS Ulan , blockading the coast of Montenegro . There were too many ships for Zenta to escape , so she remained behind to allow Ulan to get away and was sunk by gunfire during the Battle of Antivari off the coast of Bar , Montenegro . Voltaire subsequently participated in a number of raids into the Adriatic later in the year and patrolled the Ionian Islands . From December 1914 to 1916 , the ship participated in the distant blockade of the Straits of Otranto while based in Corfu . On 1 December 1916 , some of her sailors , transported to Athens by her sister Mirabeau , participated in the Allied attempt to ensure Greek acquiescence to Allied operations in Macedonia . Voltaire spent part of 1917 through April 1918 based at Mudros to prevent Goeben from breaking out into the Mediterranean . 
 The ship was overhauled from May to October 1918 in Toulon . While returning to Mudros on 10 October , the ship was torpedoed by UB @-@ 48 off the island of Milos . Despite being struck by two torpedoes , she able to make temporary repairs at Milos before sailing to Bizerte for permanent repairs . Voltaire was based in Toulon throughout 1919 and was modernized in 1922 – 25 to improve her underwater protection . The ship became a training ship in 1927 and was condemned in on 17 March 1937 . She was scuttled in Quiberon Bay on 31 May 1938 for long @-@ term use as a target ; the wreck was sold in December 1949 and broken up from March 1950 onwards . 
 = Soviet cruiser Chervona Ukraina = 
 Chervona Ukraina ( Ukrainian : " <unk> <unk> " – " Red Ukraine " ) was an Admiral Nakhimov @-@ class light cruiser of the Soviet Navy assigned to the Black Sea Fleet . During World War II , she supported Soviet forces during the Sieges of Odessa and Sevastopol before being sunk at Sevastopol on 12 November 1941 by German aircraft . She was raised in 1947 and was used as a training hulk before becoming a target ship in 1950 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Chervona Ukraina displaced 8 @,@ 400 long tons ( 8 @,@ 500 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 163 @.@ 2 metres ( 535 ft 5 in ) , a beam of 15 @.@ 7 metres ( 51 ft 6 in ) and a mean draught of about 5 @.@ 6 metres ( 18 ft 4 in ) . She was powered by four Curtiss @-@ AEG steam turbines , each driving one shaft , which developed a total of 55 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 41 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ; 33 @.@ 9 mph ) . The engines were powered by 14 Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers . Four were coal @-@ fired while the rest were mixed @-@ firing . The ship carried a maximum of 540 long tons ( 550 t ) of coal and an additional 690 long tons ( 700 t ) of fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate in the mixed @-@ firing boilers . At full capacity , she could steam for 1 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 200 km ; 1 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Chervona Ukraina was designed to carry about 630 officers and men . 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of fifteen 55 @-@ calibre 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) / 55 B7 Pattern 1913 guns in single mounts , six of which were mounted in casemates . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 64 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) guns . Chervona Ukraina also mounted twelve above @-@ water 457 @-@ millimetre ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in triple swivelling mounts . 
 Chervona Ukraina 's waterline belt consisted of 76 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) of Krupp cemented armour and above it was an upper belt 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick . The gun shields were protected by 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) of armour . Each of the armoured decks was 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick . The armour of the conning tower was 76 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 She was laid down on 3 October 1913 as Admiral Nakhimov after Pavel Nakhimov and launched on 6 November 1915 . Construction was abandoned in 1917 during the October Revolution when the ship was about 80 % complete . In the second half of 1918 , the Marine Department of Hetman Pavlo <unk> restarted construction of the ship . On 25 January 1919 , the ship was formally renamed " Hetman Bogdan <unk> " , but Nikolayev was captured shortly afterward by the Entente . 
 At the start of the Russian Civil War , the ship was run aground at the fitting dock in Nikolayev by the shipyard workers to hinder the evacuation by the Whites in 1919 . The ship was raised by the Soviets in 1920 pending a decision on her disposition . The ship was renamed to Chervona Ukraina on 7 December 1922 . It was decided to finish her in 1923 and the job was completed in 1927 to nearly the original design . She was modified to handle aircraft by adding cranes on either side of the middle funnel and a parking area was built for them between the central and rear funnels , although no catapult was ever fitted . The original internal torpedo tubes were replaced by four triple 457 mm ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes mounted on the deck abaft the rear funnel . 
 Chervona Ukraina made a number of port visits to Turkey , Greece and Italy before World War II . She was extensively overhauled between 26 August 1939 and 1 May 1941 where her aircraft equipment was removed and she was fitted with new fire control equipment . The ship was given three Italian Minizini twin @-@ gun 50 caliber 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) anti @-@ aircraft mounts , one was placed on the forecastle , in front of the forward 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) / 55 B7 Pattern 1913 gun and the other two on each side of the quarterdeck . One torpedo tube mount was removed from each side and four single mounts for the semi @-@ automatic 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) 21 @-@ K gun were fitted as well as seven 12 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) AA machine guns . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Chervona Ukraina , in company with the cruisers Krasny Kavkaz , Komintern and a number of destroyers , laid down a defensive mine barrage protecting the Black Sea Fleet base at Sevastopol on 22 June 1941 . She provided gunfire support to Soviet forces during the Siege of Odessa and escorted convoys bringing the 157th Rifle Division into Odessa during the month of September 1941 . She escorted convoys from Odessa to Sevastopol in October when the evacuation of Odessa was ordered . During the Siege of Sevastopol Chervona Ukraina provided gunfire support and evacuated cut @-@ off troops from elsewhere in the Crimea into Sevastopol and brought in reinforcements from Caucasian ports . She was hit three times in the South Bay of Sevastopol by bombs from German Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive @-@ bombers from II . / StG 77 on 12 November 1941 , but didn 't sink until the next day after her crew was ordered to abandon her . Her guns were salvaged and most of the guns and crew were incorporated into the port 's defenses , although two of her twin Minizini turrets were added to Krasny Kavkaz . 
 She was raised on 3 November 1947 , repaired , and used as a training hulk until 30 October 1950 when she became a target ship . On 10 May 1952 , Chervona Ukraina was grounded on a spit to serve as a fixed target ; by 1980 there was nothing left of the ship above the surface . 
 = Democratic Left Movement ( Lebanon ) = 
 The Democratic Left Movement ( DLM , Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> Harakat Al @-@ <unk> Al @-@ <unk> , Arabic acronym HYD ) is a nonsectarian and a democratic leftist political party with seats in the Lebanese Parliament . It was founded in September 2004 by left @-@ wing and center @-@ left intellectuals and activists some of whom had previously split from the Lebanese Communist Party ( LCP ) while some were student activists from the " Independent Leftist Groups " . The DLM affirms a European @-@ style social democracy — but is open to all forms of leftism and encourages the development of a true secular state . The party operates under a decentralized framework that emphasizes diversity of thought for a progressive democratic society in a liberal democratic environment . It participated in the 2005 Cedar Revolution , a wave of demonstrations against the Syrian occupation of Lebanon , and calls for correcting imbalanced relations with Syria . 
 The DLM won its first parliamentary seat in Lebanon 's 2005 elections representing the Tripoli district . On 2 June 2005 , amid election rounds , Samir Kassir , a founder of the movement , was assassinated in a car bombing . Less than one month later , George Hawi , a former secretary general of the Lebanese Communist Party and an ally of the DLM , was killed in a similar car bombing in Beirut . In the 2009 elections , the party again won a single seat , instead representing the West Bekaa district . It is a member of the March 14 Alliance parliamentary coalition . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background and foundation = = = 
 During the late 1990s , there was a growing number of intellectuals ( Samir Kassir , Ziad Majed , Elias Khoury ) and a network of independent student groups ( " Independent Leftist Groups " ) who advocated democracy , individual liberties , secularism and center @-@ left economic policies in Lebanon . On the other hand , a growing number Lebanese Communist Party ( LCP ) members were dissatisfied with the status of their party : the rise of Islamic Fundamentalism , the fall of the Soviet Union , and the failure of the LCP to assume a more democratic socialist platform ushered in an era of political decline for the party . This , coupled with perceived Syrian domination of its leadership , led to increasing frustration among rank @-@ and @-@ file communists against the upper echelons of the party . 
 On 13 September 2000 , a group calling itself " the reform and democracy forces in the Lebanese Communist Party " wrote an open letter demanding the resignation of party leadership . Led by Elias Atallah , the dissidents accused LCP leaders of subservience to Syria and called for full democratization of the party and abandonment of the Stalinist line . Atallah was expelled from the party on 26 September of that year . 
 These activists who split from the LCP along with the leftist student groups and the intellectuals with no prior affiliation to the LCP , formed the Democratic Left Movement . An initial " temporary preparatory committee " for the movement emerged , which issued statements critical of Syrian intervention in Lebanon and called for the birth of a new left . In September 2004 , the Democratic Left Movement was officially established . On 17 October , at a ceremony commemorating its foundation attended by figures across the political spectrum , Elias Atallah declared that the movement was founded on three principles : " [ First ] , we are preachers of real social and cultural change on the bases of democracy , national independence and reconciliation with the Arab nation and Arab nationalism . Second we are preachers of cultural and ideological renaissance for the sake of secularism and political and religious reforms in the Arab east ... Thirdly we believe in fighting for freedom and against tyranny and oppression . " 
 Shortly after foundation , the DLM , <unk> <unk> Gathering , Democratic Renewal , and Democratic Gathering formed a " multi @-@ party opposition " to oppose the constitutional amendment that extended the presidential term of Emile Lahoud . The informal coalition , which sought to defend the constitution and republic , appealed for free elections based on an equitable electoral law , curtailing corruption , fostering an independent judiciary , and reforming public administration . It was divided on the Syrian military presence in the country and on the use of arms to resolve the Shebaa farms dispute . Later , in December 2004 and again in February 2005 , the movement was among an agglomeration of opposition parties to gather at Beirut 's Le Bristol Hotel Beirut and demand a " total withdrawal " of Syrian troops . 
 = = = Independence Intifada = = = 
 The DLM actively participated in the 2005 Independence Intifada ( Cedar Revolution ) , a so @-@ called colour revolution in which hundreds of thousands rallied against the Syrian occupation of Lebanon and its supporters in the Lebanese government . As the only leftist , nonsectarian element in the demonstrations , the DLM proved important for the opposition 's public relations . Following the resignation of pro @-@ Syrian Prime Minister Omar Karami in a wave of demonstrations , DLM leader Elias Atallah is quoted as saying , " Today the government fell . Tomorrow , it 's the one huddled in Anjar , " in reference to the Syrian chief of intelligence based in that city . The New York Times credited Samir Kassir , a founder of the movement , with orchestrating the protests . On 14 March 2005 , Atallah addressed the demonstrators , articulating the need for a free , sovereign , and united Lebanon . The DLM called on the protesters to press on to Baabda Palace , residence of the president , hoping to use the momentum to compel Emile Lahoud to resign . However , resistance by Maronite Patriarch Nasrallah <unk> prevented this , resulting in a temporary fallout between the DLM and opposition . 
 The movement remains critical of perceived Syrian interference in Lebanon , citing its participation in the March 14 Alliance parliamentary bloc as " defending Lebanese independence against the Syrian government ’ s attacks and against Hezbollah and its allies ’ attempts to impose their views and choices " . It lists " attaining full independence of the country " as a political goal . 
 = = = Kassir and Hawi assassinations = = = 
 On 2 June 2005 , Samir Kassir , a founder and leader of the movement , a prominent Lebanese journalist , and an outspoken critic of Syria was assassinated in a car bombing . DLM activists marched to the presidential palace in the Beirut suburb of Baabda to lay a wreath representing guilt for Kassir 's death . Elias Atallah , head of the DLM , explained that the wreath would " place the blame at the head of the joint Lebanese @-@ Syrian security regime " . Emile Lahoud , then president , condemned the killing and told reporters , " My conscience is clear " . After Kassir 's death , membership in the DLM surged to a few thousand . 
 Less than one month later , on 21 June 2005 , George Hawi , a former secretary general of the LCP , was killed in a similar car bombing in Beirut . Hawi , an outspoken critic of Syria in recent years , actively campaigned for DLM leader Elias Atallah 's candidacy in Lebanon 's 2005 Elections . Atallah and other allies of Hawi blamed the bombing on pro @-@ Syrian forces in the Lebanese @-@ security apparatus . In an interview with NOW Lebanon , former DLM Vice President Ziad Majed explained , " Georges Hawi ... was trying to bring the communist party , or at least part of it , to join efforts with us [ the DLM ] . " 
 In Al Mustaqbal newspaper , Elias Atallah called for broadening the planned inquiries into <unk> Harri 's assassination to include the Kassir and Hawi bombings . He demanded Lahoud 's resignation , saying the president was " incapable of protecting leadership figures in Lebanon . " 
 = = Structure and composition = = 
 The DLM operates under a decentralized framework in which internal movements are encouraged and represented in a national body . The party 's constituency elects a National Assembly , the principal decision @-@ making body , through proportional representation , where every internal movement forms a list . Composed of 51 to 101 members , determined proportionately by the size of the constituency , it maintains political priorities , alliances , and rhetoric , and elects an Executive Committee of 9 to 15 members for daily organizational activities . Other organizational bodies include the Legal Committee and Financial Committee , and internal elections occur every three years . 
 In October 2004 , a 77 @-@ member constituent assembly elected a 15 @-@ member Executive Committee in the movement 's first session of internal elections . Those elected included Elias Atallah as General Secretary ( and leader ) , Nadim Abdel Samad as president , and <unk> Eid , Anju <unk> , Ziad Majed and Ziad Saab as members . In April 2007 , another internal election occurred . Two lists competed , one supported by Atallah and representing the leadership 's rhetoric and the other an all @-@ youth movement named Keep Left . While Atallah was reelected , Keep Left attained 30 % of votes in Lebanon and 58 % of votes abroad in an online poll , enabling the entire list to be elected . Ziad Majed , previously vice president of the DLM , and Elias Khoury , a prominent and founding member , chose not to participate for personal and political reasons . 
 Headquartered in the Lebanese capital , Beirut , branches are permitted in any region of Lebanon or abroad . Provincial and district associations are largely autonomous . Youth members comprise a substantial portion of the movement ; Elias Atallah stated that half of the party 's members was 26 or younger . 
 The General Assembly , which was set for 2010 , took place in December 2011 , and saw the emergence of a new leadership . Walid <unk> was elected as the new Secretary General and the Executive Bureau was formed mainly from a new generation of leaders . However , this General Assembly was boycotted by many members who refused to have an election only assembly and were insisting on having a General Assembly that discusses the direction the movement should take . Some of the members who boycotted formed a current within the movement , called the Democratic Current in the Democratic Left Movement . It is to be noted that the bylaws of the Democratic Left Movement allows for internal currents and factions to operate freely . 
 = = Political stances = = 
 = = = Ideology = = = 
 The DLM backs a European @-@ style social democracy to promote equality without hampering personal liberty or economic productivity . In an interview with NOW Lebanon , DLM Former Vice President Ziad Majed classified the movement as center @-@ left economically . However , he went on to say that the party adopted a decentralized model when founded to enable the coexistence of divergent views in which internal movements are encouraged . Its political manifesto identifies the movement as " beyond the requirement of singularity of thought " and open to leftists of all denominations . This emphasis on pluralism distinguishes the DLM from other leftist groups in Lebanon . 
 = = = Domestic policy = = = 
 The DLM is one of a few parties to propose secularization of the Lebanese state . This includes abolishing sectarian appropriation of public jobs , replacing the confessional parliamentary system with a representative system , and permitting the execution of civil marriage on Lebanese soil . The Economist magazine described the party as the " most avowedly secular component " of the March 14 Alliance . 
 The DLM appeals for administrative reform in the public sector through a decentralization , modernization , and mechanization plan . It defends human rights and calls for the respect of public freedoms and rule of law . Listed within its platform is support for the marginalized and the abandonment of divisive particularism . The movement supports prohibiting the discrimination of the disabled . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 On foreign policy , the DLM platform is more uniform . The party calls for a diverse , unified , and democratic Arab society . It opposes foreign interference in Lebanese politics and supports correcting imbalanced relations with Syria . In the <unk> farms dispute , the movement advocates resolving the identity of the territory through diplomacy . If the farms are determined Lebanese , the cabinet should authorize their " liberation " either diplomatically or militarily but through state institutions alone to allow the state to fulfill its role there . On the broader Arab @-@ Israeli Conflict , the DLM appeals for the creation of a regional defense strategy which protects Lebanese sovereignty from Israeli aggression while promoting the interests of the region . It opposes American intervention in Iraq and elsewhere while also rejecting authoritarian governments like the Ba 'ath . The party advocates democracy in Syria and associates with its democratic opposition , particularly the Syrian Democratic People 's Party . 
 = = Electoral results = = 
 In the legislative elections of May and June 2005 , the DLM won one seat to become the first leftist political party in the Lebanese Parliament . Holding the Maronite seat of Tripoli , Elias Atallah represented the district as part of the March 14 Alliance , a pro @-@ Western political coalition and parliamentary majority . Atallah received 89 @,@ 890 votes to defeat rival Fayez <unk> Karam by 14 @,@ 482 votes . 
 In the 2009 elections , Atallah could not seek reelection because March 14 selected Samer Saadeh , a <unk> Party candidate , to run on the coalition 's list in the Tripoli district . Meanwhile , Amin Wehbi , another DLM candidate , won a Shiite parliamentary seat in West Bekaa on the March 14 coalition 's list . <unk> 34 @,@ 424 votes , 53 % of ballots cast , Wehbi unseated incumbent Nasser Nasrallah of the Amal Movement , who obtained 25 @,@ 457 votes . 
 The influence of the DLM , however , stems not from its limited electoral successes but from " its articulation of anti @-@ Syrian positions from a left [ ist ] perspective . " 
 = Kate Bosworth = 
 Catherine Ann " Kate " Bosworth ( born January 2 , 1983 ) is an American actress and model . She made her film debut in The Horse Whisperer ( 1998 ) and appeared in Remember the Titans ( 2000 ) and new comers ( 2000 ) alongside Chris Evans , before landing a lead role as a teenage surfer in the box @-@ office hit Blue Crush ( 2002 ) . She also had roles in independent films , playing Dawn Schiller in the true crime film Wonderland ( 2003 ) , and as Sandra Dee in the Bobby Darin biographical drama Beyond the Sea ( 2004 ) . She also portrayed Lois Lane in Superman Returns ( 2006 ) , and has had roles in Straw Dogs ( 2011 ) and Still Alice ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bosworth was born on January 2 , 1983 , in Los Angeles , California . She is the only child of Patricia ( née Potter ) , a homemaker , and Harold Bosworth , a former executive for Talbots . She was born with heterochromia iridum , and has a hazel right eye and a blue left eye . At the age of six , Bosworth 's family relocated from San Francisco to various parts of the country due to her father 's job . She was raised mainly on the East Coast , spending the rest of her youth in Massachusetts and Connecticut . 
 Bosworth developed an interest in competitive horse racing , and by the age of fourteen , she was a champion equestrian . She graduated from Cohasset High School , in Cohasset , Massachusetts , in 2001 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Bosworth 's first film role came after an open casting call in New York for the supporting part of Judith in the 1998 film , The Horse Whisperer . The film 's producers needed someone who was already an experienced horse rider , leading to Bosworth 's successful audition for the role . The film received positive reception from film critics . In 2000 , she starred in the television series drama Young Americans , in which she played Bella Banks . The series , however , was canceled . That same year , she had a small part in the film Remember the Titans . In 2001 , Bosworth moved to Los Angeles in hopes of obtaining easier access to auditions and better film parts . 
 = = = Initial Success = = = 
 The breakthrough role in Bosworth 's career came in the 2002 surfing movie Blue Crush , which she prepared for by working out with two separate trainers seven hours a day for months in order to add fifteen pounds of muscle to her frame . In his review of the film , Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers wrote : " Bosworth is a star in the making , but even she can 't outshine the surfing footage , which is flat @-@ out spectacular . " The film received positive reviews and grossed $ 40 million at the United States box office . Following the success of Blue Crush , Bosworth took on the lead role in low @-@ budget Wonderland ( 2003 ) opposite Val Kilmer . Bosworth played the teenage girlfriend of porn star John Holmes . 
 In 2004 , she played the lead role in romantic comedy Win a Date with Tad Hamilton ! , opposite Topher Grace . The film was critically and financially unsuccessful . Also in 2004 , Bosworth depicted actress Sandra Dee in Beyond the Sea . The movie received mixed reception , and was a box office disappointment , though Bosworth received critical acclaim for her performance . The following year , Bosworth portrayed <unk> , a Hare Krishna , in the film adaptation of <unk> Goldberg 's novel Bee Season ( 2005 ) , about a dysfunctional Jewish family . She has appeared in several Revlon ads and ranked as number 60 in FHM 's " 100 Sexiest Women in the World 2005 " list . For two years running , she has placed on the Maxim Hot 100 List – number 38 in 2005 and number 8 in 2006 . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Bosworth was cast as reporter Lois Lane in Bryan Singer 's superhero film Superman Returns ( 2006 ) . She starred along with her Beyond the Sea co @-@ star Kevin Spacey as Lex Luthor , as well as newcomer Brandon Routh as Superman . The film was a box office success and received mostly positive reviews . Bosworth 's performance however , was not well received among critics ; Anthony Lane of The New Yorker noted , " The new Lois Lane , Kate Bosworth , is not a patch on Margot Kidder , or , for that matter , on Teri Hatcher , in the TV series . " San Francisco Chronicle film critic Mick LaSalle felt that Bosworth , at the age of 22 years , was too young to portray Lois Lane , and the climax did not " match the potential of the tiring 154 minute long film " . Although Bosworth 's performance was ambivalently received , she herself loved the experience of working on the movie . As she told Teen Vogue in August 2006 , " You know how you have an experience , a time in your life when you feel you 've come into your own ? When you grow up a bit , and think , Now I get it ? [ ... ] That 's how I feel . I feel a little bit more complete . " The movie grossed $ 52 million during its opening weekend in North America and went on to earn $ 391 million worldwide . 
 Bosworth starred as Louise in the psychological drama called The Girl in the Park with Sigourney Weaver , Alessandro Nivola and Keri Russell , written and directed by Pulitzer Prize winner David Auburn in his directorial debut . The film premiered at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival , it has since been picked up by The Weinstein Company . Alissa Simon of Variety wrote that Bosworth " tries her best , but her character 's too extremely drawn . " Bosworth also filmed 21 , an adaptation of the book Bringing Down the House , in early 2007 in Boston , Massachusetts and Las Vegas , Nevada . This film reunites her with co @-@ star Kevin Spacey and director Robert <unk> . 21 garnered mixed reviews , with Joanne Kaufman of the Wall Street Journal concluding , " Very little adds up in 21 . " 
 In 2006 , she optioned the film rights to Catherine Hanrahan 's novel Lost Girls and Love Hotels and was set to produce the project alongside filmmaker Nadia Connors . As of 2016 , the project was at a standstill . In 2010 , she starred in the The Warrior 's Way , which was shot in New Zealand alongside Korean actor Jang Dong @-@ gun and Geoffrey Rush . The film was a one of 2010 's biggest box office flops , grossing only slightly more than $ 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 worldwide , but costing $ 42 million . She has said about her roles , " I just don 't do comfort zones . " 
 In January 2008 , Bosworth was named the new face for Calvin Klein Jeans and will be featured in the Calvin Klein Jeans campaign . She also takes on the role of spokesperson for American luxury bag brand Coach in Asia . 
 = = = 2010s : Fashion and acting = = = 
 In 2011 , Bosworth contracted to sing the television jingle for Cotton Incorporated 's " Fabric of My Life " advertisement . On 4 December 2012 , Topshop revealed that Bosworth was the " secret " women in the new Topshop Christmas Adverts . 
 Bosworth designed a jewelry line with friend and celebrity stylist Cher Coulter called <unk> , which launched in October 2010 . <unk> , the first vertical of MySpace co @-@ founder Josh Berman and Diego <unk> ’ s social commerce company , <unk> , has designs by Coulter and Bosworth . 
 Bosworth released ten films between 2011 and 2014 , moving away from the big @-@ budget Superman franchise into lower @-@ budget film roles like Still Alice with Julianne Moore . The short film <unk> , which was filmed in Slovenia , featured Bosworth and launched fashion designer Vanessa Bruno ’ s Fall 2011 campaign . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bosworth was accepted to Princeton University in late 2000 , but because of continual deferral of her attendance , her acceptance was later revoked . She is a member of the Appalachia Service Project . 
 From 2003 until September 2006 , Bosworth was in a relationship with English actor Orlando Bloom . 
 In July 2011 , Bosworth and her boyfriend , Swedish actor Alexander <unk> , parted ways after two years of dating . In mid @-@ 2011 , Bosworth began dating American director Michael Polish , whom she had met earlier that year when he directed her in the film Big Sur . Bosworth and Polish announced their engagement in August 2012 , and married on August 31 , 2013 in Philipsburg , Montana . 
 Bosworth is a fan of the Dallas Cowboys , as mentioned as part of her appearance on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon in January 2015 . 
 She is a member of Soka Gakkai International , an organization of Nichiren Buddhism and Mahayana Buddhism . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Parliamentary Monitoring Services = 
 Parliamentary Monitoring Services is a United Kingdom @-@ based political research and publishing company . The company researches the activities of the United States Congress , European Parliament , and the Parliament of the United Kingdom . Consultants to the company have included British politicians Sir Peter Fry and William Howie , Baron Howie of Troon . The company published PMS Guide to Pressure Groups and PMS Guide to the 1997 General Election . 
 The company has been hired to undertake political research work by The Sunday Times and The Royal British Legion . In 2006 , the company and its sister company Political Wizard were sold to Dods Parliamentary Communications , a subsidiary of Dods ( Group ) PLC — formerly Huveaux PLC . Colin Doeg , author of Crisis Management in the Food and Drinks Industry , characterized the company as a " comprehensive service " . The Independent described it as a " well @-@ known political lobbying firm " . 
 = = Political research = = 
 = = = 1979 – 2002 = = = 
 Parliamentary Monitoring Services was founded in London in 1979 . The company researches the activities of the United States Congress , European Parliament , and the Parliament of the United Kingdom . Lionel Zetter became Managing Director of the company in 1986 . In 1992 the company conducted a study commissioned by The Sunday Times which " revealed that , for the first time , more Conservatives were educated in state schools than in private schools " . In 1995 , Sir Peter Fry was a paid consultant and shareholder of Parliamentary Monitoring Services . The company published the second edition of PMS Guide to Pressure Groups in 1997 , and the third edition by J. Flower in 2000 . David Boothroyd , author of The History of British Political Parties , was a researcher at the company in 2001 . Boothroyd was the principal compiler of the second edition of PMS Guide to Pressure Groups and PMS Guide to the 1997 General Election . In 2002 , the company was hired by The Royal British Legion to develop an Internet @-@ based tool to help the organization make its case for Her Majesty 's Government to recognize Gulf War syndrome . 
 = = = 2002 – present = = = 
 William Howie , Baron Howie of Troon served as a publishing consultant to Parliamentary Monitoring Services in 2004 ; in 2007 The Times reported that Lord Howie received " regular remunerated employment " from the company . In 2005 , Zetter was Managing Director of the company 's sister firm , Political Wizard . In Public Affairs in Practice , Zetter wrote , " Without parliamentary monitoring , political news and political intelligence no public affairs campaign can hope to succeed " . Westminster lobbyist Doug Smith served as chairman of the company in 2006 ; by 2007 , Smith had left this role and his position on the company 's board of directors . In 2006 , Parliamentary Monitoring Services owned half of Political Wizard and received GB £ 1 @.@ 5 million for this share when Political Wizard was bought by Huveaux subsidiary Dods Parliamentary Communications . Zetter decided in 2006 to sell Parliamentary Monitoring Services to Dods Parliamentary Communications , and its parent Huveaux purchased the company for £ 4 @.@ 8 million . In 2007 , Huveaux owned Parliamentary Monitoring Services through the Dods brand , the parent company 's political division . 
 = = Commentary = = 
 When asked if the Department for Work and Pensions maintained profiles on Members of Parliament ( MPs ) , Secretary of State for Work and Pensions Andrew Smith said , " The Department does not compile personal profiles on MPs . We do have access to parliamentary reference works such as Dods and in order to provide , in a cost @-@ effective way , such reference information to the large number of officials drafting parliamentary answers we subscribe to Parliamentary Monitoring Services Ltd . ( PMS ) . " Writing in the book Crisis Management in the Food and Drinks Industry , Colin Doeg characterized Parliamentary Monitoring Services as a " Comprehensive service covering the proceedings of Westminster and European Parliaments as well as US Congress " . The organization is described in Public Relations in Practice as " a political research , publishing , polling and campaigning company " . James Macintyre and Nigel Morris of The Independent called Parliamentary Monitoring Services a " well @-@ known political lobbying firm " . 
 = The Register @-@ Guard = 
 The Register @-@ Guard is a daily newspaper published in Eugene , Oregon , United States . It was formed in a 1930 merger of two Eugene papers , the Eugene Daily Guard and the Morning Register . The paper serves the Eugene @-@ Springfield area , as well as the Oregon Coast , Umpqua River Valley , and surrounding areas . As of 2016 , it has a circulation of around 43 @,@ 000 Monday through Friday , around 47 @,@ 000 on Saturday , and a little under 50 @,@ 000 on Sunday . 
 The newspaper is owned by the Baker family of Eugene , and members of the family were in charge of nearly all departments within the paper until 2015 , when , for the first time in 88 years , someone who is not a member of the Baker family took the reins as publisher and editor . It is Oregon 's second @-@ largest daily newspaper and one of the few medium @-@ sized family newspapers left in the United States . 
 = = History of The Guard = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The Guard was launched in Eugene City , Oregon on Saturday , June 1 , 1867 by John B. Alexander . The paper began as a weekly organ expressing allegiance to the states ' rights @-@ oriented Democratic Party and it joined an existing Republican paper in the field , the Oregon State Journal , published by Harrison R. Kincaid . 
 Founding publisher Alexander was born about 1830 and came to Oregon from the midwestern state of Illinois as a pioneer of 1852 . Alexander initially worked as a farmer , supplementing his income as a surveyor and local justice of the peace before learning the printing trade working for the town 's earlier pro @-@ Southern newspapers . Although his own venture as a publisher was short and unprofitable , Alexander unwittingly was the scion of a local newspaper dynasty in Oregon , with two of his sons later themselves publishing The Guard ( following the tenure of several intermediate owners ) , while a grandson , George L. Alexander , would one day edit another Oregon paper , the Lebanon Express . 
 Alexander and his paper vocally supported the old political governing class of the former Confederate States of America and was rabid in its opposition to the policies of Reconstruction imposed upon the South by the Northern @-@ based Republican Party . Such views were out of step with the majority of Oregonians , however , with the Republicans coming to dominate Oregon politics during the last quarter of the 19th Century . Alexander was forced to liquidate his stake in his money @-@ losing newspaper in 1868 . 
 = = = Ownership changes = = = 
 A short interregnum followed , during which ownership was transferred to J.W. Skaggs . Skaggs continued to push Alexander 's Democratic Party / states ' rights agenda during his short five weeks at the helm . The poor economics of the weekly paper were unchanged , however , and Skaggs immediately moved to unload his newly acquired white elephant , cutting his losses and avoiding the stigma of financial failure for himself and the conservative political movement by giving away the paper outright to two men who worked for him as printers , William Thompson and William Victor . According to Thompson 's later recollection , Skaggs sweetened the transfer of ownership by tossing in two bundles of paper and two cords of firewood for the new owners . 
 The leading partner in the new ownership pair , William Thompson ( 1846 @-@ 1934 ) , had come to Oregon from his native Missouri aboard a wagon train during the 1850s and had worked as a printer 's devil for the Democratic Eugene City newspapers the Democratic Register and The Review from the age of 16 . His acquisition of The Guard required only that he fulfill a contractual obligation " to run the paper and keep it alive . " This he and Victor managed to do successfully , earning Thompson a healthy $ 1 @,@ 200 for his work before his sale of the paper to George J. Buys and A. <unk> on Christmas Eve of 1869 . Thompson would subsequently move to Roseburg , Oregon and there establish a new newspaper , the Roseburg <unk> . 
 George J. Buys bought out his business partner <unk> in July 1870 and subsequently remained solely at the publisher 's desk for more than seven years . He continued to battle for the Democratic Party , " first , last , and always " in competition with the Republican Oregon State Journal and the short @-@ lived Eugene City Hawk @-@ Eye , which professed allegiance to the similarly shorter @-@ lived Oregon Independent Party , which ran a full slate of candidates for state and local office in the election of 1874 . 
 Buys ended his tenure as owner of The Guard in May 1877 when he sold out to the sons of the original publisher , F.R. Alexander and W.R. Alexander . Their stint as publishers was nearly as brief as their father 's , and in November 1878 they sold the paper yet again , this time to the brothers John R. Campbell and Ira Campbell , who would remain owners for 30 years . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 In 1890 , the Eugene Guard became a daily newspaper . Charles H. Fisher took over the paper in 1907 and published it until 1912 when E. J. Finneran purchased the paper . Finneran bankrupted the newspaper in 1916 , partly due to the purchase of a perfecting press that proved too expensive for such a small newspaper . The University of Oregon 's journalism school briefly ran the paper during the receivership under the guidance of Eric W. Allen . 
 In April 1916 , Fisher returned along with partner J. E. Shelton , forming The Guard Printing Company . Fisher continued to publish the Capital Journal in Salem until 1921 . In 1924 , after Fisher died , Paul R. <unk> purchased the Guard and published it with his son , before selling it in 1927 . The paper was purchased in 1927 by publisher Alton F. Baker , Sr. , whose father had published The Plain Dealer . Three years later , Baker bought the Morning Register and merged the two papers . Reporter William <unk> was recruited from The Plain Dealer to be the managing editor of the new paper . 
 = = Post @-@ merger history = = 
 In 1953 , <unk> was one of four editors in the country to sign a declaration opposing Senator Joseph McCarthy 's questioning of New York Post editor James Wechsler in closed Senate hearings . Eugene S. Pulliam of The Indianapolis Star , J. R. Wiggins , The Washington Post , and Herbert Brucker , of The Hartford Courant were the other editors to sign the declaration , calling Senator McCarthy 's actions " a peril to American freedom . " 
 Alton F. " Bunky " Baker , Jr . , son of Alton F. Baker , Sr. , inherited the newspaper in 1961 and later passed it on to his brother Edwin . In the late 1980s , it was handed down to Alton F. " Tony " Baker III , who remained the paper 's editor and publisher for more than 28 years , until 2015 . 
 In August 1996 , a photographer and reporter from the paper were arrested by the United States Forest Service for trespassing at the site of a timber protest in a national forest . The Register @-@ Guard responded by suing the Forest Service for violating the First Amendment freedom of the press . The criminal charged were later dropped and the civil suit was settled out of court . 
 Originally located in downtown Eugene , the paper moved to its current location in northeast Eugene in January 1998 . The former Register @-@ Guard building was leased by the University of Oregon and renamed the Baker Downtown Center for the Baker family . The building houses the university 's printing facility , archives , and continuing education program , as well as the Oregon Career Information System . 
 In 2000 , the company began negotiations with the employee ’ s union for a new contract , and during negotiations banned the use of the company email system by the union . This led to an unfair labor practice charge against the newspaper , with the National Labor Relations Board ruling for the paper in December 2007 that employers can ban employees ' pro @-@ union emails from the company email system . 
 In the weeks following the September 11 , 2001 attacks , the newspaper saw a 1 @.@ 6 % increase in paper sales . In 2006 , the paper received protests regarding its policy against including birth announcements from same @-@ sex couples . It was reported that managing editor Dave Baker was very helpful when same @-@ sex couples first complained " until he talked to Alton Baker [ III ] , and then he stopped returning our phone calls . " In November 2008 , the Register @-@ Guard finally changed its policy and printed a birth announcement featuring names of both the child 's female parents . 
 In 2003 , the newspaper reduced the width of the printing to 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 320 mm ) to reduce costs , and further shrank the paper to 11 inches ( 280 mm ) in 2009 . 
 In 2009 , two separate layoffs reduced the newspaper 's staff by the equivalent of 41 positions ; by August 2009 , it had 305 full- and part @-@ time employees . The company 's management blamed the layoffs on the " lousy economy " and advertising revenues that were 16 % below projections in May and about 25 % for June , July , and the first half of August . 
 In May 2015 , Tony Baker stepped down as the Register @-@ Guard 's editor and publisher , after 28 years , making the end of an 88 @-@ year span in which someone from the Baker family had headed the paper . He was succeeded as editor and publisher by N. Christian Anderson III , who had been publisher of The Oregonian since 2009 and president of the Oregonian Media Group since 2013 . Anderson began working in the new position on June 1 , 2015 , but held it for less than seven months . In mid @-@ December 2015 , Tony Baker , who remains the chairman of the Guard Publishing Company , announced that Anderson " is no longer Editor and Publisher " of the Register @-@ Guard , and that the Baker family was taking control again . Tony Baker returned to the position of Editor and Publisher . In July 2016 , Logan Molen took over as Publisher and CEO of RG Media Company ( a.k.a. the Guard Publishing Company ) , while Baker remains editor . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The paper won in a tie for best feature photo in 1997 from the Oregon Newspaper Publishers Association . In 1998 , the paper took first place for science reporting from the Pacific Northwest Society of Professional Journalists competition for Excellence in Journalism . The Register @-@ Guard took first place in the same competition in 2001 for best arts coverage . In 1999 , the newspaper was a Pulitzer Prize finalist for Spot News Photography , for its coverage of the community 's reaction to shootings at Springfield 's Thurston High School by student Kip Kinkel . 
 The Oregon Newspaper Publishers Association 's 2010 General Excellence Award again went to The Register @-@ Guard , and so did the association 's Best Overall Website award . 
 = = Blocked in Turkey = = 
 Since June 17 , 2008 , by court order , access to the website of The Register @-@ Guard has been blocked in Turkey . 
 = Achaemenid Assyria = 
 Athura ( Old Persian : <unk> <unk> ) was a geographical area within the Persian Achaemenid Empire held by the last nobility of <unk> ( Akkadian ) , known as Athura ( Neo @-@ Aramaic ) or <unk> ( Greek ) , during the period of 539 BC to 330 BC as a military protectorate state of Persia under the rule of Cyrus the Great . Although sometimes regarded as a satrapy , Achaemenid royal inscriptions list it as a <unk> , a concept generally interpreted as meaning either a group of people or both a country and its people , without any administrative implication . 
 It mostly incorporated the original Assyrian kingdom , corresponding with modern northern Iraq in the upper Tigris , the middle and upper Euphrates , modern @-@ day north eastern Syria ( Eber @-@ Nari ) and part of south @-@ east Anatolia ( modern Turkey ) . The Neo @-@ Assyrian Empire collapsed after a period of violent civil wars , followed by an invasion by a coalition of some of its former subject peoples , the Iranian peoples ( Medes and Persians ) , Babylonians , Scythians , and Cimmerians in the late 7th century BC , culminating in the Battle of Nineveh , and Assyria had fallen completely by 605 BC . Between 605 and 559 BC , Assyria was divided between the Median Empire to the east and the Neo @-@ Babylonian Empire to the west . Both parts were subsumed into the Achaemenid Empire in 539 BC , and it has been argued that they constituted the satrapies of Media and Athura , respectively . In Herodotus ' account the Ninth Tributary District comprised " Babylonia and the rest of Assyria " , and excluded Eber @-@ Nari . 
 Despite a few rebellions , Assyria functioned as an important part of the Achaemenid Empire . The Assyrian people were given the right to govern themselves throughout Achaemenid rule , and the Assyrian ( Aramaic ) language was used diplomatically by the Persians . Known for their combat skills , Assyrian soldiers ( along with the Lydians ) constituted the main heavy infantry of the Achaemenid empire 's military . Due to the major destruction of Assyria during the fall of its empire , some early scholars described the area as an " uninhabited wasteland . " Other Assyriologists , however , such as John Curtis and Simo <unk> , have strongly disputed this claim , citing how Assyria would eventually become one of the wealthiest regions among the Achaemenid Empire . This wealth was due to the land 's great prosperity for agriculture that the Persians used effectively for almost 200 years . In contrast to the policy of the Assyrian Empire , the Achaemenid Persians did not intervene in the internal affairs of their ruling satrapies as long as they continued the flow of tribute and taxes back to Persia . 
 = = Fall of the Assyrian Empire = = 
 Between the mid 14th centuries and late 11th century BC , and again between the late 10th and late 7th centuries BC , the respective Middle Assyrian Empire and Neo @-@ Assyrian Empire dominated the Middle East militarily , culturally , economically and politically , and the Persians and their neighbours the Medes , Parthians , Elamites and <unk> were vassals of Assyria and paid tribute . In the late 7th century BC , however , the Assyrian empire descended into a period of civil war in 626 BC , which drastically weakened it , and eventually led to a number of its former subject peoples ; the Babylonians , Chaldeans , Medes , Persians , Scythians and Cimmerians , forming an alliance and attacking the civil war ridden Assyrians in 616 BC . The Battle of Nineveh in 612 BC eventually left Assyria destroyed for years to come . The Assyrians continued to fight on , with the aid of another of their former vassals , Egypt who feared the rise of these new powers . Harran , the new Assyrian capital , was eventually taken in 608 BC . Despite this , the Assyrians continued to fight on until final defeat at Carchemish in 605 BC . 
 A costly but victorious battle at Megiddo against the forces of Judah allowed the Egyptians to advance to the rescue , only to be defeated by the Babylonian @-@ Median @-@ Scythian alliance . Assyria was conquered by the alliance . Babylonian rule was unpopular , but did not last long . In 539 , Cyrus the Great defeated the Babylonian King Nabonidus ( ironically himself an Assyrian from Harran ) , took Babylon and made it , along with Assyria , into provinces of the Persian Empire . 
 = = Athura as part of the Achaemenid Empire = = 
 The former major Assyrian capitals of Nineveh , Dur Sharrukin and Kalhu were only sparsely populated during the Achaemenid rule . Much Assyrian settlement was mostly in smaller cities , towns and villages at plain level , in the mountains , or on mounds such as Tell ed @-@ <unk> . However , according to more recent Assyriologists such as Georges Roux , cities such as <unk> , <unk> and Arbela remained intact , and Ashur was to revive . Despite many of the Assyrian cities being left largely in ruins from the battles that led to the fall of its empire in the 7th century BC , rural Assyria was prosperous according to the Greek scholar Xenophon . After passing Kalhu and Nineveh ( which he described in ruins with only a handful of Assyrians dwelling amongst them ) , Xenophon and the Greeks turned north @-@ west , following the east bank of the Tigris River , he described rural Assyria as : 
 .. there was an abundance of corn in the villages , and found a palace , with many villages round about it ... In these villages they remained for three days , not only for the sake of the wounded , but likewise because they had provisions in abundance – flour , wine , and great stores of barley that had been collected for horses , all these supplies having been gathered together by the acting satrap of the district . 
 The testimony is an example of the rich agricultural resources of Assyria 's region and the existence of a satrap ’ s palace . It is not known exactly where this palace was located , but Layard suggest it may have been near Zakho . 
 An inscription found in Egypt written by Arsames describes Assyrian cities whom obtained administrative centres within Achaemenid rule : 
 Lair : Assyrian <unk> ( Eski <unk> ) , by the <unk> Valley 
 <unk> : Tell <unk> , 40 kilometers east of Kirkuk 
 Arbela 
 <unk> : Location unknown 
 <unk> : Assyrian <unk> ( Tell <unk> ) , 20 kilometers north of ancient city of Assur 
 Prior to the Persian rule of Assyria , The Achaemenids were greatly <unk> , and Aramaic continued as the lingua franca of the Empire in the region , with the Assyrian script being the everyday writing system . Assyrian ( <unk> @-@ Akkadian ) religion within the empire were tolerated , and the judicial system , calendar and imperial standards imposed by the Assyrians remained in force everywhere . 
 The Assyrians , like all other tributary peoples of the Persian Empire , were obliged to pay taxes to the King of Persia and , whenever the King campaigned , supply troops as well . Reliefs of Assyrian tribute bearers carved on the east and north sides of the Apadana , consist of seven bearded men : one carrying animal skins , one carrying a length of cloth , two carrying bowls , and two leading <unk> . 
 = = = Rise of Aramaic = = = 
 The Assyrian Empire resorted to a policy of deporting troublesome conquered peoples ( predominantly fellow Semitic Aramean tribes as well as many Jews ) into the lands of Mesopotamia . While this allowed some integration , it may have also led to the various rebellions within the Empire in the 7th century . By the 6th century , the indigenous and originally Akkadian speaking Semites of Assyria and Babylonia , spoke Akkadian infused dialects of Eastern Aramaic , which still survive among the Assyrian people to this day . Consequently , during the Persian rule of Assyria , Aramaic gradually became the main language spoken by the Assyrians . Even before the Empire fell , the Assyrians had made the language the lingua franca of its empire , and many could speak Aramaic , and the ruling elite of Assyria needed to have been bilingual , capable of speaking both Akkadian and Aramaic . The conquest of Assyria and the violent destruction of the cities meant that many of these bilingual skilled individuals died with their language and the Aramaic script was incorporated into the Assyrian culture by around the late 6th century BC . 
 Following the Achaemenid conquest of Assyria under Darius I , the Aramaic language was adopted as the " vehicle for written communication between the different regions of the vast empire with its different peoples and languages . " The use of a single official language , which modern scholarship has dubbed " Official Aramaic " or " Imperial Aramaic " , and be assumed to have greatly contributed to the success of the Achaemenids in holding their far @-@ flung empire together for as long as they did . Imperial Aramaic was highly standardized ; its orthography was based more on historical roots than any spoken dialect , and the inevitable influence of Persian gave the language a new clarity and robust flexibility . In 1955 , Richard Frye questioned the classification of Imperial Aramaic as an " official language " , noting that no surviving edict expressly and unambiguously accorded that status to any particular language . Frye reclassifies Imperial Aramaic as the " lingua franca " of the Achaemenid territories , suggesting then that the Achaemenid @-@ era use of Aramaic was more pervasive than generally thought . 
 For centuries after the fall of the Achaemenids , Imperial Aramaic – or near enough for it to be recognizable – remained an influence on the various native Iranian languages . Aramaic script and – as ideograms – Aramaic vocabulary survived as the essential characteristics of the Pahlavi writing system . 
 One of the largest collections of Imperial Aramaic texts is that of the Persepolis fortification tablets , which number about five hundred . Many of the extant documents witnessing to this form of Aramaic come from Egypt , and Elephantine in particular . Of them , the best known is the Wisdom of <unk> , a book of instructive aphorisms quite similar in style to the biblical book of Proverbs . Achaemenid Aramaic is sufficiently uniform that it is often difficult to know where any particular example of the language was written . Only careful examination reveals the occasional loan word from a local language . 
 A group of thirty Imperial Aramaic documents from Bactria were recently discovered , and an analysis was published in November 2006 . The texts , which were rendered on leather , reflect the use of Aramaic in the 4th century BCE Achaemenid provinces of Bactria and Sogdiana . 
 Aramaic dialects and written script survive to this day among the Christian Assyrian people of Iraq , south eastern Turkey , north eastern Syria and north western Iran . 
 = = = Revolts of Assyria , 546 and 520 BC = = = 
 In 546 BC and 520 BC , the two Assyrian Provinces of Mada and Athura revolted against the Persian Empire . Though the revolts were suppressed , it illustrated that the two regions acted in unison , suggesting perhaps an ethnic and cultural link . Having said this a rebellion could occur in several different parts of an Empire for geographical reasons and it may have been that the whole of the Mesopotamia region became swept with rebellion . 
 = = = Campaigns = = = 
 Although the effectiveness of the once invincible Assyrian army was shown to be greatly depleted by the time of its eventual collapse , the soldiers of Assyria continued to be brave and fierce warriors . Most soldiers at the time would not wear heavy armour , but rather than act as melee troops , would serve as skirmishers . The Assyrian troops were different however , since they fought as archers , cavalry and heavy infantry and were useful as front line troops . The Assyrian infantry was specifically trained to engage in hand @-@ to @-@ hand . A massive army was assembled by Xerxes in the early 5th century BC . Contemporary estimates place the numbers between 100 @,@ 000 and over a million . Whatever the number , it was enormous and the Persians summoned troops from all across their realm . Herodotus remarks that Assyrian soldiers were employed in Xerxes ' expedition to Greece . 
 The Assyrian contingent wore on their heads either bronze helmets or plaited helmets of a peculiarly foreign design which is hard to describe . Their shields , spears , and daggers , resembled Egyptian ones , and they also carried wooden clubs with iron studs , and wore . | author = Herodotus 
 = = = Influence of Assyrian art on Achaemenid sculpture = = = 
 The Assyrians continued to serve the Persians under King Darius I , who was at his time considered the greatest ruler , often styling himself as " King of Kings . " He ruled as a king over many other powerful subordinates and , as such , it was believed that a great palace should be built at the Persian city of Susa . The Assyrians were employed in the construction of this building , albeit with many other tributary peoples as well as Persians themselves . The Western Assyrians of Athura were closer to Mount Lebanon , where fine trees could be found and timber processed for Darius ' grand Palace . The Eastern Assyrians of Mada were charged with excavating gold . 
 Assyrian influence over Achaemenid art and sculpture can be seen in various areas of the empire . Examples include the doorway relief of the palaces in Pasargadae , and in the Bukan area ( near Urmia ) where various tiles are decorated with human @-@ headed winged figures , lions , and ibexes . The symbol of the Assyrian God , Ashur , was chosen as the <unk> , the symbol of God in Zoroastrianism , during the Achaemenid rule of Assyria . 
 The best example of Assyrian influence can be observed in the Gate of All Nations in Persepolis , with two <unk> ( human @-@ headed winged bull ) in the entrance . The Assyrian <unk> , however , was used to protect the palace from evil spirits , while those of Persepolis expressed meditative calm and humanity . <unk> and Assyriologists have tried to answer the question of how was the influence transmitted . Possibilities include contacts between Athura and Persia were frequent and Achaemenid architects visited the Assyrian palaces . Other suggest Assyrian slaves were brought back to Persia to have them work on the new palaces . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 As with many other countries , the primary occupation was farming . The large output of Mesopotamian farms resulted in highly populated civilizations . The chief crop that fueled the ever @-@ growing civilizations in the region was the grain barley and <unk> wheat though sesame seeds also provided a source of nourishment . Like much of the rest of the world at the time , the economy of Athura relied heavily upon the produce of the farms and the rivers , including fish and what fruit and meat could be raised in the Euphrates ' fertile soils . The agricultural year began with sowing after summer . Flooding posed a serious risk to farmers , whilst rodents were supposedly driven off by prayers to the rodent god . To ensure that such prayers were answered , tall silos were built to house the grain and keep out the mice . 
 Trees were grown for their fruit . To prevent the hot winds of the region from destroying the crops , tall palm trees were planted around the smaller trees , thus breaking the wind and shading the plants from the heat of the sun , the intensity of which provided plenty for the plants , even when shaded . Following the Persian conquest , peaches were added to the original Assyrian mix of apples , cherries , figs , pears , plums and pomegranates . Tree growing was an art mastered with tree @-@ cutting and even " artificial mating " in order to have the Palm trees yield fruit . In the north , rainfall in Athura met the demands of farming but in the more <unk> parts ( covering Mada ) <unk> were used to assist in irrigation . 
 Oxen , donkeys , cattle and sheep were raised , the latter for their milk ( which could be turned into butter ) and the former as draught animals . Pigs , ducks , geese and chickens were all raised for their meat . Hunting supplemented the food supply with birds and fish . 
 The down @-@ time resulting from farming and the seasons allowed men and women to master other skills in life such as the arts , philosophy and leisure . Without the fertile soils of the Euphrates river valley , civilization would not have come to be . 
 = = = Archaeological findings = = = 
 = = = = Kalhu = = = = 
 Kalhu ( Nimrud ) ' s buildings were dramatically destroyed during the sacking of 614 – 612 BC . However , evidence of reoccupation during the " post @-@ Assyrian period " ( 612 – 539 BC ) is noted in various areas , including the Palace of Adad @-@ nirari III , the North @-@ West Palace , the Burnt Palace and Nabu Temple complex , Fort Shalmaneser , and the Town @-@ Wall Houses . 
 Claudius Xenophon passed by Nimrud ( which he called Larissa ) in 401 BC along with 10 @,@ 000 Greek soldiers and described the city as 
 a large deserted city … Its wall was twenty @-@ five feet in breadth and a hundred in height , and the whole circuit of the wall was two parasangs . It was built of clay bricks , and rested upon a stone foundation twenty feet high … Near by this city was a pyramid of stone , a <unk> in breadth and two <unk> in height ; and upon this pyramid were many barbarians ( Assyrians ) who had fled away from the neighbouring villages . 
 Despite <unk> ’ s description of the city as being abandoned , archaeological evidence seems to show that there was some Achaemenid @-@ period occupation . Phase 3 or H in the Nabu Temple complex and Burnt Palace is described as Achaemenid occupation . They include traces of kilns on the south side of Room 47 in the Burnt Palace , together with red glass ingots and slag , which after a radiocarbon analysis yielded a date of 425 + / - 50 BC . In the Nabu Temple , a pipe lamp and a group of seven pottery vessels are considered to be " ascribed to the Achaemenid period . " There was also some Achaemenid occupation in the South @-@ East Palace : a deep footed bowl , a hemispherical bowl ( which is compared with pottery from the Achaemenid village at Susa ) , and three pottery vessels . Also in the South @-@ East Palace were two " eye of Horus " amulets , often regarded as hallmarks of Achaemenid period material culture . Another eye of Horus amulet has been found in the Town Hall Houses . In the palace of Adad @-@ nirari III , three bronze kohl sticks with castellated heads having been identified as Achaemenid period . 
 = = = = Assur = = = = 
 Like other Assyrian capitals , Assur was greatly destroyed during the battles of the century before . The importance of the city thereafter is not clear , but much evidence indicate it was a flourishing city during the Achaemenid rule . After the Babylonian conquest by Cyrus the Great , the " Cyrus Cylinder " mentions Assur as one of the cities of which cult statues were returned . In 401 BC , <unk> describes the city as 
 A large and prosperous city named " <unk> " ( Assur ) which was seen on the opposite ( west ) bank of the Tigris River . From this city , the barbarians ( Assyrians ) brought over loaves , cheeses and wine , crossing upon rafts made of skins . 
 At the Assur Temple , two shrines have been identified as being built between the fifth and third centuries BC . A few graves at the site also may have been belonged to the Achaemenid period . From the grave site , a pair of circular earrings with globules has clearly been identified as Achaemenid . These earrings are similar to the silver earring found at Dur @-@ Sharrukin near Nineveh . In another grave , Haller dates grave number 811 as Achaemenid period . The grave contained three bodies , a stamp @-@ seal showing the goddess Ishtar standing on the back of a lion . This might indicate that ancient Mesopotamian religion was still being practiced within the Assyrian population during the Achaemenid rule . Other objects from the grave 811 include a bronze fibula ; another earring , but gold rather than the earlier described silver ; different kinds of beads of silver , agate , frit and glass ; an <unk> ; a bowl made of copper ; and two pottery bottles . It is not clear , however , if all the items are Achaemenid in date . 
 = = = = Tel ed @-@ Daim = = = = 
 To the northeast of Kirkuk , the site of Tel ed @-@ Daim shows significant evidence of Achaemenid rule . A small fortified palace ( most probably for a local governor ) includes a bronze wall @-@ plaques , a bronze snaffle @-@ bit of a type well @-@ known from Achaemenid contexts at Persepolis , kohl tubes with ribbed decoration tapering , and pottery . The pottery in the palace show similarities with the pottery from Nimrud that has been identified as Achaemenid . 
 = = = = Eski Mosul Dam Salvage Project = = = = 
 In Eski Mosul Dam Salvage Project , a few items have been identified as Achaemenid period . The project was located to the northwest of Mosul , in the upper <unk> valley , and within the Assyrian heartland . In the <unk> <unk> site , various amounts of pottery have been dated Achaemenid . These include , four bowls of which have similarities of Achaemenid bowls in Susa and Pasargadae . Other times include clay spindle whorls , two iron sickle blades , and a bronze plate optimistically identified as a horse ’ s forehead plaque . A bronze finger @-@ ring with a crouching animal engraved on the bezel was also found in the site and is considered to be widespread in the Achaemenid empire . Also in the project , a grave site excavated found bodies that included a conical kohl pot and a bronze pin with a castellated top . These objects are considered to be distinctive Achaemenid type . 
 = = Assyria after the Achaemenid Period = = 
 In the late fourth century BC , Alexander the Great led his Greco @-@ Macedonian army to conquer the Achaemenid Empire . The empire 's vast territory and numerous tributary peoples ensured that rebellion would be a constant problem . This new Greek Empire relied upon the administrative system put in place by the Persians to govern these new lands ; consequently , the Assyrian lands of Athura and Mada were administrated as such by their own satraps . When Alexander the Great died , the Greek successor state of the Seleucid Empire , created in the Babylonian War , retained control of much of the Persian Empire . The Babylonian Chronicles now show the vitality of Greek culture in ancient cities like Babylon . 
 Whilst Greek rule beyond the Euphrates was subject to constant and eventually successful Iranian incursions , Assyria was forced to take the role of a frontier province , first defending the Seleucid Empire against the Parthians , later defending the <unk> Empire against the Romans . Greek rule in the East did not last long even though the cultural impacts did - by the mid @-@ third century BC , the satraps began revolting against the Seleucid Empire in Iran and Bactria establishing their own domains . A temporary revival of Seleucid Power reestablished Imperial authority in these regions in the late 3rd and early 2nd century BC but after which the Parthians soon came to incorporate the lands known as Assyria once again by the mid @-@ second century BC . 
 Rule by the Parthian Empire aimed to emulate that of their Persian predecessors , the Achaemenids , with a similar system of administration involving satraps and smaller provinces . Indeed , the main rebel behind the rise of Parthia from Seleucia was a satrap himself . On top of this , the Parthian Empire was more decentralized and power was shared amongst clan leaders , hinting at the possibility of the retention of the provinces . Mesopotamia became the heartland of the Seleucid Empire with a new capital , Seleucia , founded . As a result , much culture and knowledge was exchanged between the Greeks and the Assyrians . The invasions of Alexander the Great consisted not only of soldiers but scientists and Historians . 
 Beginning in the first century BC , the Romans began expanding their Empire at the cost of the Parthians . Initially , the nomadic military tactic of circling and shooting worked to deadly effect against the slow , heavy @-@ moving infantry of the Romans . In time however , superior technology and strategy drove the Parthians out of the Mediterranean and most of Anatolia . The Parthians continued to resist Roman rule , invading and in turn being invaded by the Romans many times , with their capital Ctesiphon being sacked three times . The consequence of these bloody and inconclusive wars meant that the Assyrian provinces bore the brunt of the fighting , with Assyrian troops fighting for one side and then , at the change of the governing of the lands of Mada and Athura , fighting for the other side . Naturally such events served to undermine the Assyrians . 
 Assyrians had begun to adopt Christianity from the first century and Aramaic remained the spoken language of the region . 
 By the second century , the Roman Empire under Trajan began to achieve the upper hand against the Parthians and established the province of Assyria along the Euphrates and Tigris . 
 From 226 , Assyria became a province of the Sasanian Empire and was known as <unk> ( " <unk> @-@ land " ) in Middle Persian . 
 In 650 , the area fell to the early Muslim conquests . However , the region remained Aramaic @-@ speaking and largely Christian well into the Middle Ages . Assyrians remain in the area to this day , and there are a number of Assyrian towns and villages in the region . In addition , cities such as Mosul , Dohuk , Erbil and Kirkuk have Assyrian populations . Most Assyrians remain Christian and retain the Aramaic language and script . 
 = Stronger ( Sugababes song ) = 
 " Stronger " is a song by English girl group Sugababes from their second studio album Angels with Dirty Faces ( 2002 ) . The Sugababes wrote the song in collaboration with Jony Rockstar , Marius de Vries and Felix Howard ; it was inspired by group member Heidi Range 's experience of being separated from her family and friends . " Stronger " is a downtempo pop and R & B ballad with a self @-@ empowerment theme . It is the third single from Angels with Dirty Faces , and was released as a double A @-@ side with the album 's title track . The song received mixed reviews from critics , who were ambivalent towards its composition . 
 " Stronger " charted at number seven on the UK Singles Chart and reached the top ten on the singles charts in the Netherlands and Norway . It peaked in the top forty in Australia and New Zealand , and many European countries . Alison Murray directed the song 's music video , which was filmed at a swimming pool in London and portrays each group member as a different persona . The single was performed by the Sugababes at the Edinburgh 50 @,@ 000 – The Final Push concert in July 2005 , and was included in the set lists for their tours in support of Three , Overloaded : The Singles Collection and Change . Lee Mead covered the ballad for his self @-@ titled studio album . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Soon after the release of the group 's debut album , One Touch ( 2000 ) , and its singles " New Year " , " Run for Cover " and " Soul Sound " , the Sugababes were dropped by their record label London Records , and band member Siobhán Donaghy left the group amid reports of in @-@ fighting with members Keisha Buchanan and Mutya Buena . Former Atomic Kitten member Heidi Range was announced as Donaghy 's replacement , and the Sugababes subsequently signed to Island Records . " Stronger " was written by Buchanan , Buena and Range , in collaboration with Jony Rockstar , Marius de Vries and Felix Howard , for the group 's second studio album Angels with Dirty Faces . The song was conceptualised during the period in Range 's life when she had not yet joined the group and was separated from her family and friends . Range related her experience to the writing process of " Stronger " , a technique which she suggested was essential for songwriting . The song was produced and mixed by Rockstar . Tom Elmhirst also mixed the song , recorded the group 's vocals and programmed it . Range has named " Stronger " as her favourite song from the group 's career , and considers it personal to her . " Stronger " was released as the album 's third single as part of a double A @-@ side with the album 's title track in CD , cassette and 12 @-@ inch single formats on 11 November 2002 . To promote its release , the Sugababes played the track to the Birmingham Mail in October 2002 as part of an interview , and visited 95 @.@ 8 Capital FM in November 2002 . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Stronger " is a downtempo pop and R & B ballad , with elements of hip hop . Daily Mail 's Adrian Thrills described it as a " <unk> @-@ measure pop ballad " . " Stronger " was composed in the key of A minor in common time , at a relatively slow @-@ paced 74 beats per minute . The song features an orchestral musical arrangement ; its instrumentation is provided by a bass guitar , violin , viola , cello , double bass , drums and keyboards . The song features a slow and dark melody , and is reminiscent of the Sugababes ' 2001 One Touch single " Run for Cover " . According to NME 's Alex Needham , " Stronger " features a similar musical style to the American R & B group En Vogue . Graeme Virtue of The Sunday Herald compared the ballad to the music of English group Massive Attack , writing : " The orchestral sweep of ' Stronger ' aims for Massive Attack @-@ style emotional sweep " . " Stronger " is a self @-@ empowerment ballad that contains an " I @-@ will @-@ survive " testimony ; the chorus is opened with the line , " I 'm all alone , and finally , I 'm getting stronger " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critical response to " Stronger " was generally positive . Andy Strickland of Yahoo ! Music described it as having " splashes of pure Massive Attack " . Stuart McCaighy of This Is Fake DIY wrote that it " sounds ace " , while Birmingham Post writer Andrew Cowen described the track as " defiant " . Dean Piper from Daily Mirror considered it the Sugababes ' best release and applauded the group 's vocals on the song . Hot Press writer Phil Udell characterised " Stronger " as " an elegant ballad way beyond their tender years " . Akin <unk> of The Guardian was complimentary about the track 's R & B elements , writing : " When they get it right on tracks such as ' Stronger ' and ' Supernatural ' the Sugababes are cool " . Fiona Shepherd of The Scotsman praised the song 's composition , calling it " tastefully restrained " . However , Barry Nicholson from NME named it the weaker track on the double A @-@ side and stated that it " leers at you for a bit , then staggers off to puke up that last Bacardi <unk> " . Marianne Gunn from The Herald called the track 's strings " inferior " and wrote that it contains " the same cheesy sentiment " as American singer Britney Spears ' song of the same name . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Stronger " debuted at number seven on the UK Singles Chart in the issue dated 23 November 2002 as part of its double A @-@ side release with the album 's title track . It became the third consecutive single from Angels with Dirty Faces to reach the top ten in the UK . The single eventually spent thirteen weeks on the chart . The double A @-@ side has sold 125 @,@ 000 copies in the United Kingdom , placing it twelfth on the Sugababes ' list of highest @-@ selling singles . The double A @-@ side debuted and peaked at number thirty @-@ four on the Australian Singles Chart on 9 March 2003 and spent nine weeks on the chart . It performed better on the New Zealand Singles Chart , where it peaked at number twenty @-@ four and remained on the chart for eighteen weeks . " Stronger " charted individually in other countries . The song performed most notably on the Dutch Top 40 chart , where it peaked at number five , spent six weeks in the top ten , and was placed 29th on its list of best @-@ performing singles in 2003 . " Stronger " reached number six on the Norwegian VG @-@ lista chart and spent fourteen weeks in the top twenty . The single peaked at number eleven on the Danish Singles Chart , and number thirteen on the Irish Singles Chart . " Stronger " debuted at number forty @-@ three on the Ultratop chart in Belgium ( Flanders ) and later peaked at number twenty . It peaked at number 23 on the Swedish and Swiss singles charts and reached the top forty on the German and Hungarian charts . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Stronger " was directed by Alison Murray . It was filmed in September 2002 at a swimming pool , located in London . Range played a stripper in the video , while Buena portrayed a gangster and Buchanan was a heartbroken woman . Range described being semi @-@ naked in front of the camera as " weird , and very invasive " . The video opens with a scene of Buena in a moving car down the streets in London , where she is sitting next to a man on the phone . She boils up the courage to leave her superstar boyfriend . After the car stops at a red light , she gets out of it and walks away , leaving her boyfriend behind yelling at her . 
 The following scenes show Buchanan , Range and Buena at an outdoor swimming pool ; Buchanan is sitting on a chair , Range is standing in front of a fence , and Buena is sitting on the pool 's stairs . Five women are later shown dancing simultaneously by the pool . The video cuts to Buchanan sitting in the middle of a support group in a room in a university , with a blackboard behind her reading " Heartbroken " and " Anonymous " . She later leaves the room , and the video then shows the Sugababes sitting on a bench near the pool . Range is shown on the stage in a nightclub disco as a stripper . Like Mutya Buena , she acts up the courage and leaves her profession , then she throws the microphone into the water in the nightclub . Meanwhile , all three Sugababes appear under the running water of a shower tap , and are shown dancing with the group of women from the previous scenes . The final scenes of the video show three children swimming underwater in the pool , resembling the members of the Sugababes . 
 = = Live performances and other appearances = = 
 The Sugababes performed " Stronger " on 27 August 2002 during an Up Close gig for the launch of Angels with Dirty Faces , organised by Scottish Radio Holdings and the Royal Bank of Scotland . They performed the single on 5 October 2002 at the University of Leeds . The trio played " Stronger " , along with many of their other songs , at the Edinburgh Corn Exchange on 18 August 2004 . The song was performed by the band at the Edinburgh 50 @,@ 000 – The Final Push concert in July 2005 , which was part of the Live 8 concert series to persuade G8 leaders to increase the assistance of poverty in Africa . The performance received mixed reviews from critics , who considered it weak . " Stronger " was included in the set list for the group 's 2004 tour in support of their album Three . In October 2006 , the Sugababes performed it as part of an acoustic set with " Shape " at the 100 Club on Oxford Street , to promote the release of their greatest hits album , Overloaded : The Singles Collection . 
 " Stronger " was featured in the set list for the group 's Overloaded tour , in which the performances were accompanied by footage of their Comic Relief trip to Africa . The band performed the song in December 2007 in Glasgow , Scotland , as part of an acoustic gig . The single also appeared on the set list for their 2008 Change Tour , in support of their fifth studio album Change . The Journal 's Kat Keogh wrote that their performance at the Newcastle City Hall " displayed a confident shift from moody pop princesses to sassy Supremes @-@ style harmony " . The group performed " Stronger " on 27 June 2009 at the Cannock Chase Forrest as part of a 75 @-@ minute show , and on 10 July 2009 at County Durham 's Riverside Ground along with many of their other singles . The fourth line @-@ up of the Sugababes , consisting of Range , Amelle Berrabah and Jade Ewen , performed the song at the London <unk> in March 2010 as part of a gig . 
 English musical theatre actor Lee Mead covered " Stronger " for his self @-@ titled album . Alex Fletcher of Digital Spy characterised the cover as " the only tune on the record with the sort of story @-@ telling lyrics that are fitting for Mead 's dramatic style " , while Michael Quinn from the BBC described it as " more sweetly plaintive " than the Sugababes ' version . " Stronger " was used in an anti @-@ bullying advertisement that depicts a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old girl with her mouthed stitched up . The advertisement was banned from appearing on television , although it was permitted by the Cinema Advertising Association to appear in cinemas across Britain from 19 January 2010 . The music video for " Stronger " became the subject of media attention in June 2011 after a member of Scotland 's <unk> movement posted it on the group 's website , claiming that it was in encouragement for victims of rape . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Keisha Buchanan , Mutya Buena , Heidi Range , Jony Rockstar , Marius de Vries , Felix Howard 
 Production – Jony Rockstar 
 Mixing – Tom Elmhirst , Jony Rockstar 
 Recording – Tom Elmhirst 
 Programming – Tom Elmhirst 
 String arrangement – Chris Elliott 
 Vocals – Keisha Buchanan , Mutya Buena , Heidi Range 
 Guitar – Jeremy Shaw 
 Bass guitar – Simon Benson 
 Drums – Jony Rockstar 
 Keyboards – Jony Rockstar 
 Violin – Perry Montague @-@ Mason , Chris <unk> , Dermot <unk> , Kathy Shave , Warren Zielinski , Mark Berrow , Julian Leaper , Simon Fischer , Benedict Cruft , Everton Nelson , Gavin Wright , Patrick Kiernan , David Woodcock , Jackie Shave , Rebecca Hirsch , Peter Hanson , <unk> <unk> 
 Viola – Donald McVay , Philip Dukes , Rachel Bolt , Peter Lale , Timothy Grant , Bruce White , Zoe Lake 
 Cello – David <unk> , Michael Stirling , Chris Elliott , Naomi Wright , David Daniels , Frank Schaefer , Nick Cooper , Anthony Lewis 
 Double bass – Mary Scully , Leon , Patrick <unk> 
 Credits are taken from the liner notes of Overloaded : The Singles Collection . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Beautiful Eyes = 
 Beautiful Eyes is the second extended play ( EP ) by American singer Taylor Swift . The EP was released on July 15 , 2008 by Big Machine Records exclusively to Walmart stores in the United States and online . The limited release EP has a primarily country pop sound and features alternate versions of tracks from her debut album , Taylor Swift ( 2006 ) , and two original tracks , " Beautiful Eyes " and " I Heart ? " , songs which she had previously written ; a DVD , featuring music videos of singles from Taylor Swift , is also included on the physical release of the EP . Like their second album , this one also features CDVU + technology that includes more than 30 pages of bonus features with an exclusive video performance , 60 printable photos , complete album lyrics , downloadable graphics , and hidden links . In addition , the packaging of the album is made from 100 % recycled materials . 
 Beautiful Eyes peaked at number nine on the U.S. Billboard 200 and topped Billboard 's Top Country Albums chart , succeeding her self @-@ titled debut album . " I Heart ? " was released as a promotional single in June 2008 . Though the EP was not heavily promoted , Swift performed the title track at a few venues . 
 = = Background = = 
 Swift received much success with the release of her self @-@ titled debut album Taylor Swift ( 2006 ) , and began working on her second studio album , Fearless ( 2008 ) , in 2007 . During that time , she received a number of e @-@ mails from fans requesting for new material to be released , which drove Swift into releasing Beautiful Eyes : " I thought this might tide them over till the new album comes out in the fall . " Beautiful Eyes is musically oriented to country pop and contemporary music . It includes new versions of tracks from Taylor Swift : an alternate version of " Should 've Said No " , the fifth single from the album , an acoustic version of " Teardrops on My Guitar " , the second single from the album , a radio edit of " Picture to Burn " , the fourth single from the album , and " I 'm Only Me when I 'm with You " , a promotional single from the album . The EP also features two original songs , " Beautiful Eyes " and " I Heart Question Mark " , which she previously wrote in 2003 . The EP 's DVD features music videos from the singles from Taylor Swift , as well as a music video made for " Beautiful Eyes " from footage from Swift 's eighteenth birthday party . 
 Swift did not want any misconceptions of Beautiful Eyes as her second album and therefore partnered with the American retail company Wal @-@ Mart to make the EP an exclusive release . The album was only made available through American Wal @-@ Mart stores and Wal @-@ Mart 's website . Furthermore , it was made a limited release because Swift only allowed Big Machine Records to manufacture a certain number of copies of the EP . She said , " I ’ m only letting my record company make a small amount of these . The last thing I want any of you to think is that we are putting out too many releases . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On the week ending August 2 , 2008 , Beautiful Eyes debuted at number nine on the Billboard 200 due to sales of 45 @,@ 000 copies . The EP spent a total of twenty weeks on the Billboard 200 . On the same week , it debuted at number one on Top Country Albums , replacing her own album Taylor Swift as the chart 's number one album . With Taylor Swift charting at number two , Swift became the first artist to hold the first two positions on Top Country Albums since LeAnn Rimes charted in 1997 with Blue ( 1996 ) and Unchained Melody : The Early Years ( 1997 ) . The following week , the EP slipped to number two and , in total , it spent twenty eight weeks on Top Country Albums . As of July 2014 , the EP has sold 316 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 " I Heart ? " was released as promotional single from Beautiful Eyes on June 23 , 2008 . Swift promoted Beautiful Eyes minimally for the reason being she did not want for misconceptions of the EP being her second album , although she did perform the title track at different venues . She first performed " Beautiful Eyes " on January 23 , 2005 at the 2005 NAMM Show , an annual music product trade show held in Anaheim , California at the Anaheim Convention Center . The performance featured Swift , dressed in a red blouse and blue jeans , performing acoustically with a guitar , sitting on a bar stool . " Beautiful Eyes " was later performed as part of Swift 's set for Stripped on August 5 , 2008 ; she wore a black , one @-@ shoulder dress and performed with a back @-@ up band while playing a rhinestoned acoustic guitar . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 As listed in liner notes . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 = = = Technical = = = 
 = Joe Tipton = 
 Joe Hicks Tipton ( February 18 , 1922 – March 1 , 1994 ) was an American professional baseball player . He played as a catcher in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) from 1948 through 1954 with the Cleveland Indians , Chicago White Sox , Philadelphia Athletics , and the Washington Senators . In 417 career games , Tipton recorded a batting average of .236 and accumulated 29 home runs , and 125 runs batted in ( RBI ) . 
 Born and raised in Georgia , Tipton played amateur baseball until the Cleveland Indians signed him . He spent two years in the minor leagues before serving in World War II . He played two more years in the minor leagues upon his return , then made his MLB debut with the Indians in 1948 . The Indians traded him to the White Sox in 1949 , then the White Sox sent him to the Philadelphia Athletics in 1950 . Tipton spent two and a half years with the Athletics before returning to Cleveland . After spending a season with the Washington Senators , he played and managed in the minor leagues for a few seasons before being banned from the minor leagues . After the ban , he moved to Birmingham , Alabama where he died in 1994 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Tipton was born and raised in <unk> , Georgia as the fifth of seven children . His birthplace was on the Tennessee border , so it was originally registered as Copperhill , Tennessee . Tipton attended Epworth High School and Copperhill High School in Tennessee , where he played on the high school basketball and football teams . He moved to Shannon , Georgia at the age of 16 in order to pursue a career in baseball . Tipton began his playing career in the Textile League with Brighton Mills in Shannon in 1938 , and spent the next three years with the Talladega team . While with Talladega , he was spotted by a scout from the Cleveland Indians organization , who signed Tipton to a professional contract . 
 After being signed by the Indians , Tipton made his professional debut with the Appleton Papermakers of the Wisconsin State League , where he had a .298 batting average and 11 home runs in 59 games . He spent most of the year there , and played in ten games with the Flint Arrows of the Michigan State League . In 1942 , Tipton was promoted to the Charleston Senators , the Indians ' Class C minor league affiliate . In one of his first games with the Senators , Tipton hit two triples and a home run to give his team the win by a score of seven to four . In 81 games with the team , Tipton had a .313 batting average . 
 = = Military service = = 
 Before the 1943 season began , Tipton joined the military to serve in World War II . He served in the United States Navy and was part of the Pacific Theater of Operations from 1943 to 1945 . During his time in the Pacific , he served on the USS <unk> Bay . The ship was part of a kamikaze attack in January 1945 ; Tipton emerged unscathed from the attack . 
 After the end of the war , Tipton returned to baseball . He spent the 1946 season with the Harrisburg Senators , and had a .327 batting average in 104 games . In 1947 , he was promoted to the Wilkes @-@ Barre Barons of the Eastern League . That season , he had a .375 batting average , which led the league . The following season , Tipton joined the Cleveland Indians for spring training . By the end of March , he was considered a sure thing to make the major league roster . 
 = = Major League career = = 
 The Cleveland Indians decided to keep only two catchers on the roster for the 1948 Cleveland Indians season , and manager Lou Boudreau chose Tipton to back up Jim Hegan . He made his major league debut on May 2 , and a month later , in a game on June 6 , he had five hits in five plate appearances to give Cleveland a win against the Philadelphia Athletics . Tipton played in 47 games over the course of the season and had a .289 batting average . He also played in one game during the 1948 World Series , striking out in his only appearance . 
 After the World Series , Indians owner Bill Veeck wanted to improve the pitching staff . Despite finding Tipton to be worthy of a starting job and despite Veeck considering trading Hegan instead , Tipton was traded to the Chicago White Sox for Joe Haynes . Early in the season , White Sox manager Jack Onslow accused Tipton of tipping pitches after a loss to the St. Louis Browns and fined him $ 500 . The two then fought and Tipton threatened to leave the team , but they buried the hatchet a short time later . He played in 67 games during the season , and ended the year with a .204 batting average and three triples . 
 On October 19 , 1949 , the White Sox traded Tipton to the Philadelphia Athletics for Nellie Fox . Fox played 14 years for the White Sox and went on to become a Hall of Famer , and as a result the trade is considered one of the most lopsided in baseball history . During spring training for the Athletics , Tipton battled Mike Guerra and Joe <unk> for the starting job at catcher . All three ended up splitting time over the course of the season . Tipton finished the year hitting .266 with six home runs and 20 RBIs in 64 games . 
 Jimmy Dykes took over as Athletics ' manager in 1951 , and had high hopes for Tipton heading into the season , saying that he " is a lot better catcher than most people think . " In May , Tipton was hit in the head by a stray baseball bat during a game , and spent some time in the hospital as a result . He split time with <unk> and Ray Murray during the season , but appeared in a career @-@ best 72 games , hitting .239 with 51 walks . After the season ended , Tipton was part of Lefty O 'Doul 's American baseball team that toured Japan . To start the 1952 season , Tipton was rumored to be the subject of a trade involving the Boston Red Sox and two of their players , but the deal never materialized . Tipton missed part of May with a kidney infection , and struggled upon returning , hitting .191 in 23 games . In late June , he was waived by the Athletics and picked up by the Indians . He spent the rest of the year with them , and finished with nine home runs , 30 RBIs , and a .225 average in 66 games . 
 Tipton remained the backup catcher to Hegan during the 1953 season . He battled a myriad of injuries throughout the season , including a bruised hand , a broken thumb , a split finger , and losing a fingernail . He finished the year with a .229 batting average in 47 games . On January 20 , 1954 , Tipton was traded to the Washington Senators for Mickey Grasso in an exchange of catchers . Manager Bucky Harris traded for Tipton in hopes that he would compete for the starting job due to his defense . Tipton served as the backup catcher to Ed Fitz Gerald in 1954 . He made his last MLB appearance on September 26 , and in 54 games he had a .223 average . 
 = = Later life = = 
 The New York Giants purchased the contracts of Tipton and Wayne Terwilliger on January 14 , 1955 , who sent them to the minor league Minneapolis Millers . While Terwilliger played for the Millers that year , Tipton had planned to retire from baseball , and never played a game for Minneapolis . Later that year , White Sox general manager Frank Lane wanted him to join the Memphis Chickasaws so that the young pitchers in the minor leagues could work with a veteran catcher ; Tipton obliged and joined the team for the 1955 season . In 60 games for the Chickasaws that season , Tipton had a .277 batting average and seven home runs . 
 After playing in the 60 games , Tipton was suspended after an argument with Chickasaws manager Jack Cassini , and after the season ended he retired from the game to work at his service station . He returned to baseball in 1957 and spent a season with the Birmingham Barons , and partway through the 1958 season , he joined the Panama City Fliers as manager . He was fired a month later , and in protest the Fliers refused to play their next game . Tipton retired afterwards , and a year later was banned for life from the minor leagues after it came to light that he accepted payouts by acting as a liaison for Jesse Levan , who was intentionally fouling off balls in order for gamblers in the stands to take advantage of them . 
 His baseball career over , Tipton moved to Birmingham , Alabama with his wife and three children , where he ran automobile dealership . He was named to the Fannin County Sports Hall of Fame in 2013 . In 1994 , Tipton died in Birmingham at the age of 72 . 
 = Funerary art = 
 Funerary art is any work of art forming , or placed in , a repository for the remains of the dead . The term also encompasses cenotaphs ( " empty tombs " ) , tomb @-@ like monuments which do not contain human remains ; and communal memorials to the dead ( such as war memorials ) , which may or may not contain human remains . 
 Funerary art may serve many cultural functions . It can play a role in burial rites , serve as an article for use by the dead in the afterlife , and celebrate the life and accomplishments of the dead , whether as part of kinship @-@ centred practices of ancestor veneration or as a publicly directed dynastic display . It can also function as a reminder of the mortality of humankind , as an expression of cultural values and roles , and help to propitiate the spirits of the dead , maintaining their benevolence and preventing their unwelcome intrusion into the affairs of the living . 
 The deposit of objects with an apparent aesthetic intention may go back to the Neanderthals over 50 @,@ 000 years ago , and is found in almost all subsequent cultures — Hindu culture , which has little , is a notable exception . Many of the best @-@ known artistic creations of past cultures — from the Egyptian pyramids and the Tutankhamun treasure to the Terracotta Army surrounding the tomb of the Qin Emperor , the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus , the Sutton Hoo ship burial and the Taj Mahal — are tombs or objects found in and around them . In most instances , specialized funeral art was produced for the powerful and wealthy , although the burials of ordinary people might include simple monuments and grave goods , usually from their possessions . 
 An important factor in the development of traditions of funerary art is the division between what was intended to be visible to visitors or the public after completion of the funeral ceremonies . The Tutankhamun treasure , for example , though exceptionally lavish , was never intended to be seen again after it was deposited , while the exterior of the pyramids was a permanent and highly effective demonstration of the power of their creators . A similar division can be seen in grand East Asian tombs . In other cultures , nearly all the art connected with the burial , except for limited grave goods , was intended for later viewing by the public or at least those admitted by the custodians . In these cultures , traditions such as the sculpted sarcophagus and tomb monument of the Greek and Roman empires , and later the Christian world , have flourished . The mausoleum intended for visiting was the grandest type of tomb in the classical world , and later common in Islamic culture . 
 = = Common terms = = 
 Tomb is a general term for any repository for human remains , while grave goods are other objects which have been placed within the tomb . Such objects may include the personal possessions of the deceased , objects specially created for the burial , or miniature versions of things believed to be needed in an afterlife . Knowledge of many non @-@ literate cultures is drawn largely from these sources . 
 A tumulus , mound , kurgan , or long barrow covered important burials in many cultures , and the body may be placed in a sarcophagus , usually of stone , or a coffin , usually of wood . A mausoleum is a building erected mainly as a tomb , taking its name from the Mausoleum of Mausolus at Halicarnassus . Stele is a term for erect stones that are often what are now called gravestones . Ship burials are mostly found in coastal Europe , while chariot burials are found widely across Eurasia . Catacombs , of which the most famous examples are those in Rome and Alexandria , are underground cemeteries connected by tunnelled passages . A large group of burials with traces remaining above ground can be called a necropolis ; if there are no such visible structures , it is a grave field . A cenotaph is a memorial without a burial . 
 The word " funerary " strictly means " of or pertaining to a funeral or burial " , but there is a long tradition in English of applying it not only to the practices and artefacts directly associated with funeral rites , but also to a wider range of more permanent memorials to the dead . Particularly influential in this regard was John <unk> 's Ancient <unk> Monuments ( 1631 ) , the first full @-@ length book to be dedicated to the subject of tomb memorials and epitaphs . More recently , some scholars have challenged the usage : Phillip Lindley , for example , makes a point of referring to " tomb monuments " , saying " I have avoided using the term ' funeral monuments ' because funeral effigies were , in the Middle Ages , temporary products , made as substitutes for the <unk> corpse for use during the funeral ceremonies " . Others , however , have found this distinction " rather pedantic " . 
 Related genres of commemorative art for the dead take many forms , such as the moai figures of Easter Island , apparently a type of sculpted ancestor portrait , though hardly individualized . These are common in cultures as diverse as Ancient Rome and China , in both of which they are kept in the houses of the descendants , rather than being buried . Many cultures have psychopomp figures , such as the Greek Hermes and Etruscan <unk> , who help conduct the spirits of the dead into the afterlife . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ history = = = 
 Most of humanity 's oldest known archaeological constructions are tombs . Mostly megalithic , the earliest instances date to within a few centuries of each other , yet show a wide diversity of form and purpose . Tombs in the Iberian peninsula have been dated through thermoluminescence to c . <unk> BCE , and some burials at the Carnac stones in Brittany also date back to the fifth millennium BCE . The commemorative value of such burial sites are indicated by the fact that , at some stage , they became elevated , and that the constructs , almost from the earliest , sought to be monumental . This effect was often achieved by encapsulating a single corpse in a basic pit , surrounded by an elaborate ditch and drain . Over @-@ ground commemoration is thought to be tied to the concept of collective memory , and these early tombs were likely intended as a form of ancestor @-@ worship , a development available only to communities that had advanced to the stage of settled livestock and formed social roles and relationships and specialized sectors of activity . 
 In Neolithic and Bronze Age societies , a great variety of tombs are found , with tumulus mounds , megaliths , and pottery as recurrent elements . In Eurasia , a dolmen is the exposed stone framework for a chamber tomb originally covered by earth to make a mound which no longer exists . Stones may be carved with geometric patterns ( petroglyphs ) , for example cup and ring marks . Group tombs were made , the social context of which is hard to decipher . Urn burials , where bones are buried in a pottery container , either in a more elaborate tomb , or by themselves , are widespread , by no means restricted to the <unk> culture which is named after them , or even to Eurasia . Menhirs , or " standing stones " , seem often to mark graves or serve as memorials , while the later runestones and image stones often are cenotaphs , or memorials apart from the grave itself ; these continue into the Christian period . The <unk> stone circles are a later African form of tomb markers . 
 = = = Ancient Egypt and Nubia = = = 
 Egyptian funerary art was inseparably connected to the religious belief that life continued after death – even more , it expressed a belief that " death is a mere phase of life " . Aesthetic objects and images connected with this belief were partially intended to preserve material goods , wealth and status for the journey between this life and the next , and to " commemorate the life of the tomb owner ... depict performance of the burial rites , and in general present an environment that would be conducive to the tomb owner 's rebirth . " In this context , Egyptian mummies encased in one or more layers of decorated coffin , are famous ; canopic jars preserved the internal organs . A special category of Ancient Egyptian funerary texts clarify the purposes of the burial customs . The early mastaba type of tomb had a sealed underground burial chamber but an offering @-@ chamber on the ground level for visits by the living , a pattern repeated in later types of tomb . A Ka statue effigy of the deceased might be walled up in a <unk> connected to the offering chamber by vents that allowed the smell of incense to reach the effigy . The walls of important tomb @-@ chambers and offering chambers were heavily decorated with reliefs in stone or sometimes wood , or paintings , depicting religious scenes , portraits of the deceased , and at some periods vivid images of everyday life , depicting the afterlife . The chamber decoration usually centred on a " false door " , through which only the soul of the deceased could pass , to receive the offerings left by the living . 
 Representational art , such as individual portraiture of the deceased , is found extremely early on and continues into the Roman period in the encaustic Faiyum funerary portraits applied to coffins . However , it is still hotly debated whether there was realistic portraiture in Ancient Egypt . The purpose of the life @-@ sized reserve heads found in burial shafts or tombs of nobles of the Fourth dynasty is not well understood ; they may have been a discreet method of <unk> an edict by Khufu forbidding nobles from creating statues of themselves , or may have protected the deceased 's spirit from harm or magically eliminated any evil in it , or perhaps functioned as alternate containers for the spirit if the body should be harmed in any way . 
 Architectural works such as the massive Great Pyramid and two smaller ones built during the Old Kingdom in the Giza Necropolis and ( much later , from about 1500 BCE ) the tombs in the Valley of the Kings were built for royalty and the elite . The Theban Necropolis was later an important site for mortuary temples and mastaba tombs . The Kushite kings who conquered Egypt and ruled as pharaohs during the Twenty @-@ fifth dynasty were greatly influenced by Egyptian funerary customs , employing mummification , canopic jars and <unk> funerary figurines . They also built the Nubian pyramids , which in both size and design more closely resemble the smaller Seventeenth dynasty pyramids at Thebes than those of the Old Kingdom near Memphis . 
 Lower @-@ class citizens used common forms of funerary art — including shabti figurines ( to perform any labor that might be required of the dead person in the afterlife ) , models of the scarab beetle and funerary texts — which they believed would protect them in the afterlife . During the Middle Kingdom , miniature wooden or clay models depicting scenes from everyday life became popular additions to tombs . In an attempt to duplicate the activities of the living in the afterlife , these models show laborers , houses , boats and even military formations which are scale representations of the ideal ancient Egyptian afterlife . 
 = = = Ancient Greece = = = 
 The ancient Greeks did not generally leave elaborate grave goods , except for a coin to pay Charon , the ferryman to Hades , and pottery ; however the <unk> or funeral oration from which the word epitaph comes was regarded as of great importance , and animal sacrifices were made . Those who could afford them erected stone monuments , which was one of the functions of kouros statues in the Archaic period before about 500 BCE . These were not intended as portraits , but during the Hellenistic period , realistic portraiture of the deceased was introduced and family groups were often depicted in bas @-@ relief on monuments , usually surrounded by an architectural frame . The walls of tomb chambers were often painted in fresco , although few examples have survived in as good condition as the Tomb of the Diver from southern Italy or the tombs at Vergina in Macedon . Almost the only surviving painted portraits in the classical Greek tradition are found in Egypt rather than Greece . The Fayum mummy portraits , from the very end of the classical period , were portrait faces , in a Graeco @-@ Roman style , attached to mummies . 
 Early Greek burials were frequently marked above ground by a large piece of pottery , and remains were also buried in urns . Pottery continued to be used extensively inside tombs and graves throughout the classical period . The <unk> is a small coffin or ash @-@ chest , usually of decorated terracotta . The two @-@ handled <unk> was primarily associated with weddings , as it was used to carry water for the nuptial bath . However , it was also placed in the tombs of the unmarried , " presumably to make up in some way for what they had missed in life . " The one @-@ handled <unk> had many household uses , but outside the household , its principal use was the decoration of tombs . Scenes of a descent to the underworld of Hades were often painted on these , with the dead depicted beside Hermes , Charon or both — though usually only with Charon . Small pottery figurines are often found , though it is hard to decide if these were made especially for placement in tombs ; in the case of the Hellenistic Tanagra figurines , this seems probably not the case . But silverware is more often found around the fringes of the Greek world , as in the royal Macedonian tombs of Vergina , or in the neighbouring cultures such as those of Thrace or the Scythians . 
 The extension of the Greek world after the conquests of Alexander the Great brought peoples with different tomb @-@ making traditions into the Hellenistic sphere , resulting in new formats for art in Greek styles . A generation before Alexander , Mausolus was a Hellenized satrap or semi @-@ independent ruler under the Persian Empire , whose enormous tomb ( begun 353 BCE ) was wholly exceptional in the Greek world – together with the Pyramids it was the only tomb to be included in the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World . The exact form of the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus , which gave the name to the form , is now unclear , and there are several alternative reconstructions that seek to reconcile the archaeological evidence with descriptions in literature . It had the size and some elements of the design of the Greek temple , but was much more vertical , with a square base and a pyramidal roof . There were quantities of large sculpture , of which most of the few surviving pieces are now in the British Museum . Other local rulers adapted the high @-@ relief temple frieze for very large sarcophagi , starting a tradition which was to exert a great influence on Western art up to 18th @-@ century Neo @-@ Classicism . The late 4th @-@ century Alexander Sarcophagus was in fact made for another Hellenized Eastern ruler , one of a number of important sarcophagi found at Sidon in the modern Lebanon . The two long sides show Alexander 's great victory at the Battle of Issus and a lion hunt ; such violent scenes were common on ostentatious classical sarcophagi from this period onwards , with a particular revival in Roman art of the 2nd century . More peaceful mythological scenes were popular on smaller sarcophagi , especially of Bacchus . 
 = = = Etruscans = = = 
 Objects connected with death , in particular sarcophagi and cinerary urns , form the basis of much of current knowledge of the ancient Etruscan civilization and its art , which once competed with the culture of ancient Rome , but was eventually absorbed into it . The sarcophagi and the lids of the urns often incorporate a reclining image of the deceased . The reclining figures in some Etruscan funerary art are shown using the mano cornuta to protect the grave . 
 The motif of the funerary art of the 7th and 6th centuries BCE was typically a feasting scene , sometimes with dancers and musicians , or athletic competitions . Household bowls , cups , and pitchers are sometimes found in the graves , along with food such as eggs , pomegranates , honey , grapes and olives for use in the afterlife . From the 5th century , the mood changed to more somber and gruesome scenes of parting , where the deceased are shown leaving their loved ones , often surrounded by underworld demons , and <unk> , such as <unk> or the winged female Vanth . The underworld figures are sometimes depicted as gesturing impatiently for a human to be taken away . The handshake was another common motif , as the dead took leave of the living . This often took place in front of or near a closed double doorway , presumably the portal to the underworld . Evidence in some art , however , suggests that the " handshake took place at the other end of the journey , and represents the dead being greeted in the Underworld " . 
 = = = Ancient Rome = = = 
 See also : Roman funerary art 
 The burial customs of the ancient Romans were influenced by both of the first significant cultures whose territories they conquered as their state expanded , namely the Greeks of Magna Graecia and the Etruscans . The original Roman custom was cremation , after which the burnt remains were kept in a pot , ash @-@ chest or urn , often in a columbarium ; pre @-@ Roman burials around Rome often used hut @-@ urns — little pottery houses . From about the 2nd century CE , inhumation ( burial of unburnt remains ) in sarcophagi , often elaborately carved , became more fashionable for those who could afford it . Greek @-@ style medallion portrait sculptures on a stela , or small mausoleum for the rich , housing either an urn or sarcophagus , were often placed in a location such as a roadside , where it would be very visible to the living and perpetuate the memory of the dead . Often a couple are shown , signifying a longing for reunion in the afterlife rather than a double burial ( see married couple funerary reliefs ) . 
 In later periods , life @-@ size sculptures of the deceased reclining as though at a meal or social gathering are found , a common Etruscan style . Family tombs for the grandest late Roman families , like the Tomb of the <unk> , were large mausoleums with facilities for visits by the living , including kitchens and bedrooms . The Castel Sant 'Angelo , built for Hadrian , was later converted into a fortress . Compared to the Etruscans , though , there was less emphasis on provision of a lifestyle for the deceased , although paintings of useful objects or pleasant activities , like hunting , are seen . Ancestor portraits , usually in the form of wax masks , were kept in the home , apparently often in little cupboards , although grand patrician families kept theirs on display in the atrium . They were worn in the funeral processions of members of the family by persons wearing appropriate costume for the figure represented , as described by Pliny the Elder and Polybius . Pliny also describes the custom of having a bust @-@ portrait of an ancestor painted on a round bronze shield ( <unk> ) , and having it hung in a temple or other public place . No examples of either type have survived . 
 By the late Republic there was considerable competition among wealthy Romans for the best locations for tombs , which lined all the approach roads to the city up to the walls , and a variety of exotic and unusual designs sought to catch the attention of the passer @-@ by and so perpetuate the memory of the deceased and increase the prestige of their family . Examples include the Tomb of <unk> the Baker , a freedman , the Pyramid of Cestius , and the Mausoleum of Caecilia Metella , all built within a few decades of the start of the Common Era . 
 In Italy , sarcophagi were mostly intended to be set against the wall of the tomb , and only decorated on three sides , in contrast to the free @-@ standing styles of Greece and the Eastern Empire . The relief scenes of Hellenistic art became even more densely crowded in later Roman sarcophagi , as for example in the 2nd @-@ century <unk> sarcophagus , and various styles and forms emerged , such as the columnar type with an " architectural background of columns and niches for its figures " . A well @-@ known Early Christian example is the Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus , used for an important new convert who died in 359 . Many sarcophagi from leading centres were exported around the Empire . The Romans had already developed the expression of religious and philosophical ideas in narrative scenes from Greek mythology , treated allegorically ; they later transferred this habit to Christian ideas , using biblical scenes . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Funerary art varied greatly across Chinese history . Tombs of early rulers rival the ancient Egyptians for complexity and value of grave goods , and have been similarly pillaged over the centuries by tomb robbers . For a long time , literary references to jade burial suits were regarded by scholars as fanciful myths , but a number of examples were excavated in the 20th century , and it is now believed that they were relatively common among early rulers . Knowledge of pre @-@ dynastic Chinese culture has been expanded by spectacular discoveries at <unk> and other sites . Very large tumuli could be erected , and later , mausoleums . Several special large shapes of Shang dynasty bronze ritual vessels were probably made for burial only ; large numbers were buried in elite tombs , while other sets remained above ground for the family to use in making offerings in ancestor veneration rituals . The Tomb of Fu Hao ( c . BCE 1200 ) is one of the few undisturbed royal tombs of the period to have been excavated — most funerary art has appeared on the art market without archaeological context . 
 The discovery in 1974 of the Terracotta army located the tomb of the First Qin Emperor ( died 210 BCE ) , but the main tumulus , of which literary descriptions survive , has not been excavated . Remains surviving above ground from several imperial tombs of the Han dynasty show traditions maintained until the end of imperial rule . The tomb itself is an " underground palace " beneath a sealed tumulus surrounded by a wall , with several buildings set at some distance away down avenues for the observation of rites of veneration , and the accommodation of both permanent staff and those visiting to perform rites , as well as gateways , towers and other buildings . 
 Chinese imperial tombs are typically approached by a " spirit road " , sometimes several kilometres long , lined by statues of guardian figures , based on both humans and animals . A tablet extolling the virtues of the deceased , mounted on a stone representation of <unk> in the form of a tortoise , is often the centerpiece of the ensemble . In Han tombs the guardian figures are mainly of " lions " and " chimeras " ; in later periods they are much more varied . A looted tomb with fine paintings is the Empress Dowager <unk> tomb of the 5th century CE , and the many tombs of the 7th @-@ century Tang dynasty Qianling Mausoleum group are an early example of a generally well @-@ preserved ensemble . 
 The complex of Goguryeo Tombs , from a kingdom of the 5th to 7th centuries which included modern Korea , are especially rich in paintings . Only one of the Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties has been excavated , in 1956 , with such disastrous results for the conservation of the thousands of objects found , that subsequently the policy is to leave them undisturbed . 
 The Lei Cheng Uk Han Tomb Museum in Hong Kong displays a far humbler middle @-@ class Han dynasty tomb , and the mid @-@ 2nd @-@ century Wu Family tombs of <unk> County , Shandong are the most important group of commoner tombs for funerary stones . The walls of both the offering and burial chambers of tombs of commoners from the Han period may be decorated with stone slabs carved or engraved in very low relief with crowded and varied scenes , which are now the main indication of the style of the lost palace frescoes of the period . A cheaper option was to use large clay tiles which were carved or impressed before firing . After the introduction of Buddhism , carved " funerary couches " featured similar scenes , now mostly religious . During the Han Dynasty , miniature ceramic models of buildings were often made to accompany the deceased in the graves ; to them is owed much of what is known of ancient Chinese architecture . Later , during the Six Dynasties , sculptural miniatures depicting buildings , monuments , people and animals adorned the tops of the <unk> funerary vessels . The outsides of tombs often featured monumental brick or stone @-@ carved pillar @-@ gates ( que <unk> ) ; an example from 121 CE appears to be the earliest surviving Chinese architectural structure standing above ground . Tombs of the Tang Dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) are often rich in glazed pottery figurines of horses , servants and other subjects , whose forceful and free style is greatly admired today . The tomb art reached its peak in the Song and Jin periods ; most spectacular tombs were built by rich commoners . 
 Early burial customs show a strong belief in an afterlife and a spirit path to it that needed facilitating . Funerals and memorials were also an opportunity to reaffirm such important cultural values as filial piety and " the honor and respect due to seniors , the duties incumbent on juniors " The common Chinese funerary symbol of a woman in the door may represent a " basic male fantasy of an <unk> afterlife with no restrictions : in all the doorways of the houses stand available women looking for newcomers to welcome into their chambers " Han Dynasty inscriptions often describe the filial mourning for their subjects , for example text from a funeral stele for the daughter of a scholar @-@ official of the dynasty , which described the " hurt and grief " of her two sons : 
 = = = Korea = = = 
 Murals painted on the walls of the Goguryeo Tombs are examples of Korean painting from its Three Kingdoms era . Although thousands of these tombs have been found , only about 100 have murals . These tombs are often named for the dominating theme of the murals – these include the Tomb of the Dancers , the Tomb of the Hunters , the Tomb of the Four Spirits , and the Tomb of the Wrestlers . Heavenly bodies are a common motif , as are depictions of events from the lives of the royalty and nobles whose bodies had been entombed . The former include the sun , represented as a three @-@ legged bird inside a wheel , and the various constellations , including especially the Four directional constellations : the Azure Dragon of the East , the Vermilion Bird of the South , the White Tiger of the West , and the Black Tortoise of the North . 
 The Royal Tombs of the Joseon Dynasty in Korea , built between 1408 and 1966 , reflect a combination of Chinese and Japanese traditions , with a tomb mound , often surrounded by a screen wall of stone blocks , and sometimes with stone animal figures above ground , not unlike the Japanese haniwa figures ( see below ) . There is usually one or more T @-@ shaped shrine buildings some distance in front of the tomb , which is set in extensive grounds , usually with a hill behind them , and facing a view towards water and distant hills . They are still a focus for ancestor worship rituals . From the 15th century , they became more simple , while retaining a large landscape setting . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 The Kofun period of Japanese history , from the 3rd to 6th centuries CE , is named after <unk> , the often enormous keyhole @-@ shaped Imperial mound @-@ tombs , often on a moated island . None of these have ever been allowed to be excavated , so their possibly spectacular contents remain unknown . Late examples which have been investigated , such as the <unk> Tomb , had been robbed of most of their contents , but the <unk> Tomb retains mural paintings . Lower down the social scale in the same period , terracotta haniwa figures , as much as a metre high , were deposited on top of aristocratic tombs as grave markers , with others left inside , apparently representing possessions such as horses and houses for use in the afterlife . Both <unk> mounds and haniwa figures appear to have been discontinued as Buddhism became the dominant Japanese religion . 
 Since then , Japanese tombs have been typically marked by elegant but simple rectangular vertical gravestones with inscriptions . Funerals are one of the areas in Japanese life where Buddhist customs are followed even by those who followed other traditions , such as Shinto . The bodaiji is a special and very common type of temple whose main purpose is as a venue for rites of ancestor worship , though it is often not the actual burial site . This was originally a custom of the feudal lords , but was adopted by other classes from about the 16th century . Each family would use a particular bodaiji over generations , and it might contain a second " grave " if the actual burial were elsewhere . Many later emperors , from the 13th to 19th centuries , are buried simply at the Imperial bodaiji , the Tsuki no wa no <unk> mausoleum in the <unk> @-@ ji temple at Kyoto . 
 = = = The Americas = = = 
 Unlike many Western cultures , that of Mesoamerica is generally lacking in sarcophagi , with a few notable exceptions such as that of <unk> the Great or the now @-@ lost sarcophagus from the Olmec site of La Venta . Instead , most Mesoamerican funerary art takes the form of grave goods and , in Oaxaca , funerary urns holding the ashes of the deceased . Two well @-@ known examples of Mesoamerican grave goods are those from Jaina Island , a Maya site off the coast of Campeche , and those associated with the Western Mexico shaft tomb tradition . The tombs of Mayan rulers can only normally be identified by inferences drawn from the lavishness of the grave goods and , with the possible exception of vessels made from stone rather than pottery , these appear to contain no objects specially made for the burial . 
 The Jaina Island graves are noted for their abundance of clay figurines . Human remains within the roughly 1 @,@ 000 excavated graves on the island ( out of 20 @,@ 000 total ) were found to be accompanied by glassware , <unk> , or pottery , as well as one or more ceramic figurines , usually resting on the occupant 's chest or held in their hands . The function of these figurines is not known : due to gender and age mismatches , they are unlikely to be portraits of the grave occupants , although the later figurines are known to be representations of goddesses . 
 The so @-@ called shaft tomb tradition of western Mexico is known almost exclusively from grave goods , which include hollow ceramic figures , obsidian and shell jewelry , pottery , and other items ( see this Flickr photo for a reconstruction ) . Of particular note are the various ceramic tableaux including village scenes , for example , players engaged in a Mesoamerican ballgame . Although these tableaux may merely depict village life , it has been proposed that they instead ( or also ) depict the underworld . Ceramic dogs are also widely known from looted tombs , and are thought by some to represent <unk> ( soul guides ) , although it should also be noted that dogs were often the major source of protein in ancient Mesoamerica . 
 The Zapotec civilization of Oaxaca is particularly known for its clay funerary urns , such as the " bat god " shown at right . Numerous types of urns have been identified . While some show deities and other supernatural beings , others seem to be portraits . Art historian George Kubler is particularly enthusiastic about the craftsmanship of this tradition : 
 No other American potters ever explored so completely the plastic conditions of wet clay or retained its forms so completely after firing ... [ they ] used its wet and ductile nature for fundamental geometric modelling and cut the material , when half @-@ dry , into smooth planes with sharp edges of an unmatched brilliance and suggestiveness of form . 
 The Maya <unk> <unk> cave tombs and other sites contain paintings , carved stelae , and grave goods in pottery , jade and metal , including death masks . In dry areas , many ancient textiles have been found in graves from South America 's Paracas culture , which wrapped its mummies tightly in several layers of elaborately patterned cloth . Elite Moche graves , containing especially fine pottery , were incorporated into large adobe structures also used for human sacrifices , such as the <unk> de la Luna . Andean cultures such as the <unk> often practiced mummification and left grave goods in precious metals with jewels , including <unk> ritual knives and gold funerary masks , as well as pottery . 
 The <unk> of the Mogollon culture buried their dead with bowls on top of their heads and ceremonially " killed " each bowl with a small hole in the centre so that the deceased 's spirit could rise to another world . <unk> funerary bowls show scenes of hunting , gambling , planting crops , fishing , sexual acts and births . 
 Some of the North American mounds , such as Grave Creek Mound ( c . 250 – 150 BCE ) in West Virginia , functioned as burial sites , while others had different purposes . 
 = = Traditional societies = = 
 There is an enormous diversity of funeral art from traditional societies across the world , much of it in perishable materials , and some is mentioned elsewhere in the article . In traditional African societies , masks often have a specific association with death , and some types may be worn mainly or exclusively for funeral ceremonies . The funeral ceremonies of the Indigenous Australians typically feature body painting ; the <unk> and Tiwi people create carved <unk> burial poles from ironwood trunks , while elaborately carved burial trees have been used in south @-@ eastern Australia . The Toraja people of central Sulawesi are famous for their burial practices , which include the setting @-@ up of effigies of the dead on cliffs . The 19th- and 20th @-@ century royal <unk> Tombs in Uganda , destroyed by fire in 2010 , were a circular compound of thatched buildings similar to those inhabited by the earlier <unk> when alive , but with special characteristics . 
 In several cultures , goods for use in the afterlife are still interred or cremated , for example Hell bank notes in East Asian communities . In Ghana , mostly among the Ga people , elaborate figurative coffins in the shape of cars , boats or animals are made of wood . These were introduced in the 1950s by Seth Kane <unk> . 
 = = Funerary art and religion = = 
 = = = Hinduism = = = 
 Cremation is traditional among Hindus , who also believe in reincarnation , and there is far less of a tradition of funerary monuments in Hinduism than in other major religions . However , there are regional , and relatively recent , traditions among royalty , and the samādhi mandir is a memorial temple for a saint . Both may be influenced by Islamic practices . The mausoleums of the kings of Orchha , from the 16th century onwards , are among the best known . Other rulers were commemorated by memorial temples of the normal type for the time and place , which like similar buildings from other cultures fall outside the scope of this article , though Angkor Wat in Cambodia , the most spectacular of all , must be mentioned . 
 = = = Buddhism = = = 
 Buddhist tombs themselves are typically simple and modest , although they may be set within temples , sometimes large complexes , built for the purpose in the then @-@ prevailing style . According to tradition , the remains of the Buddha 's body after cremation were entirely divided up into relics ( <unk> ) , which played an important part in early Buddhism . The stupa developed as a monument enclosing deposits of relics of the Buddha from plain hemispherical mounds in the 3rd century BCE to elaborate structures such as those at Sanchi in India and Borobudur in Java . Regional variants such as the pagoda of China and Japan and the candi of Indonesia evolved from the Indian form . However , none of these can strictly be called tombs . Some important Tibetan lamas are buried in relatively small chortens ( Tibetan stupas ) , sometimes of precious metal , inside or outside monasteries , sometimes after mummification . There are examples at <unk> Monastery in <unk> and <unk> Monastery in Sikkim , as well as the Potala Palace in Lhasa and many other monasteries . However , most chortens do not function as tombs . 
 = = = Christianity = = = 
 The Catacombs of Rome contain most of the surviving Christian art of the Early Christian period , mainly in the form of frescos and sculpted sarcophagi . They show a Christian iconography emerging , initially from Roman popular decorative art , but later borrowing from official imperial and pagan motifs . Initially , Christians avoided iconic images of religious figures , and sarcophagi were decorated with ornaments , Christian symbols like the Chi Rho monogram and , later , narrative religious scenes . The Early Christians ' habit , after the end of their persecution , of building churches ( most famously St Peter 's , Rome ) over the burial places of martyrs who had originally been buried discreetly or in a mass grave perhaps led to the most distinctive feature of Christian funerary art , the church monument , or tomb inside a church . The beliefs of many cultures , including Judaism and Hinduism as well as classical paganism , consider the dead ritually impure and avoid mixing temples and cemeteries ( though see above for Moche , and below for Islamic culture ) . 
 Christians believed in a bodily resurrection of the dead at the Second Coming of Christ , and the Catholic Church only relaxed its opposition to cremation in 1963 . Although mass ossuaries have also been used , burial has always been the preferred Christian tradition , at least until recent times . Burial was , for as long as there was room , usually in a graveyard adjacent to the church , with a gravestone or horizontal slab , or for the wealthy or important clergy , inside it . Wall tombs in churches strictly include the body itself , often in a sarcophagus , while often the body is buried in a crypt or under the church floor , with a monument on the wall . Persons of importance , especially monarchs , might be buried in a free @-@ standing sarcophagus , perhaps surrounded by an elaborate enclosure using metalwork and sculpture ; grandest of all were the shrines of saints , which became the destinations of pilgrimages . The monument to Maximilian I , Holy Roman Emperor in the <unk> , Innsbruck took decades to complete , while the tomb of Saint Dominic in Bologna took several centuries to reach its final form . 
 If only because its strong prejudice against free @-@ standing and life @-@ size sculpture , Eastern Orthodoxy could not have developed the tomb monument in the same way as the Western Church , and the burials of rich or important individuals continued the classical tradition of sarcophagi carved in relief , with the richness of the carving tending to diminish over the centuries , until just simple religious symbols were left . Constantine I and most later Byzantine Emperors up to 1028 were buried in the Church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinople , which was destroyed after the fall of Constantinople of 1453 . Some massive but mostly plain porphyry sarcophagi from the church are now placed outside the Istanbul Archaeology Museums . 
 The Tomb of Antipope John XXIII in Florence is a grand Early Renaissance wall tomb by Donatello and Michelozzo ; although classical in style , it reflects the somewhat inharmonious stacking up of different elements typical of major Gothic tombs . It has a life @-@ size effigy , also known as a <unk> , lying on the sarcophagus , which was common from the Romanesque period through to the Baroque and beyond . Ruling dynasties were often buried together , usually in monasteries ; the Chartreuse de <unk> was founded for that purpose by the Valois Dukes of Burgundy in 1383 . The Scaliger tombs in Verona are magnificent free @-@ standing Gothic canopied tombs — they are outside the church in a special enclosure , and so are unrestricted in height . Important churches like Saint Peter 's in Rome , Saint Paul 's Cathedral , London , Santi Giovanni e Paolo , Venice ( twenty @-@ five Doges ) , and the Basilica of Santa Croce , Florence contain large numbers of impressive monuments to the great and the good , created by the finest architects and sculptors available . Local parish churches are also often full of monuments , which may include large and artistically significant ones for local landowners and notables . Often a prominent family would add a special chapel for their use , including their tombs ; in Catholic countries , bequests would pay for masses to be said in perpetuity for their souls . By the High Renaissance , led by Michelangelo 's tombs , the effigies are often sitting up , and later may stand . Often they turn towards the altar , or are kneeling facing it in profile . 
 In the late Middle Ages , influenced by the Black Death and devotional writers , explicit memento mori imagery of death in the forms of skulls or skeletons , or even decomposing corpses overrun with worms in the <unk> tomb , became common in northern Europe , and may be found in some funerary art , as well as motifs like the Dance of Death and works like the Ars moriendi , or " Art of Dying " . It took until the Baroque period for such imagery to become popular in Italy , in works like the tomb of Pope Urban VIII by Bernini ( 1628 – 1647 ) , where a bronze winged skeleton inscribes the Pope 's name on a tablet below his enthroned effigy . As cities became more crowded , bones were sometimes recovered after a period , and placed in ossuaries where they might be arranged for artistic effect , as at the Capuchin Crypt in Rome or the Czech <unk> Ossuary , which has a chandelier made of skulls and bones . 
 The church struggled to eliminate the pagan habits of leaving grave goods except for the clothing and usual <unk> of the powerful , especially rings . Kings might be buried with a sceptre , and bishops with a crozier , their respective symbols of office . The 7th @-@ century Stonyhurst Gospel , with a unique Insular original leather binding , was recovered from St Cuthbert 's coffin , itself a significant object ; it was probably Cuthbert 's personal copy , which he had very likely scribed himself . The armour and sword of a knight might be hung over his tomb , as those of the Black Prince still are in Canterbury Cathedral . The Early Christian Church , to the frustration of historians of costume , encouraged burial in a plain white winding @-@ sheet , as being all that would be required at the Second Coming . For centuries , most except royalty followed this custom , which at least kept clothing , which was very expensive for rich and poor alike , available for the use of the living . The use of a rich cloth pall to cover the coffin during the funeral grew during the Middle Ages ; initially these were brightly coloured and patterned , only later black . They were usually then given to the Church to use for vestments or other decorations . 
 From the early 13th century to the 16th , a popular form of monument north of the Alps , especially for the smaller landowner and merchant classes , was the monumental brass , a sheet of brass on which the image of the person or persons commemorated was engraved , often with inscriptions and an architectural surround . They could be on the floor or wall inside a church . These provide valuable evidence as to changes in costume , especially for women . Many bishops and even some German rulers were commemorated with brasses . 
 The castrum <unk> was a temporary catafalque erected around the coffin for the lying in state of important people , usually in a church , the funerary version of the elaborate temporary decorations for other court festivities , like royal entries . These began in the late Middle Ages , but reached their height of elaboration in the 18th century . A particular feature in Poland was the coffin portrait , a bust @-@ length painted portrait of the deceased , attached to the coffin , but removed before burial and often then hung in the church . Elsewhere , death masks were used in similar fashion . <unk> were a special lozenge @-@ shaped painted coat of arms which was displayed on the house of the deceased for a mourning period , before usually being moved to hang in the church . Like mourning clothes , these fall outside a strict definition of art . 
 For some time after the Protestant Reformation , English church monuments formed the majority of large @-@ scale artworks added to Protestant churches , especially in sculpture . The English upper classes ceased to commission altarpieces and other religious art for churches , but their tomb monuments continued to grow in size to fill the empty wall spaces ; similar trends were seen in Lutheran countries , but Calvinists tended to be more disapproving of figure sculpture . Many portraits were painted after death , and sometimes dead family members were included along with the living ; a variety of indications might be used to suggest the distinction . 
 The large Baroque tomb monument continued likely to include a portrait of the deceased , and was more likely to include personified figures of Death , Time , Virtues or other figures than angels . The late medieval <unk> tomb vocabulary of images of bodily decay , such as skulls and skeletons , was sometimes re @-@ introduced , but in a less confrontational manner . Neo @-@ Classicism , led by Antonio Canova , revived the classical stela , either with a portrait or a personification ; in this style there was little or no difference between the demands of Catholic and Protestant patrons . 
 By the 19th century , many Old World churchyards and church walls had completely run out of room for new monuments , and cemeteries on the outskirts of cities , towns or villages became the usual place for burials . The rich developed the classical styles of the ancient world for small family tombs , while the rest continued to use gravestones or what were now usually false sarcophagi , placed over a buried coffin . The cemeteries of the large Italian cities are generally accepted to have outdone those of other nations in terms of extravagant statuary , especially the Monumental Cemetery of <unk> in Genoa , the <unk> <unk> di Milano and the Certosa di Bologna . In Italy at least , funerary sculpture remained of equal status to other types during the 19th and early 20th centuries , and was made by the leading artists , often receiving reviews in the press , and being exhibited , perhaps in maquette form . Monuments kept up with contemporary stylistic developments during the 19th century , embracing Symbolism enthusiastically , but then gradually became detached from the avant @-@ garde after Art Nouveau and a few Art Deco examples . Where burials in church crypts or floors took place , memorial stained glass windows , mostly on normal religious subjects but with a commemorative panel , are often found . War memorials , other than on the site of a battle , were relatively unusual until the 19th century , but became increasingly common during it , and after World War I were erected even in villages of the main combatant nations . 
 = = = Islam = = = 
 Islamic funerary art is dominated by architecture . Grave goods are discouraged to the point that their absence is frequently one recognition criterion of Muslim burials . Royalty and important religious figures were typically buried in plain stone sarcophagi , perhaps with a religious inscription . However , funerary architecture often offered a means of " moving beyond the strictures of formal Muslim burial rites " and expressing social dimensions such as status , piety , love for the deceased , and Muslim identity . A number of distinct architectural traditions arose for expressing these social elements . The Islamic tradition was slow in starting ; the hadith " condemn the building of tombs , and Muhammad himself set the example of requesting burial in an unmarked grave in one of the chambers of his house " in Medina , though by at least the 12th century , buildings of the vast Al @-@ Masjid an @-@ Nabawi complex already marked the site . The earliest identified Muslim monumental tomb , in Samarra in Iraq , only dates from 862 , and was commissioned by the Byzantine princess whose son was buried there . At some point , the tradition incorporated the idea of a garden setting , perhaps following the Islamic concept of Paradise , an association certainly made when the tradition was mature , although the difficulty of reconstructing gardens from archaeology makes the early stages of this process hard to trace . At any rate , gardens surrounding tombs became established in Islamic tradition in many parts of the world , and existing pleasure gardens were sometimes appropriated for this purpose . Versions of the formal Persian charbagh design were widely used in India , Persia and elsewhere . 
 Another influence may have been the octagonal Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem , not a mausoleum itself , but " the earliest Islamic model for centrally planned commemorative buildings " , adapting the Byzantine form of the <unk> in a building standing alone , though on a stone platform rather than in a garden . In the Persian sphere , a tradition of relatively small mausoleums evolved , often in the shape of short hexagonal or octagonal domed towers , usually containing a single chamber , like the Malek Tomb . These single @-@ chambered tombs developed into larger buildings in the Timurid and Mughal Empires , like the Gur @-@ e Amir tomb of Timur at Samarkand and the famous Mughal tombs of India , which culminated in the Taj Mahal . The Mughal tombs are mostly set in a large walled charbagh ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) or Mughal gardens , often with pavilions at the corners and a gatehouse . The Taj Mahal is atypically placed at the end of the garden , backing onto the river Yamuna ; a central placing is usual . They may have minarets , although they do not normally function as mosques . The Tomb of Jahangir lacks any dome , while the Tomb of Akbar the Great has only small decorative ones . Other Islamic Indian rulers built similar tombs , such as Gol Gumbaz . 
 In all this tradition , the contemporary architectural style for mosques was adapted for a building with a smaller main room , and usually no courtyard . Decoration was often tilework , and could include <unk> kari inlays in semi @-@ precious stone , painting , and decorative carving . No animals would be represented , but geometric patterns and written inscriptions were common . The sarcophagus might be in a small inner chamber , dimly visible through a grille of metal or stone , or might stand in the main room . Money would be bequeathed to pay for continuous readings of the Qur 'an in the mausoleum , and they were normally open for visitors to pay their respects . The Mausoleum of Khomeini , still under construction in a Tehran cemetery , and intended to be the centre of a huge complex , continues these traditions . 
 The tradition evolved differently in the Ottoman world , where smaller single @-@ roomed türbe typically stand on the grounds of mosque complexes , often built by the deceased . The sarcophagi ( often purely symbolic , as the body is below the floor ) may be draped in a rich pall , and surmounted by a real cloth or stone turban , which is also traditional at the top of ordinary Turkish gravestones ( usually in stylised form ) . Two of the most famous are in the Süleymaniye Mosque in Istanbul ; the <unk> <unk> ( " Green Tomb " ) of 1421 is an unusually large example in Bursa , and also unusual in having extensive tile work on the exterior , which is usually masonry , whereas the interiors are often decorated with brightly colored tiles . 
 Other parts of the Islamic world reflected local techniques and traditions . The 15th @-@ century royal Tomb of <unk> in Mali used the local technique of mud @-@ building to erect a 17 metre high pyramidal tomb set in a mosque complex . At the other end of the Islamic world , Javanese royalty are mostly buried in royal graveyards such as those at Kota Gede and <unk> . 
 In the Arab world , mausoleums of rulers are more likely to be a side @-@ room inside a mosque or form part of a larger complex containing perhaps a hospital , madrasah or library . Large domes , elaborately decorated inside , are common . The tomb @-@ mosque of Sultan Qaitbay ( died 1496 ) is a famous example , one of many in Cairo , though here the tomb chamber is unusually large compared to the whole . 
 = = Modern period = = 
 Funerary art tends to be conservative in style , and many grave markers in various cultures follow rather traditional patterns , while others reflect modernism or other recent styles . Public monuments representing collective memorials to particular groups of dead people continue to be erected , especially war memorials , and in the Western world have now replaced individual or family memorials as the dominant types of very large memorials ; Western political leaders now usually receive simple graves . Some large memorials are fairly traditional , while those reflecting more contemporary styles include the Vietnam Veterans Memorial , and several Holocaust memorials , such as Yad Vashem in Jerusalem , the Vel d <unk> Memorial in Paris ( 1994 ) , the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe in Berlin ( 2004 ) , and the <unk> Holocaust Memorial in Vienna ( 2000 ) . These are in notable contrast to the style of most war memorials to the military of World War II ; earlier modernist memorials to the dead of World War I were sometimes removed after a time as inappropriate . Some war memorials , especially in countries like Germany , have had a turbulent political history , for example the much @-@ rededicated Neue <unk> in Berlin and the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo , which is internationally controversial . 
 Several critics detect a crisis in public memorial style from 1945 , when the traditional figurative symbolic language , and evocation of nationalist values , came to seem inadequate , especially in relation to genocide , at least on the Western side of the Iron Curtain . In the Communist East the established style of Socialist Realism was still considered appropriate , at least by the authorities . The generation of abstracted and conceptual war and Holocaust memorials erected in the West from the 1990s onwards seems finally to have found a resolution for these issues . 
 Many large mausoleums have been constructed for political leaders , including Lenin 's Mausoleum and those for Atatürk , Jinnah , Kim Il @-@ Sung , Che Guevara and several Presidential memorials in the United States , although the actual burials of recent presidents are very simple , with their Presidential library and museum now usually their largest commemorative memorial . The Mausoleum of Khomeini is a grand mosque complex , as large as any medieval example , not least because it includes a 20 @,@ 000 place parking lot . 
 = Miss Rosa = 
 Rosa " Miss Rosa " Cisneros is a fictional character from the Netflix dramedy series Orange Is the New Black , played by Barbara Rosenblat . The character made her first screen appearance during the premiere episode titled " I Wasn 't Ready " , which aired on July 11 , 2013 . Stephanie Andujar portrayed " Young Rosa " in flashback sequences . Rosenblat originally auditioned for another character but producers asked her to portray Miss Rosa . The character is a cancer sufferer who is incarcerated in Litchfield federal prison because she committed armed bank robberies . Rosenblat did not want to shave her head for the role and a make @-@ up artist was hired to fit a prosthetic appliance to her head creating the character 's baldness . The application process took three hours , meaning that the actress had to arrive on set earlier than other cast members . Initially there was no character biography created for Miss Rosa and it was Rosenblat who implemented a Hispanic background and accent . The character is respected amongst fellow inmates and despite her criminal past she has a caring nature and good heart . 
 The show decided to increase Miss Rosa 's role during the second season ; creating a backstory episode in which she was revealed to be a daring bank robber surrounded by tragedy . Other storylines include forming friendships with Lorna Morello ( Yael Stone ) and Yusef ( Ben Konigsberg ) , growing animosity with the show 's villain Yvonne " Vee " Parker ( Lorraine Toussaint ) . The show remained focused on developing Miss Rosa 's cancer storyline and her illness progressed to terminal stages . She was used to close the second season finale where she is told she has weeks to live , escapes prison and murders Vee . 
 Critical reception of the character has generally been positive . Various critics praised the character for being the second season 's break out role . Jayme <unk> from USA Today called for Rosenblat to be handed an Emmy Award , while Arielle Calderon of BuzzFeed and Elizabeth Freda from E ! Online labelled her as one of the show 's best characters . But Kate Zernike of The New York Times criticized the character 's fake accent and Vogue magazine 's John Powers thought that she had a " clumsy " backstory . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation and casting = = = 
 The character was created for the pilot episode of the show . At the time the character did not have a surname and there was no characterization . Barbara Rosenblat attended auditions for Orange Is the New Black in New York . She originally read for the part of Galina " Red " <unk> which was later awarded to Kate Mulgrew . Later she was asked to play Miss Rosa after she impressed the casting director . Rosenblat asked her agent for more details about the character but the only information supplied was that Miss Rosa suffers from an unknown form of cancer . Little was known because only the first episode had been planned . Alongside dialogue acquired from the audition , the actress had the creative freedom to develop Miss Rosa 's image and persona . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Miss Rosa has a unique Hispanic accent which Rosenblat created and puts on . She drew inspiration from her scripts and costume . When she first placed a wig cap and looked in the mirror she began to envision how her character should sound . Though it was not until she filmed later episodes that she made a decision . Rosenblat told Anna Silman from Vulture that it was a scene involving Miss Rosa and Piper Chapman ( Taylor Schilling ) , in which she states " I could have been the <unk> " . Rosenblat said that the Spanish word made her realize that her character is Hispanic and her dialect is indicative of something Latin . 
 Miss Rosa is a complex character and as she is developed she became more humanized . Though suffering from cancer , she does not let this define her or limit what she can do . Rosenblat said that she styled Miss Rosa to be a self @-@ absorbed woman who had spent a long time incarcerated in Litchfield prison . The character 's fellow inmates have much respect for her . While the actress also wanted to play her as " classy and centered " . She is an adrenaline junkie with attitude but also has a good heart . 
 = = = Cancer = = = 
 Miss Rosa suffers from cancer but refuses to let her illness define her . Rosenblat believed that her character 's attitude resonated with viewers and she received letters of thanks from the audience and later recalled that one such letter , from a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old viewer meant a lot to her . Her storyline helped him understand elements of his grandmother 's cancer he could not grasp . Rosenblat said that these such stories relating to Miss Rosa left her " touched and moved " . 
 Miss Rosa undertakes chemotherapy to treat her cancer which leaves her bald . Rosenblat did not shave her head for the role because she worried about other roles . She had to wear a silicone " appliance " on her head and neck . Each morning on set makeup artist Josh Turri made up the appliance onto her . The process would take approximately three hours and Turri added false beauty marks , eyebrows and small veins to complete Miss Rosa 's look . Rosenblat described him as " utterly brilliant and a perfectionist ... so you got this entirely organic sense that I was utterly bald and suffering [ from ] cancer . " While on set fellow actors and crew members incorrectly assumed she had shaved her head . The weather during filming also affected Miss Rosa 's costumer . During warm weather crew shielded Rosenblat from the sun with umbrellas because the heat would cause the make up to crack . Other breaches were caused by perspiration and Turri would drain water from underneath the prosthetics prior to repairing it . At the end of each shoot it took Rosenblat 45 minutes to remove the appliance . 
 Rosenblat also recalled ( Vulture interview ) that while filming an episode directed by Jodie Foster she plucked her nipple hair . Foster was on set to talk over the logistics of how she wanted it portrayed through Miss Rosa . During season two Miss Rosa needs life saving surgery . But Sam Healy ( Michael J. Harney ) informs her that the DOC are not willing to fund the operation . Instead she is forced to continue with chemotherapy meaning she will die . 
 = = = Character expansion = = = 
 Miss Rosa played a minor role throughout the first season . Rosenblat had admitted that she only appeared sporadically and did not get to portray much . But the actress was eager to return for the show 's second season . But during the second season the role was expanded which surprised Rosenblat . The actress told a reporter from Indiewire , " I learned where Miss Rosa is from I learned why she 's in prison . You 're going to learn a lot about her , a lot that I was desperate to know , and it helps . " In March 2014 , series creator Jenji Kohan told Jessie Katz ( The Hollywood Reporter ) that viewers would be introduced to Miss Rosa 's backstory . When the writers had planned a backstory episode for the character , Rosenblat was delighted . But the development left her unsure how Miss Rosa 's story would fit into main storyline of Orange Is the New Black . 
 The episode , titled " Appropriately Sized Pots " features a young Rosa portrayed with good looks , intelligence and lots of money . She is involved with a gang who commit bank robberies . It soon transpires that each time Rosa participates in a robbery someone close to her dies . During her first heist her boyfriend Marco ( Alfredo De Quesada ) is shot and killed by a security guard . In a later robbery her new lover Andy ( <unk> Méndez ) suffers a heart attack . Left with the only other gang member Don ( Edvin Ortega ) , Rosa continues her crime spree . But she becomes obsessed with the thrill of money and raids a bank she did not check out and is apprehended for her crimes . Actress Stephanie Andujar played the character during flashback scenes . She watched Rosenblat 's version of the character so that she could portray her similarly . 
 During the season Miss Rosa has several encounters with the show 's villain Yvonne " Vee " Parker ( Lorraine Toussaint ) . Rosenblat told Taylor Cole Miller of The Huffington Post that she recalled thinking that the storyline would not have a happy ending and felt that there was a bigger story to come from it . Another storyline sees the character attending chemotherapy sessions at a hospital . Rosenblat told radio host Ira Wood that Miss Rosa meets a cancer stricken teenager Yusef ( Ben Konigsberg ) who thinks she is an " old git " . But when he learns that she is a bank robber he gains respect for her . The dialogue featured in the story was the actress ' favourite from the entire show . 
 Rosenblat was given the storyline that ties up the second season . The scenes feature Miss Rosa being told that she is going to die from her cancer . Fellow inmate and prison van driver Lorna Morello ( Yael Stone ) feels sorry for her and exits the van urging Miss Rosa to escape . The final scene features Miss Rosa driving away when she notices Vee also making an escape from prison . Recalling an earlier altercation with Vee , Miss Rosa careens the vehicle at Vee killing her instantly . Rosenblat told Silman that she joyfully screamed in the bathroom for five minutes when she learned of her character 's actions . She added " After all this effort to get rid of this woman , just evil incarnate , you know , and then I stroll along in my van . [ In Miss Rosa voice ] ' So rude , that one . ' Amazing . That final scene was really great . " During the scene Miss Rosa morphs into her younger incarnation as she becomes free once again . Rosenblat recalled the logistics of filming having to swap backwards and forth with Andujar to create the same position behind the wheel . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Miss Rosa meets new prison inmate Piper and offers her some advice . She reveals that she is suffering from cancer and undergoing chemotherapy . Miss Rosa is told that she needs an operation to improve her chances of survival . However the DOC refuse to fund the operation and she is told that she needs to keep having chemotherapy . The outcome of which means she is likely to die . She then reminisces about her past as bank robber in which all the men she kissed during heists ended up dead . She details her life to a fellow cancer patient Yusef and they bond . He decides to help her regain the adrenaline rush felt from robbery and they steal a nurse 's purse . Miss Rosa is delighted to learn that Yusef has gone into remission but is sad to say goodbye . She returns to her cell and informs good friend Anita DeMarco ( Lin Tucci ) that she is dying before smelling the money she stole from the nurse . 
 Vee approaches Miss Rosa claiming to remember her and tries to recruit her . But she is not interested and tells Vee that she is a rude woman . Vee and Suzanne " Crazy Eyes " Warren ( Uzo Aduba ) later force Rosa to move out of the canteen and ruin her meal . Morello becomes concerned for Rosa during a hurricane which leaves Litchfield without power . Miss Rosa attends a hospital appointment and is told she only has weeks to live . The prison guard seems unfazed that she will die in prison . When a prison lockdown occurs Morello uses the opportunity to help Miss Rosa escape . She takes the offer and escapes from prison and on the way spots Vee . Recalling how Vee had treated her , Miss Rosa deliberately runs Vee down and kills her . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Anna Silman from Vulture described Miss Rosa as a " no @-@ nonsense bank robber evolved from being a bit player to becoming one of season two 's most fascinating breakout roles . " She also praised the role for being " rich and unusual " . Arielle Calderon of BuzzFeed named the character as " one of the Season 2 ’ s new fan favorites " . Elizabeth Freda from E ! Online ranked Miss Rosa as the third best character from season two . The character 's backstory was her favourite . She said that a " cursed bank robber " sounded corny , but worked well . Hilary Busis of Entertainment Weekly described the character as a forgettable non @-@ entity during the first season . She also praised Stephanie Andujar 's performance as Young Rosa and called for her own spin @-@ off series to be created . Kimberley Potts of Yahoo ! TV voted Miss Rosa 's backstory as the second best one of the entire show . But Vogue magazine 's John Powers criticized it adding " bald Miss Rosa is never again as interesting after clumsy , overlong flashbacks to her criminal career . " 
 The Huffington Post 's Miller described Rosa as " the husky @-@ voiced , curmudgeonly , terminal cancer patient who comes up for air just long enough to pluck a " tit hair " or knock off a bank . " <unk> <unk> from The Kansas City Star said that " if there ’ s one thing that sticks out about her character , it ’ s that husky and seductive voice that steals every conversation . You want to hear her speak , to cling to her words and let her paint the picture . " Anita Li writing for Mashable praised the character 's friendship with Yusef stating " despite the depressing circumstances of their meeting , the pair 's chemistry is entertaining for viewers to watch . " 
 ScreenCrush 's Britt Hayes said that Miss Rosa Vee 's stories dominated the second season . But was disappointed that the two stories collided to form the series finale . She felt that it was both comical and absurd . Kevin Fallon from The Daily Beast opined that the scene Miss Rosa learns she is dying was handled phenomenally . He also said that she deserved an award for killing Vee . Kate Zernike of The New York Times criticized the characters 's accent believing it sounded more Russian . She thought Miss Rosa 's last scene was both brilliant and exhilarating . But least expected her to kill Vee because fellow enemies sparred with Vee more . But Perri Nemiroff from Screen Rant praised the ending because it was emotional . She described Morello offering her freedom as an " especially moving season @-@ ending thrill " . She summed up Miss Rosa as being a kind person and branded it all more " gratifying " when she killed Vee . Entertainment Weekly readers voted Miss Rosa killing Vee as the " most shocking moment " of season two . Jayme <unk> ( USA Today ) said that Miss Rosa provided the best moments of season two and deserved an Emmy Award . Dana Piccoli from AfterEllen.com said Miss Rosa was a character with the ability to " <unk> me and break my heart " . She branded the scene with her sniffing the stolen money as " euphoric " . Lauren Hoffman of Cosmopolitan believed that her cancer struggle almost ignorable during the first season . But viewers later saw her true self and her branded her refusal to care as her strength . 
 = Weapon dance = 
 The weapon dance employs weapons — or stylized versions of weapons — traditionally used in combat in order to simulate , recall , or reenact combat or the moves of combat in the form of dance , usually for some ceremonial purpose . Such dancing is quite common to folk ritual in many parts of the world . Weapon dancing is certainly ancient ; among the earliest historical references we have are those that refer to the pyrrhic , a weapon dance in ancient Sparta , in which the dance was used as a kind of ritual training for battle . 
 There are virtually no parts of the world left where the weapon dance is directly connected with imminent or recent combat . This is especially true of European states , which have long since moved away from the tribalism that usually gives rise to such folk dances . It is , however , also true of parts of the world where tribal traditions have succumbed to colonialism and the forces of globalism . The dances that one sees today are often part of general movements to preserve and rejuvenate tribal or local traditions . Some of these movements are quite strong now , such as those among native North American tribes and the aboriginal peoples of Australia . 
 Related to weapon dances and war dances is the dance of the hunt . A very early reference to a weapon dance of the hunt comes in the form of a rock engraving at <unk> <unk> , the large neolithic settlement in south @-@ central Anatolia . It depicts a hunting ritual involving dancers holding their bows ; one figure has a bow in each hand , two perform artistic leaps and another holds a horn @-@ shaped stick and is striking a frame drum . 
 = = Function of the weapon dance = = 
 In the modern world , dance has come to be regarded as something one does for recreation , thus distancing dance from the important place it has held in many human cultures throughout history — that is , a method of expression , preservation and transmission of the culture and history of a people . Many of the activities that humans have engaged in for millennia ( religion and courtship , for example ) have traditionally found expression in various kinds of dance . Another activity — combat — has obviously been central to the life of most human cultures ; thus , one expects to find dances that celebrate skill in the use of weapons . Indeed , there is a wide range of such weapon dances in the world ; they vary from general displays of prowess in the use of weapons to reenactments of real episodes of combat specific to a given culture . 
 = = Examples = = 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Early examples of sword and spear dances can be found amongst the Germanic tribes of Northern Europe , such as those mentioned by <unk> , the Norse peoples and the Anglo @-@ Saxon tribes . The Sutton Hoo is thought to show figures dancing with spears . Other references to such traditions include that in " Constantine VII <unk> ’ Book of Ceremonies " ( from c . 953 ) which describes the Varangian Guard ( a group made up of Norse and later English and Anglo @-@ Danish warriors ) dancing in two circles , with some wearing skins or masks , along with chants of “ <unk> ! ” and clashing staves on shields . Sword dancing exists in some parts of Europe . The weapon may be used to act out mock combat during the dance , or may be incorporated as an element of the dance itself , intertwining with other swords . In some places , sticks are used instead of swords . Iberian stick dances ( <unk> , <unk> , ball de <unk> ) display two opposite rows of dancers . A common sword dance in Europe is the moresca in Spain , in which the dance recalls the strife between Christians and Muslims in that country from the 12th to 15th centuries . The gun parade of Moros y <unk> also celebrates these battles , as does the British morris dance . 
 In Macedonia and Northern Italy , weapon dances may be used to exorcise evil spirits before a wedding . Sabre dancing exists in the Balkans ; the most famous of these is from Albania , where two male rivals simulate a duel over a woman . Northern @-@ Portuguese <unk> do <unk> involves two rivals with long sticks . Other weapons , such as axes ( or wooden versions thereof ) may be used in some places . In parts of Europe , there are lance dances , dagger dances , and even rifle dances . 
 In the Scottish Highlands , there are dances that used the Lochaber axe , the broadsword , <unk> & dirk , and the flail . The Highland Dirk Dance , resembles a combative dance similar to those of Indonesian <unk> silat , which has the performer executing knife techniques combined with wrestling style kicks , trips , and sweeps . 
 Hilt @-@ and @-@ point sword dances exist in many places in Europe . In this kind of dance the swords interlock to form a “ rose , ” or “ lock , ” that is placed around the neck of a participant to simulate decapitation . As well , crossed @-@ sword dances are common in Europe . Typically , dancers execute complicated patterns of steps over and between the swords . In some variations , clay pipes may replace the swords . Many European sword dances were appropriated by trade guilds , with tools replacing the swords . In Turkey and Greece there exists a butchers ’ dance called the <unk> . It is now a social dance , but goes back to a battle mime in the Middle Ages performed with swords and performed by members of by the butchers ' guild . Also in Turkey are the so @-@ called “ guerrilla dances ” , performed by dances arranged in a circle who make swishing and <unk> sounds with their swords ( possibly to clear the area of evil spirits ) , followed by mock combat . 
 Chain @-@ sword dance is a group dance in which the dancers first use a sword or other implement ( stick , stave , etc . ) to link themselves in a chain . In the Hungarian tradition , the <unk> cooper dance represents this form of dance . 
 <unk> , a sword dance on the Croatian island of Korčula in the Adriatic , recalls combat between Christians and Moros ( Moors ) , though in the 19th century the dance changed from Christians vs. Moors to Turks vs. Moors . 
 Historically , the Hungarian <unk> dance was a soldiers ' dance that involved virtuoso whirling of weapons and free @-@ form compositions with battle practice motifs . Such dances also appear in Gypsy , Slovak , Ruthenian , and Transylvanian folklore . In many of these areas , the so @-@ called " stick dancing " of shepherds is a reenactment of combat with real weapons . 
 In a few isolated sections of Europe , a rather savage male combat dance survives . In the villages of the Transylvania Alps and Carpathian mountains , before Twelfth Night and Whitsunday , nine men from nine villages assemble for the Joc de <unk> or <unk> , a rite of initiation . The men engage in fierce battle with sticks , which used to be bloody and sometimes fatal . 
 = = = = Basque dances = = = = 
 Some of the Basque dances feature weapons . The ezpatadantza ( " sword dance " ) comes from the Durango area and is danced for authorities and in the feast of Corpus Christi . After the dance , both opposing rows of dancers raise their weapons and form a corridor for the authorities . The ezpatadantza and the <unk> ( " stick dance " ) employs <unk> ( traditional Basque walking sticks ) , and ends with the dancers raising one of them , lying as a fallen warrior , over their heads . In the Basque province of Gipuzkoa in Spain , the <unk> <unk> is performed in Legazpi — a sword dance in which a participant dances atop a grid of crossed swords held aloft . In Tolosa , on Midsummer Day , the <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " walking stick dance " ) is performed with the figures of the ezpatadantza ; some point its origins to the border fights in the Middle Ages , when the Castilian troops from Gipuzkoa won an important victory over the troops from Navarre at the Battle of <unk> . Sticks simulate some weapons , and halberds — a combination of a spear and a battle @-@ axe — are also used . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 Baris is a traditional dance of Bali , in which a solo dancer depicts the feelings of a young warrior prior to battle . Originally , Baris was performed as a religious ritual . The dancer may bear a kris , a spear , a bow , or other weapons , depending on the variant performed . The word " Baris " literally means " line " or " file " , and referred to the line of soldiers who served the rajas of Bali . The dance is usually performed by men in a group with as few as four dancers and as many as sixty . The ritualistic function of the dance is to show physical maturity by demonstrating military skills , particularly the use of weapons . 
 In China , dances with weapon have been recorded for a long time . The founder of the Han Dynasty Liu Bang was said to be fond of the war dance of the Ba people . Large scale performances of the dance involved the brandishing of various weapons to the accompaniment of drums and songs in the Ba language . It remained popular through the Tang Dynasty and spread as far as Central Asia . The development of art dance , in general , in China reached its peak during the Tang dynasty and then was largely integrated into Chinese Opera practice . Tribal weapon dancing may also be present among the original aboriginal tribes on Taiwan ( The Republic of China ) . The Shaolin martial arts employ weapons in ways that are sometimes enjoyed for aesthetic reasons , however , similar to a dance . Shaolin spear , <unk> spear , <unk> spear , and sword and stick exercises may be included . T 'ai chi ch 'uan also incorporates sword practise in a similar way . 
 The Dayak people of Borneo are renowned for their solo sword dances , which show the skill of a young man using a sharp <unk> . Also on the island of Borneo one finds the <unk> , an indigenous ethnic group residing in Sabah . The <unk> are well known for their very colourful costumes and their dances , one of which is the <unk> , a war @-@ like dance with a man holding a sword and a shield , originally performed to portray the sword fight and heroic exploits of the headhunting days . 
 In India , the sword dance <unk> or <unk> of the Kumaon region of the hills of the Indian state of Uttarakhand started partly due to their long martial tradition and also to give protection to marriage processions . It was also held auspicious and , according to Hindu tradition , warded off evil spirits . It has a very beautiful and graceful form and has techniques which give it the status of a martial art . 
 Among the traditional weapon dances of India is the Shad <unk> , performed in the north @-@ eastern state of Meghalaya . Both Christians and Hindus may take part as long as they belong to Khasi community . Young lads clad in colourful silk dhotis dance around with a sword or spear in one hand and a plume in the other . The move in a protective circle around an inner circle of young maidens . A popular dance in Mizoram in the north @-@ east corner of India is <unk> , a word that " means spirit of the slain . " Traditionally , the dance was led by the warrior who had hunted a big game or killed a man . He would wear his best clothes and a plume of red feather . He would wield a gun or dao and a shield . He would be followed by other dancers in a row , who would also carry weapons , or cymbals or gongs . 
 The Pashtuns of Afghanistan practice a wide range of weapon dances , including the Khattak Wal Atanrh ( named after the Khattak tribe ) and the <unk> Wal Atanrh ( which , in modern times , involves the juggling of loaded rifles ) . A sub @-@ type of the Khattak Wal Atanrh known as the <unk> involves the use of up to three swords and requires great skill to successfully execute . 
 = = = Middle East and Asia Minor = = = 
 There are a number of Arab weapon dances , including the <unk> . It was originally practiced at Manga in Muscat prior to going out on a raid ; the object of the dance was to " warm up " for combat to come . Also , on the Arabian peninsula a dance named ard recalls pre @-@ Islamic tribal battles . Two rows of men face one another , clapping , singing , and dancing in a lively manner , accompanied by large frame drums . At the peak of the dance two swordsmen perform a duel between the rows of dancers . The Assyrian minority in Syria have a dramatic folk dance called the <unk> which commemorates the bloody battles fought by the Ancient Assyrians back in their time consisting of a leader ( usually a man ) in front with a sword otherwise known as a <unk> and a line of men joining together . Generally speaking , a number of dances ( also known as <unk> or <unk> ) of Bedouin origin use weapons and have achieved modern popularity in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf and are associated with festive occasions among the non @-@ Bedouin sedentary population . 
 In Iran there exists the <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " stick game " ; or <unk> @-@ e <unk> , " stick dance " ) , a dance form that probably has its origins in reenactments of combat . Essentially , an attacker and a defender duel with poles . The <unk> @-@ <unk> is “ … both a dance and a show of skill and bravery ; participants are judged by their abilities in the combat aspects , as well as by their grace in executing the dance movements . ” 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 In South Africa , such dances as the Zulu <unk> , the traditional dance most often associated with Zulu culture , is performed with drums and full traditional attire and is derived from the war dances of the warriors . Also , the military influence of the warrior King Shaka is reflected in demonstrations of stick fighting ( <unk> ) with which the male teenagers and men settle their personal differences in a public duel . 
 The <unk> ( or <unk> ) dance of the Zezuru people in Zimbabwe is an interesting kind of hybrid war dance — " hybrid " in the sense that music and dance formed a part of the actual battle @-@ field preparations , themselves , as well as of the ritual dance recalling the battle . ( The Zezuru are one of the Shona peoples who were the builders of the great monuments of the Monomotapa kingdom in Zimbabwe between the 10th and 15th centuries . ) The dance is a re @-@ creation of a battle strategy developed by the Zezuru in the 19th century against incursions of other tribes in the wake of colonialist expansion of the Boers . The dance , itself , recalls the music and dance used as a diversionary tactic on the battlefield to distract the enemy while Zezuru warriors maneuvered into position ; thus , the ritual dance involves the music and dance of the “ <unk> ” as well as warriors with weapons moving into position . 
 Ethiopia has a long , historical reputation as a place where the weapon dance plays an important cultural role . According to Lucian , a Greek writer from the 2nd century , “ The Ethiopians dance also during the battle . The Ethiopian never shoots his arrow without dancing and making a menacing gesture beforehand . He wants to frighten the enemy by his dance beforehand . ” The broad range of weapon dances includes the hota jumping dance of Amharic males ; the attack dance of the <unk> ; the stick @-@ dance of the <unk> ; the <unk> Hama <unk> , a dramatic dagger dance of the Esa ; and the shire , the saber dance of the <unk> nomadic shepherds . 
 = = = Australia , New Zealand and Polynesia = = = 
 In Australia , there are aboriginal dances that reenact hunting and combat using traditional weapons such as the boomerang . Sometimes two boomerangs are clapped together as a musical instrument to provide sounds for dances . 
 In New Zealand , Maori have raised the martial art associated with the <unk> and mere to the level of a weapon dance . The haka could also be considered as a weapon dance , as it includes elements of warlike challenge to chanting and musical ( sung ) accompaniment . 
 The <unk> <unk> , or Samoan fire knife dance , is also a kind of weapon dance . The <unk> is a standing male war dance of Tonga . The <unk> is performed by men ( less commonly women also perform it with the men as a mixed dance ) , who carry clubs or fighting sticks . The performers dance in a fierce manner to emulate combat , all to the accompaniment of a slit drum or a tin box . Additional <unk> percussion is provided by strung rattles worn on the anklets of the dancers , and the clashing together of the wooden implements of war , which today are either sticks or mock weapons . The dance is unusual for Tonga in that it lacks recited poetry as accompaniment , which fact is taken to mean that it was imported to Tonga from elsewhere . 
 = = = North and Central America = = = 
 So @-@ called “ war dances ” of indigenous North American tribes may also be classified as weapon dances . Recent interest in preserving Native American traditions has led to such groups as The Warriors of <unk> , a Cherokee dance group who recreate Cherokee dances , including the war dance , do research and offer dance workshops for their community . A dance such as the Comanche Sun Dance of the 1870s was an invocation of invulnerability to the White Man 's bullets ; the dance was a preliminary ritual to battle and would be a war dance and , hence , a weapon dance . 
 Also , the moresca ( or <unk> ) ( above ) exists in some areas in the Americas that used to be Spanish colonies — Mexico , for example . In the <unk> region of Mexico , there exists perhaps the most colorful version of that kind of dance , the <unk> dance . It represents a battle between Moors , led by Pilate , and Christians , led by James , the apostle . Sixteen male dancers take part and the dancer who plays the part of James appears as a horse rider and wears a costume that incorporates a white horse . The dancers wear ostrich feathers on their heads , a peacock feather at the front , white cotton square over their shoulders , velvet trousers decorated with gold brocade over white cotton pants and carry a machete . In addition , the leader has a hat with a small mirror and a white feather headdress . Two men at the front carry two red flags and two white flags , red symbolizing the blood spilt by James ' soldiers and white symbolizing the peace that reigned after the Christian victory . The sounds of drums and flutes accompany the dance . These dances that pit Christian against Moor are almost certainly Christianized versions of earlier , pre @-@ Cortez dances that ritualized the battle between the tiger and the eagle . 
 Similar to the Moor @-@ Christian confrontation of the <unk> — whether in Spain or in transplanted versions in Central America — there are also elaborate ritual dances in Mexico such as the Danza de la <unk> that exploit the trauma of the Spanish conquest of indigenous America . Weapons employed may be swords ( and shields ) whips , even firearms . These representations take place over a large area of Mesoamerica and , in part , are an obvious adaptation of Spanish tradition , but in Mexico will pit the native Aztec against the Spanish invader . The most interesting aspect of these dances is that — depending on where one sees them and under what conditions — it is plausible to read into the dances an outcome other than the historical Spanish victory . That is , indigenous performers may take inspiration from the fact that the natives of Spain drove out the Moorish invaders ; thus , the natives of Mesoamerica , too , shall one day drive out the invaders . 
 Some dances that abound at Carnival and Corpus Christi fiestas go back to pre @-@ Conquest ritual combat dances of the Aztecs . For example , during the 15th month of the Aztec calendar , <unk> , god of the sun and war was honored by real duels between slave victims and mimed battles among masked boy votaries . Also , among the <unk> @-@ speaking people in the Pacific Ocean region of Michoacán , there is the <unk> " dance ( the <unk> ' dance ) . The performance of this dance represents a battle between Aztecs and Spaniards , and dancers perform with rattles made of thin metal plates and wooden cudgels . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 The landscape of all dance in a large country such as Brazil is rich and complex due to the mixing of three separate traditions — Indian native , Black African , and Portuguese . In Brazil , the African influence on Brazilian <unk> is considerable . For example , capoeira — a dance @-@ like fighting style — and the <unk> fighting dance are strongly reminiscent of African dances . Capoeira is of particular interest . In the 19th century , Capoeira was played mostly by African slaves who had been brought from West Central Africa , making them the original <unk> and making the art a complex form of social interaction , expressing the participants ' physical skills and spiritual essence , involving the gods and the spirits of the ancestral fathers . The participants played during festivals and holidays , jumping and leaping in front of musical bands , military troops , and religious processions . This dance “ game ” was considered dangerous to public order and was eventually criminalized in the late 19th century . Today , capoeira has staged somewhat of a comeback and is even studied in dance academies as part of a general movement to rejuvenate folk traditions . Capoeira may be played unarmed or with blades held in the hands or feet . 
 The sticks used as mock weapons in some of these dances also serve as percussion instruments . In the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul , the machete , a tool used to cut jungle brush , is used in a dance called <unk> dos <unk> ( dance of the machetes ) . In this dance ( historically performed only by men , although this trend changes as the dance spreads ) , the dancers knock their machetes while dancing , simulating a battle . Machete are sometimes used in place of sticks in <unk> . 
 = = Weapon dance as art = = 
 Since dance is already an art form , “ weapon dance as art ” may seem redundant ; yet , “ art ” is used here to mean the re @-@ creation , say , of a folk weapon dance in a more professional staged venue , such as a ballet , or when an Australian , Native American , or African troupe of professional musicians and dancers present a reenactment on stage of a weapon dance , or when the use of weapons is introduced in stylized dance enactments of fighting . For example , recent ballets such as the New York City Ballet ’ s version of Romeo and Juliet ( to the music of Sergei Prokofiev ) employ highly choreographed sword @-@ fight / dance sequences . 
 Additionally , there is overlap between weapon dance and stylized forms of stage combat , i.e. , choreographed enactments of “ real fights , ” from bar @-@ room brawls to sword @-@ fighting to large @-@ scale battle scenes . Stage combat uses the services of professionals called “ fight directors , ” “ weapon choreographers , ” etc . An early example of this kind of staged combat in Europe was in Italy in the late 19th century , where the term <unk> came to be used generically in the sense of “ extra ” or “ stunt man ” for those who fought on the stage in enactments of battle scenes in grand opera , for example . <unk> was originally a family name in Florence and referred to members of the family who started a gymnastics club and soon wound up appearing on stage in enactments of fighting , both bare @-@ handed and with weapons . 
 Elsewhere , the kabuki theater tradition in Japan employs ritualized representations of violence on the stage . While kabuki is technically theater and not dance , the movements , for example , of the sword @-@ fighting termed <unk> in kabuki are gymnastic to the point even of employing somersaults , and elaborate fight scenes are so deliberate and stylized that they provide at least an area of overlap between theater and dance . 
 Also , the Communist revolution in China produced the view that art — including dance — must support the “ armed struggle of the proletariat . ” By the 1970s , weapons commonly appeared in such works as " Red Detachment of Women , ’ ’ a ballet about a women ’ s revolutionary armed force in the 1930s in China . 
 Interesting , perhaps , in the use of weapons in these recent “ revolutionary ” works is that they are , generally speaking , not reenactments of traditional folk dances . The introduction of weaponry into Chinese ballet — regardless of the revolutionary message — was , itself , a revolution . 
 = = Additional reading = = 
 Highwater , Jamake . ( 1996 ) Dance : Rituals of Experience . Oxford Uni . Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 <unk> , Ashish Mohan . ( 2003 ) Folk Dance Tribal Ritual and Martial Forms . Rupa . ISBN 81 @-@ 291 @-@ 0097 @-@ 5 
 <unk> , Reginald . ( 1989 ) " Indian Dances of North America : Their Importance in Indian Life " in Civilization of the American Indian Series . University of Oklahoma Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8061 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 <unk> , Preeti . Tribal Dances of India . Discovery Pub . House . ISBN 81 @-@ <unk> @-@ 443 @-@ 5 
 National Museum of the American Indian ( ed . Charlotte Heth ) . ( 1993 ) Native American Dance : Ceremonies and Social Traditions . Fulcrum Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 021 @-@ 9 
 <unk> . Madeleine . ( 1986 ) " Swedish Sword Dances in the 16th and 17th Centuries " in Early Music , Vol . 14 , No. 3 . ( Aug. , 1986 ) , pp. 367 – 372 . 
 = Pall Mall , London = 
 Pall Mall / <unk> <unk> / is a street in the St James 's area of the City of Westminster , Central London . It connects St James 's Street to Trafalgar Square and is a section of the regional A4 road . The street 's name is derived from " pall @-@ mall " , a ball game played there during the 17th century . 
 The area was built up during the reign of Charles II with fashionable London residences . It became known for high @-@ class shopping in the 18th century , and gentlemen 's clubs in the 19th . The Reform , Athenaeum and Travellers Clubs have survived to the 21st century . The War Office was based on Pall Mall during the second half of the 19th century , and the Royal Automobile Club 's headquarters have been on the street since 1908 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The street is around 0 @.@ 4 miles ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) long and runs east in the St James 's area , from St James 's Street across Waterloo Place , to the Haymarket and continues as Pall Mall East towards Trafalgar Square . The street numbers run consecutively from north @-@ side east to west and then continue on the south @-@ side west to east . It is part of the A4 , a major road running west from Central London . London Bus Route 9 runs westwards along Pall Mall , connecting Trafalgar Square to Piccadilly and Hyde Park Corner . 
 = = History and topography = = 
 = = = Early history and pall @-@ mall field = = = 
 Pall Mall was constructed in 1661 , replacing an earlier highway slightly to the south that ran from the Haymarket ( approximately where Warwick House Street is now ) to the royal residence , St James 's Palace . Historical research suggests a road had been in this location since Saxon times , although the earliest documentary references are from the 12th century in connection with a leper colony at St James 's Hospital . When St. James 's Park was laid out by order of Henry VIII in the 16th century , the park 's boundary wall was built along the south side of the road . In 1620 , the Privy Council ordered the High Sheriff of Middlesex to clear a number of temporary buildings next to the wall that were of poor quality . 
 Pall @-@ mall , a ball game similar to croquet , was introduced to England in the early @-@ 17th century by James I. The game , already popular in France and Scotland , was enjoyed by James ' sons Henry and Charles . In 1630 , St James 's Field , London 's first pall @-@ mall court , was laid out to the north of the Haymarket – St James road . 
 After the Restoration and King Charles II 's return to London on 29 May 1660 , a pall @-@ mall court was constructed in St James 's Park just south of the wall , on the site of The Mall . Samuel Pepys 's diary entry for 2 April 1661 records that he " ... went into St. James 's Park , where I saw the Duke of York playing at <unk> , the first time that I ever saw the sport . " This new court suffered from dust blown over the wall from coaches travelling along the highway . In July 1661 posts and rails were erected , stopping up the old road . The court for pall @-@ mall was very long and narrow , and often known as an alley , so the old court provided a suitable route for relocating the eastern approach to St James 's Palace . A grant was made to Dan O 'Neale , Groom of the Bedchamber , and John Denham , Surveyor of the King 's Works allocating a 1 @,@ 400 by 23 feet ( 427 by 7 m ) area of land for this purpose . The grant was endorsed " Our warrant for the building of the new street to St James 's . " 
 A new road was built on the site of the old pall @-@ mall court , and opened in September 1661 . It was named Catherine Street , after Catherine of Braganza , wife of Charles II , but was better known as Pall Mall Street or the Old Pall Mall . The pall @-@ mall field was a popular place for recreation and Pepys records several other visits . By July 1665 Pepys used " Pell Mell " to refer to the street as well as the game . 
 = = = 17th- and 18th @-@ century buildings = = = 
 In 1662 , Pall Mall was one of several streets " thought fitt immediately to be repaired , new paved or otherwise amended " under the Streets , London and Westminster Act 1662 . The paving commissioners appointed to oversee the work included the Earl of St Albans . The terms of the act allowed commissioners to remove any building encroaching on the highway , with compensation for those at least 30 years old . The commissioners determined that the real tennis court and adjoining house at the northeast corner of Pall Mall and St James 's Street should be demolished , and in 1664 notified Martha Barker , the owner of the Crown lease , to do so . Although Barker initially rejected £ 230 compensation , the court was demolished by 1679 . 
 The street was developed extensively during 1662 – 1667 . The Earl of St Albans had a lease from the Crown in 1662 on 45 acres ( 18 ha ) of land previously part of St James 's Fields . He laid out the site for the development of St. James 's Square , Jermyn Street , Charles Street , St Albans Street , King Street and other streets now known as St James 's . The location was convenient for the royal palaces of Whitehall and St James and the houses on the east , north and west sides of the square were developed along with those on the north side of Pall Mall , each constructed separately as was usual for the time . Houses were not built along the square 's south side at first , or the adjoining part of Pall Mall . The Earl petitioned the King in late 1663 that the class of occupants they hoped to attract to the new district would not take houses without the prospect of eventually acquiring them outright . Despite opposition from the Lord Treasurer , the Earl of Southampton , on 1 April 1665 the King granted the Earl of St Albans the freehold of the St James 's Square site , along with all the ground on the north side of Pall Mall between St James 's Street and the east side of St James 's Square . The freehold of the north side of Pall Mall subsequently passed to other private owners . 
 The Crown kept the freehold of the land south of the street except for No. 79 , which was granted to Nell Gwyn 's trustees in 1676 or 1677 by Charles II . The buildings constructed on the south side of Pall Mall in subsequent years were grander than those on the north owing to stricter design and building standards imposed by the crown commissioners . When the main road was relocated further north , some houses suddenly had their backs facing the main road , losing available land for gardening . In 1664 , residents filed a petition to turn the old road into gardens , which was successful . The trustees of the Earl of St Albans received a sixty @-@ year lease on most of this from April 1665 so that trustees could issue sub @-@ leases to their tenants . 
 Several other portions of the old highway were leased for construction . At the east end , land was leased to Sir Philip Warwick who built Warwick House ( now the location of Warwick House Street ) and to Sir John Denham ; this parcel of land became part of the grounds of Marlborough House . Portions leased at the west end included the land between St James 's Palace and the tennis court at the corner of St James 's Street , and a parcel of land leased to the Duchess of Cleveland that became the site of 8 – 12 Cleveland Row and Stornoway House . The 18th @-@ century London bookseller Andrew Millar also lived in a townhouse designed by Robert Adam , at 34 Pall Mall . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 By the 18th century , Pall Mall was well known for its shops as well as its grand houses . The shops included that of the Vulliamy family who made clocks at No. 68 between 1765 and 1854 . Robert Dodsley ran a bookshop at No. 52 , where he suggested the idea of a dictionary to Samuel Johnson . Writers and artists began to move to Pall Mall during this century ; both Richard Cosway and Thomas Gainsborough lived at Schomberg House at Nos. 80 – 82 . 
 The street was one of the first in London to be lit by gas after Frederick Albert Winsor set up experimental lighting on 4 June 1807 to celebrate King George III 's birthday . Permanent lighting was installed in 1820 . The eastern end of Pall Mall was widened between 1814 and 1818 ; a row of houses on its north side was demolished to make way for the Royal Opera Arcade . 
 Pall Mall is known for the various gentlemen 's clubs built there in the 19th and early 20th centuries . The Travellers Club was founded in 1819 and moved to No. 49 Pall Mall in 1822 . Its current premises at No. 106 were built in 1823 by Charles Barry . The Athenaeum Club took its name from the Athenaeum in Rome , a university founded by the Emperor Hadrian . The club moved to No. 107 Pall Mall in 1830 from tenements in Somerset House . Its entrance hall was designed by Decimus Burton . The Reform Club at Nos. 104 – 105 was founded for the British Radicals in 1836 . The Army and Navy Club at Nos. 36 – 39 was founded in 1837 . The name was suggested by the Duke of Wellington in order to accommodate Royal Navy members . Other clubs on Pall Mall include the United Service Club ( now occupied by the Institute of Directors ) , the Oxford and Cambridge Club and the Royal Automobile Club . 
 Pall Mall was once the centre of London 's fine art scene ; in 1814 the Royal Academy , the National Gallery and Christie 's auction house were all based on the street . 
 The freehold of much of the southern side of the Pall Mall is owned by the Crown Estate . In addition to St. James 's Palace , Marlborough House , which was once a royal residence , is its neighbour to the east , opening off a courtyard just to the south of the street . It was built for Sarah , Duchess of Marlborough who laid the foundation stone in 1709 , with building complete by 1711 . The house reverted to Crown ownership in 1817 ; the future King George V was born here in 1865 and briefly lived in the house as Prince of Wales during the reign of his father , Edward VII . It became government @-@ owned in 1959 and houses now the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Commonwealth Foundation . The Prince Regent 's Carlton House was built at the eastern end of Pall Mall in 1732 for Frederick , Prince of Wales and later inhabited by his widow , Princess Augusta . A ball was held at the house on 19 June 1811 to celebrate the start of the Prince 's regency , but ultimately he did not decide to stay in the house upon ascending the throne , and it was demolished . John Nash built Carlton House Terrace on its site between 1827 – 32 . 
 Pall Mall was the location of the War Office from 1855 to 1906 , with which it became synonymous ( just as Whitehall refers to the administrative centre of the UK government ) . The War Office was accommodated in a complex of buildings based on the ducal mansion , Cumberland House . The office subsequently moved to Whitehall . 
 The street contained two other architecturally important residences . Schomberg House , at Nos. 80 – 82 Pall Mall was built in 1698 for <unk> Schomberg , 3rd Duke of Schomberg and divided into three parts in 1769 . The eastern section of the house was demolished in 1850 , but reconstructed in the mid @-@ 1950s for office use . Buckingham House was the London residence of the Dukes of Buckingham and Chandos . It was rebuilt in the 1790s by Sir John Soane and sold by the Buckingham estate in 1847 . The house was demolished in 1908 to make way for the Royal Automobile Club . 
 The Institute of Directors was founded in 1903 and received a royal charter in 1906 . The former branch of the Midland Bank at Nos. 69 – 70 Pall Mall was designed by Edwin Lutyens and constructed between 1922 and 1927 . The original plan to redevelop No. 70 proved impractical so the two premises were demolished to provide a site for the current premises . The cigarette manufacturer Rothmans have their head office at No 65 Pall Mall , in a building designed by Norman Shaw , while P & O Ferries ' main administrative office is at No 79 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When the novelist William Makepeace Thackeray visited Dublin in 1845 , he compared Pall Mall to O 'Connell Street ( then known as Upper Sackville Street ) . In 1870 , Henry Benjamin Wheatley wrote " Round about Piccadilly and Pall Mall " , documenting changes in and around the street over the century . A compilation of Oscar Wilde 's works , A Critic in Pall Mall : Being Extracts From Reviews And Miscellanies , was published in 1919 comprising essays he wrote for newspapers and journals from the 1870s to the 1890s . 
 Pall Mall is part of a group of three purple squares on the British Monopoly board game , alongside Whitehall and Northumberland Avenue . All three streets converge at Trafalgar Square . Rising house prices across London mean a small flat on Pall Mall , which is in the lowest @-@ priced third of properties on the board , now sells for over £ 1 million . 
 = Islam : The Untold Story = 
 Islam : The Untold Story is a documentary film written and presented by the English novelist and popular historian Tom Holland . The documentary explores the origins of Islam , an Abrahamic religion that developed in Arabia in the 7th century ; it criticizes the orthodox Islamic account of this history , claiming that it lacks sufficient supporting evidence . It was commissioned by the British television company Channel 4 and first broadcast in August 2012 . Its release followed the publication of Holland 's In the Shadow of the Sword : The Battle for Global Empire and the End of the Ancient World ( 2012 ) , which also discussed the rise of the Arab Empire and the origins of Islam . 
 Adopting the theories of academic historian Patricia Crone as a basis , Holland asserted that there was little hard evidence for the origins of Islam and asked why it took several decades after the death of Muhammad for his name to appear on surviving documents or artifacts . Arguing that there was little evidence for how the faith was born , he suggested that the city of Mecca may not have been the real birthplace of Muhammad and Islam , and – while not clearly disputing Muhammad 's existence as a real historical figure – claimed that much of the Islamic origin story was later developed in the early years of the Arab Empire . 
 The documentary proved controversial . Mainstream media reception was mixed , and it provoked particular criticism from figures within the United Kingdom 's Islamic community , who argued that Holland ignored evidence supporting the orthodox account of early Islamic history . Government @-@ approved regulatory authority Ofcom and the broadcaster Channel 4 received an estimated 1200 complaints regarding the program . Channel 4 eventually cancelled a public screening of the documentary at their London headquarters after numerous threats of violence . 
 = = Background = = 
 <unk> of a bachelor 's degree in English and Latin from the University of Cambridge , Holland is an English novelist and popular historian who has published a trio of best @-@ selling histories of the ancient world : Rubicon : The Last Years of the Roman Republic ( 2003 ) , Persian Fire : The First World Empire and the Battle for the West ( 2005 ) , and Millennium : The End of the World and the Forging of Christendom ( 2008 ) . In 2012 , Holland 's fourth work of history , In the Shadow of the Sword : The Battle for Global Empire and the End of the Ancient World , was published ; it explored the collapse of the Roman and Persian Empires , as well as the rise of the Arab Empire and the accompanying Arabian religion of Islam . 
 In an interview with The Spectator , he rejected the Islamic belief that the Qur 'an constituted the direct word of God , stating that he believed it to have been " very clearly " written by a human being during Late Antiquity . He highlighted " the lack of sources " that were available with which to analyse the origins of Islam , and that all religious movements come to construct their own back story , in doing so erasing alternative accounts and interpretations of their history . 
 It was on the basis of In the Shadow of the Sword that public service television Channel 4 commissioned Holland to produce a documentary on the subject of Islam 's origins . A spokeswoman for the company publicly announced that the documentary constituted a part of their " remit to support and stimulate well @-@ informed debate on a wide range of issues " through " challenging established views " and providing access to alternative perspectives and information . 
 The film 's screening came a month after the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) aired the first episode of television sitcom Citizen Khan . Revolving around the life of a British Muslim of Pakistani descent , the show had been co @-@ written by its star , Adil Ray , himself a British Muslim of Pakistani descent . The BBC received 200 complaints regarding the content of the episode , including accusations that it perpetuated stereotypes about British Asians , ridiculed Islam and disrespected the Qur 'an ; some of these criticisms would be echoed in the furore regarding Holland 's documentary . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In Islam : The Untold Story , Holland deals with the origins of the religion Islam . Traveling to Saudi Arabia , he visits Arabian Bedouins to hear their orthodox Islamic accounts of the religion 's origins . Holland then talks to Seyyed Hossein Nasr , a practicing Muslim who teaches Islamic studies at the George Washington University , Washington D.C. , and Patricia Crone , a non @-@ Muslim historian of Islamic history at the Institute for Advanced Study , Princeton . The former defends the orthodox Islamic account of the faith 's history , citing its development within oral history , but Crone challenges the reliability of oral history , and therefore the traditional account . 
 Holland looks at the earliest evidence for Muhammad , Mecca and Islam in the first century of the Arab Empire , pointing to a lack of evidence in the historical record to support the traditional account . Highlighting that very little Muslim testimony from the 7th century exists , he considers it suspicious that 30 years after Muhammad 's death , Muawiyah I became leader of the Arab Empire in Jerusalem despite showing little sign of being Muslim , and that no mention of Muhammad or Islam can be found in any of Muawiyah 's inscriptions , coins , or documents . Holland proceeds to note that with the exception of a single ambiguous reference in the Qur 'an , there is no mention of Mecca in any datable text for a century after Muhammed 's death . He points out that in the Qur 'an , the Prophet appears to address farmers and agriculturalists while his opponents are described as keeping cattle and growing olives and vines . This appears to describe an environment foreign to Mecca , where there was no agriculture ; thus Holland posits that the location attributed to Mecca in the Qur 'an more closely fits a city in the Negev desert , in what is now southern Israel . 
 Holland suggests that under the reign of Arab Emperor Abd al @-@ Malik ibn Marwan , even though only a small percentage of the inhabitants of the Empire was Muslim , Mecca was intentionally yet erroneously portrayed as Muhammad 's home and the birthplace of Islam in order to provide the religion with Arabian origins . Holland argues that in doing so , the faith was <unk> from the Jewish or Christian heritage that would have been self evident at a location in the Negev . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Mainstream media = = = 
 Writing in The Daily Telegraph , Christopher Howse , a commentator on religious issues , was critical of the documentary , awarding it two stars out of five and labelling it " disjointed " . He argued that it placed too much emphasis on historiography but that its " crowning annoyance " was Holland 's habit of pausing mid @-@ sentence . In contrast , Ed West , also of The Daily Telegraph , praised the documentary , stating that it was " atmospheric and intelligent " . Noting it would make many viewers uncomfortable , he argued that the Islamic world had to accept " higher criticism " and " embrace the pain of doubt " in order to improve life for themselves and for their non @-@ Muslim neighbours . 
 In The Independent , television reviewer Tom Sutcliffe discussed the documentary , noting that it was likely to court controversy and cause problems for Holland . Although remarking that he did not know what devout Muslims would think of Holland 's arguments , he asserted that they did not have " a monopoly on literalist affront " . John Crace reviewed the documentary for The Guardian , noting that Holland was no " attention @-@ seeking , neo @-@ Conservative , Niall Ferguson lookalike " but was probably a social liberal . Crace opined that while most Westerners would find Holland 's findings uncontentious , many devout Muslims would consider it blasphemous . Considering Holland excessively cautious , he thought the presenter " was looking over his shoulder , half expecting a fatwa at any minute . " 
 = = = Islamic community = = = 
 The UK @-@ based Islamic Education & Research Academy ( <unk> ) proclaimed that the documentary was " historically inaccurate " and " clearly biased " . In their statement , <unk> proclaimed that " in an important 74 minutes [ sic ] long full of ' complex arguments ' and ' academic scholarship ' documentary , Holland should have spent a little more time with Islamic historians instead of wasting all those precious minutes in learning the way of the Bedouin . " Similarly , the Muslim Public Affairs Committee ( <unk> ) stated that the documentary had a " flagrant bias " against Islam , expressing concern that the majority of viewers would " blindly accept " Holland 's conclusions . To counter what they believed to be an anti @-@ Islamic bias in the mainstream media , they called on Muslims to produce documentaries about Islamic history , praising Faris Kermani 's documentary , The Life of Muhammad , presented by <unk> <unk> , as a good example . Hoping that such documentaries would aid in " familiarising the nation with our ideologies " , they urged British Muslims to encourage their children to enter into professions in history , media and politics . 
 The Huffington Post published a response from practising Muslim <unk> Zaidi @-@ <unk> , a graduate in English who had recently began a masters degree student in theology at the University of Birmingham . She remarked that Holland 's methodology was flawed because he had neglected to study the corpus of material on early Islamic history found in libraries across the Islamic world , instead using only sources he had obtained in Western libraries . She argued that he did not consult a single Islamic scholar of Islamic history , instead choosing the more " exotic " option of interviewing a Bedouin , and that although he had consulted Professor Seyyed Hossein Nasr – " a token Muslim voice " – Nasr was a scholar of Islamic philosophy and not Islamic history . Asserting that Islam : The Untold Story was based on poor scholarship by assuming the superiority of secular Western historical inquiry over Islamic historical traditions , she argued that it would promote negative views of " an already poorly @-@ understood faith and its much @-@ maligned adherents . " This despite Tom Holland explaining within the documentary that " The earliest biographies we have were written nearly 200 years after Mohammed 's lifetime . " These biographies are indeed in libraries across the Islamic world . Copies are available in western libraries . 
 Another British Muslim to publicly criticise the documentary 's scholarship was Akeel Umar , a spokesman for a protest group assembled outside the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood in Edinburgh . Although the demonstration had been assembled to protest against the short film Innocence of Muslims , which asserted that Muhammad was a homosexual and a child @-@ molester , Umar also informed press that he considered Holland 's film to be an academically @-@ flawed work that " wasted everyone 's time and airspace " . He differentiated Islam : The Untold Story – which he considered to be a poor work of scholarship – with Innocence of Muslims , which he deemed to be intentionally offensive and inflammatory . 
 State media in the Islamic Republic of Iran also criticised the documentary , claiming that it constituted an " insult " to Islam . Several critics attacked Holland on the social media site Twitter , some making personal threats against him . One commented that " You might be a target in the streets . You may recruit some bodyguards , for your own safety . " Another exclaimed that he was a " fool " for suggesting Islam was a " made @-@ up religion " . 
 = = = Other alternate media = = = 
 The English Defence League ( EDL ) published an online review of the documentary authored by <unk> , a member of their LGBT division . Labelling Holland " ludicrously deferential " for praying to Allah alongside the " toothless old bedouins " , they thought that Channel 4 had been far too cautious and should have been more explicit in their denunciation of the Islamic origin story . Believing that such a documentary should have been produced in the 1970s , they argued that the " media , politicians and academics " have spent fifty years hiding the truth about Islam from the British population , and that they doubted whether the documentary would have been made had the EDL not existed to promote anti @-@ Islamic thought . 
 = = = Holland 's response to critics = = = 
 Holland initially responded to his critics through the social website of Twitter , where he summed up the public response as " you win some , you lose some . " Then publishing what he described as a " brief response " to his critics on the Channel 4 website , he stressed that the documentary was not created as a critique of Islam but as " a historical endeavour " . Comparing his documentary with others that Channel 4 had produced on religious history , such as The Bible : A History , he noted that Islam : The Untold Story fell within the channel 's remit of sparking " well @-@ informed debate on a wide range of issues " . Admitting that it was impossible to " articulate all the resonances and implications of every argument " in a 74 @-@ minute documentary , he directed those who wanted to learn more to read his recently published book . 
 Holland 's Twitter critics also came under attack from popular historian Dan Snow , who tweeted " Dear angry mad people on twitter , it is conceivable that you know more than @ <unk> _ tom & the world 's leading scholars , but very unlikely " . 
 = = Cancelled public screening = = 
 After security fears were raised , on 11 September 2012 , Channel 4 cancelled a planned screening of the film for " opinion formers " at its London headquarters . They said they were nevertheless " extremely proud " of the film and would continue to provide access to it on their website , 4oD . 
 Their decision to cancel was criticised by Jenny Taylor , the founder of <unk> Media , a consultancy specialising in religious literacy in world affairs . Invited to attend the event , Taylor described the documentary as a good historical study and its cancellation as the " appalling " result of protest whipped up by the media . She argued that the right to debate historical events is a core value of the western world , and that Islam should not be exempt from historical inquiry . 
 The Council of Ex @-@ Muslims of Britain expressed indignation at the cancellation , stating that giving in to the demands of Islamists would have a " catastrophic " effect on " free enquiry and expression where it pertains to Islam " . They urged supporters to write to Channel 4 and Ofcom requesting a repeat screening . 
 = Battle of Port Louis = 
 The Battle of Port Louis was a minor naval engagement of the French Revolutionary Wars , fought on 11 December 1799 at the mouth of the Tombeau River near Port Louis on the French Indian Ocean island of Île de France , later known as Mauritius . Preneuse had originally been part of a powerful squadron of six frigates sent to the Indian Ocean in 1796 under the command of Contre @-@ amiral Pierre César Charles de Sercey , but the squadron dispersed in 1798 and by the summer of 1799 Preneuse was the only significant French warship remaining in the region . The battle was the culmination of a three @-@ month raiding cruise by the 40 @-@ gun French Navy frigate Preneuse , commanded by Captain Jean @-@ Matthieu @-@ Adrien Lhermitte . Ordered to raid British commerce in the Mozambique Channel , Lhermitte 's cruise had been eventful , with an inconclusive encounter with a squadron of small British warships in Algoa Bay on 20 September and an engagement with the 50 @-@ gun HMS Jupiter during heavy weather on 9 – 11 October . 
 Returning to Île de France in December , Lhermitte steered for Port Louis but was intercepted by the British blockade squadron , comprising the 74 @-@ gun ship of the line HMS Tremendous and the 50 @-@ gun HMS Adamant . Unable to reach safety , Lhermitte evaded pursuit long enough to drive Preneuse onto a beach at the mouth of the Tombeau . After a brief exchange of fire the wrecked frigate was surrendered and British boarding parties in ship 's boats rowed inshore to Preneuse , removed the survivors and burnt the remains . Watching from the shore as the last of his command burned on the beach , Sercey subsequently retired from military service . 
 = = Background = = 
