 Folklore often identifies a green sky with tornadoes , and though the phenomenon may be associated with severe weather , there is no evidence linking it specifically with tornadoes . It is often thought that opening windows will lessen the damage caused by the tornado . While there is a large drop in atmospheric pressure inside a strong tornado , it is unlikely that the pressure drop would be enough to cause the house to explode . Opening windows may actually increase the severity of the tornado 's damage . A violent tornado can destroy a house whether its windows are open or closed . 
 Another commonly held misconception is that highway overpasses provide adequate shelter from tornadoes . This belief is partly inspired by widely circulated video captured during the 1991 tornado outbreak near Andover , Kansas , where a news crew and several other people take shelter under an overpass on the Kansas Turnpike and safely ride out a tornado as it passes by . However , a highway overpass is a dangerous place during a tornado : the subjects of the video remained safe due to an unlikely combination of events : the storm in question was a weak tornado , did not directly strike the overpass , and the overpass itself was of a unique design . Due to the Venturi effect , tornadic winds are accelerated in the confined space of an overpass . Indeed , in the 1999 Oklahoma tornado outbreak of May 3 , 1999 , three highway overpasses were directly struck by tornadoes , and at all three locations there was a fatality , along with many life @-@ threatening injuries . By comparison , during the same tornado outbreak , more than 2000 homes were completely destroyed , with another 7000 damaged , and yet only a few dozen people died in their homes . 
 An old belief is that the southwest corner of a basement provides the most protection during a tornado . The safest place is the side or corner of an underground room opposite the tornado 's direction of approach ( usually the northeast corner ) , or the central @-@ most room on the lowest floor . Taking shelter in a basement , under a staircase , or under a sturdy piece of furniture such as a workbench further increases chances of survival . 
 Finally , there are areas which people believe to be protected from tornadoes , whether by being in a city , near a major river , hill , or mountain , or even protected by supernatural forces . Tornadoes have been known to cross major rivers , climb mountains , affect valleys , and have damaged several city centers . As a general rule , no area is safe from tornadoes , though some areas are more susceptible than others . 
 = = Ongoing research = = 
 Meteorology is a relatively young science and the study of tornadoes is newer still . Although researched for about 140 years and intensively for around 60 years , there are still aspects of tornadoes which remain a mystery . Scientists have a fairly good understanding of the development of thunderstorms and mesocyclones , and the meteorological conditions conducive to their formation . However , the step from supercell , or other respective formative processes , to tornadogenesis and the prediction of tornadic vs. non @-@ tornadic mesocyclones is not yet well known and is the focus of much research . 
 Also under study are the low @-@ level mesocyclone and the stretching of low @-@ level vorticity which tightens into a tornado , in particular , what are the processes and what is the relationship of the environment and the convective storm . Intense tornadoes have been observed forming simultaneously with a mesocyclone aloft ( rather than succeeding <unk> ) and some intense tornadoes have occurred without a mid @-@ level mesocyclone . 
 In particular , the role of downdrafts , particularly the rear @-@ flank downdraft , and the role of baroclinic boundaries , are intense areas of study . 
 <unk> predicting tornado intensity and longevity remains a problem , as do details affecting characteristics of a tornado during its life cycle and <unk> . Other rich areas of research are tornadoes associated with mesovortices within linear thunderstorm structures and within tropical cyclones . 
 Scientists still do not know the exact mechanisms by which most tornadoes form , and occasional tornadoes still strike without a tornado warning being issued . Analysis of observations including both stationary and mobile ( surface and aerial ) in @-@ situ and remote sensing ( passive and active ) instruments generates new ideas and refines existing notions . Numerical modeling also provides new insights as observations and new discoveries are integrated into our physical understanding and then tested in computer simulations which validate new notions as well as produce entirely new theoretical findings , many of which are otherwise unattainable . Importantly , development of new observation technologies and installation of finer spatial and temporal resolution observation networks have aided increased understanding and better predictions . 
 Research programs , including field projects such as the <unk> projects ( Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment ) , deployment of <unk> ( the <unk> Tornado Observatory ) , Doppler On Wheels ( <unk> ) , and dozens of other programs , hope to solve many questions that still plague meteorologists . Universities , government agencies such as the National Severe Storms Laboratory , private @-@ sector meteorologists , and the National Center for Atmospheric Research are some of the organizations very active in research ; with various sources of funding , both private and public , a chief entity being the National Science Foundation . The pace of research is partly constrained by the number of observations that can be taken ; gaps in information about the wind , pressure , and moisture content throughout the local atmosphere ; and the computing power available for simulation . 
 Solar storms similar to tornadoes have been recorded , but it is unknown how closely related they are to their terrestrial counterparts . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Thin Lizzy = 
 Thin Lizzy are a rock band formed in Dublin , Ireland in 1969 . Two of the founding members , drummer Brian Downey and bass guitarist and vocalist Phil Lynott , met while still in school . Lynott assumed the role of frontman and led them throughout their recording career of twelve studio albums . Thin Lizzy 's most successful songs , " Whiskey in the Jar " , " Jailbreak " and " The Boys Are Back in Town " , were all major international hits . After Lynott 's death in 1986 , various incarnations of the band have emerged over the years based initially around guitarists Scott Gorham and John Sykes , though Sykes left the band in 2009 . Gorham later continued with a new line @-@ up including Downey . 
 Lynott , Thin Lizzy 's de facto leader , was composer or co @-@ composer of almost all of the band 's songs , and the first black Irishman to achieve commercial success in the field of rock music . Thin Lizzy boasted some of the most critically acclaimed guitarists throughout their history , with Downey and Lynott as the rhythm section , on the drums and bass guitar . As well as being multiracial , the band drew their members not only from both sides of the Irish border but also from both the Catholic and Protestant communities during The Troubles . Their music reflects a wide range of influences , including blues , soul music , psychedelic rock , and traditional Irish folk music , but is generally classified as hard rock or sometimes heavy metal . Rolling Stone magazine describes the band as distinctly hard rock , " far apart from the braying mid @-@ 70s metal pack " . 
 AllMusic critic John Dougan has written that " As the band 's creative force , Lynott was a more insightful and intelligent writer than many of his ilk , preferring slice @-@ of @-@ life working @-@ class dramas of love and hate influenced by Bob Dylan , Van Morrison , Bruce Springsteen , and virtually all of the Irish literary tradition . " Van Morrison , Jeff Beck and Jimi Hendrix were major influences during the early days of the band , and later influences included the pioneering twin lead guitars found in Wishbone Ash and American artists Little Feat and Bob Seger . 
 In 2012 , Gorham and Downey decided against recording new material as Thin Lizzy so a new band , Black Star Riders , was formed to tour and produce new releases such as the All Hell Breaks Loose album . Thin Lizzy plan to reunite for occasional concerts . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ history = = = 
 Two of the founding members of Thin Lizzy , bass guitarist and vocalist Phil Lynott and drummer Brian Downey , first met while at school in Dublin in the early 1960s . Lynott , born 20 August 1949 in West Bromwich , England to an Irish mother Philomena ( 1930 – ) and Guyanese father Cecil Parris ( 1925 – 2010 ) , was brought up in Dublin from the age of three . Downey , born 27 January 1951 , is a Dublin native . Lynott joined a local band , The Black Eagles , as vocalist in 1963 , and Downey was recruited as their drummer in 1965 . In 1967 , Lynott was asked to join Skid Row by bass guitarist Brush Shiels , who brought teenage Belfast guitarist Gary Moore ( 4 April 1952 – 6 February 2011 ) into the band early in 1968 . After a disappointing television appearance in June 1969 , Shiels fired Lynott , although they remained on good terms and Shiels subsequently taught Lynott to play bass guitar . Lynott then formed Orphanage with Downey on drums after Downey 's previous band , Sugar Shack , had split . 
 Guitarist Eric Bell , born in Belfast on 3 September 1947 , began his career playing in local bands such as The <unk> , Shades of Blue and The <unk> , and the last incarnation of Them to feature Van Morrison , between September and October 1966 . Bell later moved to Dublin and joined an Irish showband named The Dreams , but left in 1969 with a view to forming a rock band . An acquaintance of Bell 's , Belfast organist Eric Wrixon ( 29 June 1947 – 13 July 2015 ) , also a former member of Them , had also moved to Dublin and joined the showband circuit , but had similar plans to progress towards rock music . 
 = = = Early years ( 1969 – 72 ) = = = 
 In December 1969 , Bell and Wrixon met by chance in a pub in Dublin and found that they shared similar ideas of forming a band , and decided to visit the Countdown Club where they saw Lynott and Downey perform with Orphanage . Lynott was not playing bass guitar at this time , but Bell was particularly impressed by Downey , and introduced himself to Lynott and Downey during a break . When Bell asked if they would consider forming a band together , Downey was initially sceptical , but both men were aware of Bell 's musical reputation . They agreed on condition that Lynott play bass guitar as well as sing , and that the band would perform some of Lynott 's compositions . Wrixon was also included as organist , making the initial line @-@ up a quartet . 
 The band 's name came from a character in The Dandy called Tin Lizzie , which they adjusted to Thin Lizzy as a playful reference to the local dialect , in which " thin " would be pronounced as " t 'in " . For some of their early gigs , the band were mistakenly promoted as " Tin Lizzy " or " Tin Lizzie " . 
 In July 1970 , the band released a single , " The Farmer " / " I Need You " , on EMI with the B @-@ side written by John D <unk> , who owned Trend Studios where the single was recorded . The single sold just 283 copies and is now a collectors ' item . Wrixon left the band before the single 's release , meaning there was a greater share of income for the three remaining members . He moved to mainland Europe before returning to Belfast , rejoining his old band , Them . Wrixon died on 13 July 2015 . 
 By the end of the year , Thin Lizzy were signed to Decca Records and they travelled to London in January 1971 to record their debut album , Thin Lizzy . The album sold moderately well but did not chart in the UK despite airplay and support from influential DJs John Peel and Kid Jensen . 
 Around March 1971 , the band permanently relocated to London , before the release of the unsuccessful " New Day " EP in August . Despite poor sales , Decca agreed to finance the band 's second album Shades of a Blue Orphanage , released in March 1972 . Like the previous LP , the songs were filled with Lynott 's personal anecdotes and references to his life in Dublin and the people he knew there . Musically the style was Celtic , with little warning of the hard rock direction that the band were to take in the future . Again , the album did not chart in the UK . 
 In mid @-@ 1972 , Thin Lizzy were asked to record an album of Deep Purple covers , which was released under the title Funky Junction Play a Tribute to Deep Purple . No mention was made of Thin Lizzy on the record . Vocals and keyboards were handled by members of another band , Elmer Fudd , and a few instrumental tracks composed by the band were also included on the album . The album was released in January 1973 . 
 = = = " Whiskey in the Jar " ( 1972 – 74 ) = = = 
 In late 1972 , the band embarked upon a high @-@ profile tour of the UK with Slade , who were enjoying a string of hit singles at the time , and Suzi Quatro . Around the same time , Decca released Thin Lizzy 's version of a traditional Irish ballad , " Whiskey in the Jar " , as a single . The band was angry at the release , feeling that the song did not represent their sound or their image , but the single topped the Irish chart , and reached no . 6 in the UK in February 1973 , resulting in an appearance on Top of the Pops . It also charted in many countries across Europe . However , the follow @-@ up single , " Randolph 's Tango " , was a return to Lynott 's more obscure work , and it did not chart outside Ireland . 
 The band 's next album , Vagabonds of the Western World , was released in September 1973 to positive reviews , but again failed to chart . The accompanying single " The Rocker " also found little success outside Ireland , and the momentum gained from their hit single was lost . 
 Eric Bell suddenly left the band on New Year 's Eve 1973 after a gig at Queen 's University Belfast , due to increasing ill @-@ health and disillusionment with the music industry , and young ex @-@ Skid Row guitarist Gary Moore was recruited to help finish the tour . Moore stayed until April 1974 ; the band recording three songs with him in that time , including the version of " Still in Love with You " that was included on the fourth album Nightlife . 
 With the departure of Moore , Lynott decided to expand the line @-@ up with two guitarists , and recruited two temporary members to complete a tour of Germany in May 1974 . These were ex @-@ Atomic Rooster and Hard Stuff guitarist John Cann , and Berlin @-@ born Andy Gee , who had played with Peter Bardens and Ellis . Neither was considered as a permanent member , as Lynott and Cann did not get on well personally , and Gee was under contract to another record label . The tour was ended early , and with Thin Lizzy 's contract with Decca coming to an end , a disillusioned Downey quit the band and had to be begged to return . 
 Auditions were held for new members , and Lynott and Downey eventually settled on Glaswegian guitarist Brian Robertson who was only 18 years old at the time , and Californian Scott Gorham . The new line @-@ up gelled quickly , dropped most of the old songs when they played live , and secured a new record deal with Phonogram , but the resulting album Nightlife was a disappointment for the band due to its soft production and underdeveloped style . Robertson described Ron Nevison 's production as " pretty naff " and Gorham said the record was " ridiculously tame " . Like the previous three albums , it failed to chart . 
 = = = " The Boys Are Back in Town " ( 1975 – 77 ) = = = 
 In early 1975 , Thin Lizzy toured the United States for the first time , in support of Bob Seger and Bachman – Turner Overdrive . When BTO toured Europe later in the year to support their hit single " You Ain 't Seen Nothing Yet " , Thin Lizzy again accompanied them on what was a very high @-@ profile tour . They then recorded the Fighting album , which became the first Thin Lizzy album to chart in the UK , reaching no . 60 , although the singles still did not chart . Opening with Seger 's " Rosalie " , the album showed the first real evidence of the twin guitar sound that would lead the band towards their greatest successes , particularly with the dual harmonies of " Wild One " and both guitarists ' soloing on " Suicide " . 
 After a successful multi @-@ band tour in support of Status Quo , the band recorded the album Jailbreak , which proved to be their breakthrough record . Released on 26 March 1976 , it featured the worldwide hit " The Boys Are Back in Town " which reached no . 8 in the UK , and no . 12 in the US , their first charting record in that country . The twin guitar sound had been fully developed by this time and was in evidence throughout the album , particularly on the hit single , and other tracks such as " Emerald " and " Warriors " . The album also charted well on both sides of the Atlantic , and the follow @-@ up single , " Jailbreak " , also performed well . Thin Lizzy toured the US in support of various bands such as Aerosmith , Rush and REO Speedwagon , and they planned to tour there again in June 1976 , this time with Rainbow . However , Lynott fell ill with hepatitis and the tour was cancelled , which set them back a few months . 
 While Lynott was ill , he wrote most of the following album , Johnny the Fox . The album was recorded in August 1976 and the sessions began to reveal tensions between Lynott and Robertson ; for example , there was disagreement over the composition credits of the hit single " Don 't Believe a Word " . Lynott was still drawing on Celtic mythology and his own personal experiences for lyric ideas , which dominated Johnny the Fox and the other albums of Thin Lizzy 's successful mid @-@ 1970s period . The tour to support the album was very successful and there were further high @-@ profile TV appearances , such as the Rod Stewart BBC TV Special . 
 A further tour of the US was planned for December 1976 , but it had to be cancelled when , on 23 November , Brian Robertson suffered a hand injury when trying to protect fellow Glaswegian , singer and friend Frankie Miller in a fracas at the Speakeasy Club in London . Miller had been jamming onstage with the reggae band Gonzalez , but had been drunk , offending Gonzalez guitarist Gordon Hunte . Hunte attacked Miller with a bottle in the dressing room , and Robertson intervened , suffering artery and nerve damage to his hand . Robertson subsequently broke Hunte 's leg , broke the collarbone of another man , and headbutted another , before being hit on the head with a bottle , rendering him unconscious . 
 Robertson maintains that , contrary to reports at the time , he was not drunk and had only gone to the venue for a meal . Lynott was angry and replaced Robertson with Gary Moore for another tour of the States in January – March 1977 , this time supporting Queen . The tour was a success and Lynott asked Moore to stay on , but he returned to his previous band , Colosseum II . Robertson had not been sacked but was unsure of his position and made plans to start another band with Jimmy Bain of Rainbow . Before the American tour , Lynott had also invited Irish guitarist Jimi <unk> to " try out a few things " with Thin Lizzy , prompting speculation that the ex @-@ Skid Row member could replace Robertson . 
 Thin Lizzy flew to Canada in May 1977 as a trio to record Bad Reputation , with Gorham handling all the guitar parts . A month into the sessions Robertson joined them , in his own words , " as a session player " and in Lynott 's words , " as a guest " . Robertson added lead guitar tracks to three songs as well as rhythm guitar and keyboards , and was officially reinstated in July . The album was released in September and sold well , reaching no . 4 in the UK , after a successful single , " Dancing in the Moonlight ( It 's Caught Me in Its Spotlight ) " . Also in 1977 , Thin Lizzy headlined the Reading Festival . 
 = = = The return of Gary Moore ( 1978 – 79 ) = = = 
 In 1978 , Lizzy released their first live album Live and Dangerous . There is some disagreement over just how much of the album is actually recorded live – producer Tony Visconti claimed that the only parts that were not overdubbed were the drums and the audience . However Brian Robertson has disputed this , saying that he had refused Lynott 's request to re @-@ record a guitar solo , and that the only overdubs were backing vocals and some guitar parts by Gorham . He added , " It 's just not true . The only reason we said that it was recorded all over was obviously for tax reasons ... so everything that Visconti claims is bollocks . " Gorham concurs , stating that he attempted to re @-@ record a solo but could not recreate the live sound , adding , " I re @-@ did one rhythm track and a few backing vocals . But that 's it . " The album was a huge success , reaching no . 2 in the UK , and was ranked as the best live album of all time by Classic Rock Magazine in 2004 . But this success was overshadowed by the permanent departure of Robertson some time after a gig in Ibiza on 6 July 1978 , the disagreements with Lynott having developed to an impossible level . Robertson soon teamed up with Jimmy Bain to front their new band , Wild Horses . 
 Lynott replaced Robertson with Gary Moore again , and around this time the band loosely joined forces with Steve Jones and Paul Cook of the Sex Pistols , and also Chris Spedding and Jimmy Bain , to form The Greedy Bastards , who played a small number of gigs playing a varied selection of songs . In this way Lynott was able to align his band with the punk movement and avoid being tagged as a ' dinosaur ' as many other 1970s rock bands had been . 
 In August the band began another tour of the US , followed by a trip to Australia and New Zealand . Brian Downey did not accompany them , having contracted pneumonia and preferring to spend some time in Ireland . He was replaced for the tour by American drummer Mark Nauseef . On their return , Downey rejoined the band and at the beginning of 1979 they recorded Black Rose : A Rock Legend in Paris . The sessions were marked by the increasing drug habits of Lynott and Gorham , and the general presence of drugs around the band . This also showed in the subject matter on the album , in songs such as " Got to Give It Up " . Celtic influences remained , however , particularly in the album closer " Róisín Dubh " , a seven @-@ minute medley of traditional Irish songs given a twin guitar rock veneer . Two singles , " Waiting for an Alibi " and " Do Anything You Want To " , were successful , and the album reached no . 2 in the UK . A third , moderately successful single , " Sarah " was Lynott 's ode to his new @-@ born daughter . 
 However , on 4 July 1979 , Gary Moore abruptly left Thin Lizzy in the middle of another tour of the US . Years later , Moore said he had no regrets about walking out , " but maybe it was wrong the way I did it . I could 've done it differently , I suppose . But I just had to leave . " He subsequently pursued his solo career , releasing several successful albums . He had collaborated with Lynott and Downey on his 1978 album Back on the Streets and the hit single " Parisienne <unk> " before leaving Thin Lizzy , and in 1985 he and Lynott teamed up again on the UK no . 5 hit single " Out in the Fields " . Gary Moore died of a heart attack in <unk> , Spain on 6 February 2011 , aged 58 . 
 After Moore 's departure , Thin Lizzy continued the tour for a few nights as a trio before Lynott brought in Midge Ure to replace him on a temporary basis . Ure had prior plans to join Ultravox , but had co @-@ written a song , " Get Out of Here " , with Lynott on Black Rose : A Rock Legend , and agreed to help Thin Lizzy complete their touring commitments . He also contributed guitar parts for The Continuing Saga of the Ageing Orphans , a compilation album of remixed and overdubbed versions of Eric Bell @-@ era tracks . On their return to the UK , the band were to headline the Reading Festival for the second time on 25 August 1979 , but had to cancel due to the disruption within the line @-@ up . 
 Before a tour of Japan beginning in September , Lynott decided to bring in another guitarist , Dave Flett , who had played with Manfred Mann 's Earth Band , to enable Ure to switch to playing keyboards where necessary . The tour was completed successfully , but the line @-@ up now contained two temporary members , and Lynott was spending a lot of time on projects outside Thin Lizzy , including composing and producing material for other bands , as well as putting together his first solo album , Solo in Soho . Lynott also reactivated The Greedy Bastards , who released a one @-@ off Christmas single , " A Merry Jingle " , in December 1979 as simply The <unk> . With the group now composed of Lynott , Gorham and Downey with Sex Pistols Jones and Cook , the single reached no . 28 in the UK . 
 = = = Later years and break @-@ up ( 1980 – 83 ) = = = 
 While Lynott searched for a permanent guitarist , he and the other members of Thin Lizzy , past and present , worked on Solo in Soho which was released in April 1980 , and the next Thin Lizzy album , Chinatown . Lynott got married on 14 February , and his wife gave birth to a second daughter in July . Dave Flett had hoped to be made a permanent member of Thin Lizzy but Lynott chose Snowy White , who had played with Pink Floyd and Peter Green . Midge Ure was still acting as a temporary keyboard player at gigs during early 1980 , but was replaced by Darren Wharton in April , shortly after White joined the band . Wharton was only 17 at the time and was initially hired on a temporary basis . This new line @-@ up completed the Chinatown album between short tours , and two singles were released from it . The first , " Chinatown " , reached no . 21 in the UK , but the second , " Killer on the Loose " , reached the top 10 amid much adverse publicity due to the ongoing activities of serial killer Peter Sutcliffe , known as " The Yorkshire Ripper " . 
 Chinatown was finally released in October 1980 , and reached no . 7 in the UK , but by this time Thin Lizzy albums were not even reaching the top 100 in the US . After a successful tour of Japan and Australia , the band undertook what was to be their final tour of the US in late 1980 . At the beginning of 1981 , Lynott began work on his second solo album , using Thin Lizzy members among a large group of backing musicians . Around the same time , the band were recording material for the next Thin Lizzy album , and as before , the sessions seemed to merge to the extent that musicians were not always sure which album they were working on . Producer for the Thin Lizzy sessions , Chris Tsangarides , stated , " The feeling of confusion was in the air in that sometimes nobody knew if they were working on a Phil solo record or a Lizzy album . " Snowy White had previously felt that , as a member of Thin Lizzy , he should have been paid as a session player to appear on Lynott 's solo recordings . 
 In April 1981 , the band 's first ' greatest hits ' album was released , and The Adventures of Thin Lizzy reached no . 6 in the UK , although a stand @-@ alone single , " Trouble Boys " , only reached no . 53 , the band 's worst chart placing since 1975 . According to White and Wharton , Lynott was the only person who wanted to release it , and nobody else liked the song . " Trouble Boys " had even been pencilled in as the title for the new album , but the single 's chart failure resulted in the song being dropped from the album and the title changed to Renegade . One highlight for the band at this time was headlining the first @-@ ever Slane Castle concert on 16 August , with support from Kirsty McColl , Hazel O 'Connor and U2 . 
 Lynott 's second solo album , The Philip Lynott Album , was delayed until 1982 while Renegade was completed and released in November 1981 . Renegade was not successful , only reaching no . 38 in the UK and no . 157 in the US . A single , " Hollywood ( Down on Your Luck ) " , also flopped , although it did reach no . 24 on the US Mainstream Rock chart . Despite only two songs from the album being written solely by Lynott , and other members of the band contributing more to the compositions , both Gorham and Wharton have since stated their dissatisfaction with some of the songs , such as " Angel of Death " , " Fats " and " Mexican Blood " . Wharton was omitted from the band photos on the back of the record sleeve , despite the fact that he was by this time a permanent member of the band . " It hurt me a great deal " , he said . 
 = = = = Thunder and Lightning = = = = 
 The beginning of 1982 was marred by both Downey and Gorham having to take breaks from the European tour to recover from personal problems . Downey was involved in a fight in a nightclub in Denmark in February , and Gorham was suffering from drug @-@ induced exhaustion . Downey missed five concerts , and was replaced by Mark Nauseef again for three of them , and by Mike <unk> of support band The Lookalikes for the other two . In March , Gorham collapsed and returned home ; eight concerts were performed as a quartet and six others were postponed . 
 Later in the year , Lynott went on a solo tour and released his second solo album , which did not sell particularly well . Snowy White left the band in August 1982 , having tired of the disorganised schedules and Lynott 's drug problems , although by his own admission he was too restrained and quiet to fit in well with his more raucous bandmates . White went on to achieve top ten chart success in the UK with his single " Bird of Paradise " in 1983 . Long @-@ time co @-@ manager Chris O 'Donnell also left at this time , later stating , " A once @-@ brilliant band was turning to crap before my very eyes . " 
 Lynott wanted to find a replacement for White before starting to record the next album , which would turn out to be the band 's last . By September 1982 , he had settled on John Sykes who had been a member of Tygers of Pan Tang , and he co @-@ wrote the first single from the album , " Cold Sweat " , although the rest of the album had already been written . Thunder and Lightning was released in March 1983 , and was much more successful than its predecessor , reaching no . 4 in the UK . Sykes ' presence had rejuvenated the band musically , the composing credits were evenly shared , and the style had grown much heavier , veering towards heavy metal . 
 The tour to support the album was to be a farewell tour , although Lynott was not convinced that this would be the end of the band . Sykes wanted to continue , although Gorham had had enough . The tour was successful , and some concerts were recorded to compile a live album . Partway into the tour , many of Thin Lizzy 's past guitarists were invited onstage to contribute to some of the songs they had originally recorded , the only exception being Snowy White . The album was released in October 1983 as Life , which included an older performance of " Renegade " featuring White , and reached no . 29 in the UK . The tour continued while two more singles were released , the last of them , " The Sun Goes Down " , only reaching no . 52 in August . Lynott also undertook another solo tour , accompanied by Downey and Sykes , under the name of The Three Musketeers . 
 After a difficult leg of the tour in Japan , where some members of the band had difficulty obtaining heroin , Thin Lizzy played their final UK concert before their break @-@ up at the Reading Festival on 28 August 1983 , which was eventually released in 1992 as their BBC Radio One Live in Concert album . The last concert came in Nuremberg on 4 September , at the Monsters of Rock festival , after which the band members went their separate ways . 
 = = = Post @-@ Thin Lizzy projects and tributes ( 1985 – 96 ) = = = 
 Before the end of 1983 , Phil Lynott formed a new band called Grand Slam , but they were never able to secure a contract with a record company and split by the beginning of 1985 . Sykes and Downey initially agreed to be a part of the band , but Sykes joined Whitesnake and Downey also changed his mind . Lynott began to focus more on his solo career and enjoyed a no . 5 hit single " Out in the Fields " with Gary Moore in May 1985 . The song , composed by Moore , was taken from his solo album Run for Cover featuring various contributions from Lynott . Lynott 's solo efforts did not fare so well , and his last single , " Nineteen " , only reached no . 76 in the UK . 
 Before his death , Lynott was planning a third solo album , and had spoken to Downey about a possible reformation of Thin Lizzy around March 1986 , with Gorham and Sykes , and had booked studio time for January of that year . However , he died in hospital in Salisbury , Wiltshire , on 4 January 1986 , aged 36 , having suffered from internal abscesses , pneumonia and septicaemia , brought on by his drug dependency , which led to multiple organ failure . 
 On 17 May , Thin Lizzy reformed for the Self Aid concert , with a line @-@ up of Gary Moore , Downey , Gorham , Wharton and Bob Daisley on bass . Bob Geldof and Moore handled most lead vocals , though various singers got onstage for " Whiskey in the Jar " . A compilation album , Soldier of Fortune , was released in 1987 , and also that year , the " Vibe for Philo " tribute concert in Lynott 's memory was organised by Dublin DJ and promoter Smiley Bolger , which continues on an annual basis on the anniversary of Lynott 's death . 
 The remaining members of Thin Lizzy did not work together until the recording of the single " Dedication " in October 1990 , when a rough demo of Lynott 's was worked into a finished song to commemorate the fifth anniversary of his death . The song dated from the Grand Slam days and had been originally written with guitarist Laurence Archer . Modern recording techniques were used to replace the guitar and drum tracks with new work by Downey and Gorham . Gary Moore had agreed to participate as well , but ultimately did not do so . The song charted in the UK at no . 35 during early 1991 , and no . 2 in Ireland , and featured on another greatest hits compilation album , Dedication : The Very Best of Thin Lizzy , released in February of that year , which reached no . 8 in the UK album chart . However , a follow @-@ up reissue of " The Boys Are Back in Town " only reached no . 63 in the UK , although it peaked at no . 16 in Ireland . 
 Following this , numerous small reunion projects began to appear . In 1991 , a line @-@ up featuring Robertson and Downey performed with Bobby Tench on lead vocals , ex @-@ Grand Slam member <unk> Nagle on guitar and Doug Brockie on bass . They toured Ireland briefly with a series of " An Evening of Thin Lizzy " concerts . In August 1994 , Downey , Bell , Robertson and Wharton held a tribute concert in Wolverhampton , together with tribute bands Limehouse Lizzy , Ain 't Lizzy and Bad <unk> . Another version of Thin Lizzy was formed later that year by John Sykes ( now also performing lead vocals ) with Downey , Gorham and Wharton , and with bass parts played by Marco Mendoza , who had played with Sykes in Blue Murder from 1991 – 93 . The tour was advertised as a tribute to Phil Lynott . This line @-@ up also played at the Vibe for Philo gig on 4 January 1996 , with a number of other notable musicians including Eric Bell , Midge Ure , Henry Rollins , Therapy ? and Joe Elliott and Rick Savage from Def Leppard . 
 In 1994 , a collection of Thin Lizzy tracks from the BBC Radio 1 Peel Sessions was released , and yet another compilation album was brought out in 1996 , called Wild One : The Very Best Of Thin Lizzy . This was successful , although strangely it did not feature the title track , " Wild One " . 
 On 20 August 1996 , Rude Awakening bassist Robert Ryder held " A Celebration of the Life of Philip Lynott " at the Palace in Hollywood , California at the request of Lynott 's mother , Philomena , to commemorate both Phil Lynott 's birthday and the tenth year of his passing . Philomena Lynott , her partner Dennis Keeley , and Smiley Bolger ( Ireland 's Vibe for Philo promoter ) were flown to Los Angeles by Ryder to make a personal appearance at the show . It featured concert performances by Rude Awakening , Billy Sheehan , Rudy <unk> , John <unk> , Carmine Appice , Phantom Blue , Soma , producer Roy Z and his band the Tribe of Gypsies , Mark Ferrari , Oslo , Bang Tango , Stash , Iron Cross and Irish singer @-@ songwriter Mark Dignam . 
 = = = Thin Lizzy without Lynott ( 1996 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = 1996 – 2010 = = = = 
 In 1996 John Sykes decided to reactivate Thin Lizzy , presenting the band as a tribute to Phil Lynott 's life and work . He decided to take on the role of lead vocals himself in the absence of Lynott , and persuaded Scott Gorham , Brian Downey and Darren Wharton to return to the fold . To complete the line @-@ up , Marco Mendoza continued in Lynott 's role as bass player . They received criticism for using the Thin Lizzy name without Lynott being present , but the band only played hits from Thin Lizzy 's back catalogue , and did not compose any new material . 
 In 1997 , Tommy Aldridge filled in on drums when Brian Downey was unable to , and became a full member when Downey left shortly thereafter . This line @-@ up remained stable through to 2000 , when the group recorded a live album , One Night Only . The band went on to tour the US playing clubs in early 2001 , but Wharton had already left the band by the time of the tour . From 2000 to 2003 , Mendoza toured with Ted Nugent , and with Whitesnake in 2004 . Sykes released two solo albums in the gap in between 2002 – 03 , while Gorham worked with his band 21 Guns . 
 Wharton later stated that Thin Lizzy would have been better suited to playing fewer concerts , in bigger venues . He also felt that after the experience of fronting his own band Dare , it was not satisfying enough to play keyboards behind Gorham and Sykes . Sykes said that all the previous Thin Lizzy members were welcome to play with Thin Lizzy at any time . 
 In 2004 , Thin Lizzy worked together again , with Sykes and Gorham bringing in ex @-@ Angel bassist Randy Gregg , and drummer Michael Lee , who had played with Robert Plant and The Cult among others . They toured in North America in both the winter and then the summer as special guests of Deep Purple . This line @-@ up proved temporary however , with Mendoza returning in 2005 , and Aldridge returning in 2007 . There were no plans for a new album though Thin Lizzy continued to tour . At the London Hammersmith Apollo concert of 13 December 2007 , the line @-@ up was Sykes , Gorham , Aldridge and Francesco <unk> on bass . 
 Sykes stated that Thin Lizzy was now " more of a tribute thing " and that it would be wrong to record new material under that name . He added that while the existing band members might record together , it would not be as Thin Lizzy . In 2007 , Gorham said that Lynott still received the biggest cheer of the night at concerts , and that the current Thin Lizzy was not active simply for money . " We 'd stop if we thought we were just going through the motions ... I think that has a lot to do with the songs – if they were inferior , then maybe we would have got tired of it all . But they 're not and we haven 't , " he said . In January 2011 , Gorham maintained that Lynott would have approved of the continuation of the band : " He worked long hours and travelled thousands of miles to get it to a certain level . There 's no way he would have said ' No @-@ one should play those songs again . ' " 
 It had been announced that Thin Lizzy , along with The Answer , were to support AC / DC at stadium shows in England , Ireland and Scotland at the end of June 2009 , but these appearances were cancelled after drummer Aldridge broke his collarbone in an accident . On 30 June , the band 's website announced that Sykes had left Thin Lizzy and all shows for the rest of 2009 were cancelled or postponed . Gorham stated that he would announce Thin Lizzy 's future plans shortly . In a statement , he said , " It 's been a very tough time of late for myself and the band , firstly with drummer Tommy Aldridge 's injury and now the subsequent decision for John and the rest of the group to go their separate ways . I can only apologise to everyone who has supported us over the years , but we will be back up to full speed soon . " 
 = = = = 2010 – 17 : Ricky Warwick era and Black Star Riders = = = = 
 In September 2009 , Gorham began to assemble a new version of Thin Lizzy , and in May 2010 a new line @-@ up was announced . Joining Gorham was original drummer Brian Downey , long @-@ standing keyboardist Darren Wharton , Def Leppard guitarist Vivian Campbell , and singer Ricky Warwick from The Almighty , while Marco Mendoza returned to fill the bass guitar role . Ex @-@ Lizzy guitarist Brian Robertson was asked if he wanted to participate but had previous commitments to his own solo career . 
 In addition to a full UK and European tour beginning in January 2011 , the band initially announced a concert for 4 January at the O2 Arena in Dublin , which was in conflict with the 2011 " Vibe for Philo " . The tour itself started on 6 January at the Music Hall Aberdeen in the UK , with the band finishing the tour in The Olympia , Dublin on 17 February 2011 , having cancelled the O2 show . 
 It was announced in April 2011 that Vivian Campbell would have to leave Thin Lizzy to rejoin Def Leppard after one final gig on 28 May . He was replaced by Guns N ' Roses guitarist Richard Fortus . On 28 August , it was announced that Damon Johnson of Alice Cooper 's band would be replacing Fortus for Thin Lizzy 's tour of the US with Judas Priest . Fortus returned to tour with Guns N ' Roses for the rest of the year , and Johnson has since replaced Fortus permanently . 
 In March 2011 , Gorham told Billboard.com that Thin Lizzy may record a new album in the future , saying , " That 's the No. 1 question we 're getting from people – are we gonna record some new material ? The fans seem to trust this line @-@ up , and I don 't blame them . We 've kind of jumped this emotional hurdle together . Ricky 's writing some fucking killer lyrics , and with the kind of talent that 's in Thin Lizzy now I think we can pull off a really cool set of tunes . At least it 's something that we can think about now , where before it wasn 't on the table . " On 25 June 2012 , Thin Lizzy were in the studio recording new material , although it was not clear how many songs would be recorded or released . 
 On 10 October 2012 , Thin Lizzy announced that the new material would not be released under the Thin Lizzy name , but would be released under a different name in due course . According to Gorham , this was " out of respect to Phil Lynott and the legacy he created " , though he confirmed that the new material would feature the classic Thin Lizzy sound . Ricky Warwick announced that the group would cease regular touring as Thin Lizzy at the end of 2012 , but that this did not necessarily mean they would never play as Thin Lizzy again . 
 On 20 December 2012 , Gorham announced that the new material would be recorded under the name of Black Star Riders , and that Downey and Wharton had chosen not to participate in the new band project . Downey has decided to take a break from touring , and Wharton will be working on his own band Dare , and a film project . It was also announced that in March 2013 , the band would tour Australia under the Thin Lizzy name , with Downey and Wharton , as the opening act on a triple bill with Mötley Crüe and Kiss . Gorham stressed that Thin Lizzy would still perform together occasionally : " We 'll still go out as Thin Lizzy . There are still certain big festivals that we will do . Thin Lizzy is still on the horizon , we will still go out and do that but in the meantime we have Black Star Riders that we are going to concentrate on also . " 
 On 19 January 2016 , it was announced that the band will perform a " half dozen or so " dates in mid @-@ 2016 and early 2017 to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the band 's formation and the 30th anniversary of Lynott 's death . Two festival dates were initially revealed : the first will be the Ramblin ' Man Fair in Maidstone , Kent on 23 July 2016 , with the other being the Rock Legends Cruise in Fort Lauderdale , Florida on 19 – 23 January 2017 . The lineup for these shows was to be Gorham , Warwick , Johnson and Wharton with Motörhead drummer Mikkey Dee initially confirmed as standing in for Downey . Further dates were announced soon afterwards , at the Monsters of Rock shows in Germany on 17 and 18 June 2016 , in Barcelona on 17 July , and the <unk> Festival in Sweden on 6 August . 
 On 19 April it was announced that Dee would not be participating after all , and that Judas Priest drummer Scott Travis would be taking Downey 's place for all shows except Sweden on 6 August , when Europe drummer Ian Haugland will play . Also , Aerosmith bass guitarist Tom Hamilton was confirmed as Thin Lizzy 's bassist for these shows . 
 = = Other Thin Lizzy releases and tributes = = 
 A boxed set of four CDs of Thin Lizzy material was released in December 2001 as Vagabonds , Kings , Warriors , Angels . It contained all of the band 's major hits , and included some rare songs , such as the first single " The Farmer " , and single B @-@ sides . In 2004 and 2006 , two further greatest hits compilations were released , with 2004 's double CD Greatest Hits climbing all the way to No. 3 in the UK album chart . 
 On 19 August 2005 , Gary Moore staged a concert at the Point Theatre , Dublin , promoted as " The Boy Is Back in Town " . The concert was staged to mark the unveiling of a bronze statue of Lynott on Dublin 's Harry Street in the city centre . The performance also featured Brian Downey , Eric Bell , Brian Robertson and Scott Gorham , and included many classic Lizzy songs , such as " Whiskey in the Jar " , " Still in Love With You " , " Cowboy Song " , " Emerald " and " The Boys Are Back in Town . " A DVD of the concert was released as One Night in Dublin : A Tribute to Phil Lynott . 
 On 8 September 2008 , a 15 @-@ track album UK Tour ' 75 was released featuring the band performing at Derby College on 21 November 1975 . The album includes a 20 @-@ page booklet of previously @-@ unseen photos , liner notes written by Brian Downey and extra material of the band jamming during their soundcheck . 
 In March 2009 , VH1 Classic Records issued the band @-@ authorised Still Dangerous : Live At The Tower Theatre Philadelphia , 1977 , a live CD recorded on the Bad Reputation tour . It was produced by Gorham and Glyn Johns , and Johns also mixed the record . It reached No. 98 in the UK chart . Gorham has suggested there will be further archival releases in the future . 
 On 24 January 2011 , Universal Music issued remastered and expanded editions of Jailbreak , Johnny the Fox and Live and Dangerous . Jailbreak and Johnny the Fox are double CD editions with the second disc containing outtakes , BBC session recordings and newly remixed versions of two of that particular album 's tracks . Live and Dangerous also comes as a double CD set , with two bonus tracks which are both unused live recordings . Previous CD editions of Live and Dangerous were single discs . 
 Universal followed this with remasters of Bad Reputation , Black Rose and Chinatown , and in early 2012 , Nightlife and Fighting . Finally , Renegade and Thunder and Lightning were remastered and re @-@ released in 2013 . 
 = = Style and legacy = = 
 From 1974 , Thin Lizzy switched from using one lead guitarist to two . Though others had earlier used similar techniques , Thin Lizzy are widely recognised as one of the first hard rock bands to employ double lead guitar harmony sound – a technique pioneered by Peter Green 's Fleetwood Mac and Wishbone Ash in the UK , whilst independently in the US by Lynyrd Skynyrd and The Allman Brothers Band . This style was later refined and popularised in the mid @-@ 1970s by bands like Thin Lizzy and Judas Priest , and later by the emerging new wave of British heavy metal groups such as Iron Maiden and Def Leppard . Iron Maiden covered the song " Massacre " from Thin Lizzy 's Johnny the Fox album , and released it on their 1988 single " Can I Play with Madness " . A cover of Cowboy Song appears on Sound of White Noise by Anthrax as the bonus track for the album 's Japanese release . 
 Thin Lizzy are also a major inspiration for modern heavy metal bands such as Metallica , Alice in Chains , Mastodon and Testament . Mastodon covered Thin Lizzy 's classic " Emerald " , which was included as a bonus track for the Japanese release of their album <unk> . They have played the song live several times , including an acoustic version with Scott Gorham on guitar . Henry Rollins has expressed a fondness for Thin Lizzy , and the Rollins Band covered their song " Are You Ready ? " on their album Get Some Go Again ( 2000 ) . The 2005 release from The Great Divide included a cover of " Cowboy Song " in two parts . Megadeth covered Thin Lizzy 's " Cold Sweat " on their 2013 release , Super Collider . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Thin Lizzy ( 1971 ) 
 Shades of a Blue Orphanage ( 1972 ) 
 Vagabonds of the Western World ( 1973 ) 
 Nightlife ( 1974 ) 
 Fighting ( 1975 ) 
 Jailbreak ( 1976 ) 
 Johnny the Fox ( 1976 ) 
 Bad Reputation ( 1977 ) 
 Black Rose : A Rock Legend ( 1979 ) 
 Chinatown ( 1980 ) 
 Renegade ( 1981 ) 
 Thunder and Lightning ( 1983 ) 
 = The Chase ( Desperate Housewives ) = 
 " The Chase " is the sixteenth episode of the sixth season of the American comedy @-@ drama series , Desperate Housewives , and the 127th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on ABC in the United States on February 28 , 2010 . In the episode , Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria ) gets a break from the children when one of them catches chickenpox , Lynette ( Felicity Huffman ) forgets her daughter 's birthday , and Katherine ( Dana Delany ) continues to explore her feelings of lesbianism . 
 The episode was written by John Pardee and Joey Murphy , and directed by Larry Shaw . It included the third in a string of guest appearances by Julie Benz , a former stripper who serves as a romantic interest for Katherine . The pairing marked the first lesbian relationship in Desperate Housewives . " The Chase " also marked the first appearance of Samuel Page , who plays a mysterious man named Sam Allen who takes an unusually strong interest in Bree ( Marcia Cross ) . 
 " The Chase " received generally mixed to negative reviews . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 10 @.@ 89 million viewers , making it the second lowest rated Desperate Housewives episode at the time . Viewership for " The Chase " suffered due to competition from the 2010 Winter Olympics closing ceremony . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Back story = = = 
 Desperate Housewives focuses on the lives of several residents on the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane . In recent episodes , Susan Mayer ( Teri Hatcher ) has encouraged a stripper Robin Gallagher ( Julie Benz ) to quit her job and turn her life around . Robin briefly lived with Susan , but moved out after Susan became jealous of Robin living in the same house as her husband , Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) . Robin moved in with Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) and revealed she was a lesbian , prompting the heterosexual Katherine to start developing romantic feelings for Robin . Lynette ( Felicity Huffman ) is pregnant , despite being a middle @-@ aged career woman and already having four children . This has caused strain for Lynette and her husband , Tom Scavo ( Doug Savant ) . Bree ( Marcia Cross ) is the ambitious owner of a catering company , and her son Andrew ( Shawn Pyfrom ) works as her personal assistant . Angie ( Drea de Matteo ) and Nick Bolen ( Jeffrey Nordling ) recently moved onto Wisteria Lane to escape circumstances in their old home of New York City that are yet to be fully explained . Gabrielle and her husband Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) overheard the Bolens arguing about their circumstances , and have grown concerned about their niece Ana ( Maiara Walsh ) dating the Bolens ' son , Danny ( Beau Mirchoff ) . As a result , they convinced Ana to leave Danny and pursue her modeling career in New York City , but Danny has secretly gone into the city to find her . 
 = = = Episode = = = 
 Still struggling with her growing feelings of lesbianism , Katherine has a dream in which she seduces Robin . Katherine 's therapist suggests she stop living with Robin because she is interfering with her recovery . Later , while celebrating Robin 's new job , she accidentally spills champagne on her top and takes it off , causing Katherine to blurt out that she wants her to leave because she has feelings for her . Robin agrees to leave , but Katherine follows her upstairs , and they end up in bed together . 
 Celia Solis ( Daniella Baltodano ) , one of the Solis ' daughters , comes down with chickenpox . Since Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria ) has never had the illness , she is forced to leave the house . She stays with neighbors Bob ( Tuc Watkins ) and Lee ( Kevin Rahm ) , where she enjoys partying and drinking with them so much she tries to prolong her visit . During a party , Gabrielle accidentally stumbles into a nursery , and learns Bob and Lee have been trying to adopt a baby . With a new appreciation for her children , Gabrielle returns home . 
 Distracted by her pregnancy , Lynette and Tom are horrified to realize they have forgotten their daughter Penny 's ( Kendall Applegate ) birthday . Lynette tries to organize a last @-@ minute party , but mistakenly has the wrong name written on her cake . Penny runs away and checks into a hotel room , where Lynette tracks her and apologizes . Penny said she is jealous of her unborn sister , but Lynette jokes the women will outnumber the men in the family when the baby is born . 
 One of Bree 's employees , Tad ( Eric Ian Colton ) , keeps making major mistakes , but Andrew defends him . Later , a mysterious man named Sam Allen ( Samuel Page ) visits Bree , insisting he understands her values and wants to work for her . Although initially hesitant , Bree is impressed and hires him . Later , Andrew gets upset when Bree plans to fire Tad , and Sam correctly assesses that Andrew is having an affair with him . Later , Sam hints to Bree that Andrew should be let go , then secretly drinks coffee from Andrew 's " World 's Greatest Son " mug . 
 Susan encourages her elderly neighbor Roy ( Orson Bean ) to propose to his girlfriend Karen ( Kathryn Joosten ) , and he does so after Karen indicates she wants to get married . Later , however , Roy laments to Susan about being put in the situation , and fears he will start lusting after other women now that he is engaged . Later , Karen learns she may have lung cancer . Roy tells Susan he is marrying Karen because he now realizes he does not want to lose Karen , and is sure she will beat the cancer . 
 Danny Bolen leaves a note claiming to be camping with his friend Eddie ( Josh Zuckerman ) , but Angie runs into Eddie at a grocery store and realizes Danny has actually run off to New York City seeking Ana . Fearing a man from their past named Patrick will find Danny , Angie and Nick head to New York to find him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Chase " was written by John Pardee and Joey Murphy , and directed by Larry Shaw . It originally aired on ABC in the United States on February 28 , 2010 , and was broadcast on CTV in Canada the same day . The episode introduced the character Sam Allen , a mysterious man who starts working for Bree and takes what appears to be an unusually strong interest in her . The character , who is set to appear in several episodes , is played by Samuel Page , an actor best known as the husband of Christina Hendricks ' character Joan Holloway in the AMC drama series Mad Men . " The Chase " marked the third in a string of at least four guest appearances by actress Julie Benz as Robin Gallagher , a former stripper seeking a new life . Benz joined the show soon after her departure as a regular cast member from the Showtime drama series Dexter , where her character Rita Morgan was killed in the fourth season finale , " The Getaway " . Benz said of filming the episode , " ' The girls are all so fun to work with and have welcomed me with open arms . I 'm so thrilled that there is such a buzz about my character 's relationship with Dana 's . " 
 " The Chase " continued an ongoing storyline of Katherine Mayfair exploring her sexuality . The pairing of Katherine and Robin marks the first lesbian relationship in Desperate Housewives . Actress Dana Delany praised the subplot . She said she did not know if the character would become a lesbian permanently , because the story lines change so often in Desperate Housewives , but that series creator Marc Cherry " is interested in playing the complexity of that " . Delany compared Katherine 's new realizations to that of actress Meredith Baxter , who realized she was a lesbian late in her life after entering into a relationship with a woman . Delany said she believed her character would be taken by surprise by the new feelings she is experiencing : " I think that she ’ s still so emotionally vulnerable from getting out of the loony bin , and I think she and Robin connect on a kind of wounded , emotional level . And I think if anything , she ’ s feeling this kind of emotional solace with her , and that draws her to Robin in a physical way , and that ’ s confusing to her . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Chase " was seen by 10 @.@ 89 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 3 @.@ 6 rating / 9 share , which at the time was the lowest rating for an individual episode of Desperate Housewives in series history . This continued a downward trend in the ratings for the show : each of the previous three episodes had been the lowest rated in series history until the airing of the next episode in the subsequent week . " The Chase " dropped in viewership three percent from the previous episode , " Lovely " . Like that episode , " The Chase " suffered in the ratings partially due to competition from the NBC broadcast of the 2010 Winter Olympics , which drew an estimated 21 @.@ 3 million viewers . Desperate Housewives was also outperformed by the CBS reality series Undercover Boss which , in its fourth episode , drew 15 @.@ 15 million viewers . 
 The episode received generally mixed to negative reviews . Entertainment Weekly writer Tanner Stransky was highly critical of the episode , describing the Gabrielle story as predictable , the Susan subplot as boring and the overall Bolen story arc as too slow in developing . Stransky also felt the Katherine and Robin pairing was unbelievable , and questioned whether the show 's audiences of families and midwesterners would respond well to a lesbian pairing . Gael Fashingbauer Cooper of MSNBC praised Longoria for turning what he said could have been a gloomy story into " a gleeful fantasy " . Cooper said the character was fun and funny but ultimately heartfelt and caring . Conversely , Cooper said the subplots involving the other housewives were " all pretty standard , and dreary , stuff " . 
 Los Angeles Times writer Gerrick Kennedy said he liked the Robin character 's charm and chemistry with Katherine , and said their story arc " has already grown infinitely more interesting than the Angie Bolen mystery " . He said the relationship made more sense for Katherine than her previous subplots involving her romance with Mike and her mental breakdown following their break @-@ up . Isabelle Carreau of TV Squad said she was glad the episode was centered on the supporting cast , particularly praising the attention to Bob and Lee , but she said that did not like the direction the Andrew character had taken , and felt the relationship between Katherine and Robin had evolved too fast . 
 = Italian cruiser Giuseppe Garibaldi ( 1899 ) = 
 Giuseppe Garibaldi was the lead ship of the her class of armored cruisers built for the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) in the 1890s . The ship often served as a flagship and made several deployments to the Eastern Mediterranean and the Levant during her career . At the beginning of the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 she bombarded Tripoli . Giuseppe Garibaldi bombarded Beirut in early 1912 and sank an Ottoman ironclad there . Several months later she bombarded the defenses of the Dardanelles . 
 The ship spent several months deployed to Albania after the end of the First Balkan War in 1913 to protect Italian interests there . Giuseppe Garibaldi was sunk by an Austro @-@ Hungarian submarine in the Adriatic Sea shortly after Italy declared war on the Central Powers in 1915 with the loss of 53 crewmen . Her wreck was discovered in 2008 and has been examined by underwater archaeologists in subsequent years . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Giuseppe Garibaldi had an overall length of 111 @.@ 8 meters ( 366 ft 10 in ) , a beam of 18 @.@ 2 meters ( 59 ft 9 in ) and a deep draft ( ship ) of 7 @.@ 3 meters ( 23 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 7 @,@ 350 metric tons ( 7 @,@ 230 long tons ) at normal load . The ship was powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , using steam from 24 coal @-@ fired Niclausse boilers . The engines were rated 13 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 100 kW ) and designed to give a speed of approximately 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . During her sea trials on 7 September 1900 , Giuseppe Garibaldi failed to reach her designed speed , reaching 19 @.@ 7 knots ( 36 @.@ 5 km / h ; 22 @.@ 7 mph ) from 14 @,@ 713 ihp ( 10 @,@ 971 kW ) . She had a cruising range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her complement ordinarily consisted of 555 officers and enlisted men and 578 when acting as a flagship . 
 Her main armament consisted of one 254 @-@ millimeter ( 10 in ) gun in a turret forward of the superstructure and two 203 @-@ millimeter ( 8 in ) guns in a twin turret aft . Ten of the 152 @-@ millimeter ( 6 in ) guns that comprised her secondary armament were arranged in casemates amidships ; the remaining four 152 @-@ millimeter guns were mounted on the upper deck . Giuseppe Garibaldi also had ten 76 @-@ millimeter ( 3 in ) and six 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) guns to defend herself against torpedo boats . She was fitted with four single 450 @-@ millimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . 
 The ship 's waterline armour belt had a maximum thickness of 150 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) amidships and tapered to 80 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) towards the ends of the ship . The conning tower , casemates , and gun turrets were also protected by 150 @-@ millimeter armor . Her protective deck armour was 37 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) thick and the 152 @-@ millimeter guns on the upper deck were protected by gun shields 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Giuseppe Garibaldi , named after General Giuseppe Garibaldi , one of the founders of modern Italy , was laid down at the Gio . Ansaldo & C. shipyard in Genoa @-@ Sestri Ponente on 21 September 1898 and launched on 29 June 1899 . While conducting preliminary steam trials on 12 July 1900 , tubes in two of her boilers burst , killing one crewman and wounding two others . Repairs took until 10 August and she was completed on 1 January 1901 . From 23 July to 2 October 1902 , the ship cruised the Mediterranean , making port calls at Tripoli and in the Aegean Sea . The following year , Giuseppe Garibaldi made port visits to Algiers , Salonica , and Piraeus , Greece . During the 1905 fleet maneuvers , she was assigned to the " hostile " force blockading La Maddalena , Sardinia . The ship was part of the international expeditionary force that occupied Lemnos and Mytilene in November – December 1905 in an failed effort to force the Ottoman Empire to pay its debts to European countries in a timely manner . Together with her sister ships Francesco Ferruccio and Varese , the ship was in Marseilles , France on 15 – 16 September 1906 to participate in a fleet review for Armand Fallières , President of France , on the latter date . Giuseppe Garibaldi was deployed to the Levant in May – July 1907 and again in June 1908 . 
 When the Italo @-@ Turkish War began on 29 September 1911 , she was flagship of the 4th Division of the 2nd Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet , commanded by Rear Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , and was one of the ships that bombarded Tripoli on 3 – 4 October . Giuseppe Garibaldi was the first ship to enter the harbor after the conclusion of the bombardment when a small landing party entered Fort Hamidiye and disabled the breech mechanisms of the fort 's guns . The desultory bombardment killed 12 Ottoman soldiers and severely wounded 23 more in addition to 7 dead civilians . On 13 October , the three sisters sailed to Augusta , Sicily to recoal . The ship <unk> were in Tobruk in January 1912 while the bulk of the fleet was refitting in Italy . 
 Giuseppe Garibaldi and Francesco Ferruccio bombarded Beirut on 24 February 1912 , setting the elderly Ottoman ironclad <unk> on fire . Giuseppe Garibaldi later entered the harbor and torpedoed the ironclad , sinking it and killing two officers and 40 enlisted men . Her entry forced the torpedo boat Ankara to scuttle itself . Varese is sometimes credited with participating also in the bombardment . The bombardment killed over 140 civilians and wounded more than 200 . On 18 April , Giuseppe Garibaldi and Varese bombarded the fortifications at the Dardanelles , heavily damaging them . After returning to Italy later that month , the ship began a refit that lasted through mid @-@ June that included replacing her worn @-@ out guns . 
 After the end of the First Balkan War in May 1913 , Giuseppe Garibaldi was deployed to the Albanian port of Scutari to ensure that it was returned by Montenegro to the Ottoman Empire and to protect Italian interests in the city . She returned home in August before deploying to Benghazi in February – March 1914 . 
 When Italy declared war on the Central Powers in May 1915 , she was the flagship of the 5th Cruiser Division , commanded by Rear Admiral Eugenio <unk> , and based at Brindisi . On 5 June the division bombarded rail lines near Ragusa , modern Dubrovnik , and departed Brindisi on the evening of 17 July to do the same near Ragusa Vecchia the following morning . Shortly after beginning the bombardment at 04 : 00 , Giuseppe Garibaldi was struck by one torpedo , on the starboard side near the aft boiler rooms , fired by the Austro @-@ Hungarian submarine U @-@ 4 . She sank within minutes on an even keel , although only 53 crewmen were killed . The remaining 525 were rescued by three destroyers left behind to rescue survivors as the division immediately retreated to avoid further attacks . 
 The wreck of the Giuseppe Garibaldi is upside @-@ down and located at coordinates 42 ° 28 @.@ 362 ′ N 18 ° 16 @.@ 758 ′ E south @-@ east of Dubrovnik , Croatia , at the depth of 122 meters ( 400 ft ) . The wreck was initially located by a Czech expedition in 2008 although the death of one diver on 9 September forestalled any investigation of the wreck . The group also lacked any permits to dive on Giuseppe Garibaldi as it is a protected war grave which caused them to be expelled from the country . A follow @-@ up Croatian expedition explored and filmed the wreck in August 2009 using CCR ( Closed Circuit <unk> ) technology . Official expeditions were made in November 2009 and May 2010 to the wreck by an international team of underwater archaeologists . 
 = Milos Raonic = 
 Milos Raonic ( / <unk> <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ROW @-@ <unk> ; Serbian : <unk> <unk> , Miloš <unk> [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born December 27 , 1990 ) is a Canadian professional tennis player . He reached a career @-@ high world No. 4 singles ranking on May 11 , 2015 , as ranked by the Association of Tennis Professionals ( ATP ) . His career highlights include a Grand Slam final at the 2016 Wimbledon Championships ; two Grand Slam semifinals at the 2014 Wimbledon Championships and 2016 Australian Open ; and three ATP World Tour Masters 1000 finals at the 2013 Canadian Open , 2014 Paris Masters , and 2016 Indian Wells Masters . 
 Raonic first gained international acclaim by reaching the fourth round of the 2011 Australian Open as a qualifier , being referred to as " the real deal " , " a new star " , part of " a new generation " , and " a future superstar " . Coupled with his first ATP World Tour title three weeks later , his world ranking rose from No. 152 to No. 37 in one month . He was awarded the 2011 ATP Newcomer of the Year , and has been ranked continuously inside the top 20 since August 2012 . Raonic is the first player born in the 1990s to win an ATP World Tour title , to be ranked in the top 10 , and to qualify for the ATP World Tour Finals . He has eight ATP World Tour titles . 
 Raonic is the most successful Canadian singles player in history . He became the highest @-@ ranked Canadian male ever on February 21 , 2011 when he reached world No. 37 . His career @-@ high world No. 4 ranking is the highest by a Canadian man or woman . He is the first Canadian male in the Open Era to reach the Australian Open semifinals , the French Open quarterfinals , and the Wimbledon final . He has more ATP World Tour titles and finals appearances in the Open Era than all other Canadian men combined . 
 Raonic is frequently described as having one of the best serves among his contemporaries . Statistically , Raonic is among the strongest servers in the Open Era , winning 91 % of service games to rank third all @-@ time . Aided by his serve , he plays an all @-@ court style with an emphasis on short points . Every one of his singles titles has been won on hard courts . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Raonic was born on December 27 , 1990 , in Titograd , SFR Yugoslavia ( now Podgorica , Montenegro ) , and is of Serb heritage . Prompted by the political unrest in the Balkans , and seeking more professional opportunities , his family moved to Canada in 1994 when he was three , settling in Brampton , Ontario . His parents are both engineers ; his father , Dušan , holds a Ph.D. in electrical engineering , while his mother , Vesna , has degrees in mechanical and computer engineering , including a master 's . He has two siblings , both significantly older : his sister , Jelena , has a master 's degree in international trade and finance and is eleven years older , while his brother , Momir , has a degree in information technology and business and is nine years older . Raonic 's uncle , Branimir <unk> , is a politician in the Government of Montenegro , where he has served as Deputy Prime Minister . Raonic is fluent in Serbian and English . 
 His first , brief introduction to tennis came at age six or seven with a week @-@ long tennis camp at the Bramalea Tennis Club in Brampton , followed by weekly hour @-@ long group sessions led by tennis coach Steve Gibson , who recognized his potential . He moved to nearby Thornhill , Ontario soon after , and one or two years passed before he asked his parents if he could play again . His father sought out coach Casey Curtis at the Blackmore Tennis Club in Richmond Hill , Ontario . Curtis was at first reluctant to take on Raonic , but was convinced after Raonic demonstrated his commitment by working with his father and a ball machine daily for two months . Years later , Raonic said he chose tennis because of its " individuality and [ because he ] felt [ he ] could train more alone and on a ball machine with [ his ] dad " . 
 Raonic and Curtis worked together " twice a day , almost every day , for the next nine years . " Provided that he complete his courses , Raonic was allowed to reduce his hours of attendance at Thornhill Elementary School so that he could practice more , which he did both before and after school . His parents and siblings supported his tennis , taking turns driving him to practice and tournaments , but did not push him to it or interfere with coaching . Rather , they emphasized school throughout , insisting that he maintain academic excellence as a prerequisite to playing tennis . He attended Thornhill Secondary School , and accelerated his course load — achieving an 82 percent average — so that he could graduate a year early . Late in 2007 , at the age of 16 , Raonic moved to Montreal as one of the first group of players at Tennis Canada 's new National Tennis Centre , thus marking the end of his formal relationship with Curtis . 
 Raonic 's four favourite sports teams are FC Barcelona , the Toronto Blue Jays , the Toronto Maple Leafs , and the Toronto Raptors . He played in the 2016 NBA All @-@ Star Celebrity Game held in Toronto . 
 He worked for Rogers Sportsnet as an analyst while recovering from injury for their broadcast of the 2011 Canadian Open . In November 2011 , Raonic won an exhibition match against his childhood idol , Pete Sampras , which was dubbed " The Face Off . " In 2012 , he took up residence in Monte Carlo , Monaco in a 50 <unk> ( 538 sq ft ) apartment , located minutes away from the Monte Carlo Country Club — his " home " tennis club and the site of the Monte @-@ Carlo Masters tournament — and Stade Louis II , which he uses for off @-@ court training . Raonic has been dating Canadian model Danielle Knudson since 2014 . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 In 2011 , while recovering from a hip injury sustained at Wimbledon , Raonic decided to become involved with philanthropic work , focusing on helping disadvantaged children . The following year , in 2012 , Raonic launched the Milos Raonic Foundation , which aims to " support children from disadvantaged backgrounds in order to remove economic , physical and other barriers that might prevent them from becoming healthy , productive members of society . ... In the initial stages of its work , the foundation will focus , in particular , on children with physical disabilities . " As of 2016 , the foundation had awarded $ 120 @,@ 000 in grants to the Holland <unk> Kids Rehabilitation Hospital , and $ 30 @,@ 000 to the Canadian Paralympic Committee . Raonic and his parents are the three directors of the foundation , which has partnered with ATP Aces for Charity . 
 Several celebrity fundraising events have been held in conjunction with the foundation . On November 15 , 2012 , the inaugural " Raonic Race for Kids " was held , with multiple teams competing in quick physical and intellectual challenges . Teams were led by celebrities , including Canadian Football Hall of Fame quarterback Damon Allen and tennis players Eugenie Bouchard and Daniel Nestor . The next night , a second " Face Off " event featured exhibition matches between Raonic and Andy Roddick , and between Serena Williams and Agnieszka Radwańska . In November 2013 , the second " Raonic Race for Kids " featured Davis Cup captain Martin Laurendeau , musician Jim Cuddy , and broadcaster George Stroumboulopoulos . The third " Raonic Race for Kids " in November 2014 featured Tennis Canada CEO Kelly <unk> , soccer player Dwayne De Rosario , and figure @-@ skating champions Patrick Chan , Tessa Virtue , and Scott Moir . 
 = = Tennis career = = 
 = = = Amateur career = = = 
 Raonic first competed at a junior event sanctioned by the International Tennis Federation ( ITF ) in October 2003 at the age of 12 . Two years later , in October 2005 , he picked up his first singles match victory at age 14 . His first juniors titles in both singles and doubles came at the same Grade 4 tournament in October 2006 . Later that year , he won the Prince Cup doubles title , partnering fellow Canadian <unk> Pospisil for the first time at an ITF event . Pospisil and Raonic partnered at four more junior tournaments , including the 2008 Wimbledon Championships and the 2008 French Open , reaching the semifinals in the latter . His most notable titles as a junior were in doubles , winning two Grade 1 events in 2008 partnered with Bradley <unk> . 
 Over five years , Raonic compiled a 53 – 30 win – loss record in singles , and a 56 – 24 record in doubles on the ITF Junior Circuit . Except for reaching the semifinals at the 2008 French Open in doubles , Raonic did not advance past the second round of junior Grand Slam events . His career @-@ high combined junior ranking , which considers both singles and doubles results , was No. 35 . 
 While an amateur , Raonic played in fourteen professional tournaments against adults in North America : ten ITF Futures events at the introductory ( bottom ) tier of professional tennis ; three ATP Challenger Tour events at the middle tier ; and one ATP World Tour event at the top tier . He played his first professional circuit match in the qualifying draw of an ITF Futures tournament in Toronto in October 2005 at the age of 14 ; he won his first professional circuit main draw match at an ITF Futures tournament in Gatineau , Quebec , in March 2007 against Fabrice Martin . With the win , Raonic earned his first world ranking of No. 1518 . He played his first professional circuit doubles match at the same tournament , partnered with Pospisil again . Raonic lost his first ATP Challenger Tour match in Granby , Quebec , in July 2007 against Gary <unk> . Raonic won his first ITF Futures doubles title in Gatineau , Quebec in March 2008 , and reached his first ITF Futures singles final two weeks later in Sherbrooke , Quebec . He received a wildcard to the qualifying tournament of the 2008 Canadian Open , but lost in the first round to Alexander <unk> . The match was his first in the ATP World Tour . 
 By the summer of 2008 , Raonic had received scholarship offers from several colleges , including the University of Michigan , Princeton , and Northwestern University , and committed to play for the University of Virginia that fall while studying finance . Just two weeks before school started , he consulted his parents about his plan to turn professional instead . Raonic and his parents agreed that he would take correspondence courses in finance from Athabasca University while starting a professional tennis career , setting a deadline of two years for reaching the top 100 . During that summer , his world ranking ranged between No. 915 and No. 937 . Raonic reached the top 100 in January 2011 , around five months later than the target deadline . He thus turned down the scholarships and turned professional , agreeing to be represented by the sports agency SFX . University of Virginia men 's tennis coach Brian Boland later commented that " I have only seen two guys turn down scholarships and then succeed quickly on the Tour : Sam Querrey and Milos Raonic . " 
 = = = 2008 – 2010 : Early professional years = = = 
 After turning professional in September 2008 until the end of 2010 , Raonic played both singles and doubles , primarily at ITF Futures and ATP Challenger tournaments . He won his first ITF Futures singles title in March 2009 in Montreal . He added three more singles titles and five doubles titles at the ITF Futures level in 2009 and 2010 . He was less successful at the ATP Challenger level , tallying only one title . In his fourth tournament after turning professional , Raonic won the doubles title at the Men 's Rimouski Challenger in November 2008 , partnered with Pospisil . 
 At the ATP World Tour level , Raonic gained entry into few tournaments , compiling a main draw record of three wins and five losses over nearly two and half years . In 2009 , Raonic again received a wildcard for the qualifying tournament of the Canadian Open . This time , he beat world No. 77 Teymuraz Gabashvili and No. 113 Michaël Llodra to qualify for the main draw of an ATP World Tour tournament for the first time . In the first round , he held a match point , but lost to world No. 10 Fernando Gonzalez in three sets . The matches against Gabashvili and Gonzalez were the first singles matches for Raonic against a top 100 player and top 10 player , respectively . 
 A year later , at the 2010 Canadian Open , Raonic and Pospisil were given a doubles wildcard to the main draw , marking Raonic 's first ever ATP World Tour doubles match . They won their first round match against Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic . It was first time that the world Nos. 1 and 2 had played together in a tour doubles match since Jimmy Connors and Arthur Ashe did so in 1976 . In the second round , Raonic and Pospisil lost to reigning Wimbledon doubles champions Jürgen Melzer and Philipp <unk> . After the match , Raonic said : " Our goal here is pretty much as ambassadors to Canada . The more players that we can get to come , the more people we can get going to take tennis lessons . " 
 Less than a month later , Raonic gained entry into a Grand Slam tournament for the first time at the 2010 US Open . He qualified for the main draw , but lost in the first round to Carsten Ball . Raonic 's first ATP main draw singles victory came in September 2010 at the Malaysian Open against world No. 105 Igor Kunitsyn . He followed this with a second round victory over world No. 31 Sergiy Stakhovsky . The following week , Raonic lost in the second round of the 2010 Japan Open to world No. 1 Nadal . This marked his first singles match against a player ranked No. 1 , and his first singles match against a member of the Big Four — a quartet of dominant tennis players including Nadal , Djokovic , Roger Federer , and Andy Murray . 
 Raonic 's coaching relationship evolved during his early professional years . Since late 2007 , Raonic had been working with Tennis Canada coaches — including Guillaume Marx , Head Boys National Coach — based out of the National Training Centre at Jarry Park in Montreal . In November 2009 , with Raonic 's world ranking at No. 377 , Tennis Canada hired recently retired former player Frédéric Niemeyer to coach Raonic and travel with him for 18 weeks during the 2010 season . Toward the end of 2010 , however , Niemeyer decided to travel less owing to " family considerations . " As a result , Tennis Canada arranged for a two @-@ week trial period with former world No. 40 Galo Blanco in co @-@ operation with Niemeyer , including tournaments in Malaysia and Japan in late September and early October . Over this period , Raonic climbed from No. 237 to No. 155 . Tennis Canada hired Blanco , and Raonic moved to Barcelona to train with Blanco and trainer Tony <unk> . Commenting on the training regiment , Blanco said " the off @-@ season Milos had this winter in Barcelona was amazing . We never saw anything like that before , working the way he worked for six weeks . " 
 = = = 2011 : Top 25 and first ATP title = = = 
 The first two months of 2011 represented a significant breakthrough for Raonic , as he rose from No. 156 at the beginning of January to No. 37 by the end of February . In doing so , he became the highest @-@ ranked Canadian male ever . He began this climb by qualifying for the Australian Open main draw . His first round victory over Björn Phau marked his first victory in a main draw Grand Slam match . In the second round , he defeated No. 22 seed Llodra , becoming the first Canadian man in 10 years to reach the third round of a Grand Slam singles tournament . With his career @-@ first victory over a top 10 player ( Mikhail Youzhny ) in the third round , he became the first qualifier to make the fourth round of a major since Marcelo Filippini at the 1999 French Open . 
 Despite losing in the fourth round to world No. 7 David Ferrer , Raonic received rave reviews for his Australian Open performance . Patrick McEnroe said " Raonic [ is ] the real deal " . BBC Sport referred to Raonic as part of " a new generation " . Martina Navratilova referred to Raonic as " a new star " saying that " the sky is the limit " . The Sydney Morning Herald referred to Raonic as a " future superstar " . 
 Two weeks later , Raonic won his first ATP title at the Pacific Coast Championships , with victories over No. 45 Xavier <unk> , No. 170 James Blake , No. 74 Ričardas Berankis , and No. 9 Fernando Verdasco . With the victory , he became the first player born in the 1990s to win an ATP title , and the youngest winner since Marin Čilić won the 2008 Connecticut Open at age 19 . Raonic 's victory was the first ATP title by a Canadian since Greg Rusedski in 1995 . 
 The following week , Raonic reached the final of an ATP 500 tournament for the first time at the U.S. National Indoor Tennis Championships . He defeated Verdasco for the second time in three days in the first round , and world No. 17 Mardy Fish in the semifinal . In the final , he lost in three sets to world No. 8 Roddick , with Roddick making a diving forehand to break serve for the match on his fifth championship point . Roddick stated : " That 's the best shot I 've ever hit in my life , considering the circumstance . " 
 With his improved ranking ( No. 37 ) , Raonic earned direct entry to Grand Slam tournaments and other ATP World Tour events for the first time . He reached the third round at both the Indian Wells Masters and the Monte @-@ Carlo Masters . In May , Raonic rose to a new career @-@ high ranking of No. 25 . He was seeded for the first time at a Grand Slam event at the French Open , but lost in the first round to Michael <unk> . At the Halle Open , Raonic reached his first ATP World Tour doubles final , partnered with Robin Haase . The pair lost to Rohan Bopanna and <unk> @-@ ul @-@ Haq Qureshi in the deciding super tiebreak . During his second round singles match at Wimbledon against Gilles Müller , Raonic retired with an early lead after injuring his right hip when he slipped and fell on the grass . He underwent hip surgery which prevented him from competing until September . His only significant result in the latter half of 2011 after returning from injury was a semifinal appearance at the Stockholm Open , where he lost to Gaël Monfils . 
 = = = 2012 : Second and third ATP titles = = = 
 Raonic began 2012 with titles in two of his first three tournaments , starting with his second ATP title at the Chennai Open in India . He had back @-@ to @-@ back wins over top 10 players at a tournament for the first time , beating Nicolás Almagro in the semifinals and Janko Tipsarević in the final . Raonic held serve during the entire tournament , becoming the first player to do so since Federer at the 2008 Halle Open . He lost in the third round of the Australian Open to Lleyton Hewitt . In February , Raonic defended his title at the Pacific Coast Championships , defeating Denis Istomin in the final for his third ATP title . The following week in Memphis , Raonic reached the final of the U.S. National Indoor Tennis Championships for the second straight year , but lost to Melzer . 
 In the spring , Raonic played his first three matches against world No. 3 Federer on three different surfaces : hard court in the third round of the Indian Wells Masters ; clay in the second round at the Madrid Open ; and grass in the quarterfinals at the Halle Open . On each occasion , Raonic won the first set before losing the next two . After the Halle Open match , Federer remarked : " I am happy to have beaten him now because by the end of my career , he ’ ll be serving at 300 km / h . " He defeated world No. 4 Murray in straight sets in the quarterfinals at the Barcelona Open . This marked his first victory over a member of the Big Four . In the semifinal , he lost to world No. 6 Ferrer . Raonic lost to Juan Mónaco in the third round of the French Open , and followed this with a second round loss to Querrey at Wimbledon . 
 Raonic reached his first ATP 1000 quarterfinals at back @-@ to @-@ back events in August , losing to John Isner at the Canadian Open and Stan Wawrinka at the Cincinnati Masters . His loss to Wawrinka followed his victory over world No. 7 Tomáš Berdych , his fourth top 10 victory of the year . On August 13 , his world ranking was No. 19 , marking his first time in the top 20 . At the US Open , Raonic lost in the fourth round to eventual champion Murray . Raonic was the first Canadian male to reach the fourth round of the US Open since Laurendeau in 1988 . In October at the Japan Open , Raonic reached his third ATP 500 final , defeating Radek Štěpánek , Viktor Troicki , Tipsarević , and Murray , before dropping the final to Japan 's Kei Nishikori in three sets . His victories over Tipsarević and Murray marked the third time he won back @-@ to @-@ back matches against top 10 players . 
 In 2012 , Raonic led the ATP in points won on 1st serve ( 82 % ) and in service games won ( 93 % ) . He finished the year at a career high singles ranking of No. 13 . His six victories over top 10 players in 2012 , including two over Murray , marks a career @-@ high . 
 = = = 2013 : Top 10 and fourth and fifth ATP titles = = = 
 In all four 2013 Grand Slam tournaments , Raonic matched his previous best result . He reached the fourth round of the Australian Open , falling to world No. 2 Federer . At the French Open , he lost in the third round to Kevin Anderson . At Wimbledon , he lost in the second round to Igor <unk> . At the US Open , he fell to world No. 9 Richard Gasquet in the fourth round , despite a career @-@ high 39 aces . 
 Raonic again achieved success at ATP 250 and ATP 500 events . In February , Raonic earned his third consecutive title at the Pacific Coast Championships , defeating Tommy Haas in the final . Over three years , he achieved a perfect 12 – 0 match record , and he did not drop a single set . He is the only man in the Open Era to win three consecutive titles at this event . In September , he won the Thailand Open tournament , defeating No. 9 Gasquet in the semifinals and No. 6 Berdych in the final . The titles were Raonic 's fourth and fifth , both coming in ATP 250 events like previous titles . In October , Raonic reached the Japan Open final for the second consecutive year , but lost a close match to No. 7 Juan Martin del Potro . It marked his fourth consecutive loss in the final of an ATP 500 event . 
 In eight of the nine ATP 1000 events , Raonic matched or improved on his career @-@ best performance . This included his first ATP 1000 series final at the Canadian Open in August . During his third round victory over del Potro , Raonic was awarded a point even though his foot touched the net . He did not report his error to the umpire , and won the last nine points to close out the match . Raonic later admitted that he was wrong not to admit his error at the time : " I made a mistake in the spur of the moment ... I 'm disappointed with myself , how I dealt with it . " After beating Ernests Gulbis in the quarterfinals , Raonic defeated compatriot Pospisil in the semifinals . The match against Pospisil was the first all @-@ Canadian semifinal in an ATP 1000 tournament . In the final , he lost to Nadal in just 68 minutes . Following the tournament , Raonic was ranked No. 10 , becoming the first Canadian player and the first player born in the 1990s to break into the top 10 . 
 In 2013 , Raonic again led the ATP in points won on first serve ( 82 % ) and in service games won ( 91 % ) . He had 45 match victories for the second consecutive year . His coaching team underwent significant changes in 2013 . In May , Raonic split with his coach of two and half years , Blanco . Less than a month later , Raonic hired former world No. 3 tennis player Ivan Ljubičić as his coach . In December , he hired Riccardo Piatti as a co @-@ coach with Ljubičić . 
 = = = 2014 : First Grand Slam semifinal = = = 
 Raonic opened 2014 by reaching the third round of the Australian Open , losing to Grigor Dimitrov . He sustained an ankle injury that kept him out of action for six weeks . 
 From March through May , Raonic improved on his career @-@ best performance at five consecutive ATP 1000 events . At the Indian Wells Masters , he beat No. 6 Murray to reach the quarterfinals , losing to Alexandr Dolgopolov . He lost in the quarterfinals of the Miami Masters to Nadal . He reached the quarterfinals for the third ATP 1000 tournament in a row at the Monte @-@ Carlo Masters , before falling to Wawrinka . The result garnered Raonic a career @-@ high ranking as world No. 9 . Raonic lost in the third round of the Madrid Open to Nishikori . At the Italian Open , Raonic defeated Jérémy Chardy in the quarterfinals to reach his first Masters 1000 semifinal on clay . After winning the first set , he lost his semifinal match to eventual champion Djokovic . Although he had played Djokovic in the 2013 Davis Cup , this was their first ATP match against one another . 
 At the French Open , Raonic was seeded in the top eight for the first time at a Grand Slam tournament . He notched victories against Nick Kyrgios , Jiří Veselý , Gilles Simon , and Marcel Granollers to reach the quarterfinals of a major for the first time in his career , becoming the first Canadian man to do so in the Open Era . He lost in the quarterfinals to Djokovic in straight sets . After the match , Raonic commented : " I 've gone farther in a Slam than I have before and I 've learned things even from this loss . " 
 At Wimbledon , Raonic was again seeded eighth . He defeated Matthew Ebden , Jack Sock , Łukasz <unk> , Nishikori , and Kyrgios to reach his first major semifinal . He became the first Canadian men 's singles player to reach the semifinals at a major since Robert Powell in 1908 . In the quarterfinal victory against Kyrgios , Raonic tied a career @-@ high with 39 aces . In the semifinals , Raonic lost to Federer in straight sets . After the match , Raonic reflected : " There 's a lot of good things to take from it . ... But when you get here to this point , I think it 's just human nature , the greed of human nature , that you want so much more . You feel it in front of you and you want to grab it . " Despite the loss , Raonic saw his world ranking improve to a career @-@ high No. 6 . 
 In his next tournament , Raonic reached his first final of the year at the Washington Open , facing Pospisil in the first all @-@ Canadian final in ATP history . Raonic won the title in straight sets . It was his first ATP 500 title , after finishing as runner @-@ up in four previous ATP 500 tournaments . After reaching the quarterfinals at the Canadian Open and the semifinals at the Cincinnati Masters , he claimed the men 's 2014 US Open Series . 
 At the US Open , Raonic was seeded fifth . He won his first three matches to face rival Nishikori in the fourth round . On the morning of September 2 , Raonic and Nishikori tied the all @-@ time latest finish for a match at the US Open , ending at 2 : 26 a.m. This tied previous matches between Mats Wilander and Mikael <unk> in 1993 , and between Isner and Philipp Kohlschreiber in 2012 . The five set match lasted 4 hours and 19 minutes , with Raonic losing and Nishikori advancing to the quarterfinals . In October , Raonic reached the final of the Japan Open for the third consecutive year , but lost to Nishikori again . 
 Three years prior , in 2011 , Raonic had set a personal goal of reaching the year @-@ end ATP Finals , where only the top eight players earned a spot . Heading into the last ATP 1000 event of 2014 , the Paris Masters , Raonic trailed Ferrer for the eighth spot , and needed a deep run to surpass him . He beat Sock and Roberto Bautista Agut to set up a quarterfinals match against world No. 2 Federer , who had beaten him in all six previous meetings . Needing a win to avoid being eliminated from contention for the ATP Finals , Raonic won in straight sets . His victory was hailed as " a career @-@ defining win . " In the post @-@ match interview , Raonic was asked to rank this victory in his career . He replied : " Considering all the circumstances around it , I think this was the biggest win for me . " He went on to beat world No. 5 Berdych in the semifinals to earn a spot in the second ATP 1000 final of his career . He lost to Djokovic in the final , but secured his place in the 2014 ATP Finals . He is the first Canadian to reach the ATP Finals , and the first player born in the 1990s to do so . <unk> , Raonic withdrew from the tournament due to a leg @-@ muscle tear prior to his match against Nishikori , after losses to Federer and Murray . 
 Raonic ended the year at a career @-@ high season @-@ ending ranking of No. 8 . He was one of just three players to reach the quarterfinals or better at seven of the nine ATP 1000 tournaments . Raonic finished with a career @-@ high total of 1107 aces in 2014 . At the time , this was the fifth highest single @-@ year ace total in history . ( It was surpassed by both Ivo Karlović and Isner in 2015 . ) 
 = = = 2015 : Top 4 and injury woes = = = 
 Raonic began 2015 by reaching the final at the Brisbane International after defeating world No. 5 Nishikori in three sets , all decided in tiebreaks . He lost to world No. 2 Federer in three sets , with Federer recording his 1,000th match win on the professional tour . Later in the month , he reached the quarterfinals of the Australian Open after beating world No. 12 Feliciano López . He lost to Djokovic in straight sets . 
 At the Indian Wells Masters , Raonic won his quarterfinal match against No. 3 Nadal , after saving three match points from Nadal in the second set tiebreak . It was Raonic 's first career victory over Nadal after five defeats . He lost to Federer in the semifinals . 
 In April , Raonic opened the Monte @-@ Carlo Masters with a victory over João Sousa . Just one game into his second @-@ round match against Tommy Robredo , Raonic called for a medical timeout due to a right foot injury . Although he went on to win the match , Raonic 's manager indicated that Raonic had made a pre @-@ existing injury worse by playing . In his quarterfinal match against Berdych , he complained of numbness in his right foot during a medical timeout , and retired while trailing 2 – 5 in the opening set . It was diagnosed as a pinched nerve , and Raonic was expected to be healthy for the Madrid Open . 
 In Madrid , Raonic advanced to the quarterfinals with straight sets victories over Mónaco and Leonardo Mayer . After Raonic lost in the quarterfinals against Murray , Murray observed that Raonic was " struggling [ with injury ] . " Following the match , Raonic announced that he would undergo surgery to repair a nerve in his foot , targeting a return in time for the French Open . Ironically , Raonic 's world ranking reached a new career @-@ high of No. 4 the following week , the highest by a Canadian man or woman . 
 Following surgery , Raonic withdrew from the Italian Open and the French Open . He returned to play the Queen 's Club Championships and Wimbledon , losing in both tournaments in the third round . After his Wimbledon loss to Kyrgios , Raonic commented that his foot injury had led to problems throughout his body : " There wasn 't a place it wasn 't [ bothering me ] ... First ankle , then the hip , and then the back . Then when those things aren 't working , you just put too much pressure on your shoulder , and then your shoulder hurts . " The cascading injuries led to a withdrawal from Canada 's Davis Cup tie against Belgium ; a withdrawal from the Washington Open , where Raonic was the defending champion ; first round losses at the Canadian Open and Cincinnati Masters ; and a third round loss at the US Open to López . 
 In September , at the St. Petersburg Open , Raonic won his seventh singles title — and first in Europe — with a three @-@ set victory over Sousa . His serve was broken just once in the entire tournament . After early losses at the China Open and Shanghai Masters , Raonic ended his ATP season by withdrawing from three consecutive tournaments , citing injury . On November 2 , he fell outside the top 10 , dropping to world No. 14 . After six weeks off , Raonic joined the Philippine Mavericks of the exhibition International Premier Tennis League ( IPTL ) in December . After four matches , he withdrew due to back spasms . 
 In late November , Raonic parted ways with both Ljubičić , who had been his coach since June 2013 , and Austin Nunn , who had been his media manager for nearly four years . Ljubičić was added to Federer 's coaching team two weeks later . Raonic contacted former world No. 1 tennis player Carlos Moya about a coaching relationship , and they trained together and had discussions during the IPTL events . The relationship was subsequently formalized and on January 1 , 2016 , Raonic announced that Moya would join his coaching team alongside Piatti . Raonic said that he chose Moya for three reasons : " Carlos is very laid back and positive [ ... and ] he communicates well . " 
 = = = 2016 : First Grand Slam final = = = 
 Raonic reached the final of the Brisbane International against world No. 3 Federer in a rematch of their 2015 final . This time , Raonic upset Federer in straight sets , winning his eighth career title . Asked to talk about Raonic after the match , Federer observed : " [ F ] or a big guy he moves well ... He 's improved his fitness the last few years . Also , tactically , I think he 's better now than he 's ever been . He 's made a conscious effort of playing close to the baseline , which before when he was working with the Spanish coaches he was way back . " 
 In the fourth round of the Australian Open , he upset world No. 4 Wawrinka in five sets , beating the 2014 champion for the first time in five meetings . He then beat Monfils in the quarterfinals to advance to the semifinals of the Australian Open for the first time in his career . He became the first Canadian man to reach the Australian Open semifinals . In the semifinals , he lost to world No. 2 Murray in five sets , sustaining an adductor injury while leading two sets to one . After the match , he reflected that the loss was " probably the most heartbroken [ he has ] felt on court . " 
 The adductor injury kept Raonic out of competition for six weeks , during which he withdrew from the Delray Beach Open and the Mexican Open , and Canada 's Davis Cup clash with France . He returned to action at the Indian Wells Masters , reaching the final against world No. 1 Djokovic with a string of four victories over top 20 opponents : Bernard Tomic , Berdych , Monfils , and David Goffin . In the semifinal victory over Goffin , Raonic 's average second serve ( 112 mph ) was faster than Goffin 's average first serve ( 110 mph ) . Before the final , Djokovic said : " Milos is probably playing the best tennis that he has ever played . His serve was phenomenal before the start of this season , but it seems like he has improved even more , especially the second serve . He 's going for it more . He 's not giving you the same look . " Raonic lost a lopsided straight sets match to Djokovic in the final , his third consecutive loss in an ATP 1000 final . 
 Raonic followed Indian Wells by reaching the quarterfinals at the next three ATP 1000 events in Miami , Monte Carlo , and Madrid , eventually losing to Kyrgios , Murray , and Djokovic , respectively . On May 2 , he re @-@ entered the top 10 at No. 10 . Raonic continued the clay court season with a second @-@ round loss at the Italian Open to Kyrgios . At the French Open , he was the eighth seed , but fell in the fourth round in straight sets to world No. 55 Albert Ramos @-@ <unk> . During the French Open , former world No. 1 and 3 @-@ time Wimbledon champion John McEnroe announced that he would join Raonic 's team as a consultant for the grass court season . Commenting on McEnroe joining Moya and Piatti on his coaching team , Raonic said : " I was sort of just looking for another set of eyes to be a bit more efficient on grass " and he said it was about " generally improving . " 
 Raonic began the grass court season by advancing to his first grass court final at the Queen 's Club Championships without dropping serve in victories over Kyrgios , Veselý , Bautista Agut , and Tomic , but lost the final in three sets to Murray . At Wimbledon , Raonic won his first three matches in straight sets against Pablo Carreño Busta , Andreas Seppi , and Sock . In the fourth round against Goffin , Raonic came back from from a two set deficit to win in five sets for the first time in his career . In ten previous best @-@ of @-@ five matches where he lost the first two sets , he also lost the third set . Raonic then beat Querrey in the quarterfinals and Federer in the semifinals , marking Federer 's first defeat in 11 Wimbledon semifinals . With the victory , Raonic reached his first Grand Slam final , becoming the first Canadian man to do so . In the final , he lost to Murray in straight sets , though he made the fastest serve of the tournament at 147 miles per hour ( 237 km / h ) . 
 = = National representation = = 
 Early in his career , Raonic was questioned about whether he would follow the example of Rusedski , the last prominent Canadian tennis player , who decided to represent Great Britain instead . Raonic declared that he would play for Canada . 
 Raonic embraced his role as Canada 's top singles player , intent on growing the game in Canada . He stated in 2010 : " I want to make a difference in Canada with [ my career ] . I feel if I were to achieve my goals it could make a great difference to the growth of tennis in Canada and help to produce more top players in the future . " Before a Davis Cup tie with Japan in 2015 , he said : " I 'm here because I want to be here . I don 't have anybody telling me I need to be here . I want to succeed at this event , and I want to succeed representing Canada . " 
 = = = Davis Cup = = = 
 From 2010 to 2016 , Canada competed in 15 Davis Cup ties . Raonic represented Canada in 11 of those ties , missing four due to injury : Ecuador in 2011 , Japan in 2014 , Belgium in 2015 , and France in 2016 . Overall , Raonic has 16 match wins in 22 Davis Cup matches ( 14 – 5 in singles ; 2 – 1 in doubles ) . He is one of the most successful players in Canadian Davis Cup history , tied for the six most match wins overall and tied for third in singles match wins . 
 Raonic made his Davis Cup debut in Bogota against Colombia in 2010 at the age of 19 . Raonic lost both of his singles matches ( against Santiago Giraldo and Juan Sebastián Cabal ) , but won his doubles match partnered with Nestor , who was then the top ranked doubles player in the world . His first singles match victory came in Canada 's next tie against the Dominican Republic , when he beat Víctor Estrella Burgos in five sets . This marked the first five set match of Raonic 's career . Competing against Mexico in 2011 , Raonic won three rubbers in a tie for the first time , beating both Manuel Sánchez and Daniel Garza in singles and partnering with Pospisil to win in doubles as well . 
 In the 2013 Davis Cup World Group first round , Raonic won singles rubbers over Ramos @-@ <unk> and Guillermo García @-@ López to lead Canada over top @-@ seeded Spain . He repeated this feat with victories over Fabio Fognini and Seppi to help Canada defeat Italy in the quarterfinals , sending Canada into the Davis Cup semifinals for the first time since 1913 . In the semifinal against Serbia , Raonic won his singles match over Tipsarević , but lost to world No. 1 Djokovic as Canada was eliminated . The defeat marked Raonic 's first singles match against Djokovic . 
 = = = Olympics = = = 
 Raonic represented Canada at the London 2012 Olympics and competed in the singles competition as an unseeded player . He won his first round match over Japan 's <unk> Ito in straight sets . In the second round , Raonic lost to French player Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga 3 – 6 , 6 – 3 , 23 – 25 , breaking three Olympic tennis records . The match holds the records for the most games played in a best @-@ of @-@ three sets match ( 66 games ) and the most games played in a single set ( 48 games ) in Olympic history . At the time , it was the longest Olympic match by time played ( 3 hours 57 minutes ) , but this record was broken three days later in the semifinal match between Federer and del Potro ( 4 hours 26 minutes ) . 
 Raonic decided not to play in the 2016 Summer Olympics citing health concerns and the Zika virus . 
 = = = Hopman Cup = = = 
 In 2014 , Raonic partnered with Bouchard to represent Canada in the Hopman Cup . Raonic won two of three singles matches , and paired with Bouchard to win two of three doubles matches . Canada finished in second place in their pool — behind top @-@ seeded Poland — and were eliminated . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 The most distinctive part of Raonic 's game is his powerful and accurate serve , from which his " Missile " nickname is derived . He is frequently cited as having one of the best serves among his contemporaries , along with Karlović and Isner . Some consider Raonic 's serve to be among the best of all time . Sampras , Raonic 's childhood idol , describes the Canadian 's serve as " bigger than big . " After a match against Raonic , Djokovic commented " I can 't recall the last time I was feeling so helpless returning . Even his second serve . " Statistically , Raonic is among the strongest servers in the Open Era , winning 91 % of service games to rank third all @-@ time . Raonic has one of the fastest recorded serves of all time . 
 Aided by his serve , Raonic employs an all @-@ court style with an emphasis on short points . His groundstrokes are both good , but his forehand is stronger than his backhand . Because of this , he has been known to run around his backhand and hit inside @-@ out <unk> instead . He attempts to dictate play and is generally more aggressive than his opponent , as evidenced by usually having more winners and more unforced errors . To finish points quickly , Raonic occasionally approaches the net , with either a serve and volley or chip and charge strategy . 
 Raonic prefers playing on hard courts , where he has been more successful than on clay or grass courts . All but two of the tournaments where Raonic has reached the final have been played on hard courts , and all but three of his victories over top 10 players have been on hard courts as well . 
 When he was twenty , the National Post described Raonic as a " hothead whose on @-@ court demeanour was holding him back . " As he grew older , commentators came to see him as " stoic " , " robotic " , and " emotionless " , with The Daily Telegraph referring to him as " an analytical character who questions everything he does in practice " . In 2014 , Raonic explained : " I 'm the son of two engineers , so everything is a numbers and calculation game . " In 2016 , he added : " I am very systematic in how [ I ] need to go about things to bring out the best tennis for myself , and maybe that comes off as mechanical and robotic and those kind of things , but I don 't know if I 'd ever change that because I feel that 's the way I get the best out of myself when it comes to my tennis . " 
 Aspects of Raonic 's game which have been criticized include his return of serve , quickness and mobility , backhand , short game , and the use of <unk> or <unk> . His above @-@ average height — 196 cm ( 6 ft 5 in ) — is linked to his strong serve , but is said to limit his movement around the court . 
 = = Equipment and apparel = = 
 Raonic endorses the Wilson BLX Blade 98 <unk> tennis racket , and uses <unk> M2 Pro 1 @.@ 25 <unk> strings . In January 2013 , Raonic became the first tennis player to endorse New Balance clothing and shoes , in a deal reported to be worth " US $ 1 million annually over a five @-@ year term . " Roughly two and a half years later , this deal was extended " for the length of [ Raonic 's ] career and beyond , " and stipulates that New Balance will increase its support of the Milos Raonic Foundation . The lifelong nature of this contract was described by Tennis Canada as " unique . " 
 Since March 2014 , Raonic has donned a sleeve on his right arm while playing . At first , he wore a fisherman 's sleeve to cover a rash he had due to an allergic reaction to massage cream . This was replaced with an athletic compression sleeve , often colour @-@ coordinated with his on @-@ court apparel . The sleeve is worn for comfort , and wearing it became a habit for Raonic . The sleeve has become a distinctive part of Raonic 's image , and has spawned a Twitter account . The motto " Believe in the Sleeve " has become synonymous with Raonic in the media and among Raonic 's fans . Serena Williams described the sleeve as " super cool and different . " 
 Raonic is represented by CAA Sports , a division of Creative Artists Agency . His other sponsorship deals include <unk> ( insurance ) , Canada Goose ( apparel ) , Commerce Court ( real estate ) , Lacoste ( apparel ) , Rolex ( watches ) , SAP ( software ) , and Zepp ( sports metrics ) . 
 = = Rivals and contemporaries = = 
 = = = Raonic and the Big Four = = = 
 Raonic holds a combined 7 – 29 record ( 19 % ) against the Big Four , including 0 – 7 against Djokovic , 1 – 6 against Nadal , 3 – 9 against Federer , and 3 – 7 against Murray . 
 Each of Raonic 's deepest runs in significant tournaments ( i.e. majors and ATP 1000 tournaments ) have ended with a loss to a member of the Big Four : Nadal in the 2013 Canadian Open final , Federer in the 2014 Wimbledon semifinal , Djokovic in the 2014 Paris Masters final , Murray in the 2016 Australian Open semifinal , Djokovic in the 2016 Indian Wells Masters final , and Murray in the 2016 Wimbledon final . At majors , Raonic has a 1 – 7 record against the Big Four , losing the first five matches in straight sets . He has met only one of the four in Davis Cup play : he lost to Djokovic in the 2013 semifinals . 
 Raonic 's most frequent opponent , either inside or outside the Big Four , is Federer ( 12 matches ) . His first victory over Federer in the 2014 Paris Masters quarterfinal was hailed as " a career @-@ defining win . " His second victory over Federer — at the 2016 Brisbane International — was his first in a final against the Big Four . A third victory over Federer — in the 2016 Wimbledon semifinal — marked Raonic 's first victory at a Grand Slam tournament against the Big Four . 
 = = = Raonic and Nishikori = = = 
 Nishikori is often cited as Raonic 's primary rival . The two have very different strengths ; according to The Globe and Mail , Raonic uses his " size and his serve " , while Nishikori uses his " savvy and speed . " Both are the first from their respective countries to achieve a top 10 ranking , and both have a career @-@ high ranking of world No. 4 . In May 2015 , they were the two youngest players in the top 10 . Nishikori holds a 5 – 2 advantage in seven close matches , including two wins in the Japan Open final ( 2012 , 2014 ) . Of the twenty @-@ five sets they have played , ten have required a tiebreak . Only one of their matches has been a straight sets victory . Five matches have required the maximum number of sets . One of these was a marathon US Open five @-@ set match that equalled the record for latest finish ever at 2 : 26 a.m. 
 Nishikori and Raonic are among a group of players whom tennis pundits suggest could be the successors of the Big Four . The members of this group vary , but have included Dimitrov , Gulbis , Čilić , and Dominic Thiem . 
 = = = Raonic and Pospisil = = = 
 Pospisil is more of a contemporary rather than a rival of Raonic . Owing to their similarity in age — Pospisil is six months older — and the fact that both are successful products of Tennis Canada 's development programs , they have been linked as the leaders of a new generation of Canadian tennis players . They partnered in doubles frequently early in their careers , winning doubles titles together in junior and ATP Challenger events . Between 2011 and 2015 , Raonic and Pospisil have been the two top @-@ ranked Canadian men in year @-@ end rankings . As well as four ATP Challenger and Futures matches , they have played each other in two ATP World Tour matches : Raonic beat Pospisil in the first all @-@ Canadian semifinal at an ATP 1000 tournament , and in the first all @-@ Canadian final in ATP history . They are frequent Davis Cup teammates , and they planned to play doubles together at the 2016 Rio Olympics until Raonic withdrew . 
 = = = Raonic , Isner , and Karlović = = = 
 Raonic is often compared to Isner and Karlović . The trio possess statistically dominant serves , leading the ATP in service games won and in aces per match in the period between 2012 and 2015 . They have played each other infrequently , however . Raonic is 1 – 1 against Karlović and 0 – 3 against Isner . Karlović holds a 3 – 2 head @-@ to @-@ head advantage over Isner . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Grand Slam performance timeline = = = 
 This table is current through the 2016 Wimbledon Championships . 
 = = = Grand Slam finals : 1 ( 1 runner @-@ up ) = = = 
 = = = Records = = = 
 These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis ( post @-@ 1968 ) . 
 = = Awards = = 
 2011 – ATP Newcomer of the Year 
 2011 – Tennis Canada male player of the year 
 2012 – QMI Agency Canadian Male Athlete of the Year 
 2012 – Tennis Canada male player of the year 
 2013 – Tennis Canada male player of the year 
 2013 – Lionel Conacher Award 
 2014 – Emirates ATP Top 10 Trophy 
 2014 – Tennis Canada male player of the year 
 2014 – Lionel Conacher Award 
 2014 – Canadian Club of Toronto 's Canadian of the Year 
 2015 – Tennis Canada male player of the year 
 2016 – Toronto Sports Hall of Honour male athlete of the year 
 = Palladium = 
 Palladium is a chemical element with symbol Pd and atomic number 46 . It is a rare and lustrous silvery @-@ white metal discovered in 1803 by William Hyde Wollaston . He named it after the asteroid Pallas , which was itself named after the epithet of the Greek goddess Athena , acquired by her when she slew Pallas . Palladium , platinum , rhodium , ruthenium , iridium and osmium form a group of elements referred to as the platinum group metals ( PGMs ) . These have similar chemical properties , but palladium has the lowest melting point and is the least dense of them . 
 More than half the supply of palladium and its congener platinum is used in catalytic converters , which convert as much as 90 % of the harmful gases in automobile exhaust ( hydrocarbons , carbon monoxide , and nitrogen dioxide ) into harmless substances ( nitrogen , carbon dioxide and water vapor ) . Palladium is also used in electronics , dentistry , medicine , hydrogen purification , chemical applications , groundwater treatment , and jewelry . Palladium is a key component of fuel cells , which react hydrogen with oxygen to produce electricity , heat , and water . 
 Ore deposits of palladium and other PGMs are rare . The most extensive deposits have been found in the <unk> belt of the Bushveld Igneous Complex covering the Transvaal Basin in South Africa , the Stillwater Complex in Montana , United States , the Thunder Bay District of Ontario , Canada , and the Norilsk Complex in Russia . Recycling is also a source , mostly from scrapped catalytic converters . The numerous applications and limited supply sources result in considerable investment interest . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Palladium belongs to group 10 in the periodic table , but the configuration in the outermost electron shells is atypical for group 10 ( see also niobium ( 41 ) , ruthenium ( 44 ) , and rhodium ( 45 ) ) . Fewer electron shells are filled than the elements directly preceding it ( a phenomenon unique to palladium ) . The valence shell has eighteen electrons – ten more than the eight found in the valence shells of the noble gases from neon onward . 
 Palladium is a soft silver @-@ white metal that resembles platinum . It is the least dense and has the lowest melting point of the platinum group metals . It is soft and ductile when annealed and is greatly increased in strength and hardness when cold @-@ worked . Palladium dissolves slowly in concentrated nitric acid , in hot , concentrated sulfuric acid , and when finely ground , in hydrochloric acid . 
 Common oxidation states of palladium are 0 , + 1 , + 2 and + 4 . Relatively few compounds are known with palladium unambiguously in the + 3 oxidation state , though such compounds have been proposed as intermediates in many palladium @-@ catalyzed cross @-@ coupling reactions . Palladium ( VI ) was first observed in 2002 . 
 Palladium films with defects produced by alpha particle bombardment at low temperature exhibit superconductivity having Tc = 3 @.@ 2 K. 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Naturally occurring palladium is composed of seven isotopes , six of which are stable . The most stable radioisotopes are 107Pd with a half @-@ life of 6 @.@ 5 million years ( found in nature ) , <unk> with 17 days , and <unk> with 3 @.@ 63 days . Eighteen other radioisotopes have been characterized with atomic weights ranging from 90 @.@ <unk> ( 64 ) u ( <unk> ) to 122 @.@ <unk> ( 64 ) u ( <unk> ) . These have half @-@ lives of less than thirty minutes , except <unk> ( half @-@ life : 8 @.@ 47 hours ) , <unk> ( half @-@ life : 13 @.@ 7 hours ) , and <unk> ( half @-@ life : 21 hours ) . 
 For isotopes with atomic mass unit values less than that of the most abundant stable isotope , <unk> , the primary decay mode is electron capture with the primary decay product being rhodium . The primary mode of decay for those isotopes of Pd with atomic mass greater than 106 is beta decay with the primary product of this decay being silver . 
 <unk> <unk> is a decay product of 107Pd and was first discovered in 1978 in the Santa Clara meteorite of 1976 . The discoverers suggest that the coalescence and differentiation of iron @-@ cored small planets may have occurred 10 million years after a nucleosynthetic event . 107Pd versus Ag correlations observed in bodies , which have been melted since accretion of the solar system , must reflect the presence of short @-@ lived nuclides in the early solar system . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Palladium does not react with oxygen at standard temperatures ( and thus does not tarnish in air ) . Palladium heated to 800 ° C will produce a layer of palladium ( II ) oxide ( <unk> ) . It tarnishes lightly in a moist atmosphere containing sulfur . Palladium primarily exists in the 0 , + 2 , and + 4 oxidation states , though + 4 is comparatively rare . One major example of palladium ( IV ) is <unk> ( IV ) , [ <unk> ] 2 − . 
 Elemental palladium reacts with chlorine to give palladium ( II ) chloride ; it dissolves in nitric acid and precipitates palladium ( II ) acetate on addition of acetic acid . These two compounds and the bromide are reactive and relatively inexpensive , making them convenient entry points to palladium chemistry . All three are not monomeric ; the chloride and bromide often must be refluxed in acetonitrile to obtain the more reactive acetonitrile complex monomers , for example : 
 <unk> + 2 MeCN → <unk> ( MeCN ) 2 ( X = Cl , Br ) 
 Palladium ( II ) chloride is the principal starting material for many other palladium catalysts . It is used to prepare heterogeneous palladium catalysts : palladium on barium sulfate , palladium on carbon , and palladium chloride on carbon . It reacts with triphenylphosphine in coordinating solvents to give bis ( triphenylphosphine ) palladium ( II ) dichloride , a useful catalyst . Where desired , the catalyst may be formed in situ . 
 PdCl2 + 2 PPh3 → PdCl2 ( PPh3 ) 2 
 Reduction of this phosphine complex with hydrazine with more phosphine gives tetrakis ( triphenylphosphine ) palladium ( 0 ) , one of the two major palladium ( 0 ) complexes : 
 2 PdCl2 ( PPh3 ) 2 + 4 PPh3 + 5 <unk> → 2 Pd ( PPh3 ) 4 + N2 + 4 <unk> + Cl − 
 The other major palladium ( 0 ) complex , tris ( dibenzylideneacetone ) <unk> ( 0 ) ( <unk> ( <unk> ) 3 ) , is prepared by reducing sodium <unk> in the presence of dibenzylideneacetone . 
 Mixed valence palladium complex of <unk> ( CO ) 4 ( OAc ) <unk> ( acac ) 2 forms an infinite Pd chain structure , with alternatively interconnected <unk> ( CO ) 4 ( OAc ) 4 and Pd ( acac ) 2 units . 
 The many reactions catalyzed by palladium compounds are collectively known as palladium @-@ catalyzed coupling reactions . Prominent examples include the Heck , Suzuki , and Stille reactions . Palladium ( II ) acetate , tetrakis ( triphenylphosphine ) palladium ( 0 ) ( Pd ( PPh3 ) 4 , and tris ( dibenzylideneacetone ) <unk> ( 0 ) ( <unk> ( <unk> ) 3 ) serve either as catalysts or as starting materials for catalysts . 
 = = History = = 
 William Hyde Wollaston noted the discovery of a new noble metal in July 1802 in his lab @-@ book and named it palladium in August of the same year . Wollaston purified enough of the material and offered it , without naming the discoverer , in a small shop in Soho in April 1803 . After harsh criticism from Richard Chenevix that palladium is an alloy of platinum and mercury , Wollaston anonymously offered a reward of 20 British pounds for 20 grains of synthetic palladium alloy . Chenevix received the Copley Medal in 1803 after he published his experiments on palladium . Wollaston published the discovery of rhodium in 1804 and mentions some of his work on palladium . He disclosed that he was the discoverer of palladium in a publication in 1805 . 
 It was named by Wollaston in 1802 after the asteroid Pallas , which had been discovered two months earlier . Wollaston found palladium in crude platinum ore from South America by dissolving the ore in aqua regia , neutralizing the solution with sodium hydroxide , and precipitating platinum as ammonium chloroplatinate with ammonium chloride . He added mercuric cyanide to form the compound palladium ( II ) cyanide , which was heated to extract palladium metal . 
 Palladium chloride was at one time prescribed as a tuberculosis treatment at the rate of 0 @.@ 065 g per day ( approximately one milligram per kilogram of body weight ) . This treatment had many negative side @-@ effects , and was later replaced by more effective drugs . 
 Most palladium is used for catalytic converters in the automobile industry . In the run up to year 2000 , the Russian supply of palladium to the global market was repeatedly delayed and disrupted because for political reasons , the export quota was not granted on time . The ensuing market panic drove the price to an all @-@ time high of $ 1100 per troy ounce in January 2001 . Around that time , the Ford Motor Company , fearing that automobile production would be disrupted by a palladium shortage , stockpiled the metal . When prices fell in early 2001 , Ford lost nearly US $ 1 billion . 
 World demand for palladium increased from 100 tons in 1990 to nearly 300 tons in 2000 . The global production of palladium from mines was 222 tonnes in 2006 according to the United States Geological Survey . Many are concerned about a steady supply of palladium in the wake of Russia 's military maneuvers in Ukraine , partly as sanctions could hamper Russian palladium exports ; any restrictions on Russian palladium exports would exacerbate what is already expected to be a large palladium deficit in 2014 . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 With a 44 % world share of palladium in 2007 , Russia was the top producer , followed by South Africa with 40 % . Canada with 6 % and the U.S. with 5 % are the other substantial producers of palladium . 
 Palladium can be found as a free metal alloyed with gold and other platinum @-@ group metals in placer deposits of the Ural Mountains , Australia , Ethiopia , North and South America . For the production of palladium , these deposits play only a minor role . The most important commercial sources are nickel @-@ copper deposits found in the Sudbury Basin , Ontario , and the Norilsk – <unk> deposits in Siberia . The other large deposit is the Merensky Reef platinum group metals deposit within the Bushveld Igneous Complex South Africa . The Stillwater igneous complex of Montana and the Roby zone ore body of the Lac des Îles igneous complex of Ontario are the two other sources of palladium in Canada and the United States . Palladium is found in the rare minerals <unk> and <unk> . 
 Palladium is also produced in nuclear fission reactors and can be extracted from spent nuclear fuel ( see synthesis of precious metals ) , though this source for palladium is not used . None of the existing nuclear reprocessing facilities are equipped to extract palladium from the high @-@ level radioactive waste . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The largest use of palladium today is in catalytic converters . Palladium is also used in jewelry , dentistry , watch making , blood sugar test strips , aircraft spark plugs , surgical instruments , and electrical contacts . Palladium is also used to make professional transverse ( concert or classical ) flutes . As a commodity , palladium bullion has ISO currency codes of <unk> and 964 . Palladium is one of only four metals to have such codes , the others being gold , silver and platinum . Because it absorbs hydrogen , palladium is a key component of the controversial cold fusion experiments that began in 1989 . 
 = = = Catalysis = = = 
 When it is finely divided , as with palladium on carbon , palladium forms a versatile catalyst ; it speeds hydrogenation , dehydrogenation , and petroleum cracking . A large number of carbon – carbon bonding reactions in organic chemistry ( such as the Heck reaction and Suzuki coupling ) are facilitated by palladium compound catalysts . ( See Palladium Compounds and palladium @-@ catalyzed coupling reactions . ) 
 When dispersed on conductive materials , palladium is an excellent <unk> for oxidation of primary alcohols in alkaline media . In 2010 , palladium @-@ catalysed organic reactions were recognised by the Nobel Prize in Chemistry . Palladium is also a versatile metal for homogeneous catalysis , used in combination with a broad variety of ligands for highly selective chemical transformations . A 2008 study showed that palladium is an effective catalyst for carbon @-@ fluoride bonds . 
 Palladium is essential to the <unk> catalyst , also called <unk> 's Palladium . 
 = = = Electronics = = = 
 The second greatest application of palladium in electronics is in multilayer ceramic capacitors in which palladium ( and palladium @-@ silver alloy ) is used for electrodes . Palladium ( sometimes alloyed with nickel ) is used for component and connector plating in consumer electronics and in soldering materials . The electronic sector consumed 1 @.@ 07 million troy ounces ( 33 @.@ 2 tonnes ) of palladium in 2006 , according to a Johnson Matthey report . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 Hydrogen easily diffuses through heated palladium , and membrane reactors with Pd membranes are used in the production of high purity hydrogen . Palladium is used in palladium @-@ hydrogen electrodes in electrochemical studies . Palladium ( II ) chloride readily catalyzes carbon monoxide gas to carbon dioxide and is useful in carbon monoxide detectors . 
 = = = Hydrogen storage = = = 
 Palladium readily absorbs hydrogen at room temperatures , forming palladium hydride <unk> with x less than 1 . While this property is common to many transition metals , palladium has a uniquely high absorption capacity and does not lose its ductility until x approaches 1 . This property has been investigated in designing an efficient , inexpensive , and safe hydrogen fuel storage medium , though palladium itself is currently prohibitively expensive for this purpose . The content of hydrogen in palladium can be linked to magnetic susceptibility , which decreases with the increase of hydrogen and becomes zero for <unk> At any higher ratio , the solid solution becomes diamagnetic . 
 = = = Dentistry = = = 
 Palladium is used in small amounts ( about 0 @.@ 5 % ) in some alloys of dental amalgam to decrease corrosion and increase the metallic lustre of the final restoration . 
 = = = Jewelry = = = 
 Palladium has been used as a precious metal in jewelry since 1939 as an alternative to platinum in the alloys called " white gold " , where the naturally white color of palladium does not require rhodium plating . Palladium is much less dense than platinum . Similar to gold , palladium can be beaten into leaf as thin as 100 nm ( 1 ⁄ 250 @,@ 000 in ) . Unlike platinum , palladium may discolor at temperatures above 400 ° C ( 752 ° F ) ; it is relatively brittle . 
 Palladium is one of the three most popular alloying metals in white gold ( nickel and silver can also be used ) . Palladium @-@ gold is more expensive than nickel @-@ gold , but seldom causes allergic reactions ( though certain cross @-@ allergies with nickel may occur ) . 
 When platinum was declared a strategic government resource during World War II , many jewelry bands were made out of palladium . As recently as September 2001 , palladium was more expensive than platinum and rarely used in jewelry because of the technical difficulty of casting . Currently , the casting problem has been resolved and use in jewelry has increased because platinum has increased in price while palladium decreased . 
 Prior to 2004 , the principal use of palladium in jewelry was the manufacture of white gold . In early 2004 , when gold and platinum prices rose steeply , China began fabricating volumes of palladium jewelry , consuming 37 tonnes in 2005 . Changes in the relative price of platinum after 2008 lowered demand for palladium to 17 @.@ 4 tonnes in 2009 . 
 In January 2010 , hallmarks for palladium were introduced by assay offices in the United Kingdom , and <unk> became mandatory for all jewelry advertising pure or alloyed palladium . Articles can be marked as 500 , 950 , or 999 parts of palladium per thousand of the alloy . 
 Fountain pen nibs made from gold are sometimes plated with palladium when a silver ( rather than gold ) appearance is desired . <unk> has used palladium plating for decades , either as an accent on otherwise gold nibs or <unk> the gold completely . 
 = = = Photography = = = 
 In the <unk> printing process , photographers make fine @-@ art black @-@ and @-@ white prints using platinum or palladium salts . Often used with platinum , palladium provides an alternative to silver . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Palladium is a metal with low toxicity . It is poorly absorbed by human body when digested . Plants such as the water hyacinth are killed by low levels of palladium salts , but most other plants tolerate it , although tests show that at levels above 0 @.@ 0003 % growth is affected . High doses of palladium could be poisonous ; tests on rodents suggest it may be carcinogenic , no clear evidence indicates the element harms humans . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Finely divided palladium metal can be pyrophoric . As a platinum @-@ group metal , the bulk material is quite inert . Although contact dermatitis has been reported , the amount of data on the effects of exposure to palladium is limited . It has been shown that people with an allergic reaction to palladium also react to nickel , making it advisable to avoid the use of dental alloys containing palladium on those so allergic . 
 Some palladium is emitted with the exhaust gases of cars with catalytic converters . Between 4 and 108 ng / km of palladium particulate is released by such cars , while the total uptake from food is estimated to be less than 2 µg per person a day . The second possible source of palladium is dental restoration , from which the uptake of palladium is estimated to be less than 15 µg per person per day . People working with palladium or its compounds might have a considerably greater uptake . For soluble compounds such as palladium chloride , 99 % is eliminated from the body within 3 days . 
 The median lethal dose ( LD50 ) of soluble palladium compounds in mice is 200 mg / kg for oral and 5 mg / kg for intravenous administration . 
 = USS Minnesota ( BB @-@ 22 ) = 
 USS Minnesota ( BB @-@ 22 ) , the fifth of six Connecticut @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , was the second ship of the United States Navy in honor of the 32nd state . She was laid down at the Newport News Shipbuilding Company of Newport News , Virginia in October 1903 , launched in April 1905 , and commissioned into the US fleet in March 1907 , just four months after the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought entered service . Minnesota was armed with a main battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns and a secondary battery of twenty 7 and 8 in ( 178 and 203 mm ) guns , unlike Dreadnought , which carried an all @-@ big @-@ gun armament that rendered ships like Minnesota obsolescent . 
 Shortly after she entered service , Minnesota joined the Great White Fleet for its circumnavigation of the globe in 1908 – 09 . The years from 1909 to 1912 were uneventful , but thereafter the ship began to become involved in conflicts in the Caribbean . She supported efforts to put down an insurrection in Cuba in 1912 and patrolled the coast of Mexico in 1913 – 14 during the Mexican Revolution . In 1916 , the ship was placed in reserve , though she quickly returned to service when the United States entered World War I in April 1917 . During the war , she trained naval personnel ; while cruising off the eastern coast of the United States in September 1918 , she struck a naval mine laid by a German U @-@ boat . The extensive damage required lengthy repairs that kept her out of service for the rest of the war . She helped to return American soldiers from Europe in 1919 before resuming her training ship duties in 1920 – 21 , before being decommissioned in December 1921 and broken up for scrap at the Philadelphia Navy Yard in 1924 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Minnesota was 456 @.@ 3 ft ( 139 @.@ 1 m ) long overall and had a beam of 76 @.@ 9 ft ( 23 @.@ 4 m ) and a draft of 24 @.@ 5 ft ( 7 @.@ 5 m ) . She displaced 16 @,@ 000 long tons ( 16 @,@ 000 t ) as designed and up to 17 @,@ 666 long tons ( 17 @,@ 949 t ) at full load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft triple @-@ expansion steam engines rated at 16 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 300 kW ) and twelve coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers , generating a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . As built , she was fitted with heavy military masts , but these were quickly replaced by lattice masts in 1909 . She had a crew of 827 officers and men , though this increased to 881 and later to 896 . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of four 12 inch / 45 Mark 5 guns in two twin gun turrets on the centerline , one forward and aft . The secondary battery consisted of eight 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) / 45 guns and twelve 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) / 45 guns . The 8 @-@ inch guns were mounted in four twin turrets amidships and the 7 @-@ inch guns were placed in casemates in the hull . For close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats , she carried twenty 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull and twelve 3 @-@ pounder guns . She also carried four 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 1 @-@ pounder guns . As was standard for capital ships of the period , Minnesota carried four 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . 
 Minnesota 's main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick over the magazines and the machinery spaces and 6 in ( 152 mm ) elsewhere . The main battery gun turrets had 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) thick faces , and the supporting barbettes had the 10 in ( 250 mm ) of armor plating . The secondary turrets had 7 in ( 180 mm ) of frontal armor . The conning tower had 9 in ( 230 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Minnesota was laid down at the Newport News Shipbuilding Company of Newport News , Virginia on 27 October 1903 . The completed hull was launched on 8 April 1905 ; at the launching ceremony she was christened by Rose Marie Schaller , the daughter of a member of the Minnesota Senate . The ship was commissioned into the US Navy on 9 March 1907 , with Captain John Hubbard as her first commanding officer . The ship then conducted a shakedown cruise off the coast of New England before attending the Jamestown Exposition , the commemoration of the 300th anniversary of the Jamestown colony , the first permanent English settlement in the Americas . She was present at the ceremony from 22 April to 3 September . 
 On 16 December , Minnesota steamed out of Hampton Roads with the Great White Fleet for a circumnavigation of the globe . The cruise was intended as a show of force to Japan , the United States ' rival in the Pacific , to assert the United States ' status as a global naval power , and to convince Congress of the need to support increased naval expenditures . The fleet cruised south to the Caribbean and then to South America , making stops in Port of Spain , Rio de Janeiro , Punta Arenas , and Valparaíso , among other cities . After arriving in Mexico in March 1908 , the fleet spent three weeks conducting gunnery practice . The fleet then resumed its voyage up the Pacific coast of the Americas , stopping in San Francisco and Seattle before crossing the Pacific to Australia , stopping in Hawaii on the way . Stops in the South Pacific included Melbourne , Sydney , and Auckland . 
 The fleet then turned north for the Philippines , stopping in Manila , before continuing on to Japan where a welcoming ceremony was held in Yokohama . Three weeks of exercises followed in Subic Bay in the Philippines in November . The ships passed Singapore on 6 December and entered the Indian Ocean ; they coaled in Colombo before proceeding to the Suez Canal and coaling again at Port Said , Egypt . The fleet called in several Mediterranean ports before stopping in Gibraltar , where an international fleet of British , Russian , French , and Dutch warships greeted the Americans . The ships then crossed the Atlantic to return to Hampton Roads on 22 February 1909 , having traveled 46 @,@ 729 nautical miles ( 86 @,@ 542 km ; 53 @,@ 775 mi ) . There , they conducted a naval review for President Theodore Roosevelt . 
 Upon her return , Minnesota was assigned to the Atlantic Fleet . She spent the following three years on the eastern coast of the United States conducting a peacetime routine of training cruises , apart from one voyage to the English Channel . Starting in 1912 , the ship began to operate in the Caribbean , particularly after unrest began to break out in several countries in the region . For the first six months of 1912 , she patrolled Cuban waters ; she went to the US base at <unk> Bay to support the suppression of an insurrection on the island from 7 to 22 June . In mid 1913 , she patrolled the eastern coast of Mexico during the Mexican Revolution . She returned in 1914 , with stints there from 26 January to 7 August and 11 October to 19 December . During the first period , the United States occupied Veracruz to protect US interests . In 1915 , Minnesota returned to the United States and resumed her previous routine of training exercises with occasional cruises to the Caribbean . In November 1916 , she was placed in reserve as the flagship of the Reserve Force , Atlantic Fleet . 
 Minnesota returned to active service after the United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917 , entering World War I. She was assigned to Division 4 of the Battleship Force , based at Tangier Sound in Chesapeake Bay . She spent the war as a training ship for gunners and engine room personnel . During this time , Vice Admiral Albert W. Grant , the commander of Battleship Force 1 , instituted a program to reinforce the bulkheads of the ships under his command . This improved their ability to absorb underwater damage and remain afloat . On 29 September 1918 , while cruising off Fenwick Island with the destroyer USS Israel , she struck a naval mine that had been laid by the U @-@ boat U @-@ 117 , which inflicted serious damage but caused no casualties . The explosion tore a gaping hole in the hull from frame 5 to frame 16 , and from the keel to the bottom edge of the armor belt . The bow flooded , but the repaired bulkheads prevented the flooding from spreading . Reduced to a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , Minnesota made it back to the Philadelphia Navy Yard where repairs were effected . The work lasted for five months , by which time Germany had signed the Armistice that ended the war . 
 On 11 March 1919 , Minnesota returned to service with the Cruiser and Transport Force , making three trips to Brest , France to bring American soldiers back from the battlefields of Europe . In the course of the voyages , she brought back over 3 @,@ 000 men ; this duty ended on 23 July . The ship spent the next two years as a training ship for midshipmen from the US Naval Academy . She conducted two summer cruises in 1920 and 1921 before being decommissioned on 1 December 1921 . She was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register the same day and was sold for scrap on 23 January 1924 . Minnesota was thereafter broken up for scrap at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . 
 = Hurricane Norma ( 1981 ) = 
 Hurricane Norma was the one of two hurricanes to make landfall during the 1981 Pacific hurricane season . It developed on October 8 , strengthening into a tropical storm and later a hurricane . Norma moved slowly to the northwest and strengthened into a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm recurved and accelerated to the northeast on October 11 and weakened to a Category 2 . The next day , Norma made landfall near Mazatlán on October 12 and soon dissipated . The hurricane 's remnants continued northeastward and entered the United States , crossing into central Texas before being absorbed by a frontal system on October 14 . Norma caused $ 24 million in crop damage and one death in Mexico , as well as up to 10 in ( 250 mm ) . In Texas , the storm produced flooding rains that killed five people , $ 50 million in damage and caused many tornadoes . Rainfall was also reported as far inland as Kansas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Early on October 8 , a tropical depression had developed far from land . Initially , the storm moved west @-@ northwest , but it turned to the northwest six hours after forming . Over sea surface temperatures of 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) , the storm intensified into Tropical Storm Norma at 0600 UTC . By midday on October 9 , the winds had reached 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and on 1800 UTC October 9 , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center upgraded the storm into a hurricane and a well @-@ defined eye became visible via satellite imagery . 
 Upon reaching hurricane strength , Norma began to undergo a period rapid intensification ; it reached Category 2 intensity on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale six hours later . Later that that , the storm reached major hurricane status , a storm with winds of 111 mph ( 179 km / h ) or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . . The storm reached its peak of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) at 1800 UTC on October 10 . Passing east of Socorro Island , the storm turned north and shortly thereafter north @-@ northeast due to southwesterly flow over northwestern Mexico . 
 The storm began to accelerate while continuing to weaken ; by 1200 UTC on October 11 , the storm had weakened into a mid @-@ level Category 2 hurricane . After briefly re @-@ intensifying that night , Hurricane Norma made landfall just northeast of Mazatlan with winds of 105 mph ( 155 km / h ) at 1000 UTC on October 12 . Two hours later , advisories were discontinued as the center dissipated 46 @.@ 5 mi ( 75 km ) north of Mazatlan . However , a second area of low pressure formed over western Texas early on October 13 . After producing heavy rains , the system was absorbed by a frontal system on October 14 . 
 = = Impact and Aftermath = = 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 Four days before Norma moved through Sinaloa , Tropical Storm Lidia made landfall north of the area . Lidia killed 73 people and caused $ 60 million ( 1981 USD ) in damage . This prompted evacuations of 5 @,@ 000 people , and limited the death toll of Hurricane Norma to one person , a fisherman drowned when his boat capsized in the storm . The hurricane caused more devastation in the flood @-@ ravaged region . Six soldiers were guarding a government helicopter , five of these soldiers were washed away during a flash flood . Agriculture was disrupted , and cattle were killed , causing at least $ 24 million ( 1981 USD ) dollars in crop damage . The highest Mexican rainfall was 10 @.@ 9 in ( 280 mm ) in <unk> / Rosario , Mexico . Torrential rains caused serious flooding north of <unk> as well as ten nearby towns . Due to the damage from the storm , Antonio Toledo Corro , the Governor of Sinaloa , declared a state of emergency . Red Cross spokesperson noted that 5 @,@ 000 residents need to be evacuated from low @-@ lying areas . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The remnants of the storm moved into Texas and Oklahoma . The heavy rainfall caused two rivers , the Red River and Cedar Creek to reach flood @-@ stage . A total of five people were killed in the United States , three of these deaths occurred when floodwaters swept their car off the road in Fort Worth . Nearby , flooding forced thousands of people to evacuate their homes , including 1 @,@ 000 people in the cities of Lindsay and Breckenridge . Several tornadoes were reported in six counties , including a F2 tornado in McLennan that injured four people and caused $ 25 million in damage . A F3 tornado was also reported in Navarro Country , causing $ 25 @,@ 000 in property damage . During October 13 and 14 , a total of 13 tornadoes were reported in northern Texas and southern Oklahoma . 
 Cedar Creek overflowed its banks and homes in low @-@ lying areas of Abilene , Texas were covered in 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of water . In Gainesville , floodwaters swept a train off its track and an elephant was killed in a local zoo . In the same area , 200 people were evacuated due to the flooding . Waco reported power losses for two hours and $ 2 @.@ 8 million ( 1981 USD ) in damage for churches and businesses . In Oklahoma , 60 bridges were washed away due to flooding , but no injures or deaths were reported . In addition , a tornado struck a small town , causing minor damage to farms . The town of Bells reported winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) . Total damage in Texas was estimated at $ 50 million ( 1981 USD ) . 
 Across Texas , 13 in ( 330 mm ) fell between Bridgeport and Denton and up to 20 in ( 510 mm ) fell in areas near Abilene and Gainesville . The storm produced 17 @.@ 9 in ( 450 mm ) of rain in a three @-@ day period , thus causing <unk> to have its wettest October on record . In addition , 20 @.@ 1 inches ( 510 mm ) of rain fell in Breckenridge , Texas . In eastern Kansas light rain fell , including .7 in ( 18 mm ) near Perry Lake within a 24 ‑ hour period . 
 Due to the damage from the hurricane in the United States , the Salvation Army disaster units were sent throughout the devastated area . To prevent looting , residents in Breckenridge organized watches ; the National Guard soon patrolled the streets . In Abilene , the United States Red Cross worked to feed the homeless and supply them with drinking water until city water services was restored . 
 = Julianne Moore = 
 Julianne Moore ( born Julie Anne Smith ; December 3 , 1960 ) is an American – British actress , prolific in films since the early 1990s . She is particularly known for her portrayals of emotionally troubled women , in independent , art house and Hollywood films , and has received many accolades including the Academy Award for Best Actress . 
 After studying theatre at Boston University , Moore began her career with a series of television roles . From 1985 to 1988 , she was a regular in the soap opera As the World Turns , earning a Daytime Emmy for her performance . Her film debut was in Tales from the Darkside : The Movie ( 1990 ) , and she continued to play small roles for the next four years – including in the thriller The Hand That Rocks the Cradle ( 1992 ) . Moore first received critical attention with Robert Altman 's Short Cuts ( 1993 ) , and successive performances in Vanya on 42nd Street ( 1994 ) and Safe ( 1995 ) continued this acclaim . Starring roles in the blockbusters Nine Months ( 1995 ) and The Lost World : Jurassic Park ( 1997 ) established her as a leading actress in Hollywood , although she continued to take supporting roles . 
 Moore received considerable recognition in the late 1990s and early 2000s , earning Oscar nominations for Boogie Nights ( 1997 ) , The End of the Affair ( 1999 ) , Far from Heaven ( 2002 ) and The Hours ( 2002 ) . In the first of these she played a 1970s pornographic actress , while the other three featured her as an unhappy , mid @-@ 20th century housewife . She also had success with the films The Big Lebowski ( 1998 ) , Magnolia ( 1999 ) , Hannibal ( 2001 ) , Children of Men ( 2006 ) , A Single Man ( 2009 ) , The Kids Are All Right ( 2010 ) , and Crazy , Stupid , Love ( 2011 ) , and won several awards for her portrayal of Sarah Palin in the television film Game Change ( 2012 ) . The year 2014 was key for Moore , as she gave an Oscar @-@ winning performance as an Alzheimer 's patient in Still Alice , was named Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival for Maps to the Stars , and joined the lucrative Hunger Games series . In 2015 , Time magazine named Moore one of the 100 most influential people in the world on the annual Time 100 list . 
 In addition to acting , Moore wrote a series of children 's books about a character named " Freckleface Strawberry " . She is married to director Bart Freundlich , with whom she has two children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Moore was born Julie Anne Smith on December 3 , 1960 , at the Fort Bragg army installation in North Carolina . Her father , Peter Moore Smith , was a paratrooper in the United States Army during the Vietnam War , who later attained the rank of colonel and became a military judge . Her mother , Anne ( née Love ; 1940 – 2009 ) , was a psychologist and social worker from Greenock , Scotland , who emigrated to the United States in 1951 with her family . Moore has a younger sister , Valerie , and a younger brother , the novelist Peter Moore Smith . She considers herself half Scottish and claimed British citizenship in 2011 to honor her deceased mother . 
 Moore frequently moved around the United States as a child , due to her father 's occupation . She was close to her family as a result , but said that she never had the feeling of coming from one particular place . The family lived in multiple locations , including Alabama , Georgia , Texas , Panama , Nebraska , Alaska , New York , and Virginia , and Moore attended nine different schools . The constant relocating made her an insecure child , and she struggled to establish friendships . Despite these difficulties , Moore later remarked that an itinerant lifestyle was beneficial to her future career : " When you move around a lot , you learn that behavior is mutable . I would change , depending on where I was ... It teaches you to watch , to reinvent , that character can change . " 
 When Moore was 16 , the family moved to Frankfurt , Germany , where she attended Frankfurt American High School . She was clever and studious , a self @-@ proclaimed " good girl " , and she planned to become a doctor . She had never considered performing , or even attended the theatre , but she was an avid reader and it was this hobby that led her to begin acting at the school . She appeared in several plays , including Tartuffe and Medea , and with the encouragement of her English teacher she chose to pursue a theatrical career . Moore 's parents supported her decision , but asked that she train at university to provide the added security of a college degree . She was accepted to Boston University and graduated with a BFA in Theatre in 1983 . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early roles ( 1983 – 93 ) = = = 
 Moore moved to New York City after graduating , and worked as a waitress . After registering her stage name with Actors ' Equity , she began her career in 1983 with off @-@ Broadway theatre . Her first screen role came in 1984 , in an episode of the soap opera The Edge of Night . Her break came the following year , when she joined the cast of As the World Turns . Playing the dual roles of half @-@ sisters Frannie and Sabrina Hughes , she found this intensive work to be an important learning experience , and she said of it fondly : " I gained confidence and learned to take responsibility . " Moore performed on the show until 1988 , when she won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding <unk> in a Drama Series . Before leaving As the World Turns , she had a role in the 1987 CBS miniseries I 'll Take Manhattan . Once she had finished the soap opera , she turned to the stage to play Ophelia in a Guthrie Theater production of Hamlet opposite Željko Ivanek . The actress returned intermittently to television over the next three years , appearing in the TV movies Money , Power , Murder ( 1989 ) , The Last to Go ( 1991 ) , and Cast a Deadly Spell ( 1991 ) . 
 In 1990 , Moore began working with stage director Andre Gregory on a workshop theatre production of Chekhov 's Uncle Vanya . Described by Moore as " one of the most fundamentally important acting experiences I ever had " , the group spent four years exploring the text and giving intimate performances to friends . Also in 1990 , Moore made her cinematic debut as a mummy 's victim in Tales from the Darkside : The Movie , a low @-@ budget horror that she later described as " terrible " . Her next film role , in 1992 , introduced her to a wide audience . The thriller The Hand That Rocks the Cradle — in which she played the main character 's ill @-@ fated friend — was number one at the US box office , and Moore caught the attention of several critics with her performance . She followed it the same year with the crime comedy The Gun in Betty Lou 's <unk> , appearing as the protagonist 's kooky sister . Moore continued to play supporting roles throughout 1993 , first featuring in the erotic thriller Body of Evidence as Madonna 's love rival . The film was a failure and widely mocked , and she later regretted her involvement . She had greater success in a 1993 romantic comedy with Johnny Depp . In Benny & Joon , she played a gentle waitress who falls for Aidan Quinn 's character , Benny . Moore also appeared briefly as a doctor in one of the year 's biggest hits , the Harrison Ford thriller The Fugitive . 
 = = = Rise to prominence ( 1993 – 97 ) = = = 
 The filmmaker Robert Altman saw Moore in the Uncle Vanya production , and was sufficiently impressed to cast her in his next project : the ensemble drama Short Cuts ( 1993 ) , based on short stories by Raymond Carver . Moore was pleased to work with him , as his film 3 Women ( 1977 ) gave her a strong appreciation for cinema when she saw it in college . Playing artist Marian Wyman was an experience she found difficult , as she was a " total unknown " surrounded by established actors , but this proved to be Moore 's breakout role . Variety magazine described her as " arresting " and noted that her monologue , delivered naked from the waist down , would " no doubt be the most discussed scene " of the film . Short Cuts was critically acclaimed , and received awards for Best Ensemble Cast at the Venice Film Festival and the Golden Globe Awards . Moore received an individual nomination for Best Supporting Female at the Independent Spirit Awards , and the monologue scene earned her a degree of notoriety . 
 Short Cuts was one of a trio of successive film appearances that boosted Moore 's reputation . It was followed in 1994 with Vanya on 42nd Street , a filmed version of her ongoing Uncle Vanya workshop production , directed by Louis Malle . Moore 's performance of Yelena was described as " simply outstanding " by Time Out , and she won the Boston Society of Film Critics award for Best Actress . Following this , Moore was given her first leading role , playing an unhappy suburban housewife who develops multiple chemical sensitivity in Todd Haynes ' low @-@ budget film Safe ( 1995 ) . She had to lose a substantial amount of weight for the role , which made her ill , and she vowed never to change her body for a film again . In their review , Empire magazine writes that Safe " first established [ Moore 's ] credentials as perhaps the finest actress of her generation . " The film historian David Thomson later described it as " one of the most arresting , original and accomplished films of the 1990s , " and the performance earned Moore an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Actress . Reflecting on these three roles , Moore stated , " They all came out at once , and I suddenly had this profile . It was amazing . " 
 Moore 's next appearance was a supporting role in the comedy – drama <unk> ( 1995 ) , playing the wife of Peter Falk . Her following film , Nine Months ( 1995 ) , was crucial in establishing her as a leading lady in Hollywood . The romantic comedy , directed by Chris Columbus and co @-@ starring Hugh Grant , was poorly reviewed but a box office success ; it remains one of her highest @-@ grossing films . Her next release was also a Hollywood production , as Moore appeared alongside Sylvester Stallone and Antonio Banderas in the thriller Assassins ( 1995 ) . Despite negativity from critics , the film earned $ 83 @.@ 5 million worldwide . Moore 's only appearance of 1996 came in the Merchant Ivory film Surviving Picasso , where she played the artist Dora Maar opposite Anthony Hopkins . The period drama met with poor reviews . 
 A key point in Moore 's career came when she was cast by Steven Spielberg to star as paleontologist Dr. Sarah Harding in The Lost World : Jurassic Park — the sequel to his 1993 blockbuster Jurassic Park . Filming the big @-@ budget production was a new experience for Moore , and she said that she enjoyed herself " tremendously " . It was a physically demanding role , she said : " There was so much hanging everywhere . We hung off everything available , plus we climbed , ran , jumped off things ... it was just non @-@ stop . " The Lost World ( 1997 ) finished as one of the ten highest @-@ grossing films in history to that point , and was pivotal in making Moore a sought @-@ after actress : " Suddenly I had a commercial film career , " she said . The Myth of Fingerprints was her second film released in 1997 . During its production she met her future husband in director Bart Freundlich . Later that year , Moore made a cameo appearance in the dark comedy Chicago Cab . 
 = = = Widespread recognition ( 1997 – 2002 ) = = = 
 The late 1990s and early 2000s saw Moore achieve significant industry recognition . Her first Academy Award nomination came for the critically acclaimed Boogie Nights ( 1997 ) , which centers on a group of individuals working in the 1970s pornography industry . Director Paul Thomas Anderson was not a well known figure before its production , with only one feature credit to his name , but Moore agreed to the film after being impressed with his " exhilarating " script . The ensemble piece featured Moore as Amber Waves , a leading porn actress and mother @-@ figure who longs to be reunited with her real son . Martyn Glanville of the BBC commented that the role required a mixture of confidence and vulnerability , and was impressed with Moore 's effort . Time Out called the performance " superb " , while Janet Maslin of The New York Times found it " wonderful " . Alongside her Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actress , Moore was nominated at the Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild awards , and several critics groups named her a winner . 
 Moore followed her success in Boogie Nights with a role in the Coen brothers ' dark comedy The Big Lebowski ( 1998 ) . The film was not a hit at the time of release but subsequently became a cult classic . Her role was Maude Lebowski , a feminist artist and daughter of the eponymous character who becomes involved with " The Dude " ( Jeff Bridges , the film 's star ) . At the end of 1998 , Moore had a flop with Gus Van Sant 's Psycho , a remake of the classic Alfred Hitchcock film of the same name . She played Lila Crane in the film , which received poor reviews and is described by The Guardian as one of her " pointless " outings . The review in Boxoffice magazine regretted that " a group of enormously talented people wasted several months of their lives " on the film . 
 After reuniting with Robert Altman for the dark comedy Cookie 's Fortune ( 1999 ) , Moore starred in An Ideal Husband — Oliver Parker 's adaptation of the Oscar Wilde play . Set in London at the end of the 19th century , her performance of Mrs. Laura Cheverly earned a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy . She was also nominated in the Drama category that year for her work in The End of the Affair ( 1999 ) . Based on the novel by Graham Greene , Moore played opposite Ralph Fiennes as an adulterous wife in 1940s Britain . The critic Michael Sragow was full of praise for her work , writing that her performance was " the critical element that makes [ the film ] necessary viewing . " Moore received her second Academy Award nomination for the role — her first for Best Actress — as well as nominations at the British Academy ( BAFTA ) and Screen Actors Guild ( SAG ) awards . 
 In between her two Golden Globe @-@ nominated performances , Moore was seen in A Map of the World , supporting Sigourney Weaver , as a bereaved mother . Her fifth and final film of 1999 was the acclaimed drama Magnolia , a " giant mosaic " chronicling the lives of multiple characters over one day in Los Angeles . Paul Thomas Anderson , in his follow @-@ up to Boogie Nights , wrote a role specifically for Moore . His primary objective was to " see her explode " , and he cast her as a morphine @-@ addicted wife . Moore said that it was a particularly difficult role , but she was rewarded with a SAG nomination . She was subsequently named Best Supporting Actress of 1999 by the National Board of Review , in recognition of her three performances in Magnolia , An Ideal Husband , and A Map of the World . 
 Apart from a cameo role in the comedy The Ladies Man , Moore 's only other appearance in 2000 was in a short @-@ film adaptation of Samuel Beckett 's play Not I. In early 2001 , she appeared as FBI Agent Clarice Starling in Hannibal , a sequel to the Oscar winning film The Silence of the Lambs . Jodie Foster had declined to reprise the role , and director Ridley Scott eventually cast Moore , over Angelina Jolie , Cate Blanchett , Gillian Anderson and Helen Hunt . The change in actress received considerable attention from the press , but Moore claimed she was not interested in upstaging Foster . Despite negative reviews , Hannibal earned $ 58 million in its opening weekend and finished as the tenth highest @-@ grossing film of the year . Moore starred in three more 2001 releases : with David Duchovny in the science fiction – comedy Evolution , in her husband 's dramatic film World Traveler , and with Kevin Spacey , Judi Dench , and Cate Blanchett in The Shipping News . All three films were poorly received . 
 The year 2002 marked a high point in Moore 's career , as she became the ninth performer to be nominated for two Academy Awards in the same year . She received a Best Actress nomination for the melodrama Far from Heaven , in which she played a 1950s housewife whose world is shaken when her husband reveals he is gay . The role was written specifically for her by Todd Haynes , the first time the pair had worked together since Safe , and Moore described it as " a very , very personal project ... such an incredible honor to do . " David Rooney of Variety praised her " beautifully gauged performance " of a desperate woman " buckling under social pressures and putting on a brave face " . Manohla Dargis of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " what Moore does with her role is so beyond the parameters of what we call great acting that it nearly defies categorization . " The role won Moore the Best Actress award from 19 different organizations , including the Venice Film Festival and the National Board of Review . 
 Moore 's second Oscar nomination that year came for The Hours , which she co @-@ starred in with Nicole Kidman and Meryl Streep . She again played a troubled 1950s housewife , prompting Kenneth Turan to write that she was " essentially reprising her Far from Heaven role " . Moore said it was an " unfortunate coincidence " that the similar roles came at the same time , and claimed that the characters had differing personalities . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called the performance " wrenching " , while Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian praised a " superbly controlled , humane performance " . The Hours was nominated for nine Academy Awards , including Best Picture . Moore also received BAFTA and SAG Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress , and was jointly awarded the Silver Bear for Best Actress with Kidman and Streep at the Berlin Film Festival . 
 = = = Established actress ( 2003 – 09 ) = = = 
 Moore did not make any screen appearances in 2003 , but returned in 2004 with three films . There was no success in her first two ventures of the year : Marie and Bruce , a dark comedy co @-@ starring Matthew Broderick , did not get a cinematic release ; Laws of Attraction followed , where she played opposite Pierce Brosnan in a courtroom @-@ based romantic comedy , but the film was panned by critics . Commercial success returned to Moore with The Forgotten , a psychological thriller in which she played a mother who is told her dead son never existed . Although the film was unpopular with critics , it opened as the US box office number one . 
 In 2005 , Moore worked with her husband for the third time in the comedy Trust the Man , and starred in the true story of a 1950s housewife , The Prize Winner of Defiance , Ohio . Her first release of 2006 was <unk> , a mystery co @-@ starring Samuel L. Jackson . The response was overwhelmingly negative but her follow @-@ up , Alfonso Cuarón 's Children of Men ( 2006 ) , was highly acclaimed . Moore had a supporting role in the dystopian drama , playing the leader of an activist group . It is listed on Rotten Tomatoes as one of the best reviewed films of her career , and was named by Peter Travers as the second best film of the decade . 
 Moore made her Broadway debut in the world premiere of David Hare 's play The Vertical Hour . The production , directed by Sam Mendes and co @-@ starring Bill Nighy , opened in November 2006 . Moore played the role of Nadia , a former war correspondent who finds her views on the 2003 invasion of Iraq challenged . Ben Brantley of The New York Times was unenthusiastic about the production , and described Moore as miscast : in his opinion , she failed to bring the " tough , assertive " quality that Nadia required . David Rooney of Variety criticized her " lack of stage technique " , adding that she appeared " stiffly self @-@ conscious " . Moore later confessed that she found performing on Broadway difficult and had not connected with the medium , but was glad to have experimented with it . The play closed in March 2007 after 117 performances . 
 Moore played an FBI agent for the second time in Next ( 2007 ) , a science fiction action film co @-@ starring Nicolas Cage and Jessica Biel . Based on a short story by Philip K. Dick , the response from critics was highly negative . <unk> Dargis wrote , " Ms. Moore seems terribly unhappy to be here , and it 's no wonder . " The actress later described it as her worst film . Next was followed by Savage Grace ( 2007 ) , the true story of Barbara Daly <unk> — a high @-@ society mother whose Oedipal relationship with her son ended in murder . Moore was fascinated by the role , but the film was considered controversial for its explicit depiction of incest . She told an interviewer , " Obviously you do have some trepidation about that kind of stuff , but it 's not being celebrated . This is presented as a tragedy . " Savage Grace had a limited release , and received predominantly negative reviews . Peter Bradshaw , however , called it a " coldly brilliant and tremendously acted movie . " 
 I 'm Not There ( 2007 ) saw Moore work with Todd Haynes for the third time . The film explored the life of Bob Dylan , with Moore playing a character based on Joan Baez . In 2008 , she starred with Mark Ruffalo in Blindness , a dystopian thriller from the director Fernando Meirelles . The film was not widely seen , and critics were generally unenthusiastic . Moore was not seen on screen again until late 2009 , with three new releases . She had a supporting role in The Private Lives of Pippa Lee , and then starred in the erotic thriller Chloe with Amanda Seyfried and Liam Neeson . Shortly afterwards , she appeared in the well @-@ received drama A Single Man . Set in 1960s Los Angeles , the film starred Colin Firth as a homosexual professor who wishes to end his life . Moore played his best friend , " a fellow English <unk> and semi @-@ alcoholic divorcee " , a character that Tom Ford , the film 's writer – director , created with her in mind . Leslie Felperin of Variety commented that it was Moore 's best role in " some time " , and was impressed by the " extraordinary emotional nuance " of the performance . A Single Man was named one of the 10 best films of the year by the American Film Institute , and Moore received a fifth Golden Globe nomination for her work . 
 = = = Television and comedy ( 2010 – 13 ) = = = 
 Moore returned to television for the first time in 18 years when she played a guest role in the fourth season of 30 Rock . She appeared in five episodes of the Emmy @-@ winning comedy , playing Nancy Donovan , a love interest for Alec Baldwin 's character Jack Donaghy . She later appeared in the series finale in January 2013 . She also returned to As the World Turns , making a cameo appearance as Frannie Hughes when the show was cancelled in 2010 . Her first big @-@ screen appearance of the new decade was Shelter ( 2010 ) , a film described as " heinous " by Tim Robey of The Telegraph . The psychological thriller received negative reviews and did not have a US release until 2013 ( retitled 6 Souls ) . 
 Moore next starred with Annette Bening in the independent film The Kids Are All Right ( 2010 ) , a comedy – drama about a lesbian couple whose teenage children locate their sperm donor . The role of Jules Allgood was written for her by writer – director Lisa <unk> , who felt that Moore was the right age , adept at both drama and comedy , and confident with the film 's sexual content . The actress was drawn to the film 's " universal " depiction of married life , and committed to the project in 2005 . The Kids Are All Right was widely acclaimed , eventually garnering an Oscar nomination for Best Picture . The critic Betsy Sharkey praised Moore 's performance of Jules , who she called an " existential bundle of unrealized need and midlife uncertainty " , writing , " There are countless moments when the actress strips bare before the camera — sometimes literally , sometimes emotionally ... and Moore plays every note perfectly . " The Kids Are All Right earned Moore a sixth Golden Globe Award nomination and a second BAFTA nomination for Best Actress . 
 For her next project , Moore actively looked for another comedy . She had a supporting role in Crazy , Stupid , Love , playing the estranged wife of Steve Carell , which was favorably reviewed and earned $ 142 @.@ 8 million worldwide . Moore was not seen on screens again until March 2012 , with a performance that received considerable praise and recognition . She starred in the HBO television film Game Change , a dramatization of Sarah Palin 's 2008 campaign to become Vice President . Portraying a well @-@ known figure was something she found challenging ; in preparation , she conducted extensive research and worked with a dialect coach for two months . Although the response to the film was mixed , critics were highly appreciative of Moore 's performance . For the first time in her career , she received a Golden Globe , a Primetime Emmy , and a SAG Award . 
 Moore made two film appearances in 2012 . The drama Being Flynn , in which she supported Robert De Niro , had a limited release . Greater success came for What Maisie Knew , the story of a young girl caught in the middle of her parents ' divorce . Adapted from Henry James 's novel and updated to the 21st century , the drama earned near @-@ universal critical praise . The role of Susanna , Maisie 's rock @-@ star mother , required Moore to sing on camera , which was a challenge she embraced despite finding it embarrassing . She called Susanna a terrible parent , but said the role did not make her uncomfortable as she fully compartmentalized the character : " I know that that 's not me " . 
 Following her well @-@ received performance in What Maisie Knew , Moore began 2013 with a supporting role in Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt 's comedy Don Jon , playing an older woman who helps the title character to appreciate his relationships . Reviews for the film were favorable , and Mary Pols of Time magazine wrote that Moore was a key factor in its success . Her next appearance was a starring role in the comedy The English Teacher ( 2013 ) , but this outing was poorly received and earned little at the box office . In October 2013 , she played the demented mother Margaret White in Carrie , an adaptation of Stephen King 's horror novel . Coming 37 years after Brian De Palma 's well @-@ known take on the book , Moore stated that she wanted to make the role her own . By drawing on King 's writing rather than the 1976 film , Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that she managed to " [ suggest ] a history – one never told , just hinted at – of serious damage in [ Margaret 's ] past . " The film was a box office success , but was generally considered an unsuccessful and unnecessary adaptation . 
 = = = Awards success ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 At 53 years old , Moore enjoyed a considerable degree of critical and commercial success in 2014 . Her first release of the year came alongside Liam Neeson in the action – thriller Non @-@ Stop , set aboard an airplane . The response to the film was mixed but it earned $ 223 million worldwide . She followed this by winning the Best Actress award at the Cannes Film Festival for her portrayal of Havana <unk> , an ageing actress receiving psychotherapy in David Cronenberg 's black comedy Maps to the Stars . Described by The Guardian as a " grotesque , gaudy and ruthless " character , Moore based her role on " an amalgam of Hollywood casualties she ha [ d ] encountered " and drew upon her early experiences in the industry . Peter Debruge of Variety criticized the film but found Moore to be " incredible " and " fearless " in it . Moore 's success at Cannes made her the second actress in history , after Juliette Binoche , to win at the " Big Three " film festivals ( Cannes , Venice , and Berlin ) . She also received a Golden Globe nomination for the performance . 
 Moore played the supporting role of President Alma Coin , the leader of a rebellion against The Capitol , in the third installment of the lucrative Hunger Games film series , Mockingjay – Part 1 . The film ranks as her highest @-@ grossing to date . Her final appearance of 2014 was one of the most acclaimed of her career . In the drama Still Alice , Moore played the leading role of a linguistics professor diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer 's disease . She spent four months training for the film , by watching documentaries on the disease and interacting with patients at the Alzheimer 's Association . Critic David Thomson wrote that Moore was " extraordinary at revealing the gradual loss of memory and confidence " , while according to Kenneth Turan she was " especially good at the wordless elements of this transformation , allowing us to see through the changing contours of her face what it is like when your mind empties out . " Several critics commented that it was her finest performance to date , and Moore was awarded with the Oscar , Golden Globe , SAG and BAFTA for Best Actress . 
 Moore began 2015 by appearing as an evil queen in Seventh Son , a poorly received fantasy – adventure film co @-@ starring Jeff Bridges . She also appeared opposite Ellen Page in <unk> , a drama based on a true story about a detective and her same @-@ sex partner , and in the romantic comedy Maggie 's Plan , with Greta <unk> and Ethan Hawke . Both films were presented at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival in September 2015 . In Maggie 's Plan , Moore played a pretentious Danish professor , a comic role which critic Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair deemed as the film 's " chief pleasure " . Later that year , she reprised her role as Alma Coin in The Hunger Games : Mockingjay – Part 2 , the final film of the series . 
 As of May 2016 , Moore is filming with Michelle Williams for <unk> , a film adaptation of Brian Selznick 's historical novel of the same name , which <unk> her with director Todd Haynes . She has also committed to star as the antagonist in a sequel to the spy film Kingsman : The Secret Service ( 2015 ) , subtitled The Golden Circle , co @-@ starring Taron Egerton , Channing Tatum and Halle Berry . In addition , she will feature opposite Matt Damon in <unk> , a thriller written by the Coen brothers and directed by George Clooney . 
 = = Reception and acting style = = 
 Moore has been described in the media as one of the most talented and accomplished actresses of her generation . As a woman in her 50s , she is unusual in being an older actress who continues to work regularly and in prominent roles . She enjoys the variety of appearing in both low @-@ budget independent films and large @-@ scale Hollywood productions . In 2004 , an IGN journalist wrote of this " rare ability to bounce between commercially viable projects like Nine Months to art house masterpieces like Safe unscathed " , adding , " She is respected in art houses and multiplexes alike . " She is noted for playing in a range of material , and the director Ridley Scott , who worked with Moore on Hannibal , praised her versatility . In October 2013 , Moore was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . She has been included in People magazine 's annual beauty lists on four occasions ( 1995 , 2003 , 2008 , 2013 ) . 
 Moore is particularly known for playing troubled women , and specializes in " ordinary women who suppress powerful emotions " . Oliver Burkeman of The Guardian writes that her characters are typically " struggling to maintain a purchase on normality in the face of some secret anguish or creeping awareness of failure " . Suzie Mackenzie , also of The Guardian , identified a theme of " characters in a state of alienation ... women who have forgotten or lost themselves . People whose identity is a question . " Her performances often include small hints at emotional turmoil , until there comes a point when the character breaks . The journalist Kira Cochrane identified this as a " trademark moment " in many of her best films , while it led Burkeman to call her the " queen of the big @-@ screen breakdown " . " When she does finally crack , " writes journalist Simon <unk> , " it 's a sight to behold : nobody sobs from the soul quite like Moore . " Ben Brantley of The New York Times praised Moore 's ability to subtly reveal the inner @-@ turmoil of her characters , writing that she is " peerless " in her " portraits of troubled womanhood . " When it comes to more authoritative roles , Brantley believes she is " a bit of a bore " . " Emotional nakedness is Ms. Moore 's specialty , " he says , " and it 's here that you sense the magic she is capable of . " 
 An interest in portraying " actual human drama " led Moore to these roles . She is particularly moved by the concept of an individual repressing their troubles and striving to maintain dignity . Parts where the character achieves an amazing feat are of little interest to her , because " we 're just not very often in that position in our lives . " Early in her career , Moore established a reputation for pushing boundaries , and she continues to be praised for her " fearless " performances and for taking on difficult roles . When asked if there were any roles that she avoided , she replied , " Nothing within the realm of human behaviour . " She is known for her willingness to perform nude and appear in sex scenes , although she said she will only do so if she feels it fits the role . 
 Regarding her approach to acting , Moore said in a 2002 interview that she leaves 95 percent of the performance to be discovered on set : " I want to have a sense of who a character is , and then I want to get there and have it happen to me on camera . " The aim , she said , is to " try to get yourself in a position to let the emotion [ happen ] to you , that you don 't bring the emotion to it ... and when it happens , there 's nothing better or more exciting or more rewarding . " 
 = = Writing = = 
 Alongside her acting work , Moore has established a career as a children 's author . Her first book , Freckleface Strawberry , was published in October 2007 and became a New York Times Best Seller . Described by Time Out as a " simple , sweet and semi @-@ autobiographical narrative " , it tells the story of a girl who wishes to be rid of her freckles but eventually accepts them . Moore decided to write the book when her young son began disliking aspects of his appearance ; she was reminded of her own childhood , when she was teased for having freckles and called " Freckleface Strawberry " by other children . 
 The book has turned into a series with four follow @-@ ups as of 2015 : Freckleface Strawberry and the Dodgeball Bully was published in 2009 , and Freckleface Strawberry : Best Friends Forever in 2011 . Both carry the message that children can overcome their own problems . In 2015 , Freckleface Strawberry : <unk> ! and Freckleface Strawberry : Lunch , or What 's That ? were released as part of Random House publishers ' " Step Into Reading " program . Moore is contracted to write two more books for the company . 
 Freckleface Strawberry has been adapted into a musical , written by Rose <unk> and Gary <unk> , which premiered at the New World Stages , New York , in October 2010 . Moore had an input in the production , particularly through requesting that it retain the book 's young target audience . The show has since been licensed and performed at several venues , which she calls " extremely gratifying and extremely flattering " . 
 Moore has written one children 's book separate from the Freckleface Strawberry series . Released in 2013 , My Mom is a Foreigner , But Not to Me is based on her experiences of growing up with a mother from another country . The book had a negative reception from Publishers Weekly and Kirkus Reviews ; while recognizing it as well @-@ intentioned , Moore 's use of verse and rhyme was criticised . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Actor and stage director John Gould Rubin was Moore 's first husband , whom she met in 1984 and married two years later . They separated in 1993 , and their divorce was finalized in August 1995 . " I got married too early and I really didn 't want to be there " , she later explained . Moore began a relationship with Bart Freundlich , her director on The Myth of Fingerprints , in 1996 . The couple have a son , Caleb ( born December 1997 ) and a daughter , Liv ( born April 2002 ) . They wed in August 2003 and live in Greenwich Village , New York City . Moore commented , " We have a very solid family life , and it is the most satisfying thing I have ever done . " She tries to keep her family close when working and picks material that is practical for her as a parent . 
 Moore is politically liberal and supported Barack Obama at the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections . She is a pro @-@ choice activist and sits on the board of advocates for Planned Parenthood . She is also a campaigner for gay rights and gun control , and since 2008 she has been an Artist Ambassador for Save the Children . Moore is an atheist ; when asked on Inside the Actors Studio what God might say to her upon arrival at heaven , she gave God 's response as , " Well I guess you were wrong , I do exist . " 
 Moore said she finds little value in the concept of celebrity and is concerned with living a " normal " life . Upon meeting her , the journalist Suzie Mackenzie described Moore as " the most unostentatious of stars " , and she attracts little gossip or tabloid attention . She is humble about her profession , saying she is " just a person with a job " , and casual in her appearance . Known for maintaining a natural image , Moore has spoken out against botox and plastic surgery . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 As of April 2016 , Moore has appeared in 62 feature films , four television movies , and four television series . Her most acclaimed films , according to review @-@ aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes , include Short Cuts ( 1993 ) , Children of Men ( 2006 ) , The Kids Are All Right ( 2010 ) , Boogie Nights ( 1997 ) , Far from Heaven ( 2002 ) , Vanya on 42nd Street ( 1994 ) , What Maisie Knew ( 2012 ) , Still Alice ( 2014 ) , Safe ( 1995 ) , A Single Man ( 2009 ) , and Magnolia ( 2000 ) . Her films that have earned the most at the box office are The Hunger Games : Mockingjay – Part 1 ( 2014 ) , The Lost World : Jurassic Park ( 1997 ) , Hannibal ( 2001 ) , Non @-@ Stop ( 2014 ) , The Hand That Rocks the Cradle ( 1992 ) , Crazy , Stupid , Love . ( 2011 ) , Nine Months ( 1995 ) , The Forgotten ( 2004 ) , The Hours ( 2002 ) , Evolution ( 2001 ) and Carrie ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Moore has received five Academy Award nominations , nine Golden Globe nominations , seven SAG nominations , and four BAFTA nominations . From these , she has won an Academy Award , two Golden Globes , a BAFTA , and two SAG Awards ; she also has a Primetime Emmy and a Daytime Emmy . In addition , she has been named Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival , Berlin Film Festival , and Venice Film Festival – the fourth person , and second female , in history to achieve this . Her recognized roles came in As the World Turns , Boogie Nights , An Ideal Husband , The End of the Affair , Magnolia , Far From Heaven , The Hours , A Single Man , The Kids Are All Right , Game Change , Maps to the Stars , and Still Alice . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Moore , Julianne ( 2007 ) . Freckleface Strawberry . Illustrated by LeUyen Pham . New York : Bloomsbury Juvenile US . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 59990 @-@ 107 @-@ 7 . 
 Moore , Julianne ( 2009 ) . Freckleface Strawberry And The Dodgeball Bully . Illustrated by LeUyen Pham . New York : Bloomsbury Juvenile US . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 59990 @-@ 316 @-@ 3 . 
 Moore , Julianne ( 2011 ) . Freckleface Strawberry Best Friends Forever . Illustrated by LeUyen Pham . New York : Bloomsbury Juvenile US . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 59990 @-@ 782 @-@ 6 . 
 Moore , Julianne ( 2013 ) . My Mom Is a Foreigner , But Not to Me . Illustrated by <unk> So . San Francisco : Chronicle Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Moore , Julianne ( 2015 ) . Freckleface Strawberry : <unk> ! ( Step into Reading ) . Illustrated by LeUyen Pham . New York : Random House Books for Young Readers . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Moore , Julianne ( 2015 ) . Freckleface Strawberry : Lunch , or What 's That ? ( Step into Reading ) . Illustrated by LeUyen Pham . New York : Random House Books for Young Readers . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 = Stonewall riots = 
 The Stonewall riots ( also referred to as the Stonewall uprising or the Stonewall rebellion ) were a series of spontaneous , violent demonstrations by members of the gay ( LGBT ) community against a police raid that took place in the early morning hours of June 28 , 1969 , at the Stonewall Inn , located in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Manhattan , New York City . They are widely considered to constitute the single most important event leading to the gay liberation movement and the modern fight for LGBT rights in the United States . 
 Gay Americans in the 1950s and 1960s faced an anti @-@ gay legal system . Early homophile groups in the U.S. sought to prove that gay people could be assimilated into society , and they favored non @-@ confrontational education for homosexuals and heterosexuals alike . The last years of the 1960s , however , were very contentious , as many social / political movements were active , including the African American Civil Rights Movement , the counterculture of the 1960s , and the anti @-@ Vietnam War movement . These influences , along with the liberal environment of Greenwich Village , served as catalysts for the Stonewall riots . 
 Very few establishments welcomed openly gay people in the 1950s and 1960s . Those that did were often bars , although bar owners and managers were rarely gay . At the time , the Stonewall Inn was owned by the Mafia . It catered to an assortment of patrons and was known to be popular among the poorest and most marginalized people in the gay community : drag queens , transgender people , effeminate young men , butch lesbians , male prostitutes , and homeless youth . Police raids on gay bars were routine in the 1960s , but officers quickly lost control of the situation at the Stonewall Inn . They attracted a crowd that was incited to riot . Tensions between New York City police and gay residents of Greenwich Village erupted into more protests the next evening , and again several nights later . Within weeks , Village residents quickly organized into activist groups to concentrate efforts on establishing places for gays and lesbians to be open about their sexual orientation without fear of being arrested . 
 After the Stonewall riots , gays and lesbians in New York City faced gender , race , class , and generational obstacles to becoming a cohesive community . Within six months , two gay activist organizations were formed in New York , concentrating on confrontational tactics , and three newspapers were established to promote rights for gays and lesbians . Within a few years , gay rights organizations were founded across the U.S. and the world . On June 28 , 1970 , the first Gay Pride marches took place in New York , Los Angeles , San Francisco and Chicago commemorating the anniversary of the riots . Similar marches were organized in other cities . Today , Gay Pride events are held annually throughout the world toward the end of June to mark the Stonewall riots . 
 The Stonewall National Monument was established at the site in 2016 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Homosexuality in 20th @-@ century United States = = = 
 Following the social upheaval of World War II , many people in the United States felt a fervent desire to " restore the prewar social order and hold off the forces of change " , according to historian Barry Adam . Spurred by the national emphasis on anti @-@ communism , Senator Joseph McCarthy conducted hearings searching for communists in the U.S. government , the U.S. Army , and other government @-@ funded agencies and institutions , leading to a national paranoia . Anarchists , communists , and other people deemed un @-@ American and subversive were considered security risks . Homosexuals were included in this list by the U.S. State Department on the theory that they were susceptible to blackmail . In 1950 , a Senate investigation chaired by Clyde R. Hoey noted in a report , " It is generally believed that those who engage in overt acts of perversion lack the emotional stability of normal persons " , and said all of the government 's intelligence agencies " are in complete agreement that sex perverts in Government constitute security risks . " Between 1947 and 1950 , 1 @,@ 700 federal job applications were denied , 4 @,@ 380 people were discharged from the military , and 420 were fired from their government jobs for being suspected homosexuals . 
 Throughout the 1950s and 1960s , the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) and police departments kept lists of known homosexuals , their favored establishments , and friends ; the U.S. Post Office kept track of addresses where material pertaining to homosexuality was mailed . State and local governments followed suit : bars catering to homosexuals were shut down , and their customers were arrested and exposed in newspapers . Cities performed " sweeps " to rid neighborhoods , parks , bars , and beaches of gay people . They outlawed the wearing of opposite gender clothes , and universities expelled instructors suspected of being homosexual . Thousands of gay men and women were publicly humiliated , physically harassed , fired , jailed , or institutionalized in mental hospitals . Many lived double lives , keeping their private lives secret from their professional ones . 
 In 1952 , the American Psychiatric Association listed homosexuality in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual ( DSM ) as a mental disorder . A large @-@ scale study of homosexuality in 1962 was used to justify inclusion of the disorder as a supposed pathological hidden fear of the opposite sex caused by traumatic parent – child relationships . This view was widely influential in the medical profession . In 1956 , however , the psychologist Evelyn Hooker performed a study that compared the happiness and well @-@ adjusted nature of self @-@ identified homosexual men with heterosexual men and found no difference . Her study stunned the medical community and made her a hero to many gay men and lesbians , but homosexuality remained in the DSM until 1973 . 
 = = = Homophile activism = = = 
 In response to this trend , two organizations formed independently of each other to advance the cause of homosexuals and provide social opportunities where gays and lesbians could socialize without fear of being arrested . Los Angeles area homosexuals created the Mattachine Society in 1950 , in the home of communist activist Harry Hay . Their objectives were to unify homosexuals , educate them , provide leadership , and assist " sexual deviants " with legal troubles . Facing enormous opposition to its radical approach , in 1953 the Mattachine shifted their focus to assimilation and respectability . They reasoned that they would change more minds about homosexuality by proving that gays and lesbians were normal people , no different from heterosexuals . Soon after , several women in San Francisco met in their living rooms to form the Daughters of Bilitis ( DOB ) for lesbians . Although the eight women who created the DOB initially came together to be able to have a safe place to dance , as the DOB grew they developed similar goals to the Mattachine , and urged their members to assimilate into general society . 
 One of the first challenges to government repression came in 1953 . An organization named ONE , Inc. published a magazine called ONE . The U.S. Postal Service refused to mail its August issue , which concerned homosexuals in heterosexual marriages , on the grounds that the material was obscene despite it being covered in brown paper wrapping . The case eventually went to the Supreme Court , which in 1958 ruled that ONE , Inc. could mail its materials through the Postal Service . 
 Homophile organizations — as homosexual groups were called — grew in number and spread to the East Coast . Gradually , members of these organizations grew bolder . Frank Kameny founded the Mattachine of Washington , D.C. He had been fired from the U.S. Army Map Service for being a homosexual , and sued unsuccessfully to be reinstated . Kameny wrote that homosexuals were no different from heterosexuals , often aiming his efforts at mental health professionals , some of whom attended Mattachine and DOB meetings telling members they were abnormal . In 1965 , Kameny , inspired by the Civil Rights Movement , organized a picket of the White House and other government buildings to protest employment discrimination . The pickets shocked many gay people , and upset some of the leadership of Mattachine and the DOB . At the same time , demonstrations in the Civil Rights movement and opposition to the Vietnam War all grew in prominence , frequency , and severity throughout the 1960s , as did their confrontations with police forces . 
 = = = Compton 's Cafeteria riot = = = 
 On the outer fringes of the few small gay communities were people who challenged gender expectations . They were effeminate men and masculine women , or people assigned male at birth who dressed and lived as women and people assigned female at birth who dressed as men , respectively , either part or full @-@ time . Contemporary nomenclature classified them as transvestites , and they were the most visible representatives of sexual minorities . They belied the carefully crafted image portrayed by the Mattachine Society and DOB that asserted homosexuals were respectable , normal people . The Mattachine and DOB considered the trials of being arrested for wearing clothing of the opposite gender as a parallel to the struggles of homophile organizations : similar but distinctly separate . Gay and transgender people staged a small riot in Los Angeles in 1959 in response to police harassment . 
 In a larger event in 1966 in San Francisco , drag queens , hustlers , and transvestites were sitting in Compton 's Cafeteria when the police arrived to arrest men dressed as women . A riot ensued , with the patrons of the cafeteria slinging cups , plates , and saucers , and breaking the plexiglass windows in the front of the restaurant , and returning several days later to smash the windows again after they were replaced . Professor Susan Stryker classifies the Compton 's Cafeteria riot as an " act of anti @-@ transgender discrimination , rather than an act of discrimination against sexual orientation " and connects the uprising to the issues of gender , race , and class that were being downplayed by homophile organizations . It marked the beginning of transgender activism in San Francisco . 
 = = = Greenwich Village = = = 
 The Manhattan neighborhoods of Greenwich Village and Harlem were home to a sizable homosexual population after World War I , when men and women who had served in the military took advantage of the opportunity to settle in larger cities . The enclaves of gays and lesbians , described by a newspaper story as " short @-@ haired women and long @-@ haired men " , developed a distinct subculture through the following two decades . Prohibition inadvertently benefited gay establishments , as drinking alcohol was pushed underground along with other behaviors considered immoral . New York City passed laws against homosexuality in public and private businesses , but because alcohol was in high demand , speakeasies and impromptu drinking establishments were so numerous and temporary that authorities were unable to police them all . 
 The social repression of the 1950s resulted in a cultural revolution in Greenwich Village . A cohort of poets , later named the Beat poets , wrote about the evils of the social organization at the time , glorifying anarchy , drugs , and hedonistic pleasures over unquestioning social compliance , consumerism , and closed mindedness . Of them , Allen Ginsberg and William S. Burroughs — both Greenwich Village residents — also wrote bluntly and honestly about homosexuality . Their writings attracted sympathetic liberal @-@ minded people , as well as homosexuals looking for a community . 
 By the early 1960s , a campaign to rid New York City of gay bars was in full effect by order of Mayor Robert F. Wagner , Jr . , who was concerned about the image of the city in preparation for the 1964 World 's Fair . The city revoked the liquor licenses of the bars , and undercover police officers worked to entrap as many homosexual men as possible . Entrapment usually consisted of an undercover officer who found a man in a bar or public park , engaged him in conversation ; if the conversation headed toward the possibility that they might leave together — or the officer bought the man a drink — he was arrested for solicitation . One story in the New York Post described an arrest in a gym locker room , where the officer grabbed his crotch , moaning , and a man who asked him if he was all right was arrested . Few lawyers would defend cases as undesirable as these , and some of those lawyers kicked back their fees to the arresting officer . 
 The Mattachine Society succeeded in getting newly elected Mayor John Lindsay to end the campaign of police entrapment in New York City . They had a more difficult time with the New York State Liquor Authority ( SLA ) . While no laws prohibited serving homosexuals , courts allowed the SLA discretion in approving and revoking liquor licenses for businesses that might become " disorderly " . Despite the high population of gays and lesbians who called Greenwich Village home , very few places existed , other than bars , where they were able to congregate openly without being harassed or arrested . In 1966 the New York Mattachine held a " sip @-@ in " at a Greenwich Village bar named Julius , which was frequented by gay men , to illustrate the discrimination homosexuals faced . 
 None of the bars frequented by gays and lesbians were owned by gay people . Almost all of them were owned and controlled by organized crime , who treated the regulars poorly , watered down the liquor , and overcharged for drinks . However , they also paid off police to prevent frequent raids . 
 = = = Stonewall Inn = = = 
 The Stonewall Inn , located at 51 and 53 Christopher Street , along with several other establishments in the city , was owned by the Genovese crime family . In 1966 , three members of the Mafia invested $ 3 @,@ 500 to turn the Stonewall Inn into a gay bar , after it had been a restaurant and a nightclub for heterosexuals . Once a week a police officer would collect envelopes of cash as a payoff ; the Stonewall Inn had no liquor license . It had no running water behind the bar — used glasses were run through tubs of water and immediately reused . There were no fire exits , and the toilets overran consistently . Though the bar was not used for prostitution , drug sales and other " cash transactions " took place . It was the only bar for gay men in New York City where dancing was allowed ; dancing was its main draw since its re @-@ opening as a gay club . 
 Visitors to the Stonewall Inn in 1969 were greeted by a bouncer who inspected them through a peephole in the door . The legal drinking age was 18 , and to avoid unwittingly letting in undercover police ( who were called " Lily Law " , " Alice Blue Gown " , or " Betty Badge " ) , visitors would have to be known by the doorman , or look gay . The entrance fee on weekends was $ 3 , for which the customer received two tickets that could be exchanged for two drinks . Patrons were required to sign their names in a book to prove that the bar was a private " bottle club " , but rarely signed their real names . There were two dance floors in the Stonewall ; the interior was painted black , making it very dark inside , with pulsing gel lights or black lights . If police were spotted , regular white lights were turned on , signaling that everyone should stop dancing or touching . In the rear of the bar was a smaller room frequented by " queens " ; it was one of two bars where effeminate men who wore makeup and teased their hair ( though dressed in men 's clothing ) could go . Only a few transvestites , or men in full drag , were allowed in by the bouncers . The customers were " 98 percent male " but a few lesbians sometimes came to the bar . Younger homeless adolescent males , who slept in nearby Christopher Park , would often try to get in so customers would buy them drinks . The age of the clientele ranged between the upper teens and early thirties , and the racial mix was evenly distributed among white , black , and Hispanic patrons . Because of its even mix of people , its location , and the attraction of dancing , the Stonewall Inn was known by many as " the gay bar in the city " . 
 Police raids on gay bars were frequent — occurring on average once a month for each bar . Many bars kept extra liquor in a secret panel behind the bar , or in a car down the block , to facilitate resuming business as quickly as possible if alcohol was seized . Bar management usually knew about raids beforehand due to police tip @-@ offs , and raids occurred early enough in the evening that business could commence after the police had finished . During a typical raid , the lights were turned on , and customers were lined up and their identification cards checked . Those without identification or dressed in full drag were arrested ; others were allowed to leave . Some of the men , including those in drag , used their draft cards as identification . Women were required to wear three pieces of feminine clothing , and would be arrested if found not wearing them . Employees and management of the bars were also typically arrested . The period immediately before June 28 , 1969 , was marked by frequent raids of local bars — including a raid at the Stonewall Inn on the Tuesday before the riots — and the closing of the Checkerboard , the Tele @-@ Star , and two other clubs in Greenwich Village . 
 = = Riots = = 
 = = = Police raid = = = 
 At 1 : 20 a.m. on Saturday , June 28 , 1969 , four plainclothes policemen in dark suits , two patrol officers in uniform , and Detective Charles Smythe and Deputy Inspector Seymour Pine arrived at the Stonewall Inn 's double doors and announced " Police ! We 're taking the place ! " Stonewall employees do not recall being tipped off that a raid was to occur that night , as was the custom . According to Duberman ( p . 194 ) , there was a rumor that one might happen , but since it was much later than raids generally took place , Stonewall management thought the tip was inaccurate . Days after the raid , one of the bar owners complained that the tipoff had never come , and that the raid was ordered by the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , and Firearms , who objected that there were no stamps on the liquor bottles , indicating the alcohol was bootlegged . 
 Historian David Carter presents information indicating that the Mafia owners of the Stonewall and the manager were blackmailing wealthier customers , particularly those who worked in the Financial District . They appeared to be making more money from extortion than they were from liquor sales in the bar . Carter deduces that when the police were unable to receive kickbacks from blackmail and the theft of negotiable bonds ( facilitated by pressuring gay Wall Street customers ) , they decided to close the Stonewall Inn permanently . Two undercover policewomen and two undercover policemen had entered the bar earlier that evening to gather visual evidence , as the Public Morals Squad waited outside for the signal . Once inside , they called for backup from the Sixth Precinct using the bar 's pay telephone . The music was turned off and the main lights were turned on . Approximately 205 people were in the bar that night . Patrons who had never experienced a police raid were confused . A few who realized what was happening began to run for doors and windows in the bathrooms , but police barred the doors . Michael Fader remembered , 
 Things happened so fast you kind of got caught not knowing . All of a sudden there were police there and we were told to all get in lines and to have our identification ready to be led out of the bar . 
 The raid did not go as planned . Standard procedure was to line up the patrons , check their identification , and have female police officers take customers dressed as women to the bathroom to verify their sex , upon which any men dressed as women would be arrested . Those dressed as women that night refused to go with the officers . Men in line began to refuse to produce their identification . The police decided to take everyone present to the police station , after separating those cross @-@ dressing in a room in the back of the bar . Maria Ritter , then known as Steve to her family , recalled , " My biggest fear was that I would get arrested . My second biggest fear was that my picture would be in a newspaper or on a television report in my mother 's dress ! " Both patrons and police recalled that a sense of discomfort spread very quickly , spurred by police who began to assault some of the lesbians by " feeling some of them up inappropriately " while frisking them . 
 The police were to transport the bar 's alcohol in patrol wagons . Twenty @-@ eight cases of beer and nineteen bottles of hard liquor were seized , but the patrol wagons had not yet arrived , so patrons were required to wait in line for about 15 minutes . Those who were not arrested were released from the front door , but they did not leave quickly as usual . Instead , they stopped outside and a crowd began to grow and watch . Within minutes , between 100 and 150 people had congregated outside , some after they were released from inside the Stonewall , and some after noticing the police cars and the crowd . Although the police forcefully pushed or kicked some patrons out of the bar , some customers released by the police performed for the crowd by posing and saluting the police in an exaggerated fashion . The crowd 's applause encouraged them further : " <unk> were limp , hair was <unk> , and reactions to the applause were classic . " 
 When the first patrol wagon arrived , Inspector Pine recalled that the crowd — most of whom were homosexual — had grown to at least ten times the number of people who were arrested , and they all became very quiet . Confusion over radio communication delayed the arrival of a second wagon . The police began escorting Mafia members into the first wagon , to the cheers of the bystanders . Next , regular employees were loaded into the wagon . A bystander shouted , " Gay power ! " , someone began singing " We Shall Overcome " , and the crowd reacted with amusement and general good humor mixed with " growing and intensive hostility " . An officer shoved a transvestite , who responded by hitting him on the head with her purse as the crowd began to boo . Author Edmund White , who had been passing by , recalled , " Everyone 's restless , angry , and high @-@ spirited . No one has a slogan , no one even has an attitude , but something 's brewing . " Pennies , then beer bottles , were thrown at the wagon as a rumor spread through the crowd that patrons still inside the bar were being beaten . 
 A scuffle broke out when a woman in handcuffs was escorted from the door of the bar to the waiting police wagon several times . She escaped repeatedly and fought with four of the police , swearing and shouting , for about ten minutes . Described as " a typical New York butch " and " a dyke – stone butch " , she had been hit on the head by an officer with a baton for , as one witness claimed , complaining that her handcuffs were too tight . Bystanders recalled that the woman , whose identity remains unknown ( <unk> <unk> has been identified by some , including herself , as the woman , but accounts vary ) , sparked the crowd to fight when she looked at bystanders and shouted , " Why don 't you guys do something ? " After an officer picked her up and heaved her into the back of the wagon , the crowd became a mob and went " berserk " : " It was at that moment that the scene became explosive . " 
 = = = Violence breaks out = = = 
 The police tried to restrain some of the crowd , and knocked a few people down , which incited bystanders even more . Some of those handcuffed in the wagon escaped when police left them unattended ( deliberately , according to some witnesses ) . As the crowd tried to overturn the police wagon , two police cars and the wagon — with a few slashed tires — left immediately , with Inspector Pine urging them to return as soon as possible . The commotion attracted more people who learned what was happening . Someone in the crowd declared that the bar had been raided because " they didn 't pay off the cops " , to which someone else yelled " Let 's pay them off ! " Coins sailed through the air towards the police as the crowd shouted " Pigs ! " and " Faggot cops ! " Beer cans were thrown and the police lashed out , dispersing some of the crowd who found a construction site nearby with stacks of bricks . The police , outnumbered by between 500 and 600 people , grabbed several people , including folk singer Dave Van Ronk — who had been attracted to the revolt from a bar two doors away from the Stonewall . Though Van Ronk was not gay , he had experienced police violence when he participated in antiwar demonstrations : " As far as I was concerned , anybody who 'd stand against the cops was all right with me , and that 's why I stayed in ... Every time you turned around the cops were pulling some outrage or another . " Ten police officers — including two policewomen — barricaded themselves , Van Ronk , Howard Smith ( a writer for The Village Voice ) , and several handcuffed detainees inside the Stonewall Inn for their own safety . 
 Multiple accounts of the riot assert that there was no pre @-@ existing organization or apparent cause for the demonstration ; what ensued was spontaneous . Michael Fader explained , 
 We all had a collective feeling like we 'd had enough of this kind of shit . It wasn 't anything tangible anybody said to anyone else , it was just kind of like everything over the years had come to a head on that one particular night in the one particular place , and it was not an organized demonstration ... Everyone in the crowd felt that we were never going to go back . It was like the last straw . It was time to reclaim something that had always been taken from us .... All kinds of people , all different reasons , but mostly it was total outrage , anger , sorrow , everything combined , and everything just kind of ran its course . It was the police who were doing most of the destruction . We were really trying to get back in and break free . And we felt that we had freedom at last , or freedom to at least show that we demanded freedom . We weren 't going to be walking meekly in the night and letting them shove us around — it 's like standing your ground for the first time and in a really strong way , and that 's what caught the police by surprise . There was something in the air , freedom a long time overdue , and we 're going to fight for it . It took different forms , but the bottom line was , we weren 't going to go away . And we didn 't . 
 The only photograph taken during the first night of the riots shows the homeless youth who slept in nearby Christopher Park , scuffling with police . The Mattachine Society newsletter a month later offered its explanation of why the riots occurred : " It catered largely to a group of people who are not welcome in , or cannot afford , other places of homosexual social gathering ... The Stonewall became home to these kids . When it was raided , they fought for it . That , and the fact that they had nothing to lose other than the most tolerant and broadminded gay place in town , explains why . " 
 Garbage cans , garbage , bottles , rocks , and bricks were hurled at the building , breaking the windows . Witnesses attest that " flame queens " , hustlers , and gay " street kids " — the most outcast people in the gay community — were responsible for the first volley of projectiles , as well as the uprooting of a parking meter used as a battering ram on the doors of the Stonewall Inn . Sylvia Rivera , a self @-@ identified street queen who had been in the Stonewall during the raid , remembered : 
 You 've been treating us like shit all these years ? Uh @-@ uh . Now it 's our turn ! ... It was one of the greatest moments in my life . 
 The mob lit garbage on fire and stuffed it through the broken windows as the police grabbed a fire hose . Because it had no water pressure , the hose was ineffective in dispersing the crowd , and seemed only to encourage them . When demonstrators broke through the windows — which had been covered by plywood by the bar owners to deter the police from raiding the bar — the police inside <unk> their pistols . The doors flew open and officers pointed their weapons at the angry crowd , threatening to shoot . The Village Voice writer Howard Smith , in the bar with the police , took a wrench from the bar and stuffed it in his pants , unsure if he might have to use it against the mob or the police . He watched someone squirt lighter fluid into the bar ; as it was lit and the police took aim , sirens were heard and fire trucks arrived . The onslaught had lasted 45 minutes . 
 = = = Escalation = = = 
 The Tactical Patrol Force ( TPF ) of the New York City Police Department arrived to free the police trapped inside the Stonewall . One officer 's eye was cut , and a few others were bruised from being struck by flying debris . Bob Kohler , who was walking his dog by the Stonewall that night , saw the TPF arrive : " I had been in enough riots to know the fun was over ... The cops were totally humiliated . This never , ever happened . They were angrier than I guess they had ever been , because everybody else had rioted ... but the fairies were not supposed to riot ... no group had ever forced cops to retreat before , so the anger was just enormous . I mean , they wanted to kill . " With larger numbers , police detained anyone they could and put them in patrol wagons to go to jail , though Inspector Pine recalled , " Fights erupted with the transvestites , who wouldn 't go into the patrol wagon . " His recollection was corroborated by another witness across the street who said , " All I could see about who was fighting was that it was transvestites and they were fighting furiously . " 
 The TPF formed a phalanx and attempted to clear the streets by marching slowly and pushing the crowd back . The mob openly mocked the police . The crowd cheered , started impromptu kick lines , and sang to the tune of Ta @-@ ra @-@ ra Boom @-@ de @-@ ay : " We are the Stonewall girls / We wear our hair in curls / We don 't wear underwear / We show our pubic hair . " Lucian Truscott reported in The Village Voice : " A stagnant situation there brought on some gay tomfoolery in the form of a chorus line facing the line of helmeted and club @-@ carrying cops . Just as the line got into a full kick routine , the TPF advanced again and cleared the crowd of screaming gay power [ - ] ites down Christopher to Seventh Avenue . " One participant who had been in the Stonewall during the raid recalled , " The police rushed us , and that 's when I realized this is not a good thing to do , because they got me in the back with a nightstick . " Another account stated , " I just can 't ever get that one sight out of my mind . The cops with the [ nightsticks ] and the kick line on the other side . It was the most amazing thing ... And all the sudden that kick line , which I guess was a spoof on the machismo ... I think that 's when I felt rage . Because people were getting smashed with bats . And for what ? A kick line . " 
 Craig Rodwell , owner of the Oscar Wilde Memorial Bookshop , reported watching police chase participants through the crooked streets , only to see them appear around the next corner behind the police . Members of the mob stopped cars , overturning one of them to block Christopher Street . Jack Nichols and <unk> Clarke , in their column printed in Screw , declared that " massive crowds of angry protesters chased [ the police ] for blocks screaming , ' Catch them ! ' " 
 By 4 : 00 in the morning the streets had nearly been cleared . Many people sat on stoops or gathered nearby in Christopher Park throughout the morning , dazed in disbelief at what had transpired . Many witnesses remembered the surreal and eerie quiet that descended upon Christopher Street , though there continued to be " electricity in the air " . One commented : " There was a certain beauty in the aftermath of the riot ... It was obvious , at least to me , that a lot of people really were gay and , you know , this was our street . " Thirteen people had been arrested . Some in the crowd were hospitalized , and four police officers were injured . Almost everything in the Stonewall Inn was broken . Inspector Pine had intended to close and dismantle the Stonewall Inn that night . Pay phones , toilets , mirrors , jukeboxes , and cigarette machines were all smashed , possibly in the riot and possibly by the police . 
 = = = A second night of rioting = = = 
 During the siege of the Stonewall , Craig Rodwell called The New York Times , the New York Post , and the Daily News to inform them what was happening . All three papers covered the riots ; the Daily News placed coverage on the front page . News of the riot spread quickly throughout Greenwich Village , fueled by rumors that it had been organized by the Students for a Democratic Society , the Black Panthers , or triggered by " a homosexual police officer whose roommate went dancing at the Stonewall against the officer 's wishes " . All day Saturday , June 28 , people came to stare at the burned and blackened Stonewall Inn . Graffiti appeared on the walls of the bar , declaring " Drag power " , " They invaded our rights " , " Support gay power " , and " Legalize gay bars " , along with accusations of police looting , and — regarding the status of the bar — " We are open . " 
 The next night , rioting again surrounded Christopher Street ; participants remember differently which night was more frantic or violent . Many of the same people returned from the previous evening — hustlers , street youths , and " queens " — but they were joined by " police provocateurs " , curious bystanders , and even tourists . Remarkable to many was the sudden exhibition of homosexual affection in public , as described by one witness : " From going to places where you had to knock on a door and speak to someone through a peephole in order to get in . We were just out . We were in the streets . " 
 Thousands of people had gathered in front of the Stonewall , which had opened again , choking Christopher Street until the crowd spilled into adjoining blocks . The throng surrounded buses and cars , harassing the occupants unless they either admitted they were gay or indicated their support for the demonstrators . Sylvia Rivera saw a friend of hers jump on a nearby car trying to drive through ; the crowd rocked the car back and forth , terrifying its occupants . Another of Rivera 's friends , Marsha P. Johnson , an African @-@ American street queen , climbed a lamppost and dropped a heavy bag onto the hood of a police car , shattering the windshield . As on the previous evening , fires were started in garbage cans throughout the neighborhood . More than a hundred police were present from the Fourth , Fifth , Sixth , and Ninth Precincts , but after 2 : 00 a.m. the TPF arrived again . Kick lines and police chases waxed and waned ; when police captured demonstrators , whom the majority of witnesses described as " sissies " or " <unk> " , the crowd surged to recapture them . Street battling ensued again until 4 : 00 a.m. 
 Beat poet and longtime Greenwich Village resident Allen Ginsberg lived on Christopher Street , and happened upon the jubilant chaos . After he learned of the riot that had occurred the previous evening , he stated , " Gay power ! Isn 't that great ! ... It 's about time we did something to assert ourselves " , and visited the open Stonewall Inn for the first time . While walking home , he declared to Lucian Truscott , " You know , the guys there were so beautiful — they 've lost that wounded look that fags all had 10 years ago . " 
 = = = Leaflets , press coverage , and more violence = = = 
 Activity in Greenwich Village was sporadic on Monday and Tuesday , partly due to rain . Police and Village residents had a few altercations , as both groups antagonized each other . Craig Rodwell and his partner Fred Sargeant took the opportunity the morning after the first riot to print and distribute 5 @,@ 000 leaflets , one of them reading : " Get the Mafia and the Cops out of Gay Bars . " The leaflets called for gays to own their own establishments , for a boycott of the Stonewall and other Mafia @-@ owned bars , and for public pressure on the mayor 's office to investigate the " intolerable situation " . 
 Not everyone in the gay community considered the revolt a positive development . To many older homosexuals and many members of the Mattachine Society who had worked throughout the 1960s to promote homosexuals as no different from heterosexuals , the display of violence and effeminate behavior was embarrassing . Randy Wicker , who had marched in the first gay picket lines before the White House in 1965 , said the " screaming queens forming chorus lines and kicking went against everything that I wanted people to think about homosexuals ... that we were a bunch of drag queens in the Village acting disorderly and tacky and cheap . " Others found the closing of the Stonewall Inn , termed a " sleaze joint " , as advantageous to the Village . 
 On Wednesday , however , The Village Voice ran reports of the riots , written by Howard Smith and Lucian Truscott , that included unflattering descriptions of the events and its participants : " forces of <unk> " , " limp wrists " , and " Sunday fag follies " . A mob descended upon Christopher Street once again and threatened to burn down the offices of The Village Voice . Also in the mob of between 500 and 1 @,@ 000 were other groups that had had unsuccessful confrontations with the police , and were curious how the police were defeated in this situation . Another explosive street battle took place , with injuries to demonstrators and police alike , looting in local shops , and arrests of five people . The incidents on Wednesday night lasted about an hour , and were summarized by one witness : " The word is out . Christopher Street shall be liberated . The fags have had it with oppression . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The feeling of urgency spread throughout Greenwich Village , even to people who had not witnessed the riots . Many who were moved by the rebellion attended organizational meetings , sensing an opportunity to take action . On July 4 , 1969 , the Mattachine Society performed its annual picketing in front of Independence Hall in Philadelphia , called the Annual Reminder . Organizers Craig Rodwell , Frank Kameny , Randy Wicker , Barbara Gittings , and Kay Lahusen , who had all participated for several years , took a bus along with other picketers from New York City to Philadelphia . Since 1965 , the pickets had been very controlled : women wore skirts and men wore suits and ties , and all marched quietly in organized lines . This year Rodwell remembered feeling restricted by the rules Kameny had set . When two women spontaneously held hands , Kameny broke them apart , saying , " None of that ! None of that ! " Rodwell , however , convinced about ten couples to hold hands . The hand @-@ holding couples made Kameny furious , but they earned more press attention than all of the previous marches . Participant Lilli Vincenz remembered , " It was clear that things were changing . People who had felt oppressed now felt empowered . " Rodwell returned to New York City determined to change the established quiet , meek ways of trying to get attention . One of his first priorities was planning Christopher Street Liberation Day . 
 = = = Gay Liberation Front = = = 
 Although the Mattachine Society had existed since the 1950s , many of their methods now seemed too mild for people who had witnessed or been inspired by the riots . Mattachine recognized the shift in attitudes in a story from their newsletter entitled , " The Hairpin Drop Heard Around the World . " When a Mattachine officer suggested an " amicable and sweet " candlelight vigil demonstration , a man in the audience fumed and shouted , " Sweet ! Bullshit ! That 's the role society has been forcing these queens to play . " With a flyer announcing : " Do You Think Homosexuals Are Revolting ? You Bet Your Sweet Ass We Are ! " , the Gay Liberation Front ( GLF ) was soon formed , the first gay organization to use " gay " in its name . Previous organizations such as the Mattachine Society , the Daughters of Bilitis , and various homophile groups had masked their purpose by deliberately choosing obscure names . 
 The rise of militancy became apparent to Frank Kameny and Barbara Gittings — who had worked in homophile organizations for years and were both very public about their roles — when they attended a GLF meeting to see the new group . A young GLF member demanded to know who they were and what their credentials were . Gittings , nonplussed , stammered , " I 'm gay . That 's why I 'm here . " The GLF borrowed tactics from and aligned themselves with black and antiwar demonstrators with the ideal that they " could work to restructure American society " . They took on causes of the Black Panthers , marching to the Women 's House of Detention in support of Afeni Shakur , and other radical New Left causes . Four months after they formed , however , the group disbanded when members were unable to agree on operating procedure . 
 = = = Gay Activists Alliance = = = 
 Within six months of the Stonewall riots , activists started a city @-@ wide newspaper called Gay ; they considered it necessary because the most liberal publication in the city — The Village Voice — refused to print the word " gay " in GLF advertisements seeking new members and volunteers . Two other newspapers were initiated within a six @-@ week period : Come Out ! and Gay Power ; the readership of these three periodicals quickly climbed to between 20 @,@ 000 and 25 @,@ 000 . 
 GLF members organized several same @-@ sex dances , but GLF meetings were chaotic . When Bob Kohler asked for clothes and money to help the homeless youth who had participated in the riots , many of whom slept in Christopher Park or Sheridan Square , the response was a discussion on the downfall of capitalism . In late December 1969 , several people who had visited GLF meetings and left out of frustration formed the Gay Activists Alliance ( GAA ) . The GAA was to be entirely focused on gay issues , and more orderly . Their constitution started , " We as liberated homosexual activists demand the freedom for expression of our dignity and value as human beings . " The GAA developed and perfected a confrontational tactic called a zap , where they would catch a politician off guard during a public relations opportunity , and force him or her to acknowledge gay and lesbian rights . City councilmen were zapped , and Mayor John Lindsay was zapped several times — once on television when GAA members made up the majority of the audience . 
 Raids on gay bars had not stopped after the Stonewall riots . In March 1970 , Deputy Inspector Seymour Pine raided the Zodiac and 17 Barrow Street . An after @-@ hours gay club with no liquor or occupancy licenses called The Snake Pit was soon raided , and 167 people were arrested . One of them was Diego <unk> , an Argentinian national so frightened that he might be deported as a homosexual that he tried to escape the police precinct by jumping out of a two @-@ story window , impaling himself on a 14 @-@ inch ( 36 cm ) spike fence . The New York Daily News printed a graphic photo of the young man 's impalement on the front page . GAA members organized a march from Christopher Park to the Sixth Precinct in which hundreds of gays , lesbians , and liberal sympathizers peacefully confronted the TPF . They also sponsored a letter @-@ writing campaign to Mayor Lindsay in which the Greenwich Village Democratic Party and Congressman Ed Koch sent pleas to end raids on gay bars in the city . 
 The Stonewall Inn lasted only a few weeks after the riot . By October 1969 it was up for rent . Village residents surmised it was too notorious a location , and Rodwell 's boycott discouraged business . 
 = = = Gay Pride = = = 
 Christopher Street Liberation Day on June 28 , 1970 marked the first anniversary of the Stonewall riots with an assembly on Christopher Street ; with simultaneous Gay Pride marches in Los Angeles and Chicago , these were the first Gay Pride marches in U.S. history . The next year , Gay Pride marches took place in Boston , Dallas , Milwaukee , London , Paris , West Berlin , and Stockholm . The march in New York covered 51 blocks , from Christopher Street to Central Park . It took less than half the scheduled time due to the excitement of the marchers , but because they were wary about walking through the city with gay banners and signs . Although the parade permit was delivered only two hours before the start of the march , the marchers encountered little resistance from onlookers . The New York Times reported ( on the front page ) that the marchers took up the entire street for about 15 city blocks . Reporting by The Village Voice was positive , describing " the out @-@ front resistance that grew out of the police raid on the Stonewall Inn one year ago " . 
 By 1972 the participating cities included Atlanta , Buffalo , Detroit , Washington D.C. , Miami , Minneapolis , and Philadelphia , as well as San Francisco . 
 Frank Kameny soon realized the pivotal change brought by the Stonewall riots . An organizer of gay activism in the 1950s , he was used to persuasion , trying to convince heterosexuals that gay people were no different than they were . When he and other people marched in front of the White House , the State Department , and Independence Hall only five years earlier , their objective was to look as if they could work for the U.S. government . Ten people marched with Kameny then , and they alerted no press to their intentions . Although he was stunned by the upheaval by participants in the Annual Reminder in 1969 , he later observed , " By the time of Stonewall , we had fifty to sixty gay groups in the country . A year later there was at least fifteen hundred . By two years later , to the extent that a count could be made , it was twenty @-@ five hundred . " 
 Similar to Kameny 's regret at his own reaction to the shift in attitudes after the riots , Randy Wicker came to describe his embarrassment as " one of the greatest mistakes of his life " . The image of gays retaliating against police , after so many years of allowing such treatment to go unchallenged , " stirred an unexpected spirit among many homosexuals " . Kay Lahusen , who photographed the marches in 1965 , stated , " Up to 1969 , this movement was generally called the homosexual or homophile movement ... Many new activists consider the Stonewall uprising the birth of the gay liberation movement . Certainly it was the birth of gay pride on a massive scale . " David Carter , in his article " What made Stonewall different " , explained that even though there were several uprisings before Stonewall , the reason Stonewall was so historical was that thousands of people were involved , the riot lasted a long time ( six days ) , it was the first to get major media coverage , and it sparked the formation of many gay rights groups . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Unlikely community = = = 
 Within two years of the Stonewall riots there were gay rights groups in every major American city , as well as Canada , Australia , and Western Europe . People who joined activist organizations after the riots had very little in common other than their same @-@ sex attraction . Many who arrived at GLF or GAA meetings were taken aback by the number of gay people in one place . Race , class , ideology , and gender became frequent obstacles in the years after the riots . This was illustrated during the 1973 Stonewall rally when , moments after Barbara Gittings exuberantly praised the diversity of the crowd , feminist activist Jean O 'Leary protested what she perceived as the mocking of women by cross @-@ dressers and drag queens in attendance . During a speech by O 'Leary , in which she claimed that drag queens made fun of women for entertainment value and profit , Sylvia Rivera and Lee Brewster jumped on the stage and shouted " You go to bars because of what drag queens did for you , and these bitches tell us to quit being ourselves ! " Both the drag queens and lesbian feminists in attendance left in disgust . 
 O 'Leary also worked in the early 1970s to exclude trans people from gay rights issues because she felt that rights for trans people would be too difficult to attain . Sylvia Rivera left New York City in the mid @-@ 1970s , relocating to upstate New York , but later returned to the city in the mid @-@ 1990s to advocate for homeless members of the gay community . The initial disagreements between participants in the movements , however , often evolved after further reflection . O 'Leary later regretted her stance against the drag queens attending in 1973 : " Looking back , I find this so embarrassing because my views have changed so much since then . I would never pick on a transvestite now . " " It was horrible . How could I work to exclude transvestites and at the same time criticize the feminists who were doing their best back in those days to exclude lesbians ? " 
 O 'Leary was referring to the Lavender Menace , a description by second wave feminist Betty Friedan for attempts by members of the National Organization for Women ( NOW ) to distance themselves from the perception of NOW as a haven for lesbians . As part of this process , Rita Mae Brown and other lesbians who had been active in NOW were forced out . They staged a protest in 1970 at the Second Congress to Unite Women , and earned the support of many NOW members , finally gaining full acceptance in 1971 . 
 The growth of lesbian feminism in the 1970s at times so conflicted with the gay liberation movement that some lesbians refused to work with gay men . Many lesbians found men 's attitudes patriarchal and chauvinistic , and saw in gay men the same misguided notions about women as they saw in heterosexual men . The issues most important to gay men — entrapment and public solicitation — were not shared by lesbians . In 1977 a Lesbian Pride Rally was organized as an alternative to sharing gay men 's issues , especially what Adrienne Rich termed " the violent , self @-@ destructive world of the gay bars " . Veteran gay activist Barbara Gittings chose to work in the gay rights movement , rationalizing " It 's a matter of where does it hurt the most ? For me it hurts the most not in the female arena , but the gay arena . " 
 Throughout the 1970s gay activism had significant successes . One of the first and most important was the " zap " in May 1970 by the Los Angeles GLF at a convention of the American Psychiatric Association ( APA ) . At a conference on behavior modification , during a film demonstrating the use of electroshock therapy to decrease same @-@ sex attraction , Morris <unk> and GLF members in the audience interrupted the film with shouts of " Torture ! " and " Barbarism ! " They took over the microphone to announce that medical professionals who prescribed such therapy for their homosexual patients were complicit in torturing them . Although 20 psychiatrists in attendance left , the GLF spent the hour following the zap with those remaining , trying to convince them that homosexuals were not mentally ill . When the APA invited gay activists to speak to the group in 1972 , activists brought John E. Fryer , a gay psychiatrist who wore a mask , because he felt his practice was in danger . In December 1973 — in large part due to the efforts of gay activists — the APA voted unanimously to remove homosexuality from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual . 
 Gay men and lesbians came together to work in grassroots political organizations responding to organized resistance in 1977 . A coalition of conservatives named Save Our Children staged a campaign to repeal a civil rights ordinance in Dade County , Florida . Save Our Children was successful enough to influence similar repeals in several American cities in 1978 . However , the same year a campaign in California called the Briggs Initiative , designed to force the dismissal of homosexual public school employees , was defeated . Reaction to the influence of Save Our Children and the Briggs Initiative in the gay community was so significant that it has been called the second Stonewall for many activists , marking their initiation into political participation . 
 = = = Rejection of gay subculture = = = 
 The Stonewall riots marked such a significant turning point that many aspects of prior gay and lesbian culture , such as bar culture formed from decades of shame and secrecy , were forcefully ignored and denied . Historian Martin Duberman writes , " The decades preceding Stonewall ... continue to be regarded by most gays and lesbians as some vast neolithic wasteland . " Historian Barry Adam notes , " Every social movement must choose at some point what to retain and what to reject out of its past . What traits are the results of oppression and what are healthy and authentic ? " In conjunction with the growing feminist movement of the early 1970s , roles of butch and femme that developed in lesbian bars in the 1950s and 1960s were rejected , because as one writer put it : " all role playing is sick . " Lesbian feminists considered the butch roles as archaic imitations of masculine behavior . Some women , according to Lillian Faderman , were eager to shed the roles they felt forced into playing . The roles returned for some women in the 1980s , although they allowed for more flexibility than before Stonewall . 
 Author Michael Bronski highlights the " attack on pre @-@ Stonewall culture " , particularly gay pulp fiction for men , where the themes often reflected self @-@ hatred or ambivalence about being gay . Many books ended unsatisfactorily and drastically , often with suicide , and writers portrayed their gay characters as alcoholics or deeply unhappy . These books , which he describes as " an enormous and cohesive literature by and for gay men " , have not been reissued and are lost to later generations . Dismissing the reason simply as political correctness , Bronski writes , " gay liberation was a youth movement whose sense of history was defined to a large degree by rejection of the past . " 
 = = = Lasting impact and recognition = = = 
 The riots spawned from a bar raid became a literal example of gays and lesbians fighting back , and a symbolic call to arms for many people . Historian David Carter remarks in his book about the Stonewall riots that the bar itself was a complex business that represented a community center , an opportunity for the Mafia to blackmail its own customers , a home , and a place of " exploitation and degradation " . The true legacy of the Stonewall riots , Carter insists , is the " ongoing struggle for lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender equality " . Historian Nicholas Edsall writes , 
 Stonewall has been compared to any number of acts of radical protest and defiance in American history from the Boston Tea Party on . But the best and certainly a more nearly contemporary analogy is with Rosa Parks ' refusal to move to the back of the bus in Montgomery , Alabama , in December 1955 , which sparked the modern civil rights movement . Within months after Stonewall radical gay liberation groups and newsletters sprang up in cities and on college campuses across America and then across all of northern Europe as well . 
 Before the rebellion at the Stonewall Inn , homosexuals were , as historians Dudley <unk> and Adam <unk> write , 
 a secret legion of people , known of but discounted , ignored , laughed at or despised . And like the holders of a secret , they had an advantage which was a disadvantage , too , and which was true of no other minority group in the United States . They were invisible . Unlike African Americans , women , Native Americans , Jews , the Irish , Italians , Asians , Hispanics , or any other cultural group which struggled for respect and equal rights , homosexuals had no physical or cultural markings , no language or dialect which could identify them to each other , or to anyone else ... But that night , for the first time , the usual acquiescence turned into violent resistance .... From that night the lives of millions of gay men and lesbians , and the attitude toward them of the larger culture in which they lived , began to change rapidly . People began to appear in public as homosexuals , demanding respect . 
 Historian Lillian Faderman calls the riots the " shot heard round the world " , explaining , " The Stonewall Rebellion was crucial because it sounded the rally for that movement . It became an emblem of gay and lesbian power . By calling on the dramatic tactic of violent protest that was being used by other oppressed groups , the events at the Stonewall implied that homosexuals had as much reason to be disaffected as they . " 
 Joan Nestle co @-@ founded the Lesbian <unk> Archives in 1974 , and credits " its creation to that night and the courage that found its voice in the streets . " <unk> , however , not to attribute the start of gay activism to the Stonewall riots , Nestle writes , 
 I certainly don 't see gay and lesbian history starting with Stonewall ... and I don 't see resistance starting with Stonewall . What I do see is a historical coming together of forces , and the sixties changed how human beings endured things in this society and what they refused to endure ... Certainly something special happened on that night in 1969 , and we 've made it more special in our need to have what I call a point of origin ... it 's more complex than saying that it all started with Stonewall . 
 The events of the early morning of June 28 , 1969 were not the first instances of homosexuals fighting back against police in New York City and elsewhere . Not only had the Mattachine Society been active in major cities such as Los Angeles and Chicago , but similarly marginalized people started the riot at Compton 's Cafeteria in 1966 , and another riot responded to a raid on Los Angeles ' Black Cat Tavern in 1967 . However , several circumstances were in place that made the Stonewall riots memorable . The location of the raid was a factor : it was across the street from The Village Voice offices , and the narrow crooked streets gave the rioters advantage over the police . Many of the participants and residents of Greenwich Village were involved in political organizations that were effectively able to mobilize a large and cohesive gay community in the weeks and months after the rebellion . The most significant facet of the Stonewall riots , however , was the commemoration of them in Christopher Street Liberation Day , which grew into the annual Gay Pride events around the world . 
 Stonewall ( officially Stonewall Equality Limited ) is an LGBT rights charity in the United Kingdom , founded in 1989 , and named after the Stonewall Inn because of the Stonewall riots . The Stonewall Awards is an annual event by Stonewall held since 2006 to recognize people who have affected the lives of British lesbian , gay , and bisexual people . 
 The middle of the 1990s was marked by the inclusion of bisexuals as a represented group within the gay community , when they successfully sought to be included on the platform of the 1993 March on Washington for Lesbian , Gay and Bi Equal Rights and Liberation . Transgender people also asked to be included , but were not , though trans @-@ inclusive language was added to the march 's list of demands . The transgender community continued to find itself simultaneously welcome and at odds with the gay community as attitudes about binary and fluid sexual orientation and gender developed and came increasingly into conflict . In 1994 , New York City celebrated " Stonewall 25 " with a march that went past the United Nations Headquarters and into Central Park . Estimates put the attendance at 1 @.@ 1 million people . Sylvia Rivera led an alternate march in New York City in 1994 to protest the exclusion of transgender people from the events . Attendance at LGBT Pride events has grown substantially over the decades . Most large cities around the world now have some kind of Pride demonstration . Pride events in some cities mark the largest annual celebration of any kind . The growing trend towards commercializing marches into parades — with events receiving corporate sponsorship — has caused concern about taking away the autonomy of the original grassroots demonstrations that put inexpensive activism in the hands of individuals . 
 A " Stonewall Shabbat Seder " was first held at B ’ nai Jeshurun , a synagogue on New York ’ s Upper West Side , in 1995 . 
 In June 1999 the U.S. Department of the Interior designated 51 and 53 Christopher Street and the surrounding streets as a National Historic Landmark , the first of significance to the lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender community . In a dedication ceremony , Assistant Secretary of the Department of the Interior John Berry stated , " Let it forever be remembered that here — on this spot — men and women stood proud , they stood fast , so that we may be who we are , we may work where we will , live where we choose and love whom our hearts desire . " The Stonewall Inn itself was named a National Historic Landmark in 2000 , and it is located in the Greenwich Village Historic District , a preserved area . 
 On June 1 , 2009 , President Barack Obama declared June 2009 Lesbian , Gay , Bisexual , and Transgender Pride Month , citing the riots as a reason to " commit to achieving equal justice under law for LGBT Americans " . The year marked the 40th anniversary of the riots , giving journalists and activists cause to reflect on progress made since 1969 . Frank Rich in The New York Times noted that no federal legislation exists to protect the rights of gay Americans . An editorial in the Washington Blade compared the scruffy , violent activism during and following the Stonewall riots to the lackluster response to failed promises given by President Obama ; for being ignored , wealthy LGBT activists reacted by promising to give less money to Democratic causes . Two years later , the Stonewall Inn served as a rallying point for celebrations after the New York Senate voted to pass same @-@ sex marriage . The act was signed into law by Governor Andrew Cuomo on June 24 , 2011 . Individual states continue to battle with homophobia . The Missouri Senate passed a measure its supporters characterize as a religious freedom bill that could change the state 's constitution despite Democrats ' objections , and their 39 @-@ hour filibuster . This bill allows the " protection of certain religious organizations and individuals from being penalized by the state because of their sincere religious beliefs or practices concerning marriage between two persons of the same sex " discriminating against homosexual patronage . 
 Obama also referenced the Stonewall riots in a call for full equality during his second inaugural address on January 21 , 2013 : 
 We , the people , declare today that the most evident of truths — that all of us are created equal — is the star that guides us still ; just as it guided our forebears through Seneca Falls , and Selma , and Stonewall .... Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law — for if we are truly created equal , then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well . 
 This was a historic moment , being the first time that a president mentioned gay rights or the word " gay " in an inaugural address . 
 In 2014 a marker dedicated to the Stonewall riots was included in the Legacy Walk , an outdoor public display in Chicago celebrating LGBT history and people . 
 On May 29 , 2015 , the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission announced it would officially consider designating the Stonewall Inn as a landmark , making it the first city location to be considered based on its LGBT cultural significance alone . On June 23 , 2015 , the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission unanimously approved the designation of the Stonewall Inn as a city landmark , making it the first landmark honored for its role in the fight for gay rights . 
 The Stonewall Book Award is a set of three literary awards that annually recognize " exceptional merit relating to the gay / lesbian / bisexual / transgender experience " in English @-@ language books published in the U.S. 
 = = = National monument = = = 
 On June 24 , 2016 , President Obama announced the establishment of the Stonewall National Monument , a 7 @.@ 7 @-@ acre site to be administered by the National Park Service . The designation , which followed transfer of city parkland to the federal government , protects Christopher Park and adjacent areas totaling more than seven acres ; the Stonewall Inn is within the boundaries of the monument but remains privately owned . The National Park Foundation formed a new nonprofit organization to raise funds for a ranger station and interpretive exhibits for the monument . 
 = = Media representations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Before Stonewall : The Making of a Gay and Lesbian Community ( 1984 ) , a documentary of the decades leading up to Stonewall 
 Stonewall ( 1995 ) , a fictionalized presentation of the events leading up to the riots 
 After Stonewall ( 1999 ) , a documentary of the years from Stonewall to century 's end 
 Stonewall Uprising ( 2010 ) , a documentary presentation using archival footage , photographs , documents and witness statements 
 Stonewall ( 2015 ) , another fictionalized drama about the days leading up to the riots 
 Happy Birthday , Marsha ! ( scheduled to be released in 2016 ) , a short , experimental film about transgender rights pioneers Marsha P. Johnson and Sylvia Rivera , set on the night of the riots 
 = Sparty = 
 Sparty is the mascot of Michigan State University . Sparty is usually depicted as a muscular male Spartan warrior / athlete dressed in stylized Greek costume . After changing the team name from " Aggies " to " Spartans " in 1925 , various incarnations of a Spartan warrior with a prominent chin appeared at university events and in university literature . In 1943 , MSU art professor Leonard D. Jungwirth designed a statue for the university , which had to be cast in terra cotta because of World War II rationing . In 2005 , the university replaced Jungwirth 's original statue with a bronze replica , moving the original indoors to protect it from the elements . 
 Sparty appears in several other incarnations . In printed literature , the university uses a copyrighted cartoon Spartan , usually drawn with a grimace and several days worth of whiskers , lending the nickname of " Gruff " Sparty . Finally , Sparty appears as a foam rubber mascot with an oversized head . The mascot costume , worn by an anonymous student , appears at most university sporting , alumni , and fundraising events ; he is often portrayed in MSU notices and materials . 
 = = History = = 
 Though MSU is now a large university , in the 19th century it was a small agricultural college known as the State Agricultural College of Michigan . Thus , when the college fielded its first intercollegiate sports teams in the 1880s , the teams were appropriately named the " Aggies " . By 1925 , the school had expanded beyond agriculture , becoming Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science . To reduce the emphasis on agriculture , the college held a contest to choose a new team name . The chosen entry was the " Michigan Staters . " George S. Alderton , then sports editor of the Lansing State Journal , and Dale Stafford , sportswriter for the Lansing Capitol News , felt the name was too unwieldy for newspaper headlines and searched the contest entries for a better choice . They settled on the " Spartans " , a name submitted by former Aggie athlete Perry J. Fremont . Alderton and Stafford began using the name in their game accounts , and it soon caught on as the de facto team name . Michigan State 's teams have been the Spartans ever since . 
 = = Costumed mascot = = 
 While MSU students and alumni often refer to the Spartan statue as Sparty , the incarnation of Sparty with national visibility is that of a costumed mascot who appears at athletic events and other university @-@ related functions . The costume , with a cartoonishly oversized head , bulging muscles , and a facial expression that treads a fine line between cute and pugnacious , was introduced to MSU fans during the 1989 football season . Sparty was an immediate hit , in part because the foam @-@ rubber body parts , vinyl breastplate , and skirt have a freedom of movement that allow the anonymous student who portrays Sparty to be quite expressive despite the costume 's fixed stare . The student that portrays Sparty is a volunteer , despite rumors of financial compensation or a full scholarship . Early every calendar year , tryouts are held for the student to portray Sparty for the upcoming school year . Sparty represents an ancient Spartan warrior , but wears a late Imperial @-@ style Roman legionary 's helmet , which was not invented until several centuries after Sparta was subdued by the Roman Republic . 
 Sparty can be found entertaining MSU sporting event crowds with his antics during games . He is even lifted upon the shoulders of cheerleaders and does one @-@ handed push ups . Besides sporting events , Sparty also attends many events around campus , the community , and the country throughout the year : alumni functions , charity events , weddings , bar mitzvahs , parades , and many other university events . Any revenues generated go to the upkeep of the Sparty Mascot Program , which is funded mainly by the MSU Alumni Association with some support from the MSU Department of Athletics . 
 Sparty came to national prominence in the mid @-@ 1990s with his appearance in a series of television ads promoting ESPN 's SportsCenter . One advertisement depicted Sparty carrying gymnast Kerri Strug in the manner of Beauty and the Beast — or , more to the point , Béla Károlyi , who carried the injured Strug to the medal platform to accept her team gold medal at the 1996 Summer Olympics . He also appeared in ESPN ads with background cameos , such as eating in a diner booth or browsing the shelves of a bookstore . In 2004 , Sparty won the Best Mascot National Championship at the Universal Cheer Association / Universal Dance Association College Nationals , becoming the first Big Ten Conference mascot to do so . He won Best Mascot for the second year in a row after securing the honor again the following year . In addition to his title of " best mascot " , Sparty was voted the " <unk> Mascot " by Muscle and Fitness magazine . Sparty was even found in the refrigerators of local stores and many alumni when Sparty was featured on a series of Jones Soda bottles in late 2004 , and he appeared again in 2005 . Sparty was one of six college mascots nominated for the Mascot Hall of Fame in July 2006 . In the summer of 2006 , Alltel Wireless aired a commercial featuring ESPN 's Lee Corso and Sparty . 
 Three years after winning top honors for the first time , Sparty was again named best mascot . It was Sparty 's third title in just four years . His skit , " Sparty 's Spectacular " , featured music from many different genres , including rock , country , and Riverdance . To qualify for nationals , Sparty submitted a video showcasing his performances at athletic events and community service events . 
 Sparty appears on the cover of the Wii version of NCAA Football 09 , the first time a non @-@ athlete has graced the cover . EA Sports had a poll to see which mascot would grace the cover , and Sparty won by over 75 @,@ 000 votes . 
 = = Statues = = 
 When John Hannah became president of Michigan State College in 1941 , he commissioned assistant professor of art Leonard D. Jungwirth to design a statue of an athletic Spartan warrior . Jungwirth sculpted a statue known simply as The Spartan , which soon gained the nickname of " Sparty " . Though Jungwirth originally designed The Spartan as a bronze statue , it had to be cast in terra cotta due to World War II rationing of bronze . The terra cotta statue stood on the banks of the Red Cedar River , until 2005 , when the university replaced it with a bronze replica . The original Spartan was moved into the stadium , where it remains on display to this day . 
 = = = 1945 terra cotta statue = = = 
 Dedicated on June 9 , 1945 , the terra cotta Spartan is made of five large glazed terra cotta sections fired from red Ohio clay . These pieces were joined by mortar joints , with a poured concrete core over a steel frame . The statue stands 9 ’ 7 " high and weighs approximately 3 @,@ 000 pounds . When the statue was erected , popular media claimed that it was the tallest free @-@ standing ceramic sculpture in the world , though that record remains unconfirmed . Though the statue 's pose recalls classic Greek sculpture , Jungwirth 's stylized design is closer to the mid @-@ 20th century modernist design , borrowing heavily from Cubism , Futurism , and depression @-@ era civic art . 
 = = = 2005 bronze statue = = = 
 By the late 20th century , Michigan 's harsh winters had taken a toll on the terra cotta statue , as had vandalism by fans of MSU 's rival school , the University of Michigan . While annual repair work helped stem the damage done by precipitation , extreme cold , and vandalism , the statue needed more intensive repair . 
 In 1989 , the Save Our Sparty ( SOS ) campaign helped restore the statue . When they finished , restorers made fiberglass molds of the refurbished " Sparty " . New molds were made in 2004 , because the 1989 molds had deteriorated , to cast an identical bronze replica that will better stand up to bad weather and vandalism . 
 The terra cotta Spartan was removed from its base on May 12 , 2005 . During MSU 's 2005 summer semester , the intersection at which the statue stood was completely redesigned to allow for safer traffic interaction with pedestrians . On Thursday , August 25 , 2005 , an unveiling of the new bronze Spartan took place . In addition , a Sesquicentennial parade on Saturday , October 8 , 2005 , concluded with a dedication ceremony at the statue . Meanwhile , the original terra cotta Spartan was moved to a new Spartan Stadium annex where it could be displayed safely indoors . Though most members of the MSU community agree that the original statue needs to be sheltered , some alumni and faculty have criticized the inaccessibility of the original statue . 
 = = = Traditions = = = 
 It is tradition for some alumni and other Spartan fans to have a picture taken with the Spartan statue to mark major life events . During graduation season there is a steady stream of recent graduates and their families posing with the statue . On weekends it is not uncommon to see newlywed couples doing the same . During the week before the annual football game against the University of Michigan Wolverines , members of the marching band take turns each guarding the statue against vandalism by fans of the rival school . The tradition is known as " Sparty Watch " ; a similar vigil takes place at the Michigan <unk> , where the inlaid " M " is defended against MSU fans . During the full team walk from Kellogg Center to Spartan Stadium that takes place prior to each home football game , players and coaches toss or place pennies at the statue as they proceed past it . After the final home football game the Spartan Marching Band circles the statue once before heading home to Adams Field . 
 = Parents Television Council = 
 The Parents Television Council ( PTC ) is a United States @-@ based censorship advocacy group founded by conservative Catholic activist L. Brent Bozell III in 1995 . Through publications on its website including staff reviews , ( non peer @-@ reviewed ) research reports , and web @-@ based newsletters , the Council proclaims television programs or other entertainment products to be beneficial or harmful to the development of children and actively works to ensure broadcasters and content producers conform to the council 's advice . 
 Council activities include attempts to hold advertisers accountable for the content of the programs they sponsor , encouraging the development of what the council considers to be responsible , family @-@ friendly entertainment , pressuring broadcasters to stop and / or limit television content the council claims to be harmful to children , as well as pressuring cable operators to <unk> cable channels so consumers can pick and pay for only the channels they want to watch . 
 The council launches several media campaigns a year against the producers and advertisers of television programs they perceive to be indecent . A typical campaign involves press releases declaring a particular program harmful ( often with a tally of " unacceptable " character behavior or situations ) , the organized mass mailing of form letters and emails to advertising sponsors of unapproved programs , organized mass filing of complaints via the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) website complaint form , and direct threats of long , potentially costly FCC license challenges to local network affiliates planning to broadcast what the council considers harmful network programming . 
 In 2004 the FCC revealed the Parents Television Council as the primary source of most content complaints received . Throughout its existence , the Parents Television Council has been accused of promoting censorship . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1989 , the Media Research Center ( MRC ) began monitoring the entertainment industry for alleged liberal bias through its Entertainment Division and newsletter TV , etc . MRC founder and president L. Brent Bozell III later felt that decency was declining on most prime @-@ time television programming . The PTC began operations in 1995 following private planning meetings with Charlton Heston , Michael Medved , and others in the entertainment industry , who would eventually make up the Advisory Board of the PTC . After the release of its first annual Family Guide to Prime @-@ Time Television following the 1995 @-@ 1996 television season , the PTC hoped to hold the entertainment industry accountable for the indecency that it perceived to be prominent on prime @-@ time television . By 1996 , the organization had the support of several members of the U.S. Congress , including Joe Lieberman and Lamar S. Smith , and an estimated annual budget of $ 142 @,@ 000 . 
 By 1998 , with an estimated membership of 120 @,@ 000 , comedian and former The Tonight Show host Steve Allen joined PTC as its Honorary Chairman , and PTC released a report questioning the accuracy of the TV Parental Guidelines ratings system and campaigning for advertisers to stop sponsoring programs that the PTC claimed were offensive . Allen launched a newspaper advertisement campaign promoting the PTC , which was published in many outlets including The New York Times . The PTC was noted for criticizing such shows as Ally McBeal , Dawson 's Creek , Ellen , Friends , and Spin City . Its website was also introduced that year , and its annual budget had already surpassed $ 1 million . PTC rolled out another round of full @-@ page newspaper advertisements in 1999 ; San Francisco Examiner television columnist Tim Goodman perceived Allen and the PTC of advocating complete censorship of television to allow only what PTC considered " Family @-@ Safe TV " . 
 The PTC lost nearly $ 1 million in 2008 and in 2009 received $ 2 @.@ 9 million in revenue , a 29 percent drop from the previous year . In 2009 and 2010 , the PTC cut its staff by 38 percent to save money . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 PTC was founded in 1995 by longtime political activist L. Brent Bozell III . Bozell is a prominent conservative activist who has , among other things , served as Executive Director of the Conservative Victory Committee , a political action committee that has supported the election of dozens of conservative candidates over the past ten years . He was also National Finance Chairman for Pat Buchanan 's 1992 presidential campaign , and later president of the National Conservative Political Action Committee . Bozell was succeeded as PTC President by Timothy F. Winter . Winter served as Executive Director of the PTC for three years prior to becoming president . Prior to joining the PTC , Mr. Winter 's 20 @-@ year career as a media executive included positions with Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer and NBC . Until 2015 when his position was terminated , Dan Isett , Director of Corporate and Government Affairs of the PTC , represented the PTC on the Consumer Advisory Committee of the Federal Communications Commission . 
 = = Advisory Board = = 
 The PTC also has an Advisory Board consisting of politicians and entertainers working to assist the council in their goal of protecting children against profanity and violence in the media . Notable members of the advisory board include singer Pat Boone , former football player Mel Renfro , writer @-@ producer Coleman Luck , country musician Billy Ray Cyrus , comedian and actor Tim Conway of CBS 's The Carol Burnett Show , former U.S. Senator from Kansas and 2008 presidential candidate Sam Brownback , film critic Michael Medved , star of 1980s soap opera Dallas Susan Howard , and ION Television producer Gary Johnson . In addition , the PTC has established numerous local chapters for most American media markets . Notable former Advisory Board members include - both of whom are now deceased - comedian Steve Allen , original host of NBC 's The Tonight Show , and C. Delores Tucker , participant in the Civil Rights Movement and activist against gangsta rap music ; Allen is now given the title of National Honorary Chairman @-@ Emeritus . <unk> University associate professor Christian Christiansen questioned the backgrounds of certain PTC advisory board members as not consistent with their stance on morality . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Columns and reports = = = 
 The website of the PTC features reports on what the group finds to be harmful content on television and regular writings from its staff . Their research is done with the support of their Entertainment Tracking System , an archive of prime @-@ time television programming that they claim is the largest in the world . Such publications include : 
 " Culture Watch " - Throughout 2005 and 2006 , the PTC published columns under this series authored by Christopher Gildemeister , covering the influence on American culture by entertainment as well as exposing the increase in sex , violence , and profanity in cable television and the methods used by advertisers and broadcasting companies to attract young audiences . In a December 2005 column of his , Advertising Age columnist Simon <unk> claimed that the PTC is " very very afraid of gay TV characters " . Culture Watch columnist Christopher Gildemeister defended the PTC as being " not homophobic " but simply opposed to " sexual references or innuendo ( of any variety , hetero , homo or other ) aired where children might be exposed to them . " 
 " Parenting and the Media " authored by Rod Gustafson , where he offers advice on parenting children who frequent the media . 
 " TV Trends " - Another column by Christopher Gildemeister , published since October 2007 intending to inform parents and TV viewers in general about what he perceives to be " harmful or questionable prime @-@ time programming . " Hartford Courant television critic Roger Catlin quoted Gildemeister as criticizing ABC for having an " apparent fetish for transsexuals " in certain programs . 
 Former president Bozell 's weekly entertainment column , which it links to within the home page 
 In 2000 , PTC 's report What a Difference a Decade Makes allegedly stated that there was an increase in profanity , sex , and violence on television during the 1990s . The report also claimed that references to homosexuality increased the most during that decade - by 24 @-@ fold . In 2002 , the PTC released a report claiming that there was an increase in profanity on network programming shown during the first hour of prime time . In a 2006 report titled Wolves in Sheep 's Clothing , analyst Kristen Fyfe perceived an increase in violent , profane , and sexual content in children 's programming . Among its results , based on research during summer 2005 , the PTC stated that Teen Titans was the most violent program , and claimed Cartoon Network had the most violent incidents . Richard Huff of the New York Daily News criticized the report for misinterpreting an episode of SpongeBob SquarePants , " Sailor Mouth " , over its intent to satirize profanity implicitly . 
 Following the 2005 – 06 television season , PTC issued a report Faith in a Box that analyzed depictions of religion in primetime television . The study stated that most positive references to religion were on reality shows such as Extreme Makeover : Home Edition , while claiming that scripted shows tended to be more negative towards it . The report also ranked Fox as the " most anti @-@ religious network " , followed by NBC , UPN , ABC , CBS , and the WB . In 2008 , PTC published a report titled Happily Never After , using analysis of several primetime shows early in the 2007 @-@ 2008 television season to assert that extramarital sex is favored on television shows . Ian O 'Doherty of The Irish Independent asked regarding the PTC 's marriage depiction study : " After all , would you rather watch people having fun or would you rather watch a realistic depiction of marriage , which ... would simply be an hour of two people sullenly chewing their food , pausing occasionally only to throw each other <unk> and occasionally grumbling under their breath how the biggest regret of their life was ever setting eyes on you and that their mother was right all along ? " PTC released a report in October 2009 stating that prime @-@ time television shows on broadcast networks had twice as many depictions of violence against women in 2009 than in 2004 . 
 In November 2010 , the PTC released a study , Habitat for Profanity : Broadcast TV 's Sharp Increase in Foul Language , which claims that there was a sharp rise in the usage of profanity between 2005 and 2010 — during the 8PM to <unk> ET / PT time period commonly referred to them as the Family Viewing Hour , the PTC claimed that there were 111 instances of profanity during this hour in 2010 versus 10 in 2005 ; during all of prime time , 276 instances in 2010 against 11 in 2005 . The study claimed that there was a 69 @.@ 3 % increase in prime time in general between 2005 and 2010 , with the Fox network being heavily accused of bringing a 269 % increase for the network during that period . The study also claimed instances in which there was profanity , but the offending word was bleeped out . 
 = = = Entertainment reviews and analysis = = = 
 The PTC 's activities extend to evaluation , rating , and educating around broadcast TV programs according to a traffic light system across three categories of sex , violence and profanity , accumulating to an overall rating based on the ratings of these three categories . The guide has been in use since the 1995 – 96 season using the traffic light system . In the PTC 's definition of its traffic light system , green light indicates that the program is " appropriate for all ages " , a yellow light indicates that the program " would be unsuitable for children under the age of 14 " , and a red light indicates that the program is " appropriate for adult audiences only " . 
 Every television season since 1995 – 96 , the council has released a list of the best and worst prime @-@ time television programs for family viewing . The PTC 's website includes the guide from the 1996 @-@ 97 season at the earliest . Starting with the 2005 – 2006 season , their list was based on their traffic light system as well as Nielsen Media Research ratings of viewership among children ages 2 – 17 of certain shows . Popular shows that have frequently been praised as the most family @-@ friendly programs on television include George Lopez , 7th Heaven , Touched by an Angel , Home Improvement , Family Matters , Sabrina the Teenage Witch , Boy Meets World , Extreme Makeover : Home Edition , American Idol , Dancing with the Stars , NBC Sunday Night Football , Deal or No Deal , and Who Wants to Be a Millionaire . Popular shows frequently named " Worst of the Season " include American Dad ! , CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , House , Two and a Half Men , Ally McBeal , Dawson 's Creek , Grey 's Anatomy , The Drew Carey Show , Family Guy , Friends , The O.C. , Spin City , That ' 70s Show and Will and Grace . 
 On a weekly basis , the PTC publishes reviews of what they consider to be the best and worst television programming for family viewing , authored by the various entertainment analysts at the council . Seth MacFarlane , creator of Family Guy , compared the PTC 's frequent negative reviews of the series to " hate mail from Hitler " and " They 're literally terrible human beings . I 've read their newsletter , I 've visited their website , and they 're just rotten to the core . For an organization that prides itself on ' Christian ' values ... they spend their entire day hating people . " MacFarlane became a target again when the PTC protested the Academy Awards ' decision to have him host the 85th ceremony . " So You Think You Can Rate a TV Show ? " , the title being a play on the title of Fox television series So You Think You Can Dance , is a weekly column the PTC began in July 2007 to claim that networks inaccurately rate their shows based on the TV Parental Guidelines , whether the network applied the improper age @-@ based rating ( such as TV @-@ PG or TV @-@ 14 ) or failed to include the proper content descriptors ( such as " L " for language or " V " for violence ) . 
 = = = Seal of Approval = = = 
 To recognize excellence in the media , the Parents Television Council awards its Seal of Approval to television shows , movies , home products , and advertisers that provide or sponsor content it deems to be " family @-@ friendly " . It is divided into two categories : Entertainment and Advertiser . Popular television shows that have been awarded include 7th Heaven , American Idol , Extreme Makeover : Home Edition , Everybody Loves Raymond , George Lopez , JAG , Reba , Smallville , Touched by an Angel , The West Wing , and Wonderful World of Disney . Also receiving the Entertainment Seal of Approval are TiVo 's <unk> television filtering service , the Sky Angel Christian television service , and the <unk> DVD filtering product . 
 = = Activism = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation campaign and lawsuit = = = 
 In 1999 , the PTC launched a campaign against the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , now World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , complaining that their SmackDown ! program contained levels of sexuality and violence unbecoming prime time programming . In the campaign , Bozell said that four children had been killed by peers emulating professional wrestling moves learned from the program . With these allegations , Bozell and various PTC members began meeting with representatives of the advertising departments of various companies that advertised on SmackDown ! to persuade them to withdraw sponsorship . The PTC also suggested that between 30 and 40 advertisers had pulled their commercials from WWF programming , an assertion that was not true . 
 On November 9 , 2000 , the WWF filed a lawsuit against the PTC in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York , claiming that the PTC 's statements were false and constituted defamation . The WWF also filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against the PTC for using clips from WWF programs in their promotional videos . The PTC filed for dismissal of the suit , but on May 24 , 2001 , U.S. district court Judge Denny Chin denied the PTC 's motion on the basis that the WWF 's lawsuit had merit . The PTC and the WWF settled out of court and , as part of the settlement agreement , the PTC paid the WWF $ 3 @.@ 5 million USD and Bozell issued a public apology , stating that it was wrong to blame the World Wrestling Federation or any of its programs for the deaths of children and that the original statements had been based on what was later found to be false information designed by people close to the Lionel Tate case to blame the death of Tiffany <unk> on the WWF . 
 During the conflict the WWF created the Right to Censor ( RTC ) stable , a group of wrestlers that parodied the PTC by portraying them as self @-@ righteous moral crusaders . 
 = = = Broadcast indecency = = = 
 In 2003 , the PTC unsuccessfully campaigned for the FCC to take action against the NBC television network in response to the use of the word " fucking " by Bono , lead singer for the rock band U2 , during the network 's January 2003 telecast of the Golden Globe Awards . Among an audience of nearly 20 million , the FCC received only 234 complaints , 217 of which came from the PTC . In October 2003 , the FCC decided not to fine NBC because Bono 's obscenity was ruled as fleeting and not describing sexual or excretory functions , the FCC 's standard for fining a network for indecency . After the PTC filed an Application for Review to the FCC , in March 2004 the FCC decided that the word was indecent by law but still decided not to fine NBC ; however , the ruling was to serve as a warning to networks that there would be a " zero tolerance " policy towards obscene language willfully used during the daytime . However , the PTC 's complaints about profanity used by presenter Nicole Richie in the December 10 , 2003 broadcast of the Billboard Music Awards led the FCC to conclude that the language violated decency law . 
 The PTC began attracting more attention after it filed around 65 @,@ 000 complaints to the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) about the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy , in which one of performer Janet Jackson 's nipple shielded breasts , was exposed for 9 / <unk> of a second . FCC chairman Michael Powell stated that the number of indecency complaints to the FCC had risen from 350 in the years 2000 and 2001 , to 14 @,@ 000 in 2002 and 240 @,@ 000 in 2003 . It was also found that the PTC had generated most of the indecency complaints received by the Federal Communications Commission . In July 2008 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit voided the fine . 
 After the halftime show , the PTC launched five more FCC complaint drives , starting March 2004 with an episode of Fox 's That ' 70s Show titled " Happy Jack " , which revolved around character Eric Forman being caught masturbating . The beginning of the 2004 – 2005 television season sparked four new campaigns , the first being against NBC 's animated series Father of the Pride , stating that it contained a " barrage of sexual innuendo and profanity " while being promoted " from the creators of Shrek " , which they felt would potentially attract children to watching the series . That campaign led to over 11 @,@ 000 email complaints to the FCC . Later , shortly after CBS broadcast the word " fuck " during an airing of Big Brother 5 , the PTC took action again , this time claiming that CBS ignored a warning from the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) that there would be zero tolerance toward <unk> profanity . However , those complaints became moot when Viacom , then @-@ owners of CBS , settled with the FCC for $ 3 @.@ 5 million regarding all allegedly indecent programming broadcast in the years around 2003 and 2004 , including the Big Brother 5 episode in question . In March 2006 , the FCC ruled that Father of the Pride was not indecent . Following were complaints about an October 2004 episode of ABC 's short @-@ lived teen drama Life As We Know It , which the PTC felt was sexually charged . 
 The PTC started off 2005 with their campaign against the Without a Trace episode " Our Sons and Daughters " , leading to CBS being fined for indecency in March 2006 ; the PTC objected to the depiction of teenagers participating in an orgy in that episode . CBS argued that the episode " featured an important and socially relevant storyline warning parents to exercise greater supervision of their teenagers . " The FCC fined CBS $ 3 @.@ 63 million in March 2006 for this episode , but after a court settlement , the network agreed to pay $ 300 @,@ 000 in fines . At the end of January 2005 , the FCC rejected a set of complaints that PTC filed between October 2001 and February 2004 for allegedly indecent programs such as NBC 's Friends , the WB 's Gilmore Girls , and Fox 's The Simpsons . The FCC received complaints from the PTC in the summer over an unedited broadcast of the lyric " who the fuck are you ? " in The Who 's song " Who Are You " from the Live 8 concert broadcast July 2 , 2005 on ABC stations in the East Coast . 
 In 2006 , PTC requested that the FCC deny broadcast license renewal for Salt Lake City CBS station <unk> because they felt that the broadcast of the Without a Trace episode that was ruled indecent violated community standards and that CBS failed to take action to reduce indecent content following the FCC fines . Subsequently , CBS agreed to pay the FCC $ 300 @,@ 000 to settle the <unk> license challenge . Starting from December 2007 , the organization demanded that CBS cancel its plan to rebroadcast an edited version of the Showtime drama Dexter , whose title character was a serial killer and police forensics analyst , because it felt that the program would glorify murder even with the edits . By early February 2008 , the Council claimed to have collected 17 @,@ 000 complaints to CBS . 
 On January 25 , 2008 , the FCC proposed an estimated $ 1 @.@ 4 million fine against ABC for a scene of female nudity in the NYPD Blue episode " Nude Awakening " aired on February 25 , 2003 . Because the episode aired outside the indecency " safe harbor " in the Central and Mountain Time Zones , the fine applied only to ABC stations in those zones . The PTC praised the FCC 's action . However , PTC president Winter condemned ABC 's decision to appeal the fine in federal court . PTC has also criticized the Third Circuit Court of Appeals ' decision to void the FCC 's fine for the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show . TV series that the PTC has targeted for FCC complaints in 2008 have included NBC 's Today morning show and CBS primetime programs Big Brother 10 , Survivor : Gabon , and Two and a Half Men . Profanity was the main concern for Today and Big Brother 10 , the extremely brief exposure of contestant Marcus Lehman 's penis for Survivor : Gabon , and a " lap @-@ dance " scene for Two and a Half Men . The PTC 's first complaint in 2009 was over sexual content in an episode of Family Guy titled " Family Gay " . Later in 2009 , the PTC urged affiliates of The CW Television Network to pre @-@ empt a Gossip Girl episode to be aired November 9 ; the episode would reportedly contain a threesome scene . In response to Adam Lambert 's performance of his song " For Your Entertainment " at the end of the 2009 American Music Awards broadcast on ABC , PTC urged viewers to complain to the FCC if living in an area where the performance was shown before 10 p.m. local time . PTC complained that the performance contained a simulation of oral sex . Lambert 's performance reportedly was broadcast around 11 p.m. Eastern and Pacific time , " outside the FCC 's usual 6am @-@ 10pm time frame prohibiting the broadcast of indecent material " . ABC also received about 1 @,@ 500 telephoned complaints . 
 In January 2010 , the PTC launched a complaint campaign after the American Dad ! episode " Don 't Look a Smith Horse in the Mouth " aired in January 2010 . The FCC fined Fox $ 25 @,@ 000 on June 4 , stating that they failed to respond to an inquiry of 100 @,@ 000 complaints about the episode . A month later , Fox slammed the decision , claiming that it was " unconstitutional " . On May 20 , 2010 , the PTC announced that it plans to target CBS and its affiliates after the network announced that the new sitcom $ # * ! My Dad Says was added to the 2010 @-@ 2011 fall TV lineup . The PTC cites both the show 's title and its Thursday 8 : 30PM timeslot as reasons . The series is based on the popular Twitter account created by Justin Halpern , who will also serve as one of the co @-@ producers on the show . CBS defended its decision and says that it is working with the account 's creator and its content will be toned down for the program before the series debuts in September . 
 In October 2010 , the PTC targeted an episode of the Fox series Glee , stating that the episode featured outfits that were scantily clad and guest @-@ star Britney Spears going shopping in lingerie , calling it , " an endorsement of narcotics abuse , public masturbation , and school @-@ sanctioned burlesque . " They were also criticizing it for making an episode idolizing Britney in the first place , stating : " Perhaps most troubling is the deification of a troubled popstar into a symbol of empowerment and self @-@ esteem . " On October 20 , PTC criticized GQ magazine for featuring three Glee stars posing in risque outfits ; the PTC statement said that the photoshoot " borders on pedophilia . " 
 The PTC called on the United States Department of Justice and the Judiciary Committees of both houses of Congress to investigate whether MTV violated child pornography laws in casting teenaged actors in Skins , a remake of the British TV series of the same name . MTV rated Skins " TV @-@ MA " , meaning the show is not suitable for audiences under 17 . The Los Angeles Times responded in an editorial : " ... looking for government remedies is ineffective and unwise ; we suspect the network 's editors are smart enough to skirt prosecution . The Federal Communications Commission doesn 't regulate the content of cable networks , and even if it did , a crackdown on shows like " Skins " would be a bad idea , because adults should be able to watch whatever they like on cable and federal attempts to protect kids from adult programming have never been successful . " 
 = = = Advertising = = = 
 In May 2005 Carl 's Jr. introduced its " Spicy BBQ Six Dollar Burger " in a television advertisement featuring celebrity Paris Hilton in a swimsuit , soaping up a Bentley <unk> while leaning on it , and then eating the burger . A similar ad with Hilton for Hardee 's hamburger chain was aired in June 2005 . The Parents Television Council and other media watchdog groups criticized the commercial for being shown during programs that were very likely to be watched by children . Melissa Caldwell , PTC research director , said , " This commercial is basically soft @-@ core porn . The way she moves , the way she puts her finger in her mouth — it 's very suggestive and very titillating . " The group mobilized more than one million members to contact the restaurant chain and voice their concern and claimed that " [ i ] f this television commercial were to go unchallenged it would set a new standard for acceptable television commercial content . " Caldwell , then @-@ president Bozell , and then @-@ executive director Winter appeared on various news programs such as Good Morning America , Today , The Early Show , American Morning , and The O 'Reilly Factor to discuss this issue . Andy <unk> , CEO of Carl 's Jr . , says the group needs to " get a life ... This isn 't Janet Jackson — there is no nipple shield in this , " referring to the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show . He continued , " There is no nudity , there is no sex act — it 's a beautiful model in a swimsuit washing a car . " In addition to featuring the ad on their web site , Carl 's Jr. also set up another website playing a longer version of the commercial . 
 PTC accused television commercials for Hardee 's " biscuit holes " food product of suggesting double entendres . The commercial featured consumers suggesting " A @-@ holes " and " B @-@ holes " as nicknames for the biscuit holes . Boddie @-@ <unk> Enterprises , which owned 350 Hardee 's restaurants in four states , refused to show the ads in its respective markets . Ben Mayo Boddie , chairman of Boddie @-@ <unk> , wrote a letter to the PTC condemning the ads as well . 
 = = = In @-@ flight entertainment = = = 
 In September 2007 , the PTC launched a campaign to get airlines in America to reduce the number of " PG @-@ 13 " and " R " -rated films shown as in @-@ flight entertainment . Consequently , Heath Shuler , Democratic representative of North Carolina , introduced the Family Friendly Flights Act of 2007 bill to require airlines to set aside " child @-@ safe " viewing areas for families to sit in planes . The bill never became law . 
 = = = YouTube = = = 
 Twice has the PTC targeted video @-@ hosting website YouTube in its campaigns and statements . PTC called for NBC to reconsider uploading the uncensored clip of the Saturday Night Live novelty song " Dick in a Box " on NBC 's site and YouTube channel . In 2008 , the PTC released a report The " New " Tube : A Content Analysis of YouTube — the Most Popular Online Video Destination , which praised YouTube for filtering adult content but criticized the site for not filtering profanity and other explicit content from comments sections or videos . 
 = = = Ethics controversy = = = 
 In October 2010 , The New York Times reported that former PTC vice president of development Patrick W. Salazar had accused PTC of mishandling hundreds of thousands of mailings to donors and members . Based on Internal Revenue Service filings , the American Institute of Philanthropy rated PTC " C + " on financial efficiency . Salazar also disputed the PTC 's official membership figure of 1 @.@ 3 million and estimated that at most 12 @,@ 000 people respond to annual fundraisers . Although Salazar stated that he left the PTC in November 2009 , the PTC said that it fired Salazar and that Salazar was trying to extort money from the organization . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The PTC also criticized The Muppets for not meeting " family viewing " guidelines and suggested a boycott , based on the mockumentary format of the series including mentions of plastic surgery , " inside " business language being used in a crude manner , and the Muppets in a bar consuming alcoholic beverages . 
 The PTC also criticized the U.S. version of Sex Box , due it being a live sex show on basic cable . 
 The PTC also blasted Of Kings and Prophets for including sex and violence . 
 = = Viewpoints = = 
 On its website , PTC states that its mission is to " promote and restore responsibility and decency to the entertainment industry in answer to America 's demand for positive , family @-@ oriented television programming . " The PTC believes that the entertainment industry — not only television but also music , movies , and video games as well — and its sponsors share responsibility with parents for children 's television viewing habits . It therefore believes that television is harming children through a perceived " gratuitous " amount of sex , violence , and profanity . Its activism has influenced the removal of potentially objectionable content from certain shows , such as the fourth season of the popular CBS crime drama CSI : Crime Scene Investigation . Increased government regulation of broadcasting is another viewpoint supported by PTC . PTC considers itself nonpartisan ; others have considered the PTC to be bipartisan or socially conservative . Robyn <unk> of the St. Petersburg Times called the PTC " the Gladys Kravitz of public advocacy " in a column of hers and believed the PTC supported a federal policy on broadcast decency she called " Big Nanny run amok " . 
 = = = V @-@ Chip = = = 
 Since the V @-@ Chip was established in conjunction with the TV Parental Guidelines ratings system , PTC has frequently accused the guidelines of having inaccuracy and low standards . In 1997 , PTC was twice as likely to rate a show with the toughest rating classification , " red light " in the PTC 's case , and " TV @-@ 14 " in the Guidelines . Bill Berkowitz quoted PTC president Bozell as stating , based on PTC research , that " the current ratings system and V @-@ chip are failures . " In response to a V @-@ Chip advertising campaign in the summer of 2006 , Bozell proposed instead that cable companies either apply FCC @-@ style broadcast television standards or offer choice in ordering channels . Television Watch considers PTC 's reporting on the V @-@ chip inaccurate and ideologically charged . 
 = = = Cable choice = = = 
 The PTC is an avid supporter of " a la carte " cable television services to allow families to choose only the cable television channels that are appropriate for their children , and also impose the same decency standards already in place on broadcast television on cable channels . Frequently , the Council has criticized programs on BET , Comedy Central , E ! , FX , MTV , Spike , TNT , and VH1 because they claim some of the content aired on those channels are inappropriate for younger viewers . On the other side of the issue , the PTC has awarded its " Seal of Approval " to cable networks Disney Channel and Hallmark Channel for their original programs several years ago . 
 On June 14 , 2007 , United States Representatives Dan Lipinski ( Democratic , Illinois ) and Jeff <unk> ( Republican , Nebraska ) introduced into legislation the Family and Consumer Choice Act of 2007 , which intends to allow families to choose and pay for only the cable television channels that they want to watch . In September 2007 , the PTC launched a new website , <unk> , to allow cable customers to see how much they are paying for their monthly cable bill currently . 
 In August 2013 , the PTC released a statement criticizing MTV for the airing of a performance by Miley Cyrus during its Video Music Awards and urged Congress to pass the Television Consumer Freedom Act . 
 = = Popular music = = 
 In April 2008 , PTC released The Rap on Rap , a study covering hip @-@ hop and R & B music videos rotated on programs 106 & Park and Rap City , both shown on BET , and Sucker Free on MTV . PTC urged advertisers to withdraw sponsorship of those programs , whose videos PTC stated targeted children and teenagers " with adult content ... once every 38 seconds " . PTC also warned radio stations about playing the Britney Spears song " If U Seek Amy " over concerns it contained an audible use of an obscenity . In response to music video to Miley Cyrus ' song " Who Owns My Heart " , the PTC stated that it felt it was " unfortunate that she would participate in such a sexualized video like this one " ; Miley Cyrus ' father Billy Ray Cyrus sat on the PTC Advisory Board at the time . 
 In May 2011 , the PTC took issue with Rihanna 's music video for her song " Man Down . " In the video Rihanna portrays a woman who resorts to killing the man who had previously raped her . They claimed the video promoted gun crime and murder , while the pop star said she wanted to be a voice to victims . After the video became the most viewed YouTube video that week , she sarcastically used Twitter to thank the PTC in helping her make the video such a success . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 The PTC has been frequently criticized for hypocrisy , slanted reporting and only criticizing shows that are aimed at adults . Critics of the PTC have alleged that it supports increased governmental censorship of television by lobbying the FCC for indecency enforcement for certain television shows and inaccurately reporting on the V @-@ Chip in order to further their agenda . 
 Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane , who is frequently criticized by the PTC , said in The Advocate 
 In January 2005 , <unk> University associate professor Christian Christiansen questioned the backgrounds of certain PTC Advisory Board members ( L. Brent Bozell III as ' National Finance Chairman for the 1992 " Buchanan for President " campaign ' of " neo @-@ fascist Pat Buchanan " ; Susan Howard 's portrayal of adulterous Donna Culver Krebbs on TV series Dallas , which series " was soaked in scantily @-@ clad women , emotional cruelty , violence , alcoholism , and martial infidelity " ; Coleman Luck as ' writer and producer ' ... ' on " Otherworld , " " The Equalizer , " " [ Gabriel 's ] Fire , " " Matrix , " and " The Burning Zone " [ which ] ... included a fair amount of death and violence ' ; William Bennett as ' a very popular guest at a number of Las Vegas casinos ... gambling ' ; Bruce <unk> appearing in ' less family @-@ friendly products ... such as " The Puppet Masters " ( R @-@ rated horror ) , " Mad Dog and Glory " ( R @-@ rated comedy ) and " Married ... With Children " ( crude Fox sitcom packed with blatant sexual banter ) ' ; Billy Ray Cyrus , who ' starred in the TV pilot " Mulholland Drive " made by erotic , anti @-@ family values filmmaker David Lynch ' and ' had the lead in the independent film mega @-@ flop , " Radical Jack , " the synopsis of which highlights the lunacy of Cyrus being on the board of the PTC : " CIA agent Jack Reynolds ( Billy Ray Cyrus ) has a score to settle . Five years ago , his family was slaughtered after he tried to break up an illegal arms ring . But now he 's discovered the location of the gunrunner who killed his <unk> he 's going undercover and taking on a whole crooked town in order to get his man ! " ' ; and John <unk> , ' who , in 1987 , " took part in a fact @-@ finding mission in Nicaragua and Honduras with the National Conservative Foundation during the Nicaraguan civil war . " ' ) , as not consistent with their stance on morality . 
 In a December 2005 column of his , Advertising Age columnist Simon <unk> claimed that the PTC is " very very afraid of gay TV characters " . Culture Watch columnist Christopher Gildemeister defended the PTC as being " not homophobic " but simply opposed to " sexual references or innuendo ( of any variety , hetero , homo or other ) aired where children might be exposed to them . " 
 = Sejm of the Grand Duchy of Posen = 
 The Sejm of the Grand Duchy of Posen ( German : <unk> des <unk> Posen , Polish : Sejm Wielkiego Księstwa <unk> ) was the parliament in the 19th century Grand Duchy of Posen and the Province of Posen , seated in Poznań / Posen . It existed from 1823 to 1918 . In the history of the Polish parliament , it succeeded the general sejm and local sejmik on part of the territories of the Prussian partition . Originally retaining a Polish character , it acquired a more German character in the second half of the 19th century . 
 = = History = = 
 The province of Greater Poland was acquired by Kingdom of Prussia following the Congress of Vienna , when it was detached from the Duchy of Warsaw and given to Prussia , where it became reorganized as the Grand Duchy of Posen . The King of Prussia gave the Grand Duchy the right to call a parliament in 1823 , with specific decrees defining its competences in 1826 . The parliament carried the traditions of the General <unk> of Greater Poland , and insisted on using the Polish word sejm in its name . The Sejm met for the first time on 24 December 1827 . The second sejm session begun on 30 January 1830 . 
 Following the suppression of the Sejm of the Congress Poland in the aftermath of the November Uprising , the Sejm of the Grand Duchy was the last vestige of the Polish parliamentary tradition on Polish soil . Only Christian men owning landed property for at least ten years were enfranchised to vote . Until 1869 Jews generally remained excluded , unlike in Prussia proper . 
 So immigrants who had newly acquired land were not enfranchised as were not most of the rural ethnically Polish farmers , who still held land by way of lease or feudal fief only like serfs or vassals of their landlords , unlike Prussia proper where serfdom had been abolished in 1807 and 1810 . Immigrant farmers from the Holy Roman Empire ( such as the <unk> ) or later from member states of the German Confederation , had usually remained free peasants , causing their stronger representation within the eight members elected by peasants , of a total of 48 . With regard to ethnicity , most of the nobility representatives were Polish , peasantry representatives were balanced , and the townsfolk representatives were mostly German . The first sejm included 22 Poles and 26 Germans , and most of the subsequent elections produced an almost even split between the Poles and the Germans . A major issue of the Sejm was the abolition of serfdom , which would enlarge the number of Polish speaking landowners and after ten years allow their participation in Sejm elections . 
 The Grand Duchy 's population was 65 % Polish but with its exclusion of serfs and underrepresentation of landless rural commoners the electoral law was designed to favor the German inhabitants . The proportion of Polish representatives diminished further after the events of 1848 , and Jacek Jędruch notes that due to growing discrimination against Polish representatives that date marks the end of the period in which this legislative body can be seen as continuing the Polish parliamentary tradition . Also , while the proceedings of the first sejms were published in Polish , since 1877 they were published in German . 
 The political factions of the sejm were divided between liberals , supporting the German constitutional movement , and conservatives , like Edward Raczyński , who predicted that this movement would abolish the Grand Duchy 's autonomy . During the two or so decades of its existence , the major issues of concern of the Sejm were the abolition of serfdom and relations between the inhabitants of Polish and German ethnicity , particularly the discrimination against the Poles by the Prussian government , which increasingly excluded the Polish majority from administration and judiciary . The last petition issued by the Sejm in 1841 demanded equal rights for the Poles and stopping of the Germanization campaign . As most of the Sejm petitions were simply ignored by the King of Prussia , this contributed to dissent in the province , which eventually resulted in an uprising in 1848 in the midst of the revolutions of 1848 in the German states . The Sejm met the total of seven times before the revolutions of 1848 ( in 1827 , 1830 , 1834 , 1837 , 1841 , 1843 and 1845 ) . Following the revolutions , the Sejm of the Grand Duchy , like other provincial Prussian assemblies , gained the right to elect deputies to the Prussian Parliament . The Sejm continued its sessions till 1918 , with a total of 49 Sejms being held . 
 In the aftermath of World War I , popular protests against the electoral law discriminating against Poles led to new elections in 1918 , in which 521 deputies were elected in the Grand Duchy ; that Sejm would support the integration of the Grand Duchy territories to the newly formed Second Polish Republic . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The sejm was unicameral . Only Christian men subject to no other monarch but the king in personal union the grand duke and of at least 30 years of age were enfranchised to vote . For the nobility deputies , initially two , later four deputies held their seats due to privileges tied with other aristocratic status ( heads of Grand Duchy magnate families ) , the rest were elected by landholders . 
 The sejm had 48 deputies . The representatives were grouped into three benches , with 24 men to represent the landed nobility ( nobles not holding a feudal fief manor were excluded , if they owned private land or urban real estate , they would qualify for the election of one of the two other benches ) , 16 being elected by the cities ' burghers , if they owned real estate , and eight by landed free peasants . Similarly , certain levels of wealth were required for election of the peasantry representatives . 
 Deputies term of office was set for 6 years , with elections for the half of the deputies held every three years . For the first renewal election the to @-@ be @-@ replaced or reelected members had been chosen by lot . The Sejm was to meet every two years , but in reality the gatherings happened less often , between every two and three years . Sessions lasted two months . 
 = = = Marshals of the Sejm = = = 
 One of the noble representatives held the position of the Marshal of the Sejm ( speaker ) . Marshals of the Sejm of the Grand Duchy included Antoni Paweł Sułkowski ( the speaker of the first sejm ) and Hans Wilhelm von Unruhe @-@ <unk> , marshall as of 1874 . 
 = = = Notable members = = = 
 Notable politicians of the Sejm of the Grand Duchy included : 
 Louis <unk> 
 Theodor von Bethmann @-@ Hollweg 
 Walther <unk> 
 Julian von <unk> 
 <unk> Chłapowski 
 Stanisław Chłapowski 
 <unk> <unk> 
 Dagobert <unk> 
 Józef I. Grabowski 
 Heinrich von Heydebrand und der Lasa 
 Stanisław <unk> 
 Mieczysław <unk> 
 Wojciech Lipski 
 Maciej <unk> 
 <unk> von Morawski 
 <unk> <unk> 
 Władysław M. <unk> 
 Gustaw <unk> 
 Heinrich von <unk> 
 Edward Raczyński 
 Bogusław Fryderyk Radziwiłł 
 Emil Ritter 
 Julius Ritter 
 Karl Schmidt 
 Antoni Paweł Sułkowski , Sejm Marshall as of 1824 
 <unk> von Turno 
 Hans Wilhelm von Unruhe @-@ <unk> , Sejm Marshall as of 1874 
 = = Competences = = 
 The Sejm had mostly advisory powers , although it could legislate on some strictly local matters , such as communal self @-@ government and spending of some local taxes . It could opine legal acts relevant to the Grand Duchy . Its deputies had the right to file petitions and complaints to the King of Prussia , who could consent or reject ( as was often the case ) the Sejm proposals . Proposals from and to the King required a two @-@ thirds majority ; other proposals required a simple majority . 
 = Back to the Pilot = 
 " Back to the Pilot " is the fifth episode of the tenth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . The episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on November 13 , 2011 . In " Back to the Pilot " , two of the show 's main characters , baby genius Stewie and anthropomorphic dog Brian , both voiced by series creator Seth MacFarlane , use a time machine to travel back in time to the first episode of the series , " Death Has a Shadow " . Trouble ensues however , when Brian tells his former self about the September 11 attacks , causing the present to be dramatically changed , and ultimately resulting in a second civil war . The two must then prevent themselves from going back to the past in the first place , but soon realize that it will be much more difficult than they had originally thought . 
 The episode was written by Mark Hentemann and directed by Dominic Bianchi . It received high praise from critics for its storyline and many cultural references , in addition to receiving some criticism for its portrayal of the September 11 attacks , an example of 9 / 11 humor despite being self @-@ aware . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 6 @.@ 01 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Lacey Chabert , Chris Cox , Ralph Garman , Christine Lakin , Phil LaMarr and Fred Tatasciore , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
