 = = Plot = = 
 When Brian approaches Stewie about helping him find a tennis ball he has buried , Stewie asks if Brian remembers the date that he lost it . Brian tells him that he buried it on January 31 , 1999 ( the day that the first episode of Family Guy originally aired ) . Using Stewie 's time machine to travel back to that date , the two soon come upon the Griffin family , but notice that their past looks more strange than they remembered it : the family continually pauses for cutaways , the animation style is different , Peter 's right eye inexplicably pops out over his nose when he turns his head slightly , television sets are unplugged from the wall , and Meg 's voice sounds different . Stewie comments that " She sounds like someone who 's about to give up a huge opportunity . " 
 Telling Brian that he must not alter the past by getting the tennis ball and that he should instead memorize its location , Stewie goes into his room to set up their return to the present before Past Stewie suddenly enters . The two Stewies then meet , and Stewie tells Brian to come out from his hiding place after explaining himself to Past Stewie . However , hanging outside the window , Brian falls onto past Peter 's car as he drives to the stag party at Past Quagmire 's house . Stewie finds Brian and the two then attempt to return to the present , but find that the transportation device 's batteries are running low and moved only a bit forward in time towards their destination ( Stewie converted the return pad to run on batteries instead of uranium because of their situation in Germany ) . 
 Later , the two manage to take advantage of Past Peter dumping his extra welfare money out of a blimp above Super Bowl XXXIII to collect the money needed to purchase new batteries . Before their return , they have an encounter with the Kool @-@ Aid Man and ruin his entry during the " Oh yeah ! " part at Past Peter 's court session . Brian and Stewie return to the present . 
 Upon their return , Stewie discovers that Brian intentionally disobeyed his instructions and warned his past self about the upcoming September 11 attacks ahead of time allowing Past Brian to stop the event and alter the timeline as a result , much to Stewie 's frustration . While watching the local news with footage on Brian stopping the terrorists , Brian is honored as a hero . The news also revealed that former President George W. Bush returned to Texas after losing the 2004 election and reformed the confederacy , along with eight other states from the southern United States resulting in a Second Civil War . On a side note , it turns out that Pat Tillman ( who in this timeline is still alive as he never went off to fight in the War on Terror ) was " tackled by his own team " . 
 Brian insists that things will still be better in the end , but when they travel five years into the future they find a computer generated post @-@ apocalyptic future caused by nuclear attacks all across the United States , which also hands everything to the viewers on a silver platter which Stewie finds to be lazy . Cleveland is back in Quahog , Joe is a robotic policeman , and Quagmire is a mutant frog called <unk> before being obliterated by Joe for breaking a law . Stewie discovers online that the civil war escalated to a nuclear attack across the entire Eastern Seaboard , killing over 17 million people , including Cesar Millan . Brian admits that he made a mistake , and the two return to the past to prevent Brian from telling his past self about the attacks . They then return to the present , whereupon Stewie learns that Brian has instead taken credit for the Harry Potter series instead of J.K. Rowling . 
 Seeing that Brian has learned nothing from Stewie 's warnings , they again go back to prevent themselves from telling any future events . Before they do , however , a Stewie and Brian from the further future arrive to tell them not to stop their past selves from talking about the future . This in turn causes dozens of Stewies and Brians ( one including a confused Peter as well ) to appear , each pair telling the previous ones not to do what they are about to do . Having had enough of this , Stewie tells his numerous future selves to take their respective Brians and return to their time after they all decide to allow 9 / 11 to historically take place for obvious reasons . From there , Stewie takes Brian back a minute before their past selves arrive and demands for them to return to their time by shooting Past Brian in the knee . With that , the altered timeline ceases to exist along with its corresponding Stewie and Brian , and everything goes back to normal . 
 At home , the original Brian and Stewie mull over what has just happened , unaware of how they would have affected the timeline but grateful that they have returned to their own time without changing anything , but they get confused when Peter arrives with Quagmire , and the rest of his friends from the stag party in 1999 with Peter mentioning them unplugging the TV . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 Series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane first announced the episode at the 2011 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego , California on July 23 , 2011 . It was directed by series regular Dominic Bianchi , in his second episode of the season . Bianchi also previously served as director for the series 's landmark 150th episode " Brian & Stewie " . The episode was written by series showrunner and executive producer Mark Hentemann , who joined the show as a writer in its third season . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Andrew Goldberg and Alex Carter serving as executive story editors , and Spencer Porter , Anthony Blasucci , Mike Desilets , and Deepak Sethi serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Ron Jones , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Back to the Pilot " . The episode was originally intended to be the seventh installation in the series 's hallmark Road to ... episodes , but it was changed before airing . The episode featured several examples of the old animation style that was used in the episode 's pilot episode , with the Griffin family all appearing in the lesser quality animation style in the past universe that Stewie and Brian travel to . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Chris Cox , actor Ralph Garman , and actress Christine Lakin guest starred in the episode . Archival recordings of actress Lacey Chabert , and voice actors Phil LaMarr and Fred Tatasciore from " Death Has a Shadow " were used , although they still received credit . Recurring guest voice actors Patrick Warburton and writer John Viener made minor appearances throughout the episode . Chabert 's role in the episode was that of Meg Griffin in the pilot episode . Chabert had previously voiced Meg , before eventually being replaced by actress Mila Kunis , who had a role on the television series That ' 70s Show during Family Guy 's first season . Chabert left the series after completing the first production of episodes in order to focus on her schoolwork , as well as her participation in the television series Party of Five , with Kunis taking over the role after the first season . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Back to the Pilot " was broadcast on November 13 , 2011 , as a part of an animated television night on Fox , preceded by The Simpsons and Allen Gregory and followed by Family Guy MacFarlane 's second show , American Dad ! . It was watched by 6 @.@ 01 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with Desperate Housewives on ABC , The Good Wife on CBS and Sunday Night Football on NBC . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 1 / 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating Allen Gregory and American Dad ! , in addition to significantly edging out both shows in total viewership . The episode 's ratings increased by nearly 200 @,@ 000 viewers from the previous week 's episode , " Stewie Goes for a Drive " . 
 Reviews of the episode by television critics were positive , with Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club calling it " an episode of Family Guy that rewards every viewer who liked the show in the past . " McFarland also gave high praise to the episode , writing , " At first , I was simply pleased that ' Back to the Pilot ' didn 't screw things up at the beginning , but as the episode went , I kept looking at the clock and being amazed that it hadn 't dropped the ball yet . It used short cutaways and a plethora of self @-@ referential jokes the writers must have stockpiled for years about the animation quality , voice quality , and structure of the pilot to every possible advantage . " He continued , " It wasn 't perfect by any stretch of the imagination , and it 's not on the same level as the occasional brilliance that South Park reaches on about one occasion per season nowadays , but it 's the most fun I 've had watching the show that didn 't involve a Star Wars parody in many years . " McFarland concluded his review by giving the episode a grade of A- . Kate Moon of TV Fanatic also enjoyed the episode , noting , " ' Back to the Pilot ' was a great meta episode of Family Guy . From poking fun at its own flaws in the original series to acknowledging how silly the cutaway gags can be , Family Guy shone at its layered best tonight . " She continued , " Treating its animated characters like real actors was a nice touch as well . Watching the original family showed how much the characters evolved and changed throughout the series ' long run . " Moon concluded her review by giving the episode a 4 @.@ 2 out of 5 . 
 The episode was also the subject of criticism for its portrayal of the September 11 attacks , in which Brian and Stewie go back in time to make the attacks happen again , ultimately resulting in a high five when they are successful ( despite Stewie immediately remarking that would sound terrible out of context ) . The Daily Mail reported on the episode writing , " Nothing is ever off limits for Family Guy and its creator Seth MacFarlane . No topic is taboo , not the Holocaust , not drunk driving and not even abortion , but last night 's episode may finally have crossed the line . " Terri <unk> of Time also wrote of the episode , " It sounds custom @-@ made for a ' too soon ' label , and it probably is . But avid Family Guy viewers live for " too soon " moments , no matter how sensitive the material . " Other news organizations , including Aly Semigran of Entertainment Weekly , also thought the show had gone too far with the reference . Nellie Andreeva of Deadline also commented that it " squeaked past the Fox standards and practices department but is sure to raise as many eyebrows . " MacFarlane was scheduled to be on one of the planes that hit the Twin Towers but overslept allegedly due to being hungover . 
 = Stephen Hopkins ( politician ) = 
 Stephen Hopkins ( March 7 , 1707 – July 13 , 1785 ) was a governor of the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations , a Chief Justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court , and a signer of the Declaration of Independence . From a prominent Rhode Island family , Hopkins was a grandson of William Hopkins who served the colony for 40 years as Deputy , Assistant , Speaker of the House of Deputies , and Major . His great grandfather , Thomas Hopkins , was an original settler of Providence , sailing from England in 1635 with his first cousin , Benedict Arnold , who became the first governor of the Rhode Island colony under the Royal Charter of 1663 . 
 As a child Stephen Hopkins was a voracious reader , becoming a serious student of the sciences , mathematics , and literature . He became a surveyor and astronomer , and was involved in taking measurements during the 1769 transit of Venus across the sun . Hopkins began his public service at the early age of 23 as a justice of the peace in the newly established town of Scituate , Rhode Island . He soon became a justice of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas , while also serving at times as the Speaker of the House of Deputies and President of the Scituate Town Council . While active in civic affairs , he also was part owner of an iron foundry and was a successful merchant who was portrayed in John Greenwood 's 1750s satirical painting , Sea Captains <unk> in Surinam . In May 1747 Hopkins was appointed as a justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court , and in 1751 became the third Chief Justice of this body . In 1755 he was elected to his first term as governor of the colony , and served a total of nine of the next 15 years in this capacity . One of the most contentious political issues of his day was the use of paper money versus hard currency . His bitter political rival , Samuel Ward championed hard currency , whereas Hopkins advocated the use of paper money . The rivalry between the two men became so heated , that Hopkins sued Ward for £ 40 @,@ 000 , but lost the case and had to pay costs . By the mid @-@ 1760s the contention between the two men became a serious distraction to the government of the colony , and realizing this they attempted to placate each other , but initially without success . Ultimately , in 1768 , both agreed to not run for office , and Josias Lyndon was elected governor of the colony as a compromise candidate . 
 In 1770 Hopkins once again became Chief Justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court , and during this tenure became a principal player in the colony 's handling of the 1772 Gaspee Affair , when a group of irate Rhode Island citizens boarded a British revenue vessel , and burned it to the waterline . In 1774 he was given an additional important responsibility as one of Rhode Island 's two delegates to the First Continental Congress , Samuel Ward being the other . Hopkins had become well known in the 13 colonies ten years earlier when he published a pamphlet entitled " The Rights of Colonies Examined , " which was critical of British Parliament and its taxation policies . In the summer of 1776 , with worsening palsy in his hands , Hopkins signed the Declaration of Independence while holding his right hand with his left , saying , " my hand trembles , but my heart does not . " He served in the Continental Congress until September 1776 when failing health forced him to resign . A strong backer of the College of the English Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations ( later named Brown University ) , Hopkins was one of the school 's most ardent supporters , and became the institution 's first chancellor . He died in Providence in 1785 at the age of 78 , and is buried in the North Burial Ground there . Hopkins has been called Rhode Island 's greatest statesman . 
 = = Ancestry and early life = = 
 Born in Providence in the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations , Hopkins was the second of nine children of William and Ruth ( Wilkinson ) Hopkins . His grandfather , also named William Hopkins , was very prominent in colonial affairs , having served for more than 40 years as a Deputy from Providence , Assistant , Speaker of the House of Deputies , and Major . His grandmother , Abigail Whipple Hopkins , was a daughter of Providence settler John Whipple , sister of the wealthy Providence merchant , Joseph Whipple , and aunt to Deputy Governor Joseph Whipple , Jr . Stephen Hopkins ' great grandfather was Thomas Hopkins , who was baptized in Yeovilton , Somerset , England in 1616 , the son of William and Joanne ( Arnold ) Hopkins . Orphaned at an early age , Thomas Hopkins was raised by his uncle William Arnold , and sailed to New England in 1635 with his Arnold relatives , including his first cousin , Benedict Arnold , who became the first governor of the colony under the Royal Charter of 1663 . 
 The early part of Stephen Hopkins ' life was spent in the wooded northern part of Providence known as <unk> Hill , an area that became Scituate , Rhode Island . There were no schools in this area at the time , but the books belonging to the family , supplemented by a small circulating collection , provided Hopkins with reading material , which he consumed voraciously . Richman called Hopkins " a close and severe student , filling up all the spare hours of his life with reading , " while Sanderson wrote , " He attached himself in early youth to the study of books and men . " Besides reading , Hopkins also gained skills in surveying from his grandfather , Samuel Wilkinson . He used his surveying skills to revise the streets and create a map of Scituate , and later did the same for Providence . Because of his responsibility as a youth , at the age of 19 Hopkins was given 70 acres ( 28 ha ) of land by his father , after which his grandfather Hopkins bestowed an additional 90 acres ( 36 ha ) upon him . 
 Hopkins ' interest in surveying spilled over into an interest in astronomy and other scientific endeavors as well , which was illustrated by an event when he was much older . Before the American Revolutionary War , on June 3 , 1769 , Hopkins was involved in the observation of a rare astronomical event , the transit of Venus across the face of the sun . This event was used to determine the distance of the earth from the sun , and also in this case to improve the measure of the latitude of Providence . Joseph Brown , noted for his scientific accomplishments as well as his commercial enterprise , was able to obtain a complete set of necessary instruments , including a reflecting telescope , a micrometer , and a sextant . An observatory was erected on a hill in Providence where a street , later named " Transit Street " in honor of the event , was laid out . Brown was assisted by a group of individuals , including Hopkins , Dr. Benjamin West , and others who were also interested in science . The observation was able to very accurately determine the latitude of Providence ( to the nearest second of arc ) , after which the longitude was determined by comparing observations of the moons of Jupiter with similar observations made in Cambridge , England . 
 = = Political and mercantile pursuits = = 
 Hopkins began his public service at the age of 23 , when in 1730 he became a justice of the peace from the newly formed town of Scituate , a position he held continuously until 1735 . Also , in 1731 he became the clerk of Scituate , which position he held for 11 years , until moving to Providence in 1742 . Following his tenure as justice of the peace , Hopkins became a justice of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas and General Sessions , sitting on this court from 1736 to 1746 , and being the clerk of this body for the last five of these years . Other positions he held during this time period include President of the Town Council , Deputy , and Speaker of the House of Deputies . In 1744 he was elected as a Deputy from Providence , which position he held for seven years , also being the Speaker of the House of Deputies during two of those years . 
 In 1742 Hopkins sold his farm in Scituate and moved to the settled part of Providence . Here he devoted much energy to commercial interests which would help small Providence grow . He became a merchant who built , owned , and outfitted ships , and in 1745 he was part owner of the privateering vessel Reprisal , in partnership with John <unk> , Sheriff of Providence , and son of Colonel Peter <unk> . In the mid @-@ 1750s , the Boston portraitist , John Greenwood , was commissioned by a group of sea captains and merchants , including Hopkins , to create a satirical painting . The men were stopped at a major trading port in Suriname on the north coast of South America where Greenwood was living at the time . Greenwood concocted a 22 @-@ figure tavern scene , showing himself among the affluent traders , many of whom were intoxicated . 
 One of Hopkins ' enterprises later in life was as a manufacturer , and he became a partner with the four brothers , Moses , Nicholas , Joseph , and John Brown in establishing the Hope Furnace . This enterprise was concerned with iron works which made pig iron and cannons for use during the Revolutionary War . After its establishment , Hopkins ' son , Rufus , managed the business for four decades . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 1755 Hopkins was elected to his first term as governor , defeating his predecessor , William Greene by a small margin . The year was mostly occupied with legislation and work related to the pending war with France . Braddock 's defeat and the occupation of Crown Point led the colony to send forces to Albany . Late in the previous year Hopkins and his Attorney @-@ General , Daniel Updike , were delegates from Rhode Island to a meeting in New York called the Albany Congress , which convened to discuss the common defense of the collective colonies , and to hold a conference with the five nations of Indians to secure their assistance in thwarting French encroachment . Here , he and others considered Benjamin Franklin 's early plan for uniting the colonies , but the principles of the plan were rejected in both the colonies and Great Britain . As the war with France developed , in February 1756 the General Assembly ordered the raising of 500 Rhode Island men for the expedition to Lake George in New York . 
 After two years in office Hopkins was defeated by William Greene for the governorship , but Greene died in office in February 1758 , and Hopkins once again became governor . The most divisive political issue of the day was the use of hard money , or specie , versus the use of paper money , and Hopkins sided with the latter group . Another issue was Newport interests versus Providence interests . For several years , Hopkins was locked in a bitter rivalry with Samuel Ward of Westerly , a strong supporter of hard currency , and also a champion of Newport , his town of origin . So bitter was the animosity between these two men that Hopkins commenced an action for slander against Ward , putting damages at £ 40 @,@ 000 . The case was moved to Massachusetts for a fair trial , and in 1759 the judgment went against Hopkins by default , and he paid the costs . 
 For ten years the two men , each at the head of a powerful party , went back and forth as Governor of the colony . Ward led the wealth and conservatism of Newport , Narragansett , and Kent County , while Hopkins represented the growing strength of Providence and Bristol Counties . The two men had been likened to gladiators in an arena , thirsting for each others ' life . Hopkins eventually lost to Ward , who was finally elected Governor in 1762 . 
 In 1763 Hopkins won back the governorship , and signs of reason between the two men appeared the following year when Ward wrote to Hopkins proposing that both resign their " pretensions to the chief seat of government . " On the same day , without the knowledge of this letter , Hopkins wrote to Ward inviting him to accept the position of deputy governor , which had just been vacated by the death of John Gardner . Neither man accepted the proposal of the other , but the stage had been set for future cooperation . 
 Towards the end of Hopkins ' term one of the most contentious issues of the age arose , uniting the divided elements into a common cause . In early 1765 the Stamp Act was passed by both houses of Parliament in England . This act was a scheme for taxing the colonies , directing that all commercial and legal documents , to be valid in a court of law , must be written on stamped paper sold at fixed prices by governmental officers , and also directing that a duty be applied to newspapers . Parliament , assuming the right to tax the colonies , put additional duties on sugar , coffee and other articles , and required that lumber and iron from the colonies only be exported to England . 
 The news of the act infuriated the colonists , and Samuel Adams of Massachusetts invited all the colonies to a congress of delegates to meet in New York to discuss relief from the unjust taxes . In August 1765 , with Ward once again governor , the Rhode Island General Assembly passed resolutions following the lead of Patrick Henry of Virginia . Rhode Island 's appointed stamp distributor , Attorney General Augustus Johnson , refused to execute his office " against the will of our Sovereign Lord the People . " The Rhode Island General Assembly met again at East Greenwich in September 1765 , choosing delegates to the New York congress , and appointing a committee to consider the Stamp Act . The committee reported six resolutions that pointed to the absolution of allegiance to the British Crown unless the grievances were removed . Ultimately , the act was repealed , with news reaching the colonies in May 1766 to public rejoicing . The conflict for independence was delayed , but not abandoned . 
 Another event of great importance to the future of the Rhode Island colony also found agreement between Ward and Hopkins . In 1764 the act incorporating the college in Rhode Island was passed . Both men strongly supported an institution of higher learning within the colony , and both became trustees , with the name Stephen Hopkins appearing first on the list of 36 trustees , and that of Samuel Ward being third . Hopkins also became one of the school 's most generous supporters , and became the school 's first chancellor , which position he held until his death in 1785 . 
 Rhode Island 's election of 1767 was as hotly contested as ever , but Hopkins beat Ward by the widest margin of any of their previous elections . In 1768 Hopkins proposed to Ward that the two men should relinquish their claims on the elections and agree to a compromise candidate . Ward accepted the proposal , Josias Lyndon was elected as governor , and the two adversaries , Ward and Hopkins , met and united in a cordial friendship for the remainder of their lives . 
 = = = The Rights of Colonies Examined = = = 
 In November 1764 a pamphlet by Hopkins entitled The Rights of Colonies Examined , was published by the Rhode Island General Assembly . This pamphlet , with its broad distribution and criticism of taxation and Parliament , was directed primarily at the Stamp Act , and helped build Hopkins ' reputation as a revolutionary leader . The text begins with the words , " Liberty is the greatest blessing that men enjoy , and slavery the heaviest curse that human nature is capable of , " and goes on to present a clear and logical review of the relationship of the American colonies to the mother country . The paper received widespread circulation and brought hearty approval from throughout the colonies . Historian Thomas Bicknell called it " the most remarkable document that was issued during the period preceding the War of the Revolution . " Massachusetts Governor Thomas Hutchinson wrote of the paper , " it was conceived in a higher strain than any that were sent out by other colonies . " With this paper Hopkins became to Rhode Island what Samuel Adams was to Massachusetts and what Thomas Jefferson was to Virginia . The paper was printed widely , and Hopkins became recognized as one of the leaders of public opinion in the colonies . 
 = = = Chief Justice = = = 
 In May 1747 Hopkins was first appointed as a Justice of the Rhode Island Superior Court , whose long title was the " Superior Court of Judicature , Court Of Assize , and General Gaol Delivery . " In 1751 he became the third Chief Justice of this court , which position he held until 1755 when he became governor . Following a total of nine years as governor over the next 15 years , Hopkins was once again appointed as Chief Justice of the court in 1770 , and served until October 1775 , while simultaneously serving as a delegate to the Continental Congress . 
 One of the most important events with which Hopkins dealt during his final tenure as Chief Justice was the Gaspee Affair . In March 1772 Deputy Governor Darius Sessions , working in Providence , sent a letter of concern to Governor Joseph Wanton in Newport , having consulted with Chief Justice Hopkins . Sessions expressed alarm that the British schooner Gaspee had been cruising the Narragansett Bay , disrupting the traffic by stopping and searching commercial ships . In the letter Sessions wrote : 
 " I have consulted with the Chief Justice [ Hopkins ] thereon , who is of the opinion that no commander of any vessel has any right to use any authority in the Body of the Colony without previously applying to the Governor and showing his warrant for so doing and also being sworn to a due exercise of his <unk> this he informs me has been the common custom in this Colony . " 
 Sessions went on to request that the governor take measures to bring the ship 's commander to account . A chain of threatening correspondence ensued between the governor and the commander of the Gaspee , Lieutenant William <unk> , and the commander 's superior , Admiral John Montagu . On the night of June 9 – 10 , a party of incensed colonists attacked the vessel , and burned it to the waterline . Officially , Sessions was outraged at the incident , and offered the colony 's assistance in bringing the perpetrators to justice . To ameliorate retribution by the British authorities , Rhode Island officials took visible steps to find the culprits who burned the ship . Behind the scenes , however , Sessions and Hopkins did all they could to thwart any attempts to identify and find the attackers . When a royal commission was appointed by the British to investigate the incident , they demanded that any indicted person be sent to England for trial . This <unk> threat to local liberty prompted the colonists to form the Committees of Correspondence . Loyalist Massachusetts Governor Hutchinson further aggravated the colonists sensitivities by urging Britain to rescind the Rhode Island charter . 
 Sessions conferred with Chief Justice Hopkins and lawyer John Cole , and with Moses Brown the four men drafted a letter to Massachusetts ' statesman Samuel Adams , who replied , urging Rhode Island to remain defiant , or at least to stall matters by appealing the creation of the royal commission . Governor Wanton was put at the head of this commission , but was compliant with Sessions ' and Hopkins ' attempts to frustrate the aims of the commission . Sessions , Hopkins , and others coordinated their efforts to lose evidence , threaten potential witnesses , and discredit those who testified . The vast majority of Rhode Island 's citizens were supportive of the attackers , and kept quiet about their identities . A year after the incident , the royal commission was terminated without a single indictment . 
 = = = Continental Congress = = = 
 In 1774 , the First Continental Congress convened , and both Ward and Hopkins were chosen as the delegates from Rhode Island . Hopkins , at age 68 , was senior to every delegate there , and was the only one of the 55 delegates who had attended the Albany Congress 20 years earlier . Over the previous several years Hopkins had developed palsy in his hands , and this greatly affected his ability to write . At the seating of this congress , Henry <unk> Brown wrote , " yonder sits the oldest of them all . His form is bent , his thin locks , fringing a forehead bowed with age and honorable service , and his hands shake <unk> as he folds them in his lap . It is Stephen Hopkins . " 
 The congress was called to protest the actions of Great Britain , and to secure the rights and privileges of the 13 colonies . Both Hopkins and Ward had already predicted that independence would only come with war . To his associates in congress Hopkins said , " Powder and ball will decide this question . The gun and bayonet alone will finish the contest in which we are engaged , and any of you who cannot bring your minds to this mode of adjusting the quarrel , had better retire in time . " 
 Hopkins was again elected as a delegate to the Second Continental Congress , which met on May 10 , 1775 following the April attacks on Concord and Lexington . This congress convened to manage the war effort , and eventually declare independence from Great Britain . In July 1775 a national postal system , devised by William Goddard , was adopted , with Benjamin Franklin appointed as the first Postmaster General . This was an idea that had already been implemented in Rhode Island a month earlier . In December 1775 Hopkins was on a committee to report a plan for furnishing the colonies with naval armament . His knowledge of the shipping business made him particularly useful as a member of the naval committee established by Congress to purchase , outfit , man and operate the first ships of the new Continental Navy . Through his participation on that committee , Hopkins was instrumental in framing naval legislation and drafting the rules and regulations necessary to govern the fledgling organization during the American War for Independence . The first American naval squadron was launched on February 18 , 1776 . Hopkins used his influence to secure the position of commander in chief of the new navy for his brother Esek Hopkins , an appointment that proved to be unfortunate . 
 On May 4 , 1776 , by a nearly unanimous vote of the Rhode Island General Assembly , the Rhode Island colony declared its absolute independence from Great Britain . Exactly two months later , on July 4 , 1776 , the Continental Congress performed its supreme act by adopting the United States Declaration of Independence . The aged Stephen Hopkins had to support his palsied right hand with his left as he signed the document , remarking , " my hand trembles , but my heart does not . " The gathering of the founding fathers was depicted in John Trumbull 's famous Declaration of Independence where Hopkins is easily distinguishable as the gentleman standing in the back wearing a hat . 
 Future United States President John Adams appreciated Hopkins ' contributions during the congressional sessions , writing : 
 " ... Governor Hopkins of Rhode Island , above seventy Years of Age kept us all alive . Upon Business his Experience and judgment were very Useful . But when the Business of the Evening was over , he kept Us in Conversation till Eleven and sometimes twelve O Clock . His Custom was to drink nothing all day nor till Eight O Clock , in the Evening , and then his <unk> was Jamaica Spirit and Water . It gave him Wit , Humour , Anecdotes , Science and Learning . He had read Greek , Roman and British History : and was familiar with English Poetry particularly Pope , Tompson [ Thomson ] and Milton . And the flow of his Soul made all his reading our own , and seemed to bring to recollection in all of Us all We had ever read . I could neither eat nor drink in those days . The other Gentlemen were very temperate . Hopkins never drank to excess , but all he drank was immediately not only converted into Wit , Sense , Knowledge and good humour , but inspired Us all with similar qualities . " 
 = = Hopkins and slavery = = 
 Stephen Hopkins , like several of the signers of the Declaration of Independence , was a slave owner , and he mentioned five in his 1760 will . His five slaves consisting of a negro man , woman , lad , and two little boys , were bequeathed to close members of his family with tender instructions for their care that were highly unusual coming from any slave owner . His negro woman , <unk> ( <unk> / Phebe ) , was to go to his wife Anne and treated " so that <unk> may not be a <unk> to her , " and his negro man , Saint Jago , was to go to his oldest son , Rufus , and treated " so that his Life may be rendered easy and comfortable . " The will was never proved , because Hopkins lived another 25 years , and circumstances changed the instrument 's provisions . 
 On October 28 , 1772 , Hopkins manumitted Saint Jago , and wrote the following in the manumission document : 
 " But , principally , and most of all finding that the merciful and beneficent goodness of Almighty God ; by the blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord : hath by the blessed Spirit taught all , who honestly obey its Divine <unk> , that , the keeping any of his rational Creatures in Bondage , who are capable of taking care of , and providing for themselves in a State of Freedom : is , <unk> [ sic ] inconsistent with his Holy and Righteous Will . " 
 While Hopkins felt that the bondage of self @-@ sufficient " rational creatures " was against God 's will , he also thought that unconditional freedom for some slaves would be an abrogation of responsibility . To this end , he refused to <unk> his slave woman , even though it cost him his membership in the Quaker meeting . His rationale was simple : " She had Children that needed the Immediate Care of a Mother ... " It appears that Hopkins ' remaining slaves were not freed until after his death , but at least two of them , Primus and Bonner Jr . , had been living semi @-@ independently for several years before his death . 
 In 1774 , while serving in the Rhode Island Assembly , Hopkins introduced a bill that prohibited the importation of slaves into the colony . This became one of the first anti @-@ slavery laws in the new United States . There were several pressures occurring in the colony which led to greater restrictions on the slave trade , the greatest of which was the pressure applied by the Quakers , who comprised a large percentage of Rhode Island 's population . Hopkins ' second wife was a Quaker , and as a consequence he became an active follower of this faith . Admonition from the Quakers was likely a compelling reason for Hopkins to begin freeing his slaves and introduce his antislavery bill . Other forces acting against this institution included the influence of the Congregationalist minister , Samuel Hopkins , and also the poor profit margin derived from the trade in New England . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 In September 1776 , poor health forced Hopkins to resign from the Continental Congress and return to his home in Rhode Island , though he remained an active member of Rhode Island 's general assembly from 1777 to 1779 . He died at his home in Providence on July 13 , 1785 , at the age of 78 and is buried in the North Burial Ground there . 
 Hopkins helped to found a subscription library , the Providence Library Company , in 1753 , and was a member of the Philosophical Society of Newport . The town of Hopkinton , Rhode Island , was later named after him . Also , the SS Stephen Hopkins , a liberty ship named in his honor , was the first U.S. ship to sink a German surface warship in World War II . 
 Although largely self @-@ educated , Hopkins was instrumental in the establishment of the College in the English Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations ( now Brown University ) as a founding trustee or fellow along with the Reverend James Manning , Samuel Ward , John Brown , Nicholas Brown , Sr. , Moses Brown , the Baptist Reverend Isaac Backus , the Baptist Reverend Samuel Stillman , and the Congregationalist Reverend Ezra Stiles . Hopkins served as Brown 's first chancellor from 1764 to 1785 . His home , the Governor Stephen Hopkins House , originally located at the corner of Hopkins and South Main Streets in Providence , was moved twice after his death , both times to other locations on Hopkins Street . It is now located at 15 Hopkins Street , at the corner of Benefit Street , on the edge of the Brown University campus , and is a U.S. National Historic Landmark . 
 In his diary , the Reverend Ezra Stiles wrote of Hopkins , " I well knew Gov. Hopkins . He was a man of penetrating <unk> [ sic ] Genius , full of <unk> , deep Cunning , intriguing & <unk> ... " adding that he was a " man of a Noble fortitude & resolution " and " a glorious Patriot ! " Hopkins , has been given strong accolades from numerous historians including Sanderson , Arnold and Bicknell , but was simply called by Richman " the greatest statesman of Rhode Island . " 
 = = In fiction = = 
 In the musical 1776 , which tells the story of the drafting and signing of the Declaration of Independence , Stephen Hopkins is a main character , played by veteran character actor Roy Poole . He is depicted as a well @-@ meaning , but cantankerous , maverick politician who readily partakes of alcoholic refreshment , owns a loyal hound @-@ dog ( which is <unk> allowed to wait for Hopkins inside Independence Hall ) , and whose force of personality helps keep the Continental Congress together . When asked for his vote on opening debate on Virginia 's resolution on independence , the representative from Rhode Island to the Continental Congress declares : " I 've never seen , heard , nor smelled an issue that was so dangerous it couldn 't be talked about . Hell yes , I 'm for debating anything ! " 
 Hopkins was present when the Providence mob decided to attack Joseph Curwen in H.P. Lovecraft 's The Case of Charles Dexter Ward . 
 = = Family = = 
 In 1726 , at the age of 19 , Hopkins married Sarah Scott , the daughter of Sylvanus Scott and Joanna <unk> , and a great great granddaughter of early Providence settler Richard Scott whose wife was Katharine Marbury , the youngest sister of the famed Puritan dissident minister Anne Hutchinson . Richard Scott was said to be the first Quaker in Providence . Hopkins and Sarah had seven children , five of whom lived to maturity . Sarah died on September 9 , 1753 at the age of 46 , and following her death , Hopkins married Anne Smith , the daughter of Benjamin Smith , and the widow of an unrelated Benjamin Smith . Hopkins and Anne did not have children together . Hopkins ' younger brother , Esek Hopkins , became the first commander in chief of the Continental Navy , and another brother , William , became a celebrated merchant . 
 Hopkins ' seven children with his first wife included his oldest child , Rufus ( 1727 @-@ 1813 ) , who married first on October 18 , 1747 Abigail Angell , a great granddaughter of Thomas Angell who was one of five men who came with Roger Williams to found Providence . Rufus married second Sarah Olney . John ( 1728 @-@ 1753 ) married a cousin , Mary Gibbs , and died of smallpox at St. Andrews , Spain . His wife was a daughter of Robert and Amey ( Whipple ) Gibbs , a granddaughter of wealthy Providence merchant Joseph Whipple , and a great granddaughter of early Providence settler John Whipple . Ruth died in infancy in 1731 , and Lydia ( 1733 @-@ after 1785 ) married Daniel Tillinghast , a great @-@ grandson of early Providence Baptist minister Pardon Tillinghast . Sylvanus , ( 1734 @-@ 1753 ) was killed by Indians at St. Peter 's Island in Cape Breton , Nova Scotia . Simon ( 1736 @-@ 1743 ) died as a boy , and George ( born in 1739 ) married Ruth Smith , the daughter of his father 's second wife . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Most of this ancestry of Stephen Hopkins comes from John O. Austin 's Genealogical Dictionary of Rhode Island . Hopkins descends from King Edward I of England through his mother and her great grandmother Mary Conyers . 
 = Crater Lake = 
 Crater Lake ( Klamath : <unk> ) is a caldera lake in the western United States , located in south @-@ central Oregon . It is the main feature of Crater Lake National Park and is famous for its deep blue color and water clarity . The lake partly fills a nearly 2 @,@ 148 @-@ foot ( 655 m ) -deep caldera that was formed around 7 @,@ 700 ( ± 150 ) years ago by the collapse of the volcano Mount Mazama . There are no rivers flowing into or out of the lake ; the evaporation is compensated for by rain and snowfall at a rate such that the total amount of water is replaced every 250 years . With a depth of 1 @,@ 949 feet ( 594 m ) , the lake is the deepest in the United States . In the world , it ranks tenth for maximum depth , and third for mean ( average ) depth . 
 Crater Lake is also known for the " Old Man of the Lake " , a full @-@ sized tree which is now a stump that has been bobbing vertically in the lake for over a century . The low temperature of the water has slowed the decomposition of the wood , hence the longevity of the bobbing tree . 
 Two islands are in Crater Lake : Wizard Island , formed from a cinder cone that erupted after Crater Lake began to fill with water , and the smaller Phantom Ship , which has seven trees living on it . There are also colonies of violet @-@ green swallows and several varieties of wildflowers and lichens living there . 
 While having no indigenous fish population , the lake was stocked from 1888 to 1941 with a variety of fish . Several species have formed self @-@ sustaining populations . Since 2002 , one of the state 's regular @-@ issue license plate designs has featured Crater Lake . The commemorative Oregon State Quarter , which was released by the United States Mint in 2005 , features an image of Crater Lake on its reverse . 
 = = Location = = 
 Crater Lake is located in Klamath County , approximately 60 miles ( 97 km ) northwest of the county seat of Klamath Falls , and about 80 miles ( 130 km ) northeast of the city of Medford . 
 In June 1853 , John Wesley Hillman became the first non @-@ Native American explorer to report sighting the lake he named the " Deep Blue Lake . " The lake was renamed at least three times , as Blue Lake , Lake Majesty , and finally Crater Lake . 
 = = Dimensions and depth = = 
 The lake is 5 by 6 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 by 9 @.@ 7 km ) across , with a caldera rim ranging in elevation from 7 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 to 2 @,@ 400 m ) and an average lake depth of 1 @,@ 148 feet ( 350 m ) . The lake 's maximum depth has been measured at 1 @,@ 949 feet ( 594 m ) , which fluctuates slightly as the weather changes . On the basis of maximum depth , Crater Lake is the deepest lake in the United States , the second deepest in North America ( after Great Slave Lake in Canada ) , and the tenth deepest lake in the world ( Lake Baikal is the deepest ) . Crater Lake is often cited as the seventh deepest lake in the world , but this ranking excludes Lake Vostok in Antarctica , which is situated under about 13 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 000 m ) of ice , and the recent soundings of O 'Higgins / San Martín Lake , which is located on the border of Chile and Argentina . 
 When considering the mean , or average depth of lakes , Crater Lake becomes the deepest lake in the Western Hemisphere and the third deepest in the world . Crater Lake Institute Director and <unk> Owen Hoffman states " Crater Lake is the deepest , when compared on the basis of average depth among lakes whose basins are entirely above sea level . The average depths of Lakes Baikal and Tanganyika are deeper than Crater Lake ; however , both have basins that extend below sea level . " 
 = = Geology = = 
 Mount Mazama , part of the Cascade Range volcanic arc , was built up mostly of andesite , dacite , and rhyodacite over a period of at least 400 @,@ 000 years . The caldera was created in a massive volcanic eruption between 6 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 years ago that led to the subsidence of Mount Mazama . About 50 cubic kilometers ( 12 cu mi ) of rhyodacite was erupted in this event . Since that time , all eruptions on Mazama have been confined to the caldera . 
 Lava eruptions later created a central platform , Wizard Island , Merriam Cone , and other , smaller volcanic features , including a rhyodacite dome that was eventually created atop the central platform . Sediments and landslide debris also covered the caldera floor . 
 Eventually , the caldera cooled , allowing rain and snow to accumulate and form a lake . Landslides from the caldera rim thereafter formed debris fans and <unk> sediments on the lake bed . <unk> and hot springs remained common and active during this period . Also after some time , the slopes of the lake 's caldera rim more or less stabilized , streams restored a radial drainage pattern on the mountain , and dense forests began to revegetate the barren landscape . It is estimated that about 720 years was required to fill the lake to its present depth of 594 m ( 1 @,@ 949 ft ) . Much of this occurred during a period when the prevailing climate was less moist than at present . 
 Some hydrothermal activity remains along the lake floor , suggesting that at some time in the future Mazama may erupt once again . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Crater Lake is a subalpine climate , with the extremely rare Köppen classification <unk> owing to its high elevation and – like all of Oregon – the strong summer influence of the North Pacific High . In the summer , the weather is mild and dry , but in the winter is cold and the powerful influence of the Aleutian Low allows for enormous snowfalls averaging 488 inches ( 12 @.@ 40 m ) per year and maximum snow cover averaging 139 inches or 3 @.@ 53 meters . This snow does not usually melt until mid @-@ July , and allows for substantial glaciers on adjacent mountains . In the winter of 1949 / 1950 as much as 885 @.@ 1 inches ( 22 @.@ 48 m ) of snow fell , whilst the less complete snow cover records show cover as high as 192 inches or 4 @.@ 88 meters occurred during another particularly unsettled winter in 1981 / 1982 . The heaviest daily snowfall was 37 @.@ 0 inches ( 94 @.@ 0 cm ) , which occurred as recently as February 28 , 1971 ; 20 in ( 51 cm ) or more in one storm has occurred in both June and September . Hard frost is possible even into the summer , and the average window for freezing temperatures is August 19 through July 7 , while for measurable ( ≥ 0 @.@ 1 inches or 0 @.@ 25 centimeters ) snowfall , October 1 through June 15 . 
 = = Water quality = = 
 Due to several unique factors , mainly that the lake has no inlets or tributaries , the waters of Crater Lake are some of the purest in the world because of the absence of pollutants . Clarity readings from a Secchi disk have consistently been in the high @-@ 30 meter to mid @-@ 20 meter ( 80 to 115 @-@ foot ) range , which is very clear for any natural body of water . In 1997 , scientists recorded a record clarity of 53 @.@ 3 m ( 175 ft ) . 
 The lake has relatively high levels of dissolved salts , total alkalinity , and conductivity . The average pH has generally ranged between 7 and 8 . 
 = = Sacred significance = = 
 The Klamath tribe of Native Americans , whose ancestors may have witnessed the collapse of Mount Mazama and the formation of Crater Lake , have long regarded the lake as a sacred site . Their legends tell of a battle between the sky god <unk> and the god of the underworld <unk> . Mount Mazama was destroyed in the battle , creating Crater Lake , called <unk> in the Klamath language . The Klamath people used Crater Lake in vision quests , which often involved climbing the caldera walls and other dangerous tasks . Those who were successful in such quests were often regarded as having more spiritual powers . The tribe still holds Crater Lake in high regard as a spiritual site . 
 = Walls of Dubrovnik = 
 The Walls of Dubrovnik ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) are a series of defensive stone walls that have surrounded and protected the citizens of the afterward proclaimed maritime city @-@ state of Dubrovnik ( Ragusa ) , situated in southern Croatia , since the city 's founding prior to the 7th century as a Byzantium castrum on a rocky island named Laus ( <unk> or Lave ) . With numerous additions and modifications throughout their history , they have been considered to be amongst the great fortification systems of the Middle Ages , as they were never breached by a hostile army during this time period . In 1979 , the old city of Dubrovnik , which includes a substantial portion of the old walls of Dubrovnik , joined the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites . 
 The oldest systems of fortifications around the town were likely wooden palisades . Today 's intact city walls , constructed mainly during the 12th – 17th centuries , mostly a double line , have long been a source of pride for Dubrovnik . The walls run an uninterrupted course of approximately 1 @,@ 940 metres ( 6 @,@ 360 ft ) in length , encircling most of the old city , and reach a maximum height of about 25 metres ( 82 ft ) . The bulk of the existing walls and fortifications were constructed during the 14th and 15th centuries , but were continually extended and strengthened up until the 17th century . 
 This complex structure , amongst the largest and most complete in Europe , protected the freedom and safety of a " civilised " and " sophisticated " republic that flourished in peace and prosperity for some five centuries . The walls were reinforced by three circular and 14 quadrangular towers , five bastions ( bulwarks ) , two angular fortifications and the large St. John 's Fortress . Land walls were additionally reinforced by one larger bastion and nine smaller semicircular ones , like the casemate Fort Bokar , the oldest preserved fort of that kind in Europe . The moat that ran around the outside section of the city walls , which were armed by more than 120 cannons , provided superb city defense capabilities . 
 = = Former city walls = = 
 The construction of the first limestone forts around the city began in the Early Middle Ages , towards the end of the 8th century . But , the " old chronicles " say that some sort of castle reliably existed on the Lave peninsula quite a long time prior to that . It is certain that the early town on Laus Island was also surrounded by defensive walls , probably mainly by wooden palisades . The fact that Dubrovnik managed to survive a fifteen @-@ month @-@ long invasion by the Saracens in the 9th century proves how well the city was fortified . 
 The city first spread towards the uninhabited eastern part of the islet , which explains why the current name for the southeast part of the city , near St. John 's Fortress , is called Pustijerna . The name " Pustijerna " comes from the Latin statement " post terra " , which means " outside the town " . In the 9th and 10th centuries , the defensive wall enclosed the eastern portion of the city . When the sea channel separating the city from mainland was filled with earth in the 11th century , the city merged with the settlement on land , and soon , a single wall was built around the area of the present @-@ day city core . 
 During this same time period , Dubrovnik and the surrounding area were described as a part of the Croatian ( <unk> ) entity , in one of the works by the famous Arab geographer Muhammad al @-@ Idrisi . In his book Nuzhat al @-@ <unk> fi <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( English : Joy for those who wish to sail over the world ) from 1154 , he mentioned Dubrovnik as the southernmost city of " the country of Croatia and Dalmatia " . 
 The basic city plan dates from 1292 , when the port was rebuilt following a fire . The whole city was entirely enclosed in the 13th century , except for the Dominican monastery , which came under its protection later on , during the 14th century . 
 = = Modern @-@ day city walls = = 
 The city walls have been preserved to the present day , not only because of the knowledge of the skilled construction workers and the constant care provided by city dwellers that maintained and rebuilt the structures as needed , but also because of the brilliantly reputed diplomacy in Ragusa , which managed on many occasions to avoid dangerous measures taken by enemies against the Republic of Ragusa . 
 The present shape of the walls was defined in the 14th century after the city gained its full independence from Venetian suzerainty , but the peak of its construction lasted from the beginning of the 15th century until the latter half of the 16th century . Being constructed very solidly , the walls were generally unaffected by a strong earthquake occurring in 1667 . The largest stimulus for continued development and emergency repairs and works of the Ragusan fortresses came as a result of the danger of unexpected attack by Turkish military forces , especially after they conquered Constantinople in 1453 . The city was also under latent danger of attack by the Venetians . For centuries the people of Dubrovnik were able to preserve their city @-@ republic by skillful maneuvering between East and West . A strategic treaty with Turkey protracted Ragusa ’ s liberty and maintained the opportunity for a major trading role between the Ottoman Empire and Europe . 
 The irregular parallelogram surrounding Dubrovnik consists of four strong fortresses at its most significant points . To the north is the strong circular Minčeta Tower , and to the east side of the city port is the Revelin Fortress . The western city entrance is protected by the strong and nicely @-@ shaped Fort Bokar , and the strong , freestanding , St. Lawrence Fortress ( also known as Lovrijenac ) , protects the western side of the city from possible land and sea assaults . The large and complex St. John Fortress is located on the southeast side of the city . 
 = = = Land Walls = = = 
 The main wall on the landside is 4 metres ( 13 ft ) to 6 metres ( 20 ft ) thick , and , at certain locations , the walls reach up to 25 meters ( 80 feet ) in height . The land walls stretch from Fort Bokar in the west to the detached Revelin Fortress in the east . On the landside , the wall is protected with an additional range of slanted supporting walls as defense against artillery fire , especially against possible Ottoman attacks . 
 = = = = Gates = = = = 
 The town has four city gates : two that lead to the harbor and two ( with drawbridges ) that lead to the mainland . During the time period when the Austrian Empire controlled the city , two more gates were opened in the wall . 
 Communication with the outside world on the land side was maintained with the city through two main well @-@ protected city gates , one placed on the western side of the city and the other placed on the eastern side . These entrances were constructed so that communications with the city could not be carried out directly ; the messenger had to enter through multiple doors and walk down a winding passageway , which is evidence of the security measures taken as a last defense against the possibility of a surprise breach or entrance of unexpected visitors . 
 = = = = = Gate of Pile = = = = = 
 The Pile Gates are a well @-@ fortified complex with multiple doors , defended by Fort Bokar and the moat that ran around the outside section of the city walls . At the entrance gate to the Old Town , on the western side of the land walls , there is a stone bridge between two Gothic arches , which were designed by the esteemed architect Paskoje Miličević in 1471 . That bridge connects to another bridge , a wooden drawbridge which can be pulled up . During the republican era , the wooden drawbridge to the Pile Gate was hoisted each night with considerable pomp in a ceremony which delivered the city 's keys to the Ragusan rector . Today , it spans a dry moat whose garden offers respite from crowds . Above the bridges , over the arch of town 's principal gateway , there is a statue of city patron Saint Blaise ( Croatian : Sveti Vlaho ) , with a model of the Renaissance city . After passing the Pile Gate 's original Gothic inner gateway , it is possible to reach one of a three access points to the city walls . 
 = = = = = Gate of Ploče = = = = = 
 On the eastern side of the land walls stands the second major entrance to the city , the Gate of Ploče . This gate is protected by the freestanding Revelin Fortress , which are connected by a wooden drawbridge and a twin @-@ spanned stone bridge spanning a protective ditch . The Outer Gate of Ploče was designed and constructed by architect Mihajlo <unk> in 1628 , while the two bridges to the Revelin Fortress were built in the 15th century by Paskoje Miličević . Miličević was also designed the Pile Gate bridges , which explains the similarities between the bridges . Over the bridge , just like with the Gate of Pile , there is the statue of Saint Blaise , the patron saint of Dubrovnik . 
 = = = = = Gate of Buža = = = = = 
 The Gate of Buža ( meaning " hole " ) is located on the northern side of the land walls . This gate is relatively new compared to the other gates , as it was constructed during the early 1900s . 
 = = = Sea Walls = = = 
 The main wall on the sea @-@ facing side of Dubrovnik stretches from Fort Bokar in the west to St. John Fortress in the south , and to the Revelin Fortress on the land @-@ side . These walls are 1 @.@ 5 to 5 meters ( 5 – 16 feet ) thick , depending on their location and its strategic importance . The purpose of these walls were to help defend the city from sea @-@ based attacks , particularly from the Republic of Venice , which was often considered a threat to Dubrovnik 's safety . 
 = = = = City Harbour = = = = 
 One of the oldest sectors of Dubrovnik was constructed around a Late Antique castle by the sea , which stretched landwards a bit more than it does today . It was constructed on the site of the Pre @-@ Romanesque cathedral and the Rector 's Palace , thus encircling the city 's harbour . The harbour was designed and constructed by engineer Paskoje Miličević in the late 15th century . Notably , the harbour was noticeably painted on the palm of St. Blaise in a triptych painted by the artist Nikola Božidarević around 1500 . 
 The most prominent portion of the harbour is the three enormous arches ( the fourth original arch was walled in ) of a large arsenal built in the late 12th century and enlarged in the latter part 15th century . The harbour is also the oldest shipyard within the city and is still in use today . 
 Porporela was built in 1873 , next to St. John Fortress . The Kase jetty ( <unk> Breakwater ) was built in 1485 , according to the design of Paskoje Miličević , in order to defend the harbour and protect it from south @-@ eastern winds and waves . The breakwater thus shortened the harbour 's bulky chain stretched in the night from the St. John Fortress to St. Luke 's tower . It was constructed of huge stone blocks laid over wooden foundations without binder . 
 Today , the arsenal hosts the City Café and a movie theatre , whereas both the harbour and Porporela have become pleasant promenades and tourist attractions . 
 = = = = Gates = = = = 
 In the city port area , one of the most significant areas of the maritime trade city , there were two entrances : the Gate of Ponte ( port ) and the Fishmarket Gate . The entire layout of the Dubrovnik streets , as well as a range of expansions , was intended for fast and effective communication with the forts of the city walls . 
 = = = = = Gate of Ponte = = = = = 
 Constructed in 1476 , the Gate of Ponte is situated westwards from the Great Arsenal . The city wall , built at the same period , leads from the Gate to St. John Fortress . The present @-@ day street of Damjan Juda was formed in the 15th century when the sewage system was completed , and building houses against the western city wall was no longer allowed . 
 = = = = = The Fishmarket Gate = = = = = 
 The Fishmarket Gate , built in 1381 , stands eastward from the Great Arsenal . The three arches of the 15th century Small Arsenal , where small boats were repaired , are situated a bit further . The old tower of St. Luke 's protects the harbour in the east , and the harbour entrance is encircled and guarded by the Revelin Fortress . 
 = = Forts = = 
 = = = Forts within walls = = = 
 The fall of Constantinople in 1453 to the Ottomans was a clear sign to the cautious citizens of Dubrovnik that ample defensive measures were quickly needed , the strengthening of its defensive structures the foremost of the issues . The fall of Bosnia , which followed soon in 1463 , only hastened the works . As a result , the Republic invited the architect Michelozzo di Bartolomeo of Florence to direct the improvement of the city 's defenses . His work in Dubrovnik resulted in the construction and expansion of numerous buildings of key importance for the defense of Dubrovnik . 
 = = = = Minčeta Tower = = = = 
 The Minčeta Tower was built by a local builder named <unk> <unk> and Italian engineers sent by Pope Pius II in 1463 , at the height of the Turkish threat . Originally as a strong four @-@ sided fort , it is the most prominent point in the defensive system towards the land . The tower 's name derives from the name of the <unk> family , who owned the ground upon which the tower was built . By its height and impressive volume , the tower dominates the northwestern high part of the city and its walls . In the middle of the 15th century , around the earlier quadrilateral fort , Michelozzo built a new round tower using new warfare technique and joined it to the new system of low scarp walls . The full six @-@ meter ( 20 feet ) thick walls of the new tower had a series of protected gun ports . The architect and sculptor Giorgio da Sebenico of Zadar continued the work on the Minčeta tower . He designed and built the high narrow round tower while the battlements are a later addition . The tower was completed in 1464 and became the symbol of the unconquerable city of Dubrovnik . 
 After a long excavation , a 16th @-@ century cannon foundry was discovered under Minčeta Tower in Gornji <unk> ( Upper Tower ) . It is now a museum . 
 Since Minčeta Tower is the highest point of the wall , it is considered to offer a seemingly " unforgettable " view on the city . 
 = = = = Fort Bokar = = = = 
 The Fort Bokar , often called " Zvjezdan " , is considered to be amongst the most beautiful instances of harmonious and functional fortification architecture . Built as a two @-@ story casemate fortress by Michelozzo from 1461 to 1463 , while the city walls were being reconstructed , it stands in front of the medieval wall face protruding into space almost with its whole cylindrical volume . It was conceived as the key point in the defense of the Pila Gate , the western fortified entrance of the city ; and after the Minčeta Tower , it is the second key point in the defense of the western land approach to the city . It is said to be the oldest <unk> fortress in Europe , which contains a small lapidary collection and numerous cannons . 
 = = = = St. John Fortress = = = = 
 The St. John Fortress ( Croatian : Sveti Ivan ) , often called <unk> Tower , is a complex monumental building on the southeastern side of the old city port , controlling and protecting its entrance . The first fort was built in the mid 14th century , but it was modified on several occasions in the course of the 15th and 16th centuries , which can be seen in the triptych made by the painter Nikola Božidarević in the Dominican monastery . The painting shows Saint Blaise , the patron saint of Dubrovnik . Dominant in the port ambiance , the St. John Fortress prevented access of pirates and other enemy ships . Always cautious at the first sign of danger , the inhabitants of Dubrovnik used to close the entry into the port with heavy chains stretched between the St. John Fortress and the Kase jetty , and they also used to wall up all the port entries to the Great Arsenal . 
 Today , the fortress houses an aquarium on the ground floor , stocked with fishes from various parts of the Adriatic Sea . On the upper floors there is an ethnographic and a maritime museum devoted to the Republic Maritime Period , the Age of Steam , the Second World War , and the section of techniques of sailing and navigation . 
 = = = Detached forts = = = 
 = = = = Revelin Fortress = = = = 
 In the period of unmistakable Turkish danger and the fall of Bosnia under Turkish rule , a detached fortress providing additional protection to the land approach to the eastern Ploče Gate was built to the east of the city in 1462 . The name Revelin derives from <unk> ( ravelin ) , a term in military architecture which refers to work built opposite the city gate in order to afford better protection from enemy attack . Danger of Venetian assault suddenly increased in the times of the First Holy League , and it was necessary to strengthen this vulnerable point of the city fortifications . The Senate hired Antonio Ferramolino , an experienced builder of fortresses in the service of the Spanish admiral Doria , a trusted friend of the Republic . In 1538 the Senate approved his drawings of the new , much stronger Revelin Fortress . It took 11 years to build it , and during that time all other construction work in the city had stopped in order to finish this fortress as soon as possible . 
 The new Revelin became the strongest of the city fortresses , safeguarding the eastern land approach to the city . Shaped in the form of an irregular quadrilateral with one of its sides descending towards the sea , it is protected by a deep ditch on the other . One bridge crosses the protective ditch and connects it to the Ploče Gate , while another bridge connects it to the eastern suburb . The construction work was executed so perfectly so that the devastating earthquake of 1667 did not damage Revelin . Divided into three large vaulted rooms in its interior , Revelin became the administrative center of the Republic . 
 = = = = St. Lawrence Fortress = = = = 
 St. Lawrence Fortress ( Croatian : Lovrijenac ) , often called Dubrovnik 's Gibraltar , is located outside the western city walls , 37 metres ( 121 ft ) above sea level . The fortress has a quadrilateral court with mighty arches and , as its height is uneven , it has 3 terraces with powerful parapets with the broadest one looking south towards the sea . Lovrijenac was defended with 10 large cannons , being the largest and most famous called " Lizard " ( Croatian : <unk> ) . The walls exposed to enemy fire are almost 12 meters ( 39 feet ) thick , but the large wall surface facing the city does not exceed 60 centimetres ( 2 feet ) . Two drawbridges lead to the fort , there being the inscription " Non Bene Pro Toto Libertas <unk> Auro " – " Freedom is not to be sold for all the treasures in the world . " above the gate . To ensure loyalty , the troops in St. Lawrence Fortress were rotated every 30 days . And to ensure complete loyalty , they were given only 30 days of rations when they went into the fort . According to old scripts it was built in only three months . 
 Today its interior is one of the most dignified stages in Europe , and a well @-@ known place for William Shakespeare 's Hamlet performances . 
 = = Fortifications around Dubrovnik = = 
 = = = Walls of Ston = = = 
 The Walls of Ston are originally a series of defensive stone walls of more than 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) long . Despite its small size , the well protected Republic of Ragusa decided to use Pelješac to build another line of defense . At Pelješac 's narrowest point , just before joining the mainland , a wall from Ston to Mali Ston was built . 
 Today 's 5 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) long wall that links these two small communities has the shape of a pentagon . It was completed in the 15th century along with other 40 towers and 5 fortresses . The " wall " meant protection to the precious salt pans that greatly contributed to Dubrovnik 's wealth , which are still being worked today . It is the second longest wall in Europe , surpassed only by the Hadrian 's Wall between Scotland and England . 
 = = = Falcon Fortress = = = 
 The Falcon Fortress ( Croatian : Soko Grad ) was one of the largest and most important fortresses on the territory of the Republic of Ragusa , due to its position in the mountainous region near the Bosnian inland . It was built at the location of earlier Illyrian and later Roman fortifications , evident from the remains of ceramics and Roman bricks in its walls . In 1391 , the <unk> brothers , at that time the rulers of Konavle , gave to the Republic of Rag full authority over the Falcon Fortress , while it came under republic 's final possession only in 1423 . 
 Due to its strategic importance , the Republic of Ragusa constantly invested in the maintenance of the fortress , which contained a cistern , a powder storage , wine and food cellars , sentry @-@ boxes , military barracks , and sanctuary buildings to accommodate refugees from nearby villages in the event of war . 
 = = = Imperial Fortress = = = 
 The Fortress is placed at the top of the mountain Srđ , just above the city of Dubrovnik . It was built in 1806 by Marshal Marmont , called the Imperial , in honor of emperor Napoleon . The fortress was strategically important to defend the northern side of the city . 
 = = = Prevlaka Fortress = = = 
 This fortress is placed at Ponta <unk> , at the very end of Prevlaka peninsula . It was built in the mid @-@ 19th century , between 1856 and 1862 , as part of the fortification system of the Bay of Kotor at the time of the Austrian Empire . By its monumentality and unique structure , it presents an exceptional example of military architecture of its time . Today , the fortress is out of use and badly damaged by various destructions during history . 
 = = City walls during sieges = = 
 = = = Saracen siege in 866 – 867 = = = 
 In 866 , a major Arab raid along Dalmatia struck Budva and Kotor , and then laid siege to Dubrovnik in 867 . The city appealed to Byzantine Emperor Basil the Macedonian , who responded by sending over one hundred ships . Finally , the 866 – 867 Saracens ' siege of Dubrovnik , which lasted fifteen months , was raised due to the intervention of Basil I , who sent a fleet under the command of Niketas Oryphas in relief of the city . After this successful intervention , the Byzantine navy sailed along the coast collecting promises of loyalty to the empire from the Dalmatian cities . The damage done by Saracens is not known , but the fact that Dubrovnik managed to survive a fifteen @-@ month @-@ long siege , proves how well the city was fortified . 
 = = = Venetian siege in 948 = = = 
 With the weakening of Byzantium , Venice began to see Ragusa as a rival who needed to be brought under her control , but the attempt to conquer the city in 948 failed . The citizens of the city attributed this to Saint Blaise , whom they adopted as the patron saint of the city . 
 = = = Nemanja 's siege in 1185 = = = 
 After some territorial disputes , war broke out between Stefan Nemanja , Grand prince of Raška , and the city of Dubrovnik , at that time under Norman suzerainty . In 1185 , Nemanja attacked the city and laid siege to it , but a Ragusan counter @-@ attack drove Nemanja 's forces back . According to chronicles from Dubrovnik , which are accepted by most historians , the siege ultimately failed . How much help Dubrovnik received from the Normans while repelling the siege is also not known exactly . 
 = = = Venetian and Fourth Crusades siege in 1205 = = = 
 In 1205 , the Republic of Venice invaded Dalmatia with the forces of the Fourth Crusade . Ragusa was forced to pay a tribute , eventually becoming a source of supplies for Venice , thus saving itself from being sacked like Zadar in the Siege of Zara , used as Venice 's naval base in the southern Adriatic Sea . In the 14th century , after liberation from Venetian supremacy , extensive work was done on the walls to ensure the republic 's liberty . 
 = = = Siege by Stjepan Vukčić Kosača in 1451 = = = 
 In 1451 , the very powerful Bosnian regional lord Herzeg Stjepan Vukčić Kosača attacked Dubrovnik , and laid siege to the city . He had earlier been made a Ragusan nobleman and , consequently , the Ragusan government now proclaimed him a traitor . A reward of 15 @,@ 000 ducats , a palace in Dubrovnik worth 2 @,@ 000 ducats , and an annual income of 300 ducats was offered to anyone who would kill him , along with the promise of hereditary Ragusan nobility which also helped hold this promise to whoever did the deed . Stjepan was so scared by the threat that he finally raised the siege . 
 = = = Russian siege in 1806 = = = 
 By 1800 , the Republic had a highly organized network of consulates and consular offices in more than eighty cities and ports around the world . In 1806 , the Republic surrendered to the forces of the First French Empire to end a months @-@ long siege by the Russian and Montenegrin fleet during which 3 @,@ 000 cannonballs fell on the city . The French lifted the siege and Ragusa was saved . The French army , led by Napoleon Bonaparte , entered Dubrovnik in 1806 . In 1808 , Marshal Auguste de Marmont abolished the Republic of Ragusa and amalgamated its territory into the French Illyrian Provinces , himself becoming the " Duke of Ragusa " ( Duc de <unk> ) . 
 = = = Anglo @-@ Austrian siege in 1814 = = = 
 Austria declared war on France in August 1813 and by the Autumn the Royal Navy enjoyed unopposed domination over the Adriatic sea . Working in conjunction with the Austrian armies now invading the Illyrian Provinces and Northern Italy Rear Admiral Thomas Fremantle 's ships were able to rapidly transport British and Austrian troops from one point to another , forcing the surrender of the strategic ports one after another December . Captain William Hoste with his ship HMS Bacchante ( 38 guns ) along with HMS Saracen an 18 gun brig , arrived at Ragusa already blockaded by Pro Austrian Croat forces led by Todor Milutinović . The British with the Austrians were able to take the Imperial fortress and positions on Lokrum island . By hauling cannon up to Srđ hill they bombarded the city until the French General Joseph de Montrichard decided it was best to surrender . British and Croat troops entered the city via the Pile gates shutting the Ragusan rebels out . 
 = = = Yugoslav army siege in 1991 – 1992 = = = 
 The Siege of Dubrovnik ( Croatian : Opsada Dubrovnika ) is a term marking the battle and siege of the city of Dubrovnik and the surrounding area in Croatia as part of the Croatian War of Independence . Dubrovnik was besieged and attacked by forces of the Serb @-@ dominated Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) in late 1991 , with the major fighting ending in early 1992 , and the Croatian counterattack finally lifting the siege and liberating the area in mid @-@ 1992 . At the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , the prosecution alleged that , " It was the objective of the Serb forces to detach this area from Croatia and to annex it to Montenegro . " 
 In 1991 , the American Institute of Architects condemned the bombardment of the city 's buildings . The Institute for the Protection of Cultural Monuments , in conjunction with UNESCO , found that , of the 824 buildings in the Old Town , 563 ( or 68 @.@ 33 percent ) had been hit by projectiles during the siege . Of these 563 , nine buildings had been completely destroyed by one of several major fires that occurred during the siege . In 1993 , the Institute for the Rehabilitation of Dubrovnik and UNESCO estimated the total cost for restoring public , private , and religious buildings , streets , squares , fountains , ramparts , gates , and bridges at $ 9 @,@ 657 @,@ 578 . By the end of 1999 , over $ 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 had been spent on restoration . It is a testament to the resilience of the ancient walls that more buildings in the old town were not destroyed during the bombardment ; the ancient walls in fact were more effective at resisting modern weaponry than contemporary structures in the city 's periphery . 
 = = Main sources = = 
 = Okapi = 
 The okapi / <unk> / ( Okapia johnstoni ) , is a giraffid artiodactyl mammal native to the northeast of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Central Africa . Although the okapi bears striped markings reminiscent of zebras , it is most closely related to the giraffe . The okapi and the giraffe are the only living members of the family Giraffidae . The okapi stands about 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) tall at the shoulder and has an average body length of about 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) . Its weight ranges from 200 to 350 kg ( 440 to 770 lb ) . It has a long neck , and large , flexible ears . Its coat is a chocolate to reddish brown , much in contrast with the white horizontal stripes and rings on the legs and white ankles . Male okapis have short , hair @-@ covered horns called ossicones , less than 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in length . Females possess hair whorls , and ossicones are absent . 
 Okapis are primarily diurnal but may be active for a few hours in darkness . They are essentially solitary , coming together only to breed . Okapis are herbivores , feeding on tree leaves and buds , grasses , ferns , fruits , and fungi . Rut in males and estrus in females does not depend on the season . In captivity , estrous cycles recur every 15 days . The gestational period is around 440 to 450 days long , following which usually a single calf is born . The juveniles are kept in hiding , and nursing takes place infrequently . Juveniles start taking solid food from three months , and weaning takes place at six months . 
 Okapis inhabit canopy forests at altitudes of 500 – 1 @,@ 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 – 4 @,@ 900 ft ) . They are endemic to the tropical forests of the Democratic Republic of the Congo , where they occur across the central , northern and eastern regions . The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) classifies the okapi as Endangered . Major threats include habitat loss due to logging and human settlement . Extensive hunting for bushmeat and skin and illegal mining have also led to a decline in populations . The Okapi Conservation Project was established in 1987 to protect okapi populations . 
 = = Etymology and taxonomy = = 
 The scientific name of the okapi is Okapia johnstoni . It was first described by British zoologist Ray Lankester in 1901 . The generic name Okapia derives from the <unk> Karo name o <unk> , while the specific name ( johnstoni ) is in recognition of the British Governor of Uganda , Sir Harry Johnston , who first acquired an okapi specimen for science from the Ituri Forest while repatriating a group of Pygmies to the Belgian Congo . The animal was brought to prominent European attention by speculation on its existence found in press reports covering Henry Morton Stanley 's journeys in 1887 . Remains of a carcass were later sent to London by the English adventurer and colonial administrator Harry Johnston and became a media event in 1901 . 
 In 1901 , zoologist Philip Sclater presented a painting of the okapi before the Zoological Society of London that depicted its physical features with some clarity . There was much confusion regarding the taxonomical status of this newly discovered animal . Sir Harry Johnston himself called it a <unk> , or a relative of other extinct giraffids . Based on the description of the okapi by Pygmies , who referred to it as a " horse " , Sclater named the species Equus johnstoni . Subsequently , Lankester declared that the okapi represented an unknown genus of Giraffidae , which he placed in its own genus Okapia , and assigned the name Okapia johnstoni to the species . 
 In 1902 , Swiss zoologist Charles Immanuel Forsyth Major suggested the inclusion of O. johnstoni in the extinct giraffid subfamily <unk> . However , the species was placed in its own subfamily <unk> , by Swedish palaeontologist Birger Bohlin in 1926 , mainly due to the lack of a cingulum , a major feature of the <unk> . In 1986 , Okapia was finally established as a sister genus of Giraffa on the basis of cladistic analysis . The two genera together with Palaeotragus constitute the tribe <unk> . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The earliest members of Giraffidae first appeared in the Early Miocene in Africa , having diverged from the superficially deer @-@ like <unk> . <unk> spread into Europe and Asia by the middle Miocene in a first radiation . Another radiation began in the Pliocene but was terminated by a decline in diversity in the Pleistocene . Several important primitive giraffids existed more or less contemporaneously in the Miocene ( 23 @-@ 10 million years ago ) , including Canthumeryx , Giraffokeryx , Palaeotragus and Samotherium . According to palaeontologist and author Kathleen Hunt , Samotherium split into Okapia ( 18 million years ago ) and Giraffa ( 12 million years ago ) . However , another author J. D. Skinner argued that Canthumeryx gave rise to the okapi and giraffe through the latter three genera and that the okapi is the extant form of Palaeotragus . The okapi is sometimes referred to as an example of a living fossil , as it has existed as a species over a long geological time period , and morphologically resembles more primitive forms ( e.g. Samotherium ) . 
 A study published in 2016 found that the common ancestor of giraffe and okapi lived about 11 @.@ 5 million years ago . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The okapi is a medium @-@ sized giraffid , standing 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) tall at the shoulder . Its average body length is about 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) and its weight ranges from 200 to 350 kg ( 440 to 770 lb ) . It has a long neck , and large and flexible ears . The coat is a chocolate to reddish brown , much in contrast with the white horizontal stripes and rings on the legs and white ankles . The striking stripes make it resemble a zebra . These features serve as an effective camouflage amidst dense vegetation . The face , throat and chest are greyish white . Interdigital glands are present on all four feet , and are slightly larger on the front feet . Male okapis have short , hair @-@ covered horns called ossicones , less than 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in length . The okapi exhibits sexual dimorphism , with females 4 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) taller on average , slightly redder and lacking prominent horns , instead possessing hair whorls . 
 The okapi shows several adaptations to its tropical habitat . The large number of rod cells in the retina facilitate night vision , and there is an efficient olfactory system . The large auditory bullae lead to a strong sense of hearing . The dental formula of the okapi is 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 3 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 . Teeth are low @-@ crowned , fine @-@ cusped and efficiently cut tender foliage . The large caecum and colon help in microbial digestion , and a quick rate of food passage allows for lower cell wall digestion than in other ruminants . 
 The okapi can be easily distinguished from its nearest extant relative , the giraffe . It is much smaller and shares more external similarities with the deer and bovids than with the giraffe . While both sexes possess horns in the giraffe , only males bear horns in the okapi . The okapi has large palatine sinuses , unique among the giraffids . Morphological similarities shared between the giraffe and the okapi include a similar gait - both use a pacing gait , stepping simultaneously with the front and the hind leg on the same side of the body , unlike other ungulates that walk by moving alternate legs on either side of the body - and a long black tongue ( longer in the okapi ) useful in plucking buds and leaves as well as for grooming . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Okapis are primarily diurnal but may be active for a few hours in darkness . They are essentially solitary , coming together only to breed . They have overlapping home ranges and typically occur at densities of about 0 @.@ 6 animals per square kilometre . Male home ranges average 13 km2 ( 5 @.@ 0 sq mi ) while female home ranges average 3 – 5 km2 ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 9 sq mi ) . Males migrate continuously , while females are sedentary . Males often mark territories and bushes with their urine , while females use common defecation sites . Grooming is a common practice , focused at the earlobes and the neck . Okapis often rub their neck against trees , leaving a brown exudate . 
 The male is protective of his territory , but allows females to pass through the domain to forage . Males visit female home ranges at the time of breeding . Although generally tranquil , the okapi can kick and butt with its head to show aggression . As the vocal cords are poorly developed , vocal communication is mainly restricted to three sounds - " <unk> " ( contact calls used by both sexes ) , " moan " ( by females during courtship ) and " bleat " ( by infants under stress ) . Individuals may engage in Flehmen response , a visual expression in which the animals curls back its upper lips , displays the teeth and inhales through the mouth for a few seconds . The leopard is the main predator of the okapi . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Okapis are herbivores , feeding on tree leaves and buds , grasses , ferns , fruits , and fungi . They prefer to feed in <unk> gaps . The staple food comprises shrubs and lianas . The main constituents of the diet are woody , dicotyledonous species ; monocotyledonous plants are not eaten regularly . In the Ituri forest , the okapi feeds mainly upon the plant families Acanthaceae , <unk> , Euphorbiaceae , <unk> , <unk> , Rubiaceae and <unk> . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Female okapis become sexually mature when about one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year old , while males reach maturity after two years . Rut in males and estrus in females does not depend on the season . In captivity , estrus cycles recur every 15 days . The male and the female begin courtship by circling , smelling and licking each other . The male shows his dominance by extending his neck , tossing his head and protruding one leg forward . This is followed by mounting and copulation . 
 The gestational period is around 440 to 450 days long , following which usually a single calf is born , weighing 14 – 30 kg ( 31 – 66 lb ) . The udder of the pregnant female starts swelling two months before parturition , and <unk> discharges may occur . Parturition takes 3 – 4 hours , and the female stands throughout this period , though she may rest during brief intervals . The mother consumes the afterbirth , and extensively grooms the infant . The milk of the female is very rich in proteins and has low fat content . As in other ruminants , the infant can stand within 30 minutes of birth . Although generally similar to adults , newborn calves have false eyelashes , a long dorsal mane and long white hairs in the stripes . These features gradually disappear and give way to the general appearance within a year . The juveniles are kept in hiding , and nursing takes place infrequently . The growth rate of calves is appreciably high in the first few months of birth , after which it gradually declines . Juveniles start taking solid food from three months , and weaning takes place at six months . Horn development in males takes one year after birth . The okapi 's average lifespan is 20 to 30 years . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Okapis inhabit canopy forests at altitudes of 500 – 1 @,@ 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 – 4 @,@ 900 ft ) . They are endemic to the tropical forests of the Democratic Republic of the Congo . They do not occur in gallery forests , habitats disturbed by human settlement and swamp forests , but may occasionally use seasonally inundated areas . In the wet season , they visit rocky inselbergs that offer forage uncommon elsewhere . A study found that the population density of the okapi averaged 0 @.@ 53 animals per square kilometre in mixed <unk> forests . 
 The okapi occurs across central , northern and eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo , and north and east of the Congo river . The species ranges from the Maiko forest northward to the Ituri forest , then through the river basins of the Rubi , Lake Tele and Ebola to the west and the Ubangi river further north . Smaller populations exist west and south of the Congo river . They are also common in the <unk> and <unk> areas . The okapi is extinct in Uganda . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) classifies the okapi as Endangered . It is fully protected under Congolese law . The Okapi Wildlife Reserve and Maiko National Park support significant populations of the okapi , though there has been a steady decline in numbers due to several threats . Other areas of occurrence are the Rubi Tele Hunting Reserve and the <unk> Reserve . Major threats include habitat loss due to logging and human settlement . Extensive hunting for bushmeat and skin and illegal mining have also led to population declines . A threat that has emerged quite recently is the presence of illegal armed groups around protected areas , inhibiting conservation and monitoring actions . A small population occurs north of the Virunga National Park , but is bereft of protection due to the presence of armed groups in the vicinity . In June 2012 , a gang of poachers attacked the headquarters of the Okapi Wildlife Reserve , killing six guards and other staff as well as 13 of the captive okapi . 
 The Okapi Conservation Project , established in 1987 , works towards the conservation of the okapi as well as the growth of the indigenous <unk> people . In November 2011 , the White Oak Conservation center and Jacksonville Zoo and Gardens hosted an international meeting of the Okapi Species Survival Plan ( SSP ) and the Okapi European Endangered Species Programme ( EEP ) at Jacksonville , which was attended by representatives from zoos from the USA , Europe and Japan . The aim was to discuss the management of captive okapis and arrange support for okapi conservation . Many zoos in North America and Europe currently have okapis in captivity . 
 = Love in Several Masques = 
 Love in Several Masques , a play by Henry Fielding , was first performed on 16 February 1728 at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane . The moderately received play comically depicts three lovers trying to pursue their individual beloveds . The beloveds require their lovers to meet their various demands , which serves as a means for Fielding to introduce his personal feelings on morality and virtue . In addition , Fielding introduces criticism of women and society in general . 
 The play marks Fielding 's early approach to theatre and how he begins to create his own take on tradition 18th @-@ century theatre conventions . Critics have emphasised little beyond how the play serves as Fielding 's first play among many . The possible sources of the play including a possible failed pursuit of a lover by Fielding , or the beginnings of Fielding 's reliance on the topic of gender , identity , and social ethics . 
 = = Background = = 
 Love in Several Masques was Fielding 's first play . It was advertised on 15 January 1728 in the London Evening Post and first ran on 16 February 1728 at the Theatre Royal . Performances were held on 17 , 19 and 20 February , with the third night being the author 's benefit . The play was never revived . The cast included four members among some of the most talented of the Theatre Royal actors . Although it only ran for four nights , this was a great feat because John Gay 's popular The Beggar 's Opera was performed during the same time and dominated the theatrical community during its run . It was first printed on 23 February 1728 by John Watts , and a Dublin edition appeared in 1728 . The play was later collected by John Watts in the 1742 and 1745 Dramatick Works and by Andrew Millar in the 1755 edition of Fielding 's works . It was later translated and printed in German as Lieb unter <unk> <unk> in 1759 . 
 Most of the information on the play and its run is known because of Fielding 's preface in the printed edition of the play . The printed Love in Several Masques is dedicated " To the Right Honourable the Lady Mary Wortley Montague " , his cousin . It is probable that she read the original draft of the play , which is alluded to in the dedication . Information on her reading the draft comes from a letter written in approximately September 1727 . In the letter , Fielding writes : 
 I have <unk> 'd to send your <unk> a Copy of the Play which you did me the Honor of reading three Acts of last spring : and hope it may meet as light a Censure from your <unk> 's Judgment as then : for while your Goodness permits me ( what I esteem the greatest and indeed only Happiness of my Life ) to offer my unworthy Performances to your <unk> , it will be entirely from your Sentence that they will be regarded or <unk> 'd by Me . 
 The play was completed during September 1727 and it was listed in the British Journal of 23 September 1727 as being scheduled . There is little information on Fielding 's editing of the work , and none to support that anyone suggested corrections except Anne Oldfield , who he thanked in the Preface for supplying corrections . The prologue , dedication , and preface were probably composed during January or February 1728 , with the dedication and preface most likely composed between the last nights of the show , 20 and 21 February , and its publication , 23 February . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The cast according to the original printed billing : 
 Wisemore – lover of Lady Matchless , played by John Mills 
 Merital – lover of Helena , played by Robert Wilks 
 <unk> – lover of Vermilia , played by Bridgwater 
 Lord Formal – rival to Wisemore , played by Griffin 
 Rattle – fop and rival to Merital , played by Colley Cibber 
 Sir <unk> Simple – rival to <unk> , played by Josias Miller 
 Lady Matchless – played by Anne Oldfield 
 Vermilia – played by Mrs Porter 
 Helena – played by Mrs Booth 
 Sir Positive Trap – husband of Lady Trap , care taker of Helena , played by John Harper 
 Lady Trap – played by Mrs. Moor 
 <unk> – maid to Lady Trap , played by Mrs. Mills 
 Prologue spoken by John Mills 
 Epilogue spoken by Miss Robinson , child actress 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot is traditional in regards to Restoration theatre and includes three female characters , three respectable males , three non @-@ respectable males , and three side characters . Each respectable male meets their female counterpart three times , and each has a parallel incident with letters and an unmasking . The primary plot of the play deals with Wisemore and his pursuit of Lady Matchless . With the help of his friend Merital , Wisemore is able to overcome other lovers and various struggles in order to prove his worth to Matchless and win her love . 
 A secondary plot involves Merital and his desire to marry a woman named Helena , cousin to Matchless . He is kept from doing so externally by her uncle , Sir Positive Trap , by the workings of her aunt , and internally by themselves . Against her uncles wishes , Helena and Merital elope . Although Trap is angered by this , Lady Matchless steps in and defends the marriage by saying that she too will marry like her cousin . The play ends with a song about beauty , virtue , and lovers . 
 = = = Preface = = = 
 The printed version of the play included a self @-@ conscious preface : 
 I believe few plays have ever adventured into the world under greater disadvantage than this . First , as it succeeded a comedy which , for the continued space of twenty @-@ eight nights , received as great ( and as just ) applauses , as ever were bestowed on the English Theatre . And secondly , as it is co @-@ temporary with an entertainment which engrosses the whole talk and admiration of the town . These were difficulties which seemed rather to require the superior force of a Wycherley , or a Congreve , than of a raw and unexperienced pen ; for I believe I may boast that none ever appeared so early upon the stage . However , such was the candour of the audience , the play was received with greater satisfaction than I should have promised myself from its merit , had it even preceded the Provoked Husband . 
 He continued by thanking his cast , especially Anne Oldfield , for the effort that they put into their roles . This preface served as a model for Fielding 's later prefaces included in his novels , such as Joseph Andrews or Tom Jones . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Love in Several Masques is a traditional comic drama that incorporates morality . The theme of the play is the relationship of disguises and courtship with a discussion of the nature of love . Fielding focuses on men and how they deal with love and marriage . Also , the gentlemen must prove their worth before they can be justified in their marriage , which allows Fielding to describe the traits required in successful male suitors . The first act deals primarily with the gentlemen in order to establish a focus on their characteristics . Fielding 's first play serves as a representation for his belief in the relationship of morality and libertine beliefs and introduces character types that he would use throughout his plays and novels . However , all negative characteristics are very apparent to the audience , and those characters who are immoral are unable to accomplish their goals . The main characters are still decent individuals who are able to help another , even though they sometimes get in each other 's way . At no time is the audience able to believe that vice will conquer , which undermines part of the satire . Regardless , Harold Pagliaro is still able to conclude that " Fielding 's satire on the marriage market , however , is effective , if not biting . " 
 Wisemore 's character introduces feelings about the London community and criticises various problems . However , his reflections are portrayed as both correct and lacking , and that he is focused only on the bad aspects of life . His ideas result from removing himself from society in preference to the company of classical books . Although he does not realise it , the play suggests that there are virtuous people . Merital , in response to Wisemore , believes that Wisemore 's philosophical inclinations are foolish . As the play later reveals , Wisemore 's views are only a mask to hide from his own feelings and views on love . 
 Wisemore is not the only one to serve as a means to comment on society ; the characters Vermilia and Lady Matchless are used to discuss the proper role of females within society by serving as housewives . The dialogue between the two reveals that females are only in control of the domestic sphere because men have allowed them to dominate in the area . This is not to suggest that Fielding supports the repression of females ; instead , women are used as a way to discuss the internal aspects of humans including both emotions and morality . However , feminist critic Jill Campbell points out that Fielding does mock women who abuse their relationship with the internal , emotions , and morality in order to dominate and assume power . Tiffany Potter , another feminist critic , sees gender within the play in a different light ; Merital 's actions and words show a moderate approach to females , and " Women are neither victims of deceitful men nor <unk> virgins , but individuals who can choose to ' bestow ' their favours on a man who will ' enjoy ' them . " 
 The image of the masque within the play deals with hiding one 's identity . Fielding , like many other playwrights , focuses on how the masque genre deals with the social acceptability of altering identities within the format . However , Fielding extends the image to discuss society and those who impersonate social and gender roles that they do not fill . Fielding also has a problem with those who act viciously with license even though he is willing to accept some of the lesser libertine actions . Merital , for instance , is a sexual type of libertine and is treated differently than those like Sir Positive Trap , Lord Formal , and Sir <unk> Simple who are criticised as being part of the corrupted order . Trap and Formal are part of old families , and their attachment to the age of their families and their attempts to use that to justify their beliefs over what is proper is ridiculed within the play . In particular , Merital is the one able to point out their flaws . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Love in Several Masques was " neither a success nor a fiasco " , and Fielding writes in the preface , " the Play was received with greater Satisfaction than I should have promised myself from its Merit " . The play was later quoted in The Beauties of Fielding more than any of Fielding 's other plays , according to Thomas Lockwood , " because for anthology reading purposes it supplied far more <unk> witty bits than other Fielding plays more representative or still holding the stage . " 
 Eighteenth and nineteenth century critics did little to discuss the play . David Erskine Baker simply lists the play in Companion to the Playhouse ( 1764 ) , Charles Dibdin 's History of the Stage ( 1800 ) makes a short comment on the dialogue , and John Genest said that the play was " moderate " in Some Account of the English Stage ( 1832 ) . A page is devoted to Love in Several Masques in Edwin Percy Whipple 's review of a collection of Fielding 's works , which calls the play " a well @-@ written imitation " that has " smart and glib rather than witty " dialogue even though it contains " affected similes and ingenious comparisons , which the author forces into his dialogue to make it seem brilliant . " Frederick Lawrence , in his Life of Henry Fielding ( 1855 ) , connected the play with those of Congreve and enjoyed some of the dialogue . 
 Twentieth century critics tend to range in opinions on the play . F. Homes Dudden argues that " The dialogue is smart ; the plot , though insufficiently compact , is fairly ingenious ; the characters [ ... ] are conventional comic types [ ... ] It deserved what in fact it achieved — a qualified success . " Robert Hume believes that " The play is not , in truth , very good " , that " Fielding offers three minimally intertwined love plots " , and that the narrative is " clumsy " . However , Rivero believes that this characterisation is " unjust " and that the play deserves more merit . The play , as Rivero argues , " evinces what critics have identified as the quintessence of Fielding 's art : its clear moral purpose , its conspicuous moral tone . " Thomas Lockwood argues that the play " has been noticed mainly as it was Fielding 's first play , or else as the example of that imitation of <unk> form which supposedly marked his beginning in dramatic authorship . Beyond these impressions of the play , there is no real tradition of critical discussion . " Pagliaro , one of Fielding 's biographers , simply states that " By the standards of the day , the play neither failed nor succeeded , running four nights as it did . " 
 = Worker policing = 
 Worker policing is a behavior seen in colonies of social hymenopterans ( ants , bees , and wasps ) whereby worker females eat or remove eggs that have been laid by other workers rather than those laid by a queen . Worker policing ensures that the offspring of the queen will predominate in the group . In certain species of bees , ants and wasps , workers or the queen may also act aggressively towards fertile workers . Worker policing has been suggested as a form of coercion to promote the evolution of altruistic behavior in eusocial insect societies . 
 Proposed mechanisms for the recognition of worker @-@ laid eggs or active reproductive workers include marker hydrocarbons on the surface of queen @-@ laid eggs , cuticle hydrocarbons on reproductive workers , and recognition of nest @-@ mates . In rare cases , worker @-@ laid eggs carry mimicked queen hydrocarbons and escape policing , a condition known as the anarchic syndrome . 
 Not all forms of policing require the presence of a queen ; it also occurs in a few species of ants which establish a dominance hierarchy of reproductive female workers , where top @-@ ranking individuals reproduce . 
 = = Evolutionary basis = = 
 In many social insect communities , sex is determined through haplodiploidy . <unk> male drones develop from unfertilized eggs while diploid females develop from fertilized eggs . Queens of a colony may mate with one or several drones . On average , a queen shares half of her genes with her sons , but only shares a quarter of her genes with the sons of fertile female workers . Therefore , it is in the queen 's best interests to have her own sons raised , and not the sons of workers . Workers can reproduce in many ants , bees , and wasps because male offspring come from unfertilized eggs . 
 By contrast , the worker shares half of her genes with her sons and only a quarter with her brothers . Furthermore , the workers in colonies with a single once @-@ mated queen are related to their nephews by three eighths , higher than they are related to brothers . This results in a conflict where the queen and worker females are at odds over the proportion of male offspring they contribute , since each side tries to maximize its reproductive fitness . Queens favor production of their own sons while workers favor production of their own sons , and do not stop their sisters from laying because of the favorable relatedness to nephews . 
 Worker policing occurs when worker bees in the colony are genetically more closely related to the queen than the reproductive female . In many instances , the eggs of the female worker are eaten , or she is repeatedly attacked by other workers . This mechanism of egg removal ensures that the queen 's sons predominate . 
 Experiments confirming the role of kin selection in worker policing demonstrate the effects of multiple matings , which can lead to lower average relatedness between workers . Queens of the social wasp Dolichovespula <unk> mate singly or multiply . Researchers who study these wasps have observed a strong positive correlation between worker relatedness and male production . After controlling for the absolute number of eggs laid , these scientists conclude that the queen 's multiple matings favor mutual worker policing . 
 Although early theories of worker policing focused on the kin selection component , evidence from honey bees suggests that altruism is sometimes enforced . Fewer workers reproduce as policing effectiveness rises , and policing effectiveness decreases with increasing relatedness except in colonies with no queen . This suggests that worker policing is a social sanction imposed on selfish individuals . 
 = = Proposed mechanisms for kin recognition = = 
 Mechanisms suggested for egg discrimination in worker policing include queen hydrocarbons , fertile worker hydrocarbons , and nestmate recognition . 
 = = = Queen hydrocarbons = = = 
 A study on the carpenter ant Camponotus floridanus found a special surface hydrocarbon on queen @-@ laid eggs . Workers in the colony with the queen 's eggs refrained from egg @-@ laying , whereas other groups that did not have queen @-@ laid eggs showed worker reproduction . Thus , the hydrocarbon could act as a signal to alert workers to halt reproduction . More generally , however , the authors concluded that the hydrocarbons were a fertility signal . It is still unknown as to how the decision to restrain reproduction occurs or what minimum threshold of fertility in the queen is needed to reduce worker reproduction . 
 = = = Fertile worker hydrocarbons = = = 
 The study of cuticle hydrocarbons has also been applied to the reproductive workers . In some colonies of the ponerine ant Platythyrea punctata , the presence of <unk> in new reproductive workers triggered aggressive behavior from the rest of the colony , often between new and old reproductive workers . Specifically , the old reproductive workers rubbed a marker hydrocarbon on the antennae of the new females , identifying them as rivals and targets for aggression . 
 = = = <unk> recognition = = = 
 In contrast to the other ant species , worker policing in the ant Formica fusca appears to incorporate nestmate recognition in addition to the queen hydrocarbons . Workers displayed higher levels of aggression toward non @-@ nest mates and also removed some queen @-@ laid eggs . Thus , queen hydrocarbons were not the only contributor to discrimination of the eggs . 
 = = Examples from social Hymenoptera = = 
 Worker policing has evolved convergently in several social insect species . The following cases are examples : 
 = = = Bees = = = 
 One of the first examples of worker policing to be discovered was in the honey bee , Apis mellifera . Worker policing is prevalent in most honey bee colonies , and worker reproduction is minimal ( 0 @.@ 12 % ) in this species . Worker policing occurs via egg @-@ eating ( oophagy ) in Apis mellifera colonies . In many of these hives , the activation of ovaries in fertile females is diminished , suggesting that there are <unk> to laying eggs . 
 Workers in colonies of the Asian honey bee , Apis <unk> , are also reported to engage in oophagy . Using microsatellite analysis , researchers concluded that no mature drones had non @-@ queen alleles in the colonies they investigated . Thus , even though workers had activated ovaries and were capable of laying eggs , worker policing ensured the functional sterility of otherwise fertile workers . 
 A higher percentage of female workers of the bee species Apis <unk> are reported to activate their ovaries than those of Apis mellifera or Apis <unk> . When queens were removed , up to 40 % of the workers activated their ovaries in subsequent days . However , policing workers continued to eat the worker @-@ laid eggs , suggesting that the mechanism of policing in this species does not involve direct intervention from the queen . 
 The observation that all these Apis species engage in polyandry has led researchers to conclude that worker policing is plesiomorphic for the Apis genus . 
 Worker policing also occurs in the primitively eusocial bumblebees such as Bombus terrestris . 
 = = = Ants = = = 
 In colonies of the ponerine ant , Pachycondyla <unk> , workers eat the eggs of fertile female workers and display aggressive behavior towards egg @-@ laying females . 
 In colonies of the ant <unk> <unk> , workers will sometimes mate and lay eggs while others remain as virgins to lay trophic eggs that are consumed as nourishment . In a display of policing , workers can immobilize female reproductive workers by biting their limbs ; it is reported that 50 % of the victims die from this treatment . The attacking workers may also drag offending workers outside the colony . Since workers can lay both male and female eggs , worker policing could be favored since the cost to the community is large . 
 The ant species Aphaenogaster <unk> japonica also display evidence of policing . When researchers separated and then reunited workers from colonies that did or did not have queens , workers from the queen @-@ containing colonies attacked the workers with activated ovaries from the queenless colonies . 
 = = = Wasps = = = 
 The tree wasp Dolichovespula sylvestris also displays worker policing . Both egg @-@ eating and aggression are reported in these wasp communities , and the queen also engages in the policing process . Similar behavior has been observed in the closely related species Dolichovespula media . 
 In colonies of the paper wasp , Polistes chinensis <unk> , workers can lay up to a quarter of the male eggs in the colony . The number of eggs that survived to hatching , however , was minimal compared to the number produced by the queen . Analysis of the microsatellite markers showed that both queens and workers contributed to policing of worker and queen @-@ laid eggs even in monogynous and <unk> colonies . 
 The common wasp , Vespula vulgaris , engages in worker policing , and it is known that a significant number of workers have active ovaries . However , studies by researchers have suggested that relatedness may not be the key factor in the development of worker policing . Rather , it is hypothesized that worker policing has been selected due to conflict suppression in the colony . 
 In a test of worker policing , researchers examined the removal of worker @-@ laid eggs in Vespula rufa , a wasp that has low paternity . Under the testing conditions , worker policing was not as efficient , and some of the drones appeared to be from worker @-@ laid eggs . 
 The European Hornet , Vespa <unk> , was previously thought to be under reproductive pheromone control by the queen , thus explaining why the other females didn 't reproduce , even though they were capable of doing so . Experiments by Foster showed that the workers were instead regulating sterility in each other , thus instead exhibiting worker policing . While each worker is capable of reproducing , the colony as a whole is more efficient and organized if the workers allow only the queen to lay larvae . 
 <unk> cyanea also engage in worker policing during times when queen repopulation is not needed . They will prevent females from laying eggs through aggressive behavior and egg @-@ eating . 
 = = Exceptions = = 
 = = = Anarchic syndrome = = = 
 Very rarely , female worker bees lay eggs that escape worker policing , in a process known as the anarchic syndrome . Female reproductive workers in these colonies activate their ovaries even in the presence of a queen . The worker eggs are allowed as they mimic queen hydrocarbons . Thus , female workers can maximize their reproductive fitness at the expense of the colony . Anarchic syndrome is an example of selection working in opposite directions at individual and group levels . 
 = = = Selfish worker policing = = = 
 Temnothorax <unk> , a <unk> ant , has been shown not to have collective worker policing . However , when a queen is removed , a rank order for reproduction appears , where top ranking reproductives display aggression towards lower @-@ order female workers . Thus , reductions in egg laying are created by dominance hierarchies . Individuals do not act in benefit of the colony , instead opting to increase their own fitness by laying their eggs and reducing the contributions of opponents . 
 This type of policy is common in Dolichovespula <unk> wasps where despite being more related to other workers ’ sons , worker @-@ laid eggs were consumed by other workers . 
 = = = Worker policing without genetic conflict = = = 
 In the thelytokous ant Platythyrea punctata , colonies are clonal ; therefore , workers are all equally related genetically , and worker policing is not expected as there is no genetic conflict . However , one would expect severe effects on the condition of the colony if reproductive workers were left unchecked . For example , more time spent on individual reproduction would be predicted to detract from care of the queen 's offspring . In studies of these ants , workers did actually display worker policing , as evidenced by increased aggression towards reproductive workers . Worker policing here is favored for group efficiency . 
 = Citizen Kane = 
 Citizen Kane is a 1941 American mystery drama film by Orson Welles , its producer , co @-@ author , director and star . The picture was Welles 's first feature film . Nominated for Academy Awards in nine categories , it won an Academy Award for Best Writing ( Original Screenplay ) by Herman J. Mankiewicz and Welles . Considered by many critics , filmmakers , and fans to be the greatest film of all time , Citizen Kane was voted as such in five consecutive Sight & Sound polls of critics , until it was displaced by Vertigo in the 2012 poll . It topped the American Film Institute 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies list in 1998 , as well as AFI 's 2007 update . Citizen Kane is particularly praised for its cinematography , music , and narrative structure , which were innovative for its time . 
 The quasi @-@ biographical film examines the life and legacy of Charles Foster Kane , played by Welles , a character based in part upon the American newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst , Chicago tycoons Samuel Insull and Harold McCormick , and aspects of Welles 's own life . Upon its release , Hearst prohibited mention of the film in any of his newspapers . Kane 's career in the publishing world is born of idealistic social service , but gradually evolves into a ruthless pursuit of power . Narrated principally through flashbacks , the story is told through the research of a newsreel reporter seeking to solve the mystery of the newspaper magnate 's dying word : " Rosebud . " 
 After the Broadway successes of Welles 's Mercury Theatre and the controversial 1938 radio broadcast " The War of the Worlds " on The Mercury Theatre on the Air , Welles was courted by Hollywood . He signed a contract with RKO Pictures in 1939 . Unusual for an untried director , he was given the freedom to develop his own story , to use his own cast and crew , and to have final cut privilege . Following two abortive attempts to get a project off the ground , he wrote the screenplay for Citizen Kane , collaborating on the effort with Herman Mankiewicz . Principal photography took place in 1940 and the film received its American release in 1941 . 
 While a critical success , Citizen Kane failed to recoup its costs at the box office . The film faded from view after its release but was subsequently returned to the public 's attention when it was praised by such French critics as André Bazin and given an American revival in 1956 . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on September 13 , 2011 , for a special 70th anniversary edition . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a mansion in Xanadu , a vast palatial estate in Florida , the elderly Charles Foster Kane is on his deathbed . Holding a snow globe , he utters a word , " Rosebud " , and dies ; the globe slips from his hand and smashes on the floor . A newsreel obituary tells the life story of Kane , an enormously wealthy newspaper publisher . Kane 's death becomes sensational news around the world , and the newsreel 's producer tasks reporter Jerry Thompson with discovering the meaning of " Rosebud " . 
 Thompson sets out to interview Kane 's friends and associates . He approaches Kane 's second wife , Susan Alexander Kane , now an alcoholic who runs her own nightclub , but she refuses to talk to him . Thompson goes to the private archive of the late banker Walter Parks Thatcher . Through Thatcher 's written memoirs , Thompson learns that Kane 's childhood began in poverty in Colorado . 
 In 1871 , after a gold mine was discovered on her property , Kane 's mother Mary Kane sends Charles away to live with Thatcher so that he would be properly educated . While Thatcher and Charles ' parents discuss arrangements inside , the young Kane plays happily with a sled in the snow outside his parents ' boarding @-@ house and protests being sent to live with Thatcher . 
 Years later , after gaining full control over his trust fund at the age of 25 , Kane enters the newspaper business and embarks on a career of yellow journalism . He takes control of the New York Inquirer and starts publishing scandalous articles that attack Thatcher 's business interests . After the stock market crash in 1929 , Kane is forced to sell controlling interest of his newspaper empire to Thatcher . 
 Back in the present , Thompson interviews Kane 's personal business manager , Mr. Bernstein . Bernstein recalls how Kane hired the best journalists available to build the Inquirer 's circulation . Kane rose to power by successfully manipulating public opinion regarding the Spanish – American War and marrying Emily Norton , the niece of a President of the United States . 
 Thompson interviews Kane 's estranged best friend , Jedediah Leland , in a retirement home . Leland recalls how Kane 's marriage to Emily disintegrates more and more over the years , and he begins an affair with amateur singer Susan Alexander while he is running for Governor of New York . Both his wife and his political opponent discover the affair and the public scandal ends his political career . Kane marries Susan and forces her into a humiliating operatic career for which she has neither the talent nor the ambition . 
 Back in the present , Susan now consents to an interview with Thompson , and recalls her failed opera career . Kane finally allows her to abandon her singing career after she attempts suicide . After years spent dominated by Kane and living in isolation at Xanadu , Susan leaves Kane . Kane 's butler Raymond recounts that , after Susan leaves him , Kane begins violently destroying the contents of her bedroom . He suddenly calms down when he sees a snow globe and says , " Rosebud . " 
 Back at Xanadu , Kane 's belongings are being cataloged or discarded . Thompson concludes that he is unable to solve the mystery and that the meaning of Kane 's last word will forever remain an enigma . As the film ends , the camera reveals that " Rosebud " is the trade name of the sled on which the eight @-@ year @-@ old Kane was playing on the day that he was taken from his home in Colorado . Thought to be junk by Xanadu 's staff , the sled is burned in a furnace . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The beginning of the film 's ending credits state that " Most of the principal actors in Citizen Kane are new to motion pictures . The Mercury Theatre is proud to introduce them . " The cast is listed in the following order : 
 Joseph Cotten as Jedediah Leland , Kane 's best friend and a reporter for The Inquirer . Cotten also appears ( hidden in darkness ) in the News on the March screening room . 
 Dorothy Comingore as Susan Alexander Kane , Kane 's mistress and second wife . 
 Agnes Moorehead as Mary Kane , Kane 's mother . 
 Ruth Warrick as Emily Monroe Norton Kane , Kane 's first wife . 
 Ray Collins as Jim W. Gettys , Kane 's political rival and the incumbent governor of New York . 
 Erskine Sanford as Herbert Carter , editor of The Inquirer . Sanford also appears ( hidden in darkness ) in the News on the March screening room . 
 Everett Sloane as Mr. Bernstein , Kane 's friend and employee at The Inquirer . 
 William Alland as Jerry Thompson , a reporter for News on the March . Alland also voices the narrator of the News on the March newsreel . 
 Paul Stewart as Raymond , Kane 's butler . 
 George Coulouris as Walter Parks Thatcher , a banker who becomes Kane 's legal guardian . 
 Fortunio <unk> as Signor <unk> , vocal coach of Susan Alexander Kane . 
 Gus Schilling as John , headwaiter at the El Rancho nightclub . Schilling also appears ( hidden in darkness ) in the News on the March screening room . 
 Philip Van Zandt as Mr. <unk> , News on the March producer . 
 Georgia Backus as Bertha Anderson , attendant at the library of Walter Parks Thatcher . 
 Harry Shannon as Jim Kane , Kane 's father . 
 Sonny <unk> as Charles Foster Kane III , Kane 's son . 
 Buddy Swan as Charles Foster Kane , age eight . 
 Orson Welles as Charles Foster Kane , a wealthy newspaper publisher . 
 Additionally , Charles Bennett appears as the entertainer at the head of the chorus line in the Inquirer party sequence , and cinematographer Gregg Toland makes a cameo appearance as an interviewer depicted in part of the News on the March newsreel . 
 = = Pre @-@ production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Hollywood had shown interest in Welles as early as 1936 . He turned down three scripts sent to him by Warner Bros. In 1937 , he declined offers from David O. Selznick , who asked him to head his film company 's story department , and William Wyler , who wanted him for a supporting role in Wuthering Heights . " Although the possibility of making huge amounts of money in Hollywood greatly attracted him , " wrote biographer Frank Brady , " he was still totally , hopelessly , insanely in love with the theater , and it is there that he had every intention of remaining to make his mark . " 
 Following " The War of the Worlds " broadcast of his CBS radio series The Mercury Theatre on the Air , Welles was lured to Hollywood with a remarkable contract . RKO Pictures studio head George J. Schaefer wanted to work with Welles after the notorious broadcast , believing that Welles had a gift for attracting mass attention . RKO was also uncharacteristically profitable and was entering into a series of independent production contracts that would add more artistically prestigious films to its roster . Throughout the spring and early summer of 1939 , Schaefer constantly tried to lure the reluctant Welles to Hollywood . Welles was in financial trouble after failure of his plays Five Kings and The Green Goddess . At first he simply wanted to spend three months in Hollywood and earn enough money to pay his debts and fund his next theatrical season . Welles first arrived on July 20 , 1939 and on his first tour , he called the movie studio " the greatest electric train set a boy ever had " . 
 Welles signed his contract with RKO on August 21 . This legendary contract stipulated that Welles would act in , direct , produce and write two films . Mercury would get $ 100 @,@ 000 for the first film by January 1 , 1940 , plus 20 % of profits after RKO recouped $ 500 @,@ 000 , and $ 125 @,@ 000 for a second film by January 1 , 1941 , plus 20 % of profits after RKO recouped $ 500 @,@ 000 . The most controversial aspect of the contract was granting Welles complete artistic control of the two films so long as RKO approved both project 's stories and so long as the budget did not exceed $ 500 @,@ 000 . RKO executives would not be allowed to see any footage until Welles chose to show it to them , and no cuts could be made to either film without Welles ’ s approval . Welles was allowed to develop the story without interference , select his own cast and crew , and have the right of final cut . Granting final cut privilege was unprecedented for a studio since it placed artistic considerations over financial investment . The contract was deeply resented in the film industry , and the Hollywood press took every opportunity to mock RKO and Welles . Schaefer remained a great supporter and saw the unprecedented contract as good publicity . Film scholar Robert L. Carringer wrote : " The simple fact seems to be that Schaefer believed Welles was going to pull off something really big almost as much as Welles did himself . " 
 Welles spent the first five months of his RKO contract trying to get his first project going , without success . " They are laying bets over on the RKO lot that the Orson Welles deal will end up without Orson ever doing a picture there , " wrote The Hollywood Reporter . It was agreed that Welles would film Heart of Darkness , previously adapted for The Mercury Theatre on the Air , which would be presented entirely through a first @-@ person camera . After elaborate pre @-@ production and a day of test shooting with a hand @-@ held camera — unheard of at the time — the project never reached production because Welles was unable to trim $ 50 @,@ 000 from its budget . Schaefer told Welles that the $ 500 @,@ 000 budget could not be exceeded ; revenue was declining sharply in Europe by the fall of 1939 . 
 He then started work on the idea that became Citizen Kane . Knowing the script would take time to prepare , Welles suggested to RKO that while that was being done — " so the year wouldn 't be lost " — he make a humorous political thriller . Welles proposed The Smiler with a Knife , from a novel by Cecil Day @-@ Lewis . When that project stalled in December 1939 , Welles began brainstorming other story ideas with screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz , who had been writing Mercury radio scripts . " Arguing , inventing , discarding , these two powerful , headstrong , dazzlingly articulate personalities thrashed toward Kane " , wrote biographer Richard Meryman . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 One of the long @-@ standing controversies about Citizen Kane has been the authorship of the screenplay . Welles conceived the project with screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz , who was writing radio plays for Welles 's CBS Radio series , The Campbell Playhouse . Mankiewicz based the original outline on the life of William Randolph Hearst , whom he knew socially and came to hate after he was exiled from Hearst 's circle . 
 In February 1940 Welles supplied Mankiewicz with 300 pages of notes and put him under contract to write the first draft screenplay under the supervision of John Houseman , Welles 's former partner in the Mercury Theatre . Welles later explained , " I left him on his own finally , because we 'd started to waste too much time haggling . So , after mutual agreements on storyline and character , <unk> went off with Houseman and did his version , while I stayed in Hollywood and wrote mine . " Taking these drafts , Welles drastically condensed and rearranged them , then added scenes of his own . The industry accused Welles of underplaying Mankiewicz 's contribution to the script , but Welles countered the attacks by saying , " At the end , naturally , I was the one making the picture , after all — who had to make the decisions . I used what I wanted of <unk> 's and , rightly or wrongly , kept what I liked of my own . " 
 The terms of the contract stated that Mankiewicz was to receive no credit for his work , as he was hired as a script doctor . Before he signed the contract Mankiewicz was particularly advised by his agents that all credit for his work belonged to Welles and the Mercury Theatre , the " author and creator " . As the film neared release , however , Mankiewicz began threatening Welles to get credit for the film — including threats to place full @-@ page ads in trade papers and to get his friend Ben Hecht to write an exposé for The Saturday Evening Post . Mankiewicz also threatened to go to the Screen Writers Guild and claim full credit for writing the entire script by himself . 
 After lodging a protest with the Screen Writers Guild , Mankiewicz withdrew it , then vacillated . The question was resolved in January 1941 when the studio , RKO Pictures , awarded Mankiewicz credit . The guild credit form listed Welles first , Mankiewicz second . Welles 's assistant Richard Wilson said that the person who circled Mankiewicz 's name in pencil , then drew an arrow that put it in first place , was Welles . The official credit reads , " Screenplay by Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles " . Mankiewicz 's rancor toward Welles grew over the remaining 12 years of his life . 
 Questions over the authorship of the Citizen Kane screenplay were revived in 1971 by influential film critic Pauline Kael , whose controversial 50 @,@ 000 @-@ word essay " Raising Kane " was commissioned as an introduction to the shooting script in The Citizen Kane Book , published in October 1971 . The book @-@ length essay first appeared in February 1971 , in two consecutive issues of The New Yorker magazine . In the ensuing controversy Welles was defended by colleagues , critics , biographers and scholars , but his reputation was damaged by its charges . The essay was later discredited and Kael 's own scholarship was called into question . 
 Any question of authorship was resolved with Carringer 's 1978 essay , " The Scripts of Citizen Kane " . Carringer studied the collection of script records — " almost a day @-@ to @-@ day record of the history of the scripting " — that was then still intact at RKO . He reviewed all seven drafts and concluded that " the full evidence reveals that Welles 's contribution to the Citizen Kane script was not only substantial but definitive . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Citizen Kane was a rare film in that its principal roles were played by actors new to motion pictures . Ten were billed as Mercury Actors , members of the skilled repertory company assembled by Welles for the stage and radio performances of the Mercury Theatre , an independent theater company he founded with Houseman in 1937 . " He loved to use the Mercury players , " wrote biographer Charles Higham , " and consequently he launched several of them on movie careers . " 
 The film represents the feature film debuts of William Alland , Ray Collins , Joseph Cotten , Agnes Moorehead , Erskine Sanford , Everett Sloane , Paul Stewart , and Welles himself . Despite never having appeared in feature films , some of the cast members were already well known to the public . Cotten had recently become a Broadway star in the hit play The Philadelphia Story with Katharine Hepburn and Sloane was well known for his role on the radio show The <unk> . Mercury actor George Coulouris was a star of the stage in New York and London . 
 Not all of the cast came from the Mercury Players . Welles cast Dorothy Comingore as Susan Alexander Kane . Comingore had never appeared in a film and was a discovery of Charlie Chaplin . Chaplin recommended Comingore to Welles , who then met Comingore at a party in Los Angeles and immediately cast her . 
 Welles had met stage actress Ruth Warrick while visiting New York on a break from Hollywood and remembered her as a good fit for Emily Norton Kane , later saying that she looked the part . Warrick told Carringer that she was struck by the extraordinary resemblance between herself and Welles 's mother when she saw a photograph of Beatrice Ives Welles . She characterized her own personal relationship with Welles as motherly . 
 " He trained us for films at the same time that he was training himself , " recalled Agnes Moorehead . " Orson believed in good acting , and he realized that rehearsals were needed to get the most from his actors . That was something new in Hollywood : nobody seemed interested in bringing in a group to rehearse before scenes were shot . But Orson knew it was necessary , and we rehearsed every sequence before it was shot . " 
 When The March of Time narrator Westbrook Van Voorhis asked for $ 25 @,@ 000 to narrate the News on the March sequence , Alland demonstrated his ability to imitate Van Voorhis and Welles cast him . 
 Welles later said that casting character actor Gino Corrado in the small part of the waiter at the El Rancho broke his heart . Corrado had appeared in many Hollywood films , often as a waiter , and Welles wanted all of the actors to be new to films . 
 Other uncredited roles went to Thomas A. Curran as Teddy Roosevelt in the faux newsreel ; Richard Baer as Hillman , a man at Madison Square Garden , and a man in the News on the March screening room ; and Alan Ladd , Arthur O 'Connell and Louise Currie as reporters at Xanadu . When Kathryn Trosper Popper died on March 6 , 2016 , at the age of 100 she was believed to have been the film 's last surviving cast member . Warrick was the last surviving member of the principal cast at the time of her death in 2005 . Sonny <unk> , who played Kane 's young son , was the last surviving credited cast member of Citizen Kane when he died in 2007 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production advisor Miriam Geiger quickly compiled a handmade film textbook for Welles , a practical reference book of film techniques that he studied carefully . He then taught himself filmmaking by matching its visual vocabulary to The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari , which he ordered from the Museum of Modern Art , and films by Frank Capra , René Clair , Fritz Lang , King Vidor and Jean Renoir . The one film he genuinely studied was John Ford 's Stagecoach , which he watched 40 times . " As it turned out , the first day I ever walked onto a set was my first day as a director , " Welles said . " I 'd learned whatever I knew in the projection room — from Ford . After dinner every night for about a month , I 'd run Stagecoach , often with some different technician or department head from the studio , and ask questions . ' How was this done ? ' ' Why was this done ? ' It was like going to school . " 
 Welles 's cinematographer for the film was Gregg Toland , described by Welles as " just then , the number @-@ one cameraman in the world . " To Welles 's astonishment , Toland visited him at his office and said , " I want you to use me on your picture . " He had seen some of the Mercury stage productions ( including Caesar ) and said he wanted to work with someone who had never made a movie . RKO hired Toland on loan from Samuel Goldwyn Productions in the first week of June 1940 . 
 " And he never tried to impress us that he was doing any miracles , " Welles recalled . " I was calling for things only a beginner would have been ignorant enough to think anybody could ever do , and there he was , doing them . " Toland later explained that he wanted to work with Welles because he anticipated the first time director 's inexperience and reputation for audacious experimentation in the theater would allow the cinematographer to try new and innovative camera techniques that typical Hollywood films would never have allowed him to do . Unaware of filmmaking protocol , Welles adjusted the lights on set as he was accustomed to doing in the theater ; Toland quietly re @-@ balanced them , and was angry when one of the crew informed Welles that he was infringing on Toland 's responsibilities . During the first few weeks of June , Welles had lengthy discussions about the film with Toland and art director Perry Ferguson in the morning , and in the afternoon and evening he worked with actors and revised the script . 
 On June 29 , 1940 — a Saturday morning when few inquisitive studio executives would be around — Welles began filming Citizen Kane . After the disappointment of having Heart of Darkness cancelled , Welles followed Ferguson 's suggestion and deceived RKO into believing that he was simply shooting camera tests . " But we were shooting the picture , " Welles said , " because we wanted to get started and be already into it before anybody knew about it . " 
 At the time RKO executives were pressuring him to agree to direct a film called The Men from Mars , to capitalize on " The War of the Worlds " radio broadcast . Welles said that he would consider making the project but wanted to make a different film first . At this time he did not inform them that he had already begun filming Citizen Kane . 
 The early footage was called " Orson Welles Tests " on all paperwork . The first " test " shot was the News on the March projection room scene , economically filmed in a real studio projection room in darkness that masked many actors who appeared in other roles later in the film . " At $ 809 Orson did run substantially beyond the test budget of $ 528 — to create one of the most famous scenes in movie history , " wrote Barton Whaley . 
 The next scenes were the El Rancho nightclub scenes and the scene in which Susan attempts suicide . Welles later said that the nightclub set was available after another film had wrapped and that filming took 10 to 12 days to complete . For these scenes Welles had Comingore 's throat sprayed with chemicals to give her voice a harsh , raspy tone . Other scenes shot in secret included those in which Thompson interviews Leland and Bernstein , which were also shot on sets built for other films . 
 During production , the film was referred to as RKO 281 . Most of the filming took place in what is now Stage 19 on the Paramount Pictures lot in Hollywood . There was some location filming at Balboa Park in San Diego and the San Diego Zoo . 
 In the end of July , RKO approved the film and Welles was allowed to officially begin shooting , despite having already been filming " tests " for several weeks . Welles leaked stories to newspaper reporters that the tests had been so good that there was no need to re @-@ shoot them . The first official scene to be shot was the breakfast montage sequence between Kane and his first wife Emily . To strategically save money and appease the RKO executives who opposed him , Welles rehearsed scenes extensively before actually shooting and filmed very few takes of each shot set @-@ up . Welles never shot master shots for any scene after Toland told him that Ford never shot them . To appease the increasingly curious press , Welles threw a cocktail party for selected reporters , promising that they could watch a scene being filmed . When the journalists arrived Welles told them they had “ just finished ” shooting for the day but still had the party . Welles told the press that he was ahead of schedule ( without factoring in the month of " test shooting " ) , thus discrediting claims that after a year in Hollywood without making a film he was a failure in the film industry . 
 Welles usually worked 16 to 18 hours a day on the film . He often began work at 4 a.m. since the special effects make @-@ up used to age him for certain scenes took up to four hours to apply . Welles used this time to discuss the day 's shooting with Toland and other crew members . The special contact lenses used to make Welles look elderly proved very painful , and a doctor was employed to place them into Welles 's eyes . Welles had difficulty seeing clearly while wearing them , which caused him to badly cut his wrist when shooting the scene in which Kane breaks up the furniture in Susan 's bedroom . While shooting the scene in which Kane shouts at Gettys on the stairs of Susan Alexander 's apartment building , Welles fell ten feet ; an X @-@ ray revealed two bone chips in his ankle . The injury required him to direct the film from a wheelchair for two weeks . He eventually wore a steel brace to resume performing on camera ; it is visible in the low @-@ angle scene between Kane and Leland after Kane loses the election . For the final scene , a stage at the Selznick studio was equipped with a working furnace , and multiple takes were required to show the sled being put into the fire and the word " Rosebud " consumed . Paul Stewart recalled that on the ninth take the Culver City Fire Department arrived in full gear because the furnace had grown so hot the flue caught fire . " Orson was delighted with the commotion " , he said . 
 When " Rosebud " was burned , Welles choreographed the scene while he had composer Bernard Herrmann 's cue playing on the set . 
 Unlike Schaefer , many members of RKO 's board of governors did not like Welles or the control that his contract gave him . However such board members as Nelson Rockefeller and NBC chief David Sarnoff were sympathetic to Welles . Throughout production Welles had problems with these executives not respecting his contract ’ s stipulation of non @-@ interference and several spies arrived on set to report what they saw to the executives . When the executives would sometimes arrive on set unannounced the entire cast and crew would suddenly start playing softball until they left . Before official shooting began the executives intercepted all copies of the script and delayed their delivery to Welles . They had one copy sent to their office in New York , resulting in it being leaked to press . 
 Principal shooting wrapped October 24 . Welles then took several weeks off of the film for a lecture tour , during which he also scouted additional locations with Toland and Ferguson . Filming resumed November 15 with some re @-@ shoots . Toland had to leave due to a commitment to shoot Howard Hughes ' The Outlaw , but Toland 's camera crew continued working on the film and Toland was replaced by RKO cinematographer Harry J. Wild . The final day of shooting on November 30 was Kane 's death scene . Welles boasted that he only went 21 days over his official shooting schedule , without factoring in the month of " camera tests . " According to RKO records , the film cost $ 839 @,@ 727 . Its estimated budget had been $ 723 @,@ 800 . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Citizen Kane was edited by Robert Wise and assistant editor Mark Robson . Both would become successful film directors . Wise was hired after Welles finished shooting the " camera tests " and began officially making the film . Wise said that Welles " had an older editor assigned to him for those tests and evidently he was not too happy and asked to have somebody else . I was roughly Orson ’ s age and had several good credits . ” Wise and Robson began editing the film while it was still shooting and said that they “ could tell certainly that we were getting something very special . It was outstanding film day in and day out . ” Welles gave Wise detailed instructions and was usually not present during the film 's editing . The film was very well planned out and intentionally shot for such post @-@ production techniques as slow dissolves . The lack of coverage made editing easy since Welles and Toland edited the film " in camera " by leaving few options of how it could be put together . Wise said the breakfast table sequence took weeks to edit and get the correct " timing " and " rhythm " for the whip pans and over @-@ lapping dialogue . The News on the March sequence was edited by RKO 's newsreel division to give it authenticity . They used stock footage from Pathé News and the General Film Library . 
 During post @-@ production Welles and special effects artist Linwood G. Dunn experimented with an optical printer to improve certain scenes that Welles found unsatisfactory from the footage . Whereas Welles was often immediately pleased with Wise 's work , he would require Dunn and post @-@ production audio engineer James G. Stewart to re @-@ do their work several times until he was satisfied . 
 Welles hired Bernard Herrmann to compose the film 's score . Where most Hollywood film scores were written quickly , in as few as two or three weeks after filming was completed , Herrmann was given 12 weeks to write the music . He had sufficient time to do his own orchestrations and conducting , and worked on the film reel by reel as it was shot and cut . He wrote complete musical pieces for some of the montages , and Welles edited many of the scenes to match their length . 
 = = = Trailer = = = 
 Written and directed by Welles at Toland 's suggestion , the theatrical trailer for Citizen Kane differs from other trailers in that it did not feature a single second of footage of the actual film itself , but acts as a wholly original , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , pseudo @-@ documentary piece on the film 's production . Filmed at the same time as Citizen Kane itself , it offers the only existing behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of the film . The trailer , shot by Harry J. Wild instead of Toland , follows an unseen Welles as he provides narration for a tour around the film set , introductions to the film 's core cast members , and a brief overview of Kane 's character . The trailer also contains a number of trick shots , including one of Everett Sloane appearing at first to be running into the camera , which turns out to be the reflection of the camera in a mirror . 
 At the time , it was almost unprecedented for a film trailer to not actually feature anything of the film itself ; and while Citizen Kane is frequently cited as a ground @-@ breaking , influential film , Simon Callow argues its trailer was no less original in its approach . Callow writes that it has " great playful charm ... it is a miniature documentary , almost an introduction to the cinema ... Teasing , charming , completely original , it is a sort of conjuring trick : without his face appearing once on the screen , Welles entirely dominates its five [ sic ] minutes ' duration . " 
 = = Style = = 
 Film scholars and historians view Citizen Kane as Welles 's attempt to create a new style of filmmaking by studying various forms of film making , and combining them all into one . However , Welles stated that his love for cinema began only when he started the work on the film . When asked where he got the confidence as a first @-@ time director to direct a film so radically different from contemporary cinema , he responded , " Ignorance , ignorance , sheer ignorance — you know there 's no confidence to equal it . It 's only when you know something about a profession , I think , that you 're timid or careful . " 
 David Bordwell wrote that " The best way to understand Citizen Kane is to stop worshiping it as a triumph of technique . " Bordwell argues that the film did not invent any of its famous techniques such as deep focus cinematography , shots of the ceilings , chiaroscuro lighting and temporal jump @-@ cuts , and many of these stylistics had been used in German Expressionist films of the 1920s , such as The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari . But Bordwell asserts that the film did put them all together for the first time and perfected the medium in one single film . In a 1948 interview D. W. Griffith said " I loved Citizen Kane and particularly loved the ideas he took from me . " 
 Arguments against the film 's cinematic innovations were made as early as 1946 when French historian Georges Sadoul wrote that " the film is an encyclopedia of old techniques . " Sadoul pointed out such examples as compositions that used both the foreground and the background in the films of Auguste and Louis Lumière , special effects used in the films of Georges Méliès , shots of the ceiling in Erich von Stroheim 's Greed and newsreel montages in the films of Dziga Vertov . 
 French film critic André Bazin defended the film and wrote that " In this respect , the accusation of plagiarism could very well be extended to the film 's use of panchromatic film or its exploitation of the properties of gelatinous silver halide . " Bazin disagreed with Sadoul 's comparison to Lumière 's cinematography since Citizen Kane used more sophisticated lenses , but acknowledged that the film had similarities to such previous works as The 49th Parallel and The Power and the Glory . Bazin stated that " even if Welles did not invent the cinematic devices employed in Citizen Kane , one should nevertheless credit him with the invention of their meaning . " Bazin championed the techniques in the film for its depiction of heightened reality , but Bordwell believes that the film 's use of special effects contradict some of Bazin 's theories . 
 = = = Storytelling techniques = = = 
 Citizen Kane eschews the traditional linear , chronological narrative , and tells Kane 's story entirely in flashback using different points of view , many of them from Kane 's aged and forgetful associates , the cinematic equivalent of the unreliable narrator in literature . Welles also dispenses with the idea of a single storyteller and uses multiple narrators to recount Kane 's life . The use of multiple narrators was unheard of in Hollywood films . Each narrator recounts a different part of Kane 's life , with each story partly overlapping . The film depicts Kane as an enigma , a complicated man who , in the end , leaves viewers with more questions than answers as to his character , such as the newsreel footage where he is attacked for being both a communist and a fascist . 
 The technique of using flashbacks had been used in earlier films — most notably in The Power and the Glory ( 1933 ) — but no film was as immersed in this technique as Citizen Kane . The use of the reporter Thompson acts as a surrogate for the audience , questioning Kane 's associates and piecing together his life . 
 At that time films typically had an " omniscient perspective " , which Marilyn <unk> says give the audience the " illusion that we are looking with impunity into a world which is unaware of our gaze , Hollywood movies give us a feeling of power . " The film begins in this fashion up until the News on the March sequence , after which we the audience see the film through the perspectives of others . The News on the March sequence gives an overview of Kane 's entire life ( and the film 's entire story ) at the beginning of the film , leaving the audience without the typical suspense of wondering how it will end . Instead the film 's repetitions of events compels the audience to analyze and wonder why Kane 's life happened the way that it did , under the pretext of finding out what " Rosebud " means . The film then returns to the omniscient perspective in the final scene , when only the audience discovers what " Rosebud " is . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 The most innovative technical aspect of Citizen Kane is the extended use of deep focus . In nearly every scene in the film , the foreground , background and everything in between are all in sharp focus . Cinematographer Toland did this through his experimentation with lenses and lighting . Toland described the achievement , made possible by the sensitivity of modern speed film , in an article for Theatre Arts magazine : 
 New developments in the science of motion picture photography are not abundant at this advanced stage of the game but periodically one is perfected to make this a greater art . Of these I am in an excellent position to discuss what is termed “ Pan @-@ focus ” , as I have been active for two years in its development and used it for the first time in Citizen Kane . Through its use , it is possible to photograph action from a range of eighteen inches from the camera lens to over two hundred feet away , with extreme foreground and background figures and action both recorded in sharp relief . Hitherto , the camera had to be focused either for a close or a distant shot , all efforts to encompass both at the same time resulting in one or the other being out of focus . This handicap necessitated the breaking up of a scene into long and short angles , with much consequent loss of realism . With pan @-@ focus , the camera , like the human eye , sees an entire panorama at once , with everything clear and lifelike . 
 Both this article and a May 1941 Life magazine article with illustrated examples helped popularize deep focus cinematography and Toland 's achievements on the film . 
 Another unorthodox method used in the film was the way low @-@ angle shots were used to display a point of view facing upwards , thus allowing ceilings to be shown in the background of several scenes . Breaking with studio convention , every set was built with a ceiling — many constructed of fabric that ingeniously concealed microphones . Welles felt that the camera should show what the eyes see , and that it was a bad theatrical convention to pretend there was no ceiling — " a big lie in order to get all those terrible lights up there , " he said . He became fascinated with the look of low angles , which made even dull interiors look interesting . One extremely low angle is used to photograph the encounter between Kane and Leland after Kane loses the election . A hole was dug for the camera , which required drilling into the concrete floor . 
 Welles credited Toland on the same title card as himself and said " It 's impossible to say how much I owe to Gregg . He was superb . " He called Toland " the best director of photography that ever existed . " 
 = = = Sound = = = 
 Citizen Kane 's sound was recorded by Bailey Fesler and re @-@ recorded in post @-@ production by audio engineer James G. Stewart , both of whom had worked in radio . Stewart said that Hollywood films never deviated from a basic pattern of how sound could be recorded or used , but with Welles " deviation from the pattern was possible because he demanded it . " Although the film is known for its complex soundtrack , much of the audio is heard as it was recorded by Fesler and without manipulation . 
 Welles used techniques from radio like overlapping dialogue . The scene in which characters sing " Oh , Mr. Kane " was especially complicated and required mixing several soundtracks together . He also used different " sound perspectives " to create the illusion of distances , such as in scenes at Xanadu where characters speak to each other at far distances . Welles experimented with sound in post @-@ production , creating audio montages , and chose to create all of the sound effects for the film instead of using RKO 's library of sound effects . 
 Welles used an aural technique from radio called the " lightning @-@ mix " . Welles used this technique to link complex montage sequences via a series of related sounds or phrases . For example , Kane grows from a child into a young man in just two shots . As Thatcher hands eight @-@ year @-@ old Kane a sled and wishes him a Merry Christmas , the sequence suddenly jumps to a shot of Thatcher fifteen years later , completing the sentence he began in both the previous shot and the chronological past . Other radio techniques include using a number of voices , each saying a sentence or sometimes merely a fragment of a sentence , and splicing the dialogue together in quick succession , such as the projection room scene . The film 's sound cost $ 16 @,@ 996 , but was originally budgeted at $ 7 @,@ 288 . 
 Film critic and director François Truffaut wrote that " Before Kane , nobody in Hollywood knew how to set music properly in movies . Kane was the first , in fact the only , great film that uses radio techniques . … A lot of filmmakers know enough to follow Auguste Renoir 's advice to fill the eyes with images at all costs , but only Orson Welles understood that the sound track had to be filled in the same way . " Cedric <unk> of The Clipper wrote " of all of the delectable flavours that linger on the palate after seeing Kane , the use of sound is the strongest . " 
 = = = Make @-@ up = = = 
 The make @-@ up for Citizen Kane was created and applied by Maurice Seiderman ( 1907 – 1989 ) , a junior member of the RKO make @-@ up department . Seiderman 's family came to the United States from Russia in 1920 , escaping persecution . As a child Seiderman had won a drawing competition and received an apprenticeship at the Moscow Art Theatre , where his father was a wigmaker and make @-@ up artist . In New York his uncle was a theatrical scenic painter , and he helped Seiderman get into the union . He worked on Max Reinhardt 's 1924 production of The Miracle and with the Yiddish Art Theatre , and he studied the human figure at the Art Students League of New York . After he moved to Los Angeles he was hired first by Max Factor and then by RKO . Seiderman had not been accepted into the union , which recognized him as only an apprentice , but RKO nevertheless used him to make up principal actors . 
 " Apprentices were not supposed to make up any principals , only extras , and an apprentice could not be on a set without a journeyman present , " wrote make @-@ up artist Dick Smith , who became friends with Seiderman in 1979 . " During his years at RKO I suspect these rules were probably overlooked often . " By 1940 Seiderman 's uncredited film work included Winterset , Gunga Din , The Hunchback of Notre Dame , Swiss Family Robinson and Abe Lincoln in Illinois . " Seiderman had gained a reputation as one of the most inventive and creatively precise up @-@ and @-@ coming makeup men in Hollywood , " wrote biographer Frank Brady . 
 On an early tour of RKO , Welles met Seiderman in the small make @-@ up lab he created for himself in an unused dressing room . " Welles fastened on to him at once , " wrote biographer Charles Higham . " With his great knowledge of makeup — indeed , his obsession with it , for he hated his flat nose — Welles was fascinated … Seiderman had an intimate knowledge of anatomy and the process of aging and was acquainted with every line , wrinkle and accretion of fat in aging men and women . Impatient with most makeup methods of his era , he used casts of his subjects in order to develop makeup methods that ensured complete naturalness of expression — a naturalness unrivaled in Hollywood . " 
 " When Kane came out in script form , Orson told all of us about the picture and said that the most important aspect was the makeup , " Seiderman recalled . " I felt that I was being given an assignment that was unique — so I worked accordingly . And there was a lot of work to do . Straight makeups were done in the makeup department by staff , but all the trick stuff and the principal characters were my personal work ; nobody else ever touched them . They could not have handled it . " 
 Seiderman developed a thorough plan for aging the principal characters , first making a plaster cast of the face of each of the actors who aged , except Joseph Cotten who was unavailable at that time . He made a plaster mold of Welles 's body down to the hips . 
 " My sculptural techniques for the characters ' aging were handled by adding pieces of white modeling clay , which matched the plaster , onto the surface of each bust , " Seiderman told visual arts historian Norman Gambill . When Seiderman achieved the desired effect he cast the clay pieces in a soft plastic material that he formulated himself . These appliances were then placed onto the plaster bust and a four @-@ piece mold was made for each phase of aging . The castings were then fully painted and paired with the appropriate wig for evaluation . 
 Before the actors went before the cameras each day , the pliable pieces were applied directly to their faces to recreate Seiderman 's sculptural image . Welles was allergic to Max Factor 's gum , so Seiderman invented an alternative that also photographed more realistically . The facial surface was <unk> in a flexible red plastic compound ; Cotten recalled being instructed to puff out his cheeks during this process . Later , seeing the results in the mirror , Cotten told Seiderman , " I am acting the part of a nice old gentleman , not a relief map of the Rocky Mountains . " Seiderman replied , " You 'd be surprised at what the camera doesn 't see unless we place it within its view . How about some more coffee ? " 
 The red ground resulted in a warmth of tone that was picked up by the sensitive panchromatic film . Over that was applied liquid greasepaint , and then finally a colorless translucent talcum . Seiderman created the effect of skin pores on Kane 's face by stippling the surface with a negative cast he made from an orange peel . 
 Welles was just as heavily made up as young Kane as he was for old Kane , and he often arrived on the set at 2 : 30 a.m. Application of the sculptural make @-@ up for the oldest incarnation of the character took three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours . The make @-@ up included appliances to age Welles 's shoulders , breast and stomach . " In the film and production photographs , you can see that Kane had a belly that overhung , " Seiderman said . " That was not a costume , it was the rubber sculpture that created the image . You could see how Kane 's silk shirt clung <unk> to the character 's body . It could not have been done any other way . " 
 Seiderman worked with Charles Wright on the wigs . These went over a flexible skull cover that Seiderman created and sewed into place with elastic thread . When he found the wigs too full he untied one hair at a time to alter their shape . Kane 's mustache was inserted into the makeup surface a few hairs at a time , to realistically vary the color and texture . 
 Seiderman made scleral lenses for Welles , Dorothy Comingore , George Coulouris and Everett Sloane , to dull the brightness of their young eyes . The lenses took a long time to fit properly , and Seiderman began work on them before devising any of the other makeup . " I painted them to age in phases , ending with the blood vessels and the Aurora <unk> of old age . " 
 " Cotten was the only principal for whom I had not made any sculptural casts , wigs or lenses , " Seiderman said . When Cotten 's old @-@ age scenes needed to be shot out of sequence due to Welles 's injured ankle , Seiderman improvised with appliances made for Kane 's make @-@ up . A sun visor was chosen to conceal Cotten 's low hairline and the lenses he wore — hastily supplied by a Beverly Hills ophthalmologist — were uncomfortable . 
 Seiderman 's tour de force , the breakfast montage , was shot all in one day . " Twelve years , two years shot at each scene , " he said . " Please realize , by the way , that a two @-@ year jump in age is a bit harder to accomplish visually than one of 20 years . " 
 As they did with art direction , the major studios gave screen credit for make @-@ up to only the department head . When RKO make @-@ up department head Mel Berns refused to share credit with Seiderman , who was only an apprentice , Welles told Berns that there would be no make @-@ up credit . Welles signed a large advertisement in the Los Angeles newspaper : 
 <unk> TO <unk> WHO <unk> SCREEN <unk> FOR " <unk> <unk> " 
 AND <unk> TO <unk> WHO DON 'T 
 TO ALL THE <unk> , THE <unk> , THE <unk> , THE <unk> , <unk> 
 AND <unk> TO <unk> <unk> , THE BEST <unk> @-@ UP MAN IN THE WORLD 
 " To put this event in context , remember that I was a very low man , " Seiderman recalled . " I wasn 't even called a make @-@ up man . I had started their laboratory and developed their plastic appliances for make @-@ up . But my salary was $ 25 a week . And I had no union card . " 
 Seiderman told Gambill that after Citizen Kane was released , Welles was invited to a White House dinner where Frances Perkins was among the guests . Welles told her about the Russian immigrant who did the make @-@ up for his film but could not join the union . Seiderman said the head of the union received a call from the Labor Department the next day , and in November 1941 he was a full union member . 
 = = = Sets = = = 
 Although credited as an assistant , the film 's art direction was done by Perry Ferguson . Welles and Ferguson got along during their collaboration . In the weeks before production began Welles , Toland and Ferguson met regularly to discuss the film and plan every shot , set design and prop . Ferguson would take notes during these discussions and create rough designs of the sets and story boards for individual shots . After Welles approved the rough sketches , Ferguson made miniature models for Welles and Toland to experiment on with a periscope in order to rehearse and perfect each shot . Ferguson then had detailed drawings made for the set design , including the film 's lighting design . The set design was an integral part of the film 's overall look and Toland 's cinematography . 
 In the original script the Great Hall at Xanadu was modeled after the Great Hall in Hearst Castle and its design included a mixture of Renaissance and Gothic styles . " The <unk> element is brought out in the almost perverse juxtaposition of incongruous architectural styles and motifs , " wrote Carringer . Before RKO cut the film 's budget , Ferguson 's designs were more elaborate and resembled the production designs of early Cecil B. DeMille films and Intolerance . The budget cuts reduced Ferguson 's budget by 33 percent and his work cost $ 58 @,@ 775 total , which was below average at that time . To save costs Ferguson and Welles re @-@ wrote scenes in Xanadu 's living room and transported them to the Great Hall . A large staircase from another film was found and used at no additional cost . When asked about the limited budget , Ferguson said " Very often — as in that much @-@ discussed ' Xanadu ' set in Citizen Kane — we can make a foreground piece , a background piece , and imaginative lighting suggest a great deal more on the screen than actually exists on the stage . " According to the film 's official budget there were 81 sets built , but Ferguson said there were between 106 and 116 . 
 Still photographs of <unk> Castle in Huntington , New York , were used in the opening montage , representing Kane 's Xanadu estate . Ferguson also designed statues from Kane 's collection with styles ranging from Greek to German Gothic . The sets were also built to accommodate Toland 's camera movements . Walls were built to fold and furniture could quickly be moved . The film 's famous ceilings were made out of muslin fabric and camera boxes were built into the floors for low angle shots . Welles later said that he was proud that the film production value looked much more expensive than the film 's budget . Although neither worked with Welles again , Toland and Ferguson collaborated in several films in the 1940s . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 The film 's special effects were supervised by RKO department head Vernon L. Walker . Welles pioneered several visual effects to cheaply shoot things like crowd scenes and large interior spaces . For example , the scene in which the camera in the opera house rises dramatically to the rafters , to show the workmen showing a lack of appreciation for Susan Alexander Kane 's performance , was shot by a camera <unk> upwards over the performance scene , then a curtain wipe to a miniature of the upper regions of the house , and then another curtain wipe matching it again with the scene of the workmen . Other scenes effectively employed miniatures to make the film look much more expensive than it truly was , such as various shots of Xanadu . 
 Some shots included rear screen projection in the background , such as Thompson 's interview of Leland and some of the ocean backgrounds at Xanadu . Bordwell claims that the scene where Thatcher agrees to be Kane 's guardian used rear screen projection to depict young Kane in the background , despite this scene being cited as a prime example of Toland 's deep focus cinematography . A special effects camera crew from Walker 's department was required for the extreme close @-@ up shots such as Kane 's lips when he says " Rosebud " and the shot of the typewriter typing Susan 's bad review . 
 Optical effects artist Dunn claimed that “ up to 80 percent of some reels was optically printed . ” These shots were traditionally attributed to Toland for years . The optical printer improved some of the deep focus shots . One problem with the optical printer was that it sometimes created excessive graininess , such as the optical zoom out of the snow globe . Welles decided to superimpose snow falling to mask the graininess in these shots . Toland said that he disliked the results of the optical printer , but acknowledged that " RKO special effects expert Vernon Walker , ASC , and his staff handled their part of the production — a by no means inconsiderable assignment — with ability and fine understanding . " 
 Any time deep focus was impossible — as in the scene in which Kane finishes a negative review of Susan 's opera while at the same time firing the person who began writing the review — an optical printer was used to make the whole screen appear in focus , visually layering one piece of film onto another . However , some apparently deep @-@ focus shots were the result of in @-@ camera effects , as in the famous scene in which Kane breaks into Susan 's room after her suicide attempt . In the background , Kane and another man break into the room , while simultaneously the medicine bottle and a glass with a spoon in it are in closeup in the foreground . The shot was an in @-@ camera matte shot . The foreground was shot first , with the background dark . Then the background was lit , the foreground darkened , the film rewound , and the scene re @-@ shot with the background action . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film 's music was composed by Bernard Herrmann . Herrmann had composed for Welles for his Mercury Theatre radio broadcasts . Because it was Herrmann 's first motion picture score , RKO wanted to pay him only a small fee , but Welles insisted he be paid at the same rate as Max Steiner . 
 The score established Herrmann as an important new composer of film soundtracks and eschewed the typical Hollywood practice of scoring a film with virtually non @-@ stop music . Instead Herrmann used what he later described as ' " radio scoring " , musical cues typically 5 – 15 seconds in length that bridge the action or suggest a different emotional response . The breakfast montage sequence begins with a graceful waltz theme and gets darker with each variation on that theme as the passage of time leads to the hardening of Kane 's personality and the breakdown of his first marriage . 
 Herrmann realized that musicians slated to play his music were hired for individual unique sessions ; there was no need to write for existing ensembles . This meant that he was free to score for unusual combinations of instruments , even instruments that are not commonly heard . In the opening sequence , for example , the tour of Kane 's estate Xanadu , Herrmann introduces a recurring leitmotiv played by low woodwinds , including a quartet of alto flutes . 
 For Susan Alexander Kane 's operatic sequence , Welles suggested that Herrmann compose a witty parody of a Mary Garden vehicle , an aria from <unk> . " Our problem was to create something that would give the audience the feeling of the quicksand into which this simple little girl , having a charming but small voice , is suddenly thrown , " Herrmann said . Writing in the style of a 19th @-@ century French Oriental opera , Herrmann put the aria in a key that would force the singer to strain to reach the high notes , culminating in a high D , well outside the range of Susan Alexander . Soprano Jean Forward dubbed the vocal part for Comingore . Houseman claimed to have written the libretto , based on Jean Racine ’ s <unk> and <unk> , although some confusion remains since Lucille Fletcher remembered preparing the lyrics . Fletcher , then Herrmann 's wife , wrote the libretto for his opera Wuthering Heights . 
 Music enthusiasts consider the scene in which Susan Alexander Kane attempts to sing the famous cavatina " Una voce poco fa " from Il <unk> di <unk> by Gioachino Rossini with vocal coach Signor <unk> as especially memorable for depicting the horrors of learning music through mistakes . 
 In 1972 , Herrmann said , " I was fortunate to start my career with a film like Citizen Kane , it 's been a downhill run ever since ! " Welles loved Herrmann 's score and told director Henry <unk> that it was 50 percent responsible for the film 's artistic success . 
 Some incidental music came from other sources . Welles heard the tune used for the publisher 's theme , " Oh , Mr. Kane " , in Mexico . Called " A Poco No " , the song was written by Pepe <unk> and special lyrics were written by Herman Ruby . 
 " In a Mizz " , a 1939 jazz song by Charlie Barnet and Haven Johnson , bookends Thompson 's second interview of Susan Alexander Kane . " I kind of based the whole scene around that song , " Welles said . " The music is by Nat Cole — it 's his trio . " Later — beginning with the lyrics , " It can 't be love " — " In a Mizz " is performed at the Everglades picnic , framing the fight in the tent between Susan and Kane . Musicians including bandleader Cee Pee Johnson ( drums ) , Alton Redd ( vocals ) , Raymond Tate ( trumpet ) , Buddy Collette ( alto sax ) and Buddy Banks ( tenor sax ) are featured . 
 All of the music used in the newsreel came from the RKO music library , edited at Welles 's request by the newsreel department to achieve what Herrmann called " their own crazy way of cutting " . The News on the March theme that accompanies the newsreel titles is " Belgian March " by Anthony Collins , from the film Nurse Edith Cavell . Other examples are an excerpt from Alfred Newman 's score for Gunga Din ( the exploration of Xanadu ) , Roy Webb 's theme for the film Reno ( the growth of Kane 's empire ) , and bits of Webb 's score for Five Came Back ( introducing Walter Parks Thatcher ) . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 One of the editing techniques used in Citizen Kane was the use of montage to collapse time and space , using an episodic sequence on the same set while the characters changed costume and make @-@ up between cuts so that the scene following each cut would look as if it took place in the same location , but at a time long after the previous cut . In the breakfast montage , Welles chronicles the breakdown of Kane 's first marriage in five vignettes that condense 16 years of story time into two minutes of screen time . Welles said that the idea for the breakfast scene " was stolen from The Long Christmas Dinner of Thornton Wilder … a one @-@ act play , which is a long Christmas dinner that takes you through something like 60 years of a family 's life . " The film often uses long dissolves to signify the passage of time and its psychological effect of the characters , such as the scene in which the abandoned sled is covered with snow after the young Kane is sent away with Thatcher . 
 Welles was influenced by the editing theories of Sergei Eisenstein by using jarring cuts that caused " sudden graphic or associative contrasts " , such as the cut from Kane 's deathbed to the beginning of the News on the March sequence and a sudden shot of a shrieking bird at the beginning of Raymond 's flashback . Although the film typically favors mise @-@ en @-@ scène over montage , the scene in which Kane goes to Susan Alexander 's apartment after first meeting her is the only one that is primarily cut as close @-@ ups with shots and counter shots between Kane and Susan . <unk> says that " by using a standard Hollywood technique sparingly , [ Welles ] revitalizes its psychological expressiveness . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Political themes = = = 
 In her 1992 monograph for the British Film Institute , critic Laura Mulvey explored the anti @-@ fascist themes of Citizen Kane . The News on the March newsreel presents Kane keeping company with Hitler and other dictators while he smugly assures the public there will be no war . Mulvey wrote that the film reflects " the battle between intervention and isolationism " then being waged in the United States ; the film was released six months before the attack on Pearl Harbor , while President Franklin D. Roosevelt was laboring to win public opinion for entering World War II . " Not only was the war in Europe the burning public issue of the time , " Mulvey wrote , " it was of passionate personal importance to Orson Welles … In the rhetoric of Citizen Kane , the destiny of isolationism is realised in metaphor : in Kane 's own fate , dying wealthy and lonely , surrounded by the detritus of European culture and history . " 
 Journalist Ignacio <unk> has cited the film as an early example of mass media manipulation of public opinion and the power that media conglomerates have on influencing the democratic process . <unk> believes that this early example of a media mogul influencing politics is outdated and that " today Citizen Kane would be a dwarf . He owned a few papers in one country . The forces that dominate today have integrated image with text and sound and the world is their market . There are media groups with the power of a thousand Citizen Kanes . " Media mogul Rupert Murdoch is sometimes labeled as a latter @-@ day Citizen Kane . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release controversy = = = 
 To ensure that Citizen Kane 's influence from Hearst 's life was a secret , Welles limited access to dailies and managed the film 's publicity . A December 1940 feature story in Stage magazine compared the film 's narrative to Faust and made no mention of Hearst . 
 The film was scheduled to premiere at RKO 's flagship theater Radio City Music Hall on February 14 , but in early January 1941 Welles was not finished with post @-@ production work and told RKO that it still needed its musical score . Writers for national magazines had early deadlines and so a rough cut was previewed for a select few on January 3 , 1941 for such magazines as Life , Look and Redbook . Gossip columnist Hedda Hopper ( and Parsons ' arch rival ) showed up to the screening uninvited . Most of the critics at the preview said that they liked the film and gave it good advanced reviews . Hopper wrote negatively about it , calling the film a “ vicious and irresponsible attack on a great man ” and criticizing its corny writing and old fashioned photography . Friday magazine ran an article drawing point @-@ by @-@ point comparisons between Kane and Hearst and documented how Welles had led on Parsons , Hollywood correspondent for Hearst papers . Up until this Welles had been friendly with Parsons . The magazine quoted Welles as saying that he couldn ’ t understand why she was so nice to him and that she should “ wait until the woman finds out that the picture ’ s about her boss . ” Welles immediately denied making the statement and the editor of Friday admitted that it may be false . Welles apologized to Parsons and assured her that he had never made that remark . 
 Shortly after Friday 's article , Hearst sent Parsons an angry letter complaining that he had learned about Citizen Kane from Hopper and not her . The incident made a fool of Parsons and compelled her to start attacking Welles and the film . Parsons demanded a private screening of the film and personally threatened Schaefer on Hearst ’ s behalf , first with a lawsuit and then with a vague threat of consequences for everyone in Hollywood . On January 10 Parsons and two lawyers working for Hearst were given a private screening of the film . James G. Stewart was present at the screening and said that she walked out of the film . Soon after , Parsons called Schaefer and threatened RKO with a lawsuit if they released Kane . She also contacted the management of Radio City Music Hall and demanded that they not screen it . The next day , the front page headline in Daily Variety read , " <unk> <unk> RKO FROM <unk> . " Hearst began this ban by suppressing promotion of RKO 's Kitty Foyle , but in two weeks the ban was lifted for everything except Kane . 
 When Schaefer did not submit to Parsons she called other studio heads and made more threats on behalf of Hearst to expose the private lives of people throughout the entire film industry . Welles was threatened with an exposé about his romance with the married actress Dolores del Rio , who wanted the affair kept secret until her divorce was finalized . In a statement to journalists Welles denied that the film was about Hearst . Hearst began preparing an injunction against the film for libel and invasion of privacy , but Welles 's lawyer told him that he doubted Hearst would proceed due to the negative publicity and required testimony that an injunction would bring . 
 The Hollywood Reporter ran a front @-@ page story on January 13 that Hearst papers were about to run a series of editorials attacking Hollywood 's practice of hiring refugees and immigrants for jobs that could be done by Americans . The goal was to put pressure on the other studios to force RKO to shelve Kane . Many of those immigrants had fled Europe after the rise of fascism and feared losing the safe haven of the United States . Soon afterwards , Schaefer was approached by Nicholas Schenck , head of Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer 's parent company , with an offer on the behalf of Louis B. Mayer and other Hollywood executives to RKO Pictures of $ 805 @,@ 000 to destroy all prints of the film and burn the negative . Once RKO 's legal team reassured Schaefer , the studio announced on January 21 that Kane would be released as scheduled , and with one of the largest promotional campaigns in the studio 's history . Schaefer brought Welles to New York City for a private screening of the film with the New York corporate heads of the studios and their lawyers . There was no objection to its release provided that certain changes , including the removal or softening of specific references that might offend Hearst , were made . Welles agreed and cut the running time from 122 minutes to 119 minutes . The cuts satisfied the corporate lawyers . 
 = = = Hearst 's response = = = 
 Hearing about Citizen Kane enraged Hearst so much that he banned any advertising , reviewing , or mentioning of it in his papers , and had his journalists libel Welles . Welles used Hearst 's opposition as a pretext for previewing the film in several opinion @-@ making screenings in Los Angeles , lobbying for its artistic worth against the hostile campaign that Hearst was waging . A special press screening took place in early March . Henry Luce was in attendance and reportedly wanted to buy the film from RKO for $ 1 million to distribute it himself . The reviews for this screening were positive . A Hollywood Review headline read , " Mr. Genius Comes Through ; ' Kane ' Astonishing Picture " . The Motion Picture Herald reported about the screening and Welles 's intention to sue RKO . Time magazine wrote that " The objection of Mr. Hearst , who founded a publishing empire on sensationalism , is ironic . For to most of the several hundred people who have seen the film at private screenings , Citizen Kane is the most sensational product of the U.S. movie industry . " A second press screening occurred in April . 
 When Schaefer rejected Hearst 's offer to suppress the film , Hearst banned every newspaper and station in his media conglomerate from reviewing — or even mentioning — the film . He also had many movie theaters ban it , and many did not show it through fear of being socially exposed by his massive newspaper empire . The Oscar @-@ nominated documentary The Battle Over Citizen Kane lays the blame for the film 's relative failure squarely at the feet of Hearst . The film did decent business at the box office ; it went on to be the sixth highest grossing film in its year of release , a modest success its backers found acceptable . Nevertheless , the film 's commercial performance fell short of its creators ' expectations . Hearst 's biographer David <unk> points out that Hearst 's actions were not the only reason Kane failed , however : the innovations Welles made with narrative , as well as the dark message at the heart of the film ( that the pursuit of success is ultimately futile ) meant that a popular audience could not appreciate its merits . 
 Hearst 's attacks against Welles went beyond attempting to suppress the film . Welles said that while he was on his post @-@ filming lecture tour a police detective approached him at a restaurant and advised him not to go back to his hotel . A 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl had reportedly been hidden in the closet of his room , and two photographers were waiting for him to walk in . Knowing he would be jailed after the resulting publicity , Welles did not return to the hotel but waited until the train left town the following morning . " But that wasn 't Hearst , " Welles said , " that was a hatchet man from the local Hearst paper who thought he would advance himself by doing it . " 
 In March 1941 Welles directed a Broadway version of Richard Wright 's Native Son ( and , for luck , used a " Rosebud " sled as a prop ) . Native Son received positive reviews , but Hearst @-@ owned papers used the opportunity to attack Welles as a communist . The Hearst papers vociferously attacked Welles after his April 1941 radio play , " His Honor , the Mayor " , produced for The Free Company radio series on CBS . 
 Welles described his chance encounter with Hearst in an elevator at the Fairmont Hotel on the night Citizen Kane opened in San Francisco . Hearst and Welles 's father were acquaintances , so Welles introduced himself and asked Hearst if he would like to come to the opening . Hearst did not respond . " As he was getting off at his floor , I said , ' Charles Foster Kane would have accepted . ' No reply " , recalled Welles . " And Kane would have you know . That was his style — just as he finished Jed Leland 's bad review of Susan as an opera singer . " 
 In 1945 Hearst journalist Robert Shaw wrote that the film got " a full tide of insensate fury " from Hearst papers , " then it ebbed suddenly . With one brain cell working , the chief realized that such hysterical barking by the trained seals would attract too much attention to the picture . But to this day the name of Orson Welles is on the official son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch list of every Hearst newspaper . " 
 Despite Hearst 's attempts to destroy the film , since 1941 references to his life and career have usually included a reference to Citizen Kane , such as the headline ' Son of Citizen Kane Dies ' for the obituary of Hearst 's son . In 2012 the Hearst estate agreed to screen the film at Hearst Castle in San Simeon , breaking Hearst 's ban on the film . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Radio City Music Hall 's management refused to screen Citizen Kane for its premiere . A possible factor was Parsons 's threat that The American Weekly would run a defamatory story on the grandfather of major RKO stockholder Nelson Rockefeller . Other exhibitors feared being sued for libel by Hearst and refused to show the film . In March Welles threatened the RKO board of governors with a lawsuit if they did not release the film . Schaefer stood by Welles and opposed the board of governors . When RKO still delayed the film 's release Welles offered to buy the film for $ 1 million and the studio finally agreed to release the film on May 1 . 
 Schaefer managed to book a few theaters willing to show the film . Hearst papers refused to accept advertising . RKO 's publicity advertisements for the film erroneously promoted it as a love story . 
 Kane opened at the RKO Palace Theatre on Broadway in New York on May 1 , 1941 , in Chicago on May 6 , and in Los Angeles on May 8 . Welles said that at the Chicago premiere that he attended the theater was almost empty . It did well in cities and larger towns but fared poorly in more remote areas . RKO still had problems getting exhibitors to show the film . For example , one chain controlling more than 500 theaters got Welles 's film as part of a package but refused to play it , reportedly out of fear of Hearst . Hearst 's disruption of the film 's release damaged its box office performance and , as a result , it lost $ 160 @,@ 000 during its initial run . The film earned $ 23 @,@ 878 during its first week in New York . By the ninth week it only made $ 7 @,@ 279 . Overall it lost money in New York , Boston , Chicago , Los Angeles , San Francisco and Washington , D.C. , but made a profit in Seattle . 
 = = = Contemporary responses = = = 
 Citizen Kane received good reviews from several critics . New York Daily News critic Kate Cameron called it " one of the most interesting and technically superior films that has ever come out of a Hollywood studio " . New York World @-@ Telegram critic William Boehnel said that the film was " staggering and belongs at once among the greatest screen achievements " . Time magazine wrote that " it has found important new techniques in picture @-@ making and story @-@ telling . " Life magazine 's review said that " few movies have ever come from Hollywood with such powerful narrative , such original technique , such exciting photography . " John C. Mosher of The New Yorker called the film 's style " like fresh air " and raved " Something new has come to the movie world at last . " Anthony Bower of The Nation called it " brilliant " and praised the cinematography and performances by Welles , Comingore and Cotten . John O 'Hara 's Newsweek review called it the best picture he 'd ever seen and said Welles was " the best actor in the history of acting . " Welles called O 'Hara 's review " the greatest review that anybody ever had . " 
 The day following the premiere of Citizen Kane , The New York Times critic Bosley Crowther wrote that " ... it comes close to being the most sensational film ever made in Hollywood . " 
 Count on Mr. Welles : he doesn 't do things by halves . ... Upon the screen he discovered an area large enough for his expansive whims to have free play . And the consequence is that he has made a picture of tremendous and overpowering scope , not in physical extent so much as in its rapid and graphic rotation of thoughts . Mr. Welles has put upon the screen a motion picture that really moves . 
 In the UK C. A. Lejeune of The Observer called it " The most exciting film that has come out of Hollywood in twenty @-@ five years " and Dilys Powell of The Sunday Times said the film 's style was made " with the ease and boldness and resource of one who controls and is not controlled by his medium . " Edward <unk> Lean of Horizon praised the film ’ s technical style , calling it " perhaps a decade ahead of its contemporaries . " 
 A few reviews were mixed . Otis Ferguson of The New Republic said it was " the boldest free @-@ hand stroke in major screen production since Griffith and Bitzer were running wild to <unk> the camera " , but also criticized its style , calling it a " retrogression in film technique " and stating that " it holds no great place " in film history . In a rare film review , filmmaker Erich von Stroheim criticized the film 's story and non @-@ linear structure , but praised the technical style and performances , and wrote " Whatever the truth may be about it , Citizen Kane is a great picture and will go down in screen history . More power to Welles ! " 
 Some prominent critics wrote negative reviews . In his 1941 review for Sur , Jorge Luis Borges famously called the film " a labyrinth with no center " and predicted that its legacy would be a film " whose historical value is undeniable but which no one cares to see again . " The Argus Weekend Magazine critic Erle Cox called the film " amazing " but thought that Welles 's break with Hollywood traditions was " overdone . " Tatler 's James Agate called it " the well @-@ intentioned , muddled , amateurish thing one expects from high @-@ brows " and " a quite good film which tries to run the psychological essay in harness with your detective thriller , and doesn 't quite succeed . " Eileen <unk> of The New York Sun called it " a cold picture , unemotional , a puzzle rather than a drama " . Other people who disliked the film were W. H. Auden and James Agee . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Citizen Kane received the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Picture . The National Board of Review voted it Best Film of 1941 , and recognized Welles and Coulouris for their performances . 
 Citizen Kane received nine nominations at the 1941 Academy Awards : 
 Outstanding Motion Picture – RKO Radio Pictures 
 Best Director – Orson Welles 
 Best Actor – Orson Welles 
 Best Writing ( Original Screenplay ) – Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles 
 Best Art Direction @-@ Interior Decoration ( Black @-@ and @-@ White ) – Perry Ferguson , Van Nest Polglase , A. Roland Fields , Darrell Silvera 
 Best Film Editing – Robert Wise 
 Best Cinematography ( Black @-@ and @-@ White ) – Gregg Toland 
 Best Music ( Score of a Dramatic Picture ) – Bernard Herrmann 
 Best Sound Recording – John O. <unk> 
 It was widely believed the film would win most of its Oscar nominations , but it received only the award for Best Writing ( Original Screenplay ) , shared by Welles and Mankiewicz . Variety reported that block voting by screen extras deprived Citizen Kane of Academy Awards for Best Picture and Best Actor ( Welles ) , and similar prejudices were likely to have been responsible for the film receiving no technical awards . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Citizen Kane was the only film made under Welles 's original contract with RKO Pictures , which gave him complete creative control . Welles 's new business manager and attorney permitted the contract to lapse . In July 1941 , Welles reluctantly signed a new and less favorable deal with RKO under which he produced and directed The Magnificent Ambersons ( 1942 ) , produced Journey into Fear ( 1943 ) , and began It 's All True , a film he agreed to do without payment . In the new contract Welles was an employee of the studio and lost the right to final cut , which later allowed RKO to modify and re @-@ cut The Magnificent Ambersons over his objections . In June 1942 Schaefer resigned the presidency of RKO Pictures and Welles 's contract was terminated by his successor . 
 = = = Release in Europe = = = 
 During World War II , Citizen Kane was not seen in most European countries . It was shown in France for the first time on July 10 , 1946 at the <unk> theatre in Paris . Initially most French film critics were influenced by the negative reviews of Jean @-@ Paul Sartre in 1945 and Georges Sadoul in 1946 . At that time many French intellectuals and filmmakers shared Sartre 's negative opinion that Hollywood filmmakers were uncultured . Sartre criticized the film 's flashbacks for its nostalgic and romantic preoccupation with the past instead of the realities of the present and said that " the whole film is based on a misconception of what cinema is all about . The film is in the past tense , whereas we all know that cinema has got to be in the present tense . " 
 André Bazin , a little @-@ known film critic working for Sartre 's Les Temps <unk> , was asked to give an impromptu speech about the film after a screening at the Colisée Theatre in the autumn of 1946 and changed the opinion of much of the audience . This speech led to Bazin 's 1947 article " The Technique of Citizen Kane " , which directly influenced public opinion about the film . Carringer wrote that Bazin was " the one who did the most to enhance the film ’ s reputation . " Both Bazin 's critique of the film and his theories about cinema itself centered around his strong belief in mise en scène . These theories were diametrically opposed to both the popular Soviet montage theory and the politically Marxist and anti @-@ Hollywood beliefs of most French film critics at that time . Bazin believed that a film should depict reality without the filmmaker imposing their " will " on the spectator , which the Soviet theory supported . Bazin wrote that Citizen Kane 's mise en scène created a " new conception of filmmaking " and that the freedom given to the audience from the deep focus shots was innovative by changing the entire concept of the cinematic image . Bazin wrote extensively about the mise en scène in the scene where Susan Alexander attempts suicide , which was one long take while other films would have used four or five shots in the scene . Bazin wrote that the film 's mise en scène " forces the spectator to participate in the meaning of the film " and creates " a psychological realism which brings the spectator back to the real conditions of perception . " 
 In his 1950 essay " The Evolution of the Language of Cinema " , Bazin placed Citizen Kane center stage as a work which ushered in a new period in cinema . One of the first critics to defend motion pictures as being on the same artistic level as literature or painting , Bazin often used the film as an example of cinema as an art form and wrote that " Welles has given the cinema a theoretical restoration . He has enriched his filmic repertory with new or forgotten effects that , in today ’ s artistic context , take on a significance we didn ’ t know they could have . " Bazin also compared the film to Roberto Rossellini 's <unk> for having " the same aesthetic concept of realism " and to the films of William Wyler shot by Toland ( such as The Little Foxes and The Best Years of Our Lives ) , all of which used deep focus cinematography that Bazin called " a dialectical step forward in film language . " 
 Bazin 's praise of the film went beyond film theory and reflected his own philosophy towards life itself . His metaphysical interpretations about the film reflected humankind ’ s place in the universe . Bazin believed that the film examined one person 's identity and search for meaning . It portrayed the world as ambiguous and full of contradictions , whereas films up until then simply portrayed people ’ s actions and motivations . Bazin 's biographer Dudley Andrew wrote that : 
 The world of Citizen Kane , that mysterious , dark , and infinitely deep world of space and memory where voices trail off into distant echoes and where meaning dissolves into interpretation , seemed to Bazin to mark the starting point from which all of us try to construct provisionally the sense of our lives . 
 Bazin went on to co @-@ found Cahiers du cinéma , whose contributors ( including future film directors François Truffaut and Jean @-@ Luc Godard ) also praised the film . The popularity of Truffaut 's auteur theory helped the film 's and Welles 's reputation . 
 = = = Re @-@ evaluation = = = 
 By 1942 Citizen Kane had run its course theatrically and , apart from a few showings at big city arthouse cinemas , it largely vanished and both the film 's and Welles 's reputation fell among American critics . In 1949 critic Richard Griffith in his overview of cinema , The Film Till Now , dismissed Citizen Kane as " ... <unk> if not crackpot Freud . " 
 In the United States , it was neglected and forgotten until its revival on television in the mid @-@ 1950s . Three key events in 1956 led to its re @-@ evaluation in the United States : first , RKO was one of the first studios to sell its library to television , and early that year Citizen Kane started to appear on television ; second , the film was re @-@ released theatrically to coincide with Welles 's return to the New York stage , where he played King Lear ; and third , American film critic Andrew Sarris wrote " Citizen Kane : The American Baroque " for Film Culture , and described it as " the great American film " and " the work that influenced the cinema more profoundly than any American film since Birth of a Nation . " Carringer considers Sarris 's essay as the most important influence on the film 's reputation in the US . 
 During Expo 58 , a poll of over 100 film historians named Kane one of the top ten greatest films ever made ( the group gave first @-@ place honors to The Battleship Potemkin ) . When a group of young film directors announced their vote for the top six , they were booed for not including the film . 
 In the decades since , its critical status as the greatest film ever made has grown , with numerous essays and books on it including Peter Cowie 's The Cinema of Orson Welles , Ronald Gottesman 's Focus on Citizen Kane , a collection of significant reviews and background pieces , and most notably Kael 's essay , " Raising Kane " , which promoted the value of the film to a much wider audience than it had reached before . Despite its criticism of Welles , it further popularized the notion of Citizen Kane as the great American film . The rise of art house and film society circuits also aided in the film 's rediscovery . David Thomson said that the film ' grows with every year as America comes to resemble it . " 
 The British magazine Sight & Sound has produced a Top Ten list surveying film critics every decade since 1952 , and is regarded as one of the most respected barometers of critical taste . Citizen Kane was a runner up to the top 10 in its 1952 poll but was voted as the greatest film ever made in its 1962 poll , retaining the top spot in every subsequent poll until 2012 , when Vertigo displaced it . 
 The film has also ranked number one in the following film " best of " lists : Julio <unk> 's The 100 Best Films of the Century , Cahiers du cinéma 's 100 films pour une <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Time Out magazine 's Top 100 Films ( Centenary ) , The Village Voice 's 100 Greatest Films , and The Royal Belgian Film Archive 's Most Important and <unk> American Films . 
 Roger Ebert called Citizen Kane the greatest film ever made : " But people don 't always ask about the greatest film . They ask , ' What 's your favorite movie ? ' Again , I always answer with Citizen Kane . " 
 In 1989 , the United States Library of Congress deemed the film " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry . Citizen Kane was one of the first 25 films inducted into the registry . 
 On February 18 , 1999 , the United States Postal Service honored Citizen Kane by including it in its Celebrate the Century series . The film was honored again February 25 , 2003 , in a series of U.S. postage stamps marking the 75th anniversary of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . Art director Perry Ferguson represents the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes craftsmen of filmmaking in the series ; he is depicted completing a sketch for Citizen Kane . 
 Citizen Kane was ranked number one in the American Film Institute 's polls of film industry artists and leaders in 1998 and 2007 . " Rosebud " was chosen as the 17th most memorable movie quotation in a 2005 AFI poll . The film 's score was one of 250 nominees for the top 25 film scores in American cinema in another 2005 AFI poll . 
 The film currently has a 100 % rating at Rotten Tomatoes , based on 70 reviews by approved critics , with an average rating of 9 @.@ 4 / 10 . The site 's consensus states : " Orson Welles 's epic tale of a publishing tycoon 's rise and fall is entertaining , poignant , and inventive in its storytelling , earning its reputation as a landmark achievement in film . " 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Citizen Kane has been called the most influential film of all time . Richard Corliss has asserted that Jules Dassin 's 1941 film The Tell @-@ Tale Heart was the first example of its influence and the first pop culture reference to the film occurred later in 1941 when the spoof comedy <unk> ' featured a " Rosebud " sled . The film 's cinematography was almost immediately influential and in 1942 American Cinematographer wrote " without a doubt the most immediately noticeable trend in cinematography methods during the year was the trend toward crisper definition and increased depth of field . " 
 The cinematography influenced John Huston 's The Maltese Falcon . Cinematographer Arthur Edeson used a wider @-@ angle lens than Toland and the film includes many long takes , low angles and shots of the ceiling , but it did not use deep focus shots on large sets to the extent that Citizen Kane did . Edeson and Toland are often credited together for revolutionizing cinematography in 1941 . Toland 's cinematography influenced his own work on The Best Years of Our Lives . Other films influenced include Gaslight , Mildred Pierce and Jane Eyre . Cinematographer Kazuo Miyagawa said that his use of deep focus was influenced by " the camera work of Gregg Toland in Citizen Kane " and not by traditional Japanese art . 
 Its cinematography , lighting , and flashback structure influenced such film noirs of the 1940s and 1950s as The Killers , Keeper of the Flame , Caught , The Great Man and This Gun for Hire . David Bordwell and Kristin Thompson have written that “ For over a decade thereafter American films displayed exaggerated foregrounds and somber lighting , enhanced by long takes and exaggerated camera movements . ” However , by the 1960s filmmakers such as those from the French New Wave and Cinéma vérité movements favored " flatter , more shallow images with softer focus " and Citizen Kane 's style became less fashionable . American filmmakers in the 1970s combined these two approaches by using long takes , rapid cutting , deep focus and telephoto shots all at once . Its use of long takes influenced films such as The Asphalt Jungle , and its use of deep focus cinematography influenced Gun Crazy , The Whip Hand , The Devil 's General and Justice Is Done . The flashback structure in which different characters have conflicting versions of past events influenced La <unk> <unk> and Man of Marble . 
 The film 's structure influenced the biographical films Lawrence of Arabia and Mishima : A Life in Four Chapters — which begin with the subject 's death and show their life in flashbacks — as well as Welles 's thriller Mr. Arkadin . Rosenbaum sees similarities in the film 's plot to Mr. Arkadin , as well as the theme of nostalgia for loss of innocence throughout Welles 's career , beginning with Citizen Kane and including The Magnificent Ambersons , Mr. Arkadin and Chimes at Midnight . Rosenbaum also points out how the film influenced Warren Beatty 's Reds . The film depicts the life of Jack Reed through the eyes of Louise Bryant , much as Kane 's life is seen through the eyes of Thompson and the people who he interviews . Rosenbaum also compared the romantic montage between Reed and Bryant with the breakfast table montage in Citizen Kane . 
 Akira Kurosawa 's Rashomon is often compared to the film due to both having complicated plot structures told by multiple characters in the film . Welles said his initial idea for the film was " Basically , the idea Rashomon used later on , " however Kurosawa had not yet seen the film before making Rashomon in 1950 . Nigel Andrews has compared the film 's complex plot structure to Rashomon , Last Year at Marienbad , Memento and Magnolia . Andrews also compares Charles Foster Kane to Michael Corleone in The Godfather , Jake LaMotta in Raging Bull and Daniel Plainview in There Will Be Blood for their portrayals of " haunted megalomaniac [ s ] , presiding over the shards of [ their ] own [ lives ] . " 
 The films of Paul Thomas Anderson have been compared to it . Variety compared There Will Be Blood to the film and called it " one that rivals Giant and Citizen Kane in our popular lore as origin stories about how we came to be the people we are . " The Master has been called " <unk> ’ s only spiritual sequel to Citizen Kane that doesn ’ t shrivel under the hefty comparison " and the film 's loose depiction of L. Ron Hubbard has been compared to Citizen Kane 's depiction of Hearst . The Social Network has been compared to the film for its depiction of a media mogul and by the character Erica Albright being similar to " Rosebud " . The controversy of the Sony hacking before the release of The Interview brought comparisons of Hearst 's attempt to suppress the film . The film 's plot structure and some specific shots influenced Todd Haynes 's Velvet Goldmine . Abbas Kiarostami 's The Traveler has been called " the Citizen Kane of the Iranian children ’ s cinema . " The film 's use of overlapping dialogue has influenced the films of Robert Altman and Carol Reed . Reed 's films Odd Man Out , The Third Man ( in which Welles and Cotten appeared ) and Outcast of the Islands were also influenced by the film 's cinematography . 
 Many directors have listed it as one of the greatest films ever made , including Woody Allen , Michael Apted , Les Blank , Kenneth Branagh , Paul Greengrass , Michel <unk> , Michael Mann , Sam Mendes , Jiri Menzel , Paul Schrader , Martin Scorsese , Denys Arcand , Gillian Armstrong , John Boorman , Roger Corman , Alex Cox , Milos Forman , Norman Jewison , Richard Lester , Richard Linklater , Paul Mazursky , Ronald Neame , Sydney Pollack and Stanley Kubrick . Yasujirō Ozu said it was his favorite non @-@ Japanese film and was impressed by its techniques . François Truffaut said that the film " has inspired more vocations to cinema throughout the world than any other " and recognized its influence in The Barefoot Contessa , Les <unk> <unk> , Lola Montès , and 8 1 / 2 . Truffaut 's Day for Night pays tribute to the film in a dream sequence depicting a childhood memory of the character played by Truffaut stealing publicity photos from the film . Numerous film directors have cited the film as influential on their own films , including Theo Angelopoulos , Luc Besson , the Coen brothers , Francis Ford Coppola , Brian De Palma , John Frankenheimer , Stephen Frears , Sergio Leone , Michael Mann , Ridley Scott , Martin Scorsese , Bryan Singer and Steven Spielberg . Ingmar Bergman disliked the film and called it " a total bore . Above all , the performances are worthless . The amount of respect that movie has is absolutely unbelievable ! " 
 William Friedkin said that the film influenced him and called it " a veritable quarry for filmmakers , just as Joyce 's Ulysses is a quarry for writers . " The film has also influenced other art forms . Carlos Fuentes 's novel The Death of Artemio Cruz was partially inspired by the film and the rock band The White Stripes paid unauthorized tribute to the film in the song " The Union Forever " . 
 = = = Film memorabilia = = = 
 In 1982 , film director Steven Spielberg bought a " Rosebud " sled for $ 60 @,@ 500 ; it was one of three balsa sleds used in the closing scenes and the only one that was not burned . After the Spielberg purchase , it was reported that retiree Arthur Bauer claimed to own another " Rosebud " sled . In early 1942 when Bauer was 12 he won an RKO publicity contest and selected the hardwood sled as his prize . In 1996 , Bauer 's estate offered the painted pine sled at auction through Christie 's . Bauer 's son told CBS News that his mother had once wanted to paint the sled and use it as a plant stand , but Bauer told her to " just save it and put it in the closet . " The sled was sold to an anonymous bidder for $ 233 @,@ 500 . 
 Welles 's Oscar for Best Original Screenplay was believed to be lost until it was rediscovered in 1994 . It was withdrawn from a 2007 auction at Sotheby 's when bidding failed to reach its estimate of $ 800 @,@ 000 to $ 1 @.@ 2 million . Owned by the charitable Dax Foundation , it was auctioned for $ 861 @,@ 542 in 2011 to an anonymous buyer . Mankiewicz 's Oscar was sold at least twice , in 1999 and again in 2012 , the latest price being $ 588 @,@ 455 . 
 In 1989 , Mankiewicz 's personal copy of the Citizen Kane script was auctioned at Christie 's . The leather @-@ bound volume included the final shooting script and a carbon copy of American that bore handwritten annotations — purportedly made by Hearst 's lawyers , who were said to have obtained it in the manner described by Kael in " Raising Kane " . Estimated to bring $ 70 @,@ 000 to $ 90 @,@ 000 , it sold for a record $ 231 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2007 , Welles 's personal copy of the last revised draft of Citizen Kane before the shooting script was sold at Sotheby 's for $ 97 @,@ 000 . A second draft of the script titled American , marked " Mr. Welles ' working copy " , was auctioned by Sotheby 's in 2014 for $ 164 @,@ 692 . A collection of 24 pages from a working script found in Welles 's personal possessions by his daughter Beatrice Welles was auctioned in 2014 for $ 15 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2014 , a collection of approximately 235 Citizen Kane stills and production photos that had belonged to Welles was sold at auction for $ 7 @,@ 812 . 
 = = Rights and home media = = 
 The composited camera negative of Citizen Kane was destroyed in a New Jersey film laboratory fire in the 1970s . Subsequent prints were derived from a master positive ( a fine @-@ grain preservation element ) made in the 1940s and originally intended for use in overseas distribution . Modern techniques were used to produce a pristine print for a 50th Anniversary theatrical reissue in 1991 which Paramount released for then @-@ owner Turner Broadcasting System , which earned $ 1 @.@ 6 million in North America . 
 In 1955 , RKO sold the American television rights to its film library , including Citizen Kane , to C & C Television Corp. In 1960 , television rights to the pre @-@ 1956 RKO library were acquired by United Artists . RKO kept the non @-@ broadcast television rights to its library . 
 In 1976 , when home video was in its infancy , entrepreneur Snuff Garrett bought cassette rights to the RKO library for what United Press International termed " a pittance . " In 1978 The Nostalgia Merchant released the film through Media Home Entertainment . By 1980 the 800 @-@ title library of The Nostalgia Merchant was earning $ 2 @.@ 3 million a year . " Nobody wanted cassettes four years ago , " Garrett told UPI . " It wasn 't the first time people called me crazy . It was a hobby with me which became big business . " RKO Home Video released the film on VHS and Betamax in 1985 . 
 In 1984 , The Criterion Collection released the film as its first LaserDisc . It was made from a fine grain master positive provided by the UCLA Film and Television Archive . When told about the then @-@ new concept of having an audio commentary on the disc , Welles was skeptical but said " theoretically , that ’ s good for teaching movies , so long as they don ’ t talk nonsense . " In 1992 Criterion released a new 50th Anniversary Edition LaserDisc . This version had an improved transfer and additional special features , including the documentary The Legacy of Citizen Kane and Welles 's early short The Hearts of Age . 
 Turner Broadcasting System acquired broadcast television rights to the RKO library in 1986 and the full worldwide rights to the library in 1987 . The RKO Home Video unit was reorganized into Turner Home Entertainment that year . In 1991 Turner released a 50th Anniversary Edition on VHS and as a collector 's edition that includes the film , the documentary Reflections On Citizen Kane , Harlan Lebo 's 50th anniversary album , a poster and a copy of the original script . In 1996 , Time Warner acquired Turner and Warner Home Video absorbed Turner Home Entertainment . Today , Time Warner 's Warner Bros. unit has distribution rights for the film . 
 In 2001 , Warner Home Video released a 60th Anniversary Collectors Edition DVD . The two @-@ disc DVD included feature @-@ length commentaries by Roger Ebert and Peter Bogdanovich , as well as The Battle Over Citizen Kane . It was simultaneously released on VHS . The DVD was criticized for being " too bright , too clean ; the dirt and grime had been cleared away , but so had a good deal of the texture , the depth , and the sense of film grain . " 
 In 2003 , Welles 's daughter Beatrice Welles sued Turner Entertainment , claiming the Welles estate is the legal copyright holder of the film . She claimed that Welles 's deal to terminate his contracts with RKO meant that Turner 's copyright of the film was null and void . She also claimed that the estate of Orson Welles was owed 20 % of the film 's profits if her copyright claim was not upheld . In 2007 she was allowed to proceed with the lawsuit , overturning the 2004 decision in favor of Turner Entertainment on the issue of video rights . 
 In 2011 , it was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD in a 70th anniversary box set . The San Francisco Chronicle called it " the Blu @-@ ray release of the year . " Supplements included everything available on the 2001 Warner Home Video release , as well as RKO 281 and packaging extras that include a hardcover booklet and a folio containing a reproduction of the original souvenir program , miniature lobby cards and other memorabilia . The Blu @-@ ray DVD was scanned as 4K resolution from three different 35mm prints and rectified the quality issues of the 2001 DVD . 
 = = = <unk> controversy = = = 
 In the 1980s , Citizen Kane became a catalyst in the controversy over the colorization of black @-@ and @-@ white films . One proponent of film colorization was Ted Turner , whose Turner Entertainment Company owned the RKO library . A Turner Entertainment spokesperson initially stated that Citizen Kane would not be colorized , but in July 1988 Turner said , " Citizen Kane ? I 'm thinking of colorizing it . " In early 1989 it was reported that two companies were producing color tests for Turner Entertainment . Criticism increased when filmmaker Henry <unk> stated that shortly before his death Welles had implored him " don 't let Ted Turner deface my movie with his crayons . " 
 In February 1989 , Turner Entertainment president Roger Mayer announced that work to colorize the film had been stopped due to provisions in Welles 's 1939 contract with RKO that " could be read to prohibit colorization without permission of the Welles estate . " Mayer added that Welles 's contract was " quite unusual " and " other contracts we have checked out are not like this at all . " Turner had only colorized the final reel of the film before abandoning the project . In 1991 one minute of the colorized test footage was included in the BBC Arena documentary The Complete Citizen Kane . 
 The colorization controversy was a factor in the passage of the National Film Preservation Act in 1988 which created the National Film Registry the following year . ABC News anchor Peter Jennings reported that " one major reason for doing this is to require people like the broadcaster Ted Turner , who 's been adding color to some movies and re @-@ editing others for television , to put notices on those versions saying that the movies have been altered " . 
 = Battle of the Samichon River = 
 The Battle of the Samichon River ( 24 – 26 July 1953 ) was fought during the final days of the Korean War between United Nations ( UN ) forces — primarily Australian and American — and the Chinese communist People 's Volunteer Army . The fighting took place on a key position on the Jamestown Line known as The Hook and saw the defending UN troops , including the 2nd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 2 RAR ) from the 28th British Commonwealth Brigade and the US 7th Marine Regiment , fight off numerous assaults by the Chinese 137th Division during two concerted night attacks , inflicting numerous casualties on the Chinese with heavy artillery and small arms fire . The action was part of a larger , divisional @-@ sized Chinese attack against the US 1st Marine Division , with diversionary assaults mounted against the Australians . With the peace talks in Panmunjom reaching a conclusion , the Chinese had been eager to gain a last @-@ minute victory over the UN forces and the battle was the last of the war before the official signing of the Korean Armistice . 
 During the action the Chinese had attempted to make a breakthrough to the Imjin River along the divisional boundary between the US 1st Marine Division and the 1st Commonwealth Division in order to turn the Marine division 's flank . Yet with well @-@ coordinated indirect fires from the divisional artillery , including 16th Field Regiment , Royal New Zealand Artillery , and support from British Centurion tanks of the 1st Royal Tank Regiment , 2 RAR successfully thwarted both assaults , holding a key position known as The Hook . Later , it was estimated that Chinese casualties numbered between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 killed , with the majority of them inflicted by the New Zealand gunners . Meanwhile , on the left flank , US Marines had endured the brunt of the attack , repelling the Chinese onslaught with their infantry and artillery but suffering casualties in the process . Only a few hours later the Armistice Agreement was signed , ultimately ending the war . Both sides subsequently withdrew 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) within 72 hours to create a 4 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) demilitarised zone . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 Following the Battle of Maryang San in early October 1951 the 28th British Commonwealth Brigade remained in defence for the rest of the month . Amid heavy fighting on the afternoon of 4 November the Chinese recaptured Hill 317 , which was by then held by the 1st Battalion , King 's Own Scottish Borderers , in an action for which Private Bill Speakman was later awarded the Victoria Cross . The hill remained in Chinese hands until the end of the war . Operation Commando subsequently proved to be one of the last UN actions in the war of manoeuvre , and with peace talks ongoing the fighting was replaced by a static war characterised by fixed defences , trench lines , bunkers , patrols , wiring parties and minefields reminiscent of the Western Front in 1915 – 17 . Construction of defensive localities sited in all @-@ round defence with interlocking arcs of fire began almost immediately , although such operations were confined to the reverse slopes during the day due to artillery and mortar fire which made such operations hazardous . Patrolling and ambushing by both sides also began in order to prevent the other from gaining control of no man 's land . The 1st Commonwealth Division , which included British , Australian , Canadian , New Zealand and Indian troops , subsequently occupied part of the Jamestown Line — a UN defensive position which extended 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) across central Korea — in the US I Corps sector on the US Eighth Army 's left flank . The war was no less bloody though , and the division remained in the line for all but two of the remaining nineteen months of the war . 
 From 19 January 1952 , the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) was in defence on the Jamestown Line as part of the 28th British Commonwealth Brigade before going into reserve on 18 April , where they remained until the end of June . Meanwhile , in early 1952 the Australian government had agreed to an American request to increase its forces in Korea , dispatching a second infantry battalion to join 3 RAR which had been fighting since September 1950 . The 1st Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 1 RAR ) arrived in Korea on 6 April 1952 , with both battalions forming part of the 28th British Commonwealth Brigade under the command of an Australian brigadier . The brigade re @-@ entered the line on 30 June and 1 RAR spent the following fourteen weeks patrolling , ambushing and raiding , before the 28th British Commonwealth Brigade again went into reserve on 5 October . The brigade returned to the Jamestown Line in early November , with 1 RAR taking over the defences on Hill 355 from the Canadians . The Australians were subsequently forced to clean up large quantities of rubbish left by the Canadians as well as repairing and camouflaging the defences which had recently been attacked by the Chinese . 1 RAR implemented an aggressive patrol program in an effort to regain control of no @-@ man 's land from the Chinese , which had been allowed to establish hides close to the perimeter . Several Chinese outposts were subsequently destroyed during raids of up to company @-@ size . 
 3 RAR took over the defences on Hill 355 on 28 December 1952 and remained there until the 1st Commonwealth Division went into reserve at the end January 1953 . On 21 March , 1 RAR was replaced in Korea by the 2nd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 2 RAR ) , after nearly twelve months operational service . Heavy fighting occurred in March , with the Chinese moving back over to a limited offensive in the US I Corps sector , in an attempt to regain the initiative following the winter . Heavy fighting occurred around The Hook , which was by then held by the US 2nd Division following the relief of the 1st Commonwealth Division , the Old Baldy and Porkchop Hill features held by the US 7th Division and in the western sector held by the US 1st Marine Division around the Vegas and Reno outposts . Peace talks finally resumed at Panmunjom on 6 April and an agreement was soon made to exchange sick and wounded prisoners . Consequently , 648 UN and 6 @,@ 670 Chinese and North Korean prisoners were subsequently repatriated as part of Operation Little Switch on 20 April , including five Australians For a while the tempo of operations slackened , returning to the small @-@ scale raids and probes of the winter months . Yet during the final three months of the war the Chinese launched a series of offensives prior to the signing of a ceasefire agreement . 
 In early April 1953 the 1st Commonwealth Division returned to the Jamestown Line . By this time the division was commanded by Major General Michael West , a British officer who had taken over command in September the previous year . The 28th British Commonwealth Brigade subsequently occupied the north @-@ eastern sector . 2 RAR occupied Hill 159 during 5 May to 16 June , while 3 RAR held Hill 355 during the period 7 – 27 May . 3 RAR then relieved 2 RAR on 16 June , and remained on Hill 159 until 10 July . Meanwhile , The Hook was a key position on the left flank of the line held by the 1st Commonwealth Division , and was the division 's most threatened sector on the Jamestown Line . Held by the 29th British Infantry Brigade , the position consisted of a group of hills west of the Samichon River which dominated the Imjin River , 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) to the south , and provided observation and fields of fire over a bend in the river as it turned towards Seoul . Loss of The Hook would force the UN troops to withdraw nearly 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) to the next tenable defensive line on the high ground south of the Imjin River . As a result , the Chinese had made repeated attacks against it , with the 1st Battalion , Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry repulsing the first Chinese attempt in late @-@ March 1952 . The 1st Battalion , The Black Watch did so again in November 1952 , while the 1st Battalion , Duke of Wellington 's Regiment had fought the heaviest battle there in May 1953 during the Third Battle of the Hook . 
 In the western sector , American outposts such as Detroit , Berlin , East Berlin , Reno , Carson , Elko and Vegas had been bitterly contested over the previous months by the US 1st Marine Division and the Turkish Brigade but by June the Reno , Elko and Vegas positions had been captured by Chinese . The front subsequently returned to its usual defensive routine , but following a temporary break @-@ down in negotiations after the unilateral release of 25 @,@ 000 anti @-@ communist Chinese and North Korean prisoners of war by South Korean President Syngman Rhee , the Chinese had renewed large @-@ scale attacks on 24 June . Concentrating on the South Korean divisions in the eastern and central sectors , the Chinese launched another offensive in June in an attempt to convince the South Korean leader to come to terms . The fighting continued until the end of the month as the Chinese successively drove back elements of ROK 9th Division in the US IX Corps sector and the ROK 1st Division in the US I Corps sector . 
 By early July the Chinese launched a major offensive in the ROK II Corps and US X Corps sectors . The Americans and South Koreans subsequently responded with a series of counter @-@ attacks to regain the ground lost , yet these met with only limited success . On 6 July the Chinese attacked elements of the US 7th Division on Porkchop Hill on the US I Corps right flank , and succeeded in gaining the crest . The Americans were reinforced and counter @-@ attacked over the following days , although again without success . Following another Chinese assault on 9 July the Americans again counter @-@ attacked , yet neither side gained a clear advantage . The following day the Chinese launched a series of company and battalion @-@ sized assaults , but were repulsed . Yet , with the Americans unprepared to accept further casualties for limited tactical gain , they evacuated Porkchop Hill on 11 July . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 The peace talks resumed in early July as Rhee 's position apparently softened , yet this proved the impetus for a final Chinese offensive as they sought to further influence the talks and improve their defensive positions at the same time . On 14 July elements of five Chinese armies struck six South Korean divisions around the Kumsong salient . By 20 July the ROK Capitol Division and much of the ROK 3rd Division had been practically destroyed , exposing serious weaknesses despite two years of American training . The South Koreans fell back and the UN line was penetrated to a depth of 9 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 0 mi ) . Only American intervention restored the situation and ultimately nine South Korean and US divisions were required to stem the Chinese offensive and regain some of the lost ground . Following a counter @-@ attack by ROK II Corps a new defensive line was established south of the Kumsong River . Meanwhile , in conjunction with the main offensive at Kumsong , the Chinese 19th Army Group had conducted a series of limited offensives against US I Corps , with the 46th Army conducting five separate assaults against the US 1st Marine Division from 25 June to 27 July . Chinese losses were heavy nonetheless , and they sustained more than 28 @,@ 000 casualties for only temporary gain . 
 During the second week of July , West had re @-@ shuffled his brigades to allow the 29th British Infantry Brigade to recuperate in the 1st Commonwealth Division 's central sector . The reliable 28th British Commonwealth Brigade , under the command of an Australian officer , Brigadier John Wilton , subsequently took over the battered defences on The Hook on 9 – 10 July 1953 , on the division 's left . The brigade was the strongest in the division , consisting of the two Australian battalions — 2 RAR and 3 RAR — and two British battalions — the 1st Battalion , Durham Light Infantry ( 1 DLI ) and 1st Battalion , Royal Fusiliers ( 1 RF ) — as well as supporting artillery and armour in direct support . Among the later was the 16th Field Regiment , Royal New Zealand Artillery ( 16 RNZA ) and C Squadron of the British 1st Royal Tank Regiment equipped with Centurion tanks . The 25th Canadian Brigade was subsequently handed the responsibility for the equally exposed positions on Hills 355 and 159 on the right . The ROK 1st Division held the line on the 1st Commonwealth Division 's right flank , while the US 1st Marine Division , under the overall command of Major General Randolph Pate , held the Nevada Complex on the left flank , having taken over the line on 7 – 8 July . On the American right , the US 7th Marine Regiment under Colonel Glenn C. Funk occupied a linear defensive position , with two battalions forward and one back . The US 5th Marine Regiment occupied the central sector , while the US 1st Marine Regiment held the rear in divisional reserve . Indirect fire support was provided by the 11th Marine Artillery Regiment . Meanwhile , by May 1953 the Chinese 1st , 46th , 63rd , 64th and 65th Armies of the 19th Army Group were operating against the US I Corps under the overall command of Huang <unk> . 
 Wilton deployed the stronger Australian battalions forward , with 2 RAR occupying the left forward position on The Hook , while 3 RAR was deployed on the right , overlooking the Samichon River . 1 DLI was on the opposite side of the Samichon , while 1 RF was held in reserve as a brigade counter @-@ penetration force . 2 RAR was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel George Larkin , while 3 RAR was under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Arthur MacDonald . Larkin deployed 2 RAR with three companies forward , and one back in reserve as a counter @-@ attack force . In the centre , The Hook was held by B Company , while C Company held the left and A Company the right , with D Company in reserve . MacDonald deployed 3 RAR with two companies forward and two in depth . A Company occupied Hill 146 , on the boundary with 2 RAR , B Company held the south @-@ eastern tip of the ridge , and C and D Companies were held in reserve . British Centurion tanks were also deployed forward to support the Australians . Directly confronting the Australians on The Hook was the 137th Division of the Chinese 46th Army which had been in the line since February 1953 , under the command of Cheng <unk> . 
 The positions occupied by the Australians had been badly damaged by the Chinese assaults and bombardments in May and June , and recent rain had also collapsed some trenches and weakened many of the wire obstacles . Yet the extensive tunnel system — dug by the Canadians the previous winter — remained intact and afforded some protection . Efforts to repair the defences and assert control in no man 's land began immediately , with an aggressive patrolling program by the Australians leading to numerous clashes with Chinese patrols , while they also endured heavy shelling during this time . By day it was hot and humid making conditions in the bunkers uncomfortable , while by night the defenders worked hard digging , wiring and laying minefields . The Chinese focused most of their attention on the US 7th Marine Regiment , which was occupying positions south @-@ west of 2 RAR after having relieved the Turkish Brigade there , and thereby allowed the Australians some time to prepare . Light mortaring hit 2 RAR on 11 July , while one 3 RAR soldier was killed instantly by a 76 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) shell when he was observed walking along the crest @-@ line by a Chinese position less than 200 metres ( 220 yd ) from the Australian perimeter . The gun crew was subsequently silenced by Australian sniper fire . 
 Patrolling by the Australians continued in order to prevent the Chinese from harassing their forward positions . Small clashes occurred on the nights of 15 / 16 , 21 / 22 , 22 / 23 and 23 / 24 July , suggesting that the Chinese were preparing for a major attack . Aerial reconnaissance subsequently detected a build up of Chinese forces and supplies west of the Samichon River . In response the Australians and US Marines stepped up their defensive preparations , while at the same time rumours from the peace talks started to spread of a ceasefire . Regardless , Chinese harassing artillery and mortar fire intensified , causing a constant stream of casualties among the Australians . Intense Chinese shelling struck Hill 121 and The Hook on the night of 19 / 20 July , with more than 300 rounds wounding four members of C Company , 2 RAR and further damaging the defences . That night the US Marines were driven off the Berlin and East Berlin features on the left flank , further exposing The Hook , which became a salient . Yet on 21 July an expected Chinese assault in the US 5th Marine Regiment sector failed to occur , while sightings of Chinese troops across the US 1st Marine Division front declined as the fighting entered a lull . 
 On 22 July B Company , 2 RAR was relieved on The Hook by D Company , and subsequently moved into reserve . The following day , with the ceasefire believed to be imminent , Wilton limited patrols to only those considered essential for the security of his forward positions . Rumours spread quickly among the troops that the truce was expected to be signed on 26 July . However , by 24 July the Chinese shelling had once again grown in intensity , while large bodies of Chinese infantry were increasingly seen on the forward slopes by the Australians . Meanwhile , similar concentrations of Chinese were also reported by the US Marines . With the Chinese eager to gain a last @-@ minute victory over the UN forces and the tactical advantage offered to the side that held The Hook after the truce , simultaneous attacks were soon launched against 2 RAR and the US 7th Marine Regiment on the left flank , in two major actions on the nights of 24 / 25 and 25 / 26 July . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = First night , 24 / 25 July 1953 = = = 
 On the evening of 24 July a 50 @-@ strong Chinese force probed 2 RAR 's forward outposts after dark , attacking C Company on Hill 121 and surrounding a bunker on the left flank , while the US Marines had a similar contact on the left flank . A forward Australian standing patrol from D Company subsequently clashed heavily with the Chinese probe , losing five wounded before directing tank and artillery fire which dispersed their attackers . These attacks had been preceded by heavy artillery and mortar fire , with the Chinese subjecting C and D Companies , 2 RAR and the 2 RAR Mortar Platoon to a heavy bombardment . Waves of Chinese attacked the Australians at 20 : 50 , penetrating between C Company on Hill 121 and the nearest US Marines on Hill 111 , before being turned back amidst the driving rain . A further attack followed another barrage at 23 : 25 , but was again repelled and faltered before reaching the wire during fierce fighting with grenades and small @-@ arms , with the assault failing largely due to the weight of defensive artillery fire . More than 2 @,@ 000 Chinese mortar and artillery rounds fell on the Australian positions during the night . Two Australians were killed and 14 wounded during the night attack which was later estimated to have been made by a Chinese regiment of up to 4 @,@ 000 men . The defenders were soaking wet and exhausted , but had held their positions . Yet despite the weight of the Chinese attack against the Australians their main objective had been Hill 119 , another strong point in the American sector 500 metres ( 550 yd ) to the south @-@ west of Hill 111 , known as Boulder City , held by the US 7th Marine Regiment . 
 The Chinese engaged the US Marines on Boulder City with preparatory fire from mortars and artillery at 19 : 30 . Ten minutes later Chinese troops were observed massing for an assault north @-@ west of the Berlin feature and were subsequently shelled by the Americans . At 20 : 30 the Chinese probed the right flank held by the 3rd Battalion , 7th Marines , first striking Hill 111 and then at Boulder City . After infiltrating forward , the Chinese had hid in the paddy fields immediately in front of the American positions during the barrage , and had then rapidly assaulted as soon as the artillery had lifted . The attack coincided with the ongoing relief in place of the defenders by the US 1st Marine Regiment under the command of Colonel Wallace M. Nelson , and it subsequently succeeded in temporarily penetrating the American positions on Hill 111 . Yet the Chinese main effort fell on Boulder City , and two battalions subsequently succeeded in occupying a portion of the American trench line . From these positions the Chinese threatened to cut @-@ off Company G , 3rd Battalion , 1st Marines on Hill 119 , repeatedly assaulting the Berlin Gate feature on the company 's left flank and the East Berlin Gate on its right in an effort to exploit their gains . Throughout the fighting the Marines were strongly supported by heavy mortar , artillery and tank fire ; however , due to the prevailing weather conditions no spotter aircraft were able to fly during the night which limited the effectiveness of the indirect fire available to them . 
 In support of the US Marines on Hill 111 at 21 : 10 Wilton had ordered one company of the 1 DLI to occupy a reserve position on the left of 2 RAR , in the rear of the US 1st Marine Division where they ultimately remained for the rest of the evening . A reserve company from 3 RAR was also <unk> in order to be ready to respond to any emergency . The Americans eventually drove off the Chinese probes after their artillery broke up the attack , but not before they were forced to abandon some of their forward positions . With the attack likely only a diversionary effort , by 21 : 20 the bulk of the Chinese had begun to withdraw from Hill 111 . Meanwhile , the fighting on Hill 119 continued . A heavy bombardment fell on the American positions at 21 : 00 , followed by a second assault on Hill 119 by two Chinese companies which succeeded in penetrating the US Marine perimeter . Hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat developed across the forward trenches and in the ensuing fighting Company G was reduced to half @-@ strength , while their ammunition began to run low . Under pressure , by midnight the Americans were forced back another 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 yd ) to the reverse slope . 3 RAR was subsequently left exposed , with the forward Chinese elements moving to within 1 @,@ 200 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 yd ) of the battalion 's A Echelon area . Almost surrounded , the position was at risk of becoming untenable . At 00 : 15 Company I , 3rd Battalion , 1st Marines was ordered to reinforce Boulder City ; they lost heavily after the Chinese intercepted a coded message and adjusted mortar and artillery fire onto the Marines as they approached the rear of Hill 119 . In response the 11th Marine Artillery Regiment launched an intense counter @-@ battery barrage . 
 The Chinese also launched several assaults in the central sector against the US 5th Marine Regiment , commanded by Colonel Harvey C. <unk> . Successively striking outposts on the regimental right flank from 21 : 15 , a reinforced Chinese company from the <unk> Regiment then concentrated against outpost Esther , held by Marines from Company H. Amid heavy fighting both sides were reinforced . By early morning the Chinese had seized parts of the forward American trench @-@ line and moved to isolate the position with indirect fire and patrols which penetrated between the outpost and the main defensive position to the rear ; the Marines still controlled the rear trenches and , reorganising their defence , succeeded in checking the Chinese assault . Defending strongly , the Marines used flamethrowers , machine @-@ guns and mortars , supported by M46 Patton tanks and artillery fire and following several hours of fighting the Chinese attack was finally broken up by indirect fire . An entire Chinese battalion had been committed piecemeal to the attack , yet by 06 : 40 the following day the US Marines reported Esther secure . More than 4 @,@ 000 artillery and mortar rounds had fallen on the outpost during the night ; Marine casualties included 12 killed and 35 wounded , while Chinese loses included 85 dead which were counted around the position , 110 more believed killed and an estimated 250 wounded . 
 In the US 7th Marine Regiment 's sector , heavy shelling , small arms fire and hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting continued around Boulder City into the early morning on 25 July . Chinese infantry had succeeded in breaking through and occupying a large part of the trench @-@ line on the forward slopes , and for a while even temporarily occupied the crest . At 01 : 30 Companies G and I , 3rd Battalion , 1st Marines launched a rapid counter @-@ attack and by 03 : 30 the American perimeter had been re @-@ established , and was subsequently reinforced . By 05 : 30 Hill 119 was secured by the US Marines , although scattered groups of Chinese remained on the forward slopes , while others attempted to reinforce the left flank . Sporadic fighting and heavy shelling also continued on Hill 111 in the early morning hours , and at 04 : 00 another fight developed ; by 05 : 30 the position was also controlled by the Americans . Four M46 Patton tanks on Boulder City dispersed the Chinese concentrations with high explosive and machine @-@ gun fire , while Marine infantry assault teams with flamethrowers and 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch rocket launchers subsequently cleared the remaining Chinese from their former bunkers . In total , more the 3 @,@ 000 Chinese troops had assaulted the front held by the US 1st Marine Division during the night of 24 / 25 July . 
 Throughout the night the US 11th Marine Artillery Regiment had been heavily engaged , with the regiment and the 10 battalions under its operational control in the US 1st Marine Division sector firing a total of 23 @,@ 725 rounds , including those from batteries of the US 25th Division Artillery , the US I Corps Artillery and the 1st Commonwealth Divisional Artillery . The weight of indirect fire available to the defenders had been significant and the whole of the 1st Commonwealth Divisional Artillery ( 80 guns ) had also been engaged during the fighting , firing in support of both the Australians on Hill 121 and the US Marines on their left flank , defending Hill 111 and Boulder City . Unhindered by the restrictions on ammunition usage which had applied to the Marines during this period , the supporting fires of the British @-@ Commonwealth 3 @.@ 45 @-@ inch ( 88 mm ) 25 @-@ pounder field guns proved of considerable assistance . A liaison officer from 16 RNZA was sent subsequently over to the US Marine artillery regiment during the night to establish communication . More than 13 @,@ 000 rounds were fired by the British and New Zealand gunners that night , with the close defensive fire having a devastating effect on the assaulting Chinese infantry . The artillery had also effectively halted the Chinese assault against Hill 121 , resulting in a fair degree of frustration among the Australian infantry , some of whom later expressed disappointment at being prevented from getting to grips with the Chinese by the accurate New Zealand artillery fire . 
 Before the battle , a section from the 2 RAR Medium Machine Gun Platoon had been stationed within the American perimeter near Hill 111 to provide covering fire across the area between the positions occupied by the US Marines and the Australians . Commanded by Sergeant Brian Cooper they soon found themselves in the thick of the fighting , firing their Vickers machine @-@ guns in support of the Australian positions and to defend themselves from the weight of the Chinese main attack which fell on the Marines . Three men were wounded during the night but the machine @-@ gunners continued to fire in support , while the remainder of the section repelled Chinese assaults from the left . Ultimately the Chinese were unable to dislodge them , with the Australians calling @-@ in artillery on to their own positions during repeated Chinese attempts to overrun them as the US Marines withdrew past their position , leaving them isolated . When dawn came dozens of Chinese bodies were found strewn in front of the Australian machine @-@ gunners . As the US Marines worked to clear the Chinese stragglers from their position the Australians had endeavoured to coax a Chinese soldier from a bunker , yet when he resisted they were forced to kill him with a grenade . Cooper was later awarded the Military Medal for his leadership , with the stubborn defence of the Australians contributing to the break @-@ up of the Chinese attack which at one stage had threatened to overrun the Marine position . Large groups of Chinese remained though , occupying a number bunkers and trenches , and they were not finally dislodged by the Marines until the following afternoon . 
 = = = Second night , 25 / 26 July 1953 = = = 
 At 08 : 20 on the morning of 25 July the Chinese again assaulted the US Marines on Hill 119 in company strength but were soon halted by American artillery and mortar fire which inflicted heavy losses ; skirmishing continued for the remainder of the day . While no major assaults against Hill 111 occurred , a heavy barrage by the Chinese targeted the position at 11 : 00 . F9F Panthers provided air support to the Marines throughout the day , while American tanks continued to engage Chinese targets in support of the defenders on Hill 111 and Boulder City . Finally , at 13 : 35 the last of the Chinese infantry were forced off the forward slopes of Boulder City by the US Marines . Chinese casualties were estimated by the Americans to have included another 75 killed and 425 wounded . The Chinese continued to heavily shell the American positions , and by late afternoon 13 @,@ 500 mortar and artillery rounds had fallen on the sector held by US 7th Marine Regiment . The Americans fired many counter @-@ battery missions in response , firing 36 @,@ 794 rounds . The ongoing relief of the US 7th Marine Regiment continued throughout the day . Meanwhile , the Australian positions on The Hook were also heavily shelled throughout the day , forcing many of the defenders underground into the network of tunnels then being extended by a team of New Zealand sappers . 
 Realising that they had only faced a series of probes the previous night , rather than a major attack , and as these actions may have been in preparation for a heavier attack , a vigorous defence was subsequently prepared by the Australians with the reserve companies moved into blocking positions to strengthen the forward defences . The defenders endured steady shelling and harassing fire , while after dark The Hook was probed again , this time by a group of about 20 Chinese . The force was subsequently engaged by an Australian standing patrol from D Company at 21 : 00 and forced to withdraw , leaving behind one dead at a cost of one Australian killed and one wounded . At 21 : 20 the Chinese fire became more intense , and a heavy blow was launched by the Chinese against the Marines on Hill 119 shortly after . Beginning at 21 : 30 , elements of the 1st and 7th Marines were attacked by two Chinese companies . A heavy concentration by the entire US I Corps artillery was fired in response , and the Chinese were forced to withdraw . At 23 : 00 the Chinese shelling intensified to thirty @-@ rounds per minute , and was followed fifteen minutes later by another determined charge by the Chinese infantry against the US Marines on the left flank on Hill 111 and Boulder City during a furious attack . The Australian positions were not directly attacked during the night , although C Company engaged the Chinese in no man 's land sporadically at long range in support of the Americans . As on the previous night , 3 RAR was not attacked . In total more than 4 @,@ 200 mortar and artillery rounds were fired by the Chinese at 2 RAR during the night , and three Australians were killed and nine wounded . 
 In contrast , the US Marines were more heavily engaged , with the fighting occurring at close quarters for more than an hour before they repelled their attackers and counter @-@ attacked . An Australian bunker between the US Marines on Hill 111 and C Company , 2 RAR on Hill 121 was also the scene of heavy fighting , after the Chinese penetrated the undefended space between the two positions . Manned by just six Australians under the command of Lance Corporal Kenneth Crockford , the position was attacked by the Chinese simultaneously from several sides following a determined charge at 23 : 40 . During bitter hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting in the trenches around the bunker the under @-@ strength Australian section ejected the Chinese and prevented them from advancing any further . They then directed artillery fire onto their position to break up subsequent attacks . Further Chinese probes were launched against Hills 111 and 119 in the early hours of 26 July , and they succeeded in temporarily seizing parts of the American trench line . Between 01 : 30 and 03 : 00 heavy fighting continued before the Chinese were driven from the position by the US Marines . Meanwhile , Wilton ordered D Company , 3 RAR to move across to occupy the position behind B Company , 2 RAR to support the US Marines if required , while at 02 : 18 he placed A Company , 1 DLI on five minutes notice to move to another blocking position . American casualties were 19 killed and 125 wounded , while Chinese losses included 30 men countered dead , and another 84 estimated to have been killed and 310 wounded . 
 The 2 RAR Machine Gun Platoon on Hill 111 again found itself heavily engaged , suffering five badly wounded . The Chinese had managed to establish an artillery forward observer on Hill 111 and US Marine casualties were particularly heavy as a result . Eight critically injured Americans were subsequently evacuated through 2 RAR for urgent medical treatment . Small @-@ arms fire continued to be exchanged between the US Marines and the Chinese for the next two hours , only subsiding by 03 : 00 , with the Marines finally driving out the Chinese . D Company , 3 RAR was subsequently released and it returned to battalion 's main defensive position . The Australian outpost section also succeeded in holding through the night and the following morning they found 35 Chinese dead around their positions . During the fighting Crockford had repeatedly exposed himself to Chinese fire , and had even run across no man 's land to provide situation reports to the US Marine command post on Hill 111 . He was later awarded the Military Medal for his actions . By dawn the only activity in front of The Hook were Chinese stretcher bearers collecting their wounded , which were subsequently allowed to do so unmolested by the Australians . In the US 1st Marine Division 's sector the fighting had also ceased , while small groups of Chinese moved to reinforce their positions and were engaged with rifle and machine @-@ gun fire . 
 As with the first night , indirect fire had again played a crucial role in the defence , with the New Zealand gunners firing another 5 @,@ 700 rounds ( out of a divisional total of 9 @,@ 500 rounds ) in support of the Australians and the US Marines . Dug @-@ in to the east , 16 RNZA had been forced to fire with minimum crest clearance over the Australian lines in order to bring effective fire to bear on the assaulting Chinese from their 25 @-@ pounders . Using both variable time proximity and time @-@ set fuses , the New Zealand gunners used air bursts to break up the Chinese assaults , causing heavy casualties . Despite the risk of causing casualties among their own soldiers no serious casualties were incurred by the Australians , although one suffered a broken shoulder after a brass nose cone from a faulty time @-@ of @-@ flight fused shell exploded over his position . High explosive was also provided by C Company 's 60 mm mortar which operated against the Chinese in no man 's land despite being exposed and unprotected from fire , while the mortars also provided battlefield illumination which had allowed the Australian riflemen and machine @-@ gunners to bring accurate fire to bear on the Chinese crossing 2 RAR 's front to attack Hills 111 and 121 . The Chinese had suffered heavily during the fighting , with over 300 dead counted in front of Hill 111 alone . Throughout the following day the Australians observed a steady stream of Chinese casualties evacuating Hill 111 and crossing the paddy fields on the left flank . Later , a group of 20 armed Chinese had also attempted to withdraw but were engaged by the 2 RAR Anti @-@ Tank Platoon , resulting in at least six casualties . In the area held by the US 1st Marine Division , Chinese shelling continued sporadically , while at 13 : 30 the US 1st Marine Regiment assumed operational control of the right sector . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The battle illustrated the power of concentrated artillery fire and the wastefulness of massed attacks by infantry against modern firepower . Hundreds of Chinese dead lay in front of the UN positions , with the valley floor " almost covered with dead Chinese " . Wilton later recounted that on " the approaches to 2 RAR the bodies literally carpeted the ground sometimes two deep " . Later , it was estimated that Chinese casualties numbered between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 killed , with the majority of them inflicted by the New Zealand gunners . At least nine Chinese battalions were believed to have been involved in the attacks . The fighting between 24 – 26 July had cost the Australians five killed and 24 wounded , while during the previous two weeks on The Hook 2 RAR had lost a total of 17 men killed and 31 wounded . It had been a bitter struggle to the very end and as a testimony to the ferocity of the fighting , the Royal Australian Regiment was subsequently granted the battle honour " The Samichon " . Many Australians were later awarded bravery decorations for their actions . The New Zealand gunners had played a crucial role in stemming the Chinese assault and during these final actions the commander of 163 Battery , 16 RNZA — Major James Spence — had positioned himself well @-@ forward in order to effectively co @-@ ordinate the indirect fires of his guns . Spence was subsequently awarded the Military Cross , while a member of his tactical party , Gunner Arthur Bolton , was later Mentioned in Despatches . In total over the three nights more than 23 @,@ 000 rounds were fired by the Commonwealth Divisional Artillery . 
 During the final month of the war heavy fighting had occurred across the central and eastern fronts . Yet in the Commonwealth sector itself the only Chinese attacks had been made against 2 RAR holding The Hook on the nights of 24 – 25 and 25 – 26 July . The action was part of a larger attack against the US 1st Marine Division , with only diversionary assaults mounted against the Australians . 1st Commonwealth Division intelligence staff believed that the Chinese had been attempting to make a breakthrough to the Imjin River along the divisional boundary in order to turn the US 1st Marine Division 's flank , yet with well @-@ coordinated indirect fires from the divisional artillery and support from the British tanks , 2 RAR had been able to successfully thwart both assaults . Meanwhile , the US Marines had endured the brunt of a divisional @-@ size attack , repelling the Chinese onslaught for the loss of 43 killed and 316 wounded over the two nights ; total Marine casualties for July included 181 killed and 1 @,@ 430 wounded . Indeed , with the Chinese determined to gain local territorial advantage prior to signing the ceasefire , the United Nations Command had suffered 65 @,@ 000 casualties during the final three months of the war , while the Chinese lost at least 135 @,@ 000 more . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 On 26 July Wilton had ordered Lieutenant Colonel Peter Jeffreys to prepare a counter @-@ attack by 1 DLI to recover some of the ground lost to the Chinese the night before , but after preparatory fire failed to clear the Chinese from the objective the assault was cancelled . The Chinese subsequently made another attempt against the US Marines on Hill 119 on the night of 26 / 27 July , but it lacked the weight of those of the previous nights and was easily repelled . In a final attempt to capture Boulder City at 21 : 30 a Chinese platoon had advanced on the wire at Hill 119 , defended by Company E , 2nd Battalion , 1st Marines . Just after midnight another Chinese platoon @-@ sized assault was also halted by the Marines . At 00 : 45 a Chinese platoon probed the US Marines on Hill 111 , yet after an hour and twenty minutes it was also checked . Meanwhile , despite the clashes nearby on Hill 111 the Australians suffered no more casualties . The Armistice Agreement was subsequently signed at 10 : 00 on 27 July . Sporadic fighting continued , and the New Zealand gunners fired several counter @-@ battery tasks , engaging several Chinese guns . The Commonwealth Divisional Artillery fired 1 @,@ 300 rounds during the day ; by evening the front was largely silent . In the last four hours of the war the Chinese fired 44 @,@ 000 artillery rounds into the US Eighth Army positions , although none against the 1st Commonwealth Division . There were no further attacks and the ceasefire came into effect at 22 : 00 the same day . The following day some soldiers from both sides moved forward into no man 's land to exchange greetings , although relatively few Australians did so and the Marines were under orders not to fraternise or communicate with the Chinese . 
 With the war over both sides were required to withdraw 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) within 72 hours to create a 4 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) demilitarised zone , and preparations began to hastily evacuate the forward positions . During August and September sappers from the 1st Commonwealth Division were subsequently engaged clearing minefields and demolishing many of their former defended localities and field defences , while new battle positions were established to the rear . A similar process occurred across the entire front . Meanwhile , under the terms of the agreement all prisoners who wished to be repatriated were to be returned , and 12 @,@ 773 UN and 75 @,@ 000 Chinese and North Korean prisoners were subsequently exchanged during this period , including 21 Australians and one New Zealander . The period that followed proved uneventful , yet the UN forces were required to maintain combat readiness and the ability to react quickly in case the North Koreans violated the ceasefire . In April 1954 , 2 RAR returned to Australia and was replaced by 1 RAR which remained in South Korea until March 1956 . 3 RAR finally returned to Australia in September 1954 after four years of continuous service in Korea and five years before that in Japan . British Commonwealth forces remained in Korea until they were finally withdrawn in August 1957 . Meanwhile , the last Chinese elements did not leave Korea until 1958 . 
 = After Hours ( The Office ) = 
 " After Hours " is the sixteenth episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 168th episode overall . The episode aired on NBC in the United States on February 23 , 2012 . " After Hours " was written by co @-@ executive producers Halsted Sullivan and Warren Lieberstein and directed by Brian Baumgartner , who portrays Kevin Malone on the series , marking his directorial debut . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Dwight Shrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) compete for a job . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) has to deal with Cathy 's sexual advances in his hotel room . Also , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) has everyone stay late to cover for their co @-@ workers in Florida . 
 " After Hours " received mixed reviews from critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , " After Hours " was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 02 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , marking a 16 % rise in the ratings from the series low ratings of the previous episode , " Tallahassee " . The episode also ranked as the highest @-@ rated NBC program of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) and Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) compete to become VP under Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) by seducing her after work at the hotel bar . For most of the night , Packer seems to be the most successful , so Dwight has Gabe ( Zach Woods ) spike Packer 's beer with his asthma inhaler , which causes Packer to vomit and leaves Dwight alone with Nellie . Dwight eventually succeeds in seducing Nellie as she asks for a key to his room . Dwight scratches off the magnetic strip on his hotel card before giving it to Nellie , stating the seduction was only to gain approval and that he doesn 't intend to have sex with her . 
 Andy ( Ed Helms ) has everyone stay late to cover for their co @-@ workers in Florida , which turns into an awkward situation when Val 's ( Ameenah Kaplan ) boyfriend , Brandon ( Jerry Minor ) , arrives and accuses Darryl ( Craig Robinson ) of having an affair with her , after having read Darryl 's text messages to her . Kelly ( Mindy Kaling ) demands that Darryl read them aloud out of voyeuristic interest . Upon hearing them , most of the staff agree that his text messages , particularly an extended ellipsis at the end of one , are suggestive of Darryl wanting to be with Val . Val protests that the idea of her being romantically involved with Darryl is ridiculous . Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) suggests that he try a bold step , saying that if Jim hadn 't made romantic advances while she was still engaged to Roy , she never would have ended up marrying him . Darryl follows her advice and tells Val that a potential relationship is not ridiculous . 
 Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) confides in Ryan ( B. J. Novak ) that she 's intending to stay in Tallahassee . Ryan interprets this as an invitation to hook up with her , so he attempts to seduce her by taking her to the kitchen to help her make a waffle . They hide under a table when the chefs come back . After Ryan compliments Erin , she suggests that they could become roommates in Florida and possibly start dating in six months if things go well between them . Not wanting that long timeline , he resorts to saying he loves Kelly . 
 Meanwhile , Jim ( John Krasinski ) has started spending more time with Cathy ( Lindsey Broad ) because Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) keeps trying to rope Jim into having an affair . During the night at the hotel , Cathy asks to hang out for a while in Jim 's room under the pretext that the heat in her room is malfunctioning . She repeatedly makes seductive signals , making Jim uncomfortable , so he calls Dwight saying he has bed bugs . Dwight arrives and forces Cathy off Jim 's bed so he can lure out the bed bugs with his nearly naked body . This fails to sufficiently disgust Cathy , who merely steps into the bathroom to take a shower until Dwight leaves . Cathy gets out of the shower wearing only a bath robe . After ordering some desserts from room service and asking Jim to touch her legs , he finally comes out saying that he 's happily married , and doesn 't want to be with her . Cathy gets defensive and insists that she did not have any romantic intentions whatsoever , so Jim relents , but Cathy immediately resumes her seductive technique . After Jim goes to the bathroom , he comes out to find her in only her underwear under his blanket . Fed up , he demands that she leave and lets Dwight , armed with spray chemicals , into the room . Jim claims to see a bed bug near Cathy , making her flee from Dwight 's spraying . However , because of the chemicals , Dwight suggests Jim sleep in Cathy 's room . Jim instead spends the night with Dwight in his room , eating Cathy 's desserts and watching TV , while a drunken Nellie is outside , trying unsuccessfully to get in . 
 = = Production = = 
 " After Hours " was written by co @-@ executive producers Halsted Sullivan and Warren Lieberstein . It was directed by Brian Baumgartner , who portrays Kevin Malone on the series , marking his directorial debut . The episode features a guest appearance from David Koechner , who appears as Todd Packer in the series . He recently made a deal with NBC to do more episodes for the series and also possibly join the cast of series developer Greg Daniels 's next series , Friday Night Dinner , an adaption of the British series of the same name . The episode marks the third appearance of Catherine Tate as Nellie Bertram and her second consecutive appearance . Her character , Nellie will work with several of the office workers on a special project for Sabre in a six episode arc . The episode also marks the tenth appearance of Lindsey Broad who plays Cathy , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave . She appeared in a recurring role for the season , after she initially appeared in " Pam 's Replacement " . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Nellie establishing boundaries for flirtation , Nellie and Dwight confessing peculiar secrets to each other , and Pam and Andy calling Jim for advice , only to have Cathy answer the phone . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " After Hours " originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 23 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 02 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a 13 @-@ percent rise in the ratings from the previous episode , " Tallahassee " . The episode finished third in its time slot , being beaten by Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 1 rating / 8 % share and the CBS drama Person of Interest which received a 3 @.@ 1 rating / 7 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode beat The CW drama series The Secret Circle and the Fox drama series The Finder . Despite this , " After Hours " was the highest @-@ rated NBC television episode of the night . It was also the last episode of The Office to be viewed by more than 5 million viewers until the series finale a year later . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " After Hours " received mixed reviews from critics . HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall called it the best episode of a " disappointing " season . He was mainly positive towards the focus of the episode with both story @-@ lines in Tallahassee and Scranton taken place after hours and for the several plot lines in the episode . He praised the pairing of Darryl and Val , saying that they are better matched to be the series ' " new " Jim and Pam than Andy and Erin . Cindy White of IGN said that the episode proved the series was " on a hot streak " . She mainly liked the storylines taking place in Tallahassee and said that the end of the Dwight @-@ Nellie storyline was a " nice bit of character development " . She was also very positive to <unk> 's directing in the episode , saying he " nailed " the documentary format of the episode . She went on to slightly criticize the Scranton storyline and wrote that she hoped the writers would wait before putting Val and Darryl together . She ultimately gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 / 10 . 
 Not all reviews were positive . The A. V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt wrote that the episode was too crowded and that while all four plotlines had " potential " , they weren 't given enough time to develop . Despite this , he did compliment the Dwight scenes , due to their ability to gain a " comic rhythm " . He also complimented the Dwight @-@ Nellie @-@ Todd storyline , saying that his decision to not sleep with Nellie was a " nicely human moment " and also wrote that the character was more grounded when he was more self @-@ aware . He ultimately gave the episode a C + . 
 Many critics commented on the plot featuring Cathy attempting to seduce Jim . White noted that , " Jim did bumble it a bit in the face of Cathy ( sic ) taking insincere offense at his accusation , but the outcome wasn 't hard to predict . Of course Jim would stay true to his real soulmate . " Sepinwall noted Dwight 's cartoonish behavior in the episode , although he called it a good addition to the Jim @-@ Cathy story @-@ line . McNutt wrote that due to the " choppy storytelling " , the Jim @-@ Cathy storyline wasn 't able to feel awkward enough to " feel Jim 's struggle " . 
 = North American XF @-@ 108 Rapier = 
 The North American XF @-@ 108 Rapier was a proposed long @-@ range , high @-@ speed interceptor aircraft designed by North American Aviation intended to defend the United States from supersonic Soviet strategic bombers . The aircraft would have cruised at speeds around Mach 3 ( 2 @,@ 300 mph ; 3 @,@ 700 km / h ) with an unrefueled combat radius over 1 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 900 km ; 1 @,@ 200 mi ) , and was equipped with radar and missiles offering engagement ranges up to 100 miles ( 160 km ) against bomber @-@ sized targets . 
 To limit development costs , the program shared engine development with the North American XB @-@ 70 Valkyrie strategic bomber program , and used a number of elements of earlier interceptor projects . The program had progressed only as far as the construction of a single wooden mockup when it was cancelled in 1959 , due to a shortage of funds and the Soviets ' adoption of ballistic missiles as their primary means of nuclear attack . Had it flown , the F @-@ 108 would have been the heaviest fighter of its era . 
 = = Development = = 
 During the early 1950s , the USAF proposed a very high @-@ performance , long @-@ range interceptor . On 20 July 1955 , formal development of what became known as the Long @-@ Range Interceptor , Experimental ( <unk> @-@ X ) was approved , planned as a F @-@ 102 Delta Dagger / F @-@ 106 Delta Dart replacement . The specification was laid down on 6 October 1955 , calling for an interceptor that could fly at 60 @,@ 000 ft ( 18 @,@ 000 m ) at a speed of Mach 1 @.@ 7 ( 1 @,@ 122 mph ( 1 @,@ 806 km / h ) , with a range of 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) . It was to have a two @-@ man crew and at least two engines . A further consideration was that an integrated fire @-@ control system would be fitted , allowing the interception of a bomber at 60 nmi ( 110 km ) and three targets to be destroyed during a single mission . 
 Of the eight interested companies , contracts for preliminary studies were issued to North American Aviation , Lockheed and Northrop on 11 October 1955 , five days after the specification 's release . Of the paper designs , the North American proposal , dubbed " NA @-@ 236 " , seemed the most promising . The NA @-@ 236 shared some similarities with the XF @-@ 108 , although the most obvious differences were the additions of two <unk> at the midspan of the horizontal stabilizers , and canards . Political and budgetary difficulties led to the cancellation of the program on 9 May 1956 . 
 After considerable confusion , the program was reinstated on 11 April 1957 with North American awarded a contract for two prototypes . The designation F @-@ 108 was issued , also known as " Weapon System 202A " ( WS @-@ 202A ) . North American 's company designation was " NA @-@ 257 " , although it was basically identical to the NA @-@ 236 . At the time , Air Defense Command anticipated an order for 480 aircraft . 
 The resulting design went through considerable evolution , owing to both its cutting @-@ edge technology and continual redefinition of the USAF requirements . Early revisions prominently featured canards , with a span of 19 ft 10 in ( 6 @.@ 04 m ) , and a wing of 53 @.@ 5 ° sweep . The aircraft in this configuration would have had a maximum takeoff weight of 99 @,@ 400 lb ( 45 @,@ 088 kg ) with a 72 @,@ 550 feet ( 22 @,@ 113 m ) operational ceiling . In addition to the F @-@ 108 's interceptor role , North American proposed it as an escort fighter for its own B @-@ 70 Valkyrie supersonic bomber prototype . <unk> between the B @-@ 70 bomber and the F @-@ 108 included the escape capsule and General Electric YJ93 engines . Another role considered was for the F @-@ 108 to be " gap @-@ fillers " for the Distant Early Warning ( <unk> ) system ; because of its great speed , the F @-@ 108 could have scanned up to 278 @,@ 000 square miles ( 720 @,@ 000 km2 ) per hour . 
 From September 1958 , substantial engineering and design changes were implemented ; however , SAC had lost interest in the escort fighter concept . To accompany the B @-@ 70 all the way to its target and back , the F @-@ 108 in its initial concept would have , at best , marginal range . On 30 December 1958 , YF @-@ <unk> preproduction aircraft on order were reduced from 31 to 20 test aircraft and the first test flight was delayed from February to April 1961 . The eventual design , which was built as a full @-@ sized XF @-@ 108 mockup , was displayed to Air Force officials on 17 – 20 January 1959 . The project was given the name " Rapier " on 15 May 1959 , following a contest by the Air Defense Command asking airmen for suggestions . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 Even as the XF @-@ 108 program was progressing well , there were signs that would ultimately lead to its eventual cancellation . Unconfirmed Soviet bomber threats , the overwhelming trend toward offensive and defensive nuclear missiles in the late 1950s and early 1960s , as well as rising costs , contributed to the termination of the XF @-@ 108 . The cancellation was announced on 23 September 1959 . North American continued refining the design through 1960 in hopes that the program might be revived . Despite the extra money and time spent on the Rapier , it was not wholly in vain ; the North American A @-@ 5 Vigilante supersonic reconnaissance bomber developed for the U.S. Navy retained the fuselage / weapon package and systems design of the Rapier . In many ways the Vigilante could be seen as the successful application of the Rapier design principles in a Mach 2 supersonic design . 
 Hughes Aircraft would continue the development of the advanced fire control system and the GAR @-@ 9 missile . Development of the F @-@ 108 radar and missiles was continued by the USAF and the system was eventually used in the Lockheed YF @-@ 12 program . The final configuration for the rear cockpit in the YF @-@ 12A looked similar to that of the F @-@ 108 since it incorporated the same displays and controls required for the Hughes ASG @-@ 18 fire control system . 
 = = Design = = 
 The initial F @-@ 108 configuration featured a very large " cranked " delta wing . There were fixed ventral stabilizers on the wings , mounted at mid @-@ span , and a tall all @-@ moving vertical tailfin , supplemented by two ventral stabilizers that extended when the landing gear retracted . Although some earlier versions of the design had separate tailplanes or forward canards , both were abandoned in the final design . The large fuselage and wing had two and five fuel tanks , respectively , giving an estimated combat radius of some 1 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 000 km ) . Top speed was estimated at 1 @,@ 980 miles per hour ( 3 @,@ 190 km / h ) , about Mach 3 , at 81 @,@ 800 feet ( 24 @,@ 900 m ) . The aircraft was powered by two General Electric <unk> turbojet engines , also used in North American 's XB @-@ 70 Valkyrie bomber , in the fuselage . 
 The F @-@ 108 was intended to carry the Hughes AN / ASG @-@ 18 radar , the U.S. ' s first pulse @-@ Doppler radar set . It was to have look @-@ down / shoot @-@ down capability , but could track only one target at a time . The radar was paired with an infra @-@ red search and tracking ( IRST ) system on the wing leading edges . The radar was used to guide the Hughes GAR @-@ 9 ( later redesignated AIM @-@ 47 ) air @-@ to @-@ air missile , three of which would be carried on a rotary launcher in an internal weapons bay . The GAR @-@ 9 was a very large , long @-@ range weapon with its own radar set for terminal homing . It was intended to fly at Mach 6 , with a range of almost 112 miles ( 180 km ) . 
 = = <unk> @-@ 11 target drone = = 
 As part of WS @-@ 202A , a design for a high @-@ speed ( Mach 3 + ) aerial target for use in testing the F @-@ 108 's weapons system was proposed . The Wright Air Development Center requested the designation <unk> @-@ 11 for the target design ; the request was denied due to the early stage of development , and the F @-@ 108 program was cancelled before further work was undertaken . 
 = = Specifications ( XF @-@ 108 ) = = 
 Data from National Museum of the United States Air Force 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : two 
 Length : 89 @.@ 2 ft ( 27 @.@ 2 m ) 
 Wingspan : 57 @.@ 4 ft ( 17 @.@ 5 m ) 
 Height : 22 @.@ 1 ft ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) 
 Wing area : 1 @,@ 865 ft ² ( 173 @.@ 4 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 50 @,@ 907 lb ( 23 @,@ 098 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 102 @,@ 000 lb ( 46 @,@ 508 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × General Electric YJ93 @-@ GE @-@ <unk> afterburning turbojet 
 Dry thrust : 20 @,@ 900 lbf ( 93 @.@ 0 kN ) each 
 Thrust with afterburner : 29 @,@ 300 lbf ( 130 @.@ 3 kN ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : Mach 3 + , 1 @,@ 980 mph ( 1 @,@ 720 kn , 3 @,@ 190 km / h ) 
 Range : 1 @,@ 271 mi ( 1 @,@ 104 nmi , 2 @,@ 033 km ) combat 
 Ferry range : 2 @,@ 488 mi ( 2 @,@ 162 nmi , 4 @,@ 004 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 80 @,@ 100 ft ( 24 @,@ 400 m ) 
 Wing loading : 55 @.@ 9 lb / ft ² ( 183 @.@ 4 kg / m ² ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 56 
 Armament 
 Guns : 4 x 20 mm cannon 
 Missiles : 3 × Hughes GAR @-@ 9A air @-@ to @-@ air missiles in a rotary weapons bay 
 Bombs : 4 @,@ 000 lbs 
 = Pennsylvania Route 332 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 332 ( PA 332 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . The route runs 17 @.@ 5 miles ( 28 @.@ 2 km ) from PA 263 in Hatboro , Montgomery County east to PA 32 in Yardley , Bucks County . PA 332 runs through suburban areas to the north of Philadelphia , serving Warminster , Ivyland , Richboro , and Newtown . The route is two lanes wide most of its length , with the bypass around Newtown a four @-@ lane divided highway . PA 332 intersects PA 132 in Warminster , PA 232 in Richboro , PA 413 and PA 532 in Newtown ( all three run concurrently on the Newtown Bypass ) , and Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) in Lower Makefield Township . 
 What would become PA 332 between Newtown and Yardley was designated part of Legislative Route 252 in 1911 . PA 332 was created in 1928 to run from PA 263 in Hatboro east to Ivyland with the road between Newtown and Yardley designated as part of PA 532 . By 1940 , PA 332 was extended to PA 113 in Newtown . The route was extended to Yardley by 1947 , replacing PA 532 . PA 332 was routed to bypass Newtown in 1991 when the eastern portion of the Newtown Bypass was completed . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 332 begins at an intersection with PA 263 ( York Road ) in Hatboro , Montgomery County , heading east on Montgomery Avenue , a two @-@ lane undivided roadway . The road passes through residential areas , crossing SEPTA 's Warminster Line . Immediately after crossing the railroad tracks , the route turns northeast on Jacksonville Road and runs through industrial areas with some homes . 
 PA 332 intersects County Line Road and it enters Warminster Township in Bucks County , passing between the Warminster train station to the west and the neighborhood of Warminster Heights to the east . The route widens to four lanes and intersects PA 132 as it continues near industrial parks . The road narrows back to two lanes past the <unk> Boulevard intersection and enters Ivyland , heading past homes . The route becomes the border between Ivyland to the northwest and Warminster Township to the southeast prior to crossing Bristol Road into Northampton Township . PA 332 continues between industrial areas to the northwest and residential areas to the southeast , reaching an intersection with Almshouse Road . 
 PA 332 turns southeast onto Almshouse Road and runs through a mix of farm fields and residences . Past the Hatboro Road intersection , the road curves to the east and gains a center left @-@ turn lane , heading into Richboro . In Richboro , the route passes through business areas and intersects PA 232 . Upon crossing PA 232 , PA 332 changes its name to Newtown Richboro Road and continues past more homes as a two @-@ lane road . The road forms the southern boundary of Tyler State Park , running between areas of fields and woods in the park to the north and residential subdivisions to the south . The route curves northeast and then east before crossing the Neshaminy Creek into Newtown Township . In this area , the road briefly widens into a divided highway before it comes to an intersection with PA 413 and PA 532 at the Newtown Bypass , a road that provides a bypass of the borough of Newtown . 
 At this point , PA 332 turns south on the four @-@ lane divided Newtown Bypass , forming a concurrency with PA 413 and PA 532 . The road heads through wooded areas with nearby residential development , with PA 532 splitting southwest onto Buck Road toward Holland . PA 332 and PA 413 curve east and come to a bridge over the abandoned Fox Chase / Newtown railroad line , with PA 413 turning south onto Newtown Langhorne Road toward Langhorne . PA 332 continues east near residential and commercial development a short distance to the north of the border between Newtown Township and Middletown Township . The road curves to the northeast before turning east past the intersection with Newtown Yardley Road . 
 Upon intersecting <unk> Road , the route enters Lower Makefield Township and becomes Newtown Yardley Road . It passes through farmland before heading north of an office park and reaching an interchange with I @-@ 95 . Following this interchange , PA 332 becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road and enters residential areas . The route turns northeast onto Yardley Langhorne Road and crosses into Yardley , where it is known as Afton Avenue . The road heads into the downtown area and crosses the Delaware Canal . PA 332 comes to its eastern terminus at an intersection with PA 32 , which runs along the Delaware River . 
 = = History = = 
 What would become PA 332 between Newtown and Yardley was designated as part of Legislative Route 252 in 1911 , which continued southeast from Yardley to Morrisville . In 1928 , PA 332 was designated to run from PA 263 in Hatboro east to Ivyland , with the portion of road between Newtown and Yardley designated as part of PA 532 . Between Ivyland and Newtown , the road remained an unnumbered road that was paved with the exception of a portion west of Newtown . PA 332 was extended east to end at PA 113 ( State Street ) in Newtown by 1940 , with the entire route paved by that time . PA 332 entered Newtown from the west on Newtown @-@ Richboro Road . 
 By 1947 , PA 332 was extended east to Yardley , replacing that portion of PA 532 . The route continued north from its previous eastern terminus on PA 413 ( former PA 113 , State Street ) before turning east on Washington Street and leaving Newtown on Newtown Yardley Road . The portion of the Newtown Bypass carrying PA 332 west of PA 413 ( Newtown Langhorne Road ) was completed as part of a western bypass of Newtown for PA 413 in 1977 . In September 1989 , construction began to extend the Newtown Bypass east to the interchange between PA 332 and I @-@ 95 . Construction on this bypass was completed in November 1991 at a cost of $ 16 @.@ 6 million . With the completion of this bypass , PA 332 was routed to bypass Newtown . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Bank Markazi v. Peterson = 
 Bank Markazi v. Peterson , 578 U.S. _ _ _ ( 2016 ) , was a United States Supreme Court case that found that a law which only applied to a specific case , identified by docket number , and eliminated all of the defenses one party had raised does not violate the separation of powers in the United States Constitution between the legislative ( Congress ) and judicial branches of government . The plaintiffs in the trial court , respondents in the Supreme Court , were several parties who had obtained judgments against Iran for its role in supporting state @-@ sponsored terrorism , particularly the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings and 1996 Khobar Towers bombing , and sought execution against a bank account in New York held , through European intermediaries , on behalf of Bank Markazi , the state @-@ owned Central Bank of Iran . The initial plaintiffs obtained court orders preventing the transfer of funds from the account in 2008 and initiated their lawsuit in 2010 . Bank Markazi raised several defenses against the execution against the account , including that the account was not an asset of the bank , but rather an asset of its European intermediary , under both New York state property law and § 201 ( a ) of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act . In response to concerns that existing laws were insufficient for the account to be used to settle the judgments , Congress included a section within a 2012 bill , codified after enactment as 22 U.S.C. § 8772 , that identified the pending lawsuit by docket number , applied only to the assets in the identified case , and essentially abrogated every legal basis available to Bank Markazi to prevent the plaintiffs from executing their claims against the account . Bank Markazi then argued that § 8772 was an unconstitutional breach of the separation of power between the legislative and judicial branches of government , because it effectively directed a particular result in a single case without changing the generally applicable law . The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York and , on appeal , the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit both upheld the constitutionality of § 8772 and cleared the way for the plaintiffs to execute their judgments against the account , which held about $ 1 @.@ 75 billion in cash . 
 The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari and heard oral arguments in the case in January 2016 , releasing their opinion in April 2016 . A 6 – 2 majority found that § 8772 was not unconstitutional , because it " changed the law by establishing new substantive standards " — essentially , that if Iran owns the assets , they would be available for execution against judgments against Iran — for the district court to apply to the case . Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , writing for the majority , explained that the federal judiciary has long upheld laws that affect one or a very small number of subjects as a valid exercise of Congress ' legislative power and that the Supreme Court had previously upheld a statute that applied to cases identified by docket number in Robertson v. Seattle Audubon Society ( 1992 ) . The majority also upheld § 8772 as a valid exercise of Congress ' authority over foreign affairs . Prior to the enactment of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act ( FSIA ) in 1976 , Congress and the Executive branch had authority to determine the immunity of foreign states from lawsuits . Despite transferring the authority to determine immunity to the courts through the FSIA , the majority contended that " it remains Congress ' prerogative to alter a foreign state 's immunity . " 
 Chief Justice John Roberts , joined by Justice Sonia Sotomayor , dissented and harshly criticized the majority 's holding . After providing historical context for the separation of powers between the legislature and judiciary found in Article III of the United States Constitution , the Chief Justice explained that § 8772 is a type of unconstitutional breach of the separation of powers between Congress and the judiciary " whereby Congress assumes the role of judge and decides a particular case in the first instance . " In his view , § 8772 is no different than a hypothetical law applying to a case Smith v. Jones in which the legislature says simply " Smith wins " . In the Chief Justice 's view , § 8772 was not a valid exercise of Congress ' foreign affairs authority ; he contended that Congress and the Executive branch have sufficient authority that they do not need to " seize " the judiciary 's power to " make a political decision look like a judicial one . " Quoting James Madison in Federalist No. 48 , the Chief Justice lamented that this case " will indeed become a blueprint for extensive expansion of the legislative power at the judiciary 's expense , feeding Congress 's tendency to ' extend [ ] the sphere of its activity and draw [ ] all power into its impetuous vortex . ' " 
 The decision came as Iran was seeking access to the world financial market just three months after many sanctions were lifted as a result of Iran 's compliance with an agreement for curtailing development of its nuclear enrichment program . Various Iranian officials denounced the decision as " theft , " " a ridicule of law and justice , " and " open hostility by the United States against the Iranian people . " Iran announced that they would file suit against the United States in the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) for reparations if the U.S. courts begin to " plunder " assets from the Citibank account to give to the winning plaintiffs , although it is not clear if the ICJ would have jurisdiction to entertain the case . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = State immunity = = = 
 Foreign states generally enjoy immunity from lawsuits in the United States under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act ( FSIA ) . The FSIA is the exclusive basis for U.S. courts to exercise jurisdiction over a foreign government . Prior to enactment of the FSIA in 1976 , the executive branch was responsible for determining the immunity of foreign states on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis . By enacting the FSIA , Congress codified the guidelines for the immunity of foreign states and transferred responsibility for determining a foreign state 's immunity from the executive branch to the judiciary . 
 The FSIA contains an exception to the immunity of foreign states for victims of state @-@ sponsored terrorism . Prior to 2002 , if a judgment was awarded against a foreign government , only assets of the foreign government that were located in the U.S. and " used for commercial activity " could have been seized to satisfy the judgment . To make judgments easier to enforce , Congress enacted the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 ( TRIA ) which allows judgments to be executed against " the blocked assets of [ a ] terrorist party . " Blocked assets include assets that may be seized by the President pursuant to his authority granted by Congress . 
 = = = Litigation before § 8772 was enacted = = = 
 The suit involved more than 1300 individuals who had won several separate judgments against Iran for its supportive role in the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings , the 1996 Khobar Towers bombing , several other bombings , an assassination , and a kidnapping . After winning judgments by default , based on a clear evidentiary basis for Iran 's liability , they sought writs of execution against a Citibank account in New York connected with Iran 's central bank . The suits for execution against the Citibank account were consolidated into one case through various procedural mechanisms . 
 The named plaintiff in the case , Deborah Peterson , is the sister of a victim of the Beirut barracks bombings ; joined by victims and other relatives of victims , she had won a default judgment in 2003 against Iran for its role in the bombings . Because of the large number of plaintiffs in the case — almost 1 @,@ 000 — the judge appointed special masters to determine each plaintiff 's right to collect damages and appropriate amount of damages ; in 2007 , the judge entered a default judgment against Iran for $ 2 @,@ 656 @,@ 944 @,@ 877 in damages . 
 In 2008 , the plaintiffs first learned of the interests of the Central Bank of Iran ( Bank Markazi ) in a Citibank bank account in New York and obtained orders restraining the transfer of funds from the account . The account consisted of bonds and belonged to a Luxembourg @-@ based bank , Clearstream Banking , S.A. , which held the account on behalf of Bank Markazi and deposited interest from the bonds into Bank Markazi 's Clearstream account . At some point in 2008 , an account for Bank Markazi was opened with Italian bank Banca <unk> to place the interest payments from the Clearstream account , placing a second intermediary between Bank Markazi and the Citibank account . By the time of the Supreme Court hearing , the Citibank account held about $ 1 @.@ 75 billion in cash , as the last of the bonds had matured in April 2012 . In 2010 , the plaintiffs initiated their lawsuit against Bank Markazi , Clearstream , Banca <unk> , and Citibank , jointly , seeking to execute against the Citibank account their judgments for damages against Iran , based on § 201 ( a ) of the TRIA , which provides that when " a person has obtained a judgment against a terrorist party ... the blocked assets of that terrorist party ( including the blocked assets of any agency or instrumentality of that terrorist party ) shall be subject to execution or attachment . " 
 In February 2012 , President Obama froze all assets of the Iranian government in the U.S. , which included the Citibank account alleged to be controlled by Bank Markazi . However , there were concerns that existing laws were insufficient for the account to be used to settle the judgments . Bank Markazi claimed that the account was not an asset of Bank Markazi , but its intermediary , Clearstream , in relation to both TRIA and New York state property law . 
 = = = Section 8772 = = = 
 Due to the issues raised in the case , Congress included a section within the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act , codified as 22 U.S.C. § 8772 , that preempted any state law and provided that : 
 a financial asset that is — 
 ( A ) held in the United States for a foreign securities intermediary doing business in the United States ; 
 ( B ) a blocked asset ( whether or not subsequently unblocked ) that is property described in subsection ( b ) ; and 
 ( C ) equal in value to a financial asset of Iran , including an asset of the central bank or monetary authority of the Government of Iran or any agency or instrumentality of that Government , that such foreign securities intermediary or a related intermediary holds abroad 
 shall be subject to execution or attachment in aid of execution in order to satisfy any judgment to the extent of any compensatory damages awarded against Iran for damages for personal injury or death caused by an act of torture , extrajudicial killing , aircraft sabotage , or hostage @-@ taking , or the provision of material support or resources for such an act . 
 In response to concerns the banking industry had to early drafts of the legislation , § 8772 specified the assets that the section pertains to as : 
 The financial assets described in this section are the financial assets that are identified in and the subject of proceedings in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in Peterson et al. v. Islamic Republic of Iran et al . , Case No. 10 Civ . <unk> ( <unk> ) ( GWG ) , that were restrained by restraining notices and levies secured by the plaintiffs in those proceedings , as modified by court order dated June 27 , 2008 , and extended by court orders dated June 23 , 2009 , May 10 , 2010 , and June 11 , 2010 , so long as such assets remain restrained by court order . 
 Section 8772 also specified that the courts needed to identify " whether Iran holds equitable title to , or the beneficial interest in , the assets ... and that no other person possesses a constitutionally protected interest in the assets ... under the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States . " If another person held a constitutionally protected interest in the assets , their interest in the assets would not be infringed by the law . 
 = = = After § 8772 was enacted = = = 
 Section 8772 eliminated all of Bank Markazi 's defenses to the seizure of the account 's assets , valued at approximately $ 1 @.@ 75 billion . Bank Markazi conceded that they held " equitable title to , or beneficial interest in , the assets " , per § 8772 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( A ) , but then claimed that § 8772 violated the separation of powers in the United States Constitution between the legislative ( Congress ) and judicial branches of government . The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York and , on appeal , the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit both upheld the constitutionality of § 8772 and awarded the assets to the plaintiffs . 
 = = Appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States = = 
 On December 29 , 2014 , Bank Markazi filed a petition for certiorari with the Supreme Court of the United States , requesting the Court to consider the question : Does § 8772 violate the separation of powers by purporting to change the law for , and directing a particular result in , a single pending case ? The certiorari petition was circulated to the Justices for their conference on April 3 , 2015 , after a brief by the respondents ( Peterson ) opposing certiorari and a reply brief from the petitioner ( Bank Markazi ) were filed in March . Following the April 3rd conference , the Court called for the Solicitor General to file a brief expressing the views of the federal government , which was filed on August 19 . In May and June , the Supreme Court meets only to issue orders and opinions and does not hear oral arguments until the next term begins . The Court granted certiorari following its conference on September 28 . 
 Oral arguments were held on January 13 , 2016 with appearances by Jeffrey <unk> for the petitioner , Theodore Olson for the respondents , and Deputy Solicitor General Edwin Kneedler for the United States as amicus curiae . Justice Antonin Scalia was present during oral arguments . He passed away in February , voiding his vote in the initial vote on the case 's outcome and precluding any draft opinion he may have written from being published by the Court . The Court 's 6 @-@ 2 opinion was delivered on April 20 , 2016 . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the majority opinion , which held that § 8772 does not infringe on the separation of powers between the legislative and judicial branches of government , considering also that the law is an exercise of congressional authority regarding foreign affairs . Justice Anthony Kennedy , Justice Clarence Thomas , Justice Stephen Breyer , Justice Samuel Alito , and Justice Elena Kagan joined the majority opinion ( however , Justice Thomas did not join as to Part II @-@ C of the opinion ) . 
