 The majority began by explaining that judiciary 's authority under Article III of the United States Constitution is to " ' say what the law is ' " , quoting Marbury v. Madison ( 1803 ) . " Congress , no doubt , may not usurp a court 's power to interpret and apply the law to the circumstances before it " by , for example , saying in a hypothetical case Smith v. Jones that Smith wins or compelling the courts to reexamine a case after final judgment has been issued . 
 Bank Markazi relied on United States v. Klein ( 1871 ) for much of its argument . In Klein , the Court questioned whether " ' the legislature may prescribe rules of decision to the Judicial Department ... in cases pending before it . ' " The majority found that " [ o ] ne cannot take this language from Klein at face value " because the power of Congress to make retroactive laws applicable to pending cases has long been recognized . The majority explained that the contemporary significance of Klein is that " Congress may not exercise its authority , including its power to regulate federal jurisdiction , in a way that requires [ federal courts ] ... to become active participants in violating the Constitution . " The unfairness of any retroactive legislation is " ' not a sufficient reason for a court to fail to give that law its intended scope . ' " The Constitution contains only limited constraints on the enactment of retroactive legislation : 
 The Ex Post Facto Clause flatly prohibits retroactive application of penal legislation . Article I , § 10 , cl . 1 , prohibits States from passing ... laws ' impairing the Obligation of Contracts . ' The Fifth Amendment 's Takings Clause prevents the Legislature ( and other government actors ) from depriving private persons of vested property rights except for a ' public use ' and upon payment of ' just compensation . ' The prohibitions of ' Bills of Attainder ' in Art . I , § § 9 – 10 , prohibit legislatures from singling out summary punishment for past conduct . The Due Process Clause also protects the interests in fair notice and repose that may be compromised by retroactive legislation ; a justification sufficient to validate a statute 's prospective application under the Clause ' may not suffice ' to warrant its retroactive application . 
 The majority affirmed that " Congress may indeed direct courts to apply newly enacted , outcome @-@ altering legislation in pending civil cases , " citing its previous decisions in Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm , Inc . ( 1995 ) , Robertson v. Seattle Audubon Society ( 1992 ) , and Landgraf v. USI Film Products ( 1994 ) . Accordingly , the majority found that § 8772 " changed the law by establishing new substantive standards " — essentially , that if Iran owns the assets , they would be available for execution against judgments against Iran — for the district court to apply to the case . Section 8772 left several issues for the District Court to adjudicate : it did not define its key terms " beneficial interest " and " equitable title " ; whether any other party had a constitutionally protected interest in the account ; and whether the assets were " held in the United States " ( Clearstream argued the assets were located in Luxembourg , not New York ) . 
 The fact that the law only applied to one case does not change its validity , although the majority conceded that a narrowly crafted law affecting just one person or a limited number of people may violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment " if arbitrary or inadequately justified . " The federal judiciary has long upheld laws that affect one or a very small number of subjects as a valid exercise of Congress ' legislative power , and the Supreme Court upheld a statute that applied to cases identified by docket number in Robertson v. Seattle Audubon Society ( 1992 ) . 
 The final portion of the majority 's opinion , in which Justice Thomas did not join , upheld § 8772 as a valid exercise of Congress ' authority to regulate foreign affairs . Citing Dames & Moore v. Regan ( 1981 ) , a case which also involved the availability of Iranian assets for execution of judgments against Iran , the majority points out that regulating foreign @-@ state assets — e.g. by blocking them or regulating their availability for execution against judgments — has never been found to violate the judiciary 's authority . Prior to the enactment of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act ( FSIA ) , the Executive branch routinely made case @-@ specific determinations of the scope of immunity for foreign states . Those decisions were not rejected as infringements on the judiciary 's authority . Although the enactment of the FSIA in 1976 transferred authority to the courts to determine foreign @-@ state immunity , the majority held that " it remains Congress ' prerogative to alter a foreign state 's immunity . " When Congress enacted § 8772 , it " acted comfortably within the political branches ' authority over foreign sovereign immunity and foreign @-@ state assets . " 
 = = = Chief Justice Roberts ' dissenting opinion = = = 
 Chief Justice John Roberts , joined by Justice Sonia Sotomayor , dissented from the majority 's ruling . It was the first time that Roberts and Sotomayor were the only two dissenters in a case ; they had been on the court together since 2009 . 
 Roberts began his argument with an analogy : 
 Imagine your neighbor sues you , claiming that your fence is on his property . His evidence is a letter from the previous owner of your home , accepting your neighbor 's version of the facts . Your defense is an official county map , which under state law establishes the boundaries of your land . The map shows the fence on your side of the property line . You also argue that your neighbor 's claim is six months outside the statute of limitations . 
 Now imagine that while the lawsuit is pending , your neighbor persuades the legislature to enact a new statute . The new statute provides that for your case , and your case alone , a letter from one neighbor to another is conclusive of property boundaries , and the statute of limitations is one year longer . Your neighbor wins . Who would you say decided your case : the legislature , which targeted your specific case and eliminated your specific defenses so as to ensure your neighbor 's victory , or the court , which presided over the fait accompli ? 
 That question lies at the root of the case the Court confronts today . 
 In the Chief Justice 's view , § 8772 violates the separation of powers in Article III " [ n ] o less than if [ Congress ] had passed a law saying ' respondents win . ' " The majority responded that a more appropriate analogy to the case is if a legislature enacts a law specifying that a 2000 map supersedes a 1990 map in an ongoing property dispute in which the parties are contesting whether an ambiguous statute makes a 1990 or 2000 county map the authoritative source for establishing property boundaries . 
 The Chief Justice proceeded to detail the origin , purpose , and case law history of the separation of powers . Article Three of the United States Constitution establishes an independent judiciary with " distinct and inviolable authority . " Such separation of powers " safeguards individual freedom . " As Alexander Hamilton wrote in Federalist No. 78 , quoting Montesquieu , " ' there is no liberty if the power of judging be not separated from the legislative and executive powers . ' " The separation of powers between the judiciary and legislative branches was examined in detail in Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm , Inc . ( 1995 ) , in which the Supreme Court found unconstitutional a statute that reopened a case after a final judgment . At the time of the framing of the Constitution , judicial and legislative powers were often intermingled . The colonial legislatures often performed many of the functions of the judiciary , such as functioning as the court of last resort , granting new trials , and providing original review , appellate review , stays of judgments , and providing other types of relief " in an effort to do what is agreeable to Right and Justice . " The colonial charters of Massachusetts , Connecticut , and Rhode Island gave the legislatures the authority of court of last resort . In New Hampshire , judicial appeals were directed to the governor and his council , but routinely referred to the legislature for discussion . And for over half a century , the colonial assembly of Virginia could review court judgments . The involvement of legislatures in judicial matters " intensified during the American Revolution , " which " soon prompted a sense of a sharp necessity to separate the legislative from the judicial power . " The interference of the legislatures in judicial matters " <unk> [ ed ] prominently in the Framers ' decision to devise a system for securing liberty through the division of power . " This resulted in Article Three of the United States Constitution , which forms the " central pillar of judicial independence " and places " ' [ t ] he judicial Power of the United States ' ... in ' one supreme Court ' , and in such ' inferior Courts ' " as Congress may establish . This judicial power extends " to all Cases , in Law and Equity , arising under this Constitution , the Laws of the United States , and Treaties made , or which shall be made , under their Authority . " 
 The Chief Justice explained that there are three types of unconstitutional restrictions on the power of the judiciary . " ' Congress cannot vest review of the decisions of Article III courts in officials of the Executive Branch ' " , or " ' retroactively command the federal courts to reopen final judgments . ' " In the Chief Justice 's view , this case is a third type of unconstitutional interference with the judiciary 's authority , " whereby Congress assumes the role of judge and decides a particular case in the first instance , " which he believes is precisely what § 8772 does . Section 8772 foreclosed Bank Markazi 's defenses that it was immune from prosecution under the FSIA , a separate juridical entity under both U.S. federal common law and international law and thus not liable for Iran 's debts , and that New York state law did not permit execution of the plaintiff 's judgments against its assets . " And lest there be any doubt that Congress ' sole concern was deciding this particular case ... § 8772 provided that nothing in the statute ' shall be construed ... to affect the availability , or lack thereof , of a right to satisfy a judgment in any other action against a terrorist party in any proceedings other than ' [ this case ] . " 
 In the hypothetical case of Smith v. Jones in which Congress enacted a statute that says " Smith wins " , the majority would find it unconstitutional because it " would create no new substantive law . " In the Chief Justice 's view , it would : before the passage of the hypothetical statute , the law did not provide that Smith wins ; after passage of the hypothetical statute , it does . For the Chief Justice , " the question is whether its action constitutes an exercise of judicial power . " Both the hypothetical " Smith wins " statute and § 8772 both have the same effect , which is essentially the legislature 's " ' policy judgment ' " that one side in the case wins . He compared the majority 's opinion , which found that § 8772 left plenty of issues for the District Court to adjudicate , to " a constitutional Maginot Line , easily circumvented by the simplest maneuver of taking away every defense against Smith 's victory , without saying ' Smith wins . ' " Section 8772 only required the courts to make two decisions — that Bank Markazi had an equitable interest in the assets and no one else did — that were both already clear before § 8772 was enacted . By the majority 's view of " plenty " , the Chief Justice contended that , in the hypothetical case Smith v. Jones , the majority would uphold a judgment for Smith if the court finds that Jones was served notice of the lawsuit and the case was within the statute of limitations . Strongly criticizing the majority , the Chief Justice , quoting Federalist No. 48 , concluded that the majority 's " failure to enforce [ the boundary between the judicial and legislative branches ] in a case as clear as this reduces Article III to a mere ' parchment barrier against the encroaching spirit ' of legislative power . " 
 Finally , the Chief Justice distinguished this case from Dames & Moore . The actions of the president that Dames & Moore upheld did not dictate the outcome of the case , but merely specified that the claims be handled by a different tribunal . The court 's decision in Dames & Moore was based on the " longstanding practice of settling the claims of U.S. nationals against foreign countries by treaty or executive agreement . " In contrast with the majority 's interpretation of Dames & Moore , " those dispositions , crucially , were not exercises of judicial power . " The Chief Justice critiqued the majority 's position on Dames & Moore by contending that the political branches of the government — Congress and the executive branch — have sufficient power of their own to address the issues in this case and do not need to " commandeer [ ] the courts to make a political decision look like a judicial one . " 
 The Chief Justice concluded with a strong criticism of the majority 's decision : 
 At issue here is a basic principle , not a technical rule . Section 8772 decides this case no less certainly than if Congress had directed entry of judgment for respondents . As a result , the potential of the decision today ' to effect important change in the equilibrium of power ' is ' immediately evident . ' Morrison v. Olson , 487 U.S. 654 , 699 ( 1988 ) ( Scalia , J. , dissenting ) Hereafter , with this Court 's seal of approval , Congress can unabashedly pick the winners and losers in particular pending cases . Today 's decision will indeed become a ' blueprint for extensive expansion of the legislative power ' at the Judiciary 's expense , Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority v. Citizens for Abatement of Aircraft Noise , Inc . , 501 U.S. 252 , 277 ( 1991 ) , feeding Congress 's tendency to ' extend [ ] the sphere of its activity and draw [ ] all power into its impetuous vortex , ' The Federalist No. 48 ... ( J. Madison ) 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Payout to plaintiff @-@ respondents = = = 
 The ruling clears the way for the plaintiff @-@ respondents to collect from the roughly $ 1 @.@ 75 billion bank account , which will be enough to satisfy about 70 % of their collective $ 2 @.@ 5 billion in judgments . They will not be eligible to collect from a $ 1 billion fund — the Victims of State Sponsored Terrorism Fund — established by Congress in 2015 to pay victims of state @-@ sponsored terrorism . That fund pays 30 % of judgments until all applicants have received that amount ; remaining funds will not be distributed until all claimants have received 30 % of their judgment . 
 = = = Legal community reactions = = = 
 Attorney and law professor Alan Morrison , writing for the The George Washington Law Review , remarked that : 
 To a non @-@ lawyer trying to decide who should win just on the equity , the Bank ’ s chances did not look very good , and on April 20 , 2016 , the Supreme Court ... upheld the constitutionality of § 8772 , thereby removing a major barrier to the victims collecting at least some of their judgments . Those were the atmospherics , but on the legal issues , there was substantial agreement between the two opinions , although in their conclusions they were very far apart . All of the Justices agreed that Congress could pass laws changing the existing law and make those changes generally applicable to pending cases , provided it did so clearly . They also agreed that Congress could not pass a law in a pending case that said something along the lines of , “ The Court is directed to enter judgment for the plaintiff , ” or that “ The plaintiff wins and defendant loses . ” To do so would usurp the judicial role and improperly expand that of Congress . Nor could Congress change the law in a way that re @-@ opened a case in which there was a final judgment not subject to further appeal . There was also agreement that Congress could write laws that applied to a limited category of cases , at least in those cases in which only the Government was adversely affected by the change in the law . The issue here was where § 8772 fell on that spectrum . 
 Morrison expressed " concern ... that what happened here will repeat itself in other circumstances in which the equities [ are ] quite different " . Although Morrison suggested that an individual aggrieved by such a law could bring a claim for relief under <unk> Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment , he argued that such a claim is unlikely to be successful because the law will likely be upheld when reviewed under the rational basis test . The rational basis test asks " there is some rational relationship between disparity of treatment and some legitimate governmental purpose . " 
 According to Stuart <unk> , an attorney who represents terror victims , the ruling could hinder foreign governments from using the judiciary to override determinations by Congress and the President regarding the availability of their assets to satisfy judgments against them . <unk> praised the ruling as " a message for any country that if Congress and the president take steps to freeze assets , make assets available to victims , that the courts are going to defer . " 
 = = = U.S. reactions = = = 
 The decision was praised in the U.S. by the litigants , their counsel , and politicians . Theodore Olson , counsel for the respondents , praised the ruling , saying it " will bring long @-@ overdue relief to ... victims of Iranian terrorism and their families , many of whom have waited decades for redress . " Praising the court 's decision , lead plaintiff Deborah Peterson found solace that " in the eyes of the law , we know who is responsible , and those who are responsible have been brought to the justice that we are capable of bringing them to here on earth . " 
 Law professor Jimmy <unk> said the decision " sends a powerful message to rogue states and state sponsors of terrorism that if you , directly or indirectly , provide material support for terrorism , you will be held accountable " — sentiment echoed by Mark <unk> , director of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies — and that " hopefully , it 's also going to have a deterrent effect , or least cause Iran to think twice about supporting terrorist activity going forward . " The decision was also praised by Senator Bob Menendez , who authored § 8772 , and Speaker of the House Paul Ryan . 
 = = = Iranian reactions = = = 
 A spokesman for Iran 's Ministry of Foreign Affairs condemned the ruling as " theft " , " incompatible with international law " , " a ridicule of justice and law " and stated that Iran " totally reject [ s ] " the ruling . The Iranian Foreign Ministry summoned the Swiss ambassador to Iran , who represents U.S. interests in Iran , to receive diplomatic notes , to be forwarded to the US , protesting the ruling . A week after the decision was announced , Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif wrote a letter to Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations Ban Ki @-@ moon urging him to use his good offices to intervene in securing the release of frozen funds and to stop interfering with Iran 's international financial transactions . A U.S. State Department spokesman rejected Iran 's claims , stating that the State Department " believe [ s ] the U.S. laws and the application of those laws by the courts of the United States comport with international law . " 
 Iran announced that they would file suit against the United States in the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) for reparations if the U.S. courts begin to " plunder " assets from the Citibank account to give to the winning plaintiffs . However , the ICJ may not be able to hear the case . The U.S. withdrew its general recognition of the ICJ 's jurisdiction in response to the ICJ 's ruling in Nicaragua v. United States , but a 1955 friendship treaty between Iran and the U.S. gives the ICJ jurisdiction to rule on disputes arising from provisions of the treaty . A working group has been established in the Iranian Cabinet to investigate the ruling and determine ways of reestablishing Iran 's rights to the account . 
 Less than a month after the Supreme Court decision , Iran 's parliament overwhelmingly approved — 181 votes for , 6 votes against , 8 abstentions — an " emergency bill " requiring the government to seek compensation from the U.S. for actions the U.S. has taken against Iran , including the 1953 Iranian coup d 'état , which the U.S. helped restore the monarch ; the <unk> coup plot in 1980 ; United States support for Iraq during the Iran – Iraq war , including compensation for over 800 @,@ 000 Iranians who died or were injured during the conflict ; U.S. espionage in Iran ; U.S. support of Israel ; the alleged death of 17 @,@ 000 Iranians at the hands of U.S.-supported terrorist groups ; and the confiscation of Iranian assets . The bill requires the government to take " appropriate legal action " for the violation of Iranian state immunity , including the pursuit of U.S. assets in third countries , and to provide regular updates to parliament on its actions against the US . 
 Some Iranian officials , including the chief of the Central Bank of Iran ( CBI ) , have placed some blame for the Citibank account 's seizure on the previous administration of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , who was president of Iran from 2005 to 2013 . The Foreign Ministry 's director for political and security affairs , Hamid <unk> , said it was " reckless " for the previous administration to have invested in U.S. securities . In a post on the CBI 's website , its chief pointed out that : " Although CBI experts and senior officials had warned against investing in dollar denominated securities , the government of president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad went ahead and purchased it , thus paving the way for the damage done to our assets . " Hamid <unk> , a senior Foreign Ministry official , criticized the former head of the CBI for investing in a " hostile country " . 
 = = = Impact on US @-@ Iran relations = = = 
 The decision came at a delicate time for relations between Iran and Western nations , which were removing sanctions on Iran after its compliance with an agreement for curtailing development of its nuclear enrichment program . The agreement stipulated that once Iranian compliance with the terms of the agreement was verified , most sanctions against Iran would be lifted , including all sanctions imposed by the United Nations Security Council as well as nuclear @-@ related European Union and U.S. sanctions ; U.S. sanctions against Iran for terrorism , human rights abuses , and ballistic missiles would not be affected . In mid @-@ January 2016 , most sanctions were lifted . In March , the District Court for the Southern District of New York found , by default , that Iran had provided support to certain terrorist groups and individuals responsible for the September 11 attacks and awarded $ 10 @.@ 5 billion in damages to the plaintiffs , which consisted of $ 3 billion to reimburse insurance companies for paid claims and $ 7 @.@ 5 billion for victims and their families ( $ 2 million for pain and suffering and $ 6 @.@ 88 million in punitive damages per victim ) . The same judge ruled just six months earlier that there was insufficient evidence linking Saudi Arabia — which has sour relations with Iran — to the 9 / 11 attacks to overcome , under the terrorism exemption , Saudi Arabia 's immunity under the FSIA . 
 The Supreme Court 's decision was announced while Iran 's Foreign Minister , Mohammad Javad Zarif , was visiting the United States . The week before the decision was announced , the head of the Central Bank of Iran had visited Washington , during the spring meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund , to discuss with U.S. and foreign officials problems that remained with Iranian access to international banking , despite the lifting of sanctions . Javad Zarif criticized the Bank Markazi decision and the " even more absurd " 9 / 11 decision by the New York as " the height of absurdity " . Iranian President Hassan Rouhani called the decisions " open hostility by the United States against the Iranian people . " 
 Under the nuclear agreement , an important policy objective was to ensure that the Iranian economy benefits from suspending its nuclear weapons program . In the view of commentators Ali <unk> , a professor of international relations at the University of Isfahan , and Saam <unk> , an attorney and commentator on US @-@ Iran relations and sanctions law , the Bank Markazi decision and the 9 / 11 case threaten to undermine the nuclear deal and American credibility in negotiations with Iran . The head of the Nuclear Committee in Iran 's parliament , Ibrahim <unk> , decried the rulings as " cooperation between the American Congress , the government and courts to steal Iranian property . " 
 = American Gangster ( film ) = 
 American Gangster is a 2007 American biographical crime film directed and produced by Ridley Scott and written by Steven Zaillian . The film is based on the criminal career of Frank Lucas , a gangster from La Grange , North Carolina who smuggled heroin into the United States on American service planes returning from the Vietnam War , before being detained by a task force led by detective Richie Roberts . The film stars Russell Crowe and Denzel Washington in their first lead acting roles together since 1995 's Virtuosity . The film also co @-@ stars Ted Levine , John Ortiz , Josh Brolin , Chiwetel Ejiofor , Norman Reedus , Ruby Dee , <unk> Nadal and Cuba Gooding , Jr . 
 Development for the film initially began in 2000 , when Universal Pictures and Imagine Entertainment purchased the rights to a New York magazine story about the rise and fall of Lucas . Two years later , screenwriter Steven Zaillian introduced a 170 @-@ page scriptment to Scott . Original production plans were to commence in Toronto for budget purposes ; however , production eventually relocated permanently to New York City . Because of the film 's rising budget Universal canceled production in 2004 . After negotiations with Terry George , it was later revived with Scott at the helm in March 2005 . Principal photography commenced over a period of five months from July to December 2006 ; filming took place throughout New York City and concluded in Thailand . 
 American Gangster premiered in New York on October 20 , 2007 , and was released in the United States and Canada on November 2 . The film was well received by most film critics , and grossed over US $ 266 @.@ 5 million worldwide , with domestic grosses standing at $ 130 @.@ 1 million . Many of the people portrayed , including Roberts and Lucas , have stated that the film took a lot of creative license with the story , and three former DEA agents sued Universal claiming the agency 's portrayal was demoralizing . American Gangster was nominated for twenty @-@ one awards , including two Academy Award nominations for Best Art Direction and Best Supporting Actress ( Ruby Dee ) , and won three including a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role for Dee . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1968 , Frank Lucas is the right @-@ hand man of Harlem gangster Ellsworth " Bumpy " Johnson . When Johnson dies of a heart attack , Lucas takes control of the Harlem crime scene . 
 After handing in almost $ 1 million that he found in a mobster 's car , Newark detective Richie Roberts is ostracized in his precinct . After his exiled and addicted partner overdoses on a potent brand of heroin called " Blue Magic " , Captain Lou Toback puts Roberts in charge of a task force that targets local suppliers . Lucas buys Blue Magic directly from producers in Thailand and smuggles it into the U.S. through returning Vietnam War servicemen . His low overhead allows him to eventually wholesale Blue Magic to most the dealers in the New York area . With this monopoly , Lucas expands his control to nightclubs , casinos , and prostitution . He buys a mansion for his mother and recruits his five brothers , including Huey and Turner , as lieutenants to spread his empire . During his rise to becoming Harlem 's crime boss , Lucas falls in love with Eva , a Puerto Rican beauty queen . 
 As Lucas ' business prospers , he makes a point of operating quietly and dressing with a modest conservatism both as a sign of strength and to avoid attracting police attention . Also , he stays away from the drugs to avoid making hard decisions under the influence . However , Lucas violates these principles when he attends the Fight of the Century with Eva , sporting gaudy clothes that were a present by Eva ; Roberts attends the fight , notices the previously unknown Lucas with even better seats than the Italian mobsters , and investigates him . Meanwhile , Lucas needs to deal with Lucchese mafia boss Dominic <unk> , who threatens to destroy Lucas ' family unless he gets in on a deal , and corrupt NYPD detectives led by Nick Trupo , who attempts to extort and blackmail him to give them a cut . Lucas must also compete with local crime figure Nicky Barnes , a young gun trying to take over Harlem who has been diluting Lucas ' Blue Magic and selling it under the same brand name . After the Fall of Saigon cuts off Lucas ' supply , he is forced to rely on the other crime rings . 
 Roberts ' detectives witness Frank Lucas ' cousin and driver shoot a woman and then use the threat of a long sentence to get him to wear a wire . The gathered information allows Roberts and his task force to identify and search one of the last planes carrying Lucas ' stock , discovering Blue Magic in the coffins of dead returning servicemen . With this evidence they obtain a warrant to follow the drugs into Newark 's projects and Lucas ' heroin processing facility . In the ensuing shootout , Steve Lucas , Frank Lucas ' young nephew who gave up a promising career for the New York Yankees to join Lucas ' crime family , is killed . Meanwhile , Trupo , whose prized Shelby Mustang Lucas had destroyed , and his men break into Lucas ' mansion to steal his emergency cash supply hidden under the doghouse , killing the dog . As Lucas gets ready to go after Trupo , his mother dissuades him from killing a cop , warning him that she and Eva will leave him if he does . Lucas is arrested after Roberts ' team conducts a raid on the shops run by his brothers . 
 In the police station , Lucas offers to bribe Roberts , but is rebuffed . Instead , Roberts offers Lucas a chance at a shorter jail sentence if he aids his investigation of dirty cops in the NYPD and Lucas duly provides Roberts with the names . In the end , three quarters of the New York DEA are arrested and convicted , and a distraught Trupo commits suicide . Roberts , having just passed the bar exam , defends Lucas as his first client . Lucas is sentenced to 70 years in prison , of which he serves 15 years and is released in 1991 . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 In 2000 , Universal Pictures and Imagine Entertainment purchased the rights to " The Return of Superfly " , a New York magazine story by Mark Jacobson about the rise and fall of the 1970s heroin kingpin Frank Lucas . In 2002 , screenwriter Steven Zaillian brought a 170 @-@ page script to director Ridley Scott , who expressed interest in making two films from it . However , Scott did not immediately pursue the project , choosing to make Kingdom of Heaven instead . In November 2003 , Universal and Imagine entered negotiations with Brian De Palma to direct Tru Blu , with a script by Zaillian based on Frank Lucas . Zaillian interpreted the story as one of " American business and race " , focusing the script thematically on corporate business . Production was initially slated for a spring 2004 start . In March 2004 , the studio entered new negotiations with Antoine Fuqua to direct , as well as Denzel Washington to star in the film as Frank Lucas . The following May , Benicio del Toro entered negotiations to star as Detective Richie Roberts , who brought down Lucas . Production of Tru Blu was reset to begin in early fall 2004 , with the film slated for a release date of June 3 , 2005 . In September 2004 , Dania Ramirez entered negotiations to join the cast of the film , now titled American Gangster . 
 Universal Pictures reported that it greenlit American Gangster with a budget of $ 80 million , which escalated to $ 93 million , with $ 10 million for development costs and $ 3 million for the delay of the production start date . Sources close to the director insist that the budget was $ 93 million from the beginning . The studio also sought for American Gangster to be produced in Toronto rather than New York City to save money , but Fuqua resisted the re @-@ location . The studio 's parent company General Electric received tax credits in New York City , so production was moved to the city . The move , however , inflated the budget to $ 98 million . Fuqua 's camp insisted that it was seeking ways to reduce the budget , but the studio contended several aspects of the project under him . The director had wanted to film a Vietnam sequence in Thailand and to cast notable names such as Ray Liotta and John C. Reilly in minor roles . To add to the studio 's budgetary concerns , Fuqua was rewriting the script during the preproduction process . The director also did not have a shot @-@ list , final locations , and supporting actors signed to initiate production . 
 Fuqua was fired on October 1 , 2004 , four weeks before principal photography would begin . The studio cited creative differences for the director 's departure . After Fuqua 's departure , the studio met with Peter Berg to take over directing the film , and Denzel Washington had approved of the choice . Due to the search potentially escalating a budget already in the US $ 80 million range and the difficulty in recouping the amount based on the film 's subject matter , Universal canceled production of American Gangster , citing time constraints and creative elements for its reason . The cancellation cost the studio $ 30 million , of which $ 20 million went to Washington and $ 5 million went to del Toro due to their pay or play contracts . 
 In March 2005 , American Gangster was revived as Universal and Imagine entered negotiations with Terry George to revise Zaillian 's script and direct the film , which was to be financed with a target budget of US $ 50 million . Will Smith was approached to replace Washington as Frank Lucas , though an offer would be held off until George completed his revision of the script . George cut many key scenes , characters and Asian locations to reduce costs , but the project failed to progress given financial problems and Grazer feeling they " couldn 't make it right " without the removed material . 
 After a meeting between Scott and Zaillian on another project , Zaillian brought the project up again with Scott , who decided he was ready to do it . Producer Brian Grazer and Imagine executive Jim Whitaker decided against pursuing George 's attempt and to return to Zaillian 's vision . In February 2006 , Ridley Scott entered talks with the studio to take over American Gangster from George , returning to Zaillian 's draft as the film 's basis . Washington returned to his role as Lucas , and Russell Crowe was attached to star as Roberts . Crowe was drawn to the project based on his previous work with the director on Gladiator and A Good Year , while Washington wanted to work with Crowe again , after 1995 's Virtuosity . Production was slated in summer 2006 . 
 Scott had discussed the script with Crowe as they worked on A Good Year in France , and they sought to take on the project . The director reviewed Zaillian 's script , Terry George 's rewrite , and a revision by Richard Price during the project 's incarnation with director Antoine Fuqua . Scott preferred Zaillian 's approach and chose to follow it . In realizing the project , the director encountered a challenge in the script since the characters Frank Lucas and Richie Roberts do not encounter each other until twenty minutes before the end of the film . The director sought to flesh out the private universes of the characters that would evolve and have scenes cut between the two characters to provide a balance . Elements like Frank Lucas 's interaction with his family and Richie Roberts ' dysfunctional marriage were written to add to the characters ' backgrounds . The rappers T.I. , RZA and Common were added to the cast to appeal to younger audiences . 
 Scott chose to direct American Gangster based on the paradoxical values of Frank Lucas and Richie Roberts . The film somewhat focuses on the comparatively ethical business practices of the " wicked gangster " and the womanizing and failed marriage of the " do @-@ gooder " police detective . Washington , who was not normally a fan of gangster films , chose to portray Lucas when he saw " the arc of the character " had ended with prices that Lucas paid for his actions . To prepare for their roles , the actors met their real @-@ life counterparts . Washington acquired Lucas 's Southern accent , and Crowe practiced to match Roberts 's manner of speaking and body language , requesting tape recordings of Roberts to assist in his preparation . The following March , the studio rehired Zaillian to rewrite the script for American Gangster . It was rumored that Washington got paid another $ 20 million for when the project was greenlit again ; that rumor proved to be false , as he signed on for his gross . The budget had escalated to $ 100 million , which Grazer stated was unexpected given " It 's not a high @-@ concept comedy , it 's not a fantasy movie , it 's not a four @-@ quadrant movie " . Grazer and Scott still had to pay back the studio $ 3 million for a budget overrun . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began in July 2006 in New York City . American Gangster was filmed over a period of approximately four months in over 180 different locations , most of them across New York ; it set the record for containing the highest number of filming locations of a movie . Two months were spent in New York , with all the city 's five boroughs being used . Approximately fifty to sixty locations were set in Harlem alone . While in the neighbourhood , Scott stated that he found several interiors that had been untouched since the 1940s . According to production designer Arthur Max , exhaustive location scouting was done to find parts of New York that could still resemble the city of the early 1970s , filming Lucas ' headquarters at 116th Street 20 blocks north , on 136th Street . In his interview with ComingSoon.net , Scott stated that " [ he ] just walked in [ ... ] and [ ... ] just sho [ o ] t in the house . " Several gas masks were brought by producers due to health hazards and sanitary concerns existing in the buildings . Scott found filming in Harlem to be difficult , commenting that the rapid gentrification in Harlem provided poor opportunities for shooting angles . Hand @-@ held cameras were extensively used to depict a " guerrilla filmmaking " style . 
 Other locations for principal photography include the Brooklyn Navy Yard , the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum , Old Westbury Gardens , a segment of the George Washington Bridge , and the Brooklyn Supreme Courthouse . Briarcliff Manor in upstate New York had the locations for both the Lucas farm and the estate Lucas buys for his family . Filming locations began setting up in Thailand in November 2006 , after Branko Lustig consulted with <unk> <unk> , the country 's tourism minister . Filming for American Gangster concluded in Chiang Mai the following month . 
 Using his experience from visiting New York in the same time period in which the film 's story took place , Scott sought to downplay a " Beatles " atmosphere to the film and to instead create a <unk> atmosphere , saying that " Harlem was really , really shabby , beautiful brownstones falling apart . " Production and costume design was emphasized , transforming the location into the rundown streets of upper Manhattan from the late 1960s and early 1970s . Denzel Washington , as Frank Lucas , went through 64 different costume changes . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In 2006 , Greg Calloway was approached by producers to produce a soundtrack for the film . He presented the idea to Atlantic Records chairman Craig Kallman , and one of the company 's artists , T.I. , got an acting role in the film . However , the deal did not go further because Universal Pictures owned the rights to the film ; " It was a Universal film and they were not going to give the soundtrack to WMG " ( Atlantic 's parent company ) . Thus Scott brought back Marc Streitenfeld , who had worked with him in A Good Year . The composer stated that " the overall tone needed to be something bigger and darker " given the characters ' strong personalities , and while not being the original intention , he added shades of blues and soul music to fit the 1970s setting . The musical score for American Gangster was recorded between April and May 2007 by Streitenfeld , with the help of orchestrator Bruce Fowler and conductor Mike Nowak , using an 80 @-@ piece orchestra recorded in sections as well as acoustic pre @-@ records , performed by Streitenfeld himself . Additional score material was composed and recorded by Hank Shocklee . 
 The official soundtrack album for American Gangster was released by Def Jam Recordings within a week of the film 's release . In addition to Streitenfeld and Shocklee 's score material , the soundtrack album also features songs influenced by music in the 1960s and 1970s , including from blues and soul musicians such as Bobby Womack , The Staple Singers , Sam & Dave , and John Lee Hooker . Grazer stated that " I wanted to introduce a visual and sonic world that is a contained entity of the ' 70s " , and Scott felt it was vital to have " the brand of music that was Harlem at the time . " 
 Denzel Washington pressed Grazer into inviting rapper Jay @-@ Z to write the film 's score , but the producer " just didn 't think there 'd be enough for Jay @-@ Z to do " given the intentions to do a soundtrack filled with 1970s music . The film 's trailer had already used Jay @-@ Z 's " Heart of the City ( Ain 't No Love ) " , and the rapper was invited to an advanced screening . The film had a profound resonance on the musician , who decided to create a concept album , also entitled American Gangster . The rapper recorded tracks that were prompted by specific scenes in the film . It was speculated that the album 's release in conjunction with the film would attract a young audience and help Universal Pictures generate profits to recover from the film 's troubled development history . According to Jay @-@ Z : 
 " It was like I was watching the film , and putting it on pause , and giving a back story to the story . It immediately clicked with me . Like Scarface or any one of those films , you take the good out of it , and you can see it as an inspiring film . " 
 = = Release = = 
 American Gangster premiered in Harlem at the Apollo Theater on October 20 , 2007 . Over two weeks before the release of American Gangster , a screener for the film leaked online . The film debuted in the United States and Canada on November 2 , 2007 in 3 @,@ 054 theaters . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In its opening weekend in the United States and Canada , it grossed an estimated $ 43 @.@ 6 million , averaging $ 14 @,@ 264 per theater , placing the film first in the weekend box office . It marked the biggest opening weekend out of any film in both Washington and Crowe 's careers . In its second week , grosses declined by 44 @.@ 8 percent to $ 24 million , being beaten out by Bee Movie . In contrast by its third week , screenings for American Gangster increased to 3 @,@ 110 theaters as the film surpassed the $ 100 million mark . American Gangster finished its box office run in North America with $ 130 @,@ 164 @,@ 645 . 
 The film experienced similar success overseas . American Gangster was released in the United Kingdom on November 16 , and became the highest @-@ grossing film of the week , garnering £ 2 @.@ 6 million ( $ 5 @.@ 3 million ) in the box office . It repeated the feat in its second week , grossing an estimated £ 1 @.@ 82 million ( $ 3 @.@ 7 million ) at the box office and beating out Beowulf two consecutive times . The weekend of November 16 – 18 saw American Gangster take $ 14 @.@ 7 million from fourteen territories internationally . At the same time , American Gangster expanded in the European market ; it received $ 2 @.@ 8 million from 366 theaters in Germany and $ 3 @.@ 6 million from 366 screens in France during its opening weekend . Releases followed in Norway and Sweden the succeeding week , where it earned $ 392 @,@ 608 and $ 465 @,@ 238 from thirty @-@ seven and fifty @-@ nine theaters , respectively . The film was released in the United Arab Emirates during the film 's sixth week , and grossed a modest $ 281 @,@ 922 at the box office during its first week in the emirate . Similarly , it earned $ 6 @.@ 9 million in international markets during its sixth week , adding the total at the time to $ 40 @.@ 9 million . 
 By January 25 , 2008 , American Gangster opened in thirty @-@ seven markets , bringing international grosses to $ 93 million . In February , screenings for the film debuted in Mexico — with a modest $ 820 @,@ 482 opening weekend — and Japan , where it opened at the box office with $ 2 @.@ 3 million , landing in second place . American Gangster grossed over $ 266 @.@ 5 million worldwide at the box office , with international grosses making up 51 percent ( $ 136 @.@ 3 million ) . It ranked as the 19th highest @-@ grossing film of 2007 both domestically and worldwide . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 American Gangster was released in DVD and HD DVD format on February 19 , 2008 . The home release included an unrated extended version of the film , featuring 18 additional minutes and an alternate ending . The film topped both the DVD sales charts with 4 million units during its first week in stores , more than three times as many copies as second place Michael Clayton , and the rental charts . American Gangster ended up as the 14th best @-@ selling DVD of 2008 . It also topped the high @-@ definition charts despite being released in the same week Toshiba announced it would discontinue the HD DVD format . On October 14 , the film saw its release on Blu @-@ ray . 
 A mobile game based on the film was released by Gameloft on November 1 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes reports that 80 % of critics have given the film a positive review based on 206 reviews , with a rating average of 7 out of 10 , with the consensus being : " American Gangster is a gritty and entertaining throwback to classic gangster films , with its lead performers firing on all cylinders . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean score out of 100 to reviews from film critics , has a score of 76 based on 38 reviews . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film a perfect four star rating and opined , " This is an engrossing story , told smoothly and well . " Ebert also praised Crowe 's performance , saying that his contribution to the storytelling was " enormous " . Paul Byrnes of The Sydney Morning Herald felt that American Gangster was " one of the most intelligent gangster films in years " and expressed that the film offers " the spectacle of grand themes and two bigger @-@ than @-@ life characters played by two of the best actors in cinema . " Concluding his review , Byrnes gave the film four out of four stars . IGN 's Jim " Stax " Vejvoda rated the film four out of five stars , praising the acting — particularly of the two protagonists , " both dynamic presences on @-@ screen , with neither actor outweighing the other 's importance to the story " — and declaring that despite being preceded by other gangster stories such as Scarface and The Sopranos , American Gangster managed to justify its existence with " emphasis on the human and class elements of the story " . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times strongly commended the film , opining that " greatness hovers just outside American Gangster . " She continued : " It 's a seductive package , crammed with all the on @-@ screen and off @-@ screen talent that big @-@ studio money can buy , and filled with old soul and remixed funk that evoke the city back in the day , when heroin turned poor streets white and sometimes red . " These sentiments were echoed by Sukhdev Sandhu of The Telegraph , who asserted that the storyline was " amazing " . 
 In comparison , some reviewers were more critical of American Gangster . Jonathan Crocker of Time Out London was polarized with the film , criticizing its aesthetics . In his review , he wrote , " Scott 's meticulous aesthetics can ’ t touch the urban texture and deep focus of The French Connection , The Godfather , Serpico and Prince of the City – all looming heavily in intertextual nods . " In contrast , Crocker praised Washington 's acting , writing , " He 's immense : centering every scene with tractor @-@ beam charisma , that dangerous , easy charm hovering between a luxury smile or blazing violence . " In conclusion , Crocker gave the film three out of five stars . Similarly , Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a ' C- ' grade , expressing that American Gangster is " never dull , but it could have used more good old @-@ fashioned melodramatic intrigue . " Gleiberman found Washington 's performance to have " a ghastly ingenuity " . Empire 's Ian Freer rated the film three stars out of five ; he stated that it was " undeniably enjoyable " and praised the cast , but also noted that he felt that " very little in the movie feels fresh , re @-@ treading scenes , riffs and imagery from the whole history of crime flicks " and that the film did not explore enough of Lucas ' story and Scott 's visual imagination . Slant Magazine journalist Nick Schager harshly criticized the film , giving the film a one out of four stars . Schager remarked that the film was " dumb as a rock " , and that it was " far too convinced of its import to be any fun . " Giving American Gangster a two out of five stars , Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian was disappointed with Washington 's acting , asserting , " He doesn 't seem to relax and enjoy himself in the role , or even inhabit it very satisfyingly . " He resumed : " He never has the menace of his dirty cop in Training Day , and we don 't see anything like the transformation from street @-@ hustler to leader in Malcolm X. That shoulder @-@ shimmying swagger is rarely seen , and the brand @-@ classic robes of American Gangster sit on him heavily . " 
 = = = = Accuracy of the film = = = = 
 In an interview with MSNBC , Lucas expressed his excitement about the film and amazement at Denzel Washington 's portrayal . However , Lucas admitted to several news outlets that only a small portion of the film was true , and that much of it was fabricated for dramatic effect . In addition , Richie Roberts criticized the film for portraying him in a custody battle while in real life he never had a child . Roberts criticized the portrayal of Lucas , describing it as " almost noble " . 
 Sterling Johnson , Jr . , a federal judge who served as a special narcotics prosecutor for the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York and assisted the arrest and trial of Lucas , described the film as " one percent reality and ninety @-@ nine percent Hollywood . " In addition , Johnson described the real life Lucas as " illiterate , vicious , violent , and everything Denzel Washington was not . " Former DEA agents Jack Toal , Gregory <unk> , and Louis Diaz filed a lawsuit against Universal saying that the events in the film were fictionalized and that the film defamed them and hundreds of other agents . The lawsuit was eventually dismissed by US District Judge Colleen McMahon . While McMahon noted that the intertitle that appears at the end of the film , stating that Lucas ' collaboration led to the arrest of many corrupt DEA agents , was " wholly inaccurate " , in that Lucas ' cooperation did not lead to the convictions , and admonished that " It would behoove a major corporation like Universal ( which is owned by a major news organization , NBC ) not to put inaccurate statements at the end of popular films " , she stated that the film failed to meet legal standards of defamation because it failed to " show a single person who is identifiable as a DEA agent " . 
 Many of Lucas ' other claims , as presented in the film , have also been called into question , such as being the right @-@ hand man of Bumpy Johnson , rising above the power of the mafia and Nicky Barnes , and that he was the mastermind behind the Golden Triangle heroin connection of the 1970s . Ron <unk> , a biographer of Frank Lucas , deemed the story as a myth . Associated Press entertainment writer Frank Coyle noted that " this mess happened partly because journalists have been relying on secondary sources removed from the actual events . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 American Gangster earned various awards and nominations , in categories ranging from recognition of the film itself to its screenplay and music , to the performances of Ruby Dee and Denzel Washington . Prior to the film 's release , it was observed as a candidate for the Academy Awards based on its style and the performances of its actors , including the possibility of an Academy Award for Best Director for Ridley Scott . It received two Academy Award nominations — Ruby Dee was nominated for Best Supporting Actress , and Arthur Max and Beth A. Rubino ( set decoration ) were up for Best Art Direction . At the 14th Screen Actors Guild Awards , the film received two nominations , of which Dee won the award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role , and the cast 's overall performances earned the nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Cast . At the 12th Satellite Awards , Pietro Scalia attained an award for Best Editing . 
 American Gangster was nominated for three Golden Globe Awards , including a nomination for Best Motion Picture – Drama . At the 61st British Academy Film Awards , the film was nominated for five awards , but ultimately lost out . The film was up for four Satellite Awards , winning Best Editing . American Gangster was awarded Best Thriller at the 13th Empire Awards , and recognized as a candidate for best film by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the Broadcast Film Critics Association . In addition , the film was included on 54 reviewer lists of the ten best films of 2007 , three of them at the top spot . Among the lists ranking American Gangster as one of the best of the year were those of The Miami Herald , Rolling Stone and the Associated Press . 
 = Magnum Rolle = 
 Magnum Rolle ( born February 23 , 1986 ) is a Bahamian professional basketball player for the <unk> Phantom Mad Goat of the Thailand Basketball League . Born in Freeport , Bahamas , Rolle did not play basketball until his freshman year of high school and was taught by his coach at St. George 's High School , Darrel Sears . After his senior year at St. George 's , Rolle transferred to the Laurinburg Institute in North Carolina , where he was an integral part in leading the team to an undefeated record and the national prep school championship . He was considered a five @-@ star prospect out of Laurinburg , and committed to play at Louisiana State University ( LSU ) . 
 Rolle came off the bench on a team that reached the Final Four in his freshman campaign . After his sophomore year , he transferred to Louisiana Tech in 2007 and was forced to skip the 2007 – 08 season as a redshirt . While a junior , Rolle tripled his points @-@ per @-@ game average from 4 @.@ 0 to 12 @.@ 2 . He was named to the All @-@ WAC ( Western Athletic Conference ) Defensive Team and All @-@ WAC Newcomer Team . In his senior year , he led the WAC in blocks and finished fourth in career blocked shots at Louisiana Tech despite playing only two seasons . 
 He was drafted with the 51st overall pick in the 2010 NBA Draft by the Oklahoma City Thunder and was subsequently traded to the Indiana Pacers . Rolle was waived by the Pacers on October 25 , at the end of training camp and was later chosen with the third overall pick in 2010 NBA Development League Draft by the Maine Red Claws . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rolle was born on February 23 , 1986 in Freeport , Bahamas . His mother is Maryse Rolle , a painter , and he has one sibling . He was named after Tom Selleck 's TV show Magnum , P.I. He can trace his ancestry to freed slaves and is a distant cousin of National Football League ( NFL ) players Myron , Antrel , and <unk> Rolle . 
 Originally a soccer player , Rolle did not play basketball until he was 15 , when local coach Darrel Sears saw him walking across a basketball court and saw Rolle 's great height . Sears asked if he knew how to play ; Rolle said no . Sears asked him to try shooting from the foul line . His first shot , according to Rolle , completely missed the backboard and fell into the bushes behind it . At the time Rolle was not interested in the game and only attended Sears ' practices because free fried chicken was provided . 
 = = High school and prep school career = = 
 At St. George 's High School in Freeport , Rolle quickly developed his basketball skills and also competed in track and field events . He averaged 20 @.@ 3 points and 13 @.@ 6 rebounds per game while enrolled at that school . Rolle first dreamed of playing in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) when he was 16 years old , after he came back from a basketball camp in Arkansas , but had some academic issues to work out . Rolle 's grade point average ( GPA ) was 1 @.@ 0 early in his career at St. George 's , forcing him to repeat ninth and tenth grade . Due to a drive to succeed academically and athletically , he eventually raised his GPA to 3 @.@ 0 . 
 In 2003 , following his senior year at St. George 's , Rolle attended the Nike All @-@ America Camp and convinced his mother to let him attend a preparatory school in the United States , where he could showcase his abilities and hone his talents . They eventually settled on the Laurinburg Institute , a small school in North Carolina founded in 1904 . Due to an unrepaired leak , the school 's gymnasium was condemned in 1997 , and the basketball team was forced to play home games as far as 30 miles ( 48 km ) away . In Rolle 's only year at the institute , his team went 40 – 0 and won the national prep school championship . Under head coach Chris Chaney , Rolle recorded a per @-@ game average of 10 @.@ 1 points , 10 @.@ 2 rebounds , and 4 @.@ 5 blocked shots and had a field goal and free throw percentage of 64 percent and 76 percent , respectively . 
 Rolle also played with the Arkansas Wings on the Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) circuit while at the Laurinburg Institute . He received scholarship offers from Arizona , Florida State , Kansas , Kentucky , LSU , and North Carolina . After verbally committing to Florida State in March 2004 , Rolle reopened his recruitment in July . He decided on LSU , to which fellow Laurinburg teammate Chris Johnson had already committed , and signed his letter of intent on November 18 , 2004 . Rolle was listed as the eighth @-@ best power forward in the class of 2005 and 32nd overall recruit by Rivals.com. 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = LSU = = = 
 = = = = Freshman = = = = 
 On November 18 , 2005 , in an 84 – 56 defeat of Southern University , Rolle made his collegiate debut , playing 14 minutes and scoring six points while also grabbing three rebounds . Rolle shot 4 @-@ of @-@ 8 from the field and contributed season bests in rebounds ( 10 ) and points ( 8 ) to help lead LSU past Nicholls State . He equaled his season high in points against the Vanderbilt Commodores on February 2 , 2006 , in only nine minutes of playing time . The Tigers surprised many with a Final Four run , and in that game Rolle led the team in rebounds with eight , recorded two points from 1 @-@ of @-@ 1 shooting , and blocked a shot , all in 14 minutes of playing time . Despite this performance , LSU 's opponent UCLA ultimately prevailed , 59 – 45 . During the 2005 – 06 season , Rolle averaged 2 @.@ 2 points , 2 @.@ 5 rebounds , and 8 @.@ 7 minutes per game as a freshman , picking up 21 blocks on the year . 
 = = = = Sophomore = = = = 
 Coming into the 2006 – 07 season , the Tigers returned four starters , including Glen " Big Baby " Davis , and LSU fans hoped that Rolle would replace the shot blocking skills of Tyrus Thomas , who had left early for the NBA . As such , Andy Katz of ESPN named them the fifth best team in the nation in the preseason . Rolle 's averages improved slightly to 4 @.@ 0 points , 4 @.@ 1 rebounds , and 16 @.@ 7 minutes per contest , with nine starts and 31 blocks . He had a season @-@ best nine rebounds against Tulane on December 22 , and recorded his first double @-@ digit scoring night against the Tennessee Volunteers on March 8 , 2007 , in the SEC Tournament , when he shot 5 @-@ for @-@ 7 from the field in 18 minutes for 10 points . However , two herniated discs in his back impeded further progress . The Tigers finished the year 17 – 15 and 5 – 11 in SEC play . 
 Rolle left the LSU program on May 23 . LSU coach John Brady claimed this was due to concerns over Rolle 's development . Darrel Sears , his former high school coach , said Rolle had been unhappy with LSU since December 2006 , and that Brady had been making snide comments about Rolle for a while . After Rolle left LSU , he was courted by Division I schools Wyoming , Marshall , Oral Roberts , Delaware , Louisiana Tech , and South Florida . Although initially interested in South Florida due to its proximity to his Bahamas home , Rolle chose to transfer to Louisiana Tech to play under Kerry Rupp . 
 = = = Louisiana Tech = = = 
 = = = = Junior = = = = 
 Rolle was forced to redshirt the 2007 – 08 season due to transfer rules . In his first game as a Bulldog , on November 15 , 2008 , he registered nine rebounds and eight points , including four consecutive points within the last minute , to propel Louisiana Tech past Louisiana @-@ Lafayette , 61 – 59 . Rolle 's first double @-@ double came against Grambling State on November 18 , with 12 points and 14 rebounds . He led the team in scoring with a then @-@ career high of 17 points in a blowout 78 – 55 loss to # 10 UCLA on December 28 , while also contributing seven rebounds . On January 29 , 2009 , Rolle had a perfect night from the field , shooting 11 @-@ for @-@ 11 with 23 points . In a 60 – 52 defeat at the hands of Utah State on February 7 , Rolle fell and injured his hip early in the game , but he came back later to finish with eight points . He had a season high 25 points to go along with 11 rebounds and four blocked shots in leading the Bulldogs to a victory over Murray State 69 – 60 on February 21 . In the next game , an 80 – 71 win over New Mexico State , Rolle equalled his season high in points ( 25 ) and grabbed 12 rebounds . 
 During the 2008 – 09 season , Rolle started 30 games for the Bulldogs and averaged 12 @.@ 2 points , 7 @.@ 2 rebounds , and 1 @.@ 7 blocks per game . He registered five double @-@ doubles while scoring in excess of 10 points on 18 occasions . After the season , Rolle was named to the All @-@ WAC Defensive Team and All @-@ WAC Newcomer Team . In addition , the Louisiana Sports Writers Association recognized Rolle as a member of the All @-@ Louisiana third team . Louisiana Tech teammate Kyle Gibson was named to its first team . 
 Rolle briefly flirted with the 2009 NBA Draft . He declared for early entry in the draft , but did not hire an agent . After talking to NBA spokespeople , who said he was a borderline second @-@ round selection , Rolle considered staying in college an extra year to earn a degree . He eventually pulled his name out of the draft , thus ensuring his college eligibility . 
 = = = = Senior = = = = 
 The WAC preseason polls were released on October 29 , and Louisiana Tech was predicted to finish sixth in the media poll and fifth in the coaches poll . Fellow senior Gibson was named to the preseason All @-@ WAC second team , but Rolle was not honored by any preseason award . In the Bulldogs ' home opener against Arkansas @-@ Little Rock , Rolle was the leader in scoring with 23 points in crushing the Trojans 86 – 66 . Gibson and Olu <unk> also scored more than 20 points to push Louisiana Tech to a 4 – 1 start , their best since 2001 . Rolle 's career high in points was 29 , scored against Houston in a 99 – 94 defeat of the Cougars on December 29 ; Rolle also grabbed 10 boards . In the semifinal of the WAC tournament , against the # 1 seeded Utah State Aggies , Rolle injured his ankle less than three minutes into the game , a factor in the Bulldogs ' 30 @-@ point loss . They finished the regular season 23 – 10 , including a 9 – 7 record in conference . That was good enough for an invitation to the 2010 CollegeInsider.com Tournament ( CIT ) , in which Louisiana Tech defeated Southern Miss in the first round despite missing Rolle . In Rolle 's final collegiate game , he contributed nine points off the bench despite a 69 – 40 rout of the Bulldogs by Missouri State in the CIT 's quarterfinals . 
 During the 2009 – 10 season , Rolle started 33 games , in 24 of which he scored in double figures and in 11 of which he had double @-@ doubles . He rejected more shots than anyone else in the WAC , averaging 2 @.@ 1 blocks per game , and finished fourth in career blocked shots at Louisiana Tech despite playing there for only two seasons . Rolle also posted averages of 8 @.@ 4 rebounds per game , third in the WAC ( behind Luke Babbitt of Nevada and Chis Oakes of San Jose State ) , and 13 @.@ 9 points per game , 12th in the WAC . His field goal percentage was 51 @.@ 1 , tied with Babbitt for third in conference and behind Tai Wesley of Utah State and Ike Okoye of Boise State . At the conclusion of the season , Rolle was named to the Lefty Driesell All @-@ America Defensive Team , All @-@ WAC Defensive Team , All @-@ WAC Second Team , and All @-@ Louisiana Second Team . He graduated from Louisiana Tech with a bachelor 's degree in sociology in March 2010 , becoming the first person in his family to earn a degree . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = NBA Draft = = = 
 Prior to the 2010 NBA Draft , Rolle hired Fletcher Cockrell to be his agent . ESPN , NBADraft.net , and <unk> projected him to be a possible mid @-@ to @-@ late second @-@ round selection . He worked out with the Washington Wizards , Phoenix Suns , Milwaukee Bucks , Charlotte Bobcats , and Indiana Pacers . Dave @-@ Te ' Thomas of CBS Sports said that Rolle had a good wingspan and was very athletic . He added while larger NBA forwards might push him around , he was an intense player and would not back down if challenged . Thomas compared Rolle to former LSU teammate Tyrus Thomas . 
 On June 25 , Rolle was chosen with the 51st overall pick by the Oklahoma City Thunder . His rights were traded to the Pacers for Ryan Reid , who was the 57th overall pick , along with undisclosed cash considerations . Rolle was the first NBA player drafted out of Louisiana Tech since Paul Millsap was picked by the Utah Jazz with the 47th pick of the 2006 NBA Draft . In addition , he was the first Grand Bahamian selected in the draft . Bahamas Minister of Youth Sports and Culture Charles Maynard and Minister of Works and Transport Neko C Grant congratulated Rolle on his historic achievement . 
 = = = Indiana Pacers = = = 
 = = = = Summer League = = = = 
 Rolle played well in the 2010 Orlando Summer League , garnering averages of 28 minutes , 13 @.@ 4 points , seven rebounds , and two blocked shots per game . On opening day of the summer league , the Pacers beat the Orlando Magic 86 – 77 behind Rolle 's 13 points , five rebounds , two blocks , and a steal . In the second game , an 80 – 69 loss to the New Jersey Nets , Rolle scored nine points , brought down three rebounds , and rejected three shots . Against the Utah Jazz , Rolle 's 10 points , eight rebounds , and four blocks facilitated an 83 – 74 Pacers win . The fourth game , which The Bahamas Tribune said was the most thrilling of the summer league , featured a 27 @-@ point deficit erased by Indiana for a comeback win over the Boston Celtics . Rolle had a double @-@ double , with 19 points and 11 boards . The Pacers and him wrapped up the Orlando Summer League with a 77 – 73 defeat by the Oklahoma City Thunder , in which Rolle posted 16 points , eight rebounds and two blocks . 
 = = = = Training camp = = = = 
 Rolle , along with fellow Pacer rookie Lance Stephenson , was named one of the " steals of the draft " by The Boston Globe . Rolle was invited to the Pacers ' training camp , where he injured his head , requiring stitches . On September 28 , the Pacers announced they had officially signed Rolle to a two @-@ year contract , but his salary was not disclosed . In five preseason games , he averaged 1 @.@ 8 points per game and 1 @.@ 4 rebounds per game . 
 However , he was waived on October 25 , at the end of training camp , in order to shrink the roster to NBA @-@ mandated 15 players . The Pacers tried to trade <unk> Jones and Solomon Jones to keep Rolle , but the trade fell through and the Pacers were reluctant to drop Solomon Jones due to a lack of depth in the frontcourt . Had he made the roster , Rolle would have earned $ 510 @,@ 000 , but instead he made $ 50 @,@ 000 in a buyout . 
 = = = Maine Red Claws = = = 
 In the 2010 NBA Development League Draft , held on November 1 , Rolle was chosen with the third overall pick by the Maine Red Claws . The Red Claws were the affiliated team of the Boston Celtics and the Charlotte Bobcats . According to Red Claws general manager Jon Jennings , several D @-@ League teams thought he had the most upside of anyone on the draft . 
 On November 26 , Rolle was waived by the Red Claws because of a knee injury which was due to keep Rolle out ' indefinitely ' . In two games with the Red Claws , Rolle averaged 7 @.@ 5 points , 3 @.@ 5 rebounds and 3 @.@ 5 blocks per game . His rights were retained by the Red Claws . 
 On March 3 , 2011 , he returned to the Red Claws . He played 13 more games with the Red Claws before he was called up to the Atlanta Hawks . Overall , he averaged 14 @.@ 1 points and 5 @.@ 5 rebounds in 25 @.@ 9 minutes per game with the Red Claws . 
 = = = Atlanta Hawks = = = 
 On April 11 , 2011 , Rolle signed with the Atlanta Hawks but did not play a game with Atlanta during the 2010 @-@ 11 season . During the 2011 NBA lockout , he signed with South Korean team Changwon LG <unk> but also did not appear in a game with Changwon . 
 After the lockout ended , Rolle returned to the Hawks for the training camp . However , he was released before the start of the season . 
 = = = Orlando Magic = = = 
 In July 2012 , Rolle joined the Orlando Magic for the 2012 NBA Summer League . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 In August 2012 , Rolle signed with the Mitsubishi Diamond Dolphins of the Japanese Basketball League for the 2012 – 13 season . 
 In 2013 , he re @-@ signed with the Dolphins for the 2013 – 14 season. in just his second year became an NBL Allstar and led his team to the playoff 's . Rolle also led the league in scoring in the Emperors Cup tournament , Advancing to the final Four top teams . 
 = = = Thailand = = = 
 On June 2016 , Rolle signed with <unk> Basketball Club of the Thailand Basketball League . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = NCAA = = = 
 = Route Trident = 
 Route Trident ( known locally as the New or Big Road ) was built by the British Army 's Royal Engineers in Helmand Province , Afghanistan . The construction of the road was codenamed Operation Lar <unk> by the Ministry of Defence . Route Trident ( named after the Regimental emblem of 28 Engineer Regiment — the Amphibious Engineers who have the Trident as their emblem ) replaced an older road that was vulnerable to attack by insurgents on convoys supplying three patrol bases established in the Gholam Dastagir Kalay area as part of Operation Panther 's Claw . In the immediate aftermath of operation the Light Dragoons Battlegroup were suffering casualties as they tried to secure the area and resupply their patrol bases . The attacks resulted in the deaths of two British servicemen and led to the cancellation of the convoys , forcing the bases to be resupplied by air . 
 Following a meeting between the Commanding Officer of the Light Dragoons ( Lt Col Fair ) and Commanding Officer of 28 Engineer Regiment ( Lt Col MTG Bazeley ) it was decided that a new and easier to protect road would be constructed by the Royal Engineers . 28 Engineer Regiment had used a new road construction material called NeoWeb geosynthetic cellular confinement system on an exercise in the UK prior to deployment and this was considered to be a practical option to reduce cost aggregate and provide a barrier to the implanting of lethal <unk> . Lt Col Bazeley contacted the Sales Director of PRS ( who was at that time on holiday ) and talked him into providing a small amount of Neoweb to trial in Afghan conditions which PRS agreed to do free of charge . The trial proved successful and Bazeley undertook to use funds originally designated to buy aggregate to purchase in excess of £ 2m of NeoWeb material . The NeoWeb was shipped to Cyprus by PRS and Bazeley convinced the RAF to re @-@ route a flight via Cyprus to pick it up . Construction began in December 2009 and was completed in March 2010 , during which time the construction teams and security forces came under frequent attack . This was the first road to be built under fire since British operations in the Dhofar Rebellion in the early 1970s , the completed road allowed resupply convoys to travel its length in about 30 minutes , compared to 36 hours along the old road . The success of the project led to the approval of plans for an extension to connect the provincial capital Lashkar Gah with the economic capital of Gereshk . Construction of the extension began in July 2010 and was completed in April 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Route Trident was constructed to connect three patrol bases and a number of checkpoints in the area around Gholam Dastagir Kalay , which lies between Lashkar Gah and Gereshk , in Helmand Province , Afghanistan . The patrol bases had been built by the Light Dragoons Battle Group in the aftermath of the Operation Panther 's Claw advance in Summer 2009 . The patrol bases were garrisoned by the Coldstream Guards during Op <unk> XI ( Sept 09 - Mar 10 ) and were initially resupplied by land transport on the old Babaji Road ( Route MARS , which was a dirt track . The Babaji area was one of the most violent parts of Helmand and the road was targeted by the Taliban with Improvised Explosive Devices ( IEDs ) . The poor security was partly a result of the lack of a significant Afghan security force presence and the absence of a functioning local government . 
 During 2009 two British soldiers were killed and 17 injured while completing a resupplying patrol to Patrol Base 4 . The land convoys were subsequently stopped and replaced by aerial resupply with helicopters and Hercules transport aircraft . The use of aircraft used up valuable resources of the local British logistics system and the Coldstream Guards were often forced to fight to reach the air dropped supplies . The British Army decided to construct a road to allow better resupply of their patrol bases , to stimulate local markets and social movement , to provide greater stability , and to facilitate reconstruction in the area . 
 = = Design = = 
 Major now Lt Col Adam Foley of the 64 Headquarters and Support Squadron , 28 Engineer Regiment of the Royal Engineers was appointed to be the project designer . The project was the first of its kind to be undertaken in Afghanistan and was allocated a budget of £ 3 @.@ 5 million . The road designed was 7 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) long and 6 @.@ 5 metres ( 21 ft ) wide . One design constraint was that the patrol bases had to be able to see straight along the route to prevent insurgents gaining unmonitored access to the road . Another factor was a 300 @-@ metre ( 980 ft ) wide wadi known as the <unk> <unk> that consisted of two water bearing channels . This provided agricultural irrigation for the local people and so could not be interrupted during construction because of its economic importance . The design for this section included a floating roadway over the waterlogged ground and two box culverts for the irrigation channels . The 17 smaller culverts along the route were made from reinforced concrete and stone gabions . The road itself was designed to be of unbound aggregate that could in the future be overlain with an asphalt surfacing . 
 The cost of construction aggregate in Afghanistan is high ( around $ 250 to $ 650 per cubic metre ) because of security and transport costs , therefore Foley attempted to minimise its use . A series of trials using various foundation systems was carried out at Camp Bastion to assess the capacity of a geosynthetic cell system called Neoweb . Neoweb is supplied flat but unfolds to form a hollow honeycomb structure that can be backfilled with aggregate and overlain with a wearing course . The specification of Neoweb allowed a 75 percent reduction in aggregate and a two @-@ thirds cost saving compared to traditional road @-@ building methods . The Neoweb layer acts as a semi @-@ rigid slab foundation and is designed to allow the surfacing layer to hold together under heavy vehicles and in harsh weather . The foundation also makes it harder for insurgents to plant IEDs under or in the road . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The construction of Route Trident was begun by the British Army during the second half of Op <unk> XI . The project manager appointed for the construction phase was Captain Dick Gale , who had deployed to Afghanistan specifically for this task . The works were carried out by troops from 23 Amphibious Engineer Squadron from 28 Engineer Regiment , commanded by Lieutenant Helen Ladd , which had been in the theatre since October 2009 . The management team also included Major Brian Johnston and Staff Sergeant Darren Winter , who acted as foreman of plant . A team of 70 local labourers and plant operators were employed under the " cash @-@ for @-@ work " scheme to supplement the sappers from 23 Squadron . 
 Construction began at Gholam <unk> Kalay in mid @-@ December 2009 and progressed to the neighbouring village of Hajji Jamal Kalay and towards the patrol bases through agricultural land and desert . The project took three months to complete and soon came under attack ; becoming the first road to be built by the Royal Engineers under fire since British operations against rebel forces in the Dhofar Rebellion in southern Oman in the early 1970s . Methods of attack included small arms , rocket propelled grenades and IEDs ; and the construction team came under attack , on average , every few days . The attacks meant that the engineers had to carry full arms , body armour and camouflage their surveying equipment when setting out and undertaking reconnaissance for the road . In addition units from the 1st Battalion Coldstream Guards Battle Group and the Afghan National Army were brought in to provide protection . International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) and Afghan patrols in the area were also stepped up and unmanned drones engaged enemy combatants preparing to attack construction personnel . 
 The project encountered several problems not typically associated with road construction . Materials had to be brought in for the road from as far away as Kandahar , Quetta , in Pakistan , and the United Kingdom ; and the work was carried out in 50 ° C ( 122 ° F ) heat . The design was altered as a result of consultations with local Afghans , who wanted , for example , to route the road through villages where possible , to minimise the loss of agricultural land . The Taliban carried out direct attacks and used intimidation to deter workers ; at least one was beaten and kidnapped . Despite these difficulties the first supply convoy travelled along the road on 10 March 2010 , completing a journey that took 36 hours on the old road in just 30 minutes . The road was officially declared completed on 12 March 2010 , and another convoy made the trip that day in just 25 minutes . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Completion of the road meant that supply aircraft could be replaced by land convoys and reallocated to other areas . In addition to its military benefit the road improved the local quality of life with shops , markets , a doctors surgery and a school being built alongside it . There was also an improved sense of security for people in the area , and more patrols were able to move along the road . Such was the feeling that one building contractor felt safe enough to return to Babaji from Lashkar Gah to offer his services to construct a permanent vehicle checkpoint for the route . The design and construction techniques used in the road were so successful that they are being rolled out to engineering projects across Helmand . 
 = = Extension = = 
 There are plans to extend Route Trident north and south into the area secured by 11 Light Brigade during Operation <unk> . The extended road would link with existing routes to connect Gereshk , the economic heart of Helmand , to the provincial capital of Lashkar Gah . This has been designated as provincial governor Mohammad Gulab Mangal 's third highest priority for any activity in Helmand . The route would also provide access for Afghans to the hospitals in Gereshk and Lashkar Gah and has been described as a " critical route to further operations in South Helmand " . The extension will connect the region to the main Highway 1 road that connects many of Afghanistan 's main cities . 
 As of 7 July 2010 the two construction battlegroups , working from each end of the new extension , were just 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) apart . The work proved to be challenging , with a large number of culverts having to be installed and high levels of insurgent activity in the area . One local contractor refused to work because of security issues , which resulted in the project being delayed from its original finish date of July to October 2010 . 
 Responsibility for security of the road and its extension passed from the Coldstream Guards to the 1st Battalion Royal Gurkha Rifles Battle Group ( <unk> ) in April 2010 . The battle group suffered a loss on 5 July 2010 when Trooper James Leverett of the Royal Dragoon Guards ( <unk> ) , attached to the <unk> battle group , was killed after the Viking armoured vehicle he was travelling in was struck by an IED . Leverett was providing security for the road expansion when he was killed . Two further soldiers were killed during Route Trident security operations on 21 July 2010 . The casualties were Corporal Matthew Stenton , also of the <unk> , and Lance Corporal Stephen Monkhouse , of the 1st Battalion Scots Guards . Their deaths occurred near <unk> , north of Lashkar Gah , after insurgents opened fire on a group of Coyote and Viking vehicles protecting an IED disposal and casualty evacuation . 
 By September there was said to be " steady progress " on the extension of the road with elements of 1 Troop of the 1st Armoured Engineer Squadron , 21 Engineer Regiment being brought in from Ripon , Yorkshire to assist . Insurgent attacks had become an almost daily occurrence and halting work was said to be " the insurgents ' main effort in [ the ] area " . Operation <unk> <unk> ( in English : Eagle 's Build ) was launched in October 2010 to provide security for the extension of the route over the Loy <unk> river . The operation involved elements of 2nd Battalion Royal Regiment of Scotland and the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment working alongside Afghan forces to clear three villages of insurgents and set up new checkpoints to secure the area . The operation was highly successful , resulting in a 90 % reduction in attacks in the area and allowing the new bridge to be built by the start of January 2011 . 
 By early October 2010 Route Elephant , which will link with Trident and runs from Highway 1 to Lashkar Gah , was said to be very successful with a sixfold increase in traffic . As of mid @-@ November 2010 Route Trident was still under construction . 
 The Route Trident extension between Lashkar Gah and Gereshk was reported as complete on April 15 , 2011 and has cut journey times between the two centres from two weeks to just two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours and seen insurgent attacks drop by 90 per cent . 
 = Passer predomesticus = 
 Passer predomesticus is a fossil passerine bird in the sparrow family Passeridae . First described in 1962 , it is known from two premaxillary ( upper jaw ) bones found in a Middle Pleistocene layer of the Oumm @-@ Qatafa cave in Palestine . The premaxillaries resemble those of the house and Spanish sparrows , but differ in having a deep groove instead of a crest on the lower side . Israeli palaeontologist Eitan Tchernov , who described the species , and others have considered it to be close to the ancestor of the house and Spanish sparrows , but molecular data point to an earlier origin of modern sparrow species . Occurring in a climate Tchernov described as similar to but rainier than that in Palestine today , it was considered by Tchernov as a " wild " ancestor of the modern sparrows which have a commensal association with humans , although its presence in Oumm @-@ Qatafa cave may indicate that it was associated with humans . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The known material of Passer predomesticus consists of two premaxillary bones in the collections of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem . The bones were described by Israeli palaeontologist Eitan Tchernov in 1962 and reviewed by South African zoologist Miles Markus two years later . Tchernov did not unambiguously identify a type specimen and his paper was said by Robert M. <unk> , the editor of The Auk , to contain " many troublesome lapses and contradictions " . In 1975 , French palaeontologist Cécile <unk> @-@ <unk> reported on fossil sparrows from a cave at Saint @-@ <unk> @-@ Janson in southeastern France , which could not be identified as either P. predomesticus or the house sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) . Because no premaxillae were found , the bones could not be distinguished from those of the house sparrow . 
 Tchernov argued that the house sparrow and related species have undergone considerable morphological changes in adapting to a commensal relationship with humans , with the beak becoming longer and narrower . He wrote that P. predomesticus was intermediate between the house sparrow and Spanish sparrow ( Passer <unk> ) , and suggested that it may be a primitive relative of the ancestor of the house sparrow that did not become dependent on humans . In a 1984 paper , Tchernov suggested that the period in which the house sparrow and P. predomesticus could have separated was the <unk> glaciation 70 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Markus found that the fossil species was closest to living house sparrows from Palestine and to the great sparrow ( P. <unk> ) , and proposed that the house sparrow evolved in Africa . In a 1977 account of the evolution of the house sparrow , American zoologists Richard F. Johnston and William J. <unk> considered that the house sparrow evolved with the beginning of agriculture , dating any fossils that could even be assigned to the common ancestor of the house and Spanish sparrows as more recent than P. predomesticus . In his 1988 work The Sparrows , British ornithologist J. Denis Summers @-@ Smith considered that P. predomesticus was roughly contemporary with the common ancestor of the house and Spanish sparrows and that all present @-@ day Palaearctic Passer species evolved later . Drawing on more recent studies of molecular data , Ted R. Anderson stated in his 2006 Biology of the <unk> House Sparrow that all Passer species have a long evolutionary history , with speciation possibly occurring as early as the Miocene . 
 = = Description = = 
 <unk> , the only bones from which Passer predomesticus is known , are generally relatively easy to determine in birds . Tchernov found that the two premaxillae of P. predomesticus most closely resembled the house and Spanish sparrows , but were distinct from either . In P. predomesticus , there is a central , longitudinal groove with raised margins running along the lower ( ventral ) side of the premaxilla . In contrast , the house and Spanish sparrows have a narrow crest in this position , which is more prominent in the house sparrow . In the great sparrow , Cape sparrow ( Passer melanurus ) , and southern grey @-@ headed sparrow ( Passer <unk> ) , this crest is more poorly developed , and they may even have a shallow groove at the front of the premaxilla , not nearly as well @-@ developed as the groove in P. predomesticus . In P. predomesticus , the premaxilla has a maximum width of 8 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) and the length from the tip of the premaxilla to the back of the nasal bones is 12 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 According to Tchernov 's 1962 paper , Passer predomesticus was found in the middle Acheulean ( middle Pleistocene , probably more than 400 @,@ 000 years old ) layer E1 of the Oumm @-@ Qatafa cave in Wadi <unk> near Bethlehem . In 1984 , however , Tchernov wrote that P. predomesticus was about 140 @,@ 000 years old , from the <unk> . Layer E1 contained remains of about 40 bird species , including a premaxilla Tchernov described as a precursor of the Dead Sea sparrow ( Passer moabiticus ) and a tarsometatarsus and humerus tentatively allied with the house sparrow . An undetermined Acheulean layer of the same cave also contained fossils Tchernov described as precursors of both the house and Spanish sparrows . 
 Although interpretations of the <unk> at Oumm @-@ Qatafa have differed , Tchernov suggested that the deposits are from a Mediterranean climate , although one rainier than that today . Tchernov considered P. predomesticus a " wild " sparrow , but Anderson considered that the occurrence of P. predomesticus and the other Passer fossils in Oumm @-@ Qatafa indicates that these species lived in association with early Palaeolithic humans . 
 = California State Route 14 = 
 State Route 14 ( SR 14 ) is a north – south state highway in the U.S. state of California , largely in the Mojave Desert . The southern portion of the highway is signed as the Antelope Valley Freeway . The route connects Interstate 5 , or Golden State Freeway , on the border of the city of Santa Clarita to the north and the Los Angeles neighborhoods of Granada Hills and Sylmar to the south , with U.S. Route 395 near Inyokern . <unk> , the route extends south of I @-@ 5 to State Route 1 in the Pacific Palisades area of Los Angeles , however the portion south of the junction with I @-@ 5 has not been constructed . The southern part of the constructed route is a busy commuter freeway serving and connecting the cities of Santa Clarita , Palmdale , and Lancaster with the rest of the Greater Los Angeles area . The northern portion , from Vincent ( south of Palmdale ) to Route 395 , is legislatively named the Aerospace Highway , as the highway serves Edwards Air Force Base , once one of the primary landing strips for NASA 's Space Shuttle . This section is rural , following the line between the hot Mojave desert and the forming Sierra Nevada mountain range . Most of Route 14 is loosely paralleled by a main line of the Southern Pacific Railroad , used for the Antelope Valley Line of the Metrolink commuter rail system as well as a connection between Los Angeles and the Central Valley via Tehachapi Pass . 
 Linked with US 395 , this road connects Los Angeles with such places as Mammoth Mountain , Mono Lake , Yosemite National Park and Reno , Nevada . Route 14 was part of U.S. Route 6 prior to truncation in 1964 , when U.S. 6 was a coast @-@ to @-@ coast route from Long Beach to Provincetown , Massachusetts . The non @-@ freeway segment of SR 14 from Silver Queen Road north of Rosamond to Mojave is known as Sierra Highway , as is the old routing between Interstate 5 and Silver Queen Road where SR 14 has been moved to a newer freeway alignment . Portions of Route 14 remain signed with names associated with US 6 , including Midland Trail , Theodore Roosevelt Highway and Grand Army of the Republic Highway . This route is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Antelope Valley Freeway = = = 
 The southern portion of the freeway , from Interstate 5 to the Avenue D exit near Lancaster , has been designated the Antelope Valley Freeway by the state legislature . The Antelope Valley Freeway begins in the Santa Susana Mountains at the Newhall Pass interchange by splitting from the Golden State Freeway ( Interstate 5 ) . This is the busiest portion of the route with an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) count of 169 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . The freeway forms the eastern boundary of Santa Clarita along its route . Past Santa Clarita , the road continues to the northeast and crosses the Sierra Pelona Mountains and western San Gabriel Mountains via the canyon of the seasonal Santa Clara River . The ascent is mostly rugged and rural terrain , with only two small towns along the ascent , first Agua Dulce and later Acton . Between the two towns the freeway forms the southern boundary of Vasquez Rocks Park , a county park . Just past Acton , the highway crests the San Gabriel mountains via Soledad Pass , at an elevation of 3 @,@ 225 feet ( 983 m ) . The route of the highway through the mountains loosely parallels that of the main line of the Southern Pacific Railroad , which is also used for the Metrolink Antelope Valley Line . 
 After cresting the pass , the highway descends into the Antelope Valley , a large valley within the Mojave Desert . The highway crosses Angeles Forest Highway and the California Aqueduct in the descent . Route 14 serves as the primary north – south thoroughfare for the communities of Palmdale and Lancaster . Between Palmdale Boulevard ( County Route N2 ) and Avenue D in Lancaster , SR 14 runs concurrently with SR 138 . 
 = = = Aerospace Highway = = = 
 From the <unk> Highway exit south of Palmdale to its northern terminus at Route 395 near Inyokern , SR 14 has been designated the Aerospace Highway . Between <unk> Highway and Avenue S , there is a vista point overlooking Lake Palmdale , which features a historic plaque that honors aviation accomplishments including the space shuttle , breaking the sound barrier and the speed record . The freeway passes the Los Angeles / Kern County line at Avenue A , and continues to run north through Rosamond and Mojave . In Rosamond , the highway passes close to Edwards Air Force Base , which was often used as one of the main landing strips for NASA 's Space Shuttle , and as the base for the X @-@ 15 and many other air and spacecraft . 
 The freeway portion terminates just south of Mojave , where SR 14 serves as the main street and runs through the downtown area . To the east of the route is Mojave Air & Space Port , home to the National Test Pilot School and <unk> , the first privately funded human spaceflight , as well as a vast airplane graveyard ; all are visible from Route 14 . 
 State Route 58 was formerly routed concurrent with SR 14 through Mojave , before it was rerouted onto a bypass running north and east of the town . 
 The character of the highway changes as it leaves Mojave . The road , now a divided highway with at @-@ grade intersections , departs the corridor of the main Southern Pacific Line , to follow the crest of the forming Sierra Nevada mountains . The route continues to follow a branch line of the Southern Pacific used as a connector for the Trona Railway . The main line of the railroad proceeds towards the Central Valley via Tehachapi Pass . Though Route 14 heads away from the pass , the highway has views of the mountains and the Tehachapi Pass Wind Farm . The scenery also changes , as the highway departs the Mojave Desert and crosses Red Rock Canyon State Park . Traffic counts drop dramatically as the highway becomes more rural , with an AADT of 3200 vehicles at the northern terminus . SR 14 continues north toward U.S. Route 395 in Inyokern , much of its routing as an expressway . Towards its northern terminus , SR 14 runs briefly concurrent with State Route 178 . At its northern terminus , SR 14 merges with US 395 as it turns into an expressway heading north to Bishop . As US 395 the route continues to follow the crest of the Sierra Nevada , serving Owens Valley , Mammoth Mountain , Yosemite National Park and Mono Lake . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Trails = = = 
 The first road to use the general alignment of modern Route 14 was called the El Camino Sierra , or Sierra Highway , which extended from Los Angeles to Lake Tahoe . A dirt road was completed in the 1910s from what had been a pack trail . The Los Angeles Times declared El Camino Sierra complete in 1931 , when the portion from Mojave to the Owens Valley , along modern US 395 , was paved . 
 During the late 19th century , the corridor of modern Route 14 was also in use by the Southern Pacific Railroad for two lines . The first is a line to connect Los Angeles with the Central Valley , via Tehachapi Pass . While significantly longer than the more direct Ridge Route ( east of modern Interstate 5 ) , Tehachapi Pass is lower than Tejon Pass along the Ridge Route , with a longer , less steep grade on the descent into the Central Valley . This rail line remains the primary rail line to connect southern and northern California in use today , now owned and operated by the Union Pacific Railroad . The second resulted when the Southern Pacific acquired the un @-@ finished Carson and Colorado Railroad in 1900 . The Southern Pacific built a standard gauge connector to the narrow gauge Carson and Colorado line from their main at Mojave . Although plans were to eventually convert this acquired line to standard gauge , most of the line was abandoned before the conversion was complete . However , the southern portion of this line is still active and used for connections to the Trona Railway . 
 The Midland Trail was one of the first organized coast @-@ to @-@ coast trails in the United States . In the trail 's infancy , its routing changed numerous times . By 1925 , the Midland Trail was established along what is modern State Route 168 , joining El Camino Sierra in Big Pine . Other named trails that would eventually follow this route included the Theodore Roosevelt highway , and Grand Army of the Republic Highway . Parts of modern Route 14 continue to be signed with these names , and north of Los Angeles County is still officially designated " El Camino Sierra / Midland Trail " as well as the aforementioned " Aerospace Highway " . 
 = = = U.S. Route 6 = = = 
 U.S. Route 6 was extended from Greeley , Colorado to Long Beach , California on June 21 , 1937 . Most of this extension used the Midland Trail , although the route entered California from Nevada slightly north of the previous route of the Midland Trail , instead passing through Bishop . While being designated US 6 , parts of modern Route 14 began to be upgraded to freeway standards . 
 As part of the 1964 state highway renumbering , US 6 was truncated at Bishop . The portion of US 6 from Inyokern to Los Angeles was designated State Route 14 . Previously the Route 14 designation was used for Artesia Boulevard and Lincoln Avenue , in the Los Angeles area , a portion of modern State Route 91 . 
 Between 1963 and 1975 significant portions of US 6 / SR 14 were moved to a freeway alignment . The former routing south of Mojave ( and the current routing to the north ) is still known as Sierra Highway . The first freeway section , from just east of <unk> Junction to Red Rover Mine Road , was completed in 1963 . Further portions in the <unk> areas of Acton to Soledad Pass were completed by 1965 . By 1966 the freeway was complete as far north as Avenue P @-@ 8 in Palmdale . The freeway was completed to Mojave by 1972 . 
 = = = Incidents = = = 
 The Newhall Pass interchange , where I @-@ 5 , Sierra Highway , Foothill Boulevard , San Fernando Road and the southern terminus of Route 14 meet , has been the site of a number of catastrophic incidents . The interchange has partially collapsed twice due to earthquakes ; the 1971 Sylmar earthquake and the 1994 Northridge earthquake . As a result of the 1994 collapse this intersection was renamed the " Clarence Wayne Dean Memorial Interchange " , honoring a Los Angeles Police Department motorcycle officer killed when he was unable to stop in time and drove off the collapsed flyover ramp from SR 14 south to I @-@ 5 south . After both earthquakes , the collapsed portions were rebuilt and surviving portions reinforced . 
 In 2007 , two tractor @-@ trailer trucks collided in a tunnel along the truck lanes for southbound I @-@ 5 at the interchange . A resulting fire started , soon encompassing the entire tunnel along with 30 other trucks and one passenger vehicle that were in the tunnel at the time . The truck tunnel was closed for several days for structural damage inspections and repairs . 
 = = = Cancelled plans = = = 
 Route 14 is an unfinished route , as the definition in the California Streets and Highways Code states that the route begins at State Route 1 ( Pacific Coast Highway ) , near Sunset Blvd. in the Pacific Palisades area of Los Angeles . Between the constructed end and legislative end of Route 14 is the area of Los Angeles called Reseda and Topanga State Park . There is no paved road that directly connects these two points , with State Route 27 or Interstate 405 being the nearest through roads in this area . 
 The intersection of Route 14 with Via Princessa in Santa Clarita is an unusual design , with long flyover ramps for the connections . This is the result of a freeway revolt by the residents of Santa Clarita , that canceled plans for a freeway extension of Route 126 . While the Via Princessa alignment of Route 126 was canceled , a different alignment is being constructed with proposed connections to Route 14 . 
 = = Future = = 
 Rapid exurban growth in Santa Clarita , Lancaster , and Palmdale has made the Antelope Valley Freeway one of the most congested in southern California , with average rush hour speeds well below 20 miles per hour ( 30 km / h ) . Future predictions call for continued growth along the Route 14 corridor , including predictions of a tripling of the population of Palmdale by 2030 . In response , multiple government agencies have proposed adding more transportation arteries between Los Angeles and the Antelope Valley , as well expanding the capacity of the existing Route 14 and rail corridors . 
 Several proposals have been made to bypass the Antelope Valley Freeway by boring a tunnel under the San Gabriel Mountains and extending the Glendale Freeway through it to the Antelope Valley . In 2003 , Caltrans published a map showing potential improvements to the transportation infrastructure of southern California . The proposal showed both the unconstructed portion of Route 14 and new routes over or under the mountains to Antelope Valley . In 2005 , the idea was advanced as a combination toll tunnel and surface highway . Preliminary studies estimated costs around $ 3 billion and suggested charging a varying toll , adjusted for the time of day , averaging around $ 8 for one @-@ way passage . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = Live and Let Die ( novel ) = 
 Live and Let Die is the second novel in Ian Fleming 's James Bond series of stories , and is set in London , the US and Jamaica . It was first published in the UK by Jonathan Cape on 5 April 1954 . Fleming wrote the novel at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica before his first book , Casino Royale , was published ; much of the background came from Fleming 's travel in the US and knowledge of Jamaica . 
 The story centres on Bond 's pursuit of " Mr Big " , a criminal who has links to the American criminal network , the world of voodoo and SMERSH — an arm of the Russian secret service — all of which are threats to the West . Bond becomes involved in the US through Mr Big 's smuggling of 17th @-@ century gold coins from British territories in the Caribbean . The novel deals with the themes of the ongoing East @-@ West struggle of the Cold War — including British and American relations , Britain 's position in the world , race relations and the struggle between good and evil . 
 As with Casino Royale , Live and Let Die was broadly well received by the critics . The initial print run of 7 @,@ 500 copies quickly sold out and a second print run was ordered within the year . US sales , when the novel was released there a year later , were much slower . Following a comic @-@ strip adaptation in 1958 – 59 by John McLusky in the Daily Express , the novel was adapted in 1973 as the eighth film in the Eon Productions Bond series and the first to star Roger Moore as Bond . Major plot elements from the novel were also incorporated into the Bond films For Your Eyes Only in 1981 and Licence to Kill in 1989 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The British Secret Service agent James Bond is sent by his superior , M , to New York City to investigate " Mr Big " , real name Buonaparte Ignace Gallia . Bond 's target is an agent of the Soviet counterintelligence organisation SMERSH , and an underworld voodoo leader who is suspected of selling 17th @-@ century gold coins in order to finance Soviet spy operations in America . These gold coins have been turning up in Harlem and Florida and are suspected of being part of a treasure that was buried in Jamaica by the pirate Sir Henry Morgan . 
 In New York Bond meets up with his counterpart in the CIA , Felix Leiter . The two visit some of Mr Big 's nightclubs in Harlem , but are captured . Bond is interrogated by Mr Big , who uses his fortune @-@ telling employee , Solitaire ( so named because she excludes men from her life ) , to determine if Bond is telling the truth . Solitaire lies to Mr Big , supporting Bond 's cover story . Mr Big decides to release Bond and Leiter , and has his henchman Tee @-@ Hee break one of Bond 's fingers . On leaving , Bond kills Tee @-@ Hee and several more of Mr Big 's men , while Leiter is released with minimal physical harm by a gang member , sympathetic because of a shared appreciation of jazz . 
 Solitaire later leaves Mr Big and contacts Bond ; the couple travel by train to St. Petersburg , Florida , where they meet Leiter . While Bond and Leiter are scouting one of Mr Big 's warehouses used for storing exotic fish , Solitaire is kidnapped by Mr Big 's minions . Leiter later returns to the warehouse by himself , but is either captured and fed to a shark or tricked into standing on a trap door over the shark tank through which he falls ; he survives , but loses an arm and a leg . Bond finds him in their safe house with a note pinned to his chest " He disagreed with something that ate him " . Bond then investigates the warehouse himself and discovers that Mr Big is smuggling gold by placing it in the bottom of fish tanks holding poisonous tropical fish , which he is bringing into the US . He is attacked in the warehouse by the Robber , another of Mr Big 's men ; during the resultant gunfight , Bond outwits the Robber and causes him to fall into the shark tank . 
 Bond continues his mission in Jamaica , where he meets a local fisherman , Quarrel , and John Strangways , the head of the local MI6 station . Quarrel gives Bond training in scuba diving in the local waters . Bond swims through <unk> and barracuda @-@ infested waters to Mr Big 's island and manages to plant a limpet mine on the hull of his yacht before being captured once again by Mr Big . Bond is reunited with Solitaire ; the following morning Mr Big ties the couple to a line behind his yacht and plans to drag them over the shallow coral reef and into deeper water so that the sharks and barracuda that he attracts to the area with regular feedings will eat them . 
 Bond and Solitaire are saved when the limpet mine explodes seconds before they are dragged over the reef : though temporarily stunned by the explosion and injured on the coral , they are protected from further harm by the reef and Bond watches as Mr Big , who survived the explosion , is killed by the sharks and barracuda . Quarrel then rescues the couple . 
 = = Background = = 
 Between January and March 1952 the journalist Ian Fleming wrote Casino Royale , his first novel , at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica . Fleming conducted research for Live and Let Die , and completed the novel before Casino Royale was published in January 1953 , four months before his second book was published . Fleming and his wife Ann flew to New York before taking the Silver Meteor train to St. Petersburg in Florida and then flying on to Jamaica . In doing so they followed the same train route Fleming had taken with his friend Ivar Bryce in July 1943 , when Fleming had first visited the island . 
 Once Fleming and his wife arrived at Goldeneye , he started work on the second Bond novel . In May 1963 he wrote an article for Books and Bookmen magazine describing his approach to writing , in which he said : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " As he had done with Casino Royale , Fleming showed the manuscript to his friend , the writer William Plomer , who reacted favourably to the story , telling Fleming that " the new book held this reader like a limpet mine & the denouement was shattering " . On a trip to the US in May 1953 Fleming used his five @-@ day travelling time on RMS Queen Elizabeth to correct the proofs of the novel . 
 Fleming intended the book to have a more serious tone than his debut novel , and he initially considered making the story a meditation on the nature of evil . The novel 's original title , The Undertaker 's Wind , reflects this ; the undertaker 's wind , which was to act as a metaphor for the story , describes one of Jamaica 's winds that " blows all the bad air out of the island " . 
 The literary critic Daniel <unk> Savoye considers the titles of Fleming 's novels to have importance individually and collectively ; Live and Let Die , he writes , " turns an expression of collective wisdom , in this case fraternal and positive , into its exact opposite , suggesting a materialistic epistemological outlook , individualistic and lucid " . This is in keeping with the storyline in that Bond brings order without which " the world would quickly turn into the dystopian , barbarian reality feared by [ Thomas ] Hobbes and celebrated by [ Marquis ] de Sade . " 
 Although Fleming provided no dates within his novels , two writers have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom have written books on behalf of Ian Fleming Publications — put the events of Live and Let Die in 1952 ; Griswold is more precise , and considers the story to have taken place in January and February that year . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Plot inspirations = = = 
 Much of the novel draws from Fleming 's personal experiences : the opening of the book , with Bond 's arrival at New York 's Idlewild Airport was inspired by Fleming 's own journeys in 1941 and 1953 , and the warehouse at which Leiter is attacked by a shark was based on a similar building Fleming and his wife had visited in St. Petersburg , Florida on their recent journey . He also used his experiences on his two journeys on the Silver Meteor as background for the route taken by Bond and Solitaire . 
 Some of Fleming 's friends had their names used in the story , with Ivar Bryce giving his name to the alias used by Bond , while another friend , Tommy Leiter , found his surname being used for Felix Leiter ; Ivar Bryce 's middle name of Felix was used for Leiter 's first name , while John Fox @-@ Strangways saw part of his surname being used for the name of the MI6 station chief in Jamaica . Fleming also used the name of the local Jamaican Rufous @-@ throated solitaire bird as the name of the book 's main female character . 
 Fleming 's experiences on his first scuba dive with Jacques Cousteau in 1953 provided much of the description of Bond 's swim to Mr Big 's boat , while the concept of limpet @-@ mining is probably based on the wartime activities of the elite 10th Light Flotilla , a unit of Italian navy frogmen . Fleming also used , and extensively quoted , information about voodoo from his friend Patrick Leigh Fermor 's 1950 book The Traveller 's Tree , which had also been partly written at Goldeneye . 
 Fleming had a long @-@ held interest in pirates , from the novels he read as a child , through to films such as Captain Blood ( 1935 ) with Errol Flynn , which he enjoyed watching . From his Goldeneye home on Jamaica 's northern shore , Fleming had visited Port Royal on the south of the island , which was once the home port of Sir Henry Morgan , all of which stimulated Fleming 's interest . For the background to Mr Big 's treasure island , Fleming appropriated the details of <unk> Island in Port Maria Bay , which was the true location of Morgan 's hoard . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Fleming builds the main character in Live and Let Die to make Bond come across as more human than in Casino Royale , becoming " a much warmer , more likeable man from the opening chapter " , according to the American novelist Raymond Benson , who between 1997 and 2002 wrote a series of Bond novels and short stories . Savoye sees the introduction of a vulnerable side to Bond , identifying the agent 's tears towards the end of the story as evidence of this . Similarly , over the course of the book , the American character Leiter develops and also emerges as a more complete and human character and his and Bond 's friendship is evident in the story . Despite the relationship , Leiter is again subordinate to Bond . While in Casino Royale his role was to provide technical support and money to Bond , in Live and Let Die the character is secondary to Bond , and the only time he takes the initiative , he loses an arm and a leg , while Bond wins his own battle with the same opponent . Although Fleming had initially intended to kill Leiter off in the story , his American literary agent protested , and the character was saved . 
 Quarrel was Fleming 's ideal concept of a black person , and the character was based on his genuine liking for Jamaicans , whom he saw as " full of goodwill and cheerfulness and humour " . The relationship between Bond and Quarrel was based on a mutual assumption of Bond 's superiority . Fleming described the relationship as " that of a Scots laird with his head stalker ; authority was unspoken and there was no room for servility " . 
 Fleming 's villain was physically abnormal — as many of Bond 's later adversaries were . Mr Big is described as being intellectually brilliant , with a " great football of a head , twice the normal size and very nearly round " and skin which was " grey @-@ black , taut and shining like the face of a week @-@ old corpse in the river " . For Benson , " Mr Big is only an adequate villain " , with little depth to him . According to the literary analyst LeRoy L. Panek , in his examination of 20th century British spy novels , Live and Let Die showed a departure from the " gentleman crook " that showed in much earlier literature , as the intellectual and organisational skills of Mr Big were emphasised , rather than the behavioural . Within Mr Big 's organisation , Panek identifies Mr Big 's henchmen as " merely incompetent gunsels " when compared with Bond , who the latter can eliminate with relative ease . 
 = = Style = = 
 Benson analysed Fleming 's writing style and identified what he described as the " Fleming Sweep " : a stylistic point that sweeps the reader from one chapter to another using ' hooks ' at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next : Benson felt that the " Fleming Sweep never achieves a more engaging rhythm and flow " than in Live and Let Die . The writer and academic Kingsley Amis — who also subsequently wrote a Bond novel — disagrees , and thinks that the story has " less narrative sweep than most " . Parker considers the novel possibly Fleming 's best , as it has a tight plot and is well paced throughout ; he thinks the book " establishes the winning formula " for the stories that follow . 
 Savoye , comparing the structure of Live and Let Die with Casino Royale , believes that the two books have open narratives which allow Fleming to continue with further books in the series . Savoye finds differences in the structure of the endings , with Live and Let Die 's promise of future sexual encounters between Bond and Solitaire to be more credible than Casino Royale 's ending , in which Bond vows to battle a super @-@ criminal organisation . 
 Within the novel Fleming uses elements that are " pure Gothic " , according to the essayist Umberto Eco . This includes the description of Mr Big 's death by shark attack , in which Bond watches as " Half of The Big Man 's left arm came out of the water . It had no hand , no wrist , no wrist watch . " Eco considers that this is " not just an example of macabre sarcasm ; it is an emphasis on the essential by the inessential , typical of the école du regard . " Benson considers that Fleming 's experiences as a journalist , and his eye for detail , add to the verisimilitude displayed in the novel . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Live and Let Die , like other Bond novels , reflects the changing roles of Britain and America during the 1950s and the perceived threat from the Soviet Union to both nations . Unlike Casino Royale , where Cold War politics revolve around British @-@ Soviet tensions , in Live and Let Die Bond arrives in Harlem to protect America from Soviet agents working through the Black Power movement . In the novel America was the Soviet objective and Bond comments " that New York ' must be the fattest atomic @-@ bomb target on the whole face of the world ' . " 
 Live and Let Die also gave Fleming a chance to outline his views on what he saw as the increasing American colonisation of Jamaica — a subject that concerned both him and his neighbour Noël Coward . While the American Mr Big was unusual in appropriating an entire island , the rising number of American tourists to the islands was seen by Fleming as a threat to Jamaica ; he wrote in the novel that Bond was " glad to be on his way to the soft green flanks of Jamaica and to leave behind the great hard continent of <unk> . " 
 Bond 's briefing also provides an opportunity for Fleming to offer his views on race through his characters . " M and Bond ... offer their views on the ethnicity of crime , views that reflected ignorance , the inherited racialist prejudices of London clubland " , according to the cultural historian Jeremy Black . Black also points out that " the frequency of his references and his willingness to offer racial stereotypes [ was ] typical of many writers of his age " . The writer Louise Welsh observes that " Live and Let Die taps into the paranoia that some sectors of white society were feeling " as the civil rights movements challenged prejudice and inequality . That insecurity manifested itself in opinions shared by Fleming with the intelligence industry , that the American National Association for the Advancement of Colored People was a communist front . The communist threat was brought home to Jamaica with the 1952 arrest of the Jamaican politician Alexander Bustamante by the American authorities while he was on official business in Puerto Rico , despite the fact that he was avowedly anti @-@ communist . During the course of the year local Jamaican political parties had also expelled members for being communists . 
 Friendship is another prominent element of Live and Let Die , where the importance of male friends and allies shows through in Bond 's relationships with Leiter and Quarrel . The more complete characters profiles in the novel clearly showed the strong relationship between Bond and Leiter . In turn this provides a strengthened motive for Bond to chase Mr Big as revenge for the shark attack on Leiter . 
 Live and Let Die continues the theme Fleming examined in Casino Royale , that of evil or , as Fleming 's biographer , Andrew Lycett , describes it , " the banality of evil " . Fleming uses Mr Big as the vehicle to voice opinions on evil , particularly when he tells Bond that " Mister Bond , I suffer from boredom . I am prey to what the early Christians called ' accidie ' , the deadly lethargy that envelops those who are sated . " This allowed Fleming to build the Bond character as a counter to the accidie , in what the writer saw as a Manichaean struggle between good and evil . Benson considers evil as the main theme of the book , and highlights the discussion Bond has with René Mathis of the French Deuxième Bureau in Casino Royale , in which the Frenchman predicts Bond will seek out and kill the evil men of the world . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 Live and Let Die was published in hardback by Jonathan Cape on 5 April 1954 and , as with Casino Royale , Fleming designed the cover , which again featured the title lettering prominently . It had an initial print run of 7 @,@ 500 copies which sold out , and a reprint of 2 @,@ 000 copies was soon undertaken ; by the end of the first year , a total of over 9 @,@ 000 copies had been sold . In May 1954 Live and Let Die was banned in Ireland by the Irish Censorship of Publications Board . Lycett observed that the ban helped the general publicity in other territories . In October 1957 Pan Books issued a paperback version which sold 50 @,@ 000 copies in the first year . 
 Live and Let Die was published in the US in January 1955 by Macmillan ; there was only one major change in the book , which was that the title of the fifth chapter was changed from " Nigger Heaven " to " Seventh Avenue " . Sales in the US were poor , with only 5 @,@ 000 copies sold in the first year of publication . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Philip Day of The Sunday Times noted " How wincingly well Mr Fleming writes " , while the reviewer for The Times , thought that " [ t ] his is an ingenious affair , full of recondite knowledge and horrific spills and thrills – of slightly sadistic excitements also – though without the simple and bold design of its predecessor " . Elizabeth L Sturch , writing in The Times Literary Supplement , observed that Fleming was " without doubt the most interesting recent recruit among thriller @-@ writers " and that Live and Let Die " fully maintains the promise of ... Casino Royale . " <unk> her praise of the book , Sturch thought that " Mr Fleming works often on the edge of flippancy , rather in the spirit of a highbrow " , although overall she felt that the novel " contains passages which for sheer excitement have not been surpassed by any modern writer of this kind " . The reviewer for The Daily Telegraph felt that " the book is continually exciting , whether it takes us into the heart of Harlem or describes an underwater swim in shark @-@ infested waters ; and it is more entertaining because Mr Fleming does not take it all too seriously himself " . George Malcolm Thompson , writing in The Evening Standard , believed Live and Let Die to be " tense ; ice @-@ cold , sophisticated ; Peter Cheyney for the carriage trade " . 
 Writing in The New York Times , Anthony Boucher — a critic described by Fleming 's biographer , John Pearson , as " throughout an avid anti @-@ Bond and an anti @-@ Fleming man " — thought that the " high @-@ spots are all effectively described ... but the narrative is loose and jerky " . Boucher concluded that Live and Let Die was " a lurid meller contrived by mixing equal parts of Oppenheim and Spillane " . In June 1955 Raymond Chandler was visiting the poet Stephen Spender in London when he was introduced to Fleming , who subsequently sent Chandler a copy of Live and Let Die . In response , Chandler wrote that Fleming was " probably the most forceful and driving writer of what I suppose still must be called thrillers in England " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Live and Let Die was adapted as a daily comic strip which was published in The Daily Express newspaper and syndicated around the world . The adaptation ran from 15 December 1958 to 28 March 1959 . The adaptation was written by Henry Gammidge and illustrated by John McLusky , whose drawings of Bond had a resemblance to Sean Connery , the actor who portrayed Bond in Dr. No three years later . 
 Before Live and Let Die had been published , the producer Alexander Korda had read a proof copy of the novel . He thought it was the most exciting story he had read for years , but was unsure whether it was suitable for a film . Nevertheless , he wanted to show the story to the directors David Lean and Carol Reed for their impressions , although nothing came of Korda 's initial interest . In 1955 , following the television broadcast of an adaptation of Fleming 's earlier novel Casino Royale , Warner Bros. expressed an interest in Live and Let Die , and offered $ 500 for an option , against $ 5 @,@ 000 if the film was made . Fleming thought the terms insufficient and turned them down . 
 Live and Let Die , a film based loosely on the novel starring Roger Moore as Bond , was released in 1973 , which played on the cycle of blaxploitation films produced at the time . The film was directed by Guy Hamilton , produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman , and is the eighth in the Eon Productions Bond series . Some scenes from the novel were depicted in later Bond films , including the sequence of Bond and Solitaire being dragged behind Mr Big 's boat , which was used in the film For Your Eyes Only , while Felix Leiter was not fed to a shark until Licence to Kill , which also faithfully adapts Live and Let Die 's shoot @-@ out in the warehouse . 
 = Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brot , BWV 39 = 
 Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brot ( Break your bread for the hungry ) , BWV 39 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Leipzig and first performed it on 23 June 1726 , the first Sunday after Trinity . About three years earlier , on the first Sunday after Trinity of 1723 , Bach had taken office as Thomaskantor and started his first cycle of cantatas for the occasions of the liturgical year , and on the first Sunday after Trinity 1724 he began his second cycle , consisting of chorale cantatas . As he composed no new work for the first Sunday after Trinity 1725 , Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brot is regarded as part of his third cantata cycle . 
 The text is from a 1704 collection attributed to Duke Ernst Ludwig von Sachsen @-@ Meiningen . The symmetrical structure of seven movements is typical for this collection , beginning with a quotation from the Old Testament , culminating in a central quotation from the New Testament and ending with a chorale . The theme is an invocation to be grateful for God 's gifts and to share them with the needy . 
 Bach set the opening movement as a complex choral structure , but the central movement as a simple solo for the bass voice , traditionally considered the voice of Jesus . The instrumentation is for woodwinds and strings , including recorders as a symbol of poverty , need and humility . It is possibly the last time that Bach scored recorders in his cantatas . 
 = = History and text = = 
 Bach composed the cantata for the first Sunday after Trinity . This Sunday marks the beginning of the second half of the liturgical year , " in which core issues of faith and doctrine are explored " . Bach had taken office as Thomaskantor in Leipzig on that occasion in 1723 , responsible for the education of the Thomanerchor , performances in the regular services in the main churches of the town including Thomaskirche and the Nikolaikirche . He had started the project of composing one cantata for each Sunday and holiday of the liturgical year , termed by Christoph Wolff " an artistic undertaking on the largest scale " . In 1724 he started a project on the first Sunday after Trinity to exclusively compose chorale cantatas , based on the main Lutheran hymn for the respective occasion . After two years of regular cantata composition , Bach performed a cantata by his relative Johann Ludwig Bach for the first Sunday after Trinity in 1725 , and it was not until one year later , at the start of his fourth year in the office , that he composed Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brot for the occasion . 
 The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the First Epistle of John , ( the " God is Love " verses , 1 John 4 : 16 – 21 ) , and from the Gospel of Luke ( the parable of the Rich man and Lazarus , Luke 16 : 19 – 31 ) . While Bach 's first cantata for the occasion , Die Elenden sollen essen , BWV 75 ( 1723 ) , had concentrated on the contrast of rich and poor , and his second one , the chorale cantata O Ewigkeit , du Donnerwort , BWV 20 ( 1724 ) , had reflected on repentance , the theme of Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brot was to be grateful for God 's gifts and share them with the needy . 
 According to Christoph Wolff and Klaus Hofmann , the cantata text is taken from a 1704 collection which is attributed to Duke Ernst Ludwig von Sachsen @-@ Meiningen . Works from this collection had been set to music by the court composer Johann Ludwig Bach , whose cantatas Bach had frequently performed in 1725 . They all start with an Old Testament quotation , then focus on a New Testament passage in a central movement . The librettist organized the text in seven poetic movements , divided into two distinct parts . Both parts begin with a quotation from the Bible , but not , as in several other Bach cantatas , taken from the prescribed readings . Part I starts with a quotation from the Book of Isaiah ( Isaiah 58 : 7 – 8 ) , Part II begins with a quotation from the Epistle to the Hebrews ( Hebrews 13 : 16 ) , which forms the text for the central fourth movement . The first part derives from the words of the prophet a call to love one 's neighbour and to share God 's gifts , the second part similarly deals with thanks for God 's gifts and makes a promise to love one 's neighbour and share . The poet closed the cantata with stanza 6 from David <unk> 's hymn " Kommt , laßt euch den Herren <unk> " ( 1648 ) , which summarizes the ideas . This hymn is sung to the melody of " <unk> dich sehr , o meine Seele " , which was codified by Louis Bourgeois when setting the Geneva Psalm 42 in his collection of <unk> <unk> trios de David ( Geneva , 1551 ) . Bourgeois seems to have been influenced by the secular song " Ne l <unk> je dire " contained in the <unk> de Bayeux published around 1510 . 
 Bach first performed the cantata on 23 June 1726 . It is considered to be part of Bach 's third annual cantata cycle in Leipzig . While the first and second cycle lasted one year , according to Christoph Wolff , the cantatas of the third cycle date from a period beginning on the first Sunday after Trinity , 3 June 1725 , and lasting for about three years . Musicologist Julian Mincham notes that " Bach attached personal significance to this particular day and consequently sought to parade a work of considerable substance " . 
 = = Structure and scoring = = 
 Bach structured the cantata is in two parts , to be performed before and after the sermon . The first part begins with a chorus , followed by a recitative and aria . The second begins with the central movement , a biblical quotation sung by the bass as the vox Christi , followed by an aria , recitative and a concluding chorale . Bach scored it for three vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir SATB , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of two alto recorders ( Fl ) , two oboes ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo ( Bc ) . The recorders ( flauti dolci ) represent poverty , need and a " mood of humility " . It is possibly the last time that Bach scored recorders in his cantatas . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The cantata is symmetrically centred around the fourth movement on the words from the New Testament . Movements 1 and 7 are choral , movements 2 and 6 recitatives , 3 and 5 arias in two sections each , neither utilizing the da capo form . 
 The Old Testament text of the first movement is long and " multifaceted " . The opening chorus follows these words in a complex architecture of three sections , the first and the third section further composed of three parts . The first section begins with a two @-@ part ritornello and climaxes in a fugal exposition in all four voices . The second section starts with the shift to common time ; it is characterized by a full texture and fluid melody . The chorus then returns to triple meter for the final section , which includes two four @-@ part <unk> . The movement combines elements of the motet which follows the text , with composition in polyphony , elaborating on its different ideas . Seth <unk> explains the beginning of the movement : 
 The text of the movement is a paraphrase of Isaiah 58 : 7 – 8 in which the giving of food , shelter , and clothing to the needy is seen as a divine , transforming act of charity ... The first section ... literally depicts the distribution of bread to the hungry by ' distributing ' staccato chords to differing musical forces ( recorders , oboes , then strings ) . 
 John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage with the Monteverdi Choir in 2000 , notes : " The opening chorus is multi @-@ sectional and , at 218 bars , immense " . He continues : 
 After ninety @-@ three bars the time signature changes to common time : the basses begin unaccompanied , and are then answered by all voices and instruments very much in the old style of Bach 's Weimar cantatas , with a florid counter @-@ subject to suggest the ' clothing ' of the naked . At bar 106 the time changes of 3 / 8 ( again a Weimar feature ) and the tenors lead off in the first of two fugal expositions separated by an interlude with a coda . The sense of relief after the stifling pathos of the opening sections is palpable and comes to a sizzling homophonic conclusion with ' und deine <unk> wird schnell <unk> ' ( ' and thy health shall spring forth speedily ' ) . The basses now instigate the second fugal exposition , ' the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward ' . After so much pathos , the final coda led by the sopranos ' und die Herrlichkeit des Herrn wird dich zu sich <unk> ' releases the pent @-@ up energy in an explosion of joy . 
 A secco bass recitative leads into the alto aria with obbligato oboe and violin that concludes Part I. The aria conveys three main images : " imitation , ultimate celestial ecstasy , and the scattering of fertile seeds " . 
 The fourth movement is sung by the bass , the vox Christi ( voice of Jesus ) , as if Jesus said the words himself which Paul wrote to the Hebrews : " <unk> und <unk> <unk> nicht " ( To do good and to communicate forget not ) . The style is typical for Bach 's treatment of such words , between arioso and aria . The accompaniment is asymmetrical and repetitive , almost a ground bass . 
 The soprano aria is accompanied by two unison obbligato recorders . The ritornello is simple and fluid , while the vocal line " has , at times , the quality of a folk song " . The penultimate movement , an alto recitative , is accompanied by dense chordal strings . 
 The closing choral , " Selig sind , die aus <unk> " ( Blessed are those who , out of mercy ) is a four @-@ part setting , " symmetrical and predictable until the last two phrases " of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half measures each . 
 Gardiner summarizes that all later movements are " dwarfed by the immensity , vigour , flexibility and imagination of the opening chorus , every phrase of its text translated into music of superb quality " . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The sortable listing is taken from the selection provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . The type of choir and orchestra is roughly shown as a large group by red background , and as an ensemble with period instruments in historically informed performance by green background . 
 = Pindus National Park = 
 Pindus National Park ( Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , also known as <unk> @-@ <unk> , is a national park in mainland Greece , situated in an isolated mountainous area at the periphery of West Macedonia and Epirus , in the northeastern part of the Pindus mountain range . It was established in 1966 and covers an area of 6 @,@ 927 hectares ( 17 @,@ 120 acres ) . The park 's core zone , 3 @,@ 360 hectares ( 8 @,@ 300 acres ) , covers the greatest part of the <unk> <unk> valley and the slopes of the surrounding peaks . 
 The national park has an elevation range from 1 @,@ 076 to 2 @,@ 177 metres ( 3 @,@ 530 to 7 @,@ 142 ft ) and is characterized by dense forests of European black pine and common beech , rocky ridges , several peaks over 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) , rapid streams and mountain lakes . The area belong to the wider Pindus Mountains mixed forests ecoregion and is a representative part of Pindus mountain range . Moreover , it belongs to the Natura 2000 ecological network of protected areas and is one of the three places in Greece that hosts a population of bears . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The park lies on the borders of Grevena and Ioannina regional unit , north of the town of <unk> and near the villages of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . There are no settlements or any facilities inside the protected area 's borders . 
 Several peaks reach an altitude of over 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) ; these include <unk> , 2 @,@ 177 m ( 7 @,@ 142 ft ) , <unk> , 2 @,@ 160 m ( 7 @,@ 090 ft ) , Flegga , 2 @,@ 159 m ( 7 @,@ 083 ft ) , Tria <unk> , 2 @,@ 050 m ( 6 @,@ 730 ft ) and <unk> , 2 @,@ 082 m ( 6 @,@ 831 ft ) . 
 The underlying rock formations are mainly serpentine and they support a specialized range of plants . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The park 's climate is montane and varies according to elevation and aspect . Annual rainfall ranges 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 800 mm ( 39 to 71 in ) , whereas mean monthly temperatures vary between 0 @.@ 9 to 21 @.@ 4 ° C ( 33 @.@ 6 to 70 @.@ 5 ° F ) . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The park was established in 1966 and is considered one of the most important protected areas for the maintenance of mountainous biodiversity and ecosystem integrity at the national level . Forests of European black pine ( Pinus nigra ) and common beech ( Fagus sylvatica ) cover the park 's lower and middle altitudes 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 600 m ( 3 @,@ 300 to 5 @,@ 200 ft ) , with several of these trees being more than 700 years old . At higher altitudes 1 @,@ 600 to 1 @,@ 900 m ( 5 @,@ 200 to 6 @,@ 200 ft ) , Bosnian pine ( Pinus heldreichii ) woodland is dominant , while at the greatest heights 1 @,@ 900 to 2 @,@ 177 m ( 6 @,@ 234 to 7 @,@ 142 ft ) , only certain types of bushes are found in the treeless alpine meadows . Additionally , the dry places and the lower parts of the valley are characterized by the domination of Buxus sempervirens , while some individuals of Abies <unk> @-@ regis are scattered among the Pinus nigra and Fagus sylvatica forests . 
 In total , 415 types of plants and 86 species of mushroom are recorded in the area . A number of local flower types are considered endemic to the Balkans , such as Dianthus <unk> and Allium <unk> . On the other hand , many endemic plants of central and northern Greece grow also in the park , like the Centaurea <unk> . Moreover , rare species of the forests of Pindus mountains , typical of the lower geological layers , are <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Campanula <unk> , Viola <unk> and Silene <unk> . The most important places for the gathering of rare plants are the northern slopes of the peaks of <unk> , Flegga and Kapetan <unk> . All the above places are very steep and difficult for grazing animals and therefore natural regeneration of the forest in this area is progressing normally and many rare plants are conserved . The serpentine soil , which is dominant in the area of the Pindus National Park also favors the growing of rare endemic plant species . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 The national park is one of three areas in Greece that hosts a population of Eurasian brown bears ( Ursus arctos arctos ) , which is considered a conservation priority species . The region itself is also called " bear park " . Other large mammals that live in the park are lynxes , <unk> and wild cats , with the last two being found in the area of Flegga forest . Additionally wolves , beech martens , wild boars and red squirrels are present in the area all year round . On the other hand , the Balkan chamois , a Balkan endemic species , is found on the steep and rocky parts of the park , as well as in areas with beech forests . Its population density fluctuates between 3 @-@ 5 and even 20 individuals per 100 ha ( 250 acres ) depending on the habitat productivity . The three small rivers crossing the area of the park have very clear water and are the well conserved habitat of the otter . 
 In the area of the national park up to five types of bat have been reported , with most common being <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . Moreover , it provides shelter for than 80 species of birds , such as 10 types of rare bird species including the eastern imperial eagle , golden eagle , Levant sparrowhawk and the lanner falcon , which indicates the ornithological importance of the area . One of the rare birds found in the park is the shore lark ( <unk> alpestris ) , found in the alpine meadows , and the great grey shrike ( Lanius <unk> ) , which migrates in the summer from Africa . The dense and mature forests of the area host eight types of woodpecker , including the white @-@ backed , the middle spotted , the lesser spotted and the black woodpecker . 
 = = Management = = 
 Since 2003 , the park is under the administrative authority of the ' Northern Pindus Management Body ' . This authority is responsible for the ecological management of a much larger region that includes eight protected areas in Greece , also part of the Natura 2000 , an initiative by the governments of the European Union that aims to protect the most seriously threatened habitats and species across Europe . The ' Northern Pindus Management Body ' , together with the local forest service , is responsible for regulating human activities and maintaining the ecological value of the protected area . However , until now this target remains elusive , because of a lack of expertise and of a science @-@ based management plan . A great need therefore exists to conduct conservation @-@ oriented research that can be translated directly into practical management proposals . 
 The core of the national park has been declared a ' <unk> reserve ' zone by the European Council with human activities such as woodcutting , grazing , hunting , fishing and access by car prohibited . In the park 's buffer zone activities are also controlled in general . The most serious danger the park faced in the past were extensive fires caused by cattle breeders to create meadows for grazing . These fires have destroyed large parts of the Pinus nigra and P. heldreichii forests . However , since 1960 , no fire has occurred due to improved protection measures by opening up many forest roads . Furthermore , an observation post was established near <unk> peak . A potential threat for the national park is a state initiative to divert the <unk> river for the construction of a hydroelectric power plant . This initiative will have a negative impact on the park since a great part of the existing forest area will be covered by water , resulting in the reduction of the core zone . Another danger is the high grazing pressure in the core area , while a number of small coal @-@ producing units at the outskirts of the park have raised a lot of concern . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Pindus National Park is considered as one of the least visited and least known national parks in Europe and it is not signposted from the main roads of the region . The area offers opportunities for hiking with its dirt roads being in good condition except in winter . The park can be best accessed from north , from the village of <unk> , while there is also a track from the west side , near <unk> . A climbing resort lies near <unk> peak , at a height of 1 @,@ 950 metres ( 6 @,@ 400 ft ) , which is an ideal base for excursions to the park 's area . According to the local legislation , the collection of any kind of organism is not allowed , while camping and staying in the park 's core after the setting of the sun is prohibited . Additional restrictions include the lighting of fires , while activities such as kayaking and rafting need a special clearance from the local forestry . 
 = Choe Bu = 
 Choe Bu ( 1454 – 1504 ) was a Korean official during the early Joseon Dynasty ( 1392 – 1910 ) . He is most well known for the account of his shipwrecked travels in China from February to July 1488 , during the Ming dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) . He was eventually banished from the Joseon court in 1498 and executed in 1504 during two political purges . However , in 1506 he was exonerated and given posthumous honors by the Joseon court . 
 Choe 's diary accounts of his travels in China became widely printed in the 16th century in both Korea and Japan . Modern historians also refer to his written works , since his travel diary provides a unique outsider 's perspective on Chinese culture in the 15th century and valuable information on China 's cities and regional differences . The attitudes and opinions expressed in his writing represent in part the standpoints and views of the 15th century Confucian Korean literati , who viewed Chinese culture as compatible with and similar to their own . His description of cities , people , customs , cuisines , and maritime commerce along China 's Grand Canal provides insight into the daily life of China and how it differed between northern and southern China during the 15th century . 
 = = Official career = = 
 Choe Bu of the <unk> Choe clan was born in 1454 in the prefectural town of Naju in <unk> @-@ do , Korea . Choe passed the <unk> examinations in 1477 , which was a lower examination that did not immediately ensure a post in government ; rather , it permitted enrollment in the National Academy , or <unk> , where he could study further for the higher <unk> examinations . In preparation for the exams , he studied the Five Classics as Confucian students had for centuries , but he also was taught the emphasis of the Four Books of Zhu Xi ( 1130 – 1200 ) , which was in line with the Neo @-@ Confucian doctrine first accepted in mainstream Chinese education during the mid @-@ 13th century . He passed his first civil service examination in 1482 and a second civil service examination in 1486 , qualifying him for an immediate post in government . In a career as a graduate scholar @-@ official that spanned 18 years , Choe was privileged with various positions . He held posts in the <unk> Library , printing office , and the National Academy . He also held posts involving the military , such as on the military supplies commission , with the office of the inspector @-@ general , and with the <unk> garrison . The culmination of his career was his promotion as a minister of the Directorate of Ceremonies in the capital , a distinguished office . Choe Bu was also one of the scholars who aided in the compilation of the Dongguk <unk> in 1485 , a history of Korea from ancient times . Choe was learned in Confucian ethics , Chinese letters , Chinese poetry , and well versed in Korean history , geography , and famous people ; all this later helped him to dispel the notion of Chinese that he was a Japanese pirate instead of a Korean official who had unfortunately shipwrecked in China . In 1487 , Choe Bu was sent to Jeju Island to check the registers for escaped slaves from the mainland . 
 = = A castaway in China , 1488 = = 
 = = = Southern China = = = 
 While serving his post in Jeju as the Commissioner of Registers for the island , a family slave from Naju arrived on February 12 , 1488 to alert Choe that his father had died . In keeping with his Confucian values , Choe prepared to leave his post immediately and begin the period of mourning for the loss of his father . However , while setting sail for mainland Korea with a crew of 43 Koreans , Choe 's ship was blown far off course during a violent storm that lasted 14 days , his ship aimlessly drifting off towards China until reaching the Chinese coast off of Taizhou , Zhejiang , near Ningbo . Before reaching the shores of Zhejiang , Choe wrote on the fifth day of his travel at sea during the storm : 
 This day a dense fog obscured everything . Things a foot away could not be made out . Towards evening , rain streamed down heavily , abating somewhat with night . The frightening waves were like mountains . They would lift the ship up into the blue sky and then drop it as if down an abyss . They billowed and crashed , the noise splitting heaven from earth . We might all be drowned and left to rot at any moment . 
 Upon the urging of his crewmen , Choe changed his clothes in a ritual fashion in preparation for death , although he prayed to the heavens to spare him and his crew , asking what sins they had committed to deserve this fate . On the sixth day , during fairer weather , their ship came upon a group of islands in the Yellow Sea where Chinese pirates were moored . The pirates robbed their ship of spare goods and rations , threw away the Koreans ' oars and anchor , and left them to drift aimlessly into the sea . 
 Although it was still raining heavily , Choe 's crew spotted a near @-@ deserted strip of Zhejiang coastline on February 28 . Almost immediately , his ship was surrounded by six Chinese boats , the crews of which did not attempt to board Choe 's ship until the following day . Although he could not speak Chinese , Choe was able to communicate with the Chinese by using their written character system in what was dubbed " brush conversations " . Through writing , he questioned these Chinese sailors on how far the nearest official road and courier route was . When given three different estimates of the distance from there to the Taizhou prefectural capital , Choe was convinced that his hosts were deceiving him ; historian Timothy Brook notes that it was more likely ignorance and inexperience of traveling inland than mere deception on behalf of the Chinese sailors . Regardless , the Chinese sailors began robbing the Korean ship of its remaining goods , convinced that they were Japanese pirates . When heavy rains inundated the region once more , the Chinese sailors returned to their ships ; Choe 's party , fearing for their lives should the sailors board their ship again , saw this as an opportune moment and made a dash for the shore under cover of rain . After traveling several days overland looking for the nearest courier route , Choe 's party was found by Chinese authorities and taken to Taizhou Battalion . Like in the previous incident with the Chinese sailors and villagers along the shore , the Koreans were almost killed when they were first encountered by Chinese soldiers . Employing his wit and intellect in these dangerous confrontations of being misconstrued as a coastal pirate , Choe avoided disaster for him and his crew . 
 The battalion commander at Taizhou ordered his officer Zhai Yong to escort Choe Bu 's Korean party to the regional command centre at Shaoxing on March 6 . From there they could be transferred to provincial authorities at Hangzhou and finally to the empire 's capital of Beijing where the party could be officially escorted back to Korea . Choe Bu and his officers were carried in sedan chairs , an accommodation provided by the Taizhou Battalion , although in spots of rough terrain Choe Bu and his officers were forced to walk on foot like the others . 
 The battalion troops escorting Choe and his Korean party reached <unk> Battalion on March 8 ; on the next day , they travelled by boat across <unk> Bay to reach the <unk> Police Station and Post House . On March 10 , the party travelled along the postal route to <unk> Station , a courier centre between Taizhou and Ningbo prefectures . The courier officials were eager to see the Koreans off , since a party of 43 was a somewhat large group for a courier station to provide sudden accommodations for . 
 In a daylong trip , the party reached the next station located 35 km ( 22 mi ) north by the second watch of the night . Heavy rains and wind made further advance impossible , but despite rain on the next day , Zhai Yong urged Choe and the Koreans to push on regardless , explaining that the regulations for prompt arrival times in China 's courier system were very stringent . The party covered another 35 km ( 22 mi ) on March 11 , completely soaked by the rain when they reached the next station . The station master provided the party with a small fire to keep warm , but a man who thought the Koreans were captured pirates barged in and kicked their fire out in a rage . Zhai Yong dutifully wrote an account of this assault and passed it on to the county magistrate 's office before having the party continue en route to their destination on the following day , March 12 . They reached the <unk> River on that day , boarding ships that would lead them to the Grand Canal , the central courier and trade artery of China that would carry them all the way to Beijing . At this point , water transport was the preferable means of travel for the courier agents ; Choe wrote " all envoys , tribute , and commerce come and go by water . If either the water in the locks and rivers is too shallow because of drought to let boats pass or there is a very urgent matter , the overland route is taken . " When the party reached Ningbo on that day , Choe Bu remarked on the beautiful scenery ; when they reached Cixi City , he noted the city 's many markets and cluttering of warships ; upon entering Ningbo and reaching the Supreme Piracy @-@ Defense Office , Choe wrote that the gates and crowds there were three times as great as at Cixi . 
 After interrogating Choe Bu and Zhai Yong , Zhai was punished with a flogging for the recent fire @-@ kicking incident , which officials of Ningbo cited as evidence of his lack of command . Yet that wasn 't the only offense ; Zhai was flogged again when the party reached Hangzhou , since he failed to meet the deadline in reaching his destination while escorting the Koreans . The standard punishment was 20 strokes for a day 's delay , with an additional stroke for every subsequent three days of delay and a maximum of 60 . Although this was perhaps a damper on their travel affair , Choe was impressed with the sights of Hangzhou , writing : 
 It truly seems a different world , as people say ... Houses stand in solid rows , and the gowns of the crowds seem like screens . The markets pile up gold and silver ; the people amass beautiful clothes and ornaments . Foreign ships stand as thick as the teeth of a comb , and in the streets wine shops and music halls front directly each on another . 
 Brook states that Choe correctly observed the fact that Hangzhou was the central trade city where ships from areas throughout southeast China congregated to take goods into the Jiangnan region , the hotbed of commercial activity in China . Due to the hai jin laws , the Ming government was the only entity allowed to conduct foreign trade ; regardless of this prohibition , Choe was informed of the rampant illegal smuggling that passed through Hangzhou , bringing in sandalwood , pepper , and perfumes from Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean . Yet this was a risky pursuit , as Choe was made aware that half the ships that engaged in this business did not return . On March 23 , the Hangzhou prefectural government granted Choe 's party a new escort , an official document explaining their presence in China , and lofty provisions of food and other items that were complements of the transport offices in charge of large @-@ scale national transportation needs . The party stayed in Hangzhou for another two days before departing on March 25 . The reason for the delay was due to courier officials ' dutiful following of the handbook Bureaucratic System of the Ming Dynasty ( Da Ming <unk> ) , which was used to calculate through geomantic principles which days were auspicious to depart on and which days were not . The Europeans , too , became aware of such divination practices later in the 16th century : Mendoza 's History of the great and mighty kingdom of China and the situation thereof ( published 1585 ) mentions that among the Chinese books purchased by the Spanish Augustinian friar Martín de Rada in Fujian in 1575 were some that discussed how to " cast <unk> when they <unk> any journey ... " . 
 Traveling 50 km ( 31 mi ) on average per day , it would take the party 43 days from March 25 to May 9 to travel from Hangzhou to Beijing ; even though the party spent a day 's time in Suzhou , they still beat their deadline by two days , since 45 km ( 28 mi ) was the courier system 's standard traveling distance per day . 
 Choe Bu observed that , despite Hangzhou 's greatness , it was no competition for Suzhou , while the former was merely a supplemental commercial feeder that served to enrich the Jiangnan region . After visiting Suzhou on March 28 , Choe Bu remarked on this economic hub of the southeast : 
 Shops and markets one after another lined both river banks , and merchant junks were crowded together . It was well called an urban center of the southeast ... All the treasures of land and sea , such as thin silks , <unk> , gold , silver , jewels , crafts , arts , and rich and great merchants are there [ and ] ... merchantmen and junks from Henan , Hebei , and Fujian gather like clouds . 
 Describing the suburban sprawl around Suzhou and other cities of the Yangzi delta , Choe wrote ( note , one li here is equal to 1 @.@ 7 km or 1 @.@ 05 miles ) : " Often for as much as twenty li around them , village gates crowd the ground , markets line the roads , towers look out on other towers , and boats ply stem to stern . " 
 = = = Northern China = = = 
 After departing from Suzhou and continuing up the Grand Canal , Choe 's party reached the <unk> Rapids on April 13 , which interrupted canal traffic in the northern part of South Zhili . He wrote that a teams of ten oxen were used to pull their boats through the rapids , while teams of 100 men were used at the next stage of river rapids , the Xuzhou Rapids . He noted the pound locks here that controlled water levels in sections of the canal for safe passage of ships . He described the bustling cities of <unk> and <unk> in the northern province of Shandong , although he stated that the merchant activity and sizes of these two cities did not match the grandeur of Hangzhou and Suzhou in the south . In fact , Choe remarked that only these two and a handful of other cities in northern China matched the prosperity of southern China , stating that the north was quite poverty @-@ stricken and underdeveloped compared with the south . He also believed that southern Chinese displayed a finer degree of cultivation , social order , literacy , and industriousness than those from the north . Choe wrote that while people of the south were well @-@ dressed and had plenty to spare , people in the north often lacked supplies of everything and feared bandits . Brook writes : 
 At the end of [ Cho 'e Bu 's ] diary he presents a litany of depressing contrasts : spacious tile @-@ roofed houses south of the Yangzi , thatch @-@ roof hovels north ; sedan chairs south , horses and donkeys north ; gold and silver in the markets south , copper cash north ; diligence in farming , manufacturing , and commerce south , indolence north ; pleasant dispositions south , quarrelsome tempers north ; education south , illiteracy north . 
 Choe found that people all across China , and in nearly every social strata , participated in business affairs . He wrote that even Chinese scholar officials — who were traditionally scorned if they took part in any private business venture — would " carry balances in their own sleeves and will analyze a profit for pennies " . 
 While traveling from Shandong into North Zhili , Choe noticed a multitude of boats passing by which held officials from the Ministries of War , Justice , and Personnel . When he questioned his escorts about this , Choe was told that the newly enthroned Hongzhi Emperor ( r . 1488 – 1505 ) had recently impeached a large number of officials from office whom he considered inept and unworthy of their positions . Brook writes that it was quite a comfortable privilege for disgraced and dismissed officials to be escorted by the courier service , yet even this saving of face was still a firm reminder of their banishment from court . 
 The party spent a total of 11 days traversing the North China Plain via the Grand Canal before reaching Tongzhou District , where there was a large warehouse depot adjunct to the capital city . From there they left their courier ships and traveled by donkey and foot towards the capital Beijing , where they lodged at the Central Courier Hostel . The Ming court granted the Korean party gifts of fine clothes during their stay . On June 3 , the officer in charge of Choe 's escort notified the transport office in Beijing that three carriages plus horses and donkeys would be needed in the journey to the Korean border ; when these were granted in the morning , the party swiftly departed from Beijing . Choe was not sad to leave the sights of Beijing behind , as he found the people there to be obsessed with business and cared little for agriculture or farming , a clear indication of his Confucian @-@ oriented values . 
 = = = Return to Korea = = = 
 The party reached the capital of Liaodong on July 2 , left four days later on July 6 , and on July 12 Choe 's party finally crossed the Yalu River and entered Joseon Korea . While the Grand Canal had its post stations , canal locks , ramps , moles , and paved towpaths , the land route from Beijing to the Yalu River was less elaborate but still featured the necessary distance markers and walled stations . Within a month of Choe 's return to Korea , the Joseon court under King <unk> ( r . 1469 – 1494 ) sent an embassy to the Ming court of China in a gesture of thanks for the Ming court 's cordial treatment of Choe and his crew and providing safe travel for them . 
 = = Death = = 
 Choe became a victim of a political purge at court , was flogged in punishment by the rival faction who gained power and banished to <unk> <unk> in the north in 1498 during the First Literati Purge of <unk> 's despotic reign ( r . 1494 – 1506 ) . Choe was ultimately executed in 1504 during the Second Literati Purge . However , he was exonerated after death and given posthumous honors by the Joseon court in 1506 with the demotion and exile of <unk> and the raising of his half @-@ brother <unk> ( r . 1506 – 1544 ) to the throne . 
 = = Publication of Choe 's diary = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ modern publications = = = 
 The accounts of Choe Bu 's travels in China became famous after King <unk> requested that Choe submit a written account of his experiences to the throne . His diary account , the <unk> <unk> ( traditional Chinese : <unk> ; ; Korean : <unk> ; literally : " A Record of Drifting Across the Southern <unk> Sea " ) , written in literary Chinese ( <unk> ) , was stored away in the Korean archives . Although it is uncertain whether it was printed right after it was written , it is known that Choe 's grandson Yu <unk> had it widely printed in Korea in 1569 . A copy of the original print by Choe 's grandson is now in the <unk> Bunko of Kyoto . Choe 's diary became famous even in Japan during the 16th century when it was reprinted several times . A copy of the 1573 Japanese edition is now in the Kanazawa Bunko of Yokohama . These were woodblock print copies , but an early movable type print edition was made and is located in the <unk> Bunko of Tokyo . There was a Japanese publication in 1769 of Choe 's diary accounts in a partial translation into Japanese by the Neo @-@ Confucian scholar <unk> <unk> ( 1721 – 1785 ) . Several Edo period manuscript copies of Choe 's travel diary are also in Japan . Other works written by Choe were compiled and published under the title <unk> ( <unk> · <unk> ) in Korea . 
 = = = Modern utility = = = 
 A complete translation of Choe 's account into English was prepared by John Meskill as part of his Columbia University dissertation ( 1958 ) . A slightly abbreviated version of Meskill 's translation was published as a book in 1965 by the University of Arizona Press , for the Association for Asian Studies . 
 Choe wrote in the usual tone of a learned Confucian scholar , which provides insight into the values and attitudes of early Joseon Confucian scholars . Choe Bu 's account is unique among foreign travel accounts in China , since it is from the perspective of a castaway , not a commonplace Korean ambassador to Ming China . Historian Eugene Newton Anderson notes that , while pre @-@ modern Koreans tended to <unk> China and associate it with everything that was positive , Choe regarded it with a more objective outsider 's perspective . When curious Chinese pressed Choe about Korea 's rituals of ancestor worship , Choe responded , " All my countrymen build shrines and sacrifice to their ancestors . They serve the gods and spirits they ought to serve and do not respect unorthodox sacrifices . " Historian Laurel Kendall writes that this was perhaps wishful thinking , but it reveals what a 15th @-@ century Korean Confucian thought the Chinese would consider proper and in accordance with the teaching of Confucius . When a certain Chinese scholar Wang <unk> sympathized with Choe and his party 's plight and served him tea , he asked Choe if the Koreans revered the Buddha as the Chinese did . Choe answered , " my country does not revere the Buddhist law , it honors only the Confucian system . All its families make filial piety , fraternal duty , loyalty , and sincerity their concern . " 
 Although Choe did not <unk> China to the extent of his peers and viewed it as an outsider , he did express in his writing a close affinity towards the Chinese , noting that Korea and China 's cultures were hardly distinguishable from one another in terms of parallel values . For example , Choe wrote of a conversation he had with a Chinese officer who had shown him a great deal of hospitality during his travels , saying to him : 
 Certainly that shows your feelings that though my Korea is beyond the sea , its clothing and culture being the same as China 's , it cannot be considered a foreign country ... All under Heaven are my brothers ; how can we discriminate among people because of distance ? That is particularly true of my country , which respectful serves the Celestial Court and pays tribute without fail . The Emperor , for his part , treats us <unk> and tends us benevolently . The feeling of security he imparts is perfect . 
 However , through the written dialogue in his diary , Choe did express slight differences between the cultures of China and Korea . For example , when the Chinese asked him whether or not the Korean education system offered degrees for specialists who dealt with only one of the Five Classics , Choe wrote that a Korean student who only studied one of the Classics and not all five of them was doomed to failing his exam and never attaining the rank of a full @-@ fledged Confucian scholar . 
 Choe 's comments are valuable to historians seeking to better understand Chinese culture and civilization in the 15th century ; for example , historians ' seeking for clues about how widespread literacy was in China , Choe 's comment " even village children , <unk> , and sailors " were able to read serves as a valuable piece of evidence . Moreover , Choe asserted that they could describe for him the mountains , rivers , old ruins , and other places in their regions , along with the significance of dynastic changes . Choe also bothered to list items such as the generous provisions provided by regional commanders , which included in one instance a plate of pork , two ducks , four chickens , two fish , one beaker of wine , one plate of rice , one plate of walnuts , one plate of vegetables , one plate of bamboo shoots , one plate of wheat noodles , one plate of jujube fruit , and one plate of bean curd . Although he was offered wine in China , Choe asserts in his diary that he rejected the offer due to the continuing three @-@ year mourning period for his late father . In addition to wine , he stated that he also abstained from eating " meat , garlic , <unk> plants , or sweet things " . This strict adherence to Confucian principles by a Korean pleased his Chinese hosts . 
 Choe also made observations about China 's topography in each of the towns and villages he visited . His documenting of exact locations can aid historians in pinpointing old and lost places and structures . In his description of Suzhou , he wrote : 
 In olden times , Suzhou was called <unk> . It borders the sea in the east , commands three large rivers and five lakes , and has a thousand li of rich fields … Le Bridge is inside the wall and separates Wu and Changzhou counties . Market quarters are scattered like stars . Many rivers and lakes flow through [ the region ] , refreshing and purifying it . 
 = = = Similar publications = = = 
 A similar episode to Choe Bu 's shipwrecked travels in China occurred in 1644 , when three Japanese ships headed for Hokkaidō became lost in a violent storm at sea . The 15 survivors led by Takeuchi <unk> ( <unk> ) – those who were not murdered when they came to shore – drifted into a port in what is now Primorsky Krai , but what was then controlled by the newly established Qing dynasty of China . They were taken to the Manchu capital of Shenyang , and then escorted to the newly conquered city of Beijing . The Manchu prince Dorgon ( 1612 – 1650 ) treated these shipwrecked Japanese with respect , pitied them for their misfortune , and provided them with provisions and ships to return to Japan . When they returned to Japan , they were interrogated by Tokugawa authorities , and submitted a report to Tokugawa Iemitsu ( r . 1623 – 1651 ) on their experiences in China . Just like in the case of Choe Bu , this account was published as the <unk> <unk> ( " Account of drifting into the [ Land of the ] Tartars " , <unk> ) and as the <unk> monogatari ( " Stories from a Foreign Land " , <unk> ) . 
 = Yevadu = 
 Yevadu ( English : Who is he ? ) is a 2014 Indian Telugu @-@ language action film co @-@ written and directed by Vamsi Paidipally . The film features Ram Charan , Shruti Haasan , and Amy Jackson in the lead roles , while Allu Arjun , Kajal Aggarwal , Sai Kumar , Jayasudha and Rahul Dev play supporting roles . The film was produced by Dil Raju under the banner Sri Venkateswara Creations . Vakkantham Vamsi co @-@ wrote the film 's script with Paidipally . Devi Sri Prasad composed the film 's music , while Marthand K. Venkatesh was the film 's editor . 
 The film 's story was partially inspired by John Woo 's 1997 film , Face / Off , and revolves around two strangers , Satya and Charan . The film was made on a budget of ₹ 350 million , and was officially launched on 9 December 2011 . Principal photography began on 27 April 2012 and lasted until 22 July 2013 . The majority of the film was shot in Vishakhapatnam and Hyderabad , mostly in Ramoji Film City , while two songs were shot in Switzerland and Bangkok . 
 Released during the season of the Makar Sankranti festival , the film received decent feedback from critics . It grossed more than ₹ 600 million and collected a distributor share of ₹ 471 million , becoming one of the highest grossing Telugu films of 2014 . The film was dubbed into Tamil as Magadheera , into Malayalam as <unk> My Brother and into Hindi with the same name by Goldmine Telefilms . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Satya and Deepthi are lovers living in Vishakhapatnam . A dreaded don , Veeru Bhai , lusts for her . When Deepthi 's parents are killed , she and Satya escape . They board a bus on route to Hyderabad , but the bus is stopped unexpectedly and boarded by three men : Veeru 's henchman Deva , Veeru 's brother Ajay , and a corrupt police inspector , Shravan . They kill Deepthi in front of Satya , and he suffers an almost @-@ fatal stab wound . Before the three leave , they set fire to the bus , leaving Satya to his death ( after they stabbed him to death ) . However , Dr. Shailaja saves Satya by giving him a new face and skin . Ten months later , Satya wakes up from his coma . 
 Under the pseudonym of Ram , Satya returns to Vishakhapatnam where he meets a model named Shruti , whom Veeru likes . Befriending Shruti , he takes advantage of his new unknown face , and lures Deva to a half @-@ constructed apartment ( or unconstructed building ) , where Satya kills Deva . A photo of Deva is discovered by assistant commissioner Ashok Varma , which has been marked with a " 1 " . Satya then files a report on Deepthi with the police , stating that she has been missing for ten days . Since Shravan knows that Deepthi was killed ten months earlier , he becomes suspicious of Satya in his new persona , and follows him to a mall , where Satya kills him . During the investigation on Shravan 's death , Satya presents himself to Varma as an eyewitness . When asked to provide a description of the killer , Satya describes his former face . Satya then manipulates Ajay to fall in love with Shruti and gets the two of them to pose in compromising positions for some pictures , under the pretense that they will be used as a promotion to assist Shruti in getting an opportunity to audition for the female lead in a film . Instead , Satya sends copies of the pictures to Veeru , to turn him against both Ajay and Shruti . Satya then convinces Ajay that the only way to save Shruti from Veeru 's ire is to kill Veeru , which would also allow Ajay to gain his brother 's position . However , Veeru 's henchmen kill Ajay , but Veeru is himself killed by Satya , who reveals his true identity . He apologises to Shruti for using her , before leaving . 
 His vengeance fulfilled , Satya departs from Vishakhapatnam . On the way , a stranger attacks Satya , but is killed . Suspecting that the attack might have something to do with his new face , Satya visits Dr. Shailaja . When they meet , Shailaja confesses that she has given Satya the face of her deceased son , Charan ; she then goes on to explain the circumstances surrounding Charan 's death . Charan was a happy @-@ go @-@ lucky rich graduate who hung out with his friends and girlfriend , Manju . One of his friends , Shashank , questions the local don , Dharma , regarding his illegal acquisition of lands by exploiting the slum people . Threatened , Dharma kills Shashank , after which Charan begins to raise support among the local population to revolt against Dharma . Again threatened , Dharma approaches another one of Charan 's friends , Sharath , promising to establish his political career if he kills Charan . Charan and Sharath go to Vishakhapatnam to attend a wedding . On their return , they board the same bus as Satya and Deepthi . When the bus was stopped , Sharath pulls a knife on Charan and the two engage in a fight . Veeru 's men simultaneously enter the bus . Deepthi is killed inside the bus while Charan and Sharath 's struggle has led them outside the bus , where Charan is stabbed to death . Charan 's body is sent to Shailaja , who after observing Satya 's urge to live decides to transplant her son 's face onto Satya , rather than simple plastic surgery . Before Shailaja could inform Satya about Charan , Satya had left the hospital . 
 Leaving Shailaja , Satya visits the slum , under the guise of Charan . After meeting the locals , he decides to avenge Charan 's death . First , he meets Sharath in a political meeting and , using the shock of Charan seemingly being alive , makes him kill Dharma . Satya makes the slum people follow Sharath to Dharma 's house . Sharath stabs Dharma , who in turn kills Sharath . However , the mob , which has followed Satya , finally kills Dharma . Afterwards , Manju is shown living in a distant land , mourning Charan 's death . The film ends with Satya meeting her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ram Charan as Satya / Charan / Ram 
 Allu Arjun as Satya ( Cameo appearance ) 
 Shruti Haasan as Manju 
 Amy Jackson as <unk> 
 Kajal Aggarwal as Deepthi ( Cameo appearance ) 
 Sai Kumar as Dharma 
 Rahul Dev as Veeru Bhai 
 Jayasudha as Dr. Shailaja 
 Ajay as Ajay 
 Murali Sharma as The Assistant Commissioner of Police 
 Kota Srinivasa Rao as Central Minister 
 Shashank as Shashank ( Cameo appearance ) 
 Raja as Sharath 
 Brahmanandam as Satya 's illegal tenant 
 Vennela Kishore as Charan 's friend 
 Subbaraju as Dharma 's henchman 
 Scarlett Mellish Wilson in the item number <unk> <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Dil Raju wanted to produce a technically driven film and selected a script written by Vamsi Paidipally . Raju announced the project officially in early October 2011 , as well as announcing that Ram Charan would star as the film 's protagonist . The project would be produced under the banner Sri Venkateswara Creations , with the details , including its cast and crew , announced shortly thereafter . Before sharing the script with Charan , Paidipally worked on it for nearly two months , choosing the action genre after having directed family dramas like Brindavanam ( 2010 ) . Devi Sri Prasad was confirmed as the film 's music director in early November 2011 , marking his first collaboration with both Paidipally and Charan . The music sittings were held at Goa . 
 The film 's production was officially launched on 9 December 2011 , in Hyderabad ; the film 's title was announced as Yevadu and a first look poster was unveiled on the same day . Paidipally based his screenplay from a story written by Vakkantham Vamsi . Anand Sai was the film 's art director and completed his work by September 2013 . Abburi Ravi contributed to the dialogues . C. Ram Prasad was the film 's cinematographer , while Marthand K. Venkatesh was the film 's editor . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Ram Charan was signed as the protagonist in October 2011 . Allu Arjun was cast for a crucial cameo appearance in a role which would bring a twist in the film ; the producers wanted an energetic and spirited actor in the part . Samantha Ruth Prabhu was selected to play the female lead to be paired with Charan , and was expected to join the production in October 2012 . For the other pairing with Charan , in his alter @-@ ego role , Amy Jackson was selected to play the role of Shruti . This marked her debut in Telugu cinema , and she participated in various workshops to prepare herself for the role before joining the shoot . Jackson revealed that she was afraid to be seen as a glamorous young woman aiming to be an actress ; she worked hard to get her diction right and called the workshop an orientation programme to get her used to the Telugu language . For her role , she practised yoga , functional training , and went for jogs in and around Bandra bandstand in Mumbai , before rejoining the film 's sets in Hyderabad . 
 Kajal Aggarwal was signed for a cameo appearance and was paired with Arjun . Her inclusion was in doubt due to scheduling conflicts , but she eventually accepted the role , calling it a short and sweet one . Shweta Bhardwaj was approached to perform an item number in early May 2012 , which she confirmed the news at the time , but added that although she was approached , she was not officially cast in the film . Scarlett Mellish Wilson was selected for an item number , which was supposed to be her first in Telugu ; However the film , Cameraman Gangatho Rambabu , was released earlier , making it her debut . 
 Samantha walked out of the project in mid @-@ November 2012 due to creative differences . She was subsequently replaced by Shruti Haasan , who was reportedly paid a remuneration of ₹ 6 million , but her participation was delayed due to scheduling problems . Sai Kumar was signed as the main antagonist . Lyricist Sirivennela Sitaramasastri 's second son , Raja , was signed for a supporting role . Arjun 's character in the film was reported to be severely injured in a fight and was to be presented as Charan after repeated plastic surgeries to his face . His character 's name was revealed as Sathya , and it was speculated that he would be a police officer in the film . Murali Sharma was selected for a supporting role . Shashank and Prabhas Srinu were seen in cameo roles . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on 27 April 2012 . Ram Charan was involved in two projects simultaneously , Yevadu and Zanjeer ( 2013 ) . After completing initial filming on Zanjeer , Charan joined the cast and crew of Yevadu on 8 May 2012 , to shoot the item number , as well as scenes featuring him , Amy Jackson , and others . After this first phase of production , Charan was scheduled to go back to Bangkok to complete the filming schedule of Zanjeer , before rejoining the Yevadu production on 7 August 2012 . Filming continued in Hyderabad until mid @-@ September 2012 after which production moved to Vishakhapatnam on 14 September 2012 . By early October 2012 , 40 percent of the film was completed , consisting mostly of the first half . Shruti Haasan joined the film 's sets on 24 January 2013 . 
 After a short break , filming recommenced on 5 March 2013 , and by the end of the month , 90 percent of the film 's speaking sequences were completed . Several action sequences were shot at Ramoji Film City in mid April 2013 , under the supervision of Peter Hein . By then , the portions containing Arjun and Aggarwal were almost complete . The film 's team left for Switzerland on 20 May 2013 , to film a song sequence . Charan and Haasan were on location in Zurich , Switzerland to film one of the songs , which was completed by 27 May 2013 . 
 Primary filming recommenced on 29 May 2013 , in Hyderabad , with Amy Jackson rejoining the production . The filming was expected to be wrapped up by 20 June 2013 . In mid @-@ June 2013 , a song featuring Charan was shot at <unk> <unk> , Ramoji Film City . Later , a song choreographed by Shekhar , and featuring Charan and Haasan was shot at Annapurna 7 Acres Studio . Meanwhile , a song featuring Charan and Jackson was shot in Bangkok . The song Freedom which was choreographed by Johnny , was shot in early July 2013 at Ramoji Film City . 
 Principal photography came to an end on 22 July 2013 after the completion of Haasan 's scenes . However , in late September 2013 , some parts of the film were reportedly re @-@ shot and new scenes were added , in an effort to speed up the pace of the film , after the completion of censor formalities . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Despite the film 's writer , Vamsi , denying it in early June 2013 , many critics believed the film was heavily inspired from John Woo 's 1997 action film , Face / Off , as well as bearing similarities to the Telugu films Chhatrapati ( 2005 ) and Vikramarkudu ( 2006 ) , both directed by S. S. Rajamouli . While critic Sangeetha Devi Dundoo called the film a combination of Face / Off and Vikramarkudu , another critic , Karthik Pasupulate , wrote , " This movie this isn 't a rip off of Face / Off . We don 't have filmmakers who have the required creativity and technical know how to make half decent adaptation of that 1997 action thriller . The director just borrows the central idea to dish out another silly revenge drama . " 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Devi Sri Prasad composed the film 's soundtrack , which consists of six songs . Ramajogayya Sastry penned the lyrics for two songs , while Sirivennela Sitaramasastri , Chandrabose , Krishna Chaitanya and Sri Mani each wrote the lyrics for one song . Aditya Music acquired the audio rights . The soundtrack was released on 1 July 2013 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was initially slated for a 14 July 2013 release , which was Charan 's first wedding anniversary . After few delays , the film 's release date was announced as 31 July 2013 to coincide with the fourth anniversary of Ram Charan 's 2009 film Magadheera . After several delays , the film was rescheduled to open the same day as Pawan Kalyan 's Attarintiki Daredi , but was postponed again to 21 August 2013 . The Central Board of Film Certification gave the film an ' A ' certificate because of its violent action sequences . However , due to protests in <unk> over the Telangana State formation , the release of both the films were delayed . Raju scheduled the release on either Diwali or Christmas 2013 , again postponing the release from 10 October to avoid another release conflict with Attarintiki Daredi . Due to Piracy issues , Attarintiki Daredi released on 27 September 2013 which forced Yevadu to enter the theatres as a December release . 
 Dil Raju confirmed that the film 's original and Malayalam dubbed version would release simultaneously on 19 December 2013 . Regarding the film 's release , Dil Raju said " I 'm planning to release the film on Dec 19 if the Telangana bill is not passed . I haven 't decided on postponing the film , but if the bill is passed and it is likely create some agitation , then I plan to release the film during Sankranti next year in January " . The film finally released on 12 January 2014 as a Sankranthi release clashing with 1 : Nenokkadine , <unk> and <unk> at the worldwide box office . Sathyam Cinemas distributed the film in Chennai , where it released in 16 screens . A special paid premier show was held on 11 January 2014 at 9 : 00 PM and the money made from the premier show was donated to the construction of Lord Venkateswara Swamy temple in <unk> . 
 Bhadrakali Prasad acquired the film 's Tamil dubbing rights under his banner Bhadrakali films . The Tamil dubbed version was titled Magadheera after the 2009 Telugu film of the same name . The film 's dubbing activities commenced in July 2015 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The film 's posters were designed by Anil and Bhanu of AB Core Design . The first @-@ look poster was unveiled on 24 March 2013 , featuring Charan with a rugged look . The first @-@ look teaser of 36 seconds was unveiled on 27 March 2013 . The theatrical trailer was launched on 1 July 2013 , along with the film 's soundtrack , and received a positive response from the audience . The promos for the songs " Nee <unk> <unk> " , " Oye Oye " and " Pimple Dimple " were released on 1 , 3 and 21 July 2013 , respectively . The 16 second promo for the song " Freedom " was unveiled on 31 December 2013 , which received positive reviews . 
 Dil Raju started the film 's promotional activities 12 days before the film 's release , and planned an advertisement campaign on television , newspapers , magazines , and movie portals . Charan released the second trailer of 85 seconds on 3 January 2014 , at the Sandhya <unk> theatre in RTC X Roads . Hindustan Unilever became associated with the film by paying ₹ 10 million for co @-@ branding activity in terms of hoardings , television , radio , and print . MediaCorp did the marketing tie @-@ ups for the film . The film 's official app was launched on 5 January 2014 . While promoting the film , Shruti Haasan was admitted to the Apollo Hospital in Hyderabad , and underwent treatment for suspected food poisoning . The promo of the song " <unk> <unk> " was unveiled on 7 January 2014 . 
 The film 's crew visited Tirumala Temple on 17 January 2014 , and made obeisance to Venkateswara , before interacting with the audience at Group Theatres . A press meet addressing the audience was held at Vijayawada on the next day , with Vamsi , Dil Raju , Sai Kumar , Shashank , L. B. Sriram , Raja and others in attendance . The promo of the song " <unk> <unk> " was unveiled on 13 March 2014 . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 The All India Film Employees Confederation mandated that all regional film productions employ at least 70 per cent local stuntmen . When the Chennai stunt masters , FEFSI Vijayan and Stunt Silva , failed to comply with this mandate , Andhra Pradesh stuntmen obstructed the film 's production . 
 K. Nagendra Prasad , a former councillor of <unk> in Kurnool district , lodged a complaint with the police regarding a poster , alleging that it featured an image of a half @-@ nude Amy Jackson . Suits were filed , naming Ram Charan , Amy Jackson , Dil Raju , the film 's presenter Anitha , co @-@ producer Sirish , the photographer , and the owner of the Raghavendra theatre which screened the film , citing section 292 of the IPC , as well as section 3 of the Indecent Representation of Women ( Prohibition ) Act of 1986 . Vamsi defended that Jackson 's still used in the poster was from a song sequence which had no obscenity in it and called the charges baseless . Justice K. G. Shankar of the High Court stayed the criminal cases on 28 July 2014 . 
 Just before the release of Race Gurram ( 2014 ) , stills of Shruti Haasan from the song Pimple Dimple , taken from obscene angles , were leaked on the internet . Shruti received huge criticism for the photos , while some called it a cheap publicity stunt . Regarding them , she said that those stills were neither pre @-@ approved by the production house or her and were shot during a song shoot and called the leakage a breach of trust . She filed a FIR in Hyderabad . CID began investigation in May 2014 . They questioned administrators of the websites which uploaded the photos , and the photographers who reportedly supplied the photos to them . However , it was uncertain whether uploading the photographs , since they were taken in a public place , could be termed as illegal , and sought a legal opinion on how to go about the investigation . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film 's television rights were acquired by MAA TV for an undisclosed price . The film registered a TRP rating of 10 @.@ 14 during its television premiere . The television rights of the dubbed Malayalam version , <unk> My Brother , were sold to <unk> Manorama for ₹ 6 @.@ 5 million , which was the highest price ever paid for a Telugu film dubbed in Malayalam . The Indian DVD and Blu @-@ ray were marketed by Aditya Videos , and were released in June 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 According to International Business Times India , the film received " decent feedback " from critics . 
 Y. Sunita Chowdary of The Hindu felt that the film was made only for the mass audience . She criticised the film 's revenge sequences , calling them " non @-@ stop and prolonged " but praised Devi Sri Prasad 's music and C. Ram Prasad 's cinematography . Sridhar Vivan of Bangalore Mirror gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and wrote , " For those watching Yevadu , the first half ends quite shockingly as the director tries to wrap up the movie in the first leg itself . It is a treat for Cherry 's fans and for others , it 's strictly average stuff " . He felt that the violence , lack of comedy and a predictable turn of events affected the film 's narration . 
 IndiaGlitz rated the film 3 out of 5 and wrote , " Yevadu has not one but two revenge stories . The first revenge story has not much going for it — perhaps the director deemed it fit not to take it seriously . Followed by this no @-@ brainer , there comes the film 's actual story , giving us respite and much @-@ needed entertainment in good measure " . Sify also rated the film 3 out of 5 and wrote , " Yevadu provides novelty in the beginning episodes promising a different commercial film but ends up as a regular revenge drama . Has many cliched moments but it is also a film that works to some extent . A masala fare " . 
 Karthik Pasupulate of The Times of India was yet another to rate the film 3 out of 5 and he panned the film , criticising its blatant similarities to Face / Off . He added that the action choreography was " undecipherable " and called Sai Kumar 's character as " one of the most over the top villain characters ever " adding that he would certainly " break the outer limit of human hearing threshold " . Shekhar of Oneindia Entertainment rated the film 3 out of 5 as well , stating , " Yevadu is a good action entertainer with all commercial ingredients . Ram Charan Teja is the showman in the film . If you are looking for entertainment without any message , it is good treat for you this <unk> " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 The film became the biggest opener for Ram Charan by collecting ₹ 86 @.@ 5 million on its first day , making the film with the fourth highest opening day grosses of all time , surpassing 1 : Nenokkadine . While the film 's trade witnessed a drop on its second day , earning ₹ 40 million , it improved on its third day , earning ₹ 45 million , bringing its three @-@ day total to ₹ 173 @.@ 8 million , overtaking the totals of 1 : Nenokkadine and Ramayya Vasthavayya ( 2013 ) . The film collected a distributor share of ₹ 200 million in four days at AP Box office . The film collected ₹ 278 @.@ 5 million in six days , surpassing the first week share of Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu , and was expected to surpass its first week worldwide share of ₹ 335 million . The film also established a first week record in Nellore , and the east and west areas of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka , by collecting ₹ 16 @.@ 3 million , ₹ 26 @.@ 7 million , ₹ 22 @.@ 2 million and ₹ 40 @.@ 6 million , respectively . However , it missed a first week record in Ceded and Vishakhapatnam by a small margin . It also took the second spot in the list of the top 10 films with highest first week shares from AP . 
 The film collected ₹ 337 @.@ 5 million in 9 days , and more than ₹ 60 million from other areas , including Karnataka , the rest of India , and overseas territories , enabling it to cross the ₹ 400 million mark at the worldwide Box office , becoming Ram Charan 's fourth film to cross that mark . The film grossed ₹ 350 @.@ 5 million in 11 days . The film collected ₹ 363 @.@ 2 million by the end of its second week at the AP Box office and ₹ 440 million worldwide . The film collected ₹ 376 million in 16 days at AP Box office , and was expected to reach the ₹ 500 million mark worldwide . The film completed a 25 @-@ day run in early February 2014 , collecting more than ₹ 380 million at the AP Box office . The film collected ₹ 393 @.@ 4 million at the AP Box office and ₹ 471 million worldwide during its lifetime , and was declared as one of the Ram Charan 's biggest hits . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 According to Taran Adarsh , the film collected ₹ 14 @.@ 6 million in its opening weekend in the United States . In its first five days in the US , the film collected ₹ 22 million . By the end of its second week , the film 's performance was disappointing ; and it only collected a total of $ 330 @,@ 000 as of 20 January 2014 , while 1 : Nenokkadine collected $ 1 million during that same span of time . Overseas , the film grossed a total of ₹ 17 million during its lifetime . 
 = New Boss = 
 " New Boss " is the twentieth episode of the fifth season of the television series The Office , and the 92nd overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 19 , 2009 . In the episode , Michael Scott is disturbed by the arrival of his new no @-@ nonsense superior Charles Miner , played by The Wire star Idris Elba , making his first of six slated guest appearances with The Office . Meanwhile , Jim struggles to make a good impression on Charles , and Angela and Kelly both develop crushes on their new boss . 
 The episode was written by Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky , and directed by Paul Feig . It received generally positive reviews from television critics , particularly for the twist of Michael 's resignation , which multiple reviewers said added a fresh new change to the series . According to Nielsen ratings , " New Boss " was watched by 7 @.@ 95 million overall viewers in its original airing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael ( Steve Carell ) wants to throw a party to celebrate his fifteenth anniversary working at Dunder Mifflin . He becomes unnerved when Charles Miner ( Idris Elba ) , the new company vice president , exhibits a no @-@ nonsense attitude towards him , making Michael not feel like his own boss . Charles seems to establish a good relationship with the rest of the staff ; he buys everyone lunch and reveals the truth about their 401 ( k ) plans and the possibility of layoffs , which Michael withheld so as not to worry the staff . Taking advice from Chief Financial Officer David Wallace ( Andrew Buckley ) , Michael tries to become better acquainted with Charles , but is unsuccessful . Michael attempts to contact Wallace on the phone , one attempt leading to getting transferred to Charles . When Charles catches the Party Planning Committee planning Michael 's party during office hours , he dissolves the committee and cancels Michael 's party . Michael decides to drive to New York to talk to Wallace . 
 Meanwhile , Jim ( John Krasinski ) arrives at work wearing a tuxedo in response to a memo written by Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) , about " professionalism in the workplace " . This leads to an awkward first encounter with Charles as Jim has to explain why he wore a tuxedo . This does not amuse Charles , who seems to lack a sense of humor . Jim 's activity throughout the day is scrutinized by Charles , more so when Charles notes Jim 's idea of a " two @-@ way petting zoo " for Michael 's party . When Jim tries to smooth things over with Charles , Charles condescends to Jim , questioning the necessity of Jim 's position as Assistant Regional Manager , referring to it as made @-@ up . When Charles leaves , Jim tries to say goodbye , with no response . Jim jokes that his career could be over . 
 Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) and Kelly ( Mindy Kaling ) develop crushes on Charles . They flirt with him , leaving him uncomfortable . At the end of the day Kelly puts on more makeup to tempt Charles into asking her out , but he has already left . Kelly runs out to the parking lot where she finds Angela holding Charles 's scarf and starts chasing her . Angela mentions that Charles deserves better than Kelly . 
 In New York , Michael manages to talk to Wallace , who has seemingly been avoiding him , and complains that it is unfair that he has to drive to New York in order to talk to him instead of on the phone , and that he deserves more respect after being at Dunder Mifflin for fifteen years . David agrees to fund an anniversary party for him and attend , but Michael abruptly announces his resignation from the company and walks out . 
 = = Production = = 
 " New Boss " was written by Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky and directed by Paul Feig . Executive story editor Charlie Grandy conceived the idea of Michael leaving Dunder Mifflin . " New Boss " was the first of six episodes Idris Elba was set to guest star in as Charles , Michael 's new Dunder Mifflin superior . It was his first role in a comedy and his first television appearance since leaving his regular role on HBO 's The Wire , where he played the character Stringer Bell . Elba , a fan of The Office , said , " The creators of the show called me , said they wanted to put me in as this new character , that I ’ d be perfect for it , and I was honored , so I said yeah . [ ... ] I ’ m still playing the straight guy , but he ’ s kind of got a bit of a quirk to him . " The writing staff for The Office are fans of The Wire , and have referred to the show in previous episodes . Of the six episodes Elba appeared in , he said " New Boss " was the only one he watched immediately after they aired because , " I 'm hypercritical about my work , so I try not to torture myself . " Elba is the second actor from The Wire to appear on The Office , after actress Amy Ryan , who played Michael 's love interest Holly Flax . Paul Lieberstein , the Office producer who also plays Toby , said Elba 's work on The Wire made him " a really interesting and great foil for Michael " . John Krasinski said Elba was initially an intimidating presence on the set , due to the ruthless character he plays on The Wire . However , Krasinski said Elba proved to be " incredibly nice and incredibly funny " . 
 The official The Office website included three cut scenes from " New Boss " within a week of the episode 's original release . One clip includes Andy , Creed , Oscar and Meredith gossiping about Charles ; Andy says , " I 'm telling you , when corporate sends somebody it is big trouble , or really good news , and then again sometimes it just means business as usual . " Another clip features Jim expressing his worries to Pam about Charles 's apparent distaste for him , as Pam playfully makes fun of Jim . The video ends with Pam asking Jim to leave her workspace because , " I don 't want him to keep seeing us together . " 
 In what some reporters described as a continuity error , Charles Miner refers to Jim 's second @-@ in @-@ command position as " made up " , but the position is real and Jim was officially hired for it in the third season episode " Branch Closing " . When asked by a fan about the apparent inconsistency , The Office writer Aaron Shure said he believed it was because " Charles is clearly not great at reading people and he 's headstrong " , and the fact that Jim does not normally care about titles , so he was not used to having to defend himself in such a way . However , Shure admitted he was " ( trying ) to wiggle out of this one " with his answer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on March 19 , 2009 , " New Boss " was watched by 7 @.@ 95 million overall viewers and received a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 9 among adults aged between 18 and 49 , and 4 @.@ 4 among ages 18 to 34 . The episode received generally positive reviews . Marc Hirsh of National Public Radio said the addition of the no @-@ nonsense Charles Miner character infused a sense of reality into The Office , which he said was growing increasingly wacky and out of control : " [ The episode ] may , in fact , have been one of the most important episodes of the entire series , acting as a corrective to the show 's increasing flirtations with ridiculousness . The characters of The Office have lived in a bubble for long enough . " Travis Fickett of IGN said " New Boss " brought a badly needed change to the series , which he said had been in a " stagnant state " over the last several episodes . Fickett said Steve Carell gave " a tour de force " as Michael saw his power slip away , and he called the final scene when Michael quit as one of the show 's biggest moments . He said , " Watching Miner work like a monkey wrench thrown into the works is the most fun I 've had watching this show in a long time . " Shahzad Abbas of TV Guide said , " Overall , this was a terrific episode , tightly structured , some nice laugh @-@ out loud moments , and a genuine shocker at the end that was completely consistent with Michael 's personality . " 
 Alan Sepinwall , television critic for The Star @-@ Ledger , said the episode was satisfying , although he felt it was short on laughs , except for Jim 's antics with the tuxedo and the episode 's documentary @-@ style interviews . Sepinwall particularly praised the twist of Michael quitting and said he looked forward to seeing where the subplot went . Jeff Labrecque said " watching Jim flail for approval ( was ) one of the episode 's most awkward delights " , but he said the episode was really about " the type of man Michael Scott really is " . Labrecque also said he looked forward to seeing how Michael regained his job , and raised the suggestion that the reason Michael clashed so much with Charles was because he was intimidated by the man 's race . Brian Howard of The Journal News said , " For 22 minutes of not much fun and only some funny , ' New Boss ' was a pretty good episode . " He particularly liked the ending , which he said he did not see coming and served as a kind of redemption for Michael ; Howard also liked Pam 's documentary interviews and Jim 's failed efforts to make a good impression to Charles . Several reviewers particularly praised the line about the " two @-@ way petting zoo " , a zoo in which people pet the animals and the animals pet back . 
 Joshua Alston of Newsweek criticized the episode and the introduction of the Charles character . Although Alston said Elba 's acting was fine , he said the character " sucked the funny out of every scene he was in " and created an awkwardness inappropriate for the show . During the week following the episode 's original broadcast , many fans theorized on the Internet that Michael said " I acquit " rather than " I quit " , and that Michael 's supposed resignation was something of a prank . Jenna Fischer , who plays Pam on The Office , addressed this issue on her MySpace blog , saying , " He said ' I quit ' . And he meant it . You will see how it all plays out this week on the show . " 
 The introduction of Charles Miner ranked number 3 in phillyBurbs.com 's top ten moments from the fifth season of The Office . 
 = SMS Schwalbe = 
 SMS Schwalbe ( " His Majesty 's Ship Schwalbe — Swallow " ) was an unprotected cruiser built for the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) , the lead ship of the Schwalbe class . She had one sister ship , Sperber . Schwalbe was built at the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Dockyard ) in Wilhelmshaven ; her keel was laid down in April 1886 and her completed hull was launched in August 1887 . She was commissioned for service in May 1888 . Designed for colonial service , Schwalbe was armed with a main battery of eight 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and had a cruising radius of over 3 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) ; she also had an auxiliary sailing rig to supplement her steam engines . 
 Schwalbe spent the majority of her career overseas . She served in German East Africa from 1889 to 1893 , and during this period she assisted in the suppression of the Abushiri Revolt . In 1893 , she returned to Germany for a major overhaul . She was decommissioned until 1898 , when she returned to service for another tour abroad . She initially returned to German East Africa , where she patrolled South African waters to protect German shipping during the Second Boer War . The outbreak of the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900 prompted the Kaiserliche Marine to send Schwalbe to join the European forces battling the Boxers . Schwalbe spent 1901 and 1902 in Chinese waters , blockading the mouth of the Yangtze and suppressing local unrest . The ship returned to Germany in 1903 for another major overhaul and another stint in reserve . She ended her career as a barracks ship during World War I , and as a target ship in 1918 . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1922 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Schwalbe was 66 @.@ 9 meters ( 219 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 9 @.@ 36 m ( 30 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 40 m ( 14 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 359 t ( 1 @,@ 338 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder double @-@ expansion steam engines powered by four coal @-@ fired cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . These provided a top speed of 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ; 15 @.@ 5 mph ) and a range of approximately 3 @,@ 290 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 090 km ; 3 @,@ 790 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . To supplement the steam engines , she was fitted with a barquentine rig . Schwalbe had a crew of 9 officers and 108 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with eight 10 @.@ 5 cm K L / 35 guns in single pedestal mounts , supplied with 765 rounds of ammunition in total . They had a range of 8 @,@ 200 m ( 26 @,@ 900 ft ) . Four guns were mounted on each broadside . The gun armament was rounded out by five 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) revolver cannon . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Schwalbe was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Dockyard ) in Wilhelmshaven in April 1886 . Her completed hull was launched on 16 August 1887 ; then @-@ Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Alexander von Monts gave the launching speech . She was commissioned for sea trials on 8 May 1888 , and they lasted until 8 August . Schwalbe was formally placed into service on 12 November and assigned to the East Africa Station in German East Africa . The assignment came following requests for reinforcement from Konteradmiral Karl August Deinhard , the local commander of naval forces in the region , to help suppress the Abushiri Revolt . She departed Germany eight days later and arrived in Zanzibar on 31 December , and was joined by the aviso Pfeil . The two ships reinforced the old sail corvettes Leipzig and Sophie . 
 = = = First deployment to East Africa = = = 
 On 3 January 1889 , Schwalbe bombarded rebel positions at Bagamoyo before taking Deinhard aboard to Dar es Salaam . The next day , she ran aground on the reef surrounding <unk> <unk> Island . The ship remained stranded for two days before Leipzig and the British steamer SS Woodcock arrived to pull her free . She thereafter took her place in a blockade line to prevent contraband from reaching the rebels ; Schwalbe patrolled the line from <unk> to Ras <unk> . On 1 March , she was moved to the area between Kilwa Kisiwani and Mafia Island . Schwalbe , Leipzig , and the corvette Carola sent a contingent of naval infantry ashore at <unk> to attack rebel forces there ; the three warships also provided artillery support to the landing force . Korvettenkapitän ( KK – Corvette Captain ) Hirschberg , Schwalbe 's captain , commanded the operation . Schwalbe returned to Bagamoyo on 8 May to launch another attack ; further engagements took place at <unk> on 6 June and at Pangani on 8 July . Schwalbe and her crew were given a respite from the conflict from 20 July to 17 August for a period of rest and refit at Port Louis in Mauritius . 
 On 29 August , Schwalbe returned to the blockade line off German East Africa . During this period , she frequently carried Deinhard on special trips . Between 7 and 10 October , she carried the station commander to survey the colony 's northern border with British Kenya in company with the British gunboat HMS Mariner . Schwalbe continued to operate against insurgent forces , particularly to support Reichskommissar ( Imperial Commissioner ) Hermann Wissmann 's forces . At the end of October , Schwalbe was joined by her sister ship Sperber . In early December , Schwalbe and Sperber were present at ceremonial reception of the Emin Pasha Relief Expedition at Bagamoyo . Both ships were also involved with settling the border of Wituland on 27 – 29 December . In mid @-@ January 1890 , Pfeil , Leipzig , and Sophie left East Africa , leaving Schwalbe , Sperber , and Carola on the station . Schwalbe went to Cape Town in South Africa for an overhaul that lasted from 3 March until mid @-@ April . 
 Following her return from Cape Town , Schwalbe returned to supporting operations to pacify the coastal area in southern German East Africa carried out by Wissmann . During this period , several artillery pieces were captured , one of which was taken aboard Schwalbe before eventually being given to the Training Inspection for the colonial troops . By mid @-@ May , the uprising had finally been suppressed . Schwalbe thereafter conducted the normal peacetime routine of cruising the coast to show the German flag . Hirschberg contracted malaria and became severely ill , prompting his return to Germany on 24 June to recover ; KK Rüdiger arrived on 13 July to take over command of the ship . On 9 October , Rüdiger presided over a ceremony to dedicate a memorial in Tanga to the naval personnel who had been killed in the Abushiri revolt . Meanwhile , on 1 July , Wituland had been ceded to Britain as part of the Heligoland – Zanzibar Treaty ; this development upset the Sultan of Wituland , who ordered the killing of several Europeans in the colony , mostly Germans . The British launched a punitive expedition , and Schwalbe remained in the area as an observer until the end of October . 
 In June 1891 , Schwalbe went to Mahé in the Seychelles to rest her crew . Rüdiger was promoted to the position of Deputy Governor of the colony in October , and KK Oelrichs replaced him aboard the ship . Schwalbe then departed to visit Bombay , returning to German East Africa on 27 January 1892 . Unrest in Moshi required Schwalbe 's presence to provide support for the <unk> . She was anchored off Tanga by June , and in October , the death of Ali bin Said , the Sultan of Zanzibar , caused a succession crisis that forced Schwalbe and other vessels to steam to the island to help mediate the disputes . By January 1893 , Schwalbe was free to return to Bombay for repairs . In May , Schwalbe received the order to return to Germany . She arrived in Kiel on 6 August , and was decommissioned on 25 August . The Kaiserliche Werft in Kiel took the ship into drydock for an extensive overhaul and modernization . She remained out of service after the repair work was completed , until 1 April 1898 , when she was recommissioned for another tour in German East Africa , to replace the cruiser Seeadler . 
 = = = Second deployment overseas = = = 
 On 20 April , Schwalbe left Germany and arrived off Zanzibar a month and a half later , on 7 June . She went to Cape Town for periodic maintenance from 10 October to mid @-@ November . In January 1899 , she towed the disabled German East @-@ Africa Line steamer SS <unk> to Dar es Salaam . For this , the Line donated a sum to the Navy , which the Reichsmarineamt ( Imperial Navy Office ) used to improve the sailors ' barracks . In October , the Second Boer War broke out between British South Africa and the Boer Orange Free State and the Transvaal . Schwalbe and the cruiser Condor were sent to South Africa to protect German shipping , since the British had begun aggressively searching foreign freighters to prevent contraband from reaching the Boers . Despite the presence of the two cruisers , several German ships , including the Imperial post steamers SS Bundesrat and SS General , the freighter SS Hans Wagner , and the barque Marie were seized by the Royal Navy . This caused a major diplomatic incident and led to the passage of the Second Naval Law in Germany . During her patrol of South African waters , she stopped in Durban from 19 to 21 January 1900 , Port Elizabeth , East London , Cape Town , and Delagoa Bay . Tensions eased as the Boers began to suffer several defeats in early 1900 , and on 7 May , Schwalbe was back in Dar es Salaam . From here , she was ordered to leave for East Asian waters to reinforce the German East Asia Squadron and assist with suppressing the Boxer Rebellion in China . 
 She arrived in Chinese waters in late September , and was assigned to the blockade of the mouth of the Yangtze . She spent the period from 14 February to 3 March 1901 in the German concession at Tsingtao , after which she returned to the Yangtze . The blockade of the river ended in June , and on 10 June she returned to Tsingtao . From 4 September to 11 November , she underwent an overhaul in Shanghai . She then returned to Tsingtao and the Yangtze area , before riots in Zhejiang province forced her to steam to Ningpo to assist in suppressing the unrest on 9 April 1902 . On 16 April , she left for repairs at Shanghai . On 23 July , while Schwalbe was moored in Tsingtao , she received the order to return to Germany . On 16 August , she departed Tsingtao and arrived in Danzig on 10 December . There , she was decommissioned a second time three days later . Another lengthy overhaul followed , which lasted from 1903 to 1905 at the Kaiserliche Werft in Danzig . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Schwalbe remained in reserve following the completion of her overhaul in 1905 , until 26 October 1911 , when she was recommissioned for use as a special @-@ purpose ship . The Navy planned to convert her into a survey ship for use abroad , but in 1912 the Navy instead decided to use her to replace the old aviso Grille as a training ship . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she was converted into a barracks ship based in Kiel . She served in this capacity until 1918 , when she was used as a target ship outside Kiel . She was stricken from the naval register on 6 December 1919 and sold for scrapping on 7 August 1920 . Schwalbe was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1922 in Hamburg . 
 = Michael I Komnenos Doukas = 
 Michael I Komnenos Doukas , Latinized as Comnenus Ducas ( Greek : Μιχαήλ Κομνηνός Δούκας , <unk> Komnēnos Doukas ) , and in modern sources often recorded as Michael I Angelos , a name he never used , was the founder and first ruler of the Despotate of Epirus from ca . 1205 until his assassination in ca . 1215 . 
 Born ca . 1170 , Michael was a descendant of Alexios I Komnenos and a cousin of emperors Isaac II Angelos and Alexios III Angelos . He began his public career in 1190 , as a hostage to the Third Crusade , and went on to serve as governor of the province of Mylasa and Melanoudion in the 1190s and again in ca . 1200 / 1 . During the latter tenure he rebelled against Alexios III but was defeated and forced to flee to the Seljuk Turks . In the aftermath of the sack of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204 , he attached himself to Boniface of Montferrat . Soon , however , he abandoned the Crusader leader and went to Epirus , where he established himself as ruler , apparently through marriage with the daughter or widow of a local magnate . 
 Michael 's domain in Epirus became a refuge and centre of resistance of the Greeks against the Latin Crusaders . At about the same time , according to some modern scholars , he may have led the abortive Greek resistance to the Crusaders in the Peloponnese , which was crushed at the Battle of the Olive Grove of Kountouras ; according to other views , he may have led a campaign there between 1207 and 1209 . In order to avoid invasion and buy time to consolidate his position in Epirus , Michael soon entered into negotiations with Pope Innocent III , and concluded treaties with the Latin Empire and the Republic of Venice . In the meantime , his rule received legitimacy when he ransomed the deposed Alexios III from captivity . According to later chroniclers , Alexios III conferred the hereditary rule of Epirus to Michael and his descendants . 
 By 1210 , Michael was secure enough to launch an attack against the Latin Kingdom of Thessalonica , in conjunction with the Bulgarians . <unk> by the intervention of the Latin Emperor Henry of Flanders , Michael quickly switched sides and joined the Latins to prevent the city from falling into Bulgarian hands . In 1212 , he conquered most of Thessaly from the Lombard lords of Thessalonica . At about the same time , his troops briefly took over the Lordship of Salona . He then went on to recover Dyrrhachium and the island of Corfu from the Venetians in 1213 – 14 , but was thwarted in his attempt to push further north into Zeta . He was assassinated soon after in his sleep , and was succeeded by his half @-@ brother Theodore Komnenos Doukas . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Michael was the illegitimate son of the sebastokrator John Doukas . His paternal grandparents were Constantine Angelos and Theodora , a daughter of Emperor Alexios I Komnenos ( reigned 1081 – 1118 ) . Michael 's uncle , Andronikos , was the father of the future emperors Isaac II Angelos ( r . 1185 – 95 and 1203 – 04 ) and Alexios III Angelos ( r . 1195 – 1203 ) , who were thus Michael 's first cousins . Despite this kinship , he never used the surname " Angelos " , which has been applied by some modern scholars to Michael and his dynasty . The few documents surviving from his own hand and a couple of lead seals show his name as " Michael Doukas " or " Michael Komnenos Doukas " ( Μιχαήλ Κομνηνός ὁ Δούκας ) , evidently in an effort to emphasize his relation to the revered Doukas and Komnenos dynasties , rather than the disastrous reign of the Angeloi . The only medieval sources to use the surname " Angelos " to refer to Michael were later pro @-@ Palaiologos historians hostile to him and the Epirote state 's rival claims to the Byzantine inheritance . 
 It is unknown when Michael was born ; the only relevant information is the statement of Niketas Choniates that he was a " young man " in 1201 . The Greek scholar Konstantinos Varzos places his birth approximately in 1170 . Michael < is first mentioned on 14 February 1190 , when he , along with other imperial relatives , served as a hostage to Frederick I Barbarossa ( r . 1152 – 90 ) during the passage of the Third Crusade through Byzantine territory . He then went on to serve as governor ( doux and <unk> ) of the theme of Mylasa and Melanoudion in Asia Minor during the last years of Isaac II 's first reign , with the rank of pansebastos sebastos . Alexios III re @-@ appointed him to the same province , probably in 1200 . Demetrios <unk> , in his study on the Doukas family , reports that he was reappointed to the post by Alexios IV ( r . 1203 – 04 ) , but as Varzos remarks , this is evidently an error by <unk> . In early 1201 , for unknown reasons , Michael rose in revolt against the emperor . Alexios III campaigned against him in the summer 1201 and defeated him , forcing Michael to seek refuge at the court of the Seljuk Turk Sultan of Rûm , <unk> II ( r . 1196 – 1204 ) . In his service he led Turkish raids into Byzantine territory around the Maeander River valley . 
 According to Geoffrey of Villehardouin , a participant in the Fourth Crusade and author of De la <unk> de Constantinople , at the time of the fall of Constantinople to the forces of the Fourth Crusade , Michael was present in the city , having possibly returned from exile in the period after the deposition of Alexios III and the restoration of Isaac II and his son Alexios IV in 1203 – 04 . Michael then entered into the service of Boniface of Montferrat , who received the Kingdom of Thessalonica and overlordship over Greece in the division of the spoils among the Crusaders , and followed Boniface west as the latter went to take up his kingdom in September 1204 . Villehardouin reports that Boniface trusted Michael , but soon he abandoned him and went to Epirus , where he installed himself as the leader of the local Greeks against the Latin Crusaders . 
 The process of Michael 's establishment in Epirus is obscure . The hagiography of St. Theodora of Arta , written in the late 13th century , maintains that Alexios III had appointed Michael as governor in the Peloponnese and a certain Senachereim , who was Michael 's relative by marriage ( they both had married first cousins from the Melissenos family ) , as governor of the Theme of Nicopolis in Epirus . When the local inhabitants rose in revolt against him , Senachereim called upon Michael for aid . Michael rushed to Nicopolis , but not before the locals had killed Senachereim . After that , Michael , himself widowed , took Senachereim 's widow as his wife and succeeded him as governor . Although generally regarded as inaccurate due to the many errors it contains , this part of the hagiography is partially corroborated by Villehardouin 's account that he married the daughter of a local magnate . It is certain that Michael was never appointed governor of the Peloponnese , but the hagiography 's reference to the peninsula has led to suggestions by modern scholars that he is to be identified with the Michael who led the Peloponnesian Greeks in the Battle of the Olive Grove of Kountouras against the Crusaders . This commonly held identification has been questioned by more recent research by the historian Raymond @-@ Joseph Loenertz , who suggests that Michael leaving Epirus , which still was not securely under his control , to go on campaign in the Peloponnese would have been extremely unlikely as it would leave Epirus open to attack by Boniface . Loenertz does however consider that Michael may indeed have led another expedition into the Peloponnese a few years later , in 1207 – 09 ( see below ) . 
 = = Ruler of Epirus = = 
 From his base at Arta , Michael proceeded to expand his control over most of the region of Epirus and modern Albania , quickly establishing an independent domain encompassing the lands between Dyrrhachium in the north and Naupactus in the south , bordering the Latin Kingdom of Thessalonica in the east , the possessions of the Republic of Venice to the west , and the Bulgarians and Serbs to the north . The state Michael established is commonly known in historiography as the Despotate of Epirus , and it was long thought that Michael was the first Epirote ruler to claim the title of despotes , it being surmised that he was granted the title by the deposed emperor Alexios III after his ransoming ( see below ) . Neither Michael nor his half @-@ brother and successor , Theodore Komnenos Doukas , however , bore the title . It was Michael 's bastard son , Michael II Komnenos Doukas , who became the first ruler of Epirus to be titled a despotes in the 1230s , while the designation of the Epirote state as a " despotate " first appears in Western , rather than Byzantine , sources in the 14th century . 
 = = = Rapprochement with the Latin powers = = = 
 Along with the other major Greek successor state , the Empire of Nicaea in western Asia Minor , Epirus became the main Greek centre resisting Latin rule . Michael 's chief preoccupation therefore was the threat posed by the Latin Crusader states and the Republic of Venice . In the treaty of partition of the Byzantine Empire among the Crusaders , Epirus had been allotted to Venice , but although it had occupied Dyrrhachium in 1205 and the island of Corfu in 1207 , the maritime @-@ minded Republic had shown little interest in the rest of the Epirote mainland . To insure himself against a Latin attack , Michael began negotiations with Pope Innocent III , hinting at a possible union of the Orthodox Church of his domains with the Roman Catholic Church . The relationship was not untroubled – in a letter of 17 August 1209 , the Pope asked of " Michael Komnenos of Romania " that , if he were truly the Pope 's servant , as he claimed in his letters , he should allow the Latin Archbishop of Dyrrhachium access to the estates owned by the archbishopric in Michael 's domains — but it did serve for the moment to earn Michael the Pope 's goodwill , as well as precious time . According to Loenertz , it also appears that at some point Michael had paid homage to the Kingdom of Thessalonica as its vassal . 
 Despite these diplomatic manoeuvrings , according to a series of letters of Innocent III dated to autumn 1210 , Michael engaged in combat with the Prince of Achaea Geoffrey I of Villehardouin ( r . 1209 – 1229 ) and his barons ; the letters do not give any further details . Modern researchers have linked this reference either with his supposed leadership in the battle of Kountouras , or , more plausibly , with an abortive campaign in the Peloponnese sometime in 1207 – 09 in order to aid the beleaguered ruler of Argos and Corinth , Leo Sgouros , who was being besieged by the Crusaders in his citadel on the Acrocorinth . Traditionally , several scholars , such as Karl Hopf and Antoine Bon , have furthermore identified a certain Theodore , who appears as " lord of Argos " and Sgouros ' successor in leading the resistance against the Crusaders , with Michael 's half @-@ brother Theodore Komnenos Doukas . Loenertz points out , however , that not only is there no evidence for such an assumption , but that Theodore Komnenos Doukas is known to have been in the service of the Nicaean emperor , Theodore I Laskaris ( r . 1205 – 1222 ) , at the time . 
 In summer 1209 , after the Latin Emperor Henry of Flanders ( r . 1205 – 16 ) quelled a revolt of the Lombard barons of Thessalonica and brought the Kingdom of Thessalonica under his effective control , Michael sent envoys to propose an alliance . Henry distrusted Michael 's sincerity , but sent an embassy to Epirus with his terms , which amounted to Michael declaring himself a vassal of the Latin Empire . Michael was able to sidestep an outright declaration of submission by offering the hand of his eldest daughter to the Emperor 's brother , Eustace , and a third of his lands as her dowry . Henry accepted , and the peace agreement was sealed with the marriage of Eustace and Michael 's daughter . Finally , in early 1210 , Michael 's envoys , the Bishop of <unk> Theodore and Symeon <unk> , met with the Venetian duke of Dyrrhachium , Marino <unk> , and negotiated a treaty , confirmed by oath on 20 June . Thereby Michael accepted to become a vassal of Venice , holding his lands in fief from Venice as confirmed in a charter issued by Doge Pietro <unk> ( r . 1205 – 29 ) . Michael granted the Venetians extensive trading privileges and tax exemptions , just as they had enjoyed under the <unk> of Emperor Manuel I Komnenos ( r . 1143 – 80 ) , promised to expedite the grain exports to Venice , and to assist in any shipwreck of a Venetian vessel off the Epirote coast . In addition , as a sign of his vassalage he would pay to the Venetian duke of Dyrrhachium an annual tribute of 42 <unk> of gold hyperpyra in two instalments , and send annually a rich brocade for the altar of St. Mark 's Basilica and one for the Doge . 
 At about the same time , Michael 's rule received a boost in legitimacy through his ransoming of emperor Alexios III . After his deposition by the Crusaders in July 1203 , Alexios with his wife Euphrosyne Doukaina <unk> had been roaming Greece seeking protection . A marriage alliance with Leo Sgouros failed due to the latter 's hasty retreat before the advance of Boniface of Montferrat . Left stranded in Thessaly , Alexios was captured by Boniface . The former emperor was initially held in comfortable captivity , but at some point he fell foul of Boniface ; sources differ on whether he tried to flee to Michael 's domains and was captured by Boniface 's knights en route or whether Boniface simply came to distrust him as a potential rival focal point for the loyalties of the Greek population . He and his wife were then imprisoned , either in Thessalonica or , according to other sources , in Montferrat . Learning of their fate , Michael offered to ransom the former imperial couple and eventually secured their release , welcoming them at <unk> , the port of Arta , where they arrived by ship . Michael treated the couple with every courtesy , but Alexios did not remain long in Arta . The deposed emperor was eager to regain his throne by taking over the Empire of Nicaea with the aid of the Seljuk Sultan Kaykhusraw I. Leaving his wife behind , and accompanied by Michael 's half @-@ brother Constantine Komnenos Doukas , Alexios took sail for Asia Minor . His attempt ended in complete failure in the Battle of Antioch on the Maeander in 1211 , where Theodore I Laskaris killed Kaykhusraw and took Alexios prisoner . The hagiography of St. Theodora of Arta claims that on his departure , Alexios granted Michael and his descendants hereditary possession of his domain , while the 14th @-@ century Aragonese version of the Chronicle of the Morea claims that Alexios left Michael as his lieutenant in the west . From these references some earlier scholars erroneously inferred that Michael received the title of despotes from Alexios . Lucien Stiernon , followed by Varzos , places the ransoming of Alexios in 1206 / 7 . Loenertz on the other hand considers it a result of Michael 's rapprochement with the Latins and places it in 1210 , when the interests of the Latin Empire in curbing the growing power of Nicaea coincided with Michael 's intention to ransom Alexios . 
 = = = Territorial expansion = = = 
 Michael seized the opportunity of Henry 's focus on his planned campaign against Nicaea to attack Thessalonica . At the head of Latin mercenaries , he captured the constable of the Kingdom of Thessalonica and baron of Domokos , the Lombard Amé Buffa , and a hundred of his companions . He is alleged to have been excessively cruel to his prisoners , killing or whipping many of them , while Buffa , his confessor , and three other nobles were crucified . Michael 's army proceeded to capture several fortresses and kill the Latin garrisons , including priests . Enraged , Henry sped to Thessalonica 's aid , covering the distance from Constantinople in only twelve days . Michael in the meantime had allied himself with the Bulgarian ruler Strez , but they were defeated by Henry . It is possible that during this campaign , Henry was assisted by his vassals from Achaea , thereby explaining the reference in the Pope 's correspondence of Achaean barons fighting against Michael , rather than assuming an Epirote expedition to the Peloponnese . The Latin Emperor wrested lands from both allies , but was forced to cut short his campaign and return to Constantinople , which was being threatened by the Bulgarian emperor Boril . Henry left Thessalonica in the charge of his brother Eustace and of Count Berthold of Katzenelnbogen , who then defeated another invasion by Strez , supported with troops from his brother Boril . <unk> by the Bulgarian attacks on Thessalonica , Michael switched sides and joined the Latins in defeating the Bulgarians at Pelagonia . It is commonly assumed that during these conflicts , Michael terminated his vassalage to the Latin Empire ; historian Philip Van Tricht however points out that there are no sources for this , and that this vassalage may have survived until 1217 , when Michael 's brother Theodore captured Latin Emperor Peter II of Courtenay near Dyrrhachium . 
 Sometime between 1210 and 1214 , according to the Chronicle of <unk> , Michael came into conflict with the Latin Lord of Salona , Thomas I d 'Autremencourt . When d 'Autremencourt seized a few islands in the Corinthian Gulf off <unk> , the inhabitants of the latter called upon Michael for aid , and in the ensuing battle , Thomas was killed and Salona ( modern <unk> ) was occupied . Epirote rule there proved short @-@ lived , however , as d 'Autremencourt 's son Thomas II soon recovered his father 's lordship . In 1212 , his troops invaded Thessaly in force , overrunning the resistance of the local Lombard nobles . The Epirotes took Larissa , where they deposed the Latin Archbishop and restored the local see to an Orthodox metropolitan , Velestino , the fief of Berthold of Katzenelnbogen , and reached the shores of the <unk> Gulf at Demetrias . The newly gained Thessalian territories were entrusted to Michael 's son @-@ in @-@ law Constantine Maliasenos as a hereditary appanage . 
 Soon after , probably in 1213 , he took Dyrrhachium from Venice , followed in 1214 by Corfu . Very little is known about the details of these successes , as the generally hostile stance of the pro @-@ Nicaean Byzantine historians towards Michael means that his achievements were often ignored . According to local <unk> tradition , the castle of Angelokastro was built by Michael . Michael continued to push northward into Albania and Macedonia , taking Kruja and ending the independence of the principality of Arbanon and its ruler , Dimitri <unk> , but his attempt to seize Zeta was stopped by the Serbs at Skadar . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 Michael himself did not long outlive these successes : in late 1214 or in 1215 , he was assassinated in his sleep at <unk> by a servant called <unk> . According to the historian John V. A Fine , " whether he was hired to do the act , and , if so , by whom is unknown " . As his only surviving son was illegitimate and underage , Michael was succeeded by his half @-@ brother Theodore . Theodore had been in the service of Nicaea , and Michael had requested Laskaris to send him to Epirus because his own son 's position was weak . In the event , Theodore not only sidelined the young Michael II , but according to the hagiography of St. Theodora of Arta , sent him and his mother to exile in the Peloponnese for the duration of his reign . Theodore proved a powerful and warlike ruler , greatly expanding the Epirote state and capturing Thessalonica in 1224 , where he was crowned emperor . The rise of Theodore 's Empire of Thessalonica ended abruptly with his defeat and capture by the Bulgarians at the Battle of Klokotnitsa in 1230 , that allowed the exiled Michael II to return to Epirus and recover his father 's domain . 
 Michael laid the foundations of the Epirote state , and initiated a dynasty , the Komnenoi – Doukai , who would rule over Epirus until 1318 , when the Italian Orsini family took over . Members of the family also ruled over Thessaly , and for a while claimed the imperial title as rulers of Thessalonica from 1224 until its capture by the Nicaeans in 1246 . It appears that during his lifetime , Michael was a popular ruler with his subjects ; the contemporary metropolitan bishop of Naupactus , John Apokaukos , lauded Michael as a " new Noah " , at whose side the refugees of the Latin cataclysm found refuge . Apokaukos also praises him for his refoundation and refortification of the city of Ioannina , which henceforth chose the Archangel Michael as its patron saint in his honour . 
 = = Family = = 
 The exact identity of Michael 's wife or wives is unknown . According to the hagiography of St. Theodora of Arta , he married twice . His first wife was a lady of the aristocratic Melissenos family , who died at an unknown time . Her first cousin , likewise a Melissenos , married the governor of Nicopolis , Senachereim ( see above ) . After his murder by the locals , Michael avenged him , took his place and married his widow . Despite the unreliability of the hagiography , its account is partially confirmed by Villehardouin 's reference to the daughter of an Epirote magnate . Furthermore , as Michael 's second wife was a first cousin of his first , their marriage was uncanonical in the eyes of the Church and of hostile historians ; it is therefore likely that the " concubine " referenced by the latter as the mother of Michael II Komnenos Doukas was in reality Michael 's second wife . 
 Michael had five children , three by his ( first ) wife and two by his second wife or concubine : 
 An unnamed daughter , who in 1209 married Eustace , brother of the Latin Emperor Henry of Flanders . 
 Theodora Komnene Doukaina , only mentioned briefly by Demetrios Chomatianos in 1216 . 
 Constantine Komnenos Doukas , mentioned only in the Latin text of the 1210 treaty with Venice , where he is designated as his father 's successor . He must have died at a young age , before Michael 's own death . 
 Maria Komnene Doukaina , who married Constantine Maliasenos . 
 Michael II Komnenos Doukas , an illegitimate son who succeeded as ruler of Epirus in 1230 until his death ca . 1268 . He is the first Epirote ruler to have borne the title of despotes . 
 = McDonnell Douglas A @-@ 12 Avenger II = 
 The McDonnell Douglas / General Dynamics A @-@ 12 Avenger II was a proposed American attack aircraft from McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics . It was to be an all @-@ weather , carrier @-@ based stealth bomber replacement for the Grumman A @-@ 6 Intruder in the United States Navy and Marine Corps . Its Avenger II name was taken from the Grumman TBF Avenger of World War II . 
 The development of the A @-@ 12 was troubled by cost overruns and several delays , causing questions of the program 's ability to deliver upon its objectives ; these doubts led to the development program being canceled in 1991 . The manner of its cancellation was contested through litigation until a settlement was reached in January 2014 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = ATA program = = = 
 The United States Navy began the Advanced Tactical Aircraft ( ATA ) program in 1983 . The program was to develop and field a replacement for the A @-@ 6 Intruder by 1994 . Stealth technology developed for the United States Air Force would be used heavily in the program . Concept design contracts were awarded to the industry teams of McDonnell Douglas / General Dynamics , and Northrop / Grumman / Vought in November 1984 . The teams were awarded contracts for further concept development in 1986 . 
 The McDonnell Douglas / General Dynamics team was selected as the winner on 13 January 1988 ; the rival team led by Grumman surprisingly failed to submit a final bid . The McDonnell Douglas / General Dynamics team was awarded a development contract and the ATA aircraft was designated A @-@ 12 . The first flight was initially planned for December 1990 . The A @-@ 12 was named Avenger II in homage to the World War II @-@ era Navy torpedo @-@ bomber Grumman TBF Avenger . 
 The Navy initially sought to buy 620 A @-@ 12s and Marines wanted 238 . In addition , the Air Force briefly considered ordering some 400 of an A @-@ 12 derivative . The A @-@ 12 was promoted as a possible replacement for the Air Force 's General Dynamics F @-@ 111 Aardvark , and for the United Kingdom 's Panavia Tornado fighter @-@ bombers . The craft was a flying wing design in the shape of an isosceles triangle , with the cockpit situated near the apex of the triangle . The A @-@ 12 gained the nickname " Flying Dorito " . 
 The aircraft was to be powered by two General Electric <unk> @-@ <unk> turbofan engines , each producing about 13 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 58 kN ) of thrust . It was designed to carry precision guided weapons internally , up to two AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM air @-@ to @-@ air missiles , two AGM @-@ 88 HARM air @-@ to @-@ ground missiles and a complement of air @-@ to @-@ ground ordnance , including unguided or precision @-@ guided bombs , could be carried in an internal weapons bay . It has been claimed that the A @-@ 12 was to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons held in its internal weapons bay as well . The A @-@ 12 was to have a weapons load of 5 @,@ 160 pounds ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) . 
 Beginning in early 1990 McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics revealed delays and projected cost increases . Due to complications with the composite materials , aircraft weight had increased to 30 % over design specification . This was unwelcome for an airplane that needed to operate efficiently and effectively from an aircraft carrier . Technical difficulties with the complexity of the radar system to be used also caused costs to increase ; by one estimate the A @-@ 12 was to consume up to 70 % of the Navy 's budget for aircraft . After delays , its critical design review was successfully completed in October 1990 and the maiden flight was rescheduled to early 1992 . In December 1990 plans were made for 14 Navy aircraft carriers to equipped with a wing of 20 A @-@ 12s each . 
 A government report released in November 1990 documented serious problems with the A @-@ 12 development program . In December 1990 Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney told the Navy to justify the program and deliver reasons why it should not be canceled . The response given by the Navy and the contractors failed to persuade the Secretary of Defense , as he canceled the program in the following month , on 7 January 1991 , for breach of contract . 
 The government felt the contractors could not complete the program and instructed them to repay most of the $ 2 billion that had been spent on A @-@ 12 development . McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics disputed this in Federal Claims court . The reasons and causes for the cancellation have been debated and remain an issue of controversy , with suggestions of political expediency and scheming to be behind the action . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 After the cancellation of the A @-@ 12 , the Navy elected to purchase the F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet , which went on to replace the A @-@ 6 Intruder and the F @-@ 14 Tomcat . The Super Hornet uses the General Electric F414 turbofan engine , which is a modified variant of the upgraded F404 version developed for the A @-@ 12 . The full @-@ size A @-@ 12 mockup was revealed to the public at the Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base Fort Worth in June 1996 . The cancellation of the A @-@ 12 is seen as one of the major losses in the 1990s that weakened McDonnell Douglas and led to its merger with rival Boeing in 1997 . After years of being in storage at the Lockheed Martin Aeronautics ( formerly General Dynamics ) facility in Fort Worth , Texas , the mockup was transported to Veterans Memorial Air Park adjacent to Meacham Airport in north Fort Worth in June 2013 . ( The park was later renamed Fort Worth Aviation Museum . ) 
 The manner in which the program was canceled led to years of litigation between the contractors and the Department of Defense over breach of contract . On 1 June 2009 , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit ruled that the U.S. Navy was justified in canceling the contract . The ruling also required the two contractors to repay the U.S. government more than US $ 1 @.@ 35 billion , plus interest charges of US $ 1 @.@ 45 billion . Boeing , which had merged with McDonnell Douglas , and General Dynamics vowed to appeal the ruling . In September 2010 , the U.S. Supreme Court said it would hear the two companies ' arguments , that the government canceled the project improperly and that the use of a state secrets claim by the U.S. prevented them from mounting an effective defense . In May 2011 , the Supreme Court set aside the Appeals Court decision and returned the case to federal circuit court . In January 2014 , the case was settled with Boeing and General Dynamics agreeing to pay $ 200 million each to the U.S. Navy . 
 The Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II , an in @-@ development carrier @-@ capable fighter featuring stealth technology and oriented toward ground @-@ attack operations , is in effect a successor to the A @-@ 12 in both role and industrial origins . Comparisons have been drawn between the role of the future Next @-@ Generation Bomber and the A @-@ 12 ; the two aircraft both being stealthy sub @-@ sonic bombers designed to carry comparable bomb loads and fly similar ranges . 
 = = Specifications ( A @-@ 12 Avenger II ) = = 
 Data from Stealth Warplanes 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 
 Length : 37 ft 10 in ( 11 @.@ 5 m ) 
 Wingspan : Unfolded : 70 ft 3 in ( 21 @.@ 4 m ) 
 Folded : 36 ft 3 in ( 11 @.@ 0 m ) 
 Height : 11 ft 3 in ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) 
 Wing area : 1 @,@ 308 ft ² ( 122 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 39 @,@ 000 lb ( 17 @,@ 700 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 80 @,@ 000 lb ( 36 @,@ 300 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × General Electric <unk> @-@ GE @-@ <unk> non @-@ afterburning turbofans , 13 @,@ 000 lbf ( 58 kN ) each 
 Maximum fuel capacity : 21 @,@ 322 pounds ( 9 @,@ 700 kg ) ( internal ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 500 knots ( 580 mph , 930 km / h ) 
 Range : 800 nmi ( 920 mi , 1 @,@ 480 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 40 @,@ 000 ft ( 12 @,@ 200 m ) 
 Rate of climb : 5 @,@ 000 ft / min ( 25 m / s ) 
 Wing loading : 61 lb / ft ² ( 300 kg / m ² ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 325 
 Armament 
 Payload capability : 5 @,@ 160 pounds ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) in internal weapons bay including : 
 2 × AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM air @-@ to @-@ air missiles 
 2 × AGM @-@ 88 HARM air @-@ to @-@ ground missiles 
 Unguided or precision @-@ guided bombs 
 = Abir Congo Company = 
 The Abir Congo Company ( founded as the Anglo @-@ Belgian India Rubber Company and later known as the Compagnie du Congo Belge ) was a company that exploited natural rubber in the Congo Free State , the private property of King Leopold II of Belgium . The company was founded with British and Belgian capital and was based in Belgium . By 1898 there were no longer any British shareholders and the Anglo @-@ Belgian India Rubber Company changed its name to the Abir Congo Company and changed its residence for tax purposes to the Free State . The company was granted a large concession in the north of the country and the rights to tax the inhabitants . This tax was taken in the form of rubber obtained from a relatively rare rubber vine . The collection system revolved around a series of trade posts along the two main rivers in the concession . Each post was commanded by a European agent and manned with armed sentries to enforce taxation and punish any rebels . 
 Abir enjoyed a boom through the late 1890s , by selling a kilogram of rubber in Europe for up to 10 fr which had cost them just 1 @.@ 35 fr . However , this came at a cost to the human rights of those who couldn 't pay the tax with imprisonment , flogging and other corporal punishment recorded . Abir 's failure to suppress destructive harvesting methods and to maintain rubber plantations meant that the vines became increasingly scarce and by 1904 profits began to fall . During the early 1900s famine and disease spread across the concession , a natural disaster judged by some to have been exacerbated by Abir 's operations , further hindering rubber collection . The 1900s also saw widespread rebellions against Abir 's rule in the concession and attempts at mass migration to the French Congo or southwards . These events typically resulted in Abir dispatching an armed force to restore order . 
 A series of reports into the operation of the Free State were issued starting with the British Consul , Roger Casement 's Casement Report and followed by reports commissioned by the Free State and Leopold II . These detailed unlawful killings and other abuses made by Abir and Leopold II was embarrassed into instituting reforms . These began with the appointment of American Richard Mohun by Leopold II as director of Abir . However , rubber exports continued to fall and rebellions increased , resulting in the Free State assuming control of the concession in 1906 . Abir continued to receive a portion of profits from rubber exports and in 1911 was refounded as a rubber plantation harvesting company . The later history of the company is unknown but it was still active in 1926 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The Congo Free State was a corporate state in Central Africa privately owned by King Leopold II of Belgium founded and recognised by the Berlin Conference of 1885 . What would later become Abir Company territory was the land between the Lopori and Maringa river basins , tributaries of the Congo River , in the north of the state . The local populace here were yam and cassava farmers who engaged in trade with river fishermen and pygmy hunters . In 1885 a force of the Manyema people , followers of Tippu Tip , the Swahili @-@ Zanzibari slave trader , arrived at the head of the Lopori River from Stanley Falls . They took hostages from nearby villages to ransom in return for ivory . By 1892 they had enrolled local people into their army and controlled the entire eastern half of the basin . The Free State was concerned by this development and in 1889 had enacted the Monopoly Act which declared that all products in the area were to be under their jurisdiction alone . The Free State also began a campaign to drive the slavers , traders and the Manyema from the region , the first stage of which was the establishment of a supply post at Basankusu in May 1890 . The campaign would be long but eventually successful and the entire basin was under Free State control by 1898 . 
 The Free State began using its new @-@ found control of the region to levy taxes from the local population , gathered using similar hostage tactics to the Manyema . The taxes were initially collected in the form of ivory but when ivory supplies began to run low the Free State switched to natural rubber . The rubber was collected from <unk> <unk> <unk> rubber vines which were relatively scarce in the area with an average frequency of around one plant in each acre . The rubber was gathered by tapping a rubber vine and placing a pot beneath to collect the latex which could be used in the production of rubber for the European market . If the vines were a long distance from the ground the gatherer would have had to climb a tree , tap the plant and hold the collecting pot beneath the vine , possibly for an entire day . Hence rubber collection was a labour @-@ intensive process which made it unpopular with the villagers . Indeed , they preferred the Manyema to the Free State authorities as the Manyema only took low bulk , high value items such as ivory or slaves because of the long distances from their homeland whereas the state , with its steamboat transports , could afford to make the people harvest the low value high bulk rubber . By September 1892 the Free State was using its military forces to attack and occupy villages in the Lulonga and Maringa river valleys to expand its tax base . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 King Leopold decided to give concessions of his territory to private companies who would then collect the rubber tax and export it . With this in mind he approached British Colonel John Thomas North , who had made a fortune through speculating on Chilean nitrates , for capital with which to fund a concession company . North agreed and provided £ 40 @,@ 000 of the 250 @,@ 000 Belgian francs ' ( fr ) initial investment . As a result , the Anglo @-@ Belgian India Rubber Company ( informally known as Abir ) was established at Antwerp on 6 August 1892 . The company was divided into 2 @,@ 000 shares of 500 fr value each . British investors ( including North ) held 1880 shares whilst Belgians held the remaining 120 shares . In addition to the 2 @,@ 000 ordinary shares there were 2 @,@ 000 " actions " which entitled the holder to a share of the profits after a 6 % dividend was paid to the shareholders . The Congo Free State was the holder of 1 @,@ 000 of these actions . In return Abir received exclusive rights to all forest products from the Maringa @-@ Lopori basin for 30 years and all land within twenty miles of eight designated posts and had police powers within the limits of the concession . The Free State also had to supply guns , ammunition and soldiers to help establish the posts . In preparation two State employees were ordered to establish a headquarters for Abir at Basankusu but this was barely begun before the local villagers rebelled against State rule and killed both men . 
 The concession provided to Abir lay in the north of the country and was one of nine commercial concession areas established by Leopold in the Congo Free State . The concession was bounded to the north by the Congo River and the Société Anversoise concession , to the east by the Lomami River and the Lomami Company concession and to the west by the Lulonga Company concession which straddled the Lulonga River , into which the Maringa and Lopori flowed . To the south lay the Crown Domain ( Domaine de la Couronne ) , the private property of Leopold , which comprised the best land in the Free State and was the richest in rubber . 
 The Abir concession included the <unk> river , <unk> river and <unk> river which were tributaries of the two main rivers . Each concession operated independently and exploited its own area commercially . The other main rubber companies in the Congo Free State were the Société Anversoise and the Lulonga Company but Abir was the largest in the country . 
 Abir re @-@ established their headquarters at Basankusu in 1893 and its position at the confluence of the Maringa and Lopori allowed Abir to expand along the rivers and their tributaries , establishing new posts along the way . Progress was slow as the Free State 's activities had made the population in the west hostile to colonisation and the east remained in the control of the Manyema and the slavers . The company 's first post on the Lopori River had to be relocated because of threats from locals and rubber collection at <unk> began only after a series of bloody conflicts between the villagers and Abir 's men . 
 = = Post system = = 
 The post system was the cornerstone of Abir 's commercial activity . Each post was run by one or two European agents to oversee local operations . The salary for an agent was 1 @,@ 800 fr per year , sometimes increasing to 2 @,@ 100 fr in the second year , and the standard contract period was three years . Agents also received 60 fr of trade goods each month with which to buy their food . Despite the low wages the 2 % commission that each agent received on rubber production made up the majority of the agents ' pay , for example the agent at Bongandanga received 16 @,@ 800 fr in commission in 1903 . As a result , there were many applicants for each post and agents were hired with the expectation that they would increase production by 0 @.@ 5 – 3 tons per month . This was implemented by extending the post to include more villages or increasing the quotas expected from the villagers , often indirectly forcing women and children to harvest the rubber as well . If production fell below the quota agents made up the shortfall in lost profits to the company from their pay . Each post consisted of a residence for the agent , barracks for armed sentries and sheds for rubber drying and storage , all built using labour conscripted from the villagers . A typical post employed ten African workmen to sort and dry the rubber , seven servants for the agent and thirty <unk> for local river transport . These were paid around 36 @.@ 5 fr per year in goods , commonly 5 kg of salt , one blanket , five machetes and trade goods to the value of 6 @.@ 35 fr . The post system was managed by the Director of Congo Operations at the central office in Basankusu . He was assisted in his job of keeping production up and expenses down by the only Free State employee in the concession , the commander of the police . The police commander was in charge of suppressing revolts and punishing villages which dropped below the quota . He had access to a large force of men and river steamers which was stationed at Basankusu and could redeploy quickly to the site of large scale rebellions . Effective police commanders would receive bonuses paid for by Abir . 
 Each post maintained a census of all the males from the nearby villages to implement the tax which was initially set at 4 kg of dry rubber ( 8 kg of wet rubber ) per man per fortnight . Each post had a force of 65 – 100 " village sentries " , often ex @-@ slaves armed with muzzle loading rifles , which resided in the villages to enforce taxation . The sentries were kept at the expense of the villagers and often used flogging , imprisonment or execution to keep production up . Sentries who failed to enforce the quota or made mistakes could be fined up to half their salary or fired , imprisoned or flogged . In addition to the village sentries were " post sentries " who were 25 – 80 men armed with modern , breech @-@ loading Albini rifles who lived on the post and were used to punish villages and suppress rebellions . Sentries were paid similar wages to the post workmen and despite the strict working conditions it was a popular job as it offered a position of power over the other villagers . The sentries had their choice of food , women and luxury items and many left after a one @-@ year term with five or six wives which they then sold . 
 To comply with Congo law the company had to pay the villagers for bringing them rubber , these payments were often made in goods . Roger Casement , the British Consul in the Free State , recorded payments of a nine @-@ inch knife of 1 @.@ 25 fr value for a full basket of rubber , a five @-@ inch knife worth 0 @.@ 75 fr for a less full basket and beads worth 0 @.@ 25 fr for a smaller amount of rubber . Yet the main incentive for villagers to bring rubber was not the small payments but the fear of punishment . If a man did not fulfil his quota his family may have been taken hostage by Abir and released only when the quota was filled . The man himself was not imprisoned as that would prevent him from collecting rubber . Later agents would simply imprison the chief of any village which fell behind its quota , in July 1902 one post recorded that it held 44 chiefs in prison . These prisons were in a poor condition and the posts at Bongandanga and <unk> recorded death rates of three to ten prisoners per day each in 1899 . Those with records of resisting the company were deported to forced labour camps . There were at least three of these camps , one at <unk> , one on the Upper Maringa River and one on the Upper Lopori River . In addition to imprisonment corporal punishment was also used against tax resisters with floggings of up to 200 lashes with a <unk> , a hippopotamus hide whip , being reported . Some agents would tie men to platforms facing the sun or burn them with gum from the copal tree as a means of punishment . 
 = = Boom and refounding = = 
 Abir collected 70 tons of dried rubber in 1895 , rising to 410 tons in 1898 by which time it had eleven operational posts . At the same time the price of rubber also increased from 6 @.@ 30 – 6 @.@ 50 fr per kilogram in 1894 to 8 @.@ 04 – 10 @.@ 00 fr per kilogram in 1898 . Abir 's costs in 1897 amounted to 0 @.@ 25 fr per kilogram to purchase the rubber from the collectors ( in lieu of tax ) , 0 @.@ 4 fr for transportation , 0 @.@ 25 in export duty paid to the Congo Free State and 0 @.@ 45 for storage for a total cost of 1 @.@ 35 fr per kilogram . In the same year Abir could sell on the rubber in Europe for up to 10 fr per kilogram . Abir 's profits rose with the increasing quantity and price of rubber , for the first two years ( 1892 – 94 ) the company recorded a total profit of 131 @,@ 340 fr , this had increased almost <unk> by 1898 when they recorded a 2 @,@ 482 @,@ 697 fr profit just for one year . As a result , the dividend paid in 1898 was 1 @,@ 100 fr per 500 fr share . These profits were made in spite of increasing costs due the doubling of export duty in 1892 and the construction of the Leopoldville @-@ Matadi railway in 1894 which increased the cost of moving rubber to the coast to 0 @.@ 63 fr per kilo , more than the entire trip to Antwerp had taken in 1892 . 
 The Abir Company entered liquidation in 1898 as a means of tax avoidance and to escape Belgian business regulations . It was immediately refounded in the Congo Free State as the Abir Congo Company . The name was no longer an acronym of Anglo @-@ Belgian India Rubber and was instead a name in its own right . This change was because the company was no longer supported by British investment , partly because Colonel North had died and his heirs had sold their shares . The new company had a simpler shares system with just 2 @,@ 000 shares ( of 14 @,@ 300 fr value each ) divided between investors . The Free State held 1 @,@ 000 of these shares . As Abir was now tax resident in the Congo the Free State received 2 % of their profits through corporation tax , in addition to the 0 @.@ 5 fr per kilogram export tax . All initial capital investments had been <unk> by 1899 along with material expenses in Africa and property and equipment expenses in Antwerp . In 1900 Abir reached the boundaries of its concession which covered eight million hectares . The next three years were spent filling gaps between existing posts and by 1903 Abir controlled 49 posts , managed by 58 agents . 1900 was Abir 's most profitable year and the Congo Free State 's shares and taxes provided 2 @,@ 567 @,@ 880 @.@ 50 fr of revenue for the state , 10 % of that year 's total . The share dividend in 1900 was 2 @,@ 100 fr , in the early 1890s it had been around 2 fr per share . 
 = = Decline and abuse of power = = 
 The rubber vine could be destructively harvested by cutting up the vine and squeezing out the latex whilst it lay on the ground . This was quicker and easier than non @-@ destructive harvesting and was practised by villagers who wished to fill their quotas and avoid punishment , especially once supplies of the vine began to run low . In addition some vines were destroyed deliberately by villagers who believed that once the rubber was gone Abir would leave the concession . Because of this destruction all rubber vines within 10 km of <unk> were depleted within 18 months of that post opening . In an attempt to slow the destruction of vines Abir issued orders in 1892 and 1904 which prohibited destructive harvesting methods but these were largely ineffective . In 1896 the Congo Free State ordered Abir to plant 150 rubber trees or vines for each ton of rubber exported to replace destructively harvested vines . This was increased to 500 plants per ton in 1902 . By 1903 the plantation at the Bongandanga post held more than one million plants and by 1904 each Abir post employed around one hundred workers to manage its plantation . Despite this the plantation project was ultimately a failure due in part to the fact that each Abir agent remained at a post for just two years and was uninterested in working the plantation which would only benefit his successor . Congo Free State forestry officers also noted that Abir plantations were smaller than required or even existed only on paper . Abir would also plant vines which looked similar to the <unk> vine but did not produce rubber , as a consequence the Free State required them to instead plant the <unk> vine which was more easily recognisable but did not produce rubber in its first eight years . These vines may never have reached maturity as there is no evidence that these plantations ever produced rubber . In 1904 Abir began to run out of vines to tap and rubber production fell to half of that of 1903 , which was 1000 tons . By 1904 rubber vines within 50 miles of Abir posts had been depleting , leading to violent clashes between rival villages over control of the remaining plants . The entirety of the Lulonga concession , to the west of Abir , produced just 7 tons of rubber in 1905 . 
 The presence of Abir in the area exacerbated the effect of natural disasters such as famine and disease . Abir 's tax collection system forced men out from the villages to collect rubber which meant that there was no labour available to clear new fields for planting . This in turn meant that the women had to continue to plant worn @-@ out fields resulting in lower yields , a problem aggravated by Abir sentries stealing crops and farm animals . The post at <unk> experienced a famine in 1899 and in 1900 missionaries recorded a " terrible famine " across the Abir region . The modern descendants of Abir 's villagers refer to the period of company control as " <unk> " , the period of famine . Disease was also a problem with smallpox moving in from the east being reported in the Upper Lopori in 1893 and reaching Bongandanga in 1901 . A concurrent smallpox epidemic moving from the west destroyed villages along the Lulonga in 1899 , and reached Basankusu in 1902 . Sleeping sickness was also reported around the Lulonga by 1900 and spread up the Maringa and Lopori . Despite the arrival of these deadly diseases the main killers in the area were lung and intestinal diseases which killed twenty times as many people as smallpox and sleeping sickness combined . At least one missionary attributed the rise of disease with rubber collecting . 
 Abuses of power over the villagers by Abir had been reported by missionaries almost since they began operations in the Congo but the first real public disclosure came in 1901 with the publication of a report , written by an ex @-@ agent , in several Belgian newspapers . The Free State began an investigation into Abir 's abuses during which an inquiry established at Bongandanga heard evidence from missionaries in the concession . As a result , Abir took action against the missionaries , stopping the carriage of their mail on company steamers , stopping the missionaries ' boats and confiscating any mail that they carried . Abir also forbid missionaries from buying food from villagers , forcing them to buy from Abir 's own stores . In 1904 Roger Casement issued the Casement Report which condemned the Abir system ; this resulted in the Free State launching another investigation later that year . Although evidence of unlawful killings made by Abir was uncovered the investigation had no powers of arrest and could only submit a report to the Free State authorities . This lack of action resulted in deteriorating relations between Abir and the missionaries and there was at least one attempted shooting of a missionary . Evidence for Abir 's abuses also came from the governor of the French Congo , to the north @-@ west , who claimed that prior to 1903 30 @,@ 000 people had been driven from the Free State to the French Congo by Abir 's actions . 
 It is also known that Abir had been forced to put down rebellions of the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> peoples around the turn of the century and that five Abir sentries had been killed near Bongandanga in 1901 and 1902 . The <unk> and <unk> peoples were forcibly resettled closer to the post at <unk> and in 1903 Abir troops intervened to stop the emigration of the Lika people and villagers near Samba . To stop small scale emigration Abir instigated a permit system for people wishing to visit another village . At the <unk> post the Abir agent led a punitive expedition against the <unk> tribe which resulted in 400 civilian deaths with hundreds captured and put in prison , where a further 100 died . When the <unk> <unk> tribe attempted to emigrate 1 @,@ 000 were captured and sent to a forced labour camp . The <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Yan a @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ Ingoli , and <unk> people all successfully fled toward <unk> . Despite this chaos Abir managed to increase its exports for 1903 to 951 tons recording the second highest profits in its history . However , this partial recovery did not last long and soon profits were falling once more . 
 = = Attempts at reform = = 
 Leopold was embarrassed by complaints made by the British government about human rights abuses in the Congo Free State and dispatched a Commission of Inquiry to investigate the entirety of the Congo . This commission visited the Abir concession from 1 December 1904 to 5 January 1905 and , despite Abir 's attempts to keep witnesses away , heard evidence of violence committed by Abir . This included the desolation of villages , murder , rape , hostage taking and excessive flogging . Abir was the only commercial body mentioned by name in the report for brutality which said that the concession was " the black spot on the history of Central African settlement " . The commission instigated limited reforms , laying down new interpretations of existing legislation which included a limit of 40 working hours per week for collectors , the option of paying taxes in commodities other than rubber and the removal of sentries from the villages . Two months after this Leopold sent a Royal High Commissioner to Abir to check that the reforms were being carried out , he was told that Abir had no intention of instituting any reforms . The commissioner established two deputy public prosecutors in the Abir concession but one investigated only missionaries and the second brought few cases against Abir men . 
 One important result of the Congo Commission of Inquiry was that it spurred Leopold into carrying out reforms . One of the first stages of these reforms was Leopold 's appointment of Richard Dorsey Mohun , an American explorer and soldier of fortune , as director of Abir . Mohun held a keen interest in the eradication of the slave trade and had worked for the US and Belgian governments , with his duties including the suppression of cannibalism and slavery in the Free State . He was given extensive executive powers and placed in a position of " unusual opportunity for the correction of past abuses " . 
 Despite this Abir 's problems increased , the company reported an increase in rebellions against its rule and 142 of its sentries were killed or wounded during the first half of 1905 . An uprising at the post of <unk> resulted in the spearing of several sentries and the cutting off of food supplies to the Abir post . Abir 's military forces proved insufficient to restore control throughout the spring and summer of 1905 and they were forced to call in state troops . Three European officers and their Free State troops toured the area threatening villages with recriminations if rubber was not harvested , but despite this the post recorded absolutely no harvest for 1905 to 1906 . A similar event occurred at <unk> where around half of the population fled the area , those that remained being forcibly relocated closer to the Abir post . The agent at Bongandanga tried to prevent a rebellion by reducing rubber collection from once per fortnight to once every three weeks . This was only temporarily successful and an Abir outpost was later burned down . The company , unwilling to admit falls in rubber plant stocks , publicly stated that the rebellions were fomented by missionaries . 
 When Viscount <unk> visited the concession in 1905 he reported abandoned villages across the territory and that villagers had fled to the deepest parts of the forest to avoid Abir 's taxes . These villagers were living in makeshift leaf shelters and with few comforts . By March 1906 Richard Mohun , Abir 's director , admitted that the situation in the area was out of control and suggested that the Congo Free State should assume control of the concession . By September of that year Abir was unable to contain the increasing number of rebellions and , facing falling profits , was forced to completely withdraw from the area and hand control of the concession back to the Free State . At this point there were still 47 @,@ 000 rubber collectors listed on the company 's books . The other two major rubber companies in the Congo , the Société Anversoise and the Lulonga Company , also had their concessions taken back into state control in 1906 . 
 = = Free State takeover and legacy = = 
 The Free State was happy to take over Abir 's concession as the State had built up sufficient income to be able to afford to run tax collections by itself . In addition the Free State was embarrassed by the continuing allegations of atrocities caused by Abir and it could institute reforms more effectively if it were in control . Leopold authorised the takeover in the hope that the Free State would be able to resume rubber collection and exports and on 12 September 1906 an agreement was signed which stated that all profits from the concession would go to the Free State in return for payment to Abir of 4 @.@ 5 fr per kilogram of rubber harvested until 1952 . Leopold told Abir 's shareholders that he expected exports to return to normal levels within two years . To restore control the Free State dispatched a force of 650 men and 12 European officers under the command of Inspector Gerard to the concession . They returned four months later , leaving some areas still rebellious and with news that there were almost no rubber plants left . As a result , the quotas expected per man were cut to just 6 kg of rubber per year , with some struggling to find even that much . State income was therefore negligible whilst the costs of controlling the concession continued to increase . Throughout this time Abir was still making a profit by taking its share of the rubber exported for almost no expenditure . 
 By 1901 there were so few rubber plants left in the concession that the Free State authorities granted permission for the villagers to cut down the remaining plants and grind their bark to retrieve the rubber . Once this process was completed the rubber tax was abolished . The Abir company merged with the Société Anversoise in May 1911 to form the Compagnie du Congo Belge and now focussed on the management of rubber plantations and the gathering of rubber from them . However , later that year it agreed with the Belgian government to reduce the size of its operations and its monopoly status . In July 1911 it was banned from collecting rubber within the confines of its old concession for 18 months and was subject to new laws introduced by the Free State . The later history of the company is unknown but it continued to operate until at least 1926 when it split off its oil palm concessions into the Maringa company . 
 Abir 's rubber gathering practices made it the most notorious of all the concession companies for human rights abuses in the Congo Free State . Abir was only involved with primary resource gathering and , despite being owned by European industrialists , operated in a style similar to warlords such as Tippu Tip . Abir was supported in its operations by the Free State which required the enormous profits generated to strengthen its control over the country during its formative years . The concession companies gave the Free State the time and revenue required to secure the Congo and to plan a long @-@ term and more stable program of colonisation . Abir ultimately failed as its harvesting process valued high production over sustainability and it doomed to live out its own boom and bust cycle . Despite this the Abir production model was used by the French government as the basis for its concession system in the French Congo . 
 = Tainted Obligation = 
 " Tainted Obligation " is the fourth episode of the sixth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 106th episode overall . It was written by Jenna Bans and directed by Tom Verica . The episode was originally broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on October 8 , 2009 . In the episode , Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) and Dr. Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) ' s father is admitted into the hospital , seeking a liver transplantation . Further storylines include Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) getting nervous about losing her job , and Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) attempting to perform surgery on a terminal patient with Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) . 
 Although the episode was fictionally set in Seattle , Washington , filming primarily took place in Los Angeles , California . Jeff Perry reprised his role as a guest star , while Ralph Waite and Jocko Sims made their first appearances . The episode 's title refers to the song " Tainted Obligation " , by American alternative rock group Community Trolls . " Tainted Obligation " opened to generally positive critical reviews , with Pompeo 's and Chyler Leigh ( Dr. Lexie Grey ) ' s performances praised in particular . Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed by 14 @.@ 13 million Americans , and garnered a 5 @.@ 4 / 14 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , ranking third for the night in terms of viewership . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) leaves his trailer for work , as he approaches a bear growling outside . He wants to move back to Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) ' s house , but Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) insists that they must go forward in life . Dr. Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) brings her father , Thatcher Grey ( Jeff Perry ) , who is vomiting blood , into the emergency room , and Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) treats him . Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) admits an elderly patient , Irving Waller ( Ralph Waite ) , with skin growths , who later reveals that he wants a penile prosthesis , to which he receives . It is revealed that Thatcher needs a liver transplantation , and Stevens is assigned to a cancerous patient , Randy ( Jocko Sims ) , by Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) . Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) wants to ask the chief of surgery Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) for a job as an attending surgeon , but is nervous that he will reject her , and goes out to lunch with her girlfriend Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) . 
 Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) is fearful that she will be cut from the hospital 's staff , so she tries to get her name on the surgical board . Stevens and Hunt operate on Randy , and it is revealed that he is terminal . Lexie wants to donate her liver to Thatcher , but she is not a viable candidate , so she asks Meredith to do it , who subsequently agrees . Randy and his wife are dismayed with the outcome of the surgery , and Stevens proposes a plan to Hunt on how they can save him . Hunt agrees , but when the surgery suffers complications , the patient is pronounced dead , and Hunt condemns Stevens . Meredith undergoes the surgery , and it is a success for both her and Thatcher . Yang confronts Webber , and tells him that if a cardiothoracic surgeon is not hired , she should be cut from the program . At the conclusion of the episode , Stevens sees the bear , and ultimately agrees that she and Karev need to relocate , out of the forest . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jenna Bans and directed by Tom Verica . Edward Ornelas edited the episode , and Donald Lee Harris served as production designer . The episode 's title refers to the song " Tainted Obligation " , by American alternative rock group Community Trolls . Featured music includes The Voluntary Butler Scheme 's " Trading Things In " and <unk> 's " Come On Be Good " . Pompeo was pregnant during the episode , so the filming crew had to work around it . In the episode , Lexie advocated for Meredith to donate her liver , because she was unable to . Bans commented on this : " It was REALLY easy for me to understand Lexie in this episode – ' cause that 's how I imagine she grew up with [ her mother ] and Thatcher . There was taco night , and movie night , and if she had homework issues , one of them was always around to help . So now that her Dad needs some of her liver , recovering alcoholic or not , she ’ s gonna do it . She 's not even thinking about the Chief 's upcoming merger – and the fact that recovering from a major surgery will put her on the bench , out of the game , for at least a month . Lexie doesn 't blink , because family isn 't an obligation to her like it is for a lot of people - it 's a gift . " The scene in which Meredith offers her liver to Thatcher was originally intended to rekindle their relationship . Bans later changed this , following a request from Pompeo , and offered her insight : 
 " I thought I wrote a reconciliation story – between Mer and her father . I thought I wrote the episode that was going to put all the bad blood behind them for good . And it did , in a way – Mer tells Thatcher the door is open , which is pretty huge . And though it was incredibly hard for her to work up the courage to say that to him , she knew it was the only thing that would let him – or alleviate his guilt enough - to allow her to save his life . But something happened in this story during the shooting process . It changed – subtly , but substantially . Here 's how it started -- Ellen Pompeo came to me on the first day of shooting and wanting to change that speech she gives to Thatcher . She wanted to add a simple line , to have Mer say ' I want you to do this for her . ' Because for Ellen , this story wasn 't a Mer / Thatcher reconciliation story – it was a Mer / Lexie story . It was a story about these two women , who have done this awkward dance around each other for two seasons now , finally becoming sisters . Ellen insisted that her main reason for doing what she does , for being completely vulnerable in front of the man who has hurt her in more ways than we can count at this point , was Lexie . She was doing it for Lexie . " 
 Bans called Waller getting a new penis the most emotional scene she had to write , adding : " I loved this story because I hate the idea that once you 're old , your life is over . I hate when people treat their aging parents like old furniture they want to get rid of but have to find a place for so they stick ' em in the corner and forget about them . " Bans also commented on Heigl 's character 's storyline , writing : " Poor Izzie . The girl 's living with cancer , lost her best friend , impulsively got married and dragged her husband away to live in the woods . That takes a lot out of a person . I need to seriously recover on the couch for an hour after I go to the grocery store – I can 't imagine the emotional and physical fatigue Izzie must be feeling right now . I think by the end of this episode , after Owen tells her that channeling her experience as a patient at Seattle Grace is undermining her strength as a doctor at Seattle Grace – she 's wondering if she made a mistake . She 's wondering if Alex and Derek and now Owen might be right – that she came back to work too soon . That she 's not emotionally ready to be cutting into people yet . Because I think every doctor wants to believe all their terminal patients can be Izzie – but the odds tell another story . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcasting = = = 
 " Tainted Obligation " was originally broadcast on October 8 , 2009 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company . The episode was viewed by a total of 14 @.@ 13 million Americans , down 1 @.@ 56 % from the previous episode " I Always Feel Like Somebody 's Watchin ' Me " , which garnered 15 @.@ 69 million viewers . In terms of viewership , " Tainted Obligation " ranked third for the night , just behind CBS 's juggernauts CSI and The Mentalist . The episode did not win in viewership , but its 5 @.@ 4 / 14 Nielsen rating ranked first in its 9 : 00 Eastern time @-@ slot and the entire night , for both the rating and share percentages of the key 18 – 49 demographic , beating out CSI , The Mentalist , Private Practice , and The Office . Although its rating won for the night , it was a decrease from the previous episode , which garnered a 6 @.@ 1 / 16 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode was generally well received among television critics . Glenn Diaz of BuddyTV commented that Perry 's character was " the man of the hour " , in addition to praising Pompeo 's performance , writing : " You gotta love Mer when she 's gloomy . " Diaz also called Yang not having a surgery " hilarious " , and praised the chemistry between Ramirez 's and Capshaw 's characters . PopSugar called the title of the episode appropriate , and also praised Pompeo 's performance , adding : " I felt for Meredith , but after Lexie 's heartfelt begging and pleading , I was happy that Mere finally grows up and casts her selfishness aside . Three seasons ago Meredith would never have dreamed of putting Lexie first , and I was proud of her for giving up part of her liver — her offer to get to know her dad was an even bigger milestone . " PopSugar also enjoyed Oh 's performance , commenting that they enjoyed her " vulnerable " side , and writing that overall the episode felt " lackluster " . Cinema Blend 's Amanda Krill found Yang " babyish " and " whiny " . 
 TV Guide 's Adam Bryant called the scene with the bear " one of the funniest moments on TV that week " . Bryant also praised the story arc between Torres and Robbins , adding : " I really like how honest Arizona is with Callie , and the way she puts the firecracker in her place . " He was positive of Leigh 's performance , writing : " Chyler Leigh gave a powerful performance in this episode . Her speech to Meredith was a little overwritten , but she almost made you forget that with her emotion . And the bond that is growing between Lexie and Meredith is nice to see . From Meredith finally saying out loud how she feels about Lexie , to Lexie being at Mer 's side when she wakes up , I am really glad to see these sisters ' happy . " Michael Pascua of The Huffington Post gave a positive review of the episode , commenting : " I love how Grey 's Anatomy can bounce between serious and hysterical moments . Old people wanting penile implants , bears attacking a groggy Alex , counterbalanced with Mercy West drama , Cristina being ignored , and Lexie 's father arriving at the hospital hacking blood . " Pascua also praised the writing of Waite 's character 's storyline and Leigh 's performance . 
 = Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems = 
 Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems ( MITS ) was an American electronics company founded in Albuquerque , New Mexico that began manufacturing electronic calculators in 1971 and personal computers in 1975 . Ed Roberts and Forrest Mims founded MITS in December 1969 to produce miniaturized telemetry modules for model rockets such as a roll rate sensor . In 1971 , Roberts redirected the company into the electronic calculator market and the MITS 816 desktop calculator kit was featured on the November 1971 cover of Popular Electronics . The calculators were very successful and sales topped one million dollars in 1973 . A brutal calculator price war left the company deeply in debt by 1974 . 
 Roberts then developed the first commercially successful home computer , the Altair 8800 which was featured on the January 1975 cover of Popular Electronics . Hobbyists flooded MITS with orders for the $ 397 computer kit . Paul Allen and Bill Gates saw the magazine and began writing software for the Altair computer called the Altair BASIC . They moved to Albuquerque to work for MITS and in July 1975 started Microsoft - originally named " Micro @-@ Soft " by Paul Allen as recounted in this 1995 Fortune magazine article . MITS 's annual sales had reached $ 6 million by 1977 when they were acquired by Pertec Computer . The operations were soon merged into the larger company and the MITS brand disappeared . Roberts retired to Georgia where he studied medicine and became a small town medical doctor . 
 = = Origin = = 
 = = = Founders = = = 
 Henry Edward Roberts studied Electrical Engineering at the University of Miami before enlisting in the U.S. Air Force in 1962 . He soon became an electronics instructor at the Cryptographic Equipment Maintenance School at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio , Texas . To augment his meager enlisted man 's pay , Roberts worked on several off @-@ duty projects and even set up a one @-@ man company , Reliance Engineering . The most notable job was to create the electronics that animated the Christmas characters in the window display of <unk> 's department store in San Antonio . In 1965 , he was selected for an Air Force program to complete his college degree , and became a commissioned officer . Roberts earned an Electrical Engineering degree from Oklahoma State University in 1968 and was assigned to the Weapons Laboratory at Kirtland AFB in Albuquerque , New Mexico . 
 Forrest Mims was interested in science and electronics as a youth and even built an analog computer while in high school . Mims graduated from Texas A & M University in 1966 ( major in government with minors in English and history ) then became a commissioned officer in the U.S. Air Force . While serving in Vietnam as an intelligence officer , Mims continued his model rocket hobby . At Texas A & M , Mims developed an infrared obstacle @-@ sensing device and he experimented with it at the Saigon School for Blind Boys and Girls . Launching model rockets in an area accustomed to rocket attacks and working with blind children resulted in a story in the military newspaper , Stars and Stripes . This caught the attention of an Air Force Colonel , who arranged for Mims to be assigned to the Weapons Laboratory at Kirtland AFB even though Mims lacked an engineering degree . 
 Roberts and Mims were both assigned to the Lab 's Laser Group in 1968 . Roberts had reactivated Reliance Engineering and built an infrared intrusion alarm for his uncle 's fish farm in Florida . Later , Roberts and Stan Cagle , a civilian worker who also went to Oklahoma State , started building a power supply they hoped to sell . Mims became an advisor to the Albuquerque Model Rocket Club and met the publisher of Model Rocketry magazine in July 1969 . Mims told him about a <unk> tracking light that he had used on night launches of rockets in Vietnam . This led to an article in the September 1969 issue of Model Rocketry ; " <unk> Tracking Light for Night Launched Model Rockets " by Captain Forrest Mims . Mims became a regular contributor to Model Rocketry . 
 = = = Model rocket kits = = = 
 Manned space flight and the race to the moon in the 1960s made model rocketry a popular hobby . Roberts , Mims , Cagle and another Air Force officer from the Lab , Bob <unk> , decided they could design and sell electronics kits to model rocket hobbyists . Roberts wanted to call the new company Reliance Engineering , Mims wanted to form an acronym similar to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 's MIT . Cagle came up with Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems , MITS . The December 1969 issue of Model Rocketry ( circulation 15 @,@ 000 ) carried a press release that began : 
 Reliance Engineering in Albuquerque , New Mexico has announced the formation of a subsidiary company for the manufacture of miniaturized electronic and telemetry systems designed for model rockets . The company is called Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems ( MITS ) . Reliance Engineering president Henry Roberts announced that " MITS is presently conducting an intensive research program involving high quality miniature telemetry systems . " 
 The first commercially available model rocket telemetry transmitter is among the first items to be offered by MITS . Accessory modules including a tone beacon , temperature sensor , and a roll rate sensor , as well as tracking lights , ground systems for data reduction , and light weight , water activated batteries will soon be available . 
 They designed and built the telemetry modules in their homes and garages but they were only able to sell a few hundred units . Mims had sold a feature article about the new solid @-@ state device , light @-@ emitting diodes , to Popular Electronics ( circulation 400 @,@ 000 ) that May . With the hope of selling kits to the larger readership ; Roberts and Mims designed a device that would transmit voice over a beam of light , the <unk> . The editors accepted the project story and both articles were featured on the cover of the November 1970 issue . The payment for the articles was $ 400 but meeting Les Solomon , Popular Electronics technical editor , proved to be significant to both Mims and Roberts future success . 
 In August 1970 , Les Solomon , his wife and daughter were on vacation in the southwest and arranged to visit Mims , Roberts and their families . At that time , Dan Meyer and Don Lancaster were among the most prolific authors in Popular Electronics . Meyer had built a million dollar a year business that sold kits of parts to build the project that he and Lancaster wrote about . Mims and Roberts wanted to do the same and quizzed Solomon on the kit business . Solomon gave them some statistics but said there was no way of knowing how many kits an article would sell , maybe a hundred , maybe a thousand . 
 MITS had purchased components to build 200 <unk> but only sold around 100 units . Roberts wanted to design a new electronic calculator kit but his partners wanted out . Bob <unk> had already left MITS and Forrest Mims was out of the Air Force and wanted to become a full @-@ time writer . Roberts bought his 3 partners out for $ 600 in cash and $ 350 in equipment . ( Roberts ' four @-@ year commitment to the Air Force ended in mid @-@ 1972 . ) Mims and Roberts remained friends and collaborated on books , magazines , instruction manuals . 
 = = Calculators = = 
 Ed Roberts ' interest in computers began in high school when he built a simple digital computer from relays . His first real experience with computers came while at Oklahoma State University where engineering students had free access to an IBM 1620 computer . Roberts ' office at Weapons Laboratory had the state of the art Hewlett @-@ Packard <unk> programmable calculator in 1968 . In July 1970 , a semiconductor company , Electronic Arrays , announced a set of six LSI ICs that would make a four @-@ function calculator . Roberts was determined to design a calculator kit . 
 To fund the new project , Roberts sold 15 % of MITS to fellow Air Force officer , Lieutenant William Yates . He also got an investment from another Weapons Laboratory officer , Major Ed Laughlin . Several other officers and scientist at the lab were interested in this state of the art calculator kit and helped with the design . Forrest Mims wrote the assembly manual in return for a calculator kit . 
 The MITS 816 was known as a " four @-@ function " calculator ; it could add , subtract , multiply and divide . The display was only 8 @-@ digits but the calculations were done to 16 @-@ digits of accuracy . The custom molded case gave the kit a professional appearance ; the kit was $ 179 and an assembled unit was $ 275 . The MITS 816 was featured on the November 1971 cover of Popular Electronics . Thousands of calculator orders came in each month , in contrast to poor results for previous kits that MITS had offered . 
 The steady flow of calculator sales allowed MITS to run full page advertisements in Radio @-@ Electronics , Popular Electronics and Scientific American . In the June 1972 Radio @-@ Electronics , MITS announced a 14 digit calculator ( Model 1440 ) with memory and square root function for $ 199 @.@ 95 kit and $ 249 @.@ 95 assembled . The original 816 kit was reduced from $ 179 to $ 149 @.@ 95 . Both calculators could be controlled by upcoming programming unit . 
 The monthly sales reached $ 100 @,@ 000 in March 1973 and MITS moved to larger building with 10 @,@ 000 square feet ( 930 square meters ) of space . To meet the demand for assembled calculators , an automated wave solder machine was installed . In 1973 MITS was selling every calculator they could make , 110 employees worked in two shifts assembling calculators . 
 The functionality of calculator ICs increased at a rapid pace and Roberts was designing and producing new models . The MITS <unk> scientific and engineering calculator was introduced in December 1972 . It featured trigonometric functions , polar to rectangular conversion , two memories , and up to a seven @-@ level stack . A kit with a three @-@ level stack was $ 299 @.@ 95 and an assembled unit with a seven @-@ level stack was $ 419 @.@ 95 . The next month the Series 1200 four @-@ function pocket calculators were announced . The six @-@ digit model was $ 59 @.@ 95 and the twelve @-@ digit model was $ 99 @.@ 95 . 
 The Programmer accessory had been mentioned in the earliest advertisement but it was not featured until March 1974 . This was the same size as a desktop calculator and could hold 256 programming steps . ( It could be expanded to 512 steps . ) It was limited to emulating calculator key presses and simple sequence branching . The programming was done by entering hexadecimal key codes . The combination of the MITS <unk> calculator and the programmer was not nearly as sophisticated as the HP <unk> calculator but $ 400 for both kits was a fraction of the HP price . 
 = = = MITS calculators = = = 
 The feature and price information is from advertisements in Radio @-@ Electronics magazine ( issue date shown ) . The 816 price is from the original article in Popular Electronics . 
 = = = Price wars = = = 
 Bowmar Instrument Corporation introduced the " Bowmar Brain " , a four @-@ function pocket calculator , in September 1971 and the $ 179 calculator sold over 500 @,@ 000 copies in the first year . Bowmar then developed the " <unk> " calculator that was priced at $ 120 . In September 1972 , Texas Instruments ( TI ) introduced the TI @-@ 2500 portable four @-@ function calculator that also sold for $ 120 . The <unk> and the TI @-@ 2500 both used the TI <unk> family of " calculator @-@ on @-@ a @-@ chip " integrated circuit . TI was now directly competing with their IC customers . Other semiconductor companies such as National Semiconductor and Rockwell began selling calculators . Commodore Business Machines and other office equipment companies also got into the market . A frenzied price war started . By early 1974 , Ed Roberts found he could purchase a calculator in a retail store for less than his cost of materials . The larger companies could sell below cost to win market share . Bowmar lost $ 20 million in 1974 and filed for bankruptcy . Commodore acquired their IC supplier , MOS Technology . Texas Instruments won the price war but their calculator division lost $ 16 million in 1975 . 
 To compete in this market , Roberts needed more capital . He took MITS public in November 1973 with a stock offering of 500 @,@ 000 shares at $ 1 each . The 1973 oil crisis caused a stock market downturn and MITS was only able to sell 250 @,@ 000 shares . This allowed MITS to pay off the existing debt , but did not allow for any expansion . Roberts had developed several test equipment products such as a <unk> Generator and a Digital <unk> so he attempted to appeal to kit builders again by featuring the test equipment and digital clocks in the advertisements , instead of calculators . MITS was losing money , and by July 1974 , the full page prominent ads were replaced with quarter @-@ page ads in the back of the magazine . 
 MITS was now $ 300 @,@ 000 in debt and Roberts was looking for a new hit product . He decided to return to the kit market with a low cost computer . The target customer would think that " some assembly required " was a desirable feature . Roberts had looked at the Intel 4004 for calculators and thought the Intel 8008 was limited and difficult to work with . Intel had just released the 8080 , their first microprocessor that could be a general purpose computer . The target price of this complete computer kit had to be under $ 400 . To meet this price , Roberts agreed to order 1000 microprocessors from Intel for $ 75 each . Roberts and his head engineer , Bill Yates , began designing the computer . The company was down to 20 employees and a bank loan for $ 60 @,@ 000 financed the design and initial production of the new computer . 
 = = Popular Electronics and Radio @-@ Electronics = = 
 In January 1972 , Popular Electronics changed its editorial focus in an attempt to attract more advertising revenues . Reviews of stereo equipment and citizens band radio were featured ; experimenter and constructions projects were gone . Dan Meyer , Don Lancaster , Forrest Mims , John Simonton and many other authors immediately started contributing to the competing Radio @-@ Electronics magazine . The June 1972 cover story was " Experimenting with a $ 32 Solid State Laser " by Forrest Mims . Another article in that issue was " Experiments with Op @-@ Amps " by B.R. Rogen ; this was a pseudonym of Popular Electronics technical editor , Les Solomon . Solomon wrote articles for Radio @-@ Electronics while working for Popular Electronics . Lou Garner , the longtime solid @-@ state editor , moved to Radio @-@ Electronics for a year . Several MITS kit projects were featured in Radio @-@ Electronics including the ITC 1800 Integrated Circuit Tester ( May 1972 ) , the Model 1700 Function Generator ( July 1973 ) , the Model 1440 Calculator ( July 1973 ) and the 88 VLCT Computer Terminal ( November 1974 ) . 
 Radio @-@ Electronics had a smaller circulation than Popular Electronics but led the way with innovative construction projects between 1972 and 1975 . John Simonton 's first modular electronic music synthesizer was featured on the cover of the May 1973 issue . It sold for a fraction of commercial synthesizers and his <unk> Electronics produced them for decades . Don Lancaster 's TV Typewriter in September 1973 and Jon Titus 's Mark @-@ 8 computer in July 1974 were the catalyst of the home computer revolution . 
 Art <unk> became the editor of Popular Electronics in 1974 with a goal of reclaiming the lead in projects . He wanted to publish a computer project that was more functional and elegant than the Mark @-@ 8 . Les Solomon knew MITS was working on an Intel 8080 based computer project and thought Roberts could provide the project for the always popular January issue . 
 Ed Roberts and Bill Yates finished the first prototype in October 1974 and shipped it to Popular Electronics in New York via the Railway Express Agency . However , it never arrived due to a strike by the shipping company . Solomon already had a number of pictures of the machine and the article was based on them . Roberts got to work on building a replacement . The computer on the magazine cover is an empty box with just switches and LEDs on the front panel . The finished Altair computer had a completely different circuit board layout than the prototype shown in the magazine . 
 = = Altair computer = = 
 = = = Products = = = 
 The Altair 8800 was modeled after early 1970s minicomputers such as the Data General Nova . These machines contained a CPU board , memory boards , and I / O boards ; the data storage and display terminal were external devices . The Teletype Model 33 ASR was a popular terminal because it provided printed output and data storage on punched paper tape . More advanced systems would have 8 @-@ inch floppy disks and a video terminal that would display 24 lines of 80 characters such as the ADM @-@ 3A . ( No graphics were available and lower @-@ case letters were a $ 75 option . ) Most of these computers had a front panel with toggle switches for entering data and lights for displaying it . These were normally used to boot the computer and to diagnose problems . 
 The Altair 8800 kit came with a front panel , a CPU board with the Intel 8080 microprocessor , 256 bytes of RAM , a 4 @-@ slot back @-@ plane and an 8 @-@ amp power supply for $ 439 . A <unk> byte memory board was $ 176 and the 4k byte was $ 264 . The serial interface board was $ 124 and the parallel interface was $ 119 . There was a special price for an 8k byte system with BASIC for $ 995 . The Teletype Model 33 ASR was $ 1500 . 
 When the January 1975 issue of Popular Electronics reached readers in mid December 1974 , MITS was flooded with orders . They had to hire extra people just to answer the phones . In February , MITS received 1 @,@ 000 orders for the Altair 8800 . The quoted delivery time was 60 days but it was many more months before the machines were shipped . By August 1975 , they had shipped over 5 @,@ 000 computers . 
 The Altair 8800 computer was a break @-@ even sale for MITS . They needed to sell additional memory boards , I / O boards and other options to make a profit . The April 1975 issue of the MITS newsletter , Computer Notes , had a page @-@ long price list that offered over 15 optional boards . The delivery time given was 60 or 90 days , but many items were never produced and dropped from future price lists . Initially , Roberts decided to concentrate on production of the computers . Prompt delivery of optional boards did not occur until October 1975 . 
 The Intel 8080 did not have dedicated circuitry to support dynamic random @-@ access memory ( DRAM ) because in 1975 , this type of memory was still a new technology . MITS wanted to use DRAM because it consumed less power than static RAM . However , they had several design and component problems that led to a high failure rate with their 4K Dynamic RAM board . By July , new companies such as Processor Technology were selling 4K Static RAM boards with the promise of reliable operation . MITS released its own 4K Static RAM board in January 1976 . 
 The only floppy disk drives that were readily available in 1975 were IBM compatible 8 @-@ inch drives . MITS selected the Pertec <unk> disk drive which could store over 300 @,@ 000 bytes of data . The Altair disk controller occupied two boards and had over 60 ICs . The initial units were to be available in August , but were delayed until the end of 1975 . The production version of Extended Disk BASIC was released in April 1976 . The controller with one disk drive sold for $ 1 @,@ 480 ( kit ) and $ 1 @,@ 980 ( assembled ) . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The first full page advertisements for the Altair computer appeared in the February issues of Popular Electronics and Radio @-@ Electronics magazines . Soon MITS was advertising in technical journals such as the IEEE Computer , and general interest magazines such as Scientific American . MITS was also the most prominent advertiser in the new hobbyist computer magazines such as Creative Computing and Byte . 
 David Bunnell joined MITS as a technical writer in the calculator heyday . In April 1975 he created a newsletter so the MITS staff could easily communicate with the customers . The newsletter , Computer Notes , was available to customers and other interested readers . It was a large format newsletter ; 11 @.@ 25 by 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 286 by 394 mm ) , and each issue had 8 to 24 pages . In January 1977 , it switched to a smaller magazine format and the last issue was produced in January 1978 . Bunnell started Personal Computer magazine in October 1976 and went on to a successful career as a magazine publisher . 
 Computer Notes featured a wide variety of authors . Bill Gates and Paul Allen were regular contributors to the early issues . They wrote about Altair Basic and general software topics . Ed Roberts wrote a monthly " Letter from the President " column where he would answer customer questions and even review competing products . MITS engineers , such as Tom Durston and Steve Pollini , would give technical descriptions of new products . Altair owners would contribute software and hardware suggestions and occasionally a complete article . 
 MITS purchased a camper van in April 1975 and outfitted it with an Altair system complete with floppy disk , a Teletype Model 33 and every accessory MITS produced . The " MITS @-@ MOBILE " was literally a showroom on wheels that would travel from city to city showcasing the MITS product line . They would hold seminars at hotel conference rooms that would draw crowds of over 200 people . The most notable seminar was at Rickey 's Hyatt House in Palo Alto , California in early June 1975 , where a member of the Homebrew Computer Club left with an unreleased copy of Altair BASIC . After retail computer stores were established in most cities , the " MITS @-@ MOBILE " was retired . 
 The first ( and only ) World Altair Computer Convention was held in Albuquerque , New Mexico in March 1976 . The convention , organized by David Bunnell , was an overwhelming success ; with 700 people from 46 states and seven countries attending . Many of the attendees would go on to become leaders of the personal computer revolution . 
 = = = Clones = = = 
 Owners of mainframe systems and minicomputers could purchase additional memory , interface boards and peripherals from third party suppliers ; so it was predictable that owners of the Altair 8800 computer would do the same . MITS 's delays in delivery of systems and accessories accelerated the formation of Altair compatible suppliers . The first ones started appearing in mid @-@ 1975 and by July 1976 complete computers systems were readily available . The technical manuals for the Altair 8800 provided electrical schematics of the 100 pin computer bus allowing others to design compatible boards . There was not a proper technical standard at the time and some " compatible " boards did not work with other " compatible " boards . Later , the industry developed the S @-@ 100 bus standard . 
 Bill Godbout Electronics in Oakland , CA was the parts supplier to many of the hobbyists and students from Berkeley . George Morrow approached Godbout with several Altair compatible designs that Godbout agreed to produce and sell . The October 1975 Byte magazine carried an advertisement headlining " Get your <unk> on a Godbout RAM kit . " The 4K byte Altair compatible board was $ 131 @.@ 07 . 
 Godbout also sold components to Processor Technology for their 4K Static RAM board and serial / parallel interface board . Lee Felsenstein designed an Altair compatible video board that provided 16 lines of 64 upper and lower case characters on a black and white television . This $ 160 board became very popular and led to the Processor Technology Sol @-@ 20 Computer in 1976 . 
 The IMSAI 8080 , the first " clone " of the Altair computer , was released in December 1975 . It corrected many shortcomings of the original Altair 8800 by providing a larger power supply , a 22 slot motherboard , and easier wiring of the front panel . Ed Roberts reviewed the IMSAI in his April 1976 column in Computer Notes , and agreed that the IMSAI was in some ways better than the original Altair . Roberts also pointed out that the new Altair <unk> was superior to the IMSAI 8080 and the upgraded Altair <unk> fixed the same issues that the IMSAI did . 
 Altair computers were only available from the 20 or so authorized Altair computer dealers , but the IMSAI 8080 , Processor Technology Sol and many other clones were sold by hundreds of newly opening computer stores . 
 The S @-@ 100 bus was used throughout the 1980s until it was overtaken by the IBM PC ISA bus . Seattle Computer Products ( SCP ) was a manufacturer of S @-@ 100 memory boards . The company 's engineer , Tim Paterson , designed an Intel 8086 CPU system on two S @-@ 100 boards in 1979 . Microsoft , then in nearby Bellevue , Washington , used the prototype machine to test their 8086 version of BASIC . Digital Research had promised to deliver an 8086 version of their CP / M operating system by December 1979 but missed that date . SCP needed a disk operating system to sell its 8086 products so Patterson wrote <unk> , a " Quick and Dirty Operating System " in three months . Microsoft would later purchase <unk> from SCP for $ 50 @,@ 000 and use it as the basis for the IBM PC DOS . 
 = = = Altair BASIC = = = 
 In December 1974 Bill Gates was a student at Harvard University and Paul Allen worked for Honeywell in Boston . They saw the Altair 8800 computer in the January 1975 issue of Popular Electronics and knew it was powerful enough to support a BASIC interpreter . They wanted to be the first to offer BASIC for the Altair computer , and the software development tools they had previously created for their Intel 8008 microprocessor based <unk> @-@ O @-@ Data computer would give them a head start . While their friend , Paul Gilbert , was building the computer , Allen wrote a program that ran on a DEC PDP @-@ 10 time @-@ sharing computer that simulated the 8008 system . He also modified DEC 's macro assembler to produce the machine code for the 8008 microprocessor . The <unk> @-@ O @-@ Data software could be written and debugged before the computer hardware was complete . 
 Harvard had a DEC PDP @-@ 10 that was available for student use . They would use it to develop BASIC . While Allen modified their development software for the new 8080 microprocessor , Gates began writing 8080 assembly language by hand on yellow legal pads . They enlisted another Harvard student , Monte Davidoff , to write the math routines . 
 By early February the program coding switched from legal pads to the PDP @-@ 10 and a preliminary version was completed by March 1975 . Gates and Allen had been in contact with Roberts and MITS and the older looking Paul Allen would travel to Albuquerque in March . MITS needed more time to get a computer with <unk> bytes of memory working , and they needed more time to get the software finished . When Allen arrived at MITS it took a day to get the software running ; Allen remembers this being caused by computer memory problems while Roberts remembers the delay was due to software problems . 
 The April 1975 issue of the Altair Newsletter , Computer Notes , had a banner headline " Altair BASIC - Up and Running " . The software was to begin shipping on June 23 , 1975 . The software price was $ 500 , but discounted to $ 75 with the purchase of an Altair computer with 8k bytes of memory and a serial I / O card . 
 On July 22 , 1975 MITS signed a contract for the Altair BASIC with Bill Gates and Paul Allen . They received $ 3000 at signing and a royalty for each copy of BASIC sold ; $ 30 for the 4K version , $ 35 for the 8K version and $ 60 for the expanded version . The contract had a cap of $ 180 @,@ 000 . MITS received an exclusive worldwide license to the program for 10 years . They also had exclusive rights to sub @-@ license the program to other companies and agreed to use its " best efforts " to license , promote and commercialize the program . MITS would supply the computer time necessary for development ; a PDP @-@ 10 owned by the Albuquerque school district . Paul Allen left his job at Honeywell and became the Vice President and Director of Software at MITS with a salary of $ 30 @,@ 000 per year . Bill Gates was still a student at Harvard and just a contractor with MITS . The October 1975 company newsletter gives his title as " Software Specialist " . 
 The price of Altair BASIC to customers who purchased additional memory and I / O boards from MITS was $ 75 . Users may have gone along with that if the memory board were reliable . Customers bought the computer from MITS , and working memory from companies like Processor Technology . Rather than pay $ 500 for BASIC , they would acquire bootleg copies of the software . Only about ten percent of the early customers actually purchased BASIC . With a royalty due of $ 30 per copy , Gates felt that the computer hobbyist were stealing money from him . In February 1976 Bill Gates , " General Partner , Micro @-@ Soft " , wrote an " Open Letter to Hobbyists " that was sent to every computer publication inferring that the hobbyists were thieves . 
 MITS had announced a new computer based on the Motorola 6800 microprocessor in November 1975 , the Altair 680 . The machines were supposed to ship in January 1976 , but hardware design problems delayed shipment until May . Paul Allen rewrote their 8080 simulator to support the 6800 microprocessor . Ric Weiland , a high school friend of Gates and Allen , converted the Altair BASIC 's 8080 assembly language to 6800 assembly language . To eliminate the per copy royalty loss issue , the 6800 BASIC was licensed to MITS on a non @-@ exclusive basis for a flat fee of $ 31 @,@ 200 . Weiland and Marc McDonald were impressed with the new MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor that was a derivative of the 6800 . They modified the 6800 development system to support the 6502 and " cranked out " a 6502 edition of BASIC . This version was later sold to Commodore and Apple . 
 The January 1976 issue of MITS 's newsletter , Computer Notes , carried an ad for 8080 BASIC . The last paragraph stated : " Licenses for source listing and rights to distribute the binaries are also available to OEM buyers . Write or call Mr. Paul Allen at the MITS plant in Albuquerque for more detailed information . " Microsoft found several corporate customers for BASIC and proceeds were evenly split with MITS . Pertec acquired MITS in December 1976 and refused to allow any more OEM deals , even though the agreement required MITS to uses their " best efforts " to license the software . The contract required MITS and Microsoft to use binding arbitration to settle disputes . In September 1977 , the arbitrator ruled in favor of Microsoft , MITS could continue to use BASIC on their machines but lost the exclusive license . Microsoft could license the software to anyone and keep all of the royalties . 
 There was no longer a business requirement to remain in Albuquerque so Microsoft wanted to relocate to a larger city that would be more attractive to new employees . The San Francisco bay area was considered but Allen and Gates decided to return home to Seattle . Microsoft moved to Bellevue , Washington in January 1979 . 
 = = Sale to Pertec = = 
 In 1976 , MITS had 230 employees and sales of $ 6 million . Roberts was tiring of his management responsibilities and was looking for a larger partner . MITS had always used Pertec Computer Corporation disk drives and on December 3 , 1976 , Pertec signed a letter of intent to acquire MITS for $ 6 million in stock . The deal was completed in May 1977 just before the National Computer Conference in Dallas , Texas . Roberts got $ 2 million and the other 500 MITS shareholders ( including the Altair co @-@ designer , William Yates ) split the rest . 
 Pertec was eager to increase sales to small businesses through the 26 Altair Computer stores across the United States . The marketing toward hobby / home user was curtailed . The November 1977 issue of the MITS newsletter , Computer Notes , was the last produced by the Albuquerque staff . There was one more issue produced by the Pertec staff in Chatsworth , California . The back cover of the leading home computer magazine , Byte , always carried a full page Altair advertisement . This ended with the September 1977 issue . Roberts and Yates stayed on and worked on special projects . 
 In August 1979 , Pertec agreed to sell a 45 % stake to North American Philips for $ 37 million . Before the deal was complete , Pertec agreed to be acquired by the West German computer company , Triumph @-@ Adler , for $ 120 million . In 1978 , Pertec had sales of $ 150 million and Triumph @-@ Adler had sales of $ 466 million . 
 The Altair products were merged into the Pertec line and the MITS facility was used to produce the PCC @-@ 2000 small @-@ business computer . The Albuquerque plant was closed in December 1980 and the production was moved to Pertec plants in Irvine , California . 
 By the end of 1977 Roberts left MITS and returned to Georgia to be a gentleman farmer . He studied medicine at Mercer University in Macon , Georgia and graduated with a M.D. in 1986 . Roberts practiced medicine in Cochran , Georgia , population 4500 , until his death in 2010 . 
 = Octave Uzanne = 
 Octave Uzanne ( 14 September 1851 – 31 October 1931 ) was a 19th @-@ century French bibliophile , writer , publisher , and journalist . 
 He is noted for his literary research on the authors of the 18th century . He published many previously unpublished works by authors including Paradis <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , the Marquis de Sade and Baudelaire . He founded the Société des Bibliophiles <unk> , of which he was president . His research produced a considerable literary output and frequent publications in newspapers such as L <unk> , Le Plume , <unk> de Toulouse , Le Mercure de France , Le Gaulois and Le Figaro of Paris . 
