 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The Best of Both Worlds Tour was financially successful and was able to sell an abundance of shows throughout the United States in record times . The December 6 , 2007 concert at the Van Andel Arena in Grand Rapids , Michigan sold out within eight minutes , the third @-@ fastest sell @-@ out in the arena 's history . Numerous other concerts , such as the one held on December 1 , 2007 at the Sprint Center in North Little Rock , Arkansas and December 11 , 2007 at the Nationwide Arena in Columbus , Ohio , sold out within approximately twelve and fifteen minutes , respectively . " Absolutely every show sold out within the same amount of time . Whether you were in Moline or Omaha or New York or Los Angeles , it sold out in minutes " , stated Debra <unk> , senior vice president of AEG Live . In total , the Best of Both Worlds Tour had a total attendance of approximately one million people and grossed over US $ 54 million , according to Billboard Boxscore , becoming the highest @-@ grossing concert tour for a new act in 2007 and 2008 . The record was recognized with the award for Breakthrough Act at the 2008 Billboard Touring Awards . 
 = = Ticket controversy = = 
 Tickets for the Best of Both Worlds Tour were selling out quite rapidly . Nevertheless , ticket scalping was one of the primary reasons for it . Many tickets were immediately found for purchase on secondary markets , such as eBay or StubHub , selling for well over the face value of the tickets . Broker prices ranged from $ 350 to $ 2 @,@ 000 for the tickets originally sold for $ 29 to $ 66 . The shortage of tickets for the tour became so pronounced it gained national attention , with parents frequently expressing their outrage , discontent , and disappointment on behalf of their children . Vice president of Ticketmaster , Joe Freeman commented , " Hell hath no fury like the parent of a child throwing a tantrum . People who have been in this business for a long time are watching what 's happening , and they say there hasn 't been a demand of this level or intensity since The Beatles or Elvis [ Presley ] . " In an instance , a girl was unable to undergo a surgery she needed due to monetary issues , so she sold her tickets to a show of the tour for enough money to pay for the surgery . Debra <unk> , senior vice president of AEG Live said the tickets were priced and sold as fairly as possible and assured there as no conspiracy between those who handled the tour and brokers . " We do everything in our power to stop brokers from getting tickets , but it 's impossible " , she concluded . However , some brokers denied the allegations of purchasing most tickets for the shows . Brian Posey , owner of The Ticket Machine , an online broker based in East Lansing , Michigan , commented , " I 've never seen this as far as availability for any show . It 's never been that hard to get tickets for us . You don 't see seats anywhere . Parents shouldn 't blame brokers for snapping up loads of tickets . " He continued to complain that the company was only able to purchase 28 tickets , while they usually averaged hundreds of tickets for hot tours . 
 Investigations were held in various states , including Arkansas , Michigan , and Missouri , which led to lawsuits that accused brokers of illegally reselling tickets from the Best of Both Worlds Tour . " When you allow the hijacking of the market , it 's literally the worst of both worlds . You get charged too much , and there 's no access for the locals " , said Missouri Attorney General Jay Nixon . Numerous ticket brokers accessed tickets prior to fans as a result of a software program by RMG Technologies Inc , which permitted its clients to circumvent <unk> 's <unk> access controls , and use the copyrighted website in a manner that violated the site 's " Terms of Use " . Ticketmaster took legal action against RMG Technologies via the United States District Court for the Central District of California , claiming that the developed software for ticket brokers illegally " allows them to cut in line " . RMG Technologies representative denied the allegations and said they should not be held accountable because Ticketmaster is getting still paid for the tickets . " This may be the only time in history that any seller sued its customers for paying them too much money " , the attorney for RMG Technologies wrote in court documents . 
 In November 2007 , Kerry Inman , a woman from New Jersey , filed a lawsuit against Cyrus ' official fan club , MileyWorld , for not complying with terms . Memberships claimed fans subscribed to MileyWorld were supposed to be given priority for seats . While the site never guaranteed ticket availability , it claimed that members who logged on shortly after tickets became available would have a good opportunity to purchase tickets . " They deceptively lured thousands of individual into purchasing memberships into the Miley Cyrus Fan Club . The scenario has been replayed thousands , if not tens of thousands of times over the past few months " , said the woman 's attorney . Randy Philips , CEO of AEG Live , revealed the logical solution to all the tumult surrounding the Best of Both Worlds Tour , which he and Cyrus herself both longed for , was to add more shows , but was made impossible because Cyrus was already scheduled to film Hannah Montana : The Movie in early 2008 . Instead , the lawsuit was responded with the addition of a total of 45 @,@ 000 extra seats that were offered for a limited time to MileyWorld subscribers for the last 21 shows of the Best of Both Worlds Tour . 
 With more seats , more radio contests , tickets auctions , and other sorts of contests were offered so fans could attend concerts . One contest had participants writing an essay about an event that impacted them the most to win a makeover that included a Hannah Montana wig , flight for four to Albany , New York , and four tickets to the January 9 , 2008 concert held at the Times Union Center in Albany . The winner , a 6 @-@ year @-@ old girl from Garland , Texas , had won with an essay stating the girl 's father had died April 17 , 2007 in a roadside bombing in Iraq during the Iraq War . However , the girl 's mother , Priscilla Ceballos , later admitted that the essay and the military information she provided about her daughter 's father were untrue . " We did the essay and that 's what we did to win . We did whatever we could do to win , but when [ Robyn Caulfield ] asked me if this essay is true , I said ' No , this essay is not true , ' " Ceballos said . The prizes were awarded to the runner up . The mishap garnered much attention from the media because it exemplified parents ' desperate long to please their children . 
 = = Body double scandal = = 
 In January 2008 numerous videos capturing the change from Cyrus to the body double during the performance of " We Got the Party " surfaced on the Internet . The videos showed how , during the song 's bridge , backup dancers crowded her as a crew member covered Cyrus with a sheet and ushered her into a trap door and , through the adjacent side , a body double exited . She wore the same wardrobe as Cyrus and used the blonde wig and large glasses to obscure her face . Furthermore , live cameras barely captured her and did not film close @-@ ups as she danced , ran <unk> , and lip @-@ synched the rest of " We Got the Party " . Numerous fans and critics questioned whether Cyrus lip @-@ synched the entire show during the Best of Both Worlds Tour . 
 On January 11 , 2008 , Cyrus ' publicist confirmed that the videos were legitimate and that the body double , backup dancer Ashlee Nino , was being used throughout all stops of the Best of Both Worlds Tour . PMK Public Relations issued a statement that explained the body double 's purpose : 
 To help speed the transition from Hannah to Miley , there is a production element during the performance of ' We Got the Party ' incorporating a body double for Miley . After Hannah has completed the featured verse on the duet with the Jonas Brothers , a body double appears approximately one to two minutes prior to the end of the song in order to allow Miley to remove the Hannah wig and costume and transform into Miley for her solo set . Other than during this very brief transitional moment in the show , Miley performs live during the entirety of both the Hannah and Miley segments of the concert . 
 Cyrus later explained that it usually took over an hour and half to transition from Miley to Hannah and vice versa on the television series set , while on tour it took approximately two minutes . With the additional time , Cyrus was able to rest briefly , drink water , and prepare for the remainder of the show . 
 = = Broadcast and recordings = = 
 The concerts held on October 18 , 2007 at the Scottrade Center in St. Louis and October 26 , 2007 in the EnergySolutions Arena in Salt Lake City were filmed for a Disney Digital 3D release , a group of three @-@ dimensional films distributed by Walt Disney Pictures . The film , entitled Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert , was directed by Bruce Hendricks and produced by Art Repola . The film compiled some of the show 's performances , along with backstage footage . Cyrus said Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert was made for individuals who did not attend a concert during the tour due to ticket scalping . She continued , " This is like better than front row . You could reach out and feel like you can touch my hand , you could see me right then , right there , right in front of you , which is so fun . " It was released on February 1 , 2008 to American cinema , with an intended span of one week at theaters . The film was released to a total of 683 , with an extra four being added later . In its opening weekend , the film grossed over $ 31 @.@ 1 million . With its opening week sales , the film set multiple records . It became the highest box office total for Super Bowl weekend , the highest @-@ grossing opening for a three @-@ dimensional film , and highest per @-@ screen average ever – $ 42 @,@ 000 per screen . It went on to gross over $ 42 @.@ 8 million in its entire opening week , becoming the highest @-@ grossing film of that week and the film with the fewest theaters to debut at number one . Following its commercial success , the film 's run was extended ; it eventually closed on May 15 , 2008 , playing in theaters for 15 weeks . With a total gross of $ 70 @.@ 6 million worldwide , Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert was once the highest @-@ selling concert film of all time , until surpassed by Michael Jackson 's This Is It ( 2009 ) , which sold over $ 189 million worldwide . 
 Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert received positive to mixed reviews from critics . On Metacritic , it generated generally mixed or average reception , earning a collective score of 59 out of 100 based on 13 reviews . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film generated generally fresh reviews , with 73 percent of 42 reviewers giving positive reviews . Michael Hann of The Guardian believed the film was only appealing for young girls . He continued , " There 's nothing here to detain you , though equally there 's nothing to repel you . " Elizabeth Weitzman of the New York Daily News newspaper stated that producers did not use three @-@ dimensional technology to its full potential , but complimented the film as whole , declaring it " as you 'll come to achieving the best of both worlds " . Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert was released to cinema in international markets , including Europe , Latin America , and Oceania , in early 2008 . The film was televised on July 20 , 2008 on Disney Channel , where it was watched by over 5 @.@ 9 million viewers . It was released on blu @-@ ray and DVD on August 19 , 2008 , as an extended edition that features more performances and bonus features . 
 A live album , titled Best of Both Worlds Concert , was taken from same concerts as the film and released on March 11 , 2008 . It consisted of an audio CD and a DVD with two concerts performances and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage . The album was first released exclusively to United States ' Wal @-@ Mart stores and elsewhere in the United States a month after . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic stated , " This is another souvenir for those fans who can 't live without the show , and in that regard it 's perfectly fine – a nice , polished piece of product that will tide them over until the next new Hannah / Miley album comes along . " Best of Both Worlds Concert was commercially successful , peaking at number three on both the US Billboard 200 chart and the Canadian Albums Chart . It also peaked at number sixteen in Australia and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association for shipments exceeding 35 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Opening acts = = 
 Jonas Brothers ( October 18 , 2007 St. Louis – January 9 , 2008 Albany ) 
 Aly & A.J. ( January 11 , 2008 – January 24 , 2008 ) 
 Everlife ( January 25 , 2008 – January 31 , 2008 ) 
 = = Opening Act setlists = = 
 Jonas Brothers 
 1 . Kids of the Future 2 . Just Friends 3 . That 's just the Way we Roll 4 . Goodnight and Goodbye 5 . Hello Beautiful 6 . Hold On 7 . S.O.S 
 Everlife 1 . Find Yourself in You 2 . Real Wild Child 3 . I Could Get Used to This 4 . Look Through My Eyes 5 . 6 . 7 . What I like about you 
 = = Setlist = = 
 Act 1 : 
 " Rock Star " 
 " Life 's What You Make It " 
 " Just Like You " 
 Act 2 : 
 " Old Blue Jeans " 
 " Nobody 's Perfect " 
 Act 3 : 
 " Pumpin ' Up the Party " 
 " I Got Nerve " 
 " We Got the Party " 1 
 Act 4 : 
 " Start All Over " 
 " Good and Broken " 
 " See You Again " 
 Act 5 : 
 " Let 's Dance " 
 " Right Here " 
 Act 6 : 
 " East Northumberland High " 
 " G.N.O. ( Girl 's Night Out ) " 
 " The Best of Both Worlds " 
 Encore : 
 " I Miss You " 
 " Ready , Set , Don 't Go " with Billy Ray Cyrus 
 " Clear " 2 
 1 Performed from October 18 , 2007 to January 9 , 2008 . " Rock and Roll All Nite " was performed afterwards . 
 2 Performed as encore on January 31 , 2008 
 Source : 
 = = Interlude setlists = = 
 Jonas Brothers 
 1 . When You Look Me in the Eyes 2 . Year 3000 
 Aly & <unk> 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 = = = Box office score data = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Creative Team 
 Director – Kenny Ortega 
 Choreographer – Kenny Ortega , Teresa Espinosa 
 Design – Kelly McFadden 
 Lighting and Video Designer – Abigail Rosen Holmes 
 Management – Jason Morey , Jim Morey 
 Photography – Brian Love , Kevin <unk> , Michael T. Williams 
 Production Design – Michael Cotten 
 Screens Content Director – Steve Gerdes 
 Staff & Crew Production Coordinator – Omar Abderrahman 
 Video Techs – Eric Geiger , Steve " Bone " Gray , Evan Huff , Justin McLean , Dane <unk> , Mark Woody 
 Wardrobe Designer – Dahlia <unk> 
 Band 
 Music Direction – Stacy Jones , John Taylor 
 Guitar – Jamie <unk> , John Taylor 
 Keyboards – Mike Schmid 
 Bass – Greg <unk> , Vashon Johnson 
 Drummers – Stacy Jones , Jack Lawless 
 Background vocals – Candice <unk> , Kay Hanley 
 Source : 
 = Contagion ( film ) = 
 Contagion is a 2011 American medical thriller film directed by Steven Soderbergh . The film features an ensemble cast that includes Marion Cotillard , Bryan Cranston , Matt Damon , Laurence Fishburne , Jude Law , Gwyneth Paltrow , Kate Winslet , and Jennifer Ehle . The plot of Contagion documents the spread of a virus transmitted by fomites , attempts by medical researchers and public health officials to identify and contain the disease , the loss of social order in a pandemic , and finally the introduction of a vaccine to halt its spread . To follow several interacting plot lines , the film makes use of the multi @-@ narrative " hyperlink cinema " style , popularized in several of Soderbergh 's films . 
 Soderbergh and screenwriter Scott Z. Burns had collaborated on The Informant ! ( 2009 ) . Following that film 's release , Burns brought up the idea of producing a medical thriller film depicting the rapid spread of a virus , which was inspired by various pandemics such as the 2003 SARS epidemic and the 2009 flu pandemic . To devise an accurate perception of a pandemic event , Burns consulted with representatives of the World Health Organization as well as noted medical experts such as W. Ian Lipkin and Lawrence " Larry " Brilliant . Principal photography started in Hong Kong in September 2010 , and continued in Chicago , Atlanta , London , Geneva , and San Francisco until February 2011 . 
 Contagion premiered at the 68th Venice Film Festival in Venice , Italy on September 3 , 2011 , and went on general release on September 9 . The film was well received by critics , who praised the narratives and the performances of various actors and actresses . It was also well received by scientists , who praised its accuracy . Commercially , the film was a box office success . Budgeted at $ 60 million , Contagion attained $ 135 million in box office revenue during its theatrical run . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Returning from a Hong Kong business trip , Beth Emhoff ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) has a layover in Chicago to have sex with a former lover before returning to her family in suburban Minneapolis . She appears to have contracted a cold during her trip . Her six @-@ year @-@ old son from a previous marriage , Clark , also becomes symptomatic and is sent home from school . Beth 's condition worsens and two days later she collapses with severe seizures . Her husband , Mitch ( Matt Damon ) , rushes her to the hospital , but she dies of an unknown cause . 
 Mitch returns home and finds that Clark has also died from a similar infection . Mitch is put in isolation but seems to be immune to the disease . He is released and returns home to his teenaged daughter Jory , who had been living with Mitch 's former wife and her husband and has decided to stay with Mitch since he 's now all alone . They face decaying social order and rampant looting of stores and homes . Mitch is unsure if Jory has inherited his immunity and he struggles with the frustration of quarantine , his desire to protect his daughter and learning that his wife was cheating on him immediately prior to both her death and that of his stepson . 
 In Atlanta , representatives of the Department of Homeland Security meet with Dr. Ellis Cheever ( Laurence Fishburne ) of the CDC and express fears that the disease is a bio weapon intended to cause terror over the Thanksgiving weekend . Dr. Cheever dispatches Dr. Erin Mears ( Kate Winslet ) , an Epidemic Intelligence Service officer , to Minneapolis to begin investigating . Mears traces the outbreak back to Emhoff while negotiating with local bureaucrats initially reluctant to commit resources for a proper public health response to the virus . Dr. Mears later becomes infected and dies . 
 At the CDC , Dr. Ally Hextall ( Jennifer Ehle ) determines the virus is a mix of genetic material from pig and bat viruses . Work on a cure stalls because scientists cannot discover a cell culture within which to grow the newly identified <unk> Virus One ( MEV @-@ 1 ) . 
 UCSF professor Dr. Ian Sussman ( Elliott Gould ) violates orders from Cheever ( relayed through Hextall ) to destroy his samples , and identifies a usable MEV @-@ 1 cell culture using bat cells . Hextall uses the breakthrough to work on a vaccine . Other scientists determine the virus is spread by fomites , with a basic reproduction number of four when the virus mutates , with projections of one in twelve of the population being infected , and a 25 @-@ 30 % mortality rate . 
 Conspiracy theorist Alan Krumwiede ( Jude Law ) posts videos about the virus on his popular blog . In one video , he shows himself sick and later claims he recovered using a homeopathic cure derived from forsythia . In a panic , people seeking forsythia overwhelm pharmacies , spreading and accelerating the contagion as the infected come into contact with healthy people . 
 Krumwiede 's claims attract national attention . During a television interview he discloses that Dr. Cheever had secretly informed friends and family to leave Chicago just before the city was quarantined . Cheever is then informed the government will investigate and may charge him for leaking information . Later it is revealed Krumwiede had faked being infected by the virus in an attempt to increase profits for shareholders in companies producing and selling forsythia . Krumwiede is arrested for conspiracy and securities fraud , only to walk free when his many supporters successfully raise funds to provide for his bail . 
 Using an attenuated virus Dr. Hextall identifies a possible vaccine . To cut out the lengthy time it would take to obtain informed consent from infected patients , Dr. Hextall <unk> herself with the experimental vaccine and immediately visits her gravely ill father , who has been infected with MEV @-@ 1 . The doctor does not contract MEV @-@ 1 and the vaccine is declared a success . 
 The vaccine 's production is rapidly increased , but due to limited production , the CDC awards vaccinations by lottery based on birth date . <unk> take place for one full year until every survivor is vaccinated . First responders , doctors and others designated by the government are declared exempt from the lottery . Dr. Cheever gives his fast @-@ tracked MEV @-@ 1 vaccination to the son of Roger ( John Hawkes ) , a CDC janitor who had overheard Dr. Cheever 's phone call warning his girlfriend to leave Chicago . 
 Dr. Leonora Orantes ( Marion Cotillard ) , a WHO epidemiologist , travels to Hong Kong to follow the Beth Emhoff lead . She collaborates with Sun Feng ( Chin Han ) and other local epidemiologists and public health officials ; they identify Emhoff as patient zero . As the virus spreads , Feng kidnaps Orantes to use her as leverage to obtain MEV @-@ 1 vaccine doses for his village . Orantes spends months living with the villagers until the vaccine is announced . Feng exchanges Orantes for the vaccine doses . Her colleague mentions that the exchanged doses were placebos and Orantes rushes away to warn them . 
 The death toll reached 2 @.@ 5 million in the U.S. and 26 million worldwide . Dr. Hextall places samples of MEV @-@ 1 in cryogenic storage , alongside samples of H1N1 and SARS . 
 The source of the virus is revealed to viewers . A bulldozer ( <unk> , operating for the company Emhoff works for ) knocks down a palm tree disturbing some bats , with one finding shelter and food in a banana tree . That bat then flies over a pig pen , dropping a chunk of banana from its mouth , which is then eaten by a piglet . Chinese chefs later collect pigs from the pen and take them to a casino . A chef is called away from his preparations of a piglet , and casually wipes his hands on his apron . The chef then shakes hands with Beth Emhoff , giving her the mix of bat and pig viruses that makes her patient zero and the origin of the MEV @-@ 1 virus . 
 = = Cast and characterizations = = 
 Marion Cotillard as Dr. Leonora Orantes 
 Orantes ' main objective is to trace the origins of the MEV @-@ 1 pathogen . Cotillard , a fan of Soderbergh 's work , first met with the director in Los Angeles , California . The French actress was enthralled with the script because she was " very concerned about germs . I 've always been ... scared , in a way , by all of those disease [ s ] . So ... it was really something I was really interested . " Soderbergh said that Orantes " gets dropped into situations and has to deal with cultural as well as scientific issues that are sometimes at odds " , and notes that she has a " professional " yet stubborn , " remote " , and " dispassionate " demeanor , though " something happens to her in the course of the story that causes a significant emotional shift . " 
 Matt Damon as Mitch Emhoff 
 Damon viewed his character as the embodiment of the " everyman " — an individual that is seen as " one of the human faces of the <unk> " following his wife and stepson 's deaths . Soderbergh also noted Mitch 's " common individual " lack of medical and scientific knowledge , though keeping the situation dynamic and compelling was challenging for the director , as he was concerned that Emhoff would be a one @-@ dimensional character . Soderbergh felt that Damon understood the concept and addressed the producers ' concerns . " You never catch him acting " , said Soderbergh . " There 's no vanity , no self @-@ consciousness in his performance ; it 's as if the cameras aren 't there . " Writer Scott Z. Burns sent him a copy of the script with a " read this and then go wash your hands " note attached to it . Damon recalled : " I just really want to be in this movie . It was a terrific , riveting , really fast read and really exciting and really horrifying , but managed to be really touching . " 
 Laurence Fishburne as Dr. Ellis Cheever 
 Soderbergh admired Fishburne 's ability to portray an emphatic and assertive figure in previous films . To Fishburne , Cheever was a " smart " , " competent " physician who often epitomized a " voice of reason " . Once he conferred with W. Ian Lipkin , a virologist and professor at Columbia University , the character 's complexities were nonexistent for the actor . Fishburne stated , " The personal stuff that I have as Ellis Cheever was telling my fiancée , soon @-@ to @-@ be wife , Sanaa Lathan , to get out of town , to leave , to pack up , to not talk . That 's really easy . Any human being in that situation is going to do that , I think . " 
 Jude Law as Alan Krumwiede 
 Krumwiede is an ardent conspiracy theorist who , according to Law , is the so @-@ called index patient for " what becomes a parallel epidemic of fear and panic " . " We definitely wanted him to have a messianic streak " , said Soderbergh , whom Law talked to during the character 's creating process . The two men discussed the appearances and the behaviors of a typical anti @-@ government conspiracy theorist . Producer Gregory Jacobs commented that " what 's interesting is that you 're not really sure about him . Is the government really hiding something and does the herbal remedy he 's talking about really work ? I think we all suspect at one time or another that we 're not getting the whole truth , and in that sense Krumwiede represents the audience 's point of view . " 
 Gwyneth Paltrow as Elizabeth " Beth " Emhoff 
 A " working mom " , as described by Paltrow , Elizabeth is the central figure in the detective process . Despite being among the virus ' first victims , Paltrow believed that Elizabeth was " lucky " , as she thought the disease 's survivors were being left to deal with the newly difficult conditions of everyday life , such as finding food and potable water . When on location in Hong Kong , Paltrow was instructed by Soderbergh to take photographs to be used in the film , and admitted she was apprehensive about the assignment . " I was just another tourist taking pictures " , she said , and added , " I did feel a little pressure . When Steven Soderbergh gives you a photo assignment , you had better come back with something decent . " 
 Kate Winslet as Dr. Erin Mears 
 In researching her character , Winslet traveled to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) in Atlanta , Georgia , where she consulted with current and former officers of the Epidemic Intelligence Service to receive insight on not only the daily life , but on the type of person qualified for the occupation . " These are people who can be sent into war zones where there 's been an outbreak of a new virus . Fear is not an option . If they feel it , they learn to push it aside . " Winslet felt that Mears was able to bring the epidemic " down to the layman 's level " so the viewer could comprehend the scope of it without the science dragging the story down . 
 Jennifer Ehle as Dr. Ally Hextall 
 Soderbergh had seen Ehle 's performance in Michael Clayton ( 2007 ) , though it was ultimately cut prior to the film 's release , and it prompted him to offer her a role in Contagion . He " had known who Jennifer was for a long time , and this didn 't take a lot of thought , honestly " . 
 Elliott Gould as Dr. Ian Sussman 
 A doctor in San Francisco , Sussman identifies a cell culture capable of growing the virus . 
 Chin Han as Sun Feng 
 Han spoke of his character 's development : " He starts off as a button @-@ down , serious ... government official , and then as the movie progresses ... you find out a different side of him and his secret agenda . " 
 Bryan Cranston as Rear Admiral Lyle Haggerty , United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps 
 John Hawkes as Roger , CDC custodian and acquaintance of Dr. Cheever 
 Anna Jacoby @-@ Heron as Jory Emhoff , daughter of Mitch <unk> 
 Josie Ho as Li Fai 's sister 
 Sanaa Lathan as Aubrey Cheever , fiancée of Dr. Cheever 
 Demetri Martin as Dr. David Eisenberg , CDC colleague of Dr. Hextall 
 Armin Rohde as Damian Leopold , a WHO official 
 Enrico Colantoni as Dennis French , a Department of Homeland Security official 
 Larry Clarke as Dave , a Minnesota health official working with Dr. Mears 
 Monique Gabriela Curnen as Lorraine Vasquez , a print journalist in San Francisco 
 Amr <unk> as Rafik 
 Matt <unk> as Minnesota Body Burial Worker 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Concerted efforts to devise Contagion coincided with Burns ' collaboration with Soderbergh in The Informant ! ( 2009 ) . The duo had initially planned to create a biographical film on Leni Riefenstahl , a trailblazer in German cinema during the 1930s and a figure in the rise of the Nazi Party . Soderbergh later contacted Burns to cancel the project , as he thought that a film about Riefenstahl would struggle to attract an audience . Intrigued with the field of transmission , Burns suggested that they instead create a film that centered on a pandemic situation — " an interesting thriller version of a pandemic movie " . His main objective was to construct a medical thriller that " really felt like what could happen " . 
 Burns consulted with Lawrence " Larry " Brilliant , renowned for his work in eradicating smallpox , to develop an accurate perception of a pandemic event . He had seen one of Brilliant 's TED presentations , which he was fascinated by , and realized that " the point of view of people within that field isn 't ' If this is going to happen ' , it 's ' When is this going to happen ? ' " Brilliant introduced Burns to another specialist , W. Ian Lipkin . With the aid of these physicians , the producers were able to obtain additional perspectives from representatives of the World Health Organization . Burns also met with the author of The Coming Plague , Laurie Garrett . Her 1995 book helped Burns consider a variety of potential plots for the film . He wanted to feature an official from the CDC , and ultimately decided to use an epidemiologist , since that role requires interacting with people while tracking the disease . 
 Although he had done research on pandemics six months prior to the 2009 flu pandemic , the outbreak was " really helpful " to his studies , because it provided a glimpse of the societal apparatus following the onset stages of a pandemic . To him , it was not solely the virus itself that one had to be concerned about , but how society handles the situation . " I saw them come to life " , Burns said , " and I saw issues about , ' Well , do you close the schools and if you close the schools , then who stays home with the kids ? And will everyone keep their kids at home ? ' Things happening online , which is where the Jude Law character came from , that there 's going to be information that comes out online where people want to be ahead of the curve , so some people will write things about anti @-@ virals or different treatment protocols , and so there 's always going to be an information and that information also has sort of a viral pulse . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In conjunction with overseeing the directing process , Soderbergh functioned as a cinematographer for Contagion . The film was wholly shot using Red Digital Cinema Camera Company 's RED One MX digital camera , which uses ambient light and has a <unk> image resolution . Since he hoped for the premise to be authentic and " as realistic as possible " , Soderbergh opted not to film in the studio . " There 's , to me , nothing more satisfying occasionally than making someplace look like someplace else on film and having nobody know the difference . " For choosing cities , Soderbergh felt that they couldn 't " go anywhere where one of our characters hasn 't been " , since he wanted to portray an " epic " , yet " intimate " scenario . He explained , 
 We can 't cut to a city or a group of extras that we 've never been to that we don ’ t know personally . That was our rule . And that ’ s a pretty significant rule to adhere to in a movie in which you 're trying to give a sense of something that ’ s happening on a large scale , but we felt that all of the elements that we had issues with prior , when we see any kind of disaster film , we 're centered around that idea . 
 Principal photography started in Hong Kong in September 2010 , and continued for approximately two weeks . Soderbergh was originally hoping to also film in mainland China , though Moviefone journalist David Ehrlich believed that permission from the Chinese government was unlikely to be forthcoming . Although producers also intended to establish a filming location in one of the many casinos in Macau , the Jumbo Floating Restaurant in Hong Kong 's Aberdeen Harbour was used instead for the casino setting , as filming within the vicinity of a gambling establishment is prohibited by law . To move the equipment for the casino scenes to the on @-@ the @-@ water location , producers hired a number of locals to carry out the task , as they were accustomed to " using sampans like trucks " . Additional locations included the Hong Kong International Airport , InterContinental Hong Kong , and the Princess Margaret Hospital . 
 Principal photography relocated in the following month to Chicago , Illinois , which served as the nexus for production . Much of the cityscape and its surrounding suburbs were used to emulate Minneapolis , Minnesota , and Atlanta , Georgia , in addition to serving as backdrop for Chicago itself . Since principal photography occurred during the winter months , snowfall was a prerequisite in simulating a " persistent coldness " that encompassed " a hypersensitive kind of glare " . Within the city limits , filming locations were installed at the Shedd Aquarium , O 'Hare International Airport , and the Midway Airport . Arguably the largest sets were at the General Jones Armory , which was converted into an infirmary , and a major location shoot occurred in Waukegan , where a portion of the <unk> Expressway was used to simulate the Dan Ryan Expressway . Production also took place at Sherman Hospital in Elgin and Central Elementary School in Wilmette , and also in Downtown Western Springs , where the grocery store scene was filmed . 
 Filming moved once again in January 2011 to the Druid Hills quadrant of Atlanta , which contains the headquarters of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . The restricted nature of the CDC campus meant that producers were only allowed to shoot exterior scenes of the area , as well as within the parking garage and reception area for the CDC 's museum onsite . Principal photography then proceeded into Atlanta 's central business district and Decatur , before advancing to London , Geneva , and lastly San Francisco , California , in the ensuing month . The San Francisco Film Commission charged filmmakers $ 300 per day for production within the city limits . In the North Beach and Potrero Hill sections of the city , production designer Howard Cummings scattered trash and discarded clothing on the ground to depict the rapid decline of civilization . For the Civic Center set , over 2 @,@ 000 extras were sought for in background roles ; actors who were a part of the Screen Actors Guild were paid $ 139 per day , while nonunion workers received $ 64 per day for their work . Other filming locations were established at Golden Gate Park , Chinatown , and Candlestick Park ; it cost $ 60 @,@ 000 to rent the football stadium for six days . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Cliff Martinez composed the film 's soundtrack , which was his first score for Soderbergh since Solaris in 2002 . Given that the pacing of the music was one of Soderbergh 's biggest concerns , Martinez needed to maintain a brisk pace throughout the soundtrack , while also conveying fear and hope within the music . " I tried to create the sound of anxiety . And at key , strategic moments I tried to use the music to conjure up the sense of tragedy and loss . " Martinez incorporated orchestral elements , and fused them with the predominantly electronic sounds of the score . He noted that the " sound palette for Contagion came by way of combining three very different approaches Steven went through as he was cutting the film . " Martinez received a rough cut for the film in October 2010 , which contained music that was imbued with elements of The French Connection ( 1971 ) and Marathon Man ( 1976 ) . He " loved " those two soundtracks , and composed a few pieces in their style . A few months later , he acquired a new cut , which included music influenced by German electronic group Tangerine Dream . Toward the end , Soderbergh changed again and used contemporary soundtrack music that was " more energetic and more rhythmic " . Ultimately , Martinez used aspects of all three approaches : " I reasoned that combining them would not only be effective but would give the score a style all its own . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Steven Soderbergh was motivated to make an " ultra @-@ realistic " film about the public health and scientific response to a pandemic . The movie touches on a variety of themes , including the factors which drive mass panic and collapse of social order , the scientific process for characterizing and containing a novel pathogen , balancing personal motives against professional responsibilities and rules in the face of an existential threat , the limitations and consequences of public health responses , and the pervasiveness of interpersonal connections which can serve as vectors to spread disease . Soderbergh acknowledged the salience of these post @-@ apocalyptic themes is heightened by reactions to the September 11 attacks and Hurricane Katrina . The movie was intended to realistically convey the " intense " and " unnerving " social and scientific reactions to a pandemic . The recent real @-@ life epidemics such as the 2003 SARS epidemic and the 2009 flu pandemic have been inspirations and influences in the film . The chain of contagion involving bats and pigs is reminiscent of the trail of the Nipah virus that originated in Malaysia in 1997 , which similarly involved the disturbance of a bat colony by deforestation . 
 The film presents examples of crowd psychology and collective behavior which can lead to mass hysteria and the loss of social order . The bafflement , outrage , and helplessness associated with the lack of information , combined with new media such as blogs , allow conspiracy theorists like Krumwiede to spread disinformation and fear , which become dangerous <unk> themselves . Dr. Cheever must balance the need for full disclosure but avoid a panic and allow the time to characterize and respond to an unknown virus . The movie indirectly critiques the greed , selfishness , and hypocrisy of isolated acts in contemporary culture and the unintended consequences they can have in the context of a pandemic . For example , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends social distancing by forcibly isolating the healthy to limit the spread of the disease , which stands in stark opposition to contemporary demands for social networking . Responding to the pandemic presents a paradox , as the <unk> and lethality of the virus instills deep distrust of others but surviving and limiting the spread of the disease also requires individuals to work together . 
 Against this existential threat and fraying social order , the film also explores how individual characters bend or break existing rules for both selfish and selfless reasons . Dr. Hextall violates protocols by testing a potential vaccine on herself , Dr. Sussman continues experiments on a cell line despite orders to destroy his samples , Dr. Cheever notifies his fiancé to leave the city before a public quarantine is imposed , Sun Feng kidnaps Dr. Orantes to secure vaccine supplies for his village , Dr. Mears continues her containment work despite contracting the virus , and Krumwiede is paid to use his blog to peddle snake oil cures so as to drive demand and profit for investors in Alternative Medicine . Soderbergh repeatedly uses the cinematographic style of lingering and focusing on the items and objects which are touched by the infected and become vectors ( fomites ) to infect other people . These objects link characters together and reinforce the multi @-@ narrative hyperlink cinema style which Soderbergh developed in Traffic ( 2000 ) and Syriana ( 2005 ) , which he produced . 
 The story also highlights examples of political cronyism ( a plane to evacuate Dr. Mears from Minneapolis is instead diverted to evacuate a Congressman ) , platitudes and rigid thinking ( public health officials consider postponing the closing of shopping malls until after the Thanksgiving shopping season ) , federal responders trying to navigate 50 separate state @-@ level public health policies , and the heroism of Federal bureaucrats . Soderbergh does not use type @-@ cast pharmaceutical executives or politicians as villains , but instead portrays bloggers such as Krumwiede in a negative light . Social media plays a role in Krumwiede 's accusations against Dr. Cheever and in Emhoff 's daughter 's attempts to carry on a relationship with her boyfriend through text messaging . Other responses in the movie , such as Emhoff 's appropriating a shotgun from a friend 's abandoned house to protect his home from looters , imposition of federal quarantines and curfews , the allocation of vaccines by lottery , inadequate federal preparation and responses , and use of bar @-@ coded wristbands to identify the inoculated highlight the complex tensions between freedom and order in responding to a pandemic . Soderbergh uses Emhoff to illustrate the micro @-@ effects of macro @-@ level decisions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release and box office = = = 
 Contagion premiered on September 3 , 2011 at the 68th Venice Film Festival in Venice , Italy , and a wider release followed on September 9 . In the United States and Canada , Contagion was shown in 3 @,@ 222 theaters , of which 254 screenings occurred at IMAX venues . Various American commercial analysts anticipated that the film would have ticket sales of between $ 20 million and $ 25 million during its opening weekend , which it did , grossing $ 8 million on its first day , and $ <unk> for the entire weekend . Of that total , ten percent ( $ 2.3M ) of the gross came from IMAX screenings . By outgrossing competitor The Help ( $ <unk> ) , Contagion became the highest @-@ grossing film of the week . Demographically , the opening audience was evenly divided among gender , according to Warner Bros. , while eighty percent of spectators were of the age of 25 and over . Contagion did well the following weekend , generating a $ <unk> box office , but came in second to the re @-@ release of The Lion King ( 1994 ) . The third week saw the box office drop by forty percent , for a total gross of $ <unk> By the fourth week , Contagion had dropped to ninth place at the box office with $ 5M , and the number of theaters narrowed to 2 @,@ 744 . The film completed its theatrical run on December 15 , 2011 , at which point its total domestic gross was $ <unk> 
 Contagion made its international debut in six foreign markets the same weekend as its American release , including Italy , where it achieved $ 663 @,@ 000 from 309 theaters . The first week saw Contagion acquire $ <unk> from 553 establishments — a per @-@ theater average of $ 3 @,@ 797 . Foreign grosses for Contagion would remain relatively stagnant up until the weekend of October 14 – 16 , 2011 , when the film expanded into several additional European markets . Out of the $ <unk> that was generated from 1 @,@ 100 venues during that weekend , nearly 40 % of the gross originated from Spain , where the film earned $ 1.5M from 325 theaters . With the growing expansion of the film in seven additional markets , the weekend of October 21 – 23 , 2011 saw Contagion take in $ <unk> from 2 @,@ 505 locations , increasing the international gross to $ <unk> In the United Kingdom , one of the film 's significant international releases , Contagion opened in third place at the box office with $ 2.3M from 398 theaters ; it subsequently garnered the highest debut gross of a Soderbergh film since Ocean 's Thirteen ( 2007 ) . International grosses for Contagion stand at $ <unk> 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Contagion has received positive reviews by film commentators . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes sampled 237 reviewers and judged 84 % of the reviews to be positive . With a mean score of 7 / 10 , the site 's consensus stated , " Tense , tightly plotted , and bolstered by a stellar cast , Contagion is an exceptionally smart — and scary — disaster movie . " At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 based on the critiques from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 70 based on 38 reviews . 
 The Guardian journalist Peter Bradshaw felt that Contagion blended well together as a film , although opined that Soderbergh was somewhat unsuccessful on channeling the fears , <unk> , and " the massive sense of loss " of " ordinary people " . To David Denby of The New Yorker , the " brilliant " film was " serious , precise , frightening , " and " emotionally enveloping " . Despite applauding Soderbergh for " hopscotching " tidily " between the intimate and international " , The Atlantic 's Christopher Orr was disappointed with the film 's detached and " clinical " disposition , which led him to conclude that Contagion should have gone with a more inflexible rationale , or a lesson " beyond ' wash your hands often and hope you 're lucky ' . " " For all the craft that went into it , Contagion is ultimately beyond good or bad , beyond criticism . It just is , " professed The Atlantic writer . Described as a " smart " and " spooky " installment , Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote , " Mr. Soderbergh doesn 't milk your tears as things fall apart , but a passion that can feel like cold rage is inscribed in his images of men and women isolated in the frame , in the blurred point of view of the dying and in the insistent stillness of a visual style that seems like an exhortation to look . " In regards to the story , Salon columnist Andrew O 'Hehir avouched that the " crisp " and succinct narrative matched up to the " beautifully composed " visuals of the film . Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter proclaimed that Soderbergh and Burns effectively created anxiety in the " shrewd " and " <unk> " film without becoming exaggerated , a sentiment echoed by Jeanette <unk> of NPR , who insisted that the duo " weave multiple characters into a narrative that 's complex without being confusing , and intelligent without being baffling " . Writing for The Village Voice , Karina Longworth thought that Contagion reflected the " self @-@ consciousness " and " experimentation " of some of Soderbergh 's previous efforts , such as the Ocean 's trilogy and The Girlfriend Experience ( 2009 ) . 
 The performances of multiple cast members were frequently mentioned in the reviews . Lou Lumenick of New York Post asserted that Ehle was " outstanding " , a view that was analogous to that of The Boston Globe journalist Wesley Morris , who praised not only Ehle 's performance , but the work of the " undercard " such as Cranston , Gould , and Colantoni , among others . Similarly , Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called Ehle the " best in show " . As Los Angeles Times ' Kenneth Turan summed up , " Two @-@ time Tony @-@ winning actress Jennifer Ehle comes close to stealing the picture with this quietly yet quirkily empathetic performance . " In regards to Law , The Philadelphia Inquirer 's Steven Rea stated that the actor portrayed the character with a " nutty " confidence ; Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle agreed with Rea 's thoughts . Damon provided the film 's " relatable heart " , according to Forrest Wickman of Slate , who concluded that even with her controlled performance , Winslet " lives up to her head @-@ of @-@ the @-@ class reputation even in an unusually small role " . 
 The character development of multiple characters produced varying response from critics . Contrary to Mitch 's stance as the main protagonist , Michael O 'Sullivan of The Washington Post felt that Contagion " treats him with an oddly clinical detachment " . In particular Law 's character , Alan Krumwiede , attracted commentary from Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , who wrote , " The blogger subplot doesn 't interact clearly with the main story lines and functions mostly as an alarming but vague distraction . " 
 = = = = Scientific accuracy = = = = 
 Ferris Jabr of New Scientist approved of Contagion for accurately portraying the " successes and frustrations " of science . Jabr cites story elements such as " the fact that before researchers can study a virus , they need to figure out how to grow it in cell cultures in the lab , without the virus destroying all the cells " as examples of accurate depictions of science . Carl Zimmer , a science commentator , praised the film , stating , " It shows how reconstructing the course of an outbreak can provide crucial clues , such as how many people an infected person can give a virus to , how many of them get sick , and how many of them die . " He also describes a conversation with the film 's scientific consultant , W. Ian Lipkin , in which Lipkin defended the rapid generation of a vaccine in the film . Zimmer wrote that " Lipkin and his colleagues are now capable of figuring out how to trigger immune reactions to exotic viruses from animals in a matter of weeks , not months . And once they 've created a vaccine , they don 't have to use Eisenhower @-@ era technology to manufacture it in bulk . " Paul Offit , a pediatrician and vaccination expert , stated that " typically when movies take on science , they tend to sacrifice the science in favor of drama . That wasn 't true here . " Offit appreciated the film 's usage of concepts such as R0 and fomites , as well as the fictional strain 's origins , which was based on the Nipah virus . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Contagion was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in North America on January 3 , 2012 , and in the United Kingdom on March 5 , 2012 . In its first week of release , the film topped the DVD chart with 411 @,@ 000 units sold for $ 6 @.@ 16 million . That same week it sold 274 @,@ 000 Blu @-@ ray copies for $ 4 @.@ 93 million , topping that chart as well . DVD sales dropped during the second week of release , with 193 @,@ 000 units sold for $ 2 @.@ 89 million . As of early July 2012 , Contagion had sold 802 @,@ 535 copies in DVD , for $ 12 @.@ 01 million in revenue . 
 = One of Us ( Lost ) = 
 " One of Us " is the 16th episode of the third season of Lost . It aired on April 11 , 2007 , making it the 65th episode of the series . The episode was written by Carlton Cuse and Drew Goddard and directed by Jack Bender . The title of the episode is not only a reference to the season two episode titled " One of Them " , it is also a major theme of the episode , as Jack tries to convince the other flight survivors that Juliet is " one of us " , rather than an Other . 
 The character of Dr. Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) is featured in the episode 's flashbacks , which reveal how Juliet got on the Island and why she went to the island in the first place . While on the island , Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) , Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) and Juliet trek back to the beach camp , and Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) is struck by a mysterious illness . Andrew Divoff , William Mapother and Nestor Carbonell again reprise their recurring roles as Others ; Mikhail Bakunin , Ethan Rom and Richard Alpert . The Island events in this episode take place between December 13 and December 15 , 2004 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Juliet arrives at an airport with her sister , where Richard Alpert and Ethan Rom are there to escort her the rest of the way . Juliet says good @-@ bye to her sister , Rachel , promising to be back before her baby is born . In the airport terminal , Alpert pours sedative into a glass of orange juice and gives it to Juliet to drink , explaining that the trip is very intense . Juliet is wary of drinking the juice , even though she is okay with the other circumstances surrounding the trip . Alpert interrupts and tells her the place she is going is very special and that she has a gift with which she is supposed to do something significant . Juliet drinks the orange juice and passes out . She wakes up in a submarine with her arms and waist strapped down for safety . 
 She then moves out onto a dock , where she meets Ben Linus . Juliet is shown operating with Ethan and Goodwin ( Brett Cullen ) on a pregnant patient , Sabine , who dies ; she is comforted by Goodwin . Juliet meets with Ben , and explains her theory that the problems with pregnant women happen at conception . She wants to test this theory by having a woman conceive off the island , but Ben refuses to let anyone off the island . When Juliet tells him that nothing else can be done and asks to go home and be with her sister , Ben informs Juliet that her sister 's cancer has come back . He offers her a choice : either Juliet can go home and be with her sister as she dies , or she can stay and he will have Jacob cure her sister 's cancer . 
 Juliet is in bed after sleeping with Goodwin . Afterwards , she is given x @-@ rays of Ben 's back , and when she determines that Ben has a tumor , she confronts him and accuses him of lying about Rachel . He denies lying to her and refuses to let her go home . The next day , immediately after Flight 815 crashes , Ben takes Juliet to the Flame Station to see Mikhail . Ben tells Mikhail that he wants information on all of the passengers of the plane , then asks him to bring up a live feed . On the screen a newspaper is shown with the current date , September 22 , 2004 , followed by a shot of Rachel playing with her child ( Rachel named her son Julian , presumably after Juliet ) in a playground , and Ben explains that her cancer is in complete remission . The final flashback shows Juliet and Ben discussing their plans immediately before the events of " Left Behind " . Ben tells her to handcuff herself to Kate and say she was left behind . She is also told that Claire 's " implant " has been " activated " and that this will make Claire ill . Juliet is to use drugs left at the drop point to cure her and earn the trust of the survivors ; Ben gives her a gas mask and leaves . While setting up her shelter , Juliet looks around the camp and ties a final double knot as Jack smiles at her . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 Jack Shephard , Kate Austen , Sayid Jarrah and Juliet Burke move back to the beach camp . As they stop for the night , Jack explains to Kate the deal he made with Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) . Sayid attempts to interrogate Juliet , but Jack intervenes and defends her . At the beach camp , Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) hears Claire Littleton 's baby , Aaron , crying and wakes up Claire . Claire says she is not feeling well , so Charlie offers to take care of Aaron . James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) sees Jack , Kate , and Sayid returning . Though happy about their return , he expresses his displeasure at seeing Juliet . 
 Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) engages Juliet in casual conversation . Juliet guesses that Hurley was sent to keep an eye on her . He tells her the last Other who came over , Ethan , was killed and buried nearby . 
 That night , Jack tells everyone that he trusts Juliet and that should be enough , but Sayid disagrees . Jack continues to explain that John Locke blew up the submarine that was to take him home . Claire suddenly collapses with blood gushing from her face . Juliet takes Jack and Kate aside and tells them she knows what 's wrong with Claire because she did it to her . At the camp , Juliet explains that Claire 's immune system has turned against her due to a latent reaction to medication in her bloodstream . The medication was designed by Juliet to keep Claire alive during her pregnancy . She was brought to the island to find out why women couldn 't have children . The mother 's body treats the pregnancy as a foreign invader and the immune system attacks ; every pregnant woman on the island has died . Claire was the first to survive even though she showed some of the symptoms . 
 Juliet explains that Ethan kept a stash of the serum at a nearby drop point . She goes out into the jungle and retrieves the serum , but Sayid and Sawyer have followed her , and they want answers . Juliet tells them there is no time , and realizing they are not going to budge , she stands up to them and says she finds it interesting that they are the camp 's moral police , considering their violent pasts . She takes the serum back to the beach and gives it to Jack . He warns her that if anything happens to Claire , he will not be able to protect her against the will of the survivors any longer and she would be alone , to which Juliet states that she already is . At the camp , Claire wakes up . She is feeling and looking much better . Juliet is now on the path to being trusted by the survivors . Jack brings her supplies to set up her tent area and tells her eventually everyone will need answers . Juliet asks why Jack trusts her and does not ask for answers . He says because when the submarine exploded , he saw in her eyes that she wanted to get off this island more than anything . That makes her " one of us . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " One of Us " was the nineteenth episode directed by Jack Bender . It was written by Carlton Cuse and Drew Goddard ; the pair had never before collaborated on an episode . 
 As usual , the scenes on the beach ( the survivors camp ) were shot at Oahu 's Papa <unk> Beach , while the island scenes were actually filmed at the Waialua <unk> Ranches . The <unk> secure building exterior scenes were shot at the Honolulu Advertiser Production and Distribution Building . Most of the scenes displaying the Others ' camp were shot at the Hawaii Film Studio , with the exception of the barracks which were filmed at YMCA Camp Erdman . The inside of the submarine was filmed inside the SS @-@ 287 which is located at the USS Arizona Memorial . Once again , the song " Downtown " by Petula Clark was used in flashbacks ; it was already used in the earlier episode " A Tale of Two Cities " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " One of Us " was watched by 12 @.@ 09 million Americans , ranking Lost as the twentieth most watched program of the week . Lost defeated CBS ' CSI : NY by 53 % among adults 18 @-@ 49 , the largest ever margin of victory for Lost over CSI : NY in original episodes . The ratings were also an increase over the previous episode , and improved the timeslot by 5 @.@ 7 million viewers over the same night last year . Lost was the fifth most watched program for the week in the key adults 18 @-@ 49 demographic , achieving 5 @.@ 2 million viewers . In the United Kingdom , the episode attracted 1 @.@ 09 million viewers , and was the second most watched program of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels , beaten only by Live FA Cup Football . 
 Reviewer Chris Carabott of IGN rated the episode with an 8 @.@ 7 out of 10 , commenting that " One of Us " was " yet another solid effort from long @-@ time Lost director Jack Bender who deserves credit for bringing us some of the best episodes the series has to offer . Bender has helmed " Walkabout " , " Man of Science , Man of Faith " and this season 's best " The Man from Tallahassee " just to name a few " . BuddyTV senior writer Jon Lachonis commented that " One of Us " was " perhaps the most perfect episode of Lost ever produced , bar none . For those of you who were upset with how inelegantly " Exposé " squandered its flashback opportunities , prepare for a huge apology from the producers . For those Lost fans who stuck around knowing that the show would obtain that mythical level of greatness that seemed to come so natural , here is your pay @-@ off . " In this same review , he complimented Elizabeth Mitchell on her portrayal of Juliet . 
 Mitchell submitted this episode for consideration for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = 1st Provisional Marine Brigade = 
 The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was a Marine infantry brigade of the United States Marine Corps ( USMC ) that existed periodically from 1912 to 1950 . It was an ad hoc unit formed for specific operations and not considered a " permanent " USMC unit . 
 The brigade saw five brief activations for service over a 40 @-@ year span . First created for duty in Cuba following the Negro Rebellion , the brigade was not activated again until 1941 when it was hastily constructed from the 6th Marine Regiment to garrison Iceland after the occupation of that country by British troops during World War II . The brigade saw service once more in the war during the Battle of Guam in the Pacific War , conducting an amphibious landing on that island 's southern sector and subduing resistance from Japanese troops . It was activated once more in a brief organizational shift after the war . 
 The brigade was formed again in 1950 when it was hastily assembled for service in the Korean War . The brigade participated in a counterattack at Masan before reinforcing United States Army units during the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , and at the First and Second Battles of Naktong Bulge along the Naktong River . The brigade was deactivated for the last time when it was merged with the 1st Marine Division . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade varied in size and structure each time it was created . Headquarters and Service Company , the company comprising the headquarters staff and support personnel , was much smaller than the equivalent company in standard Marine brigades . Each iteration of the brigade was assigned provisional military police , signal and other supporting companies and platoons . This was not an uncommon practice for the U.S. Marine Corps , which created such ad hoc units regularly in wartime . During World War II two other provisional Marine brigades were formed , which eventually expanded into divisions . 
 Component units varied considerably as well . In its first iteration in 1912 , the brigade had only 1 @,@ 200 men in two provisional regiments . When re @-@ formed for duty in Iceland in 1941 , it was based around volunteers from the 2nd Marine Division . Volunteers from the division were moved into the 6th Marine Regiment 's 1st , 2nd and 3rd Battalions , and the 10th Marine Regiment 's 2nd Battalion . It took 4 @,@ 095 men from A Company of the 2nd Tank Battalion , A Company of the 2nd Service Battalion , and parachute and antitank platoons . For the Iceland deployment , the 5th Marine Defense Battalion was attached . In its 1944 iteration , the brigade was far larger than a standard brigade , 9 @,@ 886 men , formed around the 4th Marine Regiment and the 22nd Marine Regiment , with provisional headquarters , military police , and signal companies and a provisional battalion of artillery . 
 The brigade 's Korean War organization was a 4 @,@ 725 @-@ man force based around the 5th Marine Regiment and supported by Marine Aircraft Group 33 , including military police , reconnaissance and intelligence companies . The attack force included the 1st Battalion , 2nd Battalion and 3rd Battalion of the 5th Marine Regiment as well as supporting companies from the 1st Combat Engineer Battalion , 1st Medical Battalion , 1st Motor Transport Battalion , 1st Ordnance Battalion , 1st Service Battalion , 1st Shore Party Battalion , 1st Signal Battalion , 1st Tank Battalion , 1st Amphibian Tractor Company , and 1st Combat Service Group . 
 In each of its iterations , the brigade was not organized as a permanent formation . Typically it was created only as a temporary front @-@ line unit while larger United States Marine units were formed . The brigade would then merge with these to form a Marine division . The 1942 brigade merged with the 2nd Marine Division , the 1944 brigade was the basis for the formation of the new 6th Marine Division , and the 1950 brigade acted as an advance force for the newly reactivated 1st Marine Division before merging into that unit . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was first created in 1912 for occupation duties in Cuba . Earlier that year , the Negro Rebellion had erupted throughout Cuba among former black slaves . A 1st Provisional Marine Regiment of 450 men under Colonel Lincoln <unk> was assembled in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , on 22 May . At the same time , a 2nd Provisional Marine Regiment of 750 men under Colonel James Mahoney assembled at Key West , Florida . The two regiments sailed for Cuba aboard the USS Prairie , with 1st Battalion , 2nd Regiment , landing at Havana and the remainder of the force at Guantanamo . There they combined to form the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade in early June under <unk> , and the United States Marines fanned out in Oriente Province , occupying 26 towns and controlling all rail traffic in the area . The Marines protected United States sugar plantations in Siboney and El Cobre until late July when the Cuban government was able to clamp down on the revolt . At that point , the Marines pulled back to Guantanamo , disbanded the brigade and returned home . 
 Another 1st Marine Brigade was created once again during the Occupation of Haiti . This brigade , however , was not considered a " provisional " unit and maintained a permanent establishment in Haiti from 1915 to 1934 . The 1st Marine Brigade was considered a separate unit lineage , and it was reactivated in 1941 and expanded to form the 1st Marine Division . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = Iceland = = = = 
 In May 1940 , during World War II , the United Kingdom initiated an invasion of politically neutral Iceland , fearing it would otherwise fall to the forces of Nazi Germany which had recently conquered Denmark . Iceland 's indigenous population was generally opposed to the British occupation , instead preferring troops of the United States , which was neutral at that phase in the war . Iceland signed a defense agreement with the United States in which United States troops would be stationed on the island nation . The U.S. Marine Corps hastily assembled the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade in Charleston , South Carolina , to move to Iceland as part of the agreement . The brigade was first activated on 14 July 1941 . Its elements were taken from the 2nd Marine Division , which was training at Marine Corps Base San Diego and Camp Elliott , both in San Diego , California . This brought the force up to a strength of 4 @,@ 095 men . They were the first of 28 @,@ 000 men occupying Iceland under Major General Holland M. Smith and his 1st Marine Division . While the 1st Marine Division was building its forces , though , the Provisional Brigade would hold Iceland . However , priorities soon changed and the 1st Marine Division was moved elsewhere . The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was instead joined by units of the United States Army . 
 Under the command of Colonel Leo D. <unk> and Brigadier General John Marston , the brigade sailed from San Diego to Charleston aboard the attack transports USS Heywood , USS Fuller , and USS William P. Biddle . There , they met with additional ships which sailed with their supplies as well as the remaining elements of the brigade , the 5th Defense Battalion . These elements were joined by the USS Orizaba , USS Arcturus , and USS <unk> on 27 June . They were escorted by Task Force 19 , a fleet of 25 United States Navy warships including the battleships USS Arkansas and USS New York as well as the cruisers USS Brooklyn and USS Nashville . The force stopped at Newfoundland , before continuing to Iceland , landing in Reykjavík on 7 July . There they relieved the British Army 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division of control of some areas of the country , while the British continued to administer the remainder . 
 The British commanders distributed the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade throughout camps around the Reykjavik area , to act as an emergency force which could quickly counter any German invasion . The British gave their division patch to the brigade , and it was worn for the remainder of the Marines ' time in Iceland . The Marines were joined by units of the U.S. Army and Army Air Corps in August 1941 . The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade troops spent much of their time in Iceland building infrastructure and bases to fortify Iceland against potential German attack . On 22 September , the British division departed Iceland and command was assumed by the United States Army . During the winter of 1941 – 1942 the brigade saw no combat and spent much of its time attempting to construct fortifications and drill for combat , hampered by a lack of supplies , communications equipment , transportation , and good weather . Aside from the occasional German reconnaissance aircraft , no German forces came to Iceland . 
 Following the 7 December attack on Pearl Harbor , the men were informed they would be redeployed from Iceland at the beginning of 1942 and would likely see combat in the Pacific Theatre . In January 1942 , the brigade began deploying back to the United States , one battalion at a time . Elements of the brigade were gradually relieved by Army units and returned to New York City aboard the USS McCawley and the USS <unk> until March 1942 , when the entire brigade was in New York . The brigade was disbanded in New York City on 25 March 1942 , and its component elements were reassigned to the 2nd Marine Division . Most of them were immediately dispatched to California and by the end of the year most of the Marines had been transferred to units fighting in the Guadalcanal Campaign . 
 = = = = Guam = = = = 
 On 18 April 1944 , the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was again activated , this time at Guadalcanal , and placed in reserve for a time , commanded by Brigadier General Lemuel C. Shepherd . In July , it was moved to the Marshall Islands for a planned invasion of Guam , an island under the control of the Empire of Japan . This much larger brigade was built around the 4th and 22nd Marine Regiments with supporting units , and comprised 9 @,@ 886 Marines . The brigade was assigned to III Amphibious Corps , a force almost 67 @,@ 000 strong , in anticipation of a 15 July invasion of Guam 's southern beaches , in conjunction with a northern landing by the Army 's 4 @,@ 500 @-@ man 305th Infantry Regiment , 77th Infantry Division . The brigade commenced training at Guadalcanal in conjunction with the 3rd Marine Division . Then , in early July , the two formations staged through the Eniwetok Atoll in preparation for the invasion . 
 On 21 July at 08 : 32 the 22nd Marines landed on beaches around <unk> while the 4th Marines landed at Bangi Point to the north . Opposing the U.S. landings were 22 @,@ 000 Japanese troops stationed on the island . The most intense fighting struck the other units of III Amphibious Corps to the north , which held through heavy Japanese counterattacks . The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade encountered lighter resistance on the southern beaches , but nonetheless fought a substantial Japanese force occupying <unk> Point , between the two regiments ' landing zones . Japanese defenders had built fortifications into the point , including Type 41 75 mm Mountain Guns which had gone undetected in U.S. reconnaissance probes , using them to pin down 20 amphibious vehicles supporting the 22nd Marines and slow their advance . The 22nd Marines subsequently spent most of the day capturing the point against stiff Japanese resistance . Their 1st Battalion was eventually able to capture <unk> , and the 2nd Battalion took Mount <unk> , 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) inland . In the meantime , the 1st Battalion of the 4th Marines took Bangi point with support from their 3rd Battalion . They then began an advance to Mount <unk> but were delayed by fierce Japanese resistance inland . At nightfall the Japanese mounted a large , coordinated counterattack which was unsuccessful . By the end of the day , the 4th and 22nd Marines were holding positions 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) into the island along a 4 @,@ 500 @-@ metre ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) front . The 305th Regimental Combat Team supported the Marines for several days before rejoining the rest of the 77th Infantry Division to the north . The 1st Brigade was 7 miles ( 11 km ) south of the 3rd Marine Division and 77th Infantry Division landing zones to the north at Asan . On 25 July , the two forces cut off <unk> Peninsula between the two landing zones , and the brigade turned west and cleared the peninsula until 29 July against heavier resistance , killing some 2 @,@ 500 Japanese . It advanced north in a sweeping motion with the 4th Marines on the right , west flank and the 22nd Marines on the left , east flank , until reaching the forces on the northern beach landings . 
 By 28 July , the 3rd Marine Division and 77th Infantry Division had formed a continuous flank and were advancing north . On 6 August , the brigade joined them on the left , western flank . Here , Japanese forces staged last stands in their remaining fortifications , and holdouts on Mount Santa Rosa were cleared on 8 August , <unk> Point on August 10 , and Pati Point the same day . The island was declared " officially " secure at 11 : 31 on 10 August , after 11 @,@ 000 Japanese dead had been counted . However , thousands of Japanese troops fled to the woods of Guam after the fight , and mop @-@ up operations continued long after the island was declared secure . By V @-@ J Day , the island had cost the Japanese 18 @,@ 400 killed and 1 @,@ 250 captured , and the Americans 1 @,@ 700 killed and 6 @,@ 000 injured . The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade , however , only assisted in mop @-@ up operations for a month . The 4th Marines moved along the north coast while the 22nd Marines patrolled inland to the south . 
 On 9 September 1944 , the brigade was disbanded and its elements were moved to Guadalcanal where the new 6th Marine Division was forming . That division was activated on 25 September 1944 . Most of the Provisional Marine Brigade units were transferred to the command of the 6th Marine Division . The 29th Marine Regiment was added to form the division . 
 = = = After the war = = = 
 The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was briefly re @-@ formed in the post @-@ war era on 1 June 1947 , by enlarging the 1st Battalion , 11th Marines . The force served as a contingency force for the Pacific Ocean area , based in Camp Witek , Guam . However , as post @-@ war military spending was drastically cut , the brigade at this time was far undermanned , and considered only a " paper unit " . It was again " downsized " and re @-@ designated the 1st Provisional Artillery Battalion on 1 October 1947 . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 The U.S. Marine Corps , which had been drastically reduced in size after World War II , was unprepared at the outset of the Korean War on 25 June 1950 . The Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered the Marine Corps to ready a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ man division for duty in Korea as a part of the United Nations Command being created there . The Marine Corps began rebuilding the 1st Marine Division to wartime strength , but in the meantime assembled a 4 @,@ 725 @-@ man force around the 5th Marine Regiment to assist in the war effort as quickly as possible . On 7 July the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was reactivated in California . One week later it sailed from Long Beach and San Diego . The regiment , which had originally been slated for landing in Japan , bypassed that country and landed at Pusan in South Korea on 3 August . As it sailed to Korea , it was put under the command of Brigadier General Edward A. Craig , who met the brigade in @-@ country . The brigade was supported by Marine Aircraft Group 33 , and became a subordinate unit of the Eighth United States Army under Lieutenant General Walton Walker , who placed it in his reserve . 
 = = = = Task Force Kean = = = = 
 The brigade was immediately moved to Masan , the westernmost flank of the Pusan Perimeter , which the Eighth Army had set up to resist the North Korean Army which was attempting to overrun the UN forces . The brigade joined the U.S. 25th Infantry Division and the 5th Regimental Combat Team , under Major General William B. Kean . The three units together formed " Task Force Kean " , a formation of about 20 @,@ 000 men . 
 General Walker and the Eighth Army began preparing a counteroffensive , the first conducted by the UN in the war , for 6 August . It would kick off with an attack by the U.S. reserve units on the Masan area to secure Chinju from the North Korean 6th Division , followed by a larger general push to the Kum River in the middle of the month . One of Walker 's goals was to break up a suspected massing of North Korean troops near Taegu by forcing the diversion of some North Korean units southward . On 6 August , the Eighth Army issued the operational directive for the attack by the task force . The plan of attack was to move west from positions held near Masan , seize the Chinju Pass , and secure the line as far as the Nam River , and depended on the arrival of the entire U.S. 2nd Infantry Division , as well as three more battalions of American tanks which were en route from the United States . 
 Task Force Kean kicked off its attack on 7 August , moving out from Masan . The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade surged forward to Pansong , quickly inflicting 350 casualties on the North Koreans as it overran the North Korean 6th Division 's headquarters . The other units of the Task Force , however , were slowed by North Korean resistance . Task Force Kean pressed on the Chindong @-@ ni area , resulting in a confused battle where the fragmented force had to rely on air strikes and airdrops to keep it effective . Task Force Kean 's offensive had collided with one being delivered simultaneously by the North Korean 6th Division . 
 Heavy fighting continued in the area for three days . By 9 August , Task Force Kean was poised to retake Chinju . The task force , aided by air power , initially advanced quickly though North Korean resistance was heavy . On 10 August , the Marines picked up the advance , inadvertently encountering the North Korean 83rd Motorized Regiment of the 105th Armored Division , which was caught off @-@ guard and attempted to withdraw . F4U Corsairs from the 1st Marine Aircraft Wing strafed the retreating column repeatedly , inflicting 200 casualties and destroying about 100 of the regiment 's equipment vehicles , but 1st Provisional Marine Brigade forces were not able to follow up the attack , as they were redeployed elsewhere on the perimeter on 12 August . Task Force Kean continued forward , supported by field artillery , capturing the area around Chondong @-@ ni . At that time , Eighth Army requested several of its units to redeploy to Taegu to be used elsewhere on the front , particularly at the Naktong Bulge . 
 At the end of the counteroffensive on 14 August , Task Force Kean had failed in its two objectives of diverting North Korean troops from the north and reaching the Chinju pass . The NK 6th Division had been reduced to 3 @,@ 000 or 4 @,@ 000 and had to replenish its ranks with South Korean conscripts from Andong . Fighting in the region continued for the rest of the month . 
 = = = = First Naktong Bulge = = = = 
 Immediately north on the line , the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was desperately needed to break a stalemate between the U.S. 24th Infantry Division and the NK 4th Division . Beginning at midnight on the night of 5 – 6 August , North Koreans had begun crossing the Naktong River at the Ohang ferry site , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) south of Pugong @-@ ni and west of Yongsan , carrying light weapons and supplies over their heads or on rafts . At 02 : 00 on the morning of 6 August , the North Koreans began engaging the 3rd Battalion , U.S. 34th Infantry Regiment , and moved forward after a short fight , attempting to penetrate the lines to Yongsan . The North Korean infantry forced the 3rd Battalion back , and the battalion abandoned its command post to consolidate its positions . The North Koreans surprised the Americans , who had been expecting an attack from further north , and captured a large amount of American equipment . The attack threatened to split the American lines and disrupt supply lines to the north . 
 Repeated American attacks resulted in a stalemate . By the morning of 7 August , North Koreans were able to press forward and capture the Cloverleaf Hill and Oblong @-@ ni Ridge , critical terrain astride the main road in the bulge area . By 16 : 00 that day , the U.S. 9th Infantry Regiment , U.S. 2nd Infantry Division , a newly arrived unit , was sent to the region . 24th Infantry Division commander Major General John H. Church immediately ordered it to attack the Naktong Bulge salient . Despite a tenacious attack , the 9th Infantry was only able to regain part of Cloverleaf Hill before intense fighting stalled its movement . 
 The NK 4th Division had in the meantime constructed underwater bridges of sandbags , logs and rocks , finishing the first one the day before . It moved trucks and heavy artillery across the river over this bridge , as well as additional infantry and a few tanks . By the morning of 10 August close to two full North Korean regiments were across the river and occupying fortified positions . After a series of unsuccessful counterattacks , the threat to Yongsan necessitated more U.S. reinforcements . As U.S. casualties mounted , a frustrated Walker ordered the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade to the area . They mounted a massive offensive on Cloverleaf Hill and Obong @-@ ni beginning at 08 : 00 on 17 August , unleashing all available heavy weapons : artillery , mortars , M26 Pershing tanks , and airstrikes . 
 At first , tenacious North Korean defense halted the Marines . Heavy indirect fire forced the North Koreans out of their positions before the Marines and Task Force Hill overwhelmed them , one hill at a time . The Marines approached Obong @-@ ni first , destroying resistance on the slope with an airstrike and a barrage from U.S. tanks , but strong resistance caused heavy casualties , and they had to withdraw . The 18th North Korean Regiment , in control of the hill , mounted a disastrous counterattack in hopes of pushing the Marines back . The division 's previously successful tactics of cutting off supplies and relying on surprise failed in the face of massive U.S. numerical superiority . 
 By nightfall on 18 August , the North Korean 4th Division had been annihilated ; huge numbers of deserters had weakened its numbers during the fight , but by that time , Obong @-@ ni and Cloverleaf Hill had been retaken by the U.S. forces . Scattered groups of North Korean soldiers fled back across the Naktong , pursued by American planes and artillery fire . The next day , the remains of 4th Division had withdrawn across the river . In their hasty retreat , they left a large number of artillery pieces and equipment behind which the Americans later pressed into service . 
 The battle caused heavy casualties for both sides . By the end of the fight , the NK 4th Division had only 300 or 400 men in each of its regiments . Of its original 7 @,@ 000 men , the division now had a strength of only 3 @,@ 500 , having suffered over 1 @,@ 200 killed . Several thousand members of the division deserted during the fight . Most of these men were South Korean civilians forcibly conscripted into the North Korean army . The NK 4th Division would not recover until much later in the war . The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade reported 66 Marines dead , 278 wounded , and one missing . In total , American forces suffered around 1 @,@ 800 casualties during the battle , with about a third of those killed . 
 = = = = Second Naktong Bulge = = = = 
 By 1 September , the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was down to 4 @,@ 290 men , having suffered 500 casualties in its month of Korean service , and was preparing to move back to Pusan to evacuate to Japan . There , the brigade was to join with Marine reinforcements to re @-@ form the 1st Marine Division , which would then be a part of X Corps for a counterattack at Inchon . However , the North Korean Great Naktong Offensive delayed these plans , as the brigade was needed to repel one more North Korean crossing of the Naktong River . 
 At the same time , the 1st and 2nd Regiments of the NK 9th Division , in their first offensive of the war , stood only a few miles short of Yongsan after a successful river crossing and penetration of the American line . Division commander Major General Pak Kyo Sam felt the chances of capturing Yongsan were strong . 
 On the morning of 1 September , with only the shattered remnants its E Company at hand , the U.S. 9th Infantry Regiment , 2nd Infantry Division , had virtually no troops to defend Yongsan . Division commander Major General Lawrence B. Keiser formed ad @-@ hoc units from his support troops but they were not enough to counter the North Korean attack . 
 On 2 September , Walker spoke by telephone with Major General Doyle O. Hickey , Deputy Chief of Staff , Far East Command , in Tokyo . He described the situation around the Perimeter and said the most serious threat was along the boundary between the U.S. 2nd and 25th Infantry Divisions . He said he had started the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade toward Yongsan but had not yet released them for commitment there and he wanted to be sure that General of the Army Douglas MacArthur approved his use of them , since he knew that this would interfere with other plans of the Far East Command . Walker said he did not think he could restore the 2nd Division lines without using them . Hickey replied that MacArthur had the day before approved the use of the Marines if and when Walker considered it necessary . A few hours after this conversation , at 13 : 15 , Walker attached the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade to the U.S. 2nd Division and ordered a coordinated attack by all available elements of the division and the Marines , with the mission of destroying the North Koreans east of the Naktong River in the 2nd Division sector and of restoring the river line . The Marines were to be released from 2nd Division control as soon as this mission was accomplished . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A conference was held that afternoon at the U.S. 2nd Division command post , attended by leaders of the U.S. Eighth Army , 2nd Division , and 1st Provisional Marine Brigade . A decision was reached that the Marines would attack west at 08 : 00 on 3 September astride the Yongsan – Naktong River road , and U.S. Army troops would attack northwest above the Marines and attempt to re @-@ establish contact with the U.S. 23rd Infantry , while the 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion with remnants of the 1st Battalion , 9th Infantry , and elements of the 72nd Tank Battalion would attack on the left flank , or south , of the Marines to reestablish contact with the 25th Division . 
 The troops holding this line on the first hills west of Yongsan were G Company , 9th Infantry , north of the road running west through Kogan @-@ ni to the Naktong ; A Company , 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , southward across the road ; and , below the engineers , F Company , 9th Infantry . Between 03 : 00 and 04 : 30 on 3 September , the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade moved to forward assembly areas . The 2nd Battalion , 5th Marines , assembled north of Yongsan , the 1st Battalion , 5th Marines , south of it . The 3rd Battalion , 5th Marines , established security positions southwest of Yongsan along the approaches into the regimental sector from that direction . 
 Fighting began the night of 2 September , and at dawn on 3 September , U.S. troops gained the high ground which was part of the designated Marine line of departure . With help from Marine tank fire , G Company overcame heavy resistance , but this early morning battle for the line of departure delayed the planned attack . The Marine attack started at 08 : 55 toward North Korean @-@ held high ground 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) westward . The 1st Battalion , 5th Marines , south of the east @-@ west road , gained its objective when North Korean soldiers broke under air attack . Air strikes , artillery concentrations , and machine gun and rifle fire of the 1st Battalion now caught North Korean reinforcements in open rice paddies moving up from the second ridge and killed most of them . In the afternoon , the 1st Battalion advanced to Hill 91 . 
 North of the road the 2nd Battalion had a harder time , encountering heavy North Korean fire when it reached the northern tip of Hill 116 , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Yongsan . The North Koreans held the hill during the day , and at night D Company of the 5th Marines was isolated there . In the fighting west of Yongsan , Marine armor knocked out four T @-@ 34 tanks , and North Korean crew members abandoned a fifth . That night the Marines dug in on a line 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Yongsan . The 2nd Battalion had lost 18 killed and 77 wounded during the day , most of them in D Company . Total Marine casualties for 3 September were 34 killed and 157 wounded . Coordinating its attack with that of the Marines , the 9th Infantry advanced abreast of them on the north . 
 Just before midnight , the 3rd Battalion , 5th Marines , received orders to pass through the 2nd Battalion and continue the attack in the morning . That night torrential rains made the troops miserable . The North Koreans were unusually quiet and launched few patrols or attacks . The morning of 4 September , the weather was clear . The counterattack continued at 08 : 00 on 4 September , at first against little opposition . North of the road the 2nd Battalion quickly completed occupation of Hill 116 , from which the North Koreans had withdrawn during the night . South of the road the 1st Battalion occupied what appeared to be a command post of the NK 9th Division . Tents were still up and equipment lay scattered about . Two abandoned T @-@ 34 tanks in excellent condition stood there . Tanks and ground troops advancing along the road found it littered with North Korean dead and destroyed and abandoned equipment . By nightfall the counterattack had gained another 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 That morning , 5 September , after a 10 @-@ minute artillery preparation , the American troops moved out in their third day of counterattack . It was a day of rain . As the attack progressed , the Marines approached Obong @-@ ni Ridge and the 9th Infantry neared Cloverleaf Hill where they had fought tenaciously during the First Battle of Naktong Bulge the month before . There , at midmorning , on the high ground ahead , they could see North Korean troops digging in . The Marines approached the pass between the two hills and took positions in front of the North Korean @-@ held high ground . At 14 : 30 approximately 300 North Korean infantry came from the village of Tugok and concealed positions , striking B Company on Hill 125 just north of the road and east of Tugok . Two T @-@ 34 tanks surprised and knocked out the two leading Marine M26 Pershing tanks . Since the destroyed Pershing tanks blocked fields of fire , four others withdrew to better positions . Assault teams of B Company and the 1st Battalion with 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch rocket launchers rushed into action , took the tanks under fire , and destroyed both of them , as well as an armored personnel carrier following behind . The North Korean infantry attack was brutal and inflicted 25 casualties on B Company before reinforcements from A Company and supporting Army artillery and the Marine 81 mm mortars helped repel it . September 5 was a day of heavy casualties everywhere on the Pusan Perimeter . Army units had 102 killed , 430 wounded , and 587 missing in action for a total of 1 @,@ 119 casualties . Marine units had 35 killed , 91 wounded , and none missing in action , for a total of 126 battle casualties . Total American battle casualties for the day were 1 @,@ 245 men . 
 The American counteroffensive of 3 – 5 September west of Yongsan resulted in one of the bloodiest and most terrifying debacles of the war for a North Korean division , according to historians . Even though remnants of the NK 9th Division , supported by the low strength NK 4th Division , still held Obong @-@ ni Ridge , Cloverleaf Hill , and the intervening ground back to the Naktong on 6 September , the division 's offensive strength had been spent at the end of the American counterattack . The NK 9th and 4th divisions were not able to resume the offensive . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 During the previous night , at 20 : 00 on 4 September , Walker had ordered the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade released from operational control of the 2nd Division effective at midnight , 5 September . At 00 : 15 , 6 September , the Marines began leaving their lines at Obong @-@ ni Ridge heading for Pusan . They would join the 1st Marine Regiment and 7th Marine Regiment to form the new 1st Marine Division . 
 Walker had protested in vain against releasing the brigade , believing he needed it and all the troops then in Korea if he were to stop the North Korean offensive against the Pusan Perimeter . The order prompted a heated disagreement between Walker 's command and MacArthur 's command . Walker said he could not hold the Pusan Perimeter without the Marines in reserve , while MacArthur said he could not conduct the Inchon landings without the Marines . MacArthur responded by assigning two newly arrived units of the 3rd Infantry Division , the 17th Infantry Regiment and the 65th Infantry Regiment to Walker 's reserves . Walker did not feel the inexperienced troops would be effective , and believed the transition endangered the Pusan Perimeter at a time when it was unclear if it could hold back the North Koreans . The brigade moved to Japan and merged with the 1st Marine Division . It was deactivated as an independent unit for the last time on 13 September 1950 . 
 Permanent Marine brigades were established decades later , and a 1st Marine Expeditionary Brigade was formed in 1990 . However , the 1st Marine Expeditionary Brigade had no relation to the provisional unit which fought in Korea and did not assume its lineage . 
 = = Unit awards = = 
 Though not considered a " permanent " unit , the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was awarded campaign streamers for each of its missions , creating a lineage for the unit . Those streamers include : 
 = Radyr = 
 Radyr ( Welsh : <unk> ) is an outer suburb of Cardiff , about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) northwest of Cardiff city centre . Radyr is part of Radyr and Morganstown Community , for which the 2011 Census recorded a population of 6 @,@ 417 . 
 Morganstown is north of Radyr , on the other side of the M4 Motorway . Neighbouring communities are Whitchurch to the east on the opposite bank of the River Taff , Pentyrch to the west with St Fagans and Llandaff to the south . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Stone Age until the Norman Conquest = = = 
 Evidence of Stone Age occupation of the Lesser Garth Cave near Morganstown was discovered in 1912 and included worked flints . In 1916 excavation of a mound of 30 metres ( 100 ft ) in Radyr Woods revealed charcoal and Iron Age pottery . Radyr developed after the Norman invasion of Wales at the start of the 12th century and formed part of the Welsh Lordship or cantref of Miskin under the Lordship of Glamorgan created by the Norman King , William Rufus , in 1093 . 
 = = = Origin of the name = = = 
 Hints about the derivation of the name Radyr can be found in Lifris 's writings Life of St <unk> , written between 1081 and 1104 but relating to the earlier period around AD 530 , which mentions a croft or <unk> on the site called <unk> Hen . Lifris also tells the story of <unk> , a religious hermit who was held to have lived on the banks of the Taff . <unk> 's cell is the most likely origin of the name Radyr ; from the Welsh yr <unk> , meaning " the chantry " , although <unk> Hen is also possible . 
 = = = Norman occupation and Middle Ages = = = 
 The Norman motte in the " mound field " is a flat @-@ topped mound 30 metres ( 100 ft ) in diameter at the base and 3 @.@ 8 metres ( 12 ft ) high , surrounded by a ditch 7 metres ( 23 ft ) wide . An adjoining bailey to east of the motte could indicate the boundary between Norman and Welsh land . The motte was surrounded by a timber palisade around a wooden keep and formed part of a defensive line with similar mottes at Thornhill and Whitchurch . The early settlement that became Radyr developed around the Norman church and manor house in what is now Danescourt . Surveys in 1307 describe an agricultural hamlet surrounded by arable fields . The 14th century Welsh Lord of Radyr , <unk> ap Hywel , followed by his descendants , farmed the area until it was devastated by the Black Death and by battles between the Marcher Lords in 14th and 15th centuries when the whole area was laid waste . 
 = = = Mathew family = = = 
 In 1469 Thomas Mathew ( died 1469 ) , the third or fourth son of Sir David Mathew ( died 1484 ) of Llandaf , inherited the land by marriage to Catherine , heiress of Radyr , and built Radyr Court , a manor house on the site of what is now the Radyr Court Inn in Danescourt . The house was used as a court . Although it was destroyed by a fire in the 19th century , the three large dungeons survived and can still be seen at the Inn . On Thomas ' death , his lands passed to his eldest son David and then to his younger son William Mathew ( died 1528 ) , who was knighted by King Henry VII at the Battle of Bosworth in 1485 . Sir William accompanied Henry VIII to the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520 . His successor was his eldest son Sir George Mathew , who became MP for Glamorganshire and in 1545 Sheriff of Glamorgan . 
 Sir George created a deer park that ranged far north of Radyr . Tenant farmers there were evicted , and the loss of rental income contributed to the decline in the family 's fortunes . He had 24 children , eight of whom were illegitimate . Many were daughters , and Sir George needed large sums of money for their dowries . On his death Sir George 's lands passed to his eldest son William , who also became a MP and invested in the Pentyrch ironworks . This was an astute move as feudalism was giving way to early industrialisation . William 's descendants inherited a diminishing fortune . Captain George Mathew , the last of the family to live in Radyr , married Elizabeth Poyntz , and the couple left Radyr to live on her estates at <unk> in County Tipperary , Ireland in 1625 . 
 = = = Stuart period = = = 
 Radyr 's new owner was a wealthy landowner , Sir Edward Lewis , who was knighted by James I. Sir Edward owned St Fagans Castle and its surrounding lands , scene of the Battle of St Fagans in the English Civil War . The Lewis fortune passed to Elizabeth Lewis , who married Other Windsor [ sic ] , 3rd Earl of Plymouth , the principal landowner in Cardiff , Penarth and Barry . 
 A survey in 1766 shows that the Plymouth family owned the <unk> of most of Radyr . It continues to do so today . Plymouth Estates sold 22 acres ( 9 ha ) of residential land in Radyr in 2007 . 
 = = = Development from the 18th century = = = 
 Many residents of Radyr worked in the <unk> Tin Plate Works , on the other side of the River Taff in Whitchurch . The works opened in 1749 and closed in 1957 . 
 Samuel Lewis ' 1849 Topographical Dictionary of Wales says of Radyr : 
 " A parish , in the <unk> union of Cardiff , hundred of <unk> , county of Glamorgan , in South Wales , 3 ½ miles ( N. W. by W. ) from Cardiff ; containing 279 inhabitants . This parish probably derives its name , signifying " a cataract , " from the rushing waters of the river Tâf , by which it is bounded on the north @-@ east . It was formerly comprehended within the hundred of Miskin , but has been recently separated therefrom . It comprises about eleven hundred acres of arable and pasture land , inclosed and in a profitable state of cultivation : the surface is in some parts elevated , and in others flat , but no where subject to inundation ; the soil is a strong brown earth , favourable to the production of good crops of grain of all kinds , potatoes , and hay . The substratum is partly a hard brown stone , and partly limestone of very good quality . Radyr Court , formerly the seat of the family of Matthew , ancestors of the late Lord Llandaf , has been partially taken down , and the remainder has been modernised , and converted into a farmhouse . The turnpike @-@ road leading from Cardiff to <unk> passes a little to the south of the parish ; and the Tâf @-@ Vale railway runs through it , nearly parallel with the river , which is crossed by the line in this vicinity . Some of the inhabitants are employed at the iron @-@ works in the parish of Pentyrch . 
 The living is a vicarage , endowed with £ 200 royal bounty ; patron and <unk> , the representative of the late Earl of Plymouth , who is lord of the manor : the tithes have been commuted for £ 113 . 9s . 0d , of which a sum of £ 38 . 9s . 0d is payable to the <unk> , and a sum of £ 75 to the vicar . The church , dedicated to St. John the Baptist , is a neat plain edifice , with a curious turret at the west end . There is a place of worship for Calvinistic Methodists ; a Sunday school for gratuitous instruction is held in it , and another at Radyr Court . In the parish is a spring of very cold water , called Y Pistyll <unk> , " the bright water @-@ spout , " issuing from the side of a hill , under a considerable depth of earth over a limestone rock : it has by some writers been termed mineral , but it is not known to possess any other properties than that of its extreme coldness , which renders it efficacious in curing sprains and weakness of the sinews . " 
 Until the mid 19th century Radyr was a collection of small farms , crofts and cottages , but after Radyr railway station opened in 1863 , the population rose from 400 to more than 600 in 20 years . The Taff Vale Railway and its successor , the Great Western Railway , brought significant employment to Radyr . Junction Terrace ( the first street in Radyr ) was built to house the railway workers . It was the start of strong demand for housing in Radyr that transformed the hamlet . The Barry Railway 's Walnut Tree Viaduct , built in 1901 , dominated the village for some 70 years . 
 = = = Wartime = = = 
 In the First World War the community raised funds for a " Radyr bed " at the nearby Welsh Metropolitan Military Hospital in Whitchurch and established a " Citizen Guard " made up of those too old or too young to enlist . Losses suffered by the village are recorded on the War Memorial in Heol Isaf . 
 In the Second World War thousands of children were evacuated from metropolitan areas such as London , Birmingham and Liverpool . One evacuee from Woolwich , Patricia Armstrong aged nine , was knocked down by a passenger train and killed on a Saturday afternoon in May 1943 while using the <unk> foot crossing at Morganstown . She was lodged with a family in Morganstown . As air raids on Cardiff increased , even younger children from Radyr were evacuated to boarding schools at <unk> and Bridgend . 
 = = = Post @-@ war history = = = 
 An extensive housebuilding programme started in the 1960s , and Radyr 's population grew rapidly — particularly children . In 1964 Radyr Comprehensive School had 135 pupils on its roll . This number more than trebled in the next decade . A new development , the Danescourt estate , was built on land surrounding Radyr Court and St John the Baptist parish church , and the land was officially incorporated as a suburb of Cardiff in 1974 . <unk> Woods , near the development , was retained as the entire forest is protected by a tree preservation order and is home to many species of plants and wildlife . Radyr railway station was renovated in 1998 and the tracks through the station were renewed , reducing journey times to Cardiff city centre . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = UK Parliament and Welsh Assembly = = = 
 Radyr is in the Cardiff West parliamentary constituency and the Cardiff West Welsh Assembly constituency . 
 = = = Cardiff Council = = = 
 Radyr and Morganstown electoral ward has an electorate of 4 @,@ 368 ( 1 May 2008 ) and has one seat on Cardiff Council . The ward elected a Conservative , Roderick <unk> , in the election of May 2008 and he was re @-@ elected in 2012 . Cllr <unk> is a member of the Council 's Environmental Scrutiny Committee . 
 = = = Community Council = = = 
 Radyr and Morganstown Community Council is funded by an addition to the Council Tax bill paid by local residents . The Community Council is run by 11 elected councillors from three wards in the parish – Radyr North ( 4 seats ) , Radyr South ( 3 seats ) and Morganstown ( 4 seats ) . At the Community Council 's annual meeting on 15 May 2008 , David Silver was elected Chair of the Council for 2008 and 2009 and Rachel Granger was elected Vice Chair . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Geological structure = = = 
 The surrounding soils are mostly a strong , brown , dry earth , well adapted for arable farming and the growing of grains of all kinds that contributed to the area being a mostly farming community until the modern era . Soils were further enriched over the millennia by alluvial deposits from the River Taff . The bedrock under the whole area is predominantly sandstone , dating from both the Devonian period ( Old Red Sandstone ) and the Triassic ( New Red Sandstone ) laid down in arid conditions . These may subsequently have been ground down by the Taff valley glacier during the last ice age around 18 @,@ 000 years ago . Radyr Stone is a Triassic breccia used widely for decorative work in the Cardiff area , including Llandaff Cathedral , Cardiff Docks and in the bridges of the Taff Vale Railway . 
 = = = Radyr Weir = = = 
 The River Taff at this point runs roughly south through Taff 's Well , past Radyr and through Llandaff . 
 Radyr Weir was built in 1774 to divert water into a leat to the <unk> Tin Plate Works . The weir is the third obstacle to migratory salmon and sea trout — the others being Llandaff Weir and <unk> , both of which also have fish passes . Since the early 1980s , the salmon and sea trout stocks in the Taff have been recovering from nearly 200 years of industrial pollution and exploitation . In 1993 the National Rivers Authority monitored over 500 salmon and 700 sea trout returning to the river to spawn . 
 From 1749 , iron from Pentyrch was initially transported to the works using pack @-@ horses , then tub boats were used on the Taff passing onto the feeder via a lock at Radyr Weir . Parts of this lock can still be seen beside the feeder sluice . In 1815 the tub boats were discontinued and a tramway built along the Taff . There is a public picnic site by the Radyr weir . 
 A hydro @-@ electric scheme is being built on Radyr Weir to generate renewable energy . The Radyr Weir scheme will channel more than 500 million cubic metres of water per year through two turbines and is expected to generate 400 kW — enough energy to power three of the city ’ s leisure centres — which will save 700 tonnes of CO2 annually . 
 The River Taff through Radyr is flanked on both sides by an undeveloped greenway that passes uninterrupted through northern Cardiff all the way to Cardiff Castle in the centre of the city , before the river enters Cardiff Bay . 
 = = = Radyr Woods Nature Area = = = 
 Radyr Woods is a Site of Nature Conservation Importance and the adjoining Hermit Woods is also a Local Nature Reserve . The community nature reserve covers 14 acres ( 6 ha ) . It has a network of footpaths and boardwalks and includes evidence of Iron Age settlements and remains of an early cooking hearth . Originally part of the Tudor deer park owned by the Mathew family and later Radyr Quarry , the area is owned by Cardiff Council and Plymouth Estates , and managed by the Radyr community council with the support of Cardiff Council 's Parks Service . 
 Radyr Woods provides habitats for a wide range of species . It also has a number of natural springs that feed a duck pond and a kingfisher pond . Recent housing developments between the reserve and the railway line have added complementary public open space with picnic areas and a children 's play area . Since 1986 all maintenance and development of the reserve has been carried out by a volunteer group known as The Friends of Radyr Woods . 
 = = = Radyr hawkweed = = = 
 Radyr hawkweed is the common name of <unk> <unk> , a very rare endemic member of the aster , daisy , or sunflower family . It is a <unk> , so far only identified at Radyr . It was first identified in 1907 at the quarry , was described as a variety in 1948 and then as a separate species in 1955 . It has rarely been seen and regular surveys between 1998 and 2004 indicate that today only a single population of about 25 plants survives in the wild . 
 In the first survey of 1998 , only nine plants were identified in one single Radyr garden , where it traditionally grew on grassy banks and lawns , often in shade . It was no longer found at the original locality of Radyr Quarry where examples were last seen in 1985 . At Bridgend , six possible plants of the Radyr genus were found on an old garden wall , but confirmation of identification is still awaited . 
 Neither the species nor the sites have any current legal protection , and it could be under significant threat of survival in the long term from inappropriate gardening or care . Seed samples of the Radyr hawkweed have been provided to the Millennium Seed Bank , the international conservation project coordinated by the Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew , and plants are being carefully cultivated . The plant normally flowers between May and early July and Radyr residents are urged by botanists to be on the look out for further examples of the endangered species while walking in the area . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The 2001 census showed that the suburb had a total population of 4 @,@ 658 , of whom 2 @,@ 268 were male and 2 @,@ 390 were female . The average age was 39 @.@ 7 years . 68 @.@ 27 % of [ adult ] residents are married , with 20 @.@ 81 % having never married . 73 @.@ 97 % declared their religion as Christianity . 23 @.@ 97 % stated no religion and 0 @.@ 9 % stated Muslim . 96 @.@ 02 % stated their ethnicity as white , 1 @.@ 76 % as Asian , 1 @.@ 03 % as mixed race , 1 @.@ 01 % as Chinese , and 0 @.@ 2 % as Black . 15 @.@ 5 % are Welsh language speakers . 
 = = Landmark buildings and local attractions = = 
 <unk> Cheshire Home was once a private house owned by Sir Lewis Lougher MP . It later had two wings added to accommodate the residents , who are physically disabled young people . The Thatch , the only thatched cottage in Radyr , was built for the Mathias family in 1936 . St John the Baptist parish church is nearly 800 years old , but underwent a Victorian restoration in the 19th century . 
 The Taff Trail cycle path passes through Radyr via Radyr Weir . Other <unk> buildings include The Old Church Rooms and Radyr War Memorial . In nearby districts are St Fagans National History Museum ( formerly the Museum of Welsh Life ) and Castell Coch . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Church Rooms in Park Road were also a primary school until 1896 when the Board School was opened next door . Older pupils had to travel to secondary schools in Penarth by train . The part @-@ time Radyr Library serves the area . 
 = = = Nursery and primary schools = = = 
 Bryn Deri Primary School was opened in 1976 and has included a nursery school since September 1999 . Radyr has also a private pre @-@ school , Park Road Nursery , and a Welsh @-@ language nursery called <unk> <unk> , both of which are based in the Old Church Rooms . 
 Radyr Primary School in Park Road opened in 1896 , and new classrooms were added in 1968 to accommodate the rising population . The school currently has 11 classes and over 300 pupils . 
 = = = Secondary education = = = 
 Radyr Comprehensive School has more than 1 @,@ 400 pupils from across west Cardiff . It also has a large Sixth Form college with about 300 students , and an active adult education centre . 
 = = Churches = = 
 The Church in Wales Parish of Radyr is in the Diocese of Llandaff . The parish church of St John the Baptist , beside Radyr Chain , is now surrounded by the Danescourt housing estate . It is nearly 800 years old but was altered in the 19th century . It is a Grade II listed building . 
 Christ Church , although a larger building than St John 's , is the daughter church in Radyr . Designed by the Llandaff diocesan surveyor George Halliday , the nave was ready for use at Easter 1904 and the chancel and tower were completed in November 1910 . Also in 1910 John Taylor & Co of Loughborough cast a ring of eight bells for the tower . Lieutenant Colonel Fisher paid for the bells , and each bell is inscribed with the names of members of his family . 
 Radyr Methodist Church in Windsor Road replaced an earlier Methodist Church in Heol Isaf . Radyr is also served by Radyr Baptist Church , which worships in the Old Church Rooms in Park Road . 
 = = Sport and leisure = = 
 Llandaff North RFC is the closest rugby team to Radyr . Nearby <unk> Well RFC was formed in 1887 , and has provided three former Welsh Rugby captains and six Welsh International players during its history . 
 Radyr Golf Club was founded in 1902 after moving from its original nine @-@ hole course at the Tŷ Mawr in Lisvane . It is a 6 @,@ 053 yards ( 5 @,@ 535 m ) , par 69 ( SSS 70 ) course for men and 5 @,@ 485 yards ( 5 @,@ 015 m ) , par 72 ( SSS 72 ) for women , and operates all year round . Laid out by the course designer Harry Colt , the Chairman of the 2010 Ryder Cup recently described Radyr 's course as " One of Colt 's Little Jewels " . 
 Radyr Lawn Tennis Club was founded in 1914 by 20 Radyr ' Gentlemen ' , helped by the Earl of Plymouth Estates . Its first location was near the railway station but the courts were badly laid . Again with the help of Plymouth Estates , the club lifted the turf from all three grass courts and relaid it on its current site next to Christ Church on Heol Isaf . 
 Radyr Cricket Club was founded in 1890 by the Earl of Plymouth , who granted a hundred @-@ year lease for the current riverside ground to the local residents for a nominal sum . The pavilion was destroyed by fire in 1973 while the team were away on tour . Under the leadership of the new Chairman Keith Terry , a huge fund @-@ raising effort was made and a new pavilion opened on the footprint of the old one in 1975 . Radyr currently plays in the first division of the South Wales Premier Cricket League . 
 Cardiff Corinthians Football Club ( known locally as the " <unk> " ) has played its home games at the Riverside Football Ground in Radyr since 1974 and competes in the first division of the Welsh Football League . 
 The main shops in Radyr are in Station Road . One of the buildings on this road , Bryn <unk> , is now a dental surgery but was formerly the village post office . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century Radyr had a busy railway from where coal trains were transferred onto either the Taff Vale Railway to Cardiff Docks , or the Penarth district line to the docks at Penarth , 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) southwest of Cardiff city centre . Also , the Barry Railway Company freight route ran just to the north of Morganstown , over Walnut Tree Viaduct . To the south @-@ east of Radyr was an extensive railway marshalling yard which included another railway bridge over the Taff to provide an alternative route towards Llandaff . The sidings were lifted in preparation for a housing development in the 1970s . 
 Radyr railway station still handles significant traffic , with over 200 trains calling each weekday and more than 400 @,@ 000 passenger journeys per year . Radyr is the northern terminus of the Cardiff City Line . 
 = = = Bus = = = 
 Cardiff Bus services 63 and Stagecoach 's 122 operate from Morganstown and Radyr to Cardiff central bus station via Danescourt , Llandaf and <unk> . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 The <unk> road ( Heol Isaf ) runs through the centre of Radyr and Morganstown , leading north to Taff 's Well and the A470 towards Pontypridd , and south to the <unk> ( Llantrisant Road ) , which links Llantrisant with Danescourt , Llandaff and Cardiff city centre . 
 The M4 corridor around Cardiff was announced in 1971 as a replacement for a northern link road that had been planned since 1947 but never built . The northern " Lisvane and Radyr route " for the M4 was eventually chosen after a number of noisy public enquiries and active objections by residents from both communities . The new motorway was completed and opened on 10 July 1980 , and passes east – west between Radyr and Morganstown . Later this section was widened to three lanes in each direction at a cost of over £ 71 million , being completed in December 2009 . Radyr has no direct access to or from the motorway . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Radyr is twinned with Saint @-@ Philbert @-@ de @-@ Grand @-@ Lieu , a town south @-@ west of Nantes ( Cardiff 's twin city ) on the southern shores of the Lac de Grand Lieu in Loire @-@ Atlantique , France . The first exchange visit took place in May 1986 and Twinning Charters were signed by Chairmen of both community councils . On the 10th anniversary of the twinning fellowship , Radyr presented the people of St Philbert with a red telephone box . 
 The next year the French presented the Radyr community with a wine press , now sited in the gardens of the Old Church Rooms . The 20th anniversary was celebrated with a reception at the Old Church Rooms in 2006 . The twinning committee is one of the more active in the area and cultural exchanges between the two communities take place annually . In 2008 , 45 visitors from St Philbert visited Radyr , and a visit by villagers to St Philbert also took place . The twinning committee also arranges Boules tournaments and social events throughout the summer . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Several notable people are associated with Radyr . The children 's author Roald Dahl ( 1916 – 90 ) lived in the 1920s at a house called Tŷ Mynydd in Radyr ( which was demolished in 1967 ) . He called it an " imposing country mansion , surrounded by acres of farm and woodland " in his book Boy : Tales of Childhood . Jimi Mistry ( born 1973 ) , who is an Asian @-@ British actor and appeared in EastEnders , The Guru and East Is East , attended Radyr Comprehensive School . Actor Harry Ferrier also went to Radyr Comprehensive as he grew up in <unk> and Tess Griffiths ( Nee Davies ) . 
 Local sportsmen include Harry Corner ( 1874 – 1938 ) , an English cricketer who played in the Great Britain team that won a gold medal at the 1900 Summer Olympics , who lived , died and was buried in Radyr . Hugh Johns ( 1922 – 2007 ) , who was best known as a football commentator for ITV , retired and died in Radyr . Frank Meggitt ( 1901 – 45 ) , a Welsh cricketer , a right @-@ handed batsman and wicket @-@ keeper who played for Glamorgan , also lived in the town after retiring from the sport . The athlete and runner Timothy Benjamin ( born 1982 ) was born and raised in Radyr . 
 Another notable resident is Sir Martin Evans ( born 1941 ) , the Professor of mammalian genetics at Cardiff University who received the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research in 2001 , was knighted in 2003 and was awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize for medicine for his work on stem cells . He is also a Fellow of the Royal Society and a Fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences . 
 = = Radyr in the media = = 
 The outdoor scenes in an episode of the TV science fiction series Torchwood , called Small Worlds , were filmed mostly around Radyr Primary School . 
 = HMS Exeter ( 68 ) = 
 HMS Exeter was the second and last York @-@ class heavy cruiser built for the Royal Navy during the late 1920s . Aside from a temporary deployment with the Mediterranean Fleet during the Abyssinia Crisis of 1935 – 36 , she spent the bulk of the 1930s assigned to the Atlantic Fleet or the North America and West Indies Station . When World War II began in September 1939 , the ship was assigned to patrol South American waters against German commerce raiders . Exeter was one of three British cruisers that fought the German pocket battleship Admiral Graf Spee later that year in the Battle of the River Plate . She was extensively damaged during the battle and was under repair for over a year . 
 After her repairs were completed , the ship spent most of 1941 on convoy escort duties before she was transferred to the Far East after the start of the Pacific War in December . Exeter was generally tasked with escorting convoys to and from Singapore during the Malayan Campaign and continued on those duties in early February 1942 as the Japanese prepared to invade the Dutch East Indies . Later that month , she was assigned to the Striking Force of the joint American @-@ British @-@ Dutch @-@ Australian Command and took on a more active role in the defence of the Dutch islands . The culmination of this was her participation in the Battle of the Java Sea later in the month as the Allies attempted to intercept Japanese invasion convoys . Exeter was crippled early in the battle and did not play much of a role as she was forced to withdraw . Two days later , she attempted to escape inbound Japanese forces , but was intercepted and sunk by Japanese ships at the beginning of March in the Second Battle of the Java Sea . 
 Most of her crew survived the sinking and were rescued by the Japanese . About a quarter of them died during captivity . Her wreck was discovered in early 2007 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Exeter was ordered two years after her sister ship York and her design incorporated improvements in the light of experience with the latter . Her beam was increased by one foot ( 30 cm ) to cater for increases in topweight , and the boiler uptakes were trunked backwards from the boiler rooms , allowing for straight funnels further removed from the bridge rather than the raked funnels necessary in York to ensure adequate dispersal of the flue gasses . As the eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) gun turrets had proved not strong enough to accommodate the aircraft catapult originally intended , Exeter was given a pair of fixed catapults angled out from amidships in a ' V ' shape , with the associated crane placed to starboard . Consequently , the bridge was lowered ( that of York being tall to give a view over the intended aircraft ) , and was of a streamlined , enclosed design that was incorporated into later cruisers . 
 Exeter was slightly lighter than expected and displaced 8 @,@ 390 long tons ( 8 @,@ 520 t ) at standard load and 10 @,@ 620 long tons ( 10 @,@ 790 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 575 feet 1 inch ( 175 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 58 feet ( 17 @.@ 7 m ) and a draught of 20 feet 3 inches ( 6 @.@ 2 m ) . She was powered by four Parsons geared steam turbine sets , each driving one shaft , which developed a total of 80 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 60 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by eight Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . The ship carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 900 long tons ( 1 @,@ 900 t ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 628 officers and ratings . 
 The ships mounted six BL eight @-@ inch MK VIII guns in three twin turrets . The turrets were designated ' A ' , ' B ' and ' Y ' from front to rear . Their secondary armament consisted of four QF four @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk V anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in single mounts . They also mounted two single two @-@ pounder ( 40 mm ) light AA guns ( " pom @-@ poms " ) . The Yorks carried two triple torpedo tube above @-@ water mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . 
 The York @-@ class cruisers lacked a full @-@ length waterline armour belt . The sides of Exeter 's boiler and engine rooms and the sides of the magazines were protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armour . The transverse bulkheads at the end of her machinery rooms were 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) thick . The top of the magazines were protected by 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 140 mm ) of armour and their ends were 4 @.@ 375 inches ( 111 @.@ 1 mm ) thick . The lower deck over the machinery spaces and steering gear had a thickness of 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 In 1932 , Exeter had her side plating extended to enclose her open main deck as far back as the fore funnel . During that same refit , her pair of fixed catapults were finally installed for her embarked Fairey IIIF floatplanes . In 1934 – 35 , two quadruple mounts for Vickers 0 @.@ 5 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) AA machineguns replaced the pair of two @-@ pounder " pom @-@ poms " originally installed . About four years later , the catapults were replaced by a single revolving catapult and the ship now carried Supermarine Walrus amphibians . 
 While under repair in 1940 – 41 after her battle with the Admiral Graf Spee , the navy decided to upgrade her armament and fire @-@ control systems . The bridge was rebuilt and enlarged to accommodate a second High @-@ Angle Control System aft of the Director @-@ Control Tower ( DCT ) on top of the bridge , her single four @-@ inch AA guns were replaced with twin @-@ gun mounts for Mark XVI guns of the same calibre and a pair of octuple mounts for 40 mm " pom @-@ poms " were added abreast the aft superstructure . Enclosures ( " tubs " ) for single 20 mm Oerlikon guns were added to the roof of both ' B ' and ' Y ' turrets . The pole masts were replaced by stronger tripod masts because the Type 279 early @-@ warning radar had separate transmitting and receiving aerials , one at each masthead . In addition , a Type 284 fire @-@ control radar was fitted to the DCT . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Exeter , the fourth ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy , was laid down on 1 August 1928 , launched on 18 July 1929 and completed on 27 July 1931 . The ship was then assigned to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet , where she served between 1931 and 1933 . In 1934 she was assigned to the America and West Indies Station and remained there , aside from a temporary deployment to the Mediterranean during the Abyssinian crisis of 1935 – 36 , until 1939 . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War , she formed part of the South American Division with the heavy cruiser Cumberland , under Commodore Henry Harwood . The ship , commanded by Captain Frederick Bell , was assigned to Force G to hunt for German commerce raiders off the eastern coast of South America on 6 October 1939 . Three months later , Harwood ordered Exeter and the light cruiser Achilles to rendezvous with his own Ajax off the mouth of the River Plate , while Cumberland covered the Falkland Islands . The two other ships arrived on 12 December and Admiral Graf Spee spotted Exeter the following morning . 
 Captain Hans Langsdorff decided to engage the British and closed at full speed . Following British doctrine on how to engage ships like Admiral Graf Spee , Exeter operated as a division on her own , Achilles and Ajax as the other , to split the fire of the German ship . They were only partially successful as the ship concentrated her main armament of six 283 @-@ millimetre ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) guns on Exeter and her secondary armament of eight 150 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns on the light cruisers . Langsdorff opened fire at Exeter at 06 : 18 with high @-@ explosive shells and she returned fire two minutes later at a range of 18 @,@ 700 yards ( 17 @,@ 100 m ) . The German ship straddled the British cruiser with her third salvo ; splinters from the near misses killed the crew of the starboard torpedo tubes and damaged both seaplanes . After eight salvos from Exeter , Admiral Graf Spee scored a direct hit on ' B ' turret that knocked it out of action and splinters from the hit killed all of the bridge personnel except three . Bell , wounded in the face , transferred to the aft conning position to continue the battle . His ship was hit twice more shortly afterwards , but her powerplant was not damaged and she remained seaworthy , although her aircraft had to be jettisoned . 
 At 06 : 30 , Langsdorff switched his fire to the light cruisers , but only inflicted splinter damage on them before some of Exeter 's torpedoes forced him to turn away at 06 : 37 to evade them . Her second torpedo attack at 06 : 43 was also unsuccessful . In the meantime , Langsdorff had switched his main guns back to the heavy cruiser and scored several more hits . They knocked out ' A ' turret , started a fire amidships that damaged the ship 's fire @-@ control and navigation circuits , and caused a 7 ° list with flooding . She remained in action until flooding disabled the machinery for ' Y ' turret at 07 : 30 . At 11 : 07 , Bell informed Harwood that Exeter had one eight @-@ inch and a four @-@ inch gun available in local control and that she could make 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . He ordered Bell to head to the Falklands for repair . 
 Exeter was hit by a total of seven 283 mm shells that killed 61 of her crew were and wounded another 23 . After all Exeter 's guns had been put out of action but she was still seaworthy , Bell planned to collide with the enemy , saying " I 'm going to ram the <unk> . It will be the end of us but it will sink him too " . In return the ship had hit Admiral Graf Spee three times ; one shell penetrated her main armour belt and narrowly missed detonating in one of her engine rooms , but the most important one disabled her oil @-@ purification equipment . Without it , the ship was unlikely to be able to reach Germany . Several days later , unable to be repaired and apparently confronted by powerful Royal Navy reinforcements , Admiral Graf Spee was scuttled in Montevideo harbour . 
 Exeter made for Port Stanley for emergency repairs which took until January 1940 . She was repaired and modernised at Devonport Dockyard between February 1940 and March 1941 ; Captain <unk> Beckett relieved Bell on 12 December 1940 . On 10 March 1941 , the day Exeter was due to be re @-@ commissioned , Beckett died at Saltash Hospital from complications resulting from surgery related to injuries received earlier in his career . His replacement was Captain Oliver Gordon . On returning to the fleet , she was engaged on escort duty for Atlantic convoys , including the escort of Convoy WS @-@ 8B to the Middle East during the chase for the German battleship Bismarck . After the start of the Pacific War in December 1941 , the ship was transferred to the Far East . 
 Upon her arrival at Singapore on 13 January 1942 , Exeter was assigned to the ABDACOM naval force that was intended to defend the Dutch East Indies ( Indonesia ) from Japanese invasion . She spent the first several weeks of February escorting convoys in the East Indies . On 13 February , Allied reconnaissance aircraft spotted Japanese invasion convoys north of Bangka Island and the new commander of ABDA naval forces , Vice Admiral Conrad Helfrich of the Royal Netherlands Navy , was ordered to assemble the Allied Striking Force of Exeter and three Dutch and one Australian light cruisers at Oosthaven on the morning of 14 February . Escorted by six American and three Dutch destroyers , the force departed that afternoon . The Dutch Rear Admiral Karel Doorman , commanding the force , took his ships through the Gaspar Strait and then northwest towards Bangka Island . While passing through the strait , the Dutch destroyer Van Ghent struck a rock in poor visibility and another Dutch destroyer was tasked to take off her crew . The Japanese spotted the Allied ships around 08 : 00 and repeatedly attacked them . The first was a group of seven Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bombers from the light carrier Ryūjō that attacked Exeter with bombs around 10 : 30 . The blast from a near miss badly damaged her Walrus , but the ship was only damaged by splinters . They were followed shortly afterwards by a group of 23 Mitsubishi G3M " Nell " bombers from the <unk> Air Group that inflicted no damage as they dropped their bombs from high altitude . Another group of six B5Ns attacked without effect at 11 : 30 . 
 The repeated aerial attacks persuaded Doorman that further progress was unwise in the face of Japanese aerial supremacy and he ordered his ships to reverse course and head for Tanjung Priok at 12 : 42 . The attacks continued as 27 G3Ms of the <unk> Air Group then bombed from high altitude . Seven more B5Ns attacked fruitlessly at 14 : 30 ; a half @-@ dozen more followed an hour later . The final attack was made by 17 Mitsubishi G4M " Betty " bombers of the Kanoya Air Group shortly before dark . The Japanese attacks were almost entirely ineffectual , with no ship reporting anything more than splinter damage . In return Allied anti @-@ aircraft fire was moderately effective with most of the attacking bombers damaged by shell splinters . In addition one G4M crashed while attempting to land and another was badly damaged upon landing . 
 = = = = First Battle of the Java Sea = = = = 
 On 25 February , Helfrich ordered all available warships to join Doorman 's Eastern Striking Force at Surabaya . Exeter and the Australian cruiser Perth , escorted by three British destroyers , Jupiter , Encounter , and Electra , set sail at once , leaving behind one Australian cruiser and two destroyers that were short of fuel . After they had arrived the following day , Doorman 's entire force of five cruisers and nine destroyers departed Surabaya at 18 : 30 to patrol off Eastern Java in hopes of intercepting the oncoming invasion convoy which had been spotted earlier that morning . The Japanese were further north than he anticipated and his ships found nothing . His own ships were located at 09 : 35 on the following morning , 27 February , and were continuously tracked by the Japanese . Doorman ordered a return to Surabaya at 10 : 30 and his ships were attacked by eight bombers from the Kanoya Air Group at 14 : 37 . They claimed to have made two hits on Jupiter , but actually missed the British destroyer . Just as his leading ships were entering harbour , he received reports of enemy ships 90 miles ( 140 km ) to the north and Doorman ordered his ships to turn about to intercept them . 
 Aware of Doorman 's movements , the Japanese commander , Rear Admiral Takeo Takagi , detached the convoy 's two escorting destroyer flotillas , each consisting of a light cruiser and seven destroyers , to intercept the Allied ships in conjunction with his own pair of heavy cruisers , ( Nachi and Haguro ) , which were escorted by a pair of destroyers . His heavy cruisers opened fire at long range at 15 : 47 with little effect . The light cruisers and destroyers closed to ranges between 13 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 and 14 @,@ 000 m ) and began firing Type 93 " Long Lance " torpedoes beginning at 16 : 03 . All of these torpedoes failed to damage their targets , although one torpedo hit Exeter and failed to detonate at 16 : 35 . Three minutes later , Haguro changed the course of the battle when one of her shells penetrated the British ship 's starboard aft twin four @-@ inch gun mount before detonating in the forward boiler room , knocking six of her boilers off @-@ line and killing 14 of her crew . The ship sheered out of line to avoid another torpedo and slowed , followed by all of the trailing cruisers . Perth laid a smoke screen to protect Exeter and the Allied ships sorted themselves into separate groups as they attempted to disengage . Exeter was escorted by one Dutch and all three British destroyers in one group and the other cruisers and the American destroyers formed the other group . The Japanese did not initially press their pursuit as they maneuvered to use their torpedoes against the crippled Exeter , which could only make 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) , and her escorts . 
 The Japanese began launching torpedoes beginning at 17 : 20 at ranges of 10 @,@ 000 to 18 @,@ 500 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 to 16 @,@ 900 m ) , but they all missed . For some reason , two Japanese destroyers continued to close before firing their torpedoes at 6 @,@ 500 yards ( 5 @,@ 900 m ) and Encounter and Electra pulled out of line to counter @-@ attack . They engaged Asagumo and <unk> at close range as they closed . Asagumo was damaged by Electra , but the Japanese ship sank the British destroyer at 17 : 46 . In the meantime , Exeter continued south to Surabaya , escorted by Encounter and the Dutch destroyer Witte de With . Doorman 's repeated , unsuccessful , and ultimately fatal , attempts to reach the transports concentrated the Japanese on the task of protecting the transports and allowed the damaged British cruiser to reach harbour . 
 = = = = Second Battle of the Java Sea = = = = 
 The following day , after making temporary repairs and refuelling , Exeter , escorted by Encounter and the American destroyer Pope , was ordered to sail to Colombo , Ceylon , via the Sunda Strait . They departed on the evening of 28 February , but were intercepted by the Japanese heavy cruisers Nachi , Haguro , Myōkō and Ashigara and the destroyers Akebono , Inazuma , <unk> and Kawakaze on the morning of 1 March . About 08 : 00 , the British ships spotted two of the Japanese cruisers , one of which launched its spotting floatplanes . Two others were seen closing in , and both launched their aircraft before opening fire at about 09 : 30 . The Allied ships laid smoke and turned away to the east with the Japanese to their north and south . Exeter was able to reach a speed of 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) before the first hit on her again detonated in a boiler room and knocked out all power around 11 : 20 . The Japanese destroyers closed in and fired a total of 18 torpedoes , which made a number of hits . Two of those from from the destroyer Inazuma were claimed as hits and Exeter quickly capsized and sank . Encounter and Pope were also lost ; Pope temporarily escaped the initial melee , only to be sunk by B5Ns a few hours later . 
 The Japanese rescued 652 of Exeter 's crew , including her captain , who became prisoners of war . Of these men , 152 died in captivity . The wreck was located and positively identified in February 2007 . Exeter lies in Indonesian waters , at a depth of about 200 feet ( 61 m ) , 90 miles ( 140 km ) north of Bawean Island – some 60 miles ( 97 km ) from the sinking position given by Gordon after the war . 
 = Glamorgan sausage = 
 Glamorgan sausage ( Welsh : <unk> Morgannwg ) is a traditional Welsh vegetarian sausage for which the main ingredients are cheese ( usually Caerphilly ) , leeks and breadcrumbs . The earliest published mention of the dish is from the 1850s in the book Wild Wales by George Borrow , although earlier records in the Glamorgan Archives show a version which contains pork . The modern vegetarian version became popular during the Second World War when meat was harder to come by , and is now mass produced by at least two companies . Variations include swapping the leeks for onions , as well as different herbs and spices , and various types of cheese . 
 = = History = = 
 The origins of Glamorgan sausages are unknown . Research conducted at the Glamorgan Archives in Leckwith discovered that there is at least one traditional recipe which used meat . In a notebook dated between 1795 and 1813 , John Perkins , of Ty @-@ draw , <unk> , included 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) each of lean pork and fat in his recipe for Glamorgan sausage . The spicing was also different from modern versions , calling for the use of cloves , sage and ginger . 
 The first published mention of them was by George Borrow in his book Wild Wales , written in the 1850s and published in the next decade . He described them as " not a whit inferior to those of Epping " ; Epping sausages were skinless meat @-@ based sausages . Borrow visited Y <unk> Fawr ( now known as <unk> ) ; the <unk> Arms has been suggested as the location at which Borrow ate his sausages . Advertisements promoting the sale of Glamorgan sausages in the British Newspaper Archive begin to appear from 1869 onwards , with the first advert placed by pork butcher Henry S. Morgan of 288 Bute Street , Cardiff , placed in the Western Mail on 15 December . Morgan continued to advertise over the next several years , and by 1874 was claiming that the demand necessitated making the sausages on an hourly basis , and referenced other makers of the sausages making theirs days in advance prior to sale . The advert makes it clear that the sausages were made from " choice dairy @-@ fed pork " . 
 Glamorgan sausages are thought to have been originally made with Glamorgan cheese which is no longer made due to the near @-@ extinction of the Glamorgan cattle from which it was produced . They rose in popularity during the Second World War due to rationing limiting the volume of meat . The Welsh Gas Board promoted the sausage in a cookbook published in the 1950s , in which it did not specify the type of cheese to be used . 
 In 2005 , a campaign began to register the Glamorgan sausage under the European Union geographical indications and traditional specialities scheme . This would have resulted in only Glamorgan sausages that were made in Glamorgan being labelled as such . The move was led by Greta Watts @-@ Jones , who runs the Cwrt Newydd company in Cowbridge , which was the only major manufacturer in the area . Her main competitor , Cauldron Foods , is based in Bristol , England . This protection had previously been extended to Welsh lamb and beef . The vote to gain this status , alongside Caerphilly cheese , was held in March 2006 at the European Parliament , but was not passed into law . 
 = = Recipe = = 
 Traditionally vegetarian , in modern versions , Caerphilly cheese is used , which is a descendant of the old traditional Glamorgan cheese recipe and lends the same general texture and flavour . The basic recipe calls for a mixture of cheese , leeks and breadcrumbs , although some recipes swap the leeks for onions or spring onions and may add herbs such as parsley or further flavourings such as mustard . The mixture is then rolled into sausage shapes , and then fried . There is no sausage casing used , although egg is used to bind the mixture so that it does not fall apart during the cooking process . 
 = = = Variations = = = 
 In various recipes , other substitutions and additions are suggested . The Hairy Bikers ( Dave Myers and Si King ) suggest Welsh cheddar as an alternative to Caerphilly and propose that it should be served with a red onion and chilli pepper relish . An Australian recipe suggests Lancashire cheese as an alternative ingredient . Regarding the breadcrumbs , chef Bobby Freeman suggests using half brown and half white breadcrumbs , while the cookbook for the London @-@ based restaurant Canteen proposes using a combination of boiled potatoes and breadcrumbs for the coating of the sausage . 
 Cooking techniques for the leeks vary , as some recipes call for them to be mixed in raw , while others suggest browning them first in a frying pan . If left raw , they can lend a crunchier texture to the sausage . Both the Hairy Bikers and Canteen opt for cooking the leeks first . A variety of herbs are used , with Canteen using sage as seen in the Perkins recipe , in addition to nutmeg . The Welsh gas board recipe simply called for " mixed herbs " , while Felicity Cloake in The Guardian suggested the addition of thyme . For the frying , the gas board and chef Sophie Grigson suggested the use of lard , while the Bikers used vegetable oil . Both Cloake and The Daily Telegraph writer Nigel Godwin proposed frying Glamorgan sausages in butter . 
 = Against All Odds ( 2008 ) = 
 Against All Odds ( 2008 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , which took place on February 10 , 2008 at the BI @-@ LO Center in Greenville , South Carolina . It was the fourth event under the Against All Odds chronology and the second event in the 2008 TNA PPV schedule . Nine professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's card , four of which involved championships , while two matches were held prior to the event . 
 The main event was for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship with Samoa Joe as Special Outside Enforcer between then @-@ champion Kurt Angle and the challenger Christian Cage . Angle ended up winning the bout , thus retaining the championship . Jay Lethal and The Motor City Machine Guns ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ) fought Johnny Devine and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) in a Six Man Tag Team Street Fight on the card . Lethal and The Motor City Machine Guns won the encounter . A Barbed Wire Massacre between Abyss and Judas Mesias was held at Against All Odds , which Abyss won . Booker T fought Robert Roode to a double countout in another highly promoted match for the event . 
 This is the first event to have matches featured from different arenas air on the same show . This event also marked the second time the Barbed Wire Massacre match type was used by TNA . Chris Sokol of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the event a seven and a half out of ten , higher than the six out of ten given to the 2007 event 's ranking by Chris Sokol . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The next installment in the Against All Odds chronology was announced in late @-@ November 2007 to take place on February 10 , 2008 at the BI @-@ LO Center in Greenville , South Carolina . Tickets for the event went on sale December 7 , 2007 . In January 2008 , In Demand listed a preview regarding Against All Odds , which advertised the event would hold the second @-@ ever Barbed Wire Massacre . The South Carolina Athletic Commission originally gave TNA permission to hold Barbed Wire Massacre , however they receded their blessing prior to the event . Due to this , TNA were forced to change the location of the bout from the BI @-@ LO Center to the TNA Impact Zone in Orlando , Florida . TNA taped the match between Abyss and Judas Mesias on January 22 , 2008 at the tapings of the January 31 and February 7 , 2008 episodes of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! . Consequences Creed taking part in a match prior to the show was promoted by TNA on their website . Due to poor ticket sales , it was reported TNA gave away several tickets for free . TNA released a poster featuring Abyss sometime prior to help promote the event . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Against All Odds featured nine professional wrestling matches and two matches prior to the event that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated into a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event at Against All Odds was for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship with Samoa Joe as Special Outside Enforcer between then @-@ champion Kurt Angle and the challenger Christian Cage . On January 6 , 2008 at TNA 's previous PPV event Final Resolution , Angle defeated Cage to retain the championship after Cage 's alliance A.J. Styles attacked Cage , aligning with Angle and The Angle Alliance . On the January 10 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Management Director Jim Cornette announced that Cage , Joe , and Styles would compete in a Three Way match on the January 17 , 2008 episode of Impact ! . Stipulations for the match were that the winner would get a TNA World Heavyweight Championship match against Angle at Against All Odds , however if Styles won he could choose instead of the title match to allow Angle to not have to defend his title for two months . Cage ended up winning the contest , thus becoming the number one contender . On the January 24 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Cornette announced that Joe would be the Special Outside Enforcer at Against All Odds due him being controversially disqualified during the match . Also connected to the storyline was the allegiance of former Christian 's Coalition and The Angle Alliance member Tomko to either Cage or Angle . Heading up to the match , Tomko explained he was not on either 's side , despite being one @-@ half of the TNA World Tag Team Champions with Styles . On the January 31 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Tomko defeated Angle after interference from Cage . This resulted in Tomko and Cage seeming to be on the same page on the February 7 , 2008 episode of Impact ! . 
 The main storyline in TNA 's X Division revolved around Team 3D 's ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) attempt to eliminate the X Division . This feud began on the October 18 , 2007 episode of Impact ! when Team 3D attacked The Motor City Machine Guns ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ; MCMG ) and proclaimed they were going to eliminate the X Division . MCMG went on to defeat Team 3D at TNA 's Genesis PPV event on November 11 , 2007 . At the same event , Team 3D attacked and stole the TNA X Division Championship from then @-@ champion Jay Lethal . On the November 15 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , Johnny Devine turned on the X Division and joined Team 3D in their quest . Team 3D and Devine went on to defeat Lethal and MCMG in a Six Man Tag Team Tables Match at TNA 's Turning Point PPV event on December 2 , 2007 . The two teams then faced again at Final Resolution in a Six Man Tag Team Ultimate X match , which Team 3D and Devine won . On the January 10 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Devine and Team 3D challenged Lethal and MCMG to a Street Fight at Against All Odds , with the stipulation that if Team 3D won the X Division would disband , but if Lethal and MCMG won they would regain possession of the TNA X Division Championship and the X Division would continue to exist . On the January 17 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Lethal and MCMG accepted the agreement but only after including that Team 3D would have to weigh less than 275 pounds in order to compete in their matches in TNA . On the January 24 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Devine defeated Lethal to become the new TNA X Division Champion . 
 The second @-@ ever Barbed Wire Massacre was promoted for Against All Odds between Abyss and Judas Mesias . The feud for this match began in mid @-@ 2007 when Abyss ' former manager Father James Mitchell returned and began a storyline with Abyss . Mesias made his debut on the September 13 , 2007 episode of Impact ! attacking Abyss at the request of Mitchell . After months of inactivity , Mesias returned on the December 13 , 2007 episode of Impact ! attacking Abyss . At Final Resolution , Mesias defeated Abyss with help from Mitchell . On the January 24 episode of Impact ! , Mitchell finally announced his reasons for feuding with Abyss , that he was Abyss ' father and Mesias was Abyss ' half @-@ brother in the narrative . TNA promoted a Barbed Wire Massacre match between Abyss and Mesias at Against All Odds sometime after this . 
 At Final Resolution , the team of Robert Roode and Ms. Brooks fought the team of Booker T and Sharmell . The storyline behind this encounter involved Sharmell coming to the defense of Roode 's manager Ms. Brooks , who Roode verbally abused on the December 13 , 2007 episode of Impact ! . After the encounter , Roode accidentally punched Sharmell in the face , resulting in a storyline fractured jaw which sidelined her from appearing for the promotion and upsetting her real @-@ life husband Booker T. Following the event , Roode fired Brooks and higher her replacement Payton Banks on the January 10 episode of Impact ! , setting up a match between the two at Against All Odds . TNA promoted a match between Booker T and Robert Roode heading into Against All Odds . 
 Two matches taking place at Against All Odds revolved around the Feast or Fired cases won at Turning Point by B.G. James , Petey Williams , and Scott Steiner . On the December 13 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , James was revealed to hold a future TNA World Tag Team Championship match with a partner of his choice , Williams ' case was shown to hold a future TNA World Heavyweight Championship match , and Steiner 's case held a future TNA X Division Championship match . During the segment , Steiner switched his case with Williams prior to the contents being revealed . This created a storyline between the two leading up to the January 31 , 2008 episode of Impact ! when Steiner teamed with Williams to face The Rock ' n Rave Infection ( Jimmy Rave and Lance Hoyt ) . During the contest , Steiner stole Williams ' case , bashed Williams with it , and left the arena . On the February 7 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Cornette announced that Steiner and Williams would face at Against All Odds in which the winner would gain both cases . In the weeks following the December 13 episode , B.G. ' s Voodoo Kin Mafia tag team partner Kip James inquired on when B.G. would announce his tag team partner . Finally , on the January 17 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , B.G. announced his choice was his real @-@ life father Bob Armstrong . On the January 24 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , B.G. and Armstrong announced they would use their title shot at Against All Odds . TNA later promoted A.J. Styles and Tomko versus B.G. James and Bob Armstrong for the TNA World Tag Team Championship for the event . 
 = = Event = = 
 Two matches were held prior to the event . The first was a tag team match pitting Jackie Moore and newly named Traci Brooks against <unk> <unk> The Rise Guys ( Skip and Mattman ) , which Moore and Brooks won when Moore gained the pinfall . The second was also a tag team match , in which the team of Sonjay Dutt and Consequences Creed defeated The Rock ' n Rave Infection ( Jimmy Rave and Lance Hoyt ) after Creed gained the fall on Rave . 
 = = = On @-@ air employees = = = 
 The event featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Earl Hebner , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees for the encounters . Crystal Louthan , Scott Hudson , and Borash were used as interviewers during the event . Besides employees appearing in a wrestling role , Jackie Moore , Raisha Saeed , Jim Cornette , Father James Mitchell , Sonjay Dutt , SoCal Val , and Karen Angle all appeared on camera , either in backstage or ringside segments . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 A.J. Styles and Tomko defended the TNA World Tag Team Championship against the team of B.G. James and Bob Armstrong in the opening match . It lasted seven minutes and forty @-@ five seconds . B.G. and Armstrong were accompanied to the ring by United States Military officers . B.G. was injured in storyline after Styles hit him in the leg with a dropkick during the contest . Tomko and Styles won the match after they performed their signature tag team Tornado – Plex maneuver forcing B.G. into the mat to retain the TNA World Tag Team Championship . 
 Traci Brooks fought Payton Banks in the second bout , lasting five minutes and seven seconds . Brooks won the bout after gaining a pinfall with a schoolgirl pin . After the match , Banks attacked Brooks . 
 The TNA World Heavyweight and TNA X Division Feast or Fired Title shots were fought over in the match between Scott Steiner and Petey Williams . Its duration was nine minutes and twenty @-@ four seconds . Williams gained a near @-@ fall during the bout by using a schoolboy pin . Near the end an unknown woman entered the arena and stood on the ring apron to distract Williams . This allowed Steiner to perform a powerbomb on Williams , thus winning the encounter and both cases . 
 Eric Young defended the TNA World Beer Drinking Championship against James Storm , who was accompanied by Jackie Moore , in the fourth encounter . Moore interfered in the bout helping Storm twice . The first ended when Young performed a suplex on Moore and Storm at the same time . The second involved Moore distracting the referee , at which time Rhino made his return from an injury and entered the ring to perform his signature Gore maneuver on Storm , giving Young the victory at seven minutes and forty @-@ nine seconds to retain the TNA World Beer Drinking Championship . 
 The TNA Women 's Knockout Championship was defended by Awesome Kong , who was accompanied by Raisha Saeed , against ODB in a match lasting six minutes and fifty @-@ four seconds . During the match , Kong was positioned on the top of a padded turnbuckle which allowed ODB to lift her off and perform a powerbomb gaining a near @-@ fall . Afterwards , Saeed stood on the ring apron to distract ODB , allowing Kong to perform her signature Awesome Bomb maneuver and gain the pinfall to retain the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The second @-@ ever Barbed Wire Massacre was the sixth match on the card between Abyss and Judas Mesias , who was accompanied by Father James Mitchell . Its duration was fourteen minutes and fifty @-@ one seconds . It was featured from the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida , because the city of Greenville , SC refused to allow a match that violent to take place live . In Barbed Wire Massacre , the ring ropes are switched with strands of barbed @-@ wire and several weapons are featured wrapped in barbed @-@ wire . The match falls under no disqualifications rules and is won by either a pinfall or submission . Mesias bashed Abyss over the head with a barbed @-@ wire wrapped chair , which caused Abyss to bleed from the forehead . Abyss performed his signature Black Hole Slam maneuver on Mitchell after he interfered in the bout . Abyss won the contest after using the Black Hole Slam to drop Mesias onto a barbed @-@ wire wrapped board . 
 The next match pitted Booker T against Robert Roode , who was accompanied by Payton Banks , in a bout lasting nine minutes and seventeen seconds . Near the end , Booker T began to bash Roode 's leg against the ringpost . Afterwards , Roode began walking to the backstage area as Booker T followed continuing the fight as the referee counted out both men , ending the contest in a draw . Booker T and Roode fought throughout the backstage area into the parking lot , where Roode pulled Banks from the driver 's seat of a car before making his own get away leaving Booker T and Banks behind . 
 The Six Man Tag Team Street Fight between the team of Jay Lethal and MCMG ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ) and the team of Johnny Devine and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) . The stipulations were if Lethal and MCMG won then Team 3D would be forced to work with a weight limit , while if Devine and Team 3D won the TNA X Division would <unk> . Another added stipulation before the contest was whoever gained the pinfall would win the TNA X Division Championship . It lasted twelve minutes and thirty seconds . A Street Fight is fought under no disqualification and no count @-@ out rules , with weapons legal and provided for the match . During the final minutes , both Sabin and Shelley were scripted to appear unconscious at ringside , which caused Lethal to have to fight off Devine and Team 3D alone . Near the end of the match Team 3D set up a table ; Lethal followed by sending both out of the ring and laying Devine over the table . Lethal then stood on the top of a padded turnbuckle and jumped off to perform an elbow drop on Devine through the table to win the match . With the victory , Lethal won the TNA X Division Championship , prevented the X Division from disbanding , and forced Team 3D to work with a weight limit in the company . 
 The main event was for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship with Samoa Joe as Special Outside Enforcer between the champion Kurt Angle , who was accompanied by Karen Angle , and the challenger Christian Cage . The duration of the encounter was twenty minutes and forty seconds . Angle attempted to use a steel chair during the contest , but was stopped and it was taken away by Joe . Cage performed his signature Unprettier maneuver , resulting in a near @-@ fall . In the final minutes , A.J. Styles interfered in the bout to attack Cage , but was stopped by Joe . Angle then grabbed a steel chair from ringside and bashed Cage with it . Tomko came down to the ring where he threw the chair out of the ring and proceeded to grab Angle . He then released Angle and lifted Cage up to perform an Argentine Neckbreaker to slam Cage into the mat back first . Angle followed by pinning Cage to retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Reception = = 
 3 @,@ 500 people attended the event . Canadian Online Explorer writer Chris Sokol rated the entire event a seven and a half out of ten , which was higher than the six out of ten given to the 2007 Against All Odds event by Chris Sokol . Against All Odds rating was higher than TNA 's previous event Final Resolution , which was given a six out of ten . It was also higher than the six given to TNA 's next event Destination X. Compared to rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's No Way Out PPV event held on February 17 , 2008 , Against All Odds was rated higher as No Way Out was given a six out of ten by Dave Hillhouse . Sokol gave the main event his highest rating of the review a nine out of ten . The Six Man Tag Team Street Fight was given an eight out of ten . The Barbed Wire Massacre and Booker T versus Robert Roode bouts were both ranked with a six out of ten . The lowest rating of Sokol 's review was given to the TNA World Tag Team Championship match with a four out of ten . Sokol felt the main event was an " instant classic " , while the Street Fight was a " great match . " Regarding the Barbed Wire Massacre , Sokol believed it was a " decent match overall . " The Booker T and Roode contest he thought was " more of a brawl " than a match . Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch rated the main event three and a half stars out of five , his highest rating of the review , and believed there was just " too much interference at the end . " Keller gave the Street Fight three stars out of five , while the Barbed Wire Massacre was given two and a quarter stars out of five . Booker T versus Roode was given one and three @-@ quarter stars out of five , while Payton Banks versus Traci Brooks was ranked with half of a star out of give , Keller 's lowest rating . Keller thought the Street Fight was a " good chaotic brawl , " while the Roode versus Booker T bout had " good intensity " but was " short for a grudge match with an unsatisfying finish . " Keller felt the Barbed Wire Massacre " largely delivered " on what people " expected based on the build up . " James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch also reviewed the event , giving the main event his highest rating of four and one @-@ quarter stars out of five and the Roode versus Booker and Barbed Wire Massacre his lowest rating with one star each . Caldwell gave the Street Fight three stars out of five . Commenting on the main event , Caldwell said it was a " really strong main event " and " easily top match on the show . " Caldwell felt the Street Fight qualified for " best match of the show " up to that point . The event was released on DVD on April 22 , 2008 by TNA Home Video . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 There were no major issues suffered from the Barbed Wire Massacre . It was reported after the event that there were issues ordering the show in the Australian market . 
 On the February 14 , 2008 , episode of Impact ! , Tomko announced he attacked Christian Cage at the event because he no longer wanted an alliance with Cage and felt he could become a star on his own . Tomko then joined The Angle Alliance later on the same episode . On the February 21 , 2008 , episode of Impact ! , it was revealed a Six @-@ Man Tag Team match pitting the team of Cage , Samoa Joe , and Kevin Nash against The Angle Alliance ( Kurt Angle , A.J. Styles , and Tomko ) was planned for the Destination X PPV event on March 9 , 2008 . At Destination X , Cage , Joe , and Nash under The Unlikely Alliance moniker defeated The Angle Alliance . 
 Following Against All Odds , Team 3D were forced to weigh in before each contest , which created a feud with the team of Curry Man and Shark Boy , leading to a Fish Market Street Fight between the two teams , with the stipulation that if Team 3D could not make weight they would be fired from TNA . At the event , Management Director Jim Cornette announced that if Team 3D made weight that night they would not have to abide by a weight restriction henceforth . Team 3D marked in below the mark prior to the contest ; however eventually lost the encounter . 
 At Destination X , Robert Roode fought Booker T in a Stand By Your Man Strap match . Cornette announced on the February 14 episode of Impact ! , that Booker T and Roode would face in another match at Destination X. On the March 6 , 2008 , episode of Impact ! , Cornette announced that Booker T and Roode would face in a Stand By Your Man Strap match , in which if Booker T won then Traci Brooks would be allowed to beat Payton Banks with a strap ten times and vice versa . Roode won the bout at Destination X. After the contest , Sharmell returned from injury attacking Roode and Banks . This resulted in an Intergender Tag Team Six Sides of Steel Cage match at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event on April 13 , 2008 pitting Roode and Banks against Booker T and Sharmell , which the later team won . 
 TNA held the second @-@ ever Elevation X match at Destination X between Rhino and James Storm . On the February 14 episode of Impact ! , Rhino challenged Storm to the contest at the event . On the February 28 , 2008 , episode of Impact ! , Storm defeated Young to win the TNA World Beer Drinking Championship in a Ladder match . Rhino stole the championship belt on the March 6 , 2008 episode of Impact ! and destroyed it by bashing it against a ring post , thus ending the storyline over the title between Storm and Young . Rhino was the victor in the encounter at the event . 
 After winning the TNA X Division Championship at Against All Odds , Jay Lethal went on to defend the title against Petey Williams at Destination X. Lethal retained the title at the event . However , the storyline between Steiner and Williams continued after Against All Odds , with the two creating a partnership , in which Steiner gave Williams the TNA X Division Feast or Fired Title shot , which Williams used on the April 17 , 2008 episode of Impact ! to win the title . Meanwhile , Steiner went on to use the TNA World Heavyweight Feast or Fired Title shot at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event on May 11 , 2008 , in a losing effort against then @-@ champion Samoa Joe and Kaz in a 3 @-@ Way Dance . 
 After Against All Odds , the feud between Abyss and Judas Mesias ended , with Abyss disappearing from TNA after the February 14 episode of Impact ! , when he removed his mask and left the arena . Abyss returned at TNA 's Slammiversary PPV event on June 6 , 2008 in new attire still wearing a mask . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Sky Blue Sky = 
 Sky Blue Sky is the sixth studio album by American rock band Wilco , released on May 15 , 2007 by Nonesuch Records . Originally announced on January 17 , 2007 at a show in Nashville , Tennessee , it was the band 's first studio album with guitarist Nels Cline and multi @-@ instrumentalist Pat Sansone . Before its release , the band streamed the entire album on its official website and offered a free download of " What Light " . 
 Sky Blue Sky was Wilco 's highest debuting album on the Billboard 200 at number four . The self @-@ produced album received mostly favorable reviews by critics . Publications such as PopMatters and Rolling Stone praised its maturity , while Playlouder and Pitchfork criticized its " dad @-@ rock " sound . While some critics praised the direct lyrical approach , others criticised it when compared to previous Wilco albums . The band licensed six songs from the Sky Blue Sky sessions to a Volkswagen advertisement campaign , a move that generated criticism from fans and the media . 
 = = Production = = 
 In April 2006 , Wilco was still touring in support of their most recent studio album , A Ghost Is Born which was released in 2004 . The band performed a few new songs during this leg of the tour , including " Walken " , " Either Way " , and " On and On and On " . The following month , drummer Glenn Kotche mentioned to Pitchfork that those new songs were going to be recorded as demos for a new album release . During a January 17 , 2007 solo concert , frontman Jeff Tweedy announced that the band would release their sixth studio album on May 15 , 2007 through Nonesuch Records . The album was named Sky Blue Sky , a reference to a childhood memory of Tweedy 's , of a Memorial Day parade in Belleville , Illinois . He had come home from St. Louis with his family , but could not reach his house because the parade blocked the main street . This led Tweedy to reflect upon his future in the town : he knew that he would have to leave when he grew up because it was too small . 
 The album was recorded by TJ Doherty at The Loft in Irving Park , Chicago , where Tweedy had recorded Loose Fur 's Born Again in the USA and most of Wilco 's Yankee Hotel Foxtrot . In an interview with Billboard , the band revealed that the album would be less experimental than the two previous albums and more influenced by The Beatles , The Beach Boys , and The Rolling Stones . Also , unlike the previous albums , the album was made with only minimal involvement of Jim O 'Rourke ; the album which was produced with very few overdubs . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 The band sought to be more direct with this record than the previous two , resulting in a more mellow album . Tweedy attributes the lyrical directness to his listening to material by The Byrds and Fairport Convention while recording the album . He disliked the reliance on studio effects on previous albums : 
 I got nervous about the technology on Yankee Hotel Foxtrot . If you need a certain amp or pedal to make a song what it is , it isn 't a song . 
 Many of the album 's songs were recorded in a single day , with the band reaching a consensus on how each song should sound . Eighteen songs were recorded for the album and twelve were selected for the album 's track listing . The outtake " Let 's Not Get Carried Away " was included with iTunes digital downloads , and a full @-@ band version of " The Thanks I Get " was released on the band 's Myspace page . Some albums that were shipped to independent record stores included an EP featuring the outtake " One True Vine " and a live version of " Theologians " recorded at The Vic Theater in Chicago . A deluxe edition of Sky Blue Sky was also released , which included a DVD with eight live performances from the Wilco Loft . 
 Unlike previous Wilco albums , Sky Blue Sky features more songwriting collaboration between Tweedy and the other members of the band . As a result , a variety of lyrical themes appear on Sky Blue Sky ( Tweedy was the only designer of the songs on A Ghost Is Born , using Pro Tools , before presenting them to the band ) . The title track references the worries Tweedy had as a child in a small town while " On and On and On " is an ode to Tweedy 's father 's experience after the death of Tweedy 's mother . Not every song on the album is as serious — " Hate It Here " somewhat humorously describes a man who tries to fill his free time with chores after breaking up with his lover . 
 Sky Blue Sky was the band 's first studio record to feature the expanded lineup that premiered on Kicking Television : Live in Chicago . Guitarist Jeff Tweedy provided the lead vocals for the album and John Stirratt , the only other original member of the band , played bass guitar and added background vocals . Glenn Kotche played drums and Mikael Jorgensen performed on a variety of keyboards . New to the band since the previous studio album were lead guitarist Nels Cline and multi @-@ instrumentalist Pat Sansone . Additional instrumentation was provided by violist Karen Waltuch and multi @-@ instrumentalist Jim O 'Rourke . The album was mixed by Jim Scott at <unk> Studios in Santa Clara , California . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 The cover artwork of Sky Blue Sky is a photograph by Manuel Presti titled " Sky Chase . " The photograph was taken in Rome , Italy , and helped Presti win the 2005 Wildlife Photographer of the Year competition . The same photograph is featured in the July 2007 issue of National Geographic . Nathaniel Murphy provided several illustrations for the liner booklet , which include a tree on a hill , a hand , and a flock of birds . The booklet also contains photographs of the band members by Frank Ockenfels . Graphic design was provided by Jeff Tweedy and Lawrence Azerrad . 
 = = Marketing and promotion = = 
 On March 3 , 2007 , Wilco 's official website hosted a Sky Blue Sky " listening party " , which streamed the new album in its entirety . Two days later , the track " What Light " was made available for download on the band 's website and was streamed on its MySpace page . On March 11 , 2007 , the official website streamed the album in its entirety again . " The Thanks I Get " , a song recorded during the Sky Blue Sky sessions but not included on the album , was made available as a free download to purchasers of the album . During the European segment of the promotional tour , Wilco included a five @-@ song extended play with purchase of the album . The EP contained the songs " The Thanks I Get " , " One True Vine " , " Let 's Not Get Carried Away " , and live versions of " Impossible Germany " and " Hate It Here " . Wilco made the EP available online for free to previous purchasers of Sky Blue Sky . 
 Frustrated by the lack of radio airplay received by previous Wilco albums , the band decided to branch out into television advertising . Wilco had previously licensed songs for Telefónica <unk> , and Jeff Tweedy appeared in a series of advertisements for Apple Computer . In May 2007 , Volkswagen began running a pair of commercials with " You Are My Face " and bonus track " The Thanks I Get " playing in the background . The band commented on their website that " we feel okay about <unk> . Several of us even drive them . " The band licensed six songs for the campaign , which was created by advertising agency Crispin Porter and Bogusky . The move was met with criticism from both fans and popular media . 
 A promotional tour followed the release of the album . The band performed " Sky Blue Sky " and " You Are My Face " on Later ... with Jools Holland on May 25 , 2007 and was interviewed on The Dermot O 'Leary Show the next day . Beginning June 13 , 2007 , Wilco played fourteen shows in North America with Low as its opening act . Following this , the band made plans to tour Norway , Denmark , Switzerland , the United Kingdom , Belgium , Italy , and Spain before playing a few more North American shows , including a performance on The Tonight Show . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Nonesuch released the album on May 15 , 2007 ; the following week became Wilco 's best @-@ ever sales week . The album debuted at number four on the U.S. Billboard 200 , selling 87 @,@ 000 copies domestically in its first week . Sky Blue Sky was also an international success , peaking at number 7 in Norway , number 21 in Belgium , number 23 in Australia and Ireland , number 26 in Sweden , number 32 in New Zealand , number 36 in Germany , and number 39 in the United Kingdom . 
 The album so far has a score of 73 out of 100 from Metacritic based on " generally favorable reviews " upon its release . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone pondered in his review whether Wilco had ever made a song as good as " Impossible Germany , " praising how the song builds into a " twin guitar epic " in the mold of Television and Peter Green @-@ era Fleetwood Mac . Michael Metivier of PopMatters commented that while the album took a while to understand , it was full of " exquisitely beautiful melodies and performances " . AllMusic writer Mark Deming called the album " Wilco 's strongest album as an ensemble to date , " and found the return to roots rock music a fresh new method for the band . Blender gave it three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five and said that the album " often feels like the [ Grateful ] Dead 's American Beauty if Jerry Garcia had taken Paxil instead of acid . " 
 Colin Stutz of Filter gave the album a score of 91 % and stated : " Wilco has constructed their most straightforward release in recent memory , which relies heavily on the inspired intricacies of a full @-@ hearted band . " Richard Cromelin of Los Angeles Times gave the album three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four and called it " The most musically direct and down to earth of the band 's six @-@ album career . " Andrew C. <unk> of Prefix Magazine gave the album a favorable review and called it " Wilco 's first step toward aging well , but it transcends transition and is an album that sounds right in its place and time . " Alan Shulman of No Ripcord gave it a score of eight stars out of ten and said , " Wilco has come up with 50 % of a classic album and 50 % of a merely decent one . Buy it for the moments you simply won ’ t hear anywhere else . " Will Hermes of Spin gave it a score of eight out of ten and called it " A near @-@ perfect album by a band that seems , finally , to have found their identity . " Alternative Press gave it four stars out of five and said , " It 's apparent it takes deft skill to sound this simple . " Tiny Mix Tapes also gave it four stars out of five and stated : " While the elders will rejoice [ in ] this sober , satisfied , and craftily subdued effort , the <unk> of the bunch , with their abbreviated attention spans , iPod shuffles , and demand for instant gratification , will declare the album a boring and lethargic affair . " Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine likewise gave it four stars out of five and said that " Though it may not fit comfortably alongside any other albums in Wilco 's catalogue , Sky Blue Sky is further confirmation that , even at their most retro , they 're among contemporary pop music 's most vital acts . " Likewise , Graeme Thomson of The Observer gave it four stars and said , " The closer you listen to the jazzy guitars , Beatles touches and easy , shuffling rhythms ... the more it transpires that Tweedy is simply allowing the songs sufficient room to speak up for themselves . " 
 John Pareles of The New York Times gave the album a positive review and said , " The production is straightforward , but the song structures aren ’ t ; that ’ s where Wilco ’ s idiosyncrasies still hide out . " Joan Anderman of The Boston Globe also gave it a positive review and said the band " hasn 't forsaken its experimental streak , and the group uses it in the service of darkness -- or rather the threat of darkness . " 
 However , not all publications praised the new style of Sky Blue Sky . Stylus Magazine editor Ian Cohen criticized the album 's disregard for the " fourth wall " , and expressed concern about its dissimilarities to Kicking Television : Live in Chicago . Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian gave the album three stars out of five and said , " On its own terms , Sky Blue Sky succeeds : it 's tender , poignant and sumptuously textured , occasionally jolted into fiery life by flaring guitar passages redolent of Neil Young or Television . " Now gave it a positive review and stated : " All those self @-@ consciously avant bits of the two previous albums have been ditched along with Jeff Tweedy 's laughable lyrical abstractions in favour of tuneful , direct songs that at least seem to carry some emotional weight . " Ted Grant of Playlouder gave the album two stars out of five and called it the " <unk> and most creatively uninspired record of their career " , finding that the album was leading to tame " dad @-@ rock " . Pitchfork writer Rob Mitchum also used the " dad @-@ rock " colloquialism , dismissing its straightforwardness and arguing " Tweedy merely ended up with the wrong personnel to articulate his mood here . " Mojo also gave the album three stars out of five , stating that " Many longtime listeners ... are sure to be disappointed with the radio @-@ friendly production and sheer innocuousness of [ the ] lyrics . " Andy Gill of Uncut gave the album three stars out of five and called it " a slight disappointment " . Billboard gave it an average review and stated : " On first listen , it might seem too derivative , even dull , but Jeff Tweedy 's intricate vocal melodies and Nels Cline 's ferocious guitar work keep things interesting . " Under the Radar gave it five stars out of ten and called it " a very professional but almost inconsequential set ... flat and ultimately uninspired . " John Walshe of Hot Press gave it a mixed review and said the album was " just too ' nice ' . " 
 The lyrical content was considered by critics to be somewhat experimental , but more straightforward than previous Wilco albums . Michael <unk> of PopMatters found the lyrics to be " some of the most affecting and least clumsy " of the band 's career , though he worried that they might strike some Wilco fans as dull . Rob Sheffield said that while he was unimpressed with the lyrics of other Wilco albums , he liked the songwriting on Sky Blue Sky . However , Brandon <unk> of Dusted Magazine felt that the lyrics seem like an insular Tweedy confessional , and Doug Freeman of The Austin Chronicle described the collaborative songwriting as yielding " fatalistic ambivalence " while giving the album two stars out of five . 
 The album received a nomination at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards for Best Rock Album . It placed 12th in the 2008 Pazz & Jop Poll . This album was # 42 on Rolling Stone 's list of the Top 50 Albums of 2007 , and the song " Impossible Germany " was # 71 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 100 Best Songs of 2007 . <unk> named " Impossible Germany " as the # 1 song of 2007 and named the album as a whole the # 1 album of 2007 . Sky Blue Sky was named one of the ten best albums of the year by Billboard , Paste , Uncut , and The A.V. Club . The album was placed at # 97 on the Rolling Stone 100 Best Albums Of The 2000s list . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jeff Tweedy , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Wilco 
 Nels Cline – electric guitar , 12 string guitar , lap steel guitar 
 Mikael Jorgensen – piano , organs , Wurlitzer 
 Glenn Kotche – drums , percussion , glockenspiel 
 Pat Sansone – organs , guitar , Chamberlin , Mellotron , Wurlitzer , harpsichord , piano , backing vocals 
 John Stirratt – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Jeff Tweedy – vocals , guitar , graphic design 
 Additional musicians 
 Jim O 'Rourke – feedback , percussion , acoustic guitar , string arrangements 
 Karen Waltuch – viola , violin 
 Production and design 
 Lawrence Azerrad – graphic design 
 TJ Doherty – recording 
 Robert Ludwig – mastering 
 Nathaniel Murphy – illustrations 
 <unk> Ockenfels – photography 
 Manuel Presti – cover photograph 
 Jim Scott – mixing 
 Jason Tobias , Tom <unk> , Kevin Dean – assistant engineering 
 = Nescopeck Mountain = 
 Nescopeck Mountain ( also known as <unk> Mountain ) is a ridge in Columbia County and Luzerne County , in Pennsylvania , in the United States . Its elevation is 1 @,@ 594 feet ( 486 m ) above sea level . The ridge is a forested ridge , with at least two types of forest and two systems of vernal pools . It is a very long and unbroken ridge with two water gaps : one carved by Catawissa Creek and one carved by Nescopeck Creek . Rock formations in the ridge include the Lower Helderberg Formation , the Onondaga Formation , the Spechty Kopf Formation , the Trimmers Rock Formation , and the Mauch Chunk Formation . In the most recent ice age , it was affected by glaciation . 
 Native Americans historically settled in the vicinity of Nescopeck Mountain . It was visited by Europeans as early as 1755 . The ridge 's name most likely means " dirty waters " or " black waters " . Two Pennsylvania State Game Lands and one state park are situated partially on it . The ridge spans numerous townships in Columbia County and Luzerne County . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The elevation of Nescopeck Mountain is 1 @,@ 594 feet ( 486 m ) above sea level , making it the highest ridge in Columbia County . Townships that Nescopeck Mountain occupies include Beaver Township , Mifflin Township , and Main Township in Columbia County . The ridge extends into several townships in Luzerne County , including Nescopeck Township , and reaches at least as far east as Nescopeck State Park . 
 Nescopeck Mountain is an unbroken ridge , being described as " regular and almost unbroken " in Thomas Francis Gordon 's 1832 book A Gazetteer of the State of Pennsylvania . John Gosse Freeze 's 1888 book A History of Columbia County , Pennsylvania : From the Earliest Times described the ridge as " beautiful and regular in its formation " . It stretches from near the Susquehanna River almost to the Lehigh River and has a length of nearly 20 miles ( 32 km ) . It is considerably steeper and higher on its northern side , at least in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Berwick . The ridge is too rocky for agriculture , with large boulders being abundant on it . 
 Nescopeck Mountain is part of a long chain of continuously forested mountains and ridges that stretches from Moosic Mountain to the Susquehanna River . It is considered to be an extension of Catawissa Mountain . The ridge is similar in height to mountains in the vicinity of the Wyoming Valley . The ridge has a topographic prominence of up to approximately 850 feet ( 260 m ) in places and up to 900 feet ( 270 m ) at the Nescopeck Creek water gap . However , it is only 400 to 500 feet ( 120 to 150 m ) high near its western end at Mainville . 
 Interstate 80 crosses through the water gap carved by Nescopeck Creek in Nescopeck Mountain . The Susquehanna River Lowlands are in the vicinity of the ridge . Large groups of small kettle holes are found along the base of the ridge . 
 Nescopeck Mountain occupies the United States Geological Survey quadrangles of <unk> , Nuremberg , Berwick , Sybertsville , Freeland , and White Haven . 
 = = Streams and valleys = = 
 A creek known as Nescopeck Creek is in the vicinity of Nescopeck Mountain . Additionally , Black Creek , a major tributary of Nescopeck Creek , empties into the larger creek at the base of the ridge . The ridge is north of the creek for a portion of its length . There is a valley known as the Nescopeck Valley which is between Nescopeck Mountain and Buck Mountain . Nescopeck Creek flows through this valley . The valley is 20 miles ( 32 km ) long and 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) wide . Some streams on the ridge are part of the Lehigh River watershed . 
 A stream known as Scotch Run flows through a valley with Nescopeck Mountain on its northern edge . 
 Nescopeck Mountain forms a water gap with Catawissa Mountain . Catawissa Creek cuts through this water gap . There is also a water gap carved by Nescopeck Creek through Nescopeck Mountain . Both of these water gaps are relatively narrow . The mountain serves as part of the dividing line between the Susquehanna River and the Lehigh River watersheds . For some distance , the ridge runs parallel to the Susquehanna River at a distance of 2 @.@ 5 to 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Nescopeck Mountain is mainly formed by hard , upturned conglomerates belonging to the Pocono Formation . There are a total of three rock formations on Nescopeck Mountain in the Berwick Quadrangle , which is in Columbia County and Luzerne County . From north to south , these rock formations are the Trimmers Rock Formation ( from the Devonian Period ) , the Spechty Kopf Formation ( from the Devonian Period and the Mississippian Period ) , and the Onondaga Formation ( from the Devonian Period ) . All three of these formations occur in bands that are at an angle relative to the surface . The Spechty Kopf Formation occurs at the peak of the ridge and extends to a depth of approximately 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) below sea level . The Onondaga Formation runs from near the ridge 's peak to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) below sea level . The Trimmers Rock Formation runs from the middle elevations of the ridge to more than 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) below sea level . Additionally , the Mauch Chunk Formation is found on the ridge . The summit of the ridge consists of hard Pocono Formation rock . A plain of the Catskill Formation occurs to the north of the ridge . 
 There are coal basins to the south of Nescopeck Mountain . 
 During an ice age , glaciers pressed against Nescopeck Mountain and eventually moved over it , carrying gravel from the Susquehanna River . The ridge was near the southern edge of the most recent period of glaciation . 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 Nescopeck Mountain was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . The ridge is also known as <unk> Mountain . This variant name appears in Israel C. White 's 1883 book The geology of the North Branch Susquehanna River Region in the six counties of Wyoming , Lackawanna , Luzerne , Columbia , Montour and Northumberland . Nescopeck Mountain is most likely named for a Native American village called Nescopeck . The word <unk> itself is a corruption of <unk> , which may mean " dirty waters " or " black waters " . 
 Historically , there was a Native American village in the vicinity of Nescopeck Mountain , where the borough of Nescopeck is in modern times . Additionally , the Forks Indians arrived at the ridge in 1740 after being evicted from their lands in the Lehigh Valley . As early as 1755 , a pair of Moravian missionaries , Christian Seidel and Henry Frey , descended the ridge while visiting Native Americans . 
 In 1838 , a man named Mr. Butler requested permission of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives to construct a tunnel or through cut through Nescopeck Mountain for the Lehigh Coal and Navigation Company . In the late 1800s and early 1900s , the Glen Summit Springs Hotel operated on top of Nescopeck Mountain . It was constructed by the Lehigh Valley Railroad Company . During its most active use , it attracted visitors from the Wyoming Valley and from the East Coast of the United States . The Lehigh Valley Railroad historically passed over the ridge . In the late 1800s , the ridge was prospected for coal . 
 The top of Nescopeck Mountain was devoid of trees by the middle of the 1800s . Logging has been done on the ridge in the early 2000s and plans have been made to construct communication towers on the ridge . Local produce is sometimes traded over Nescopeck Mountain . The mountain is almost completely undeveloped . 
 A gypsy moth infestation began on Nescopeck Mountain in the summer of 2014 , causing hundreds of trees to be defoliated . The Bureau of Forestry expects to begin spraying the area in May 2015 and June 2015 . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Nescopeck Mountain is one of several mountains in Columbia County to contain undisturbed oak / mixed hardwood forests . This forest is also an Appalachian Oak Forest . Specific tree species on the ridge in Columbia County include red oak , chestnut oak , scarlet oak , black birch , American chestnut , pitch pine , red maple , and serviceberry . Other plants on the ridge include black huckleberry , <unk> blueberry , mountain laurel , sheep 's laurel , bracken fern , wild sarsaparilla , and Virginia creeper . 
 An ephemeral / fluctuating pool natural community known as the Edgewood Vernal Pools is located on and near Nescopeck Mountain . It consists of dozens of vernal pools created by glaciation . Numerous amphibian species breed in the pools and hardwood trees and hemlock are present on the southern edge of the pool system . A globally rare species of invertebrate was observed in the pools in 1990 . Another system of vernal pools known as the <unk> Vernal Pools are found north of the ridge . 
 The Nescopeck Mountain Barrens are a ridgetop dwarf @-@ tree forest natural community . The barrens consist of scrub oaks , <unk> , pitch pines , little <unk> , and blueberries . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 A portion of the Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 58 is on Nescopeck Mountain . Additionally , the Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 187 contain the Nescopeck Mountain Barrens . The ridge is on the northern border of the <unk> @-@ acre Nescopeck State Park . Historically , there were trails leading up to the top of Nescopeck Mountain . There is high visibility from the top of the ridge and the town of Bloomsburg can be seen . 
 The water gap where Catawissa Creek flows between Nescopeck Mountain and Catawissa Mountain was described as " attractive " by I. W. Hartman in 1912 . The water gap where Nescopeck Creek flows through Nescopeck Mountain is described as " impressive " in Jeff Mitchell 's book Paddling Pennsylvania . 
 = Noel Park = 
 Noel Park in north London is a late @-@ 19th early 20th @-@ century planned community consisting of 2 @,@ 200 model dwellings , designed by Rowland Plumbe . It was developed in open countryside to the north of London in the valley of the River Moselle , about half @-@ way between the historic villages of Highgate and Tottenham . It is one of four developments on the outskirts of London built by the Artizans , Labourers & General Dwellings Company ( Artizans Company ) . From 2003 to sometime in 2009 , the name was also given to a small park near the southern edge of Noel Park , formerly known , and now known again as Russell Park . 
 One of the earliest garden suburbs in the world , Noel Park was designed to provide affordable housing for working @-@ class families wishing to leave the inner city ; every property had a front and rear garden . It was planned from the outset as a self @-@ contained community close enough to the rail network to allow its residents to commute to work . In line with the principles of the Artizans Company 's founder , William Austin , no public houses were built within the estate , and there are still none today . 
 As a result of London 's rapid expansion during the early 20th century , and particularly after the area was connected to the London Underground in 1932 , Noel Park became completely surrounded by later developments . In 1965 , it was incorporated into the newly created London Borough of Haringey , and in 1966 it was bought by the local authority and taken into public ownership . 
 Despite damage sustained during World War II and demolition work during the construction of Wood Green Shopping City in the 1970s , Noel Park today remains largely architecturally intact . In 1982 , the majority of the area was granted Conservation Area and Article Four Direction status by the Secretary of State for the Environment , in recognition of its significance in the development of suburban and philanthropic housing and in the history of the modern housing estate . 
 = = Location = = 
 Noel Park is 6 @.@ 4 miles ( 10 @.@ 3 km ) north of Charing Cross , near the centre of the modern London Borough of Haringey , of which it is a ward . The area forms a rough triangle , bordered by the <unk> road ( Lordship Lane ) to the north , <unk> road ( Westbury Avenue ) to the south @-@ east , and <unk> road ( Wood Green High Road , formerly part of Green Lanes ) to the west . 
 When construction began , the River Moselle , running parallel to Lordship Lane a short distance south of it , formed the de facto northern boundary of the area . During the development of the area in the 1880s the river was culverted and the land between the river and Lordship Lane built on . 
 The historic western boundary was the now @-@ defunct Palace Gates Line of the Great Eastern Railway ( GER ) , a short distance to the east of Wood Green High Road . Since the railway 's closure in 1964 , much of the area between the former railway line and Wood Green High Road has been occupied by the eastern section of the large The Mall Wood Green shopping , cinema and residential complex ( commonly known as Shopping City ) . 
 = = History and development = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Historically , the site of Noel Park was virtually uninhabited . The 1619 Earl of Dorset 's Survey of Tottenham shows the area as forming the historic Duckett 's ( Dovecote ) Manor ; as with the rest of the Moselle valley the land consisted almost entirely of woodland and pasture , with the only building shown in the area which was to become Noel Park being Dovecote House itself , dating from 1254 and the earliest recorded property in Wood Green . The small village of Wood Green itself is shown a short distance to the north @-@ east . The manor itself was situated on the ancient arterial road of Green Lanes . The last recorded occupancy of the manor was in 1881 , shortly before the site was cleared for the construction of Noel Park . 
 By 1880 the estate had been broken up into fifteen smaller farms . The rough northern meadows adjacent to the Moselle were used for beef farming , whilst the southern fields , known as Grainger 's Farm , were used as grazing land . The western edge of the estate was by this time occupied by the Great Eastern Railway 's Palace Gates Line and Green Lanes railway station , opened in 1878 . 
 = = = Artizans , Labourers & General Dwellings Company = = = 
 The Artizans , Labourers & General Dwellings Company ( Artizans Company ) was established in 1867 by William Austin . Austin was an illiterate who had begun his working life on a farm as a scarecrow paid 1d per day , and had worked his way up to become a drainage contractor . The company was established as a for @-@ profit joint stock company , with the objective of building new houses for the working classes " in consequence of the destruction of houses by railroads and other improvements " . The company aimed to fuse the designs of rural planned suburbs such as Bedford Park with the ethos of high @-@ quality homes for the lower classes pioneered at Saltaire . Whilst earlier philanthropic housing companies such as the Peabody Trust and the Improved Industrial Dwellings Company focused on multi @-@ storey blocks of flats in the inner cities , the Artizans Company aimed to build low @-@ rise housing in open countryside alongside existing railway lines to allow workers to live in the countryside and commute into the city . The company attracted the attention of Lord Shaftesbury , who served as president until 1875 . 
 The company built and immediately sold a group of houses in Battersea , then still a rural village . The proceeds of the sale were used to purchase a plot of land in Salford for development , and by 1874 the company had developments in Liverpool , Birmingham , Gosport and Leeds . 
 The first of the four large @-@ scale estates built by the Artizans Company was Shaftesbury Park , a development of 1 @,@ 200 two @-@ storey houses covering 42 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 17 km2 ; 0 @.@ 07 sq mi ) built in 1872 on the site of a former pig farm in Battersea . The success of Shaftesbury Park led to the construction of Queen 's Park , built in 1874 on a far more ambitious scale on 76 acres ( 0 @.@ 31 km2 ; 0 @.@ 12 sq mi ) of land to the west of London , adjacent to the newly opened Westbourne Park station , purchased from All Souls College , Oxford . A third London estate was planned at Cann Hall , and a site of 61 acres ( 0 @.@ 25 km2 ; 0 @.@ 10 sq mi ) was purchased . 
 However , the Queen 's Park project suffered serious mismanagement and fraud ; the company secretary William <unk> and two others were found guilty in 1877 of defrauding £ 9 @,@ 312 ( approximately £ 791 thousand today ) from the project . The company was forced to raise rents and tenants were no longer permitted to buy their houses ; by 1880 the company 's finances had recovered sufficiently to allow further expansion . 
 = = = Selection of the site = = = 
 On 14 February 1881 , Rowland Plumbe was appointed Consulting Architect to the Artizans Company , with a brief to prepare a third estate . A leading architect of the period , Plumbe had primarily been a designer of hospitals , such as the London Hospital , and Poplar Hospital ; he had been President of the Architectural Association in 1871 – 72 and a Council Member of the Royal Institute of British Architects since 1876 . 
 In April 1881 , the Artizans Company inspected sites at Fulham and " in the vicinity of Alexandra Park " in the Tottenham Local Board . The Fulham site was rejected as too prone to flooding , and the Wood Green site rejected as being too far from any centre of population . 
 However , the next month , the decision was taken to bid for the site near Wood Green . Despite its distance from London at the time , the area was well served by railways . The Palace Gates Line , opened in 1878 to serve nearby Alexandra Palace , had an intermediate station at Green Lanes , immediately adjacent to the site in question . This provided direct service to the City of London from the outset ; following the construction of a link with the Tottenham and Hampstead Junction Railway on 1 June 1880 , direct services also ran to Blackwall and North Woolwich , providing direct links with the Port of London . In addition , the Great Northern Railway 's station at Wood Green ( now Alexandra Palace station ) was within walking distance . The company decided that the quality of transport links compensated for the distance from any significant centre of population , and , in June 1881 , a site of 100 acres ( 0 @.@ 40 km2 ; 0 @.@ 16 sq mi ) was purchased by the company for £ 56 @,@ 345 ( approximately £ 5 @.@ 13 million today ) . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Plumbe designed the estate with five classes of houses , all built in the Gothic Revival style . Although the houses were built to the same five basic designs , each street was given a distinct style of design and ornamentation . Varying mixes of red and yellow bricks , and variations in window design and ornamental motifs were used to give each street a distinct identity . All were designed with front and rear gardens . Corner houses were given distinctive designs and turrets . 
 The distribution of houses followed the traditional Victorian model of town planning . The larger first- and second @-@ class houses were built in the centre , close to the church and school , while the more numerous third- , fourth- and fifth @-@ class houses were built in the estate 's outskirts . Welch ( 2006 ) speculates that this segregation of housing was not Plumbe 's intention ; Plumbe himself was quoted in 1896 as saying that " I regret that it is necessary to separate the richer and more cultured classes from the poorer , owing to the prejudices which exist ; and these prejudices exist on the part of the poor as well as on the part of the other class " . 
 Except for the corner houses , the houses were built in pairs , each sharing a porch with its neighbour . For many of the smaller fourth- and fifth @-@ class houses , the doors were aligned at right angles to the façade of the house , so as not to open directly adjacently to their neighbours . All houses were designed with at least one parlour and with the kitchen , scullery , and toilet in separate rooms at the rear of the house ; the first @-@ class houses also had toilets upstairs . In line with the design principles of the time , the downstairs toilets were accessible only from the rear gardens , and the houses were not fitted with separate bathrooms ; baths were taken in a moveable bath located in the kitchen . 
 All houses were built with marble @-@ <unk> fireplaces and flues . All houses were supplied with running water supplied from the New River , which flowed through nearby Wood Green . However , not all houses were supplied with gas or mains electricity from the outset , the remainder being lit by candles or oil or paraffin lamps . 
 Houses at Noel Park were deliberately designed to be relatively small , both for cheapness and to discourage tenants from taking on lodgers . Many of the larger houses at Shaftesbury Park had been sublet and split , and the practice went against the principles of the Artizans Company 's founders . To discourage the practice at Queen 's Park and Noel Park cottage flats were built ; these maintained the terraced façade , but split the house into upper and lower flats , each flat having a separate front door onto the street . Many properties , particularly on the central Gladstone Avenue , were built in this style ; this maintained the unbroken façade of the first @-@ class houses , but allowed large numbers of smaller and low @-@ income families to be housed . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 On 4 May 1883 , the Artizans Company sold a parcel of land adjacent to the railway line to the Great Eastern Railway for construction of a goods yard , and a siding was built into the development site . Although initially the company had considered making bricks on the site , the rail yard allowed raw materials to be purchased wholesale and transported cheaply to the site , with large warehouses and workshops constructed for the manufacture of doors , flooring and other necessary materials ; in 1884 the Pall Mall Gazette reported that " in a shed <unk> long by <unk> broad are stored a million superficial feet of flooring boards " . 
 In early 1883 serious discrepancies were discovered between the amounts of building material apparently purchased and the actual amounts acquired . Rowland Plumbe and Sir Richard Farrant , Deputy Chairman of the Artizans Company , visited the site to investigate the matter . Mr Hunt , the foreman , advised that " in answer to questions as to the mode of measurement in use for Ballast heaps , that one third was added to the measurement for shrinkage " . 
 When summoned to appear before the " Hornsey Committee " of the Artizans Company the next day , Hunt instead sent his assistant , without the relevant ledgers and instead with a paper described in the Committee minutes as " a paper of measurements which were soon ascertained not to be the actual measurements but measurements falsified so as to work out <unk> to about the measurements certified by Mr Hunt " . The total overpaid by the company was calculated by Plumbe as £ <unk> ( approximately £ 97 @.@ 3 thousand today ) ; Hunt was immediately dismissed and a gatekeeper to record all goods entering the site was put in place to avoid a repetition of the incident . 
 In 1883 , it was decided to name the estate " Noel Park " , in honour of Ernest Noel ( 1831 – 1931 ) , Liberal Member of Parliament for Dumfries Burghs and chairman of the Artizans Company since 1880 . The streets were laid out on a grid plan of broad avenues running on a south @-@ west to north @-@ east axis and narrower roads running north @-@ west to south @-@ east . Streets were named after prominent members of the Artizans Company and leading political figures of the time , with the exception of Darwin Avenue , named for Charles Darwin , prominent naturalist and an early investor in the Artizans Company , and Moselle Avenue , which was to follow the course of the culverted River Moselle ; see Derivation of street names , below . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 On 4 August 1883 , with approximately 200 houses completed , Noel Park was formally opened . Noel gave a speech at the opening ceremony in which he described the development as : 
 ... what , out of the metropolis , would be called a town , which would eventually ... be larger than the Royal Borough of Windsor and nearly as large as the old cathedral city of Canterbury . But this town would not contain various classes of population , but would be built for the express purpose of meeting the wants of the artisan classes , so that they whose resources are limited should be enabled to reside amid pleasant surroundings . 
 Lord Shaftesbury then laid the memorial stone , praising Noel Park as " the furtherance of a plan which has proved to be most beneficial , and would , if carried out to its full extent , completely alter for the better the domiciliary habits of the people of the metropolis " . Edward White Benson , Archbishop of Canterbury , sent a note which was read to the crowd in which he stated that " no one who cares for our labouring population can doubt that this is one of the first , perhaps the most , necessary of all steps for their good " . 
 = = = Financial difficulties = = = 
 Noel Park was heavily marketed as a " Suburban Workman 's Colony " , with promotional material playing heavily on the area 's transport links . The Great Eastern Railway was persuaded in 1884 to rename Green Lanes railway station to " Green Lanes ( Noel Park ) " ( shown on some signs and maps as " Green Lanes & Noel Park " ) ; the area was also less than half a mile from Wood Green railway station ( now Alexandra Palace station ) on the Great Northern Railway . By 1886 Noel Park had over 7 @,@ 000 residents . 
 However , the poor workers at whom the Noel Park development was aimed found themselves unable to afford railway tickets . The issuing of cheap early morning workman 's fares on the Great Eastern Railway 's lines further east in Tottenham , Stamford Hill and Walthamstow had led to overcrowding on trains and large numbers of poor workers moving to the areas ( many of them displaced by the construction of the GER 's Liverpool Street station in the City of London and rehoused by the company ) . William Birt , General Manager of the GER was strongly against extending the policy of workmen 's fares , stating that " to issue them from Green Lanes would do us a very large amount of injury , and would cause the same public annoyance and inconvenience as exists already upon the Stamford Hill and Walthamstow lines " and that " no one living in Noel Park could desire to possess the same class of neighbours as the residents of Stamford Hill have in the neighbourhood of St Ann 's Road " . 
 In 1884 , a deputation led by Lord Shaftesbury was made to the Great Eastern Railway and Great Northern Railway , proposing that for trains due to arrive in central London prior to 8 am , third class tickets should be sold at a fare of 3d providing the return journey was not made before 4 pm . By May 1885 both railways had adopted this policy . However , the delays and uncertainty caused by the fares dispute had discouraged prospective tenants , leaving large numbers of properties vacant and causing further building work to slow considerably . In 1887 , construction work was temporarily suspended altogether , in response to the large backlog of un @-@ let properties . 
 By the time of the 1894 Ordnance Survey , roughly 50 % of the estate was complete . The entire southern half of the estate between Gladstone Avenue and Westbury Avenue at this point remained open fields . 
 = = = Amenities = = = 
 Terraces of shops were built around the fringes of the estate , both to cater for the residents of Noel Park and for residents of the expanding suburb of Wood Green and the users of the adjacent railway station . The designs of the terraces varied , from short terraces of small shops on the edges of the less @-@ visited eastern portions of the estate , to parades of large shops on Wood Green High Road near the railway station . 
 One of the few buildings constructed in the early stages of Noel Park 's development not designed by Rowland Plumbe , Noel Park School was built in 1889 by the Wood Green School Board , to the design of architect Charles Wall . 
 The school was designed to accommodate 1 @,@ 524 pupils of both sexes ; however , by 1898 the growth of the Noel Park estate led to severe overcrowding problems , with an average attendance of 1 @,@ 803 , making it the most overcrowded school in the School Board 's area . In 1924 a school for the partially blind opened within the school . 
 In 1946 , the school became a Secondary Modern . Between 1957 and 1963 the secondary facilities were closed , leaving the school as a primary school . In 1965 , the school came under the control of the newly created London Borough of Haringey . Following reorganisation of Haringey 's education services , it is now a primary school serving approximately 500 pupils between the ages of three and 11 . 
 Although Plumbe 's original plans for the estate had envisaged a recreational area in the centre of the estate , this never came into being and the land reserved for it was built over during the estate 's early development . Despite Noel Park 's proximity to the leisure facilities of nearby Alexandra Park , in 1929 a long , thin strip of land near the south of the estate was designated as parkland and given the name " Russell Park " . In 2003 , following consultation with residents , the park was renamed " Noel Park " by Haringey Council . Its name has since been changed back to Russell Park . 
 A site for a church had been set aside on the estate from the outset , and in 1884 Plumbe submitted designs for a church and mission hall . The mission hall opened in March 1885 with room for 350 , and soon began to suffer from overcrowding . The people of Noel Park started a fund to pay for the church , which was consecrated on 1 November 1889 as St Mark 's . 
 The church is relatively large , seating 850 . It is built in the Venetian Gothic style , and divided into a five @-@ bay nave , transepts , chancel , morning chapel and organ chamber . Although Plumbe 's original design envisaged a tower , one was never built . By 1900 , St Mark 's was reported as having a congregation twice that of any other church in Wood Green . 
 In 1913 , a second much larger mission hall was opened nearby , named the Walsham @-@ How Mission Hall after William Walsham How , leader of the Shropshire Mission to East London . The Shropshire Hall , built by the Shropshire Mission in Gladstone Avenue , is now the Noel Park Children 's Centre . Noel Park 's relative geographic isolation led to the formation of large numbers of clubs and societies using the two mission halls for a wide range of activities , including large numbers of sporting societies . 
 Due to the temperance views of the Artizans Company 's directors , no public houses were built in Noel Park , a situation which remains the case today . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 = = = Early 20th @-@ century expansion = = = 
 In 1905 , G. J. Earle , the Artizans Company 's Surveyor , drew up plans for the remainder of the site based on the experiences learned from the completed northern half of the estate . Buildings were designed to a modified version of Plumbe 's third @-@ class house plan in the Arts and Crafts style , with white @-@ rendered brickwork , regular low gables , and curved ground floor windows . The toilets were now designed with connecting doors to the <unk> , and in some cases the staircases repositioned to the front of the house . They were no longer described or marketed as " third @-@ class " houses . 
 By October 1906 1 @,@ 999 properties were let , including 88 shops and 4 stables . Although the estate was nearing completion by this point , construction work was not entirely completed until 1929 . 
 By this point , the Noel Park development and the growing nearby community of Wood Green were coming to dominate the area . In recognition of this , in 1902 Green Lanes railway station was renamed Noel Park & Wood Green . In 1911 a group of mid @-@ Victorian houses on Wood Green High Road , immediately south of the railway station , were demolished by the Artizans Company to make way for the Cheapside shopping parade , built to serve residents of Noel Park and the growing community of Wood Green . 
 The centrepiece of the Cheapside development was the Wood Green Empire , a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity theatre designed by Frank Matcham . The Empire soon became one of London 's leading entertainment venues , hosting acts such as Marie Lloyd , Frankie Vaughan and Shirley Bassey . The Empire is best known as the theatre in which magician Chung Ling Soo ( William Ellsworth Robinson ) was fatally shot in the chest on 23 March 1918 , when a theatrical pistol used in a bullet catch demonstration malfunctioned . 
 With the postwar decline of variety and music hall and increased competition from cinema and television , the theatre went into decline and was closed on 31 January 1955 . Following its closure it was used by Associated <unk> as a studio until 1963 . The interior was demolished in 1970 , but the building remains intact and is now used as a shop and offices . 
 = = = Piccadilly line = = = 
 In 1904 the Great Northern & City Railway underground railway had opened , running from the City of London to a terminus at Finsbury Park station , followed in 1906 by the Great Northern , Piccadilly & Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR ) from the western suburbs through central London to Finsbury Park , approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Noel Park ; both were prevented from expanding further north by a legal agreement with the Great Northern Railway giving the GNR a veto on any expansion of underground railways into areas within which they would compete with the GNR . This led to serious congestion at Finsbury Park as passengers from the expanding suburbs changed from buses and trams to the GN & CR and GNP & BR , and in June 1923 a petition of 30 @,@ 000 signatures calling for the extension of one of the underground lines northwards was delivered to the Ministry of Transport . 
 The London and North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) , successor to the GNR , was compelled by the Ministry of Transport to waive the veto or proceed with its own electrification . In November 1925 , the LNER abandoned its electrification scheme . In 1929 the incoming Second Labour Government initiated a policy of direct subsidy for major infrastructure projects , and , in 1930 , the Underground Electric Railways Company of London began work on extending the GNP & BR , now the Piccadilly line . The Piccadilly line extension to Cockfosters opened in stages , with stations at Wood Green and Turnpike Lane – both on the western edge of Noel Park , at the junctions of Wood Green High Road and Lordship Lane , and Wood Green High Road and Westbury Avenue , respectively – opening on 19 September 1932 . With the area now connected to west and central London by clean , rapid and frequent electric trains , the population of the surrounding areas began to rise rapidly . 
 = = = Postwar reconstruction = = = 
 Although of little strategic value and undamaged during the early stages of World War II , in the final stages of the war a number of V @-@ 1 flying bombs and V @-@ 2 ballistic missiles struck the area . The worst attack occurred in February 1945 , when a V @-@ 2 struck <unk> Road , killing 17 and injuring 68 . The <unk> were redeveloped with housing in then @-@ current styles , rather than to Plumbe and Earle 's designs . 
 In 1958 , as part of the commemorations of the 70th anniversary of the creation of the Wood Green Local Board , the railway goods depot was used for a three @-@ day exhibition of locomotives and other railway rolling stock . The exhibition was a great success , and was visited by around 14 @,@ 000 spectators . Among locomotives on exhibit were the land speed record holder Mallard and a Class <unk> steam locomotive . 
 However , by this point the Palace Gates Line was in severe decline . Passenger numbers had fallen greatly since the opening of the Piccadilly line , while freight usage dropped throughout the 1950s as a result of improved road haulage and declining demand for coal . The line was closed to passengers on 7 January 1963 . With freight usage dwindling to a trickle following the ending of passenger services , the goods yard was closed on 7 December 1964 . The site of the goods yard was used for the construction of a large apartment block known as The <unk> , and Noel Park & Wood Green railway station was converted into commercial premises , before being demolished in the early 1970s to become the site of the eastern section of Wood Green Shopping City . 
 = = = Transfer to local authority control = = = 
 In 1952 , the Artizans , Labourers & General Dwellings Company was renamed the Artizans and General Properties Company Ltd . The combination of a taxation system biased against private property developments and legal restrictions on raising rents made the company 's traditional model unprofitable , and it began to divest itself of its original low @-@ rent developments and instead to sell vacant houses on the estates and to reinvest in non low @-@ rent housing and commercial property , especially in the United States and Canada where depreciation before tax was permitted . In 1966 , ownership of the four original London estates ( Shaftesbury Park , Queen 's Park , Noel Park and <unk> Court ) was transferred to the respective local authorities as council housing – in the case of Noel Park , the newly created London Borough of Haringey , which purchased the 2 @,@ 175 properties comprising the Noel Park estate for a total of £ 2 @,@ 917 @,@ 000 ( approximately £ 49 million today ) – leaving 377 homes at <unk> Park in Pinner as the last residential estate in Greater London owned by the company . 
 In 1976 , the Artizans Company , by then renamed <unk> Properties Ltd , became a wholly owned subsidiary of Sun Life , and on , 3 February 1981 , the company was renamed Sun Life Properties Ltd . 
 = = Modern Noel Park = = 
 Following the transfer to local authority control , much of the property on the estate was found to be in poor condition . In 1971 a report by the London Borough of Haringey found that half the properties on the estate were still lacking basic facilities such as baths , internal toilets and hot water . Houses were systematically extended to the rear to accommodate modern bathrooms . 
 In the early 1970s , the nine @-@ storey Wood Green Shopping City shopping , cinema and residential complex was built on both sides of Wood Green High Road , and now dominates the area . Although some houses were demolished during construction works , it was intended at the time to divert Wood Green High Road around Shopping City , which would have necessitated the demolition of much of the western section of Noel Park . However , the diversion scheme was abandoned , leading to the current unusual situation in which the road runs directly through the shopping centre ; Cherry & Pevsner note that Noel Park was " spared worse damage by the abandonment of the proposed road " . 
 In 1980 , the Housing Act 1980 gave council tenants the right to buy their homes . In light of this , a group of 1500 properties in the area was given Conservation Area status , and Plumbe 's northern section of the estate was granted Article Four Direction by Michael Heseltine , Secretary of State for the Environment , preventing any alterations to the external appearances of the properties without planning permission , in recognition of its architectural and historic interest . St Mark 's Church was meanwhile Grade II listed . However , these measures have not been consistently enforced , and Noel Park has been cited in a report by English Heritage as a prominent example of the failure of conservation areas . 
 Throughout the eighties and early nineties the estate was the home of a large squatter community , mostly made up of young punks from Ireland , Wales , Scotland and outside London which greatly enlivened the area but also led to many legal and other conflicts with Haringey Council who ironically had left so many of the properties empty in the first place . Many of these were later to move to the Woodberry Down Estate in Manor House . 
 In line with the original principles of the Artizans Company , there are still no public houses in Noel Park . In 2008 parts of Noel Park and the surrounding area were declared a Controlled Drinking Zone , allowing police to confiscate alcohol from those engaged in anti @-@ social behaviour . 
 As with much of Haringey , Noel Park is now one of the most ethnically diverse areas in the world . In 2002 , 86 % of pupils attending Noel Park School were from ethnic minorities . 
 = = Derivation of street names = = 
 Ashley Crescent : Evelyn Ashley , MP for Isle of Wight , son of Lord Shaftesbury and Chairman of the Artizans Company 
 Buller Road : Redvers Buller , winner of the Victoria Cross at the Battle of <unk> , 1879 
 Darwin Road : Charles Darwin , naturalist and early investor in the Artizans Company 
 Dovecote Avenue : On the site of the original Duckett 's ( Dovecote ) Manor , by this time demolished 
 Farrant Avenue : Sir Richard Farrant , Deputy Chairman of the Artizans Company 1881 – 1906 
 Gladstone Avenue : William Ewart Gladstone , Prime Minister at the time of the opening of Noel Park 
 Hewitt Avenue : Thomas Hewitt QC , Director of the Artizans Company 1895 – 1917 
 Lymington Avenue : Viscount Lymington , Director of the Artizans Company 1883 @-@ 1891 
 Mark Road : Mark H Judge , Director of the Artizans Company 1878 – 1922 
 Maurice Avenue : Maurice Powell , Director of the Artizans Company 1880 – 1914 
 Morley Avenue : Samuel Morley , MP for Bristol and Director of the Artizans Company 1877 – 1880 
 Moselle Avenue : Runs above the culverted River Moselle 
 Pelham Road : T W Pelham , Director of the Artizans Company 1880 – 1894 
 Redvers Road : Redvers Buller ( see Buller Road , above ) 
 Russell Avenue : John Russell , former Liberal Prime Minister 
 Salisbury Road : Robert Cecil , 3rd Marquess of Salisbury , leader of the Conservative Party 
 Vincent Road : Unknown ; Welch speculates from Rev. Henry Vincent Le Bas , the only member of the Noel Park Committee at the time of opening not known to have had a street named for him 
 = Andy Ganteaume = 
 Andrew " Andy " Gordon Ganteaume ( 22 January 1921 – 17 February 2016 ) was a Trinidadian cricketer who played one Test match for the West Indies in 1948 as a batsman . He scored 112 in his only Test innings , which left him with the highest Test batting average in history . Ganteaume played for Trinidad from a young age and was chosen to play in a Test match against England following his good batting form in 1948 . However , his slow scoring probably cost him his place and he never played another Test , although he toured England with the West Indies in 1957 . At the time of his death , Ganteaume was the oldest surviving West Indies Test cricketer . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ganteaume was born in Belmont , Port of Spain , Trinidad and Tobago . He had no formal cricket coaching but made his first @-@ class debut for Trinidad as a wicketkeeper in 1941 as a 19 @-@ year @-@ old . He scored 87 batting at number eight . Over the next few seasons , Ganteaume played regularly for Trinidad in first @-@ class competition and for North Trinidad in a non @-@ first @-@ class island competition . He also played football for the Trinidad team around this time , but his time for sport was restricted by his career in the civil service . 
 From batting in the middle @-@ order , Ganteaume was eventually promoted to open the batting as a theory at the time suggested that <unk> might make good openers as they became accustomed to the conditions while keeping wicket ; Ganteaume neither believed this theory nor enjoyed being an opener . He scored his maiden first @-@ class century in 1946 ; a second followed later in the year . 
 = = Test match call @-@ up = = 
 In the 1947 – 48 season , the England cricket team toured the West Indies . When the team played in Trinidad , Ganteaume scored 101 and 47 not out in the first match but journalists criticised him for scoring slowly in easy batting conditions . In a second match against the touring side , he scored 5 and 90 but was not selected in the team for the Test match which followed — Ganteaume later suggested his non @-@ selection was a result of his underprivileged background . However , an injury to Jeff Stollmeyer , one of the West Indies ' opening batsmen , before the game meant that Ganteaume was called up into the side . 
 England batted first to score 362 , but when the West Indies batted , Ganteaume and his opening partner , George Carew shared a partnership of 173 . Once more , Ganteaume was criticised for slow batting , although he later suggested that he had concentrated on scoring singles to allow his in @-@ form partner to face the bowling . On the third day , he carried on batting to reach his century , the first in a Test match by a Trinidadian in Trinidad . The innings took around 270 minutes , but he slowed down as he neared three @-@ figures , and the West Indies ' captain sent out a note asking the batsmen to score faster . Other batsmen also batted slowly , and Ganteaume later claimed that England used negative , run @-@ saving tactics to slow the scoring rate . He did not bat in the second innings , when the West Indies needed to score runs quickly in an unsuccessful attempt to win the game . The match was drawn , having been earlier interrupted by rain which cut the playing time , but in the knowledge that quick scoring was vital , Ganteaume 's slow batting adversely affected the West Indies ' chances of victory . 
 Ganteaume did not play in the next Test match — he was replaced by John Goddard who came into the team as part of a pre @-@ arranged scheme to rotate the captaincy . He was chosen in a preliminary 24 @-@ man squad to tour India and Pakistan in 1948 – 49 , but did not make the final selection of 16 players , and was overlooked for the 1950 tour of England . He continued to play irregularly for Trinidad in the following years , but played no further representative cricket until 1957 . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Ganteaume was selected to tour England with the West Indies team in 1957 at the age of 36 . He played 19 first @-@ class matches on the tour and scored 800 runs at an average of 27 @.@ 58 . He passed fifty in seven innings , with a top @-@ score of 92 against Glamorgan . Norman Preston , the editor of Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , suggested neither Ganteaume nor any of the other three specialist opening batsmen in the team " came up to expectations " , forcing Frank Worrell to open the batting . He never came close to selection for a Test match . After the tour , Ganteaume played just twice more for Trinidad in first @-@ class cricket , and ended his career with 2 @,@ 785 first @-@ class runs at an average of 34 @.@ 81 and five centuries . Having played just one Test innings , Ganteaume was left with a Test batting average of 112 . This is higher than that of Donald Bradman , who has the highest average of those to play more than 20 innings in a Test career . As of 2013 , his average is the highest by a former player to have appeared in a solitary Test in their career . 
 There are several possible reasons why Ganteaume played no further Test cricket after his single match . Apart from the slow pace of his batting during that hundred — Goddard later suggested that it would have been better for Ganteaume 's career to score a rapid 60 than a slow hundred — West Indies ' batting was strong at the time and there was plenty of competition for places in the team . Even so , his team @-@ mate and later West Indies captain Jeff Stollmeyer suggested that he was unlucky to be left out of subsequent teams . It is also possible that Ganteaume was affected by his attitude to authority . The cricket journalist Martin Williamson suggests : " Ganteaume probably paid as much for his anti @-@ establishment attitude as for slow scoring . He was certainly not someone who was going to bow and scrape to the white players who still dominated the region 's cricket . " In later years , Ganteaume served as a Test selector and was West Indies manager in 1973 – 74 . In 2007 , his autobiography , My Story : The Other Side of the Coin was published , in which he criticised the West Indies " establishment " of his playing days . He died at the age of 95 on 17 February 2016 . At the time of his death he was the oldest surviving West Indies Test cricketer , and the second oldest in the world . 
 = Blackstone Library = 
 T. B. Blackstone Memorial Library is a building that is part of the Chicago Public Library System and is named after Timothy Blackstone . The building was designed by Chicago architect Solon S. Beman . It is now known as the Chicago Public Library - Blackstone Branch and commonly referred to as Blackstone Library , or Blackstone Branch and sometimes Blackstone for short . The Concord Granite building 's two @-@ year construction started in 1902 , and it was dedicated on January 8 , 1904 . Blackstone Library marks the beginning of the Chicago Branch Library System as the first dedicated branch in the system . Blackstone is also the only branch of the 79 @-@ branch Chicago Public Library branch system that was constructed using private funding . 
 The building is located in Chicago 's Kenwood community area in Cook County , Illinois , United States and serves the Hyde Park , Kenwood , and Oakland community areas . The branch celebrated its 100th anniversary of service in 2004 . Today , the library has bronze and <unk> furnishings and has themed paintings on the rotunda ceiling . The library is equipped with custom @-@ designed furniture and makes public Wi @-@ Fi access available to its patrons . 
 = = History = = 
 The library was dedicated to the memory of Timothy Beach Blackstone , President of the Chicago and Alton Railroad from 1864 to 1899 , a period longer than any of his contemporaries . Blackstone , who had died on May 26 , 1900 , was also the founding president of the Union Stock Yards . He had owned the property on which the Blackstone Library now stands , and he donated this tract for the construction of the library after his death . The library was built on the tract through a codicil in his will , carried out by his wife , Isabella Norton Blackstone ( 1838 – 1928 ) , after his death . Blackstone Library was his contribution to the city where he had made his fortune and stands as a monument to his generosity . Blackstone is 13 @,@ 794 sq ft ( 1 @,@ 281 @.@ 5 m2 ) and its original cost was $ 250 @,@ 000 ( $ 6 @,@ 837 @,@ 500 today ) . 
 Although the Blackstones lived downtown , they maintained numerous close friendships in the affluent Hyde Park neighborhood , which then included what is now called the Kenwood community area . Prior to the donation of the Blackstone Library , the Chicago Public Library System had been renting reading room spaces around the city and had been seeking stand alone branches . On January 8 , 1904 , Isabella Blackstone handed the keys and deed to the Timothy B. Blackstone Library to the city 's Library Board members . Blackstone Library became the first branch library in the Chicago Public Library System . The building retains a Lake Park Avenue address although the neighboring section of Lake Park was moved about a half a block east several decades ago . 
 At least three renovations have occurred , which have expanded , renovated and updated the library . From 1938 – 1939 the new children 's room annex , a Works Progress Administration project , was added at a cost of $ 68 @,@ 400 ( $ 1 @,@ 163 @,@ 618 ) . During this annexation one of a set of Howard Van Doren Shaw townhouses was razed . From 1977 – 1980 a major restorative renovation occurred . Blackstone was rededicated on November 18 , 1980 , in recognition of completion of the three years of work . There was also a 2004 renovation for the centennial . 
 Blackstone donated a larger James Blackstone Memorial Library ( 1891 , opened 1893 ) , in his father 's memory to Branford , Connecticut , Blackstone 's birthplace . In addition to the James Blackstone Library in Branford , there is a library named " Blackstone Library " in Blackstone , MA . The architect for both the Branford and Chicago libraries was Solon S. Beman . 
 = = Service = = 
 As one of the 79 Chicago Public Library branch libraries , Blackstone Library serves the Hyde Park , Kenwood , and Oakland community areas . These communities include 17 elementary schools and 4 high schools . The 2000 census service area population was 50 @,@ 084 . 
 In 2003 , the " Friends of Blackstone Branch Library " was formed , making the Blackstone Branch one of approximately 34 branches to have such a support group . The volunteer support group attempts to " serve as an advisory council for Chicago 's first branch library , promote use and improvement of the library , and provide volunteer and fundraising services for Blackstone " . 
 The Blackstone Library participates in most Chicago Public Library programs and partnerships , including Great Kids Museum Passport Program , the Monthly Adult Book Club Discussion as well as many annual events and activities . The branch also partners with neighborhood institutions such as the Hyde Park Art Center and the Smart Museum for programs and workshops . Like all branches , the library provides both free wi @-@ fi access and free terminals with both internet access and printing facilities . Blackstone has 5 internet terminals requiring reservations for each session of up to one hour and 1 express terminal that does not require reservations for sessions of up to 15 minutes . Currently , patrons can use the terminals for up to two free internet sessions per day and print for a small charge per page anywhere in the Chicago Public Library system . 
 = = Design = = 
 The building was designed by the architect Solon S. Beman and modeled after Beman 's Merchant Tailors Building , the domed temple facing the lagoon in the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition , and the <unk> at the Athenian Acropolis . Greek Mythology teaches that Demeter , the goddess , bestowed agriculture and civilization upon the world during Erechtheus 's reign . The library 's rotunda murals have thematic titles : " Labor " , " Literature " , " Art " and " Science " . 
 The following is a summary of the building 's features : Tiffany style dome ; Marble column and walls in the rotunda and foyer ; 4 overhead rotunda murals painted by Oliver Dennett Grover , mural painter for the World Columbian Exposition ; 1 in ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) square Italian marble mosaic flooring ; glass @-@ floored mezzanine ; 2 @,@ 800 pounds ( 1 @,@ 300 kg ) bronze plate , solid copper core outer front doors ; 2 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) <unk> bronze and glass inner doors ; 12 inches ( 30 cm ) thick granite walls ; and ionic columns . 
 The building 's adult reading room is equipped with mahogany furniture specifically designed for the space . It also contains matching built @-@ in shelving and custom @-@ made bronze lamps . The circulation desk area has two @-@ tiered bronze @-@ trimmed book stacks . The mezzanine floor is composed of glass blocks . 
 = = Related structures and ways = = 
 Although parts of South Blackstone Avenue south of 53rd Street accommodate two @-@ way traffic , near the library it is a northbound street that accommodates one @-@ way traffic running north along the 1436 east block and ending immediately to the west of ( behind ) the Blackstone Library at 4900 south ( see Kenwood map in external links below and picture to the right ) . The street was also named after Timothy Blackstone well after the library was built . The Blackstone Library does not bear a Blackstone Avenue address , despite its proximity . Blackstone Hotel and adjacent Blackstone Theatre ( now the Merle Reskin Theatre ) would also be named after Timothy Blackstone , whose mansion had stood on their site . 
 = = Photo gallery = = 
 = Millennium ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the serial crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium commenced airing in the United States on September 19 , 1997 , concluding on May 15 , 1998 after airing twenty @-@ three episodes . It tells the story of retired FBI Agent Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) . Black lives in Seattle , Washington with his wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) and daughter Jordan ( Brittany Tiplady ) . He works for a mysterious organization known as the Millennium Group , investigating murders using his remarkable capability of relating to the monsters responsible for horrific crimes . After killing a man who stalked and kidnapped Catherine , Black faces tension within his family while simultaneously being drawn deeper into the sinister Group . 
 The season began with " The Beginning and the End " , which marked the first episode of the series helmed by new co @-@ executive producers Glen Morgan and James Wong , who would remain in charge for the full season . Accolades earned by the season include a Bram Stoker Award nomination for Darin Morgan 's " Somehow , Satan Got Behind Me " , a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for " Jose Chung 's Doomsday Defense " guest star Charles Nelson Reilly and a Young Artist Award win for Tiplady . 
 = = Production = = 
 The second season saw series creator Chris Carter step down as executive producer , being replaced by the team of Glen Morgan and James Wong . Morgan and Wong had previously written episodes for the series in its first season , and had worked with Carter on his first television series The X @-@ Files . Morgan and Wong left similar positions on The X @-@ Files to take up the Millennium roles , with Fox president Sandy Grushow saying that " with Chris writing and producing X @-@ Files ' fifth season , as well as the feature film , it was critical that we identify exec producers who could enable Millennium to grow " . 
 Discussing plans for the season , Morgan noted that " the Millennium Group is a much deeper organization " than seen in the first season , adding that " they 're considering [ Frank Black ] for a candidate for the group ( and ) trying to show him that at the millennium there 's going to be an event - either fire and brimstone or harmonic convergence " . Wong spoke about how the character of Catherine Black , saying " there 's a different relationship between Frank and his family this season because of the separation ... I think that will not only bring some kind of heartfelt drama but humor into it " . Wong also stated " we don 't want to have the audience expect to see a serial killer every week . ... We would like to make it so that it 's a surprise to them , just like it is a surprise when you watch The X @-@ Files " . 
 Producer John Peter Kousakis has noted that the first and second seasons , and the third season after those , were markedly different , crediting each season 's differing approach to the changes in leadership behind the scenes ; Kousakis felt that the character of Frank Black remained the main constant throughout the series . Fellow producer Ken Horton felt that the change in focus for season two arose as the first season 's focus on serial killers had " overpowered " its storytelling , making it necessary to focus attention elsewhere instead ; the focus switched from external forces and villains to the internal workings of the Millennium Group . The series ' musical supervisor Mark Snow found that Morgan and Wong brought another new element to the series — the music of Bobby Darin , which has been a hallmark of the duo 's work . Darin 's music accompanied Snow 's scores in a number of episodes , often as diegetic music being listened to by Lance Henriksen 's character . Snow believed this gave the character a down @-@ to @-@ earth , everyman feel . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Starring = = = 
 Lance Henriksen as Frank Black 
 Megan Gallagher as Catherine Black 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = = = Also starring = = = = 
 Brittany Tiplady as Jordan Black 
 = = = = Guest starring = = = = 
 Terry O 'Quinn as Peter Watts 
 Peter Outerbridge as Barry Baldwin 
 Stephen E. Miller as Andy McClaren 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The second season earned several awards and nominations for those associated with the series . Tiplady and " Monster " guest star Lauren Diewold earned nominations at the 1998 Young Artist Awards , with Tiplady winning in the category Best Performance in a TV Comedy / Drama – Supporting Young Actress Age Ten or Under . Henriksen earned a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actor in a Television Series Drama , losing out to Anthony Edwards as ER 's Mark Greene At the Primetime Emmy Awards , the series earned two nomination . Charles Nelson Reilly earned an acting nod for his guest role in " Jose Chung 's Doomsday Defense " , losing out to The Practice 's John Larroquette . Millennium also earned a nomination for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series , losing the award to ER . The season also produced a Bram Stoker Award nomination in 1999 , for Darin Morgan 's episode " Somehow , Satan Got Behind Me " ; the award was won jointly by Bill Condon for Gods and Monsters and Alex Proyas , David S. Goyer and Lem Dobbs for Dark City . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Writing for Slant magazine , Keith Uhlich gave the season an overall rating of three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , finding that the appointment of Morgan and Wong was " an inspired choice that led to , arguably , the finest episodic run ever produced under [ series creator Chris ] Carter 's Ten @-@ Thirteen Productions banner " . Uhlich found that the season was torn between episodes remaining true to the Carter @-@ led first season 's " serial killer of the week " format and make @-@ it @-@ up @-@ as @-@ you @-@ go @-@ along approach to storytelling " , and Morgan and Wong 's attempt to introduce a continuous story arc which lent a " sealed @-@ off feel " to the season , finding that the latter approach lead to a " compulsively watchable " but largely dated end result . DVD Talk 's Bill Gibron rated the season overall four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , finding that the new thematic direction was " right on the money " . Gibron felt that the season " was truly ahead of its time . It predates and predicts such fashionable fads as The Da Vinci Code , the omens of terrorist evil and the slow erosion of the citizenry 's faith in the Federal Government " . Todd VanDerWerff , writing for The A.V. Club , wrote that " the second season of Millennium is some sort of work of weird genius " . VanDerWerff added that the season " moves like a series with a new purpose , with a new sense of meaning . Morgan and Wong start tossing ideas at the wall with a thrilling abandon , almost as if they were pretty sure they ’ d never work in Hollywood again " . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated several episodes across the season highly , awarding five stars out of five to " The Curse of Frank Black " , " Jose Chung 's Doomsday Defense " , " Midnight of the Century " , " A Room with No View " , " The Fourth Horseman " and " The Time Is Now " . However , several episodes rated poorly , with " Beware of the Dog " , " A Single Blade of Grass " , " The Hand of St. Sebastian " , " Roosters " , " In Arcadia Ego " and " Anamnesis " being seen as particularly poor . In all , Shearman singled out the season 's climactic two @-@ part episodes " The Fourth Horseman " and " The Time Is Now " as the highlight of the season , finding that Morgan and Wong took a considerable risk with the storyline as they believed the series would be cancelled at the end of the season , but believing that the episodes gained from this additional level of attempted closure . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = The Most Hated Family in America = 
 The Most Hated Family in America is a 2007 BBC documentary film written and presented by Louis Theroux about the family at the core of the Westboro Baptist Church . The organization was led by Fred Phelps ( who has since died ) and located in Topeka , Kansas . Westboro Baptist Church members believe that the United States government is immoral due to its tolerance of homosexuality ; in addition , they protest at funerals of U.S. military killed in action with signs that display text such as " God Hates Fags " and " Thank God for Dead Soldiers " . With a BBC film crew , Theroux travelled to Kansas to spend time with members of the church and interview its leadership . In the documentary , church members are shown protesting at funerals of U.S. soldiers . Theroux interviews church leadership including Fred Phelps and Shirley Phelps @-@ Roper . 
 The documentary first aired on BBC Two in the United Kingdom in April 2007 . The documentary was a ratings success in its initial airing , beating simultaneous programming for BBC One for the 9pm hour . It was broadcast again on BBC Two later that month , and Seven Network purchased the programme for airing in Australia in August 2007 and again in April 2008 . It aired in May 2008 on TV3 and Seven Network , and multiple times in June 2008 on the television channel Dave . It aired again on BBC Two in December 2008 and in February 2010 in Ireland on 3e . A DVD @-@ box @-@ set including the documentary and other Theroux programmes was released in January 2009 ; The Independent placed the DVD release as number eight among its list of " The 50 Best DVD boxsets " . 
 The Most Hated Family in America received a positive reception , with four @-@ star ratings from publications The Daily Record and The Mail on Sunday . It was recommended in reviews as a critic 's choice by The Daily Mail , The Independent , The Times , Financial Times , The Age , and the Herald Sun . A review in the Leicester Mercury noted of Theroux 's interview techniques , " His subtle interviewing style was perfect for showing off the crazy views of the members . " The documentary was highlighted in The Sydney Morning Herald among " The week 's best " , and characterised as , " Disturbing , perplexing and very entertaining . " 
 A follow @-@ up documentary by Theroux , America 's Most Hated Family in Crisis , was first broadcast on BBC Two on 3 April 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The documentary focuses on the Westboro Baptist Church , headed by Fred Phelps and based in Topeka , Kansas . Born in 1929 in Meridian , Mississippi , Phelps conducts himself under the belief that he is a prophet chosen by God " to preach his message of hate " . Phelps was ordained a Southern Baptist in 1947 . The Westboro Baptist Church was started by Phelps in 1955 . Members of the church meet in Phelps 's residence ; the majority of the group 's adherents are his family . Phelps received an associate 's degree from John Muir Junior College in 1951 , a bachelor 's degree in 1962 and a degree in law in 1964 from Washburn University . He formed a " crusade for righteousness " , attempting to abolish Jim Crow laws in Topeka . 
 In 1991 when a local park started to serve as a meeting place for homosexual men , Phelps began to protest against homosexuality . Phelps subsequently enlarged the scope of his activities and formed protests in areas where civil rights were being debated for LGBT people . Phelps received criticism in 1998 when he repeatedly exclaimed " Matt is in hell " during the funeral of Matthew Shepard , a man murdered for being homosexual . 
 Westboro Baptist Church bases its work around the belief that " God Hates Fags " , and expresses the opinion , based on its Biblical interpretation , that nearly every tragedy in the world is God 's punishment for homosexuality – specifically society 's increasing tolerance and acceptance of gay , lesbian , and bisexual people . It maintains that God hates homosexuals above all other kinds of " sinners " and that homosexuality should be a capital crime . The church runs the website <unk> , and <unk> , and websites expressing condemnation of LGBT people , Roman Catholics , Muslims , Hindus , Jews , Sweden , Ireland , Canada , the Netherlands , and the United States . The organisation is monitored by the Anti @-@ Defamation League and is classified as a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center . The group has achieved notoriety because of its picketing of funeral processions of U.S. soldiers killed in combat in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 Controversial acts of Phelps and the Westboro Baptist Church resulted in litigation and the formation of groups which counter @-@ protest against its efforts . President George W. Bush signed the Respect for America 's Fallen Heroes Act into law in on Memorial Day in May 2006 . Groups of American Legion members formed motorcycle honor guards , such as the Patriot Guard Riders , with the intention of safeguarding funerals of U.S. military from the church protesters . Another group , called " Free Republic , " held signs praising the military . 
 = = Content = = 
 The Most Hated Family in America includes footage of members of the Westboro Baptist Church picketing at funerals of United States soldiers . The organisation members hold signs blaming deaths of U.S. soldiers on the country 's tolerance towards homosexuality and LGBT people . Westboro Baptist Church members believe that these deaths are caused by God as retribution for the immorality of the U.S. ; stating the soldiers were " struck down by God for fighting for a depraved nation " . 
 They attend the funeral of a soldier Kevin Zeigler who died at the age of 31 while attempting to disable a bomb in Iraq . Referring to improvised explosive devices , Westboro Baptist Church hold signs reading , " Thank God for IEDs " . Protest signs carried by members of the organisation at the funeral , including six @-@ year @-@ old children , state : " Thank God For Dead Soldiers " , " Don 't Worship The Dead " and " Fag Marines " . Another placard criticises Diana , Princess of Wales , for her friendship with the LGBT community , stating , " Royal Whore In Hell " . Diana is criticised by the organisation as a " fag enabler " . Additional signs read " God hates fags " , " Thank God for Dead Soldiers " , " God is America 's Terrorist " , and " Fag Troops " . The Westboro Baptist Church members reveled in the September 11 attacks and stated they were punishment for the country 's " fornication and lust " . The group also protests outside the local synagogue and holds signs which state that , " Jews worship the rectum " . 
 Theroux interviews members of the Phelps family including Fred Phelps ( called " Gramps " by members of the organisation ) and Shirley Phelps @-@ Roper . Theroux asks Fred Phelps , " Isn 't it an act of presumption , when you don 't have all the information about all the other churches , to assume you have privileged access to Grace ? " ; Phelps responds , " Oh , I know all there is to know about ' em . " When Theroux asks him how he knows this , Phelps answers , " I 'm not going to keep on talking to you . I know what you are . – you 're an evil . – I don 't even wanna go there . Good luck to ya ! " 
 = = Filmmaker = = 
 Theroux traveled from the United Kingdom to Kansas , United States to meet members of the Westboro Baptist Church . Theroux and a BBC film crew spent three weeks in Topeka , Kansas , gathering information on the 71 members of the organisation . In an article for The Guardian , Theroux noted , " It was fascinating to see the power of a family to create its own bizarre ideology and pass it down through the generations . " In a statement in The Age , Theroux posited , " Maybe , through my enthusiasm , people reveal more of themselves than they may have intended . The show is laughing at me , adrift in their world , as much as at them . " The Western Mail quoted Theroux on how he selects subject matter which interests him , " The subjects I 'm interested in are quite extreme . They 're so far beyond the pale of normal human interaction that you 're never going to get a reality show on that territory . " 
 In an interview with BBC News , Theroux stated that the <unk> are the most extreme people he has ever met . Theroux gave his opinion on the teachings of Fred Phelps . Theroux stated , " I think that the pastor is not a very nice person . I think he 's an angry person who 's twisted the Bible and picked and chosen verses that support his anger , that sort of justify his anger , and he 's instilled that in his children and they 've passed it on to their children . Although the second and third generation are by and large quite nice people from what I saw , they still live under the influence of their Gramps . " 
 Apart from their protests , Theroux found them to be quite kind , and commented , " It shows you what strange avenues the religious impulse can take you down . I think another part of the answer is that parts of the Christian Bible are pretty weird . There 's a lot of weird stuff in there and when you take that and you add this angry , domineering kind of a father figure , which is Gramps , and you add that he has sort of separated them off from other people , other families and driven them to achieve a lot , and he was kind of a charismatic guy , and still is up to a point . He was a very verbal , very persuasive , an extremely compelling speaker . All these things added together combined to make a powerful influence . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Response from organization = = = 
 The Westboro Baptist Church appreciated the attention its organisation received from the documentary , and added a citation to the film on its website . Shirley Phelps @-@ Roper stated she had one regret about the documentary : " If he had just called it , ' The Most Hated Family in the World ' " . The Washington Post reported , " In the last hours of the last days , she explained , Jesus said his chosen will be ' hated by all men . ' " 
 On April 8 , 2007 , Fred Phelps Sr preached a sermon addressing Louis Theroux directly and personally , accusing Theroux of taking " cheap unfair advantage " of the young women in the church , and trying to embarrass them about their chastity . Phelps also stated that Theroux " contrives and manipulates those he interviews " , accusing him of feigning naïvety on camera . 
 = = = Release and ratings = = = 
 The Most Hated Family in America aired on BBC Two on 1 April 2007 . The Guardian characterised its performance as " a ratings hit " . The film received 19 percent of viewership between the 9pm to 10pm hour , and beat programming for BBC One for the same time period . The documentary received 4 @.@ 3 million viewers while the programme which aired at the same time on BBC One only drew 1 @.@ 8 million viewers . The Most Hated Family in America was again aired on BBC Two on 4 April 2007 . 
 In August 2007 , Seven Network of Australia purchased a package of programmes from the BBC including The Most Hated Family in America and two other specials by Theroux : Under the Knife and Gambling in Las Vegas . In April 2008 , Seven Network purchased The Most Hated Family in America and the same two other programmes from the BBC , with an additional two documentaries by Theroux added : Behind Bars and African Hunting Holiday . In May 2008 , the documentary aired on TV3 . The documentary aired in Australia on Seven Network in May 2008 . It aired again in the UK on 21 and 26 June 2008 on the television channel Dave . The documentary aired again on BBC Two on 18 December 2008 . 
